OUR Saviors Passion: Delivered in a SERMON, Preached in the Cathedral Church
of Saint PETER in EXON.

On Good Friday, the First of April, 1670.

BY Matthew Hole, Master of Arts, and Fellow of Exeter College, OXON.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Royston, and are to be sold by Abisha Brocas
Bookseller in Exon. 1670.

To the Right Worshipful William Morton Knight, one of the Honorable Justices
of the Kings Bench.
Honored Sir,
THE satisfaction that was expressed at the hearing of this Sermon, and the
Candid entertainment it has found since, have induced me to gratify the
requests of some, in making it more public; which I the rather complied with,
because it gave me an opportunity to publish to your Honor, and the World, my
grateful resentment of your great and unmerited favors. I am not so vain as to
imagine that any thing therein delivered should be thought able to present your
Honor with any instruction, or make the least addition to the ample stock of
your present knowledge; if it may prove only a remembrancer, or upon any other
account may be esteemed worthy your Honors perusal or acceptance, the Author
has attained his end, and will rest satisfied in the success

(...) (...) daea, and all ye that dwell at Jerusalem, be this known unto you,
and hearken unto my words, for these men (whom you thus wickedly traduce) are
not drunk with Wine, seeing it is but the third hour of the Day; and those
sudden inspirations which you have heard and seen, are not, as you profanely
imagine, the effects of Enthusiasm or intemperance, but the gifts of the Holy
Ghost, and in them is accomplished that gracious promise of the plentiful
effusion of knowledge that should come to pass in the last days; but we need
not wonder (as he goes on) at this your carriage toward them, (v. 22.) since
Jesus Christ himself, who was a man approved of God among you by miracles,
signs and wonders, which God did by him in the midst of you, as ye your selves
also know, yet even him, not without the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and
slain.

So that the words are part of that excellent and successful Sermon of St.
Peter preached unto the Jews, wherein he sharply rebuked them for their
barbarous and inhumane carriage toward him who abundantly proved himself to be
the true Messiah; and from them I shall treat,

1. First of all, concerning our Saviors Passion, in the three stpes or
degrees of it, mentioned here in the Text, viz. That he was taken, and by
wicked hands crucified, and slain; to which I shall add a word or two touching
the cause and the design of his undergoing all this.

2. Secondly, I shall show, that this his Passion was not without the
determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God.

3. And, lastly, conclude with some practical inferences from the whole.

I begin with the History of our Saviors Passion, and there with the first
step of it, which is his apprehension or being taken, him ye have taken; this
we know is the first degree of punishment that is wont to be exercised toward
Malefactors, who are first apprehended and arraigned, before they are condemned
or executed* Suitable hereunto, the Sons of ^iolence laid hands on our Savior
to take him; which act of pretended justice was not done by any private or
single person, but by the counsel, or rather the conspiracy of the chief
Priests and Elders; for we read, in Mat. 26. v. 4. That they held a
consultation, how they might take Jesus by subtilty, and carry him away; though
his daily presence at Jerusalem seemed to give them fair opportunities of
effecting their design, yet the reputation he had with the people made them not
so forward to embrace them, and therefore they dealt underhand with one of his
own Disciples, corrupting him with the promise of a reward, to betray him with
the greater secrecy into their hands. The Scribes and Pharisees, Herod and
Pilate, though bitter enemies to each other, and scarce agreeing in any thing
else, yet did conspire together in the apprehending and taking our Savior; so
true was that prediction of the Psalmist, in the second Psalm, v. 2. The Kings
of the Earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together against the
Lord, and against his anointed. The place where they apprehended him was in the
Garden, where, after the treachery of Judas in betraying him, a band of
Soldiers seized on his Person, hall'd him away before Pilate, and from thence
into prison, where he met with no better company then an infamous Robber named
Barrabbas, who yet, by a custom of releasing one at the Feast, was dismissed at
the request of the people, whilst our Savior was sacrificed to the clamors and
crucifige's of the multitude. The manner of his apprehension St. Luke informs,
in the 22. Chap. v. 52. They came out against him, as against a thief, with
Swords and Staves. He who was the very pattern, and great exemplar, of
lowliness, of meekness, was yet thus roughly handled by the merciless
Soldiers; and though Peter, out of a high resentment hereof, offered to make
resistance by drawing his sword, and cutting off the ear of one of the High
Priest's servants, yet our Savior sharply checked his inconsiderate zeal and
rashness; partly, because they did all by the authority and command of the
Magistrate, against whom he would by no means suffer or encourage the least
resistance; and partly because it behooved him to suffer, and to be thus
handled, for the completing the work of our redemption.

But the jealous malice and violence of the Soldiers thought him not yet
sufficiently secured before they had cast their cords on him, and carried him
away bound unto Pilate, as we read, Mat. 27.2 Having seized on his Person, they
secure him in Bonds, and make all haste to dispatch him away, to prevent his
escape, or rescue; which circumstance of their malice was prefigur'd in the Old
Testament, by tying the Sacrifices with Cords, and dragging them bound to the
Altar, as also his being apprehended and taken was not obscurely presignified
in Joseph's being taken and carried prisoner into Egypt, of which we read in
Genesis 39. And so much, briefly, for the first step or degree of our Saviors
Passion, namely his being taken.

2. The second degree of it mentioned here in the Text, is his being crucified;
we know a man may be apprehended, and yet afterward dismissed without any farther
censure or infliction; but the malice of the Jews toward our Savior rested
not so, but proceeded further, to his crucifixion. Him ye have taken, and by
wicked hands crucified. This assixing of Criminals unto a Cross was a Roman
punishment, inflicted only on thieves and robbers, or other very notorious
offenders; till Constantine the first Christian Emperor, out of a Pious honor
and respect to Christ's death, forbade any farther use of it; but for the
better understanding hereof, we must know that the Romans, to increase the
shame and sting of this punishment, made use of these four circumstances toward
those on whom it was inflicted; all which were improved to the very highest
degree of cruelty in our Savior's Crucifixion.

First, those that were condemned to this punishment were made to bear their
Cross upon their shoulders to the place of execution, which was ever without
the City. So Plutarch tells us expressly, [Plutar. de his qui sero puniuatu^.]
(...), i. e. malefactors when they are led forth to execution, each one bears
his own cross: and Artemidorus [Artem. lib. 2. cap. 42.] is as plain, (...),
i.e. the Cross resembles death, and he that was to be crucified did first bear
it; in compliance with which custom, the barbarous Jews leading forth our
Savior, forced him to bear his own Cross, as we read, John 19.17. as if it
were not enough to be thus shamefully executed, unless he bare the unhappy
instrument of his shame; or because the Cross was shortly to bear him,
therefore he should be constrained to bear it. It is indeed said, that Simon
the Cyrenian was compelled to bear his Cross, Mat. 27.32. but that was only
when our Savior through weariness had almost fainted under the burden; else,
had his strength held out, he had found none to have eased him of that
reproachful weight. Now this act of bearing his Cross was represented to us in
the Old Testament, by Isaack's bearing the wood for Sacrifice, of which we
read, Genesis 22. in allusion and imitation hereof it was, that our Savior told
his followers, that if they would be his Disciples, they must take up their
Cross and follow him, in the patient bearing of distress and infamy.

Secondly, Those who were to undergo this punishment were commanded to be
stripped of their clothes and to suffer naked, for so Artemidorus assures us,
(...), they that were to be crucified were stripped naked. Suitable whereunto we
read, concerning our Savior, Mat. 27.28. that they stripped him of his clothes;
he who was clothed with Light, as with a garment, and invested with the
glorious robes of immortality, was pleased for a while to lay these aside, and
put on the rags of humane flesh, together with those outward coverings that
were ordained to conceal our shame; but of these too did unthankful mortals
unworthily strip him; and, as if he had aspired too high, when he parted with
his glory for these inconsiderable ornaments, he was wholly deprived of them,
and exposed naked to all their scoffs and revilings; and having thus stripped
him, They parted his Garments among them, and upon his Vesture did they cast
lots, Mat. 27.35.

Thirdly, Those who, among the Romans, were condemned to this punishment were
first of all to be whipped and scourged. So St. Jerome informs us; Sciendum est,
legibus Romany sancitum esse, ^t qui crucifigitur prius flagellis verberetur,
i. e. It was decreed by the Laws of the Romans, that they who were to be
crucified should be first scourged; accordingly Valerius tells us of one, qui
servam suum verberibus multatum ad supplicium egisset; and Artemidorus of
another, (...), i. e. who being tied to a Pillar receiv^d many stripes; this
circumstance of Barbarity too was exercised toward our Savior, Mat. 27.26.
When they had scourged Jesus they delivered him up to be crucified. Having
stripped him naked they lash and scourge him on every side; the bitterness
whereof was increased by that reproachful taunt used at every blow, now
prophesy who it is that strikes thee; of this did the Evangelical Prophet
Isaias plainly foretell, in Isai. 53.5. The Chastisement of our peace was upon
him, and by his stripes we are healed.

Fourthly, Those who were wont to be fastened to the Cross had the cause of
their punishment written over them in Capital Letters, that so the equity of it
might the better appear to the World. Hence Di^ tells us of a servant hanging
on the Cross (...), with letters declaring the cause of his death; this piece
of pretended justice too was not omitted toward our Savior; for having hailed
his body to the Cross all besmeared in blood and gore, which the nails and
scourges drew from him, they set over his head this accusation written, THIS IS
JESUS THE KING OF THE JEWS, Mat. 27.37. Which that it might be the more
generally known and understood by all, St. Luke tells us it was written in
three Languages, viz. in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, Luke 23.38. Thus did the
malicious Jews improve this Roman punishment to the height of cruelty upon our
Savior; crucifying him between two thieves, as if he had been the
Archmalefactor; where after he had hung on the Cross from the sixth to the
ninth hour, upon the tenderwounds of his hands and feet, he gave up the Ghost,
which was the last act of this doleful Tragedy, and leads us to the third step
or degree of his Passion, mentioned in the Text; to wit, his death, or being
slain, Him ye have taken, and with wicked hands have crucified and slain. As we
showed before, that the taking of any prisoner does not necessarily suppose any
farther censure, much less crucifixion; so neither does crucifixion necessarily
import death; for they on whom it is inflicted, being fastened to the Cross not
by any vital part, die so leasurely, that being taken from thence, may easily
be supposed to live: but neither did the malice of the Jews nor our Saviors
sufferings end here, but proceeded to the very extremity of this punishment,
and fulfilled the utmost intention of Crucifixion; hence St. Paul tells us,
Philip. 2.3. That he became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross,
which of all the Roman ways of excution was the most painful, and the most
ignominious.

First of all, I say, his death was exceeding painful and dolorous; for he was
nailed to the Cross, not by those parts that might have inferred sudden death,
and so quickly have dispatched his pain, but by his hands and feet, which are
of all other the most nervous, and consequently the most sensible parts; by
which means they made him (as Nero afterward did the Christians) sentire se
mori, feel himself dying, and endured the racking torments of a lingering death;
their cruel scourges in the mean while fetching blood, and making long furrows
upon his back; the Soldiers pierced his side with spears, and his Soul with
scoffs and mockings more sharp then they; the multitude came about him hanging
on the Cross, not to pity but deride him; and as if he had been the vilest
miscreant upon earth, they spit in his face, and in the midst of all his pain
and anguish poured on him, not tears, but scorn and contempt. In his bitter
Agonies they denied him a drop of water, a courtesy never denied any but the
damned in hell, and instead thereof filled him a sponge of Vinegar and Gall, on
purpose to increase the bitterness of his Passion. In the Garden of Gethsemane
his Soul felt greater tortures, than his body on the Cross; there it was, that
he drunk that bitter Cup, which set him in an Agony, and caused him to sweat
great drops of blood, which made him pray three times most eathestly, Father,
if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me; then did he appear forsaken of
his friends, and in his apprehension deserted of God too; which made him in the
anguish of his Soul to cry out, My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me? and
sure, if we consider these things, we must needs say, that there was no death
like unto his, nor any sorrow like unto his sorrow. But,

Secondly, as his death was thus painful, so was it no less shameful and
ignominious too; Our Savior having humbled himself to the form of a servant
was condemned to be crucified, which Tacitus calls Servile supplicium, a
punishment inflicted only on servants or slaves, never on any freeman or
cirizen; but before he underwent this infamous and slavish death, they kept him
a while to sport themselves in his misery; to that end they stripped him of his
clothes; and in derision put on him a scarlet robe, the true emblem of their
crimson sins; and having accused him as one aspiring to be King of the Jews,
they platted for him a Crown of Thorns, setting it on his head; and because he
should not want a Scepter, they put a reed into his right hand, after which
they in mockery bow their head to him, saying, Hail King of the Jews; and when
they had spotted their fill with him, they carried him away to be crucified;
where, as he hung on the Cross, they reproached him with all his former
Miracles and Prophesies, saying he saved others, himself he cannot save; if he
be the Son of God let him now come down from the Cross; and wagging their heads
at him, they said, thou that destroyest the Temple, and buildest it in three
days, save thy self, Mat. 27. After all which, he laid down his life, and
drank up this bitter Cup,, even to the very dregs.

And now, one would think that these bloody instruments of his death should
feel within them some sting of Conscience, and conceive some remorse after so
black and tragical an enterprise; but these, alas, as if they were (what was
said of Tiberius, (...), etc. but so many clods of earth kneaded and cemented
with blood, remain as senceless and unrelenting after all this, as the Tree on
which he hung, or the Gravestone that covered him; they think of nothing but
casting him into the earth, and securing his Grave with a Band of Soldiers;
however, since these remorsless Jews could conceive neither sorrow, nor
repentance, the whole Creation seemed concerned to lament the fall of so great
a Person; the Sun drew in its Light, as unwilling to behold so sad a spectacle;
the earth trembled and quaked, as impatient of bearing up those persons that
occasioned it; the heavens were all overcast and clothed in black, as the
chief mourners at his Funeral; the Vail of the Temple was rent in twain from
the top to the bottom; the hard Rocks clave; the Graves opened, and all things
but these unrelenting Jews were appalled and confounded at the Passion of our
Lord. And thus have we gone through the several acts or scenes of this direful
Tragedy; having seen him taken, and by wicked hands crucified and slain; which
every one that has heard will be ready to inquire into the cause for which he
suffered all this.

For answer whereunto, we must know,

First of all, that sin is the sole meritorious cause of all sorrows and
sufferings; which appears, not only, because before sin entered into the world,
these things were altogether unknown, and strangers to humane Nature; but
likewise, because ever since its entrance, they have ever gone hand in hand
together; to this purpose is that of St. Paul, Romans 5.12. As by one man sin
entered into the World, and death by sin, even so death passed upon all men,
for that all have sinned. But

Secondly, to prevent an Objection, ( Heb. 7.26.) that may be taken from the
High, Holy, and harmless Nature of Christ, separated from sinners, and made
higher than the Heavens, who though he assumed our Nature, Heb. 4.15. Yet was
sin and all kind of irregularities excepted; I say, to prevent this, we must
know, that though the immaculate Son of God had no sins of his own to be laid
to his charge, and consequently was not liable to punishment, or the
displeasure of Heaven, upon his own score, yet when he graciously undertook to
be our surety or Savior, the whole burden of our sins lay upon his shoulders,
and he became answerable to the justice of God for the transgressions of
mankind; and hence was that harsh saying of Luther, who styled our Savior
peccatorum maximus, the greatest of sinners; viz. not by any actual guilt of
his own, but only by imputation: Now, since the wages of sin is death, Romans
6.23. And without shedding of blood there is no remission, Heb. 9.22. Therefore
our Savior must, and accordingly was content to die, that he might become our
sufficient ransom and atonement. And if one sin were enough to turn Adam out of
Paradise, and to set up a flaming sword to prevent his return; if one sin
(whatever it were) were sufficient to throw the lapsed Angels out of Heaven,
and to reserve them in Chains of darkness to the judgment of the great day, as
we read in the Epistle of St. Jude; what an unsupportable weight (think we)
must be the concurrent guilt of all mankind's transgressions; a pressure sure
that must sink the stoutest Atlas, and disorder the whole frame of Nature: So
that we may cease our wonder at the severity of Christ's sufferings, when we
reflect on that complicated guilt which was the cause of them. 'Twere our debts
for which Jesus Christ was arrested and imprisoned by the Soldiers, and which
by his consequent sufferings he paid to the utmost farthing; our sin was the
Spear that pierced his side, and the nails that fastened him to the Cross:
which leads us to the

Last thing to be spoken to concerning our Saviors Passion; namely, the end or
design of his undergoing all this, which was the expiation of sin, and the
restoring us again to the lost love and favor of God: he wore a Crown of
Thorns, only that we might wear a Crown of Gold; and those drops of blood which
his enemies drew from him, are turned into so many pearls to bestud and adorn
ours; that scarlet Robe which the Jews put on him, died as it were in his own
blood, serves to hide our shame, and to cover for us a multitude of sins; that
bitter Cup, which he drunk off to the very dregs, is our Nectar, and a glorious
Potion of immortality; the Vinegar and Gall, which made him to faint, is become
our most reviving Cordial; his Cross, the cursed instrument of his death, is to
us a Tree of life, which bears no other fruit than that of knowledge and
eternal happiness; his agonies are our triumphs, and his bloody sweat the most
Sovereign Balsam to cure our wounds; the Spear that pierced our Saviors side
opened there a Fountain for sin and for uncleanness; he lived and died with
thieves and robbers, and was numbered among transgressors, only that we might
live with Saints, and sing forth his praises with Myriads of Angels; thus did
every part of this Tragedy relate wholly to our benefit and advancement; and so
much may suffice for the first thing propounded to be spoken to; the

Second, is to show that all this was done by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God: which truth, beside the express words of the Text, is as
fully set forth, Acts 4.27, 28. Of a truth against the Holy Child Jesus, whom
thou have anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and people
of Israel, were gathered together, to do whatsoever thy hand and thy Counsel
determined before to be done: for the clearing and evincing whereof, we must
know,

First, that there was from all eternity a certain covenant and agreement
between the Father and the Son, concerning what and how he should suffer; for
Almighty God foreseeing the Apostasy and fall of mankind, did from eternity, at
least for some of them, decree a ransom and redemption; to effect which,
because justice demanded satisfaction for the violation of that positive Law
that was to be given to them; the Son, as a surety, interposed and promised
satisfaction; whereupon it was determined and agreed between them, what should
be the manner and measure of his sufferings, in order to the procuring pardon
and redemption for them: of this Covenant, on God the Fathers part, we read,
Isai. 53.10. If he shall make his soul an Offering for sin he shall see his
seed, and prolong his days: Of the Sons acceptance and undertaking hereof we
read, Psalm. 40.7, 8. Then said I, lo, I come, in the volume of thy Book it is
written of me, to do thy will, O God; and hence is our Savior said to be the
Lamb slain before the Foundations of the World, Revel. 13.8. viz. in Gods
eternal decree and determination, which makes it evident, that every
circumstance of Christ's Passion was done by the counsel and foreknowledge of
God; which will yet further appear, if we consider,

Secondly, That as these things were from eternity transacted and resolved
upon, between the Father and the Son, so likewise were they by the Spirit of
God revealed unto the Prophets, and by them delivered unto the World, long
before the incarnation of Jesus Christ. Hence St. Paul, in the defense of this
doctrine, told Agrippa, that he said none other things then those which Moses
and the Prophets did say should come, that Christ should suffer, Act. 26.22,
23. yea, if we compare the Prophecies of the Old Testament with the History of
the New, we shall find that exact correspondence of the event with the
predictions, and the punctual accomplishment of every circumstance, even in
that way and manner as it was foretold, will make it clearly to appear, that
all this was done by the determinate Counsel and foreknowledge of God; which
will be yet more plain, if we consider,

Thirdly, that these things were not only punctually foretold by the Prophets,
but likewise prefigur'd in Types, and in a previous manner acted over in the
sacrifices; long before our Saviors coming in the flesh, the slaying of the
Paschal Lamb in the Passover, clearly represents the slaughter of this Lamb of
God; who was to take away the sins of the world: the lifting up of the brazen
Serpent in the wilderness betoken'd, and is accordingly by the Apostle applied
to the lifting up of the Messiah upon the Cross: yea all the Sacrifices under
the Law, which were offered and purged with blood, are but so many Types and
Representations of the death of the Messiah; signifying to us, that only
through his blood we must look for the remission of sins, and through the vail
of his flesh alone hope for the admission into the Holy of Holies; all which
(without having recourse to the infinity of his wisdom and knownledge) make it
more particularly and unquestionably certain, that our Saviors Passi^on, as to
all the Modes and Circumstances of it, was done by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God.

The practical inferences, by way of Application, (our last particular) now
follow; and

First of all, from the several steps of our Saviors Passion, together with
the infamy and severity of them all, we may learn the heinous and pernicious
nature of sin, which could be no otherwise expiated, then by the blood of the
Son of God; the sins of lost man cried so loud in the ears' of Heaven, that
Jesus Christ must descend thence, er'e he could stop the clamor; and when he
came down, nothing could silence it, but the sweeter voice of that blood that
speaks better things than that of Abel: If any can be so dangerously
mistaken, as to think sin but a slight matter, let him enter into the High
Priests Palace, the Judgment Hall, and Mount Calvary, and there see what it
cost our Savior to do it away; let him take a walk in the Garden of
Gethsemane, and then give his sins a prospect, of what they drew upon a
bleeding and Crucified Christ; there may thou see what a dismal night of
affliction thou have made him to suffer by thy luxury and night-revellings;
there may thou behold those sad wounds and bruises which thy sins have made
upon his body; and how he groans under that, at which thou do but sport thy
self; call upon thy deep draughts and riotous excess, to see what a cup of
wrath and trembling they have made him to drink off for their sake; show thy
drunkenness the Gall and Wormwood which he was forced to swallow for its
atonement; call hither thy lewd embraces, and sinful dalliances, show them a
naked Christ, all over bathed in tears and blood, to wash off their impurities;
bid thy oaths and cursing look yonder, and see the blood and wounds which they
have so often played withal; view those bitter pangs, throws, and Agonies, which
sin has made him to labor under, and then see whether it be so light and
inconsiderable a matter, as thou would fain persuade thy self it is:
certainly, if there be any pressure in that which cracked the very heart strings
of Nature, and made the whole Creation groan; if there be any weight in that
which sank the Lord of Heaven and Earth into the Grave, then is sin one of the
heaviest and most intolerable burdens in the World.

Secondly, this discourse of our Saviors Passion bids us to conform unto his
death, by dying unto sin, and crucifying the the flesh with the affections and
lusts; this is the use which the Apostle makes of it, Romans 6.4. that as Christ
dyed and rose again, so should we dye unto sin and live unto God; and verse
second, how shall we that are dead in sin live any longer therein? was Christ
bruised and wounded for our iniquities, and shall we act over the same Tragedy
upon him again by our repeated transgressions? had he not sorrow and sufferings
enough of old, but by renewed offenses will we tear open his wounds afresh, and
Crucify him again? shall we think it much to shed a few penitential tears for
that which made him sweat great drops of blood? when Satan, or thy own corrupt
heart tempt thee to the commission of any sin; imagine thou saw thy
Crucified Savior coming toward thee, showing thee his Cross, and beseeching
thee by all his wounds, that thou would not pierce his side again, or drive
any more nails into him; yea, fancy all his wounds to be so many mouths, gaping
for pity, and begging thee not to renew their smart by any fresh acts of
cruelty; would not this dissuade any that had but the bowels of a man from such
unreasonable attempts? imagine that he showed thee his cheeks swollen with
buffetings, his face defiled with spitting on, his head gored with Thorns, and
his back torn with scourges; and would not this be a spectacle sad enough to
move compassion? Sure, unless we are become transformed into wild Beasts, we
can never delight in the blood of our dearest friend; yea, we must be more
savage than they, if we prey upon our Keeper, and wound that hand that does but
reach us our it^ assistance; let us not then any longer hug that Viper in our
bosom, which not only stung our Savior to death, but likewise gnaws upon our
own Conscience, and leaves the^ Worm to torture us, that never dies; let us
bury our sins in our Saviouts grave; or, like the Egyptians of old, let them be
all drowned in the Red Sea of his blood.

Thirdly, in this story of our Saviors Passion, we may read the transcendent
and unexpressible love of Christ unto mankind, in undergoing all this misery
and torment for their sakes; the greatest expression of love that ever was, or
could be manifested toward the Sons of men, was the sending of a Savior into
the World; for when all mankind lay in a forlorn, undone condition, unable
either to bear or remove the great burden of those miseries which sin had
brought upon them; then to feel the gentle hand of a Redeemer taking off the
weight, and administering to them ease and deliverance, to find their chains
exchanged for a Crown, and their mourning turned into Jubilees, and songs of
Triumph; this is a mercy to be expressed only with wonder, and eternity it self
is too little sufficiently to celebrate and admire it: especially, considering
that the lapsed Angels, those nobler and far more glorious Creatures, were
totally past by and neglected, whilst the worthless sons of Adam became the
select objects of divine love and compassion; this is so high and eminent a
testimony of Gods love, that Saint John is at a loss, how to describe it, Chap.
3. verse 16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, etc.
and St. Paul, like one astonished at the consideration of it, cries out, O the
depth and height, the length and breadth of this love of God, that passes
knowledge! Ephesians. 3.18. Should any generous Monarch take some forlorn wretch from
the dunghill, in all his running sores and Ulcers, and not only receive him
into his Palace, but adopt him for his son, and pronounce him his heir; this,
though it were a kindness truly great and noble, is yet but a faint resemblance
of the great love of God toward us. Yea, farther, should any compassionate
Prince expose his own Darling Child to the most barbarous and bloody death,
only to save the life of (...) Traitor, who had oftentimes forfeited it by many
acts of Trea^on and Rebellion; this, though it come somewhat nearer, does yet
come infinitely short of this unimitable instance of Gods love and goodness; if
we would work our hearts to some sense of it, let us

First, meditate a while on the surpassing greatness and eminence of the person
who suffered all this for us; it being no other than the eternal and only
begotten Son of God; yea, on^ that was God blessed for evermore, and might have
been for over glorious, though the whole World still continued miserable.

Secondly, let us consider a little, what kind of death it wa^ that he
underwent, a death heightened with all the ingredien^^ of pain and anguish,
that the most ingenious and intaged malic^ could invent or execute; a death,
wherein the wrath of God and the spite of men, and the rage of all the power of
darkness most fatally conspired.

Thirdly, let us consider likewise the great worthlesness o^ the persons for
whom all this was done; persons that were n^^ only strangers, but the greatest
Enemies and Rebels to hi^ persons, that never did any thing, but what did (...)
highly disoblige and provoke him. The serious consideratio(...) these things
may help us to some small glimpses of this unp^^ lel'd mercy, though the just
dimensions of it can by no m^^^^ be comprehended, and is therefore left to be
the Object of (...) eternal praises and admiration.

Fourthly, from our Saviors Passion, we may learn patien(...) bear all the
afflictions and crosses that may befall us in this (...) we may not expect
better usage in the World than our (...) met with, the Disciple is not above
his Lord; as he has (...) before us in this hard and rugged way, so has he
left (...) him a fair copy of humility and patience for us to write (...) the
(...) that can happen to us of these calamities, are nothing (...) with his
Agonies, and bitter p^ssion; and shall ^ actions, that bear no proportion at
all (...) the heavy burden of his sufferings at that (...)ing excessive weight
of glory, which he (...)


