AN ANSWER TO Several Material Passages IN A BOOK, Published some time since by
W.P. ENTITLED, A Brief Examination and State of Liberty spiritual, both with
respect to Persons in their private Capacity, and in their Church-Society and
Communion, etc.

By J. H.

London, Printed in the Year, 1691.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
FRIENDS,
YOU being esteemed such as profess the Spirit of Truth, the guide into all
Truth, having met with this Book, Entitled, A brief Examination and state of
Liberty spiritual, both with respect to Persons in their private Capacity, and
in their Church Society and Communion; and finding the Author tells us, his aim
was to assert Truth, detect Error, and point at some Shoals and Sands, that
some have too boldly run upon, etc. Noting the great difference among Friends,
touching the latter, we could do no less than give it a serious Perusal, in
which we found, instead of asserting the Truth freely, detecting Error fairly,
or pointing at any dangerous Sand or Shoal certainly; the tendency of our
Author's Discourse, was rather to remove those true Marks we had, then
otherwise; by endeavoring to bring in a Blind Obedience, and an Implicit
Faith, to what he calls the Church, (which seems rather implied too, than
fairly set forth that we can find.)

On this account, considering how easy it is for many on a Religious score, to
take things for granted from Persons valued on that account, rather than give
themselves the trouble of trial, by a true search, according to the due weight
of the Matter.

We say, considering the danger of this, we could do no less than take notice
of several parts of the said Book, desiring they may be well weighed and
considered, by such as believe the Spirit of Truth, is that only guide into all
Truth. How far we was obliged to do this at present, by an immediate Motion
from God, we shall not now determine, nor Impose upon any; for as we find the
name of the Lord in this case is almost become as a Reproach, being so often
used of late to so little purpose, so we would not administer further Occasion
in that respect, to those that are without, to speak evil of the way of Truth,
because of some difference among such as profess it; nor would we peremptorily
impose upon our Brethren, who professing the same Principles of Truth, may
pretend to the like Certainty; for avoiding those things, we choose rather to
commend wh^t we have to say, to the witness of God in every mind, that being
the likeliest way to make room for Truth; and as soft words are said to pacify
Wrath, so are they most like to be heard at this time.

It Is true, we have delivered our Judgment plainly, that the Tendency and
Import of our Author's Discourse was, and is to bring in blind Obedience, etc.
which as it leads from the Truth, so it is wrong in it self; and as every wrong
is managed knowingly, or otherwise through some mistake; if wrong is carried on
knowingly, it is evil or wicked, because designed; but from this censure, we may
in Charity excuse our Author, believing him both a better Man, and more a
Christian; but if not designed, it must be carried on and managed through some
mistake, and so we would have what is said in the following Discourse to be
understood.

But then some may inquire, how our Author could be mistaken, being Master of
such great Abilities? to which we answer, easily, through the mysterious
working of the Enemy in the likeness of Truth; nor need this seem strange to
any, if they consider how many have been deceived thereby, both great and
small, and some at times hurried into things grossly evil, as killing their
fellow Creatures; and yet at the same time, think they did God Service, etc.
How much more easy is it for Persons to be deceived by the Enemy, in things
that appear like good? The likeness of good and of Truth, is that which the
evil one takes up, to keep his place, and save his Life, when he can keep no
longer in the polluted State; for being a Spirit, he can turn into any
likeness, and through the over-valuing of outward thing's on a Religious score,
has the Enemy slipped undiscovered into all Forms of Religion, that have been
in the World, and thereby kept alive his Kingdom, in the Wrath; Enmity, hard
Speeches, Hatred, and Incharitableness, that have been kept up among the
various Professors of it.

Therefore, that great Mystery of Iniquity stands in the likeness of Truth; for
if there was nothing like Truth, that is not Truth, there could be no
Incharitableness among such, as in any measure fear God; for as then there
would be nothing but good and Evil, so such as loved the Good, as they would
deny the Evil, they would own the good to the least degree of its appearance,
knowing that as the Root of all Evil, was but one, so the Root of all good, was
but one.

But now besides what is evil and good, as coming from each respective Root,
there is a third thing, as we may say, that stands betwixt them. The outward
appearance resembles good to a great degree, but the Root is of the same Nature
with the Evil, having only changed his appearance; and though good may
sometimes be witnessed here, as there is any thing of Sincerity in the Mind,
yet the Root of Evil not being removed away, the covering of the Soul in the
best sense, is but as the linen and woolen Garment, forbid to be worn under
the Law: On this account, it is as needful to know the Enemy cast out of our
Hearts, as he appears like good, as it was to know him cast out, as he appeared
as Evil; for as where the latter is not known, there wants the form of Truth;
so where the former is not witnessed, there wants the power of it. It is here
that he deceives poor Man, sitting as God in the Temple of God; and therefore,
till he is cast out, we cannot know our Names truly to be written in the Lamb's
Book of Life. In this is the Victory, not only over Sin, but over Satan; for
when he can keep no longer in the polluted State, nor deceive by the likeness
of good, then can he deceive no more.

This we must hope and look for, and the Turnings and overturnings in
Profession of Religion, since the stirring of God by his Spirit to Reformation,
do show that he is on his way to reign, whose Right it is a But to our Time
this Likeness of Truth, this Enemy, as God sitting in the Temple of God, etc.
has not been cast out, nor could in any Reformation, because all-a-long some
outward Ceremoniel or shadowy things was joined with the Spirit of Truth, as
essential to Salvation, True Religion, and the Government of Christ: But as the
Enemy can go into any outward Form or Thing, therefore he could not be cast
forth whilst those outward Things were overvalued; but whether such have acted
against Understanding, or the Day was not so far dawned upon them, we shall not
have determine, because our Business is to consider what the Lord has done for
us; has he not given us to believe that God's Holy Spirit is the only Guide
into all Truth, the Substance of all Types and Figures, and the fulfiller of
every addition for Righteousness-sake, truly reconciling to God? But if after
we have seen or believed the Lord is that Spirit, the Heir of all things that
is Good and Serviceable for man's Souls Good, that was either in the Law,
Prophets, or in any External Order, Form, Rule or Shadowy thing; if after we
have believed all this we set up Ceremonial Circumstantial or shadowy Things,
as Terms of Communion and Essential to the Government of Christ, then we err on
one Hand as they did on the other; they seemed to come short, in not believing
the thing to be done on this side the Grave, etc. And we err and come short in
concluding the Work is done before it is, which is a false Rest, for as we have
more Additions than we had in our Beginning, and as every adding of outward
Rules shows a Want of Christ's Government by his Holy Spirit; therefore, in the
best Sense, if these Rules are added to perfect, and not only as an Expedient
for the present Want, and so only to be used till Christ come in Power, to
govern the Soul; instead of helping they will certainly hinder.

For as there is no Rule that has been, is, or ever shall be, to perfect the
Soul, by bringing it to God, but the Holy Spirit; so it is certain there is no
Government in this Case but that of Christ, but it shall have an End. From
hence it is certain that no outward Rule, as it concerns a Holy Conversation on
the Worship of God is of any Service, but until he come: therefore outward
Rules, as above are set up, by us as a standing Ordinance or but for a Time: If
but for a Time, then their Service is but to steady our Mind, that so in the
Use of them we might daily wait for their fulfilling, by the coming of Christ,
by his Holy Spirit: But if Rules, as above, are made as a standing Ordinance,
then are these outward things over-valued, and whilst over-valued we cannot
know Christ the Emanuel come to fulfill them.

On this account it is that every latter Appearance of God is as Death to the
former, and this is our Case, as well as any that did go before us, for the
Substance of those two great Dispensations of Law and Gospel must be known in
every Man that comes truly through the Work of Regeneration into the Kingdom of
God, and therefore as the Natural Life is hard to be parted with, where a
better is not hoped for, so where the Life of Religion stands in outward Things
or Rules they are hard to be parted with while a better Life and Rule is not
hoped for. Can any Man serve two Masters, which in our case we desire may be
truly considered; and for that end we offer, as the Object of the Mind is, so
is the Mind, whether it regard Conversation or the Worship of God, for if the
Object of the Mind be an outward Rule the Mind can go no further than that
Rule, for can any thing give forth more than it has in it self? therefore by
outward Rules Man can go no further than a Legal Dispensation; and if Mantakes
up his Rest here, his Dependence is no higher than a Covenant of Works, and
such cannot know self-slain, and as such can never know boasting excluded, they
cannot know Salvation truly, by the free Grace of God: But if the Object of the
Mind be God's Holy Spirit, and truly follows it, the Mind thereby will become
wholly Spiritual, wherein the old Things pass away and all becomes new, both as
to outward things and also to heavenly things: Here the Tree is made Good, and
its Fruit Good; Now the Root being Holy the Conversation is Holy, for as is the
Fountain so is the Stream, what was difficult before is now easy, and what
seemed harsh before is now pleasant, for the Root of evil being cast out there
remains nothing but Good: Here the Peace on Earth and good Will is known to all
Mankind; we desire therefore that outward Things may not be over-valued, for
therein stand the uncharitableness that is amongst all that fear God, for as
the over-valuing outward things hinders from coming into Communion and
Fellowship with God, so it hinders the true Knowledge of the stirings of God in
others, for when the Appearance or Conversation must be measured by certain
Rules, it follows, what is Terms of Communion, or is accepted of God, may not
be accepted of Men; we know where the Heart is purified, the Mind made Holy by
the indwelling of God's Holy Spirit, this is terms of Communion, or what is
accepted of God, from hence proceeds a Holy Conversation with a Confession to
that Righteous Principle by which it is made such, and therefore as this is not
accepted with Men, such are not born of God, nor do they know that Holy City,
whose Gates stands open by Day, for there is no Night there, this lets all in
that are Good, but hinders what is not: But all Cities but this, as they have
Day and Night, so they know not what they do, but shut their Gates as soon
against the Good as the contrary: That this great Evil may be avoided is all
that is intended by what is here written, and that as we began in the Spirit so
we may wait to be perfected thereby, that so as we have in any measure known
him to have been our Alpha, we may know him to be our Omega also, for by no
other way can the Deceiver be cast out as he takes up the Profession of the
Truth.

Where the Term You is found in the following Discourse, we intend the Author
and those of his Mind, whoever they are, whether many or few.

And as the Term We is also used, it may be understood in respect to those of
the same Mind with the Author of this Boook.

There are several Faults committed by the Press, in Letters, Stops, etc. which
the Reader is desired to amend in the Reading; and in page 5. line 8. for
Author read Apostle. And page 49. lin. 8. for uncountable read unaccountable.

AN ANSWER to a BOOK, ENTITLED, A Brief EXAMINATION, etc.
AS to the Definition of Liberty spiritually explained, Page the first, we
agree upon the matter.

But Page 2. after the asking of several Questions, the Author comes to this
result, That there is some things left to our freedom, and bounds it at this
time to outward things of Life and Commerce, as what I shall eat, and when,
etc. And then states this Question.

But does not freedom extend farther than this? For since God has given me a
manifestation of his Spirit to profit withal, and that I have the gift of God
in my self, should I not be left to act according as I am free and persuaded in
my own mind in the things that relate to God, least looking upon my self as
obliged by what is revealed unto another, though it be not revealed unto me, I
should be led out of my own measure, and act upon another motion, and offer a
blind sacrifice to God? To which he answers thus.

Answ. This is true in a sense, that is, if thou art such an one that can do
nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth, then thou may safely be left
to thy freedom in the things of God; and the reason is plain, because thy
freedom stands in the perfect Law of Liberty, in the Law of the Spirit of Life
in Christ Jesus, and in the Truth which is Christ Jesus, which makes thee free
indeed, that is, perfectly free from all that is bad, and perfectly free to all
that is holy, just, lovely, comely, and of good report: But if thou plead thy
freedom against such things, yea, obstructest and slightest such good, wholesome
and requisite things, thy freedom is naught, dark, perverse, and out of Truth,
and against the perfect Law of Love and Liberty.

Answer, That this question above is weighty, is clear, for the whole
controversy seems included in it; for where the gift of God is received to
profit withal, they have liberty and freedom to choose or refuse things
according as they are persuaded, or they have not; and all this is included in
the question; whereupon according to truth, if his design had been to assert
it, the Question ought to have been effectually answered, and all the parts of
it freely and fairly discussed, that Persons might have known their true
Liberty, with respect to Church Communion according to his Title Page: But on
the contrary, in our Judgment, the Answer, if worthy of that name, is slight
and evasive, no way deserving to be reputed or accepted as a true Answer to
this weighty Question.

For, Observe, the Question is, Whether freedom and liberty do not extend
further than outward things; that is, whether it do not reach to the things of
God where the gift of God is received according to the Question, which being
set down above Verbatim, we allways refer to in this matter, both to avoid
mistake and repetition.

To this, observe we find no direct Answer, neither directly affirming or
denying the Question; what is there, it is true implies a grant, but not to the
purpose; and it seems rather to take the Question to be an Assertion than a
Question, in our Judgment; for it follows thus, that this Question is true in a
sense, which to us is neither clear nor very proper, a Question in some sort
being a matter undetermined till affirmed or denied: And thus at first we see
the Question is rather avoided than answered; for what cause we shall enquire
afterward. And in the mean time, seeing his Answer takes the Question to be an
Assertion to humor it, we are content the Question be affirmed and turned into
a position, to see then if we can speed any better. And it will follow thus, or
to this effect:

That true liberty and freedom does extend further than outward things, as what
I shall Eat, and when, etc. for it reaches to the things of God, to all that
have received the gift of God to profit withal; for such as they do adhere to
it, have liberty and freedom in the fear of God, to choose what they believe,
and are persuaded is good, and to refuse, and let alone what they believe and
are persuaded is not good; nor can they act upon another's motion, whilst they
want a sense of it in their own mind, by the gift of God given them to profit
withal, but offer a blind Sacrifice to God. Here we hope we have kept close to
the true sense of the Question, if affirmed, however we are content to abide by
the genuine sense of it according to Truth.

To this, observe he answers, this Assertion or Question is true in a sense,
and that is, he says, If thou be such an one as is perfectly free to all good,
and perfectly free from all evil, then thou may be safely left to thy
freedom. To find whether this Answer be full or nay to the Question, we offer,
either this Question, if affirmed, is true in a larger sense than he has
granted, or its but true in this sense.

If true in a larger sense, it follows, if his aim and design, as he says, was
to assert the truth, he has missed his mark. For to assert, the truth is so
comprehensive a term, as to take in the direct Answer to this weighty Question.

But if but true in this sense that he has laid down, then it follows, because
I am not arrived at this Perfection he speaks of, that is, to be perfectly free
from all that is bad, and perfectly free to all that is good, as Above; though
I may have received the gift of God for that end, and do adhere to it, and am
travailing for it, yet I am not to be left to my freedom and liberty in the
things of God, to act as I am persuaded. Now if I must not act as I am
persuaded, then I must act as others are persuaded; and how I can so act and
not offer a blind Sacrifice to God, he has not so much as attempted to show
which, discovers his Answer deficient, if his design was good.

Again, either he believes his Answer is full to the Question, or he believes
and knows it is not: If he believes and knows it is not full, then must he not
only, not have asserted the Truth as above, but also be conscious wherefore he
did it not; and we conceive, that must either be because he wanted Ability, or
otherwise, because he wanted Truth in his way, which we shall examine by and by.

And in the mean time, if he believed this was a full answer to the question,
when affirmed, then we must assert, he was under a great mistake; for the
Question affirmed as above, is certainly not only true in a part, or in a
sense, as he is pleased to say; but it is true in every part, true in the
whole, and every sense that a Position can be true in; nay it is so far true,
that if it can be wrong at all, it is only in a sense; and that is only when
mis-applied. But the Mis-application of this weighty Question when affirmed,
does (observe) neither destroy it in it self, nor in the least take away the
true use; and therefore we believe, where the gift of God is received to profit
withal, and truly adhered too, there must be a liberty to choose and refuse
things according as such are persuaded, even from the Babe in Christ, to the
strong Man, and so to all States: Nor do we hereby exclude External Counsel and
Advice, but still it must accord, and agree with the gift of God received, or
it is not obliging. And where this is not freely granted, at least among a
People that acknowledge the Spirit of Truth to be the only guide into all
Truth, there the Government of Christ is either directly or indirectly opposed
or hindered; for admit of one Error or Uncertainty, and more will follow; an
Uncertainty admitted for the Truth in this case, standing in the nature of a
Lie.

But now to show, that this part of his Answer which seems to affirm the
Question, is so far from being a direct and full Answer, as it is not worthy of
that name, being of no use or service with respect to the Controversy, the end
for which he pleads his great concern to write. For observe, though it is true
in the sense he grants, that those that are perfectly free from all bad, and
perfectly free to all good, may safely be left to their freedom to act in the
things of God as they are persuaded. Yet, forasmuch as he neither has, nor we
believe, can give us any certain or undoubted Rule, how to know who these are
that are so to be left; all that he has said by way of affirming this great
and weighty Question, is worth nothing; for as it is altogether unintelligible,
it is every way impracticable. Well then, if any certain Rule can be given to
know who may be left to their freedom as above, let us have it, and by the
contrary Rule, we shall know who may not be so left: But if no such Rule can be
given, it must follow, all must be left free, or none must be left. If none
must be left, then must an outward Rule be set up to govern all, and that would
make us like Israel that rejected God's Government, to be like other Nations.
But if all must be left free to act in the things of God as they are persuaded,
let all this Clamor cease, that we may be quiet and live like Christians in
the fellowship of the Gospel. There is but one Objection, and that is, that
this is to give liberty to evil, which we may speak to in another place; and in
the mean time, that is far from our thoughts, as the Author said, it ought not
to be named among Saints.

But now to the latter part of his Answer, where he makes a flourish, as if he
would tell us who were not to be left to their freedom, that so he might give
some thing like an Answer to the whole Question; in which, if he succeeds no
better than he has done above, we believe there is none will be better or
wiser, for what he has done. But to the matter, he tells us, if thou plead'st
thy freedom against such requisite things, thy freedom is naught, dark,
perverse, and out of the Truth, etc. This is still to the same tune; here is a
Judge implied, but not set forth; it is not the Spirit of Truth, but some
outward thing, whatever it is.

But since we know not where he will fix, to say no more, it is dark to be sure:
To help it all we can, we shall thus far grant, there are some outward things
so far essential to true Religion, as those that do contrary to them may be
detected of Error; but if it had been any of those things that had been done
contrary too, we believe they would not have been omitted here, because if
certain, they would have greatly advantaged this Discourse, there being much
want of certainty in it: But this not being done, and things laid down in a
general way, in which often deceit or cunning lurks, we can do no less than
judge, that the things suggested as the ground of Difference, are neither such
Principles nor Practices as have been from our beginning, nor yet such things
as can be truly said to be essential to true Religion; and if not essential
things, (observe it) nor yet such things as have been from our beginning, they
can at best be but circumstantial, or if you will, ceremonial or shadowy
things, and such things at best are but accidentally good, that is, as Persons
are persuaded of them; and what is but accidentally good, may on the contrary,
be accidentally not good, and that is as persons are disatisfied with them. And
if they prove such things as those, we believe they concern only that outward
Court which God has left unmeasured, on purpose that Christians might never
differ about them; and if such things (as we are fit to take for granted) we
would gladly know, how they can be brought in and made terms of Communion
against the mind of other of the same persuasion, while we have run down with
all our power the like in others? What, was they wrong there, and can they be
right here (that is strange) according to truth? But in the likeness of truth
its not strange, it being commonly found, that Persons plead for or against
things in others, which they will neither give nor take themselves. Besides
it is seen, it is about such things that the most of Christians have differed,
denying Communion to one another on some specious pretense or other, forgetting
to give what they themselves desired to receive. And thus has poor Man been
deceived all along by the Devil in the likeness of Truth.

But to proceed, that the Question above is weighty, we have noted, and that
the Answer is evasive, and nothing to the purpose, we have showed. The Reason
wherefore it was evaded, remains to be inquired into according to our promise;
and that we conceive still as above, must either be because our Author wanted
Ability, or else his Cause was not good, and so could not bear the answering it
according to truth.

Not the first we are satisfied, for those many Tracts wrote by him, when
directed to a good end, do abundantly show his Ability, and skill in things of
this kind, yea to that exactness, that without flattery, he might have been
compared to the Men of Benjamin that could hit their Mark to an hairs breadth.
Thus it could not be the want of Ability, therefore we are satisfied, it was
the want of Truth in the design carried on; Opinion or the likeness of Truth,
was endeavored to be obtruded and set up instead of Truth; betwixt which and
Truth, there is as much difference in the ground, nay, more than betwixt the
shadow and the substance; and yet there is that likeness in outward appearance,
or else it could not be called the Mystery of Iniquity; by which all are and
have been deceived, to their hurt, but only such who are sincere to God, and
cannot sit down before they know their Names writ in the Lamb's Book of Life.
This is that only which can fully satisfy the Hungry and the Thirsty Soul.

So that though Men have begun well, yet if they travel not for the end, they
must miscarry; for if the Travel cease in any state short of the Rest, let
former Openings and Experiences bin what they will, as that work is stopped by
the Enemy, so are they deceived by him in the likeness of the Truth at best;
for as the Rest is that which remains for the People of God, so is there no
state allotted men that have simply begun in Spirit to dwell in short of that,
because none safe but that; the Rest is only by being in Christ, the Travel is
while he appears in us, to fit us for himself, to new create us; for it is the
new Creature that only finds room in him.

Now the Enemy, that fallen Angel, can go with Man into every remove, whilst
man is fitting and preparing, but into Christ he cannot come; for in him he has
no part; upon which account it is plain, the difference is great betwixt our
being in Christ, and he only in us. And as man must be made a new Creature
before he can come into Christ, so must he travel through the whole Mystery of
Iniquity; and in the last step of the Travel, is the very height of the Mystery
known, and not before. Here is the delivering of Isaac up indeed, and the
receiving of him again after another sort: Here the Mystery is finished, and
Man's works cease, etc. We know whilst the Hunger and Thirst remains for
God's Kingdom in Man's Mind and Soul, he cannot choose but be sincere, and then
he must travel, because the Hope stands before him, and the sense of Eternal
Life lives upon his Mind; but if the value of that Heavenly Country fall in his
Mind, the Travel ceases; and then, if in any state short of the Rest, it is not
God nor his Holy Spirit that bears Rule; for where he rules, there is
Sincerity, and where there is Sincerity, there is travel. And as the Lord begets
it, so he has regard to the least measure of his own begeting, and there the
Enemy is chained, and the Sin of the least Child is forgiven for his Name sake;
so that though the Enemy can go with the Creature, he rules not; but if the
Travel of the Mind and Soul cease before the Rest is known, let it be where it
will, as the Sincerity ceases, it is the Enemy that rules, and the more
Knowledge revealed, the greater is the Mystery of Iniquity; and when this comes
to pass as there is a false Rest set up, so there is a great noise about
outward things. All was quiet before, but now all in a Tumult, not about
essential, but circumstantial or shadowy things. It would not be so, if we
truly sought the Heavenly Country, or rightly knew our Lives hid with Christ in
God; for if that was truly known, first, as to the Travel, we should find work
enough at Home; and if the latter, wherein our own Works cease, we should
never think of establishing God's Kingdom by our Works: But to leave this
Digression, and come again to the Matter.

As the likeness of Truth, and Truth, differ in the Ground, so their Arguments
do also differ. Those plain and simple Arguments that will serve the Truth,
will do nothing for the other to help the likeness forward; weighty Questions
must be evaded, or indeed agreeable to the Nature of the matter carried on;
something like Answer must be given to weighty Questions, which in truth are
none; things that God has left unmeasured, must be measured, and a greater
value set upon them, than he ever set; and what ought to be proved, (that it
might be certain, because where there wants Certainty there wants Truth) must
instead of being proved, be taken for granted; which begging of the Question is
apparent throughout the whole Discourse, as may be showed in part as we
proceed; by which it is plain to us, and we hope will be to every considerate
Reader, that the plain tendency of the Paper, was, and is to bring in the
likeness of Truth, for the Truth, by endeavoring a Conformity that is more
presumptive than real, wherein things must be taken for granted, because others
say it, and not because they that should receive them, know they are true; and
that this Discourse levels at this Mark, is plain to us, and hopes will be to
more, if they consider the go-by to this weighty Question. And this will be
further confirmed, when we consider the Difficulties that lie in the Question,
to be answered truly, where Men's ways is not that of the Truth.

To this end consider, the Question is fair and easily answered according to
Truth; then as his aim was to have asserted Truth, he ought to have done it;
but it is plain with respect to Truth and his Discourse, he could do it neither
way, that is, he could neither directly affirm or deny the Question.

For first, had he affirmed the Question as he ought to have done, that is to
have fairly granted, that where the gift of God is received to profit withal,
there all such ought to be left to act in the things of God as they are
persuaded, then had he spoiled his Discourse, for he could not deny but those
that he would conclude to be guided by others, have received the gift of God to
profit withal, therefore as this would have been inconsistent with his
Discourse, it is plain, his way was not the way of Truth. Again, had he granted
the Question as above, he had not only spoiled his Discourse by asserting
Truth, but then he had asserted and stood by one of the Foundations, Principles
of our building, and of every true building, to wit, Conviction and Persuasion.
And indeed without which, as there can be no true buillding, so can no true
building stand where it is discontinued; this must needs have marred the Market
of those whose cause he undertook, that cannot be quiet about their Opinions,
till others of the same Communion are persuaded, which ought, and must be, if
Conviction or Persuasion must preceed Conformity: By Opinions, we mean such
things as have not been from our beginning, and which can never be proved
essential things; for they may tell us, they are moved of God, in the matter,
this will not do whilst we are sure that he has left such things on purpose
unmeasured, that Men might agree; therefore, where Persons will press such
things to dissatisfaction, they raise themselves above the level of their
Brethren, and then of necessity there must be something of Lordship and
Dominion exercised, contrary to the Rule laid down by our Lord, who said, after
those things the Gentiles seek, but said, it shall not be so among you; he that
will be the greatest, let him be as him that serves. On this account they was
to call no Man Doctor or Father, that so their Dependence might not be on Men,
let their Abilities be what they will. And thus, as his Discourse could not
bear the affirming truly this weighty Question, because then must have granted
Conviction; so on the other hand, he could not deny it; for had he done that,
he must have been under an Obligation to have demonstrated, how there could be
a dependence on others in the things of God, without offering a blind Sacrifice
to God; but this he could not with respect to Truth, and the other he could
not, with respect to his Discourse; and those we conclude the true Reasons why
the Question was left unanswered.

There is one thing more worth our while to consider before we leave this
matter, and that is, how it should come to pass that a Man of his Ability
should state a Question that he could not answer, with respect to his design
and end; had another set it, and he slipped it over, it had been the more
tolerable; but for him to state it himself, and give it the go by so sorrily,
is plain weakness; to which, what can be said, but when Men will employ their
Parts and Abilities to a wrong end, an end God never designed them to, there
divine Providence suffers Men to show their weakness, first, that no Flesh
should glory in his Presence; and secondly, that others seeing weaknesses as in
the best of Men, might be cautioned to wait to know their dependence upon him,
that neither slumbereth nonsleepeth, nor can be mistaken, which is all that is
desired by what is writ. We have stood the longer upon this, in looking upon
its weight.

He Questions Page the 3 d. But must I conform to things whether I can receive
them or nay? Ought I not to be left to the Grace and Spirit of God in my own
Heart?

To this, he answers to the first part of the Question, Nay; that is, Thou
ought not to receive things against Truth; to the latter part, Yea; that is,
Thou ought to be left to the Grace and Spirit of God.

Answer. This is fairly said we must confess, and if truly stood to, might help
to make amends for the former deficient Answer, but if otherwise, it will be a
further Evidence his end is not good; and therefore to examine the matter, he
says, let us consider what is the reason, that thou can not receive them, is
the fault in the things, or is it in thee, etc. If in thee, thou ought to be
dealt with; thus far he has said well; but now on the other Hand, what if the
fault be in the things, or in the ground or manner of bringing them in? What
Care has he taken? What Remedy has he provided, that such things may be fairly
and freely withstood? Verily none at all, neither here, nor in any place of his
Book that we can find; which certainly he ought to have done, if he had
asserted equal Liberty according to his Discourse, if it was to assert Truth;
for he inquires fairly where the fault is, that is, whether in the things
brought in, or in those that cannot receive them; by which it is fairly employed,
if not granted, that the fault may lie on the side of the things brought in, as
well as on the side of those that cannot receive them, and does lie there for
any thing that he has said, to prove the contrary; but if not determined, yet
for a much as most danger may lie on the side of the things, if they must come
in without control; for we may conclude, such as bring them in are reputed
Leaders; and forasmuch as the Leaders may do more harm in bringing in things
that are wrong, than others can do in opposing some things that may in some
sort be right. But as a way is granted to deal with those that oppose what is
right, there ought to be as much care for Liberty, to oppose what is wrong; but
for that he has taken no care, though it is plain, the Danger is as great, nay,
greater on that side; for the Leaders have caused the People to err, and the
effect was, that the People led by them was devoured. The wise Man said, There
was nothing new; then the Leaders may again cause the People to err, and the
People may again be devoured for any thing that he has said, either to prove
there is no Danger, or by asserting true Liberty to prevent it, which can never
be better done, nor more according to Truth, than by allowing freely Conviction
and Persuasion to preceed Conformity; for as this keeps down Men from being
masterly, so it helps such as are to receive things, to consider of true
Religion in themselves; and therefore, the contrary may be the ruin of the
whole; on which account it is plain, he having taken no care as he has not
asserted the Truth, for that allows equal Liberty, so he appears partial.

Again in the same Page, he says, It is a dangerous Principle, and pernicious
to true Religion; and which is worse, he says, It Is the root of Ranterism to
assert, that nothing is a Duty incumbent upon thee, but what thou art persuaded
on, etc.

Answer. This deserves our Consideration, for it is as removing a Bounder or
Landmark, it is of the same Nature with Conviction or Persuasion; for if
Conviction and Persuasion is to preceed or go before Conformity in our Duty to
God and true Religion, then nothing can be a Duty incumbent upon us, but what
we are persuaded on: But if Duty to God and true Religion must be performed
before convinced or persuaded to it, then something may be a Duty incumbent
upon us, that we know not, or are not persuaded on.

We shall examine this a little, and therefore offer, if to assert or believe
that nothing is a Duty incumbent upon us, but what we are persuaded on, be in
it self a dangerous Principle, pernicious to true Religion, and what is still
worse, the root of Ranterism, then the saying that stands against this, must be
as good as that is evil; that is, it must be a safe Principle, propitious to
true Religion; and which is still better, it should be as the root of all good
to Man; for we conceive, the root of Ranterism is as the root of all evil.
Well, this saying that stands against the former, is to believe or assert, that
something is a Duty incumbent upon us, that we know not, or are not persuaded
on; for we must either believe, that nothing is a Duty incumbent upon us but
what we are persuaded on, or we must believe the contrary.

Now, as opposite sayings have contrary senses and effects, then if the first
saying be evil, the latter must be good; and on the contrary, if the latter in
a direct and true sense be wrong, as leading from Truth into blind Obedience,
then the former saying, notwithstanding all his ugly Epithites bestowed upon
it, must be good in a true sense, as tending to lead truly to know, both our
Duty toward God and true Religion.

And therefore observe, if according to his saying, to assert or believe that
nothing is a Duty incumbent upon us, but what we are persuaded on, be the root
of Ranterism worse than what is pernicious to true Religion: Then to avoid this
dangerous Shoal and Sand that he has given notice of, we must believe, that
something is a Duty incumbent upon us that we are not persuaded on; and if we
can thus believe, we must of necessity depend on him or others, to let us know
what our Duty is.

If this is his meaning, and what he aims at; and for our parts, we can see no
other sense obvious on the Consequence of his Argument; we say, this must be
back again to something, like the first Covenant that could not make the
Comers thereunto perfect; but this is not so good; for that was measured of
God, whilst this is not: This is to Impeach the Grace of God, and Spirit of
Truth, to whose sufficiency so many Testimonies have been born, as not now
sufficient to lead all (observe) into all Truth; it is true, it may imply, that
some are led into all Truth, or else we know not on whom they must depend, that
are to believe, that something is a Duty incumbent upon them that they are not
persuaded on; but as this is his meaning, he has left us miserably unprovided,
whilst the Consequence of his arguing is to make us believe, that something is
a Duty incumbent upon us that we do not know, and yet at the same time does not
let us know on whom we may depend; but seeing our Inability to understand our
Duty, must be the cause of our Dependence, on whom he or others is pleased to
set forth; may not we say this bears for Rome, where Ignorance is said to be
the Mother of Devotion? but that we will not at present, because perhaps his
meaning may be better than his Expression, and indeed it had been the easilier
passed by, had he made any good Provision in his Book, that we might not have
been imposed on contrary to our Understandings; but taking no care for that
that we can find, as also discouraging all those Positions that seems to
reserve a Liberty to understand what we are to receive, demonstrates plainly,
the tendency of his writing is to bring in blind Obedience.

But to confirm his ugly dress put upon this saying, that nothing is a Duty
incumbent upon us but what we are persuaded on, he tells us, the dead, dark,
and seared Consciences plead Liberty against all Duty, and this is all that he
offers that is material; but this will not do his business; for there is a vast
difference betwixt denying all Duty to God, and believing nothing a Duty but
what we are persuaded on: The first deny all Duty, the latter owns all Duty
that can be known.

The first denying all Duty is directly evil, but the latter, as they own all
Duty that they know, so may they wait truly to know what God is pleased farther
to show, wherein a true Christian is included and stands; and therefore, for
him to join this state which may be truly good, with that which is certainly
evil, though he has not justified the wicked, yet certainly he has condemned
the Righteous, concerning which, there is much might be spoken. But in short,
either he believes those that believe or assert, that nothing is a Duty
incumbent upon them, but what they are persuaded on, are those dead, dark, and
seared Consciences, or he does not so believe; if he does not so believe, why
does he compare them with such? But if he does so believe, then seeing
according to his account, they must be dead, dark and seared, before they made
those Pleas; and then seeing there is nothing more contrary to the living than
the dead, how came it they was not found out till those Circumstantial things
was brought in? For so we must account them till they are proved otherwise.
It Is true, he calls them requisite things, and no marvel that you should so
esteem them, when you could not know your dead, dark and seared Consciences
without them; but can those requisite things that keeps out, or makes known
those dead, dark and seared Consciences that pleads, being left to the Grace of
God, and that nothing is a Duty incumbent upon them, but what they are
persuaded on? Can those requisite things which keeps those above out, keep out
Hypocrites? If not, must they not be living or dead Members? If living, we
leave you modestly to make the Application; but if dead, it is worth your while
to consider, if you have not been under some mistake all this time, and so have
been endeavoring to cast out the living, but kept the dead; does this bespeak
you truly living, and your spiritual Senses perfect? To say no more to this we
doubt not.

But again, to this Position, that nothing is a Duty but what we are persuaded
on; if this saying be so evil as he has represented it, as above, then it must
be so, either because of it is abuse, or because evil in it self. If it must be
disused and criminated only because some abuse it, then what is there but it
must be parted with; according to his own saying, Page 4. in a like Case,
farewell with the Scripture, and indeed with every thing else that is good,
since all those things that Man can meddle with, have been abused at one time
or other.

But if he be so angry at this Position, as evil in it self, which it must, if
the root of Ranterism, then we believe he is in a great mistake, and do offer
in its favor, that what may be said by a Holy and Religious Man; truly as a
Holy and Religious Man cannot be Evil, much less the root of Ranterism, but
this, that nothing is a Duty, but what we are persuaded on, we believe may be
truly affirmed by a Holy and Religious Man, and that against Imposition. For as
no Man can be Holy but by God's Holy Spirit, so no Man can truly know his Duty
toward God, but by the same Spirit; and as Duty to God cannot be known, nor
true Religion performed, but by the Influences of it, so we believe where the
gift of God is received to profit withal, and truly adhered too, nothing is a
Duty incumbent upon such, but what they are persuaded on. We do not say, that
nothing shall be a Duty but what such are persuaded on, but this we say,
whatever shall be a Duty, must be known before it can be so. Now, if nothing be
a Duty but what they are persuaded on, certainly they may affirm on a Christian
account, nothing is a Duty incumbent upon them, but what they know or are
persuaded on, without being Ranters, which they could not, if this saying was
the root of Ranterism.

But to observe a little what his own Words afford us, he tells us of some
Persons above, that was perfectly free from all bad, and perfectly free to all
good, which might safely be left to their freedom to act in the things of God.
Now, we hope however that he will grant, that nothing is a Duty incumbent upon
them, but what they are persuaded on; and then we hope he will allow, they may
affirm nothing is a Duty but what they are persuaded on, and if but true in
that one sense, this saying cannot be the root of Ranterism, for that is true
or good in no sense: It Is true, he has not given us a Rule to know those of
whom we last spoke, nor do we believe that he can set them out; but that is not
against us, but for us; for if any may assert, that nothing is a Duty but what
they are persuaded on, tho others may abuse it, if we cannot distinguish
betwixt the one and the other; he knows Tares must be suffered to grow, rather
than run the hazard to destroy Wheat.

Again, he tells us Page 9. That a saying may be true or false according to the
subject or matter it is applied to. Now, though we believe he has mist the truth
there, yet it will serve us here against himself; for this Position that he is
so angry at, is but a saying, and such as has been advanced truly against
Imposition, and again, may be truly used on that occasion; therefore it cannot
be the root of Ranterism, for that is simply evil; wherefore, we hope he will
withdraw his Charge of the root of Ranterism from this Position, that nothing
is a Duty incumbent upon us but what we are persuaded on and instead of
condemning it as evil, allow it as good and necessary in its genuine sense.

But to conclude this matter, we grant a saying may come from the root of
Ranterism, but no saying whatever can be that Root, much less such a saying
that has, and may again be applied to a good end; wherefore we cannot see why
this saying should be written with a different Character for, and this ugly and
undeserved dress put on it, except instead of persuading, to affrighten into
blind Obedience.

To the latter part of the Question, Ought I not to be left to the Grace and
Spirit of God in my own Heart, etc.

To this he answers, That is of all things most desirable, for no fear of want
of Unity, where all are so left with the one Spirit, they must be of one Mind,
they cannot be otherwise, etc.

Answer, That he desires all should be guided by God's Spirit, we believe, and
therein does well; but that he should limit it to that one way, with respect to
shadowy or circumstantial things, that he may believe is good, is his mistake;
by which it is plain, though he may have received a measure of God's Spirit, yet
he is not truly born of it, for if he were, he would not limit God's Holy
Spirit to this or that ceremonial, circumstantial or shadowy thing; for that is
to set the measure above him from whom it comes, and to measure that which God
has left unmeasured, the hurt and mischief through all the Reformations that
have been; this is not the Truth, but a likeness of it at best, which all
hitherto have been deceived by, and it is our danger. O that it could be
considered in our day!

But to the matter, that those that are truly left with the one Spirit of
Truth, must and will agree, we grant; and therefore, where difference is
carried on to the Breach of Charity, one side at least must be wrong; but which
ought in God's fear to be inquired, the greater number cannot determine it; but
that there must be an Identity of Opinion, as we think the Schoolmen call it,
that is a sameness of Mind, and oneness of Judgment to circumstantial,
ceremonial or shadowy things, is sooner said than proved, and savours more of
Curiosity than any real necessity.

And thus, what he seems fairly to grant in the forepart of his Answer above,
he takes away in the latter part, by limitting it to an Oneness of Mind, or
Identity of Opinion, without making a difference betwixt circumstantial things,
and such as are truly essential; for though all that fear God, must and will
agree in the latter, yet there is no necessity that they must agree in the
former; therefore, to insist too much upon such things, have always been of
evil Consequence, making differences greater than else they would have been;
and the reason is plain, for where such things are too much pressed, it is
because they are over-valued, and by how much that such things are over-valued,
it is the likeness, and not the truth that prevails; O that it could be
considered! For by how much, as such things are over-valued, God and his Holy
Spirit are neglected. Where this happens, such things that else might have been
indifferent, becomes sinful to espouse, by such as truly fear God; for we may
note, God and his Holy Spirit can never be over-valued in our Hearts and Minds,
but every thing below him may.

And yet on the other hand, some seeing this as a certain wrong, the Enemy has
aggravated the matter to make both wrong, and that whilst they both thought
they was right; and thus the Devil has deceived poor Man, even unto this day;
and it is our danger, and will continue until the Spirit of the Son of God be
more plentifully poured forth upon us that can say, Father forgive them, they
know not what they do: This is that which we want, and should truly wait for,
that the great Deceiver, the occasion of all strife and trouble among such as
fear God, might be cast out, that so he might deceive no more; which we hope is
near; for there seems but one grand Remove to know the Mystery of Iniquity
finished; and that is, to know our Habitation in God who we have professed has
appeared in us by his Light and Spirit: Most look for this great Mystery of
Iniquity every where but where it is; they look for it abroad, when it can only
be truly finished in their own Hearts; for as he that never knew spiritual
Bondage, can never know and value true spiritual Liberty; so he that never knew
this great Mystery of Deceit in his own Mind revealed, can never know a true
delivering from it. It Is not possible to give a Rule by Words to escape it; for
he that knows the most, and thinks by that Knowledge to escape being deceived,
he is deceived already; we wish it could be seriously considered by all, for
it is the greatest Trial Men can meet with. But to make lesser things than
essential things Terms of Communion, we have observed to be a great Evil in
others, and shall we cry it up as good in our selves? That which we have
affirmed was never blessed and successful in others, shall we put in practice?
Unity has been the great Plea with which the World has abounded; and whilst
they have sought for it in ceremonial and shadowy things, instead of being
united, they have been divided, and instead of being gathered, they have been
scattered, not to the Honor of Christ, but the shame of Christians; and shall
we pipe to the same Tune for company, in which there seems no material
Difference, but a change of the Persons and Opinions? Have others been
determining Truth by the majority of Voices, and do not we so too? And if we
do, had we not better acknowledge it than let the matter prove it? (Observe) do
not we set up the Body of our Community to determine the matter, and what
difference betwixt that and resolving matters of Faith by the majority of
Voices? For is not the Body taken for the greater number, and then is it not
the same thing when truly applied; and if this be true, is it not much worse in
us, by how much we begun better? O that it could be considered! For otherwise
we believe, at last it will not only be found wrong, but that it is but a few
that manage this Mystery, in comparison to the greater number, though they may
be supported by their compliance; but as we can truly say, Father forgive them,
they know not what they do, we are not without hope; but seeing we have
observed, that Christians and Christianity was always disadvantanged by those
Pleas for Unity, when put in practice, of which we have had the Experience from
others, and now have it among our selves, if we could heed to improve the
occasion; and that is, to put in practice among our selves that good advice we
have given to others, to wit, to make nothing Terms of Communion but essential
things; to which purpose, that Book styled, An Address to Protestants, is so
full to the matter, that if more can be said, no more need, if the Advice
there, were but effectually taken by our selves, of which to be sure there is
most need, that so at least, if we cannot mend others, we might prove the truth
of our Advice by amending our selves; till then, those excellent Precepts want
Examples, and all know they are more prevailing; therefore let us begin to set
that great and glorious Example, which as yet the World never knew. We forbear
to transcribe any part of the Book, considering it is great applause and late
Writing; We hope it should not yet be forgotten. However, it may be reviewed to
corroborate the Memory, and then there can want nothing that we know of but
Self-application.

In the mean time, since it is matter of Fact, that Christians never thrived on
a true Christian account, where those Pleas for Unity have been put in
practice, relating to ceremonial, circumstantial, and shadowy things; do not
object, that was only as carried on to violence; for we say, the ground of all
Evil is first in the Mind, and from a straitness there; and therefore, they
that omit nothing of that power they have, who can believe, if such had more,
they would employ it better? Self-denial and Forbearance is the best
demonstration of a Christian frame of Spirit; for Christ did not come to take
away the greater Evils only, but the lesser also, yea, even the ground of all
strife, that is Evil.

Therefore let us alter our course, and take other but better measures; have
Christians and Christianity, as truly such, almost been extinguished in the
World, by seeking an Unity in Opinion? Let us seek it in Essentials, and then
the work is done among us, at least, to peace, and then to be sure we shall
promote, according to our power, what the World stands need of, as well as to
wait, that a true Figure of the Universal Church, of which Christ is the true
Head, may be advanced among our selves; and as this is truly set up and
promoted, all difference dies that is evil, among such as truly fear God; then
what remains, will be of no more Evil, than the various forms and colors of
Flowers in Gardens, if not of much more service; that true Philosophers Stone,
being known to turn all the Metals into pure Gold. Do we think we have been the
most true that have been since the Apostasy, which perhaps we have, as to
Notion and Profession of the things of God? Then let us endeavor to promote
what is more true. What can hinder the putting this in practice, but the Devil,
by the likeness of Truth, persuading this was to give liberty to Evil? And
therefore, to prevent that they set up their own Works, whereby instead of
leaving People to come in at the right Door, they do but make them formal. We
must confess this cannot be fully known till God discover it, and therefore we
must wait in Patience for God's time; but it is a mistake to think, this is to
give liberty to Evil, while our end, we are sure, bears witness to the
contrary. But to answer all the Objections that may be made, as it would take
up now too much time, so perhaps we may not know all that may be advanced; so
we shall omit that till we are better informed of them, as also, till more
sitting Opportunity do occur. In the mean time, we desire those things may be
taken in the best sense, but if otherwise, we hope we shall not altogether be
unprovided.

We know it is writ, They shall come from the West, North, East and South, to
sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom; Those certainly was not
of one external Form and Order, as to ceremonial and shadowy things, yet we
find they agree; but perhaps some will say, this is in Heaven; well, what then?
Must they not agree on Earth, that must agree in Heaven? Shall not God's Will
be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven? How else shall the Governments of this
World become the Kingdom of Christ, but as the Peace of the one becomes the
Peace of the other, and as the Government of that, becomes the Government of
this? For is not Christ the Head of all that is good, from the least breathing
to the fullest perfection? And does not he own all that is of his own begetting,
every where, according to the degree of Knowledge revealed? Can any thing
that is good in a spiritual sense be received, but as it comes down from above?
And as Christ owns all that is good, shall not we own it? Does not he gather
all the good together in one, even himself? Does he gather all universally in
every Nation that fears him, and work Righteousness without respect to shadowy
things, etc. wherein they may differ, for those he has left unmeasured on
purpose that they might not hinder? Does he do this in every Nation, and shall
not he do it in one Nation? Does he do this in general, and shall he not do it
in a Family? Yes, surely he will in his own appointed time. It Is true, he
proceeds by weight and measure, nor can we hasten his Work, yet certainly we
may wait for it in a true Christian Moderation and Patience, desiring the Lord
Jesus may come, and if he please, quickly to gather the Minds and Spirits of
all that fear him in any measure, into his Name, that is but one; then would
Sion become our Solemnity, and Jerusalem a City sought out, and not forsaken,
even the Praile of the whole Earth, not that which is below, for she is in
Bondage with her Children; but that which is from above, the Mother of all,
that is born free, which is not of Man's Contrivance, Work, or Workmanship; for
she comes down from above, ready prepared of God, for all that is fit to enter
therein; Man's Work cease here; for he can add nothing to her Beauty and
Perfection; Martha's over Carefulness ends here, and Mary's better part is
enjoyed, that can never be taken away; and as Man's over-carefulness is over
here, so fear is at an end; for as there is no Night here, so her Gates stand
open by Day, for the good to enter therein, whilst that which is not good,
cannot. The true Church is here indeed, but not yet referable to any Society,
with respect to outward Rules, and therefore ought to be waited for by all.

Again, he tells us Page 4. To plead being left to the Grace of God against
Unity, is to abuse the very Plea, etc.

Answer, The drift of this Argument is like the rest, to gain a presumptive
dependence upon Men, either for their greater number, or for some external
consideration or other, without (...) regard to Conviction or Persuasion; it is
true, to plead this against our Understanding is an abuse of the Plea, and is
little better than Heresy, but none can be an Heretic that truly fears God;
therefore, to plead this against this or that thing, brought in by this or that
Man, or by this or that Assembly, that we believe is wrong, is so far from
abusing the Plea, that it may be a true using of it; therefore, before the Plea
is proved abused, he must prove the things brought in, to concern the Essence
of true Religion, or those that bring them in, to be infallible, that so we may
have something that is certain to depend on; for as that is a-wanting, Truth is
to seek till this be done; he does nothing but beg the Question, we are
satisfied, and that he knows it.

Page the 4th. he says, I must say unto thee Friend, what if thou will not be
left unto the Grace and Spirit of God in thy self? etc.

Answ. We answer readily, then such do the thing that is extremely evil; but on
the other hand, what if they are left with the Grace and Spirit of God, which
they may, or at least some, for any thing that he has said? What Care has he
taken? What Remedy has he provided, that true liberty and freedom of Speech may
be maintained? Not a word of that, which as it shows he has not asserted the
Truth, for that has no respect to Persons, but allows equal liberty to all, so
it discovers him partially devoted in this business: He cannot but know equal
liberty is absolutely necessary in Truths Government, as also, the want of it
has ruined most of Christian Societies before us; and as we have heretofore
impeached the Building of others as not good, where that was awanting, allowing
it at that time as a main Pillar of our Building, if discontinued, our Building
that was true, will not only fall down, but then what is set up, will be worse
than what has been before us, by how much we did begin better.

Again in the same Page, he asks, If he may not exhort to the practice of
what he is moved to press to the practice of, etc. If not, he says, Thou art
the Imposer, by restraining me from my Christian liberty, and not only so, but
away goes Preaching, and with it, the Scripture, that are both appointed of
God for Exhortation, R^proof and Instruction.

Answer, We are as much for saving of the Scripture as he is, and for saving of
all that is good; therefore we grant, he may exhort to what he believes he is
moved to press to the practice of; and thus having agreed with him to save true
liberty, and all that is good, we hope he will accord with us, to shut all out
that is not good; therefore we say, though we have granted this liberty as
above, it is not our Duty to obey him, because he says it, but because we know,
or at least are persuaded, that what he says is true; for he may be mistaken
and moved to what is wrong, as well as to what is right, for any thing that we
know; and the same that may be said to him, is true to every one, and all Men
in the things of God.

Again in the same Page he Questions, But are there not various Measures,
diversities of Gifts, and several Offices in the Body? To this he answers, Yea;
and then questions, But therefore, are not the Members of one Mind and Judgment
in common and universal Matters, relating to the Church of God?

Answer, There is not much doubt in this when truly understood, but we are to
mind that we be not deceived and imposed upon, as to what is, or ought to be
accounted common and universal Matters: By common and universal Matters, we
understand, and we hope according to Truth, that is what has been commonly and
universally received, and not new and novel things that have not been so
received; for all new things that have not been so received, they must stay
that bring them in, whatever they are, till they come in as the former did, to
wit, by Conviction, or at least by Persuasion, before they can be truly said to
be common and universal Matters; and in the mean time observe, this of
Conviction and Persuasion preceding Conformity, has been a common and
universal matter or thing, because commonly and universally received among us
as a great Truth, we believing no true Building could be, or stand without it;
therefore, let us mind we leave not common and universal Matter, and old Truths
too, for new Notions; for if we must receive new things for common and
universal Matters, because some that bring them in, call them so, would have
them so, or at best, believe they should be so, we do not only go from this old
received Truth, Conviction and Persuasion, the main Pillar of every true
Building, but then, what is it that may not be obtruded? This would bring us to
rest upon Opinion, and what is uncertain, then what is more contrary to Truth,
and the whole tendency of his Discourse seems to this purpose, on which account
many excellent Truths are mis-applied.

Page the 5th, he tells us, What comes from the Light, Life and Spirit, in one,
is the same in Truth and Unity to the rest, as if it rise in themselves; this
is seen, he says, in our Assemblies every day, etc.

Answer, The Design of this Argument is to gain a dependence upon the teachings
of God, by Instruments, equal at least to the teaching of God, immediately by
his Spirit, in our own Hearts; but how plausible soever this is, it is not
according to the Truth, as it is in Jesus; for though there is no contrariety in
the Spirit of God, so no contradiction in the Spirit teaching, being all for
one and the same end, to wit, the good of Man, by the Salvation of his Soul;
yet betwixt God's teaching by Instruments, and teaching immediately by his
Spirit in our own Hearts, there is this distinction or difference, that the
first is but to prepare the latter to perfect.; and as the latter is the
highest Administration, the Leader being only here, that cannot be removed into
a Corner; so he is in that Administration, the substance of all Types, Figures
and Shadows, and the fulfiller of every Addition for Righteousness sake, to
them that truly believe in him; therefore, in a Holy Reverence to the Divine
Being, we say, the teaching of God by his Spirit immediately in our own Hearts,
must have the preference, if ever we be truly perfected; and yet there is so
much Truth in what our Author has said, that when fairly stated, we are
content it should be as a Rule to measure the whole Difference by.

And therefore we offer, either all that do speak in our Assemblies or
Meetings, speak from the Light, Life and Spirit, or all do not, if all do so
speak, set it out fairly and prove it, that we may be satisfied, but if all do
not so speak, which we take for granted, then you must give us a certain rule
to know who do so speak and who do not, or otherwise you must leave us to
receive or refuse, according to the best of our understanding: Observe, we say,
you must either give us a rule as above, or you must leave us free, for there
does not appear any mean betwixt those two that can be certain. To make the
matter short, we take it for granted, that you can give no such Rule, therefore
we conclude, we are left free in those things of God, which when they do come
from God's holy Spirit immediately, there is no greater Authority, for are then
as the Oracles of God.

It Is true, all should speak thus, but all do not, there is the doubt; and the
like doubt is every where, where the Truth is concerned, if not, give us an
infallible Rule to know, that the Church as referred to this or that Assembly,
is infallible; this is absolutely necessary if we must not act according to our
Understanding; for no less than what is infallible, can keep in the Truth. We
take it for granted, that you can give no such Rule, and therefore conclude, we
are every where free where the Truth is concerned, to act according to the best
of our Understanding, in the fear of God; for the Truth is but one in all, it is
not more, because many say it, nor less, because one says it; therefore we are
as much bound to receive the Truth from one, as from many, and no more to
regard many, than one in this case; wherefore it follows, as we are not bound
to receive from one Man, what he says is Truth, when it agrees not with our
Understanding, we are not to receive it from many; for it must agree with the
Understanding, or unto such as receives it, it cannot be Truth.

Again, Truth is to be received for its own value, and not for the value of
those that bring it in; for if it were, we were in equal hazard to miss it on
both hands, on the one by an overvalue of Persons, or else, how could the
Leaders of the People have caused to have erred as they have done? And on the
other, by an undervaluing, when God chooses the foolish Things of this World to
confound the wise, as he often does; and what is this for, but that no Flesh
should glory in his Presence? Therefore upon this foot, as above, we conclude,
that Conviction, or at least Persuasion, must be freely allowed to preceed
Conformity, as well to keep down that over Greatness and Dominion, poor Man by
the Enemy's subtilty is subject to aspire at, as also, to keep every one in
mind, that they must know the Truth for themselves, for others can never know
it for them; nay, to speak plainly and properly, Truth can only be received for
its own value, or it can never be received; so that we may safely conclude,
where Conviction and Persuasion are disallowed, that Government cease to be
true, and is so far from being the Government of Truth, as that it wants the
likeness of it.

Page the 6th. he says, They that walk in the Light, have Fellowship one with
another, 1 John 1. whence he says, It Is easy to conclude, that those that go
out of Fellowship, go out of the Light, etc.

Answer, Every saying or Position has only one other saying or Position that
stands against it, if therefore what is brought as the Antithesis, differ from
the direct opposite sense, the Work that follows, or what is builded upon it,
cannot be true.

Now this Position, that they that go out of Fellowship go out of the Light, he
brings as the true Antithesis to this Position of Scripture, quoted 1 John 1.
or he does not so bring it; if he does not bring it as true, he deceives or
abuses his Reader, but if he do bring it as the true Antithesis, he is
mistaken; for this is not that true Position that stands against this
Scripture; for if it was, then what stands against this Position, would
directly be that Scripture, at least in a true sense; for opposites remain as
fixed in their sense, as the East does from the West.

Therefore, we need go no farther for a Proof of the Truth of the Work, than to
take that Position that stands against his; for if it be that Scripture in a
true sense, the work is true, but if it prove another thing, then may we see
the cunning that is in daubing, as well as something of that ground of the
false reasoning, that is among the Children of Men.

To try the matter, his Position is, that they that go out of Fellowship go out
of the Light. Now that saying that stands against this, must be, that they that
keep in Fellowship, abide in the Light; this is not that Scripture, 1 John 1.
but another thing, differing materially from it; that Scripture is, If we walk
in the Light, as God is in the Light, then have we Fellowship one with another,
and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses us from all Sin. Here the
ground and cause of true Fellowship is a walking in the Light, and the proof
that the work is true, is the witness in a Man's own mind, by the cleansing
from all sin without this Fellowship is ineffectual; but where this is, such is
safe, let what will come; and as this is the beginning and ground of Fellowship
with God, it is the ground of Fellowship with those that is born of God; but his
Position, that those that go out of Fellowship, go out of the Light, make
Fellowship with Men (for so it must be understood at last, or it is
un-intelligible) to be the ground of Fellowship with God, or of walking in the
Light, as God is in the Light, which is the same thing; and as for the Proof
that the work is true, to wit, the cleansing from all sin, not a word of that,
should the witness in a Man's self been spoken on, or referred too, all his
work had been to no purpose, grant that, and no hopes of conforming before
Conviction; from hence it is plain, it is Form, and not Power and Life, that is
so strenuously endeavored to be set up.

But the sense and consequence of his Argument sets Fellowship up instead of
Truth; for we can find no difference by his Argument, betwixt saying, They that
go out of the Truth, go out of the Light, and they that go out of Fellowship,
go out of the Light; but as the word Fellowship is set up for Truth, we must
inquire what must be understood by it; for it cannot stand of it self.
Therefore to make it intelligible in the best sense, we must join to it what he
calls the Church, and then that Church must relate to People, and at last we
judge, it must relate to those Orders, Rules and Forms, that are set up by this
Church; for the difference begun there, and therefore the Fellowship seems to
stand there: and then according to the Consequence of his reasoning, in our
Judgment, his Position must be read thus, or to this effect; They that go out
of Fellowship with this Church, in these circumstantial or ceremonial things,
which she set up to be observed, they go out of the Light that God dwells in:
Now, if this be true, the contrary Position is as true; That they that walk in
Fellowship with this Church, in the things she sets up to be observed, they
abide in the Light that God dwells in.

Upon the whole, it is necessary to know, whether all this be true or nay; if
not necessary, a bare Conformity will serve, and they that can believe this
Doctrine, have no more to do but to mind to keep in Fellowship with this Church,
in the things she set up to be observed; and what may confirm such in it, is
his Position, That they that go out of Fellowship, go out of the Light; for if
this be certain, the contrary is as certain, That they that keep in Fellowship
abide in the Light; but if needful to know the truth of those things beyond a
bare Conformity, Belief or Report, as most sure it is; for if we must be led by
this Church, and she be wrong, and that not known, our Damage is irreparable;
but if she is right, it is as necessary to know that, as it was the other,
otherwise we may be wrong, whilst she may be right. Now, whether she is right
or wrong, can only be truly known by coming sincerely to the Spirit of Truth in
our own Hearts, and there waiting to know what is right, and what is wrong; for
that way only can we be gathered into the Truth, and kept out of what is wrong;
therefore we must affirm, it is absolutely necessary for every one to come to
the Spirit of Truth for themselves, for he that knows not the Truth in
himself, can never know it in another as he ought to know it, nor can he value
the Truth in another, that does not first love and value it in himself; by
which it is plain, it is God that adds to the true Church, and not Man, though we
do not deny any means that God may make use of; but as they all direct to him,
so they all end in him, for Righteousness sake to them that truly believe.

But to come to his Argument again, which is, that it is easy to conclude, That
those that go out of Fellowship go out of the Light; to which we say, as easy
as it is, it is not safe; so to conclude upon this Argument, the Word Fellowship
being dubious and uncertain, as above, because those that did go out of
Fellowship with the Apostles, did go out of the Light; therefore, those that go
out of Fellowship, or differ with this or that Assembly, in this or that
ceremonial or shadowy thing, go out of the Light, is no good Argument, being
still but a begging of the Question; what is this but to overvalue our selves,
and bear witness of our selves as others before us have done, endeavoring to
set our Post by the Apostles, which we cannot? And if we could, the work would
not follow God has designed, which is to go forward; but instead of that,
there would be a declining, seeing it is plain, as the Apostle and these then
were most eminent, so there was a declining until the true Church did go into
the Wilderness; nor can the work succeed better, whilst those that go before
are to be relled on in the things of God, or whilst they look for it betwixt
the Apostles time, and the Church going into the Wildernss; the inquiry was,
what the Apostle did thinking by doing what they did, to meet with the same
Life and Power, or at least by doing such things to find acceptance with God;
but when that was missed, and Life could not be found, nor Satisfaction in
observing of outward things, then was the true Church allured by the Lord into
the Wilderness state, wherein nothing could serve to satisfy the Immortal
Soul, but what came immediately from God, and then such God visited by his Holy
Spirit, according to their state and his time, and so from step to step, till
he came to us, to whom we believe he has appeared more clearly than to any
since the Apostasy; and as we have seen that Christ must be the beloved of the
Soul, before we could by his Holy Spirit be led out of the Wilderness, so it
must be a true dependence upon him that can only perfect that Work begun,
according to his own will; and as we believe there is to be no end of the
increase of his Government now begun, we are to consider there is some
alteration in the work; it then decreased, it must now increase, and if it must
increase, we may well consider, as God is Infinite and Eternal, he has still
more Wisdom, Power, and Glory to reveal; and as we think of this, and consider
that we are but come to the beginning of this glorious Day, we should be so far
from thinking our selves the greatest, as we should think our selves the least;
for this only fits Men to know more, this is that which makes the Elders low
and little in their own eyes, and then always ready to throw down their Crowns
at the feet of Jesus, let him appear when, how, and where he pleases. Thus
there must be a looking forward, and not backward for the mind of Christ.

This has yet never been truly known in any Reformation; for instead of
waiting truly upon him that stired in their minds, and showed them things that
was true, and did appear to them in the use of outward things, whilst their
mind was sincere to him, we say, instead of waiting upon him to complete and
fulfill those Additions that might be serviceable for a time, they depended too
much on outward Things, and limited him by those Forms that he had appeared in;
and herein the Elders in every breaking forth of God since the Apostasy, have
not been the least to blame, and the same Rocks or like them on which they were
split, is our danger; wherefore, we should not think by what we know, to
measure what is to come, or that the form that is now set up, is that which the
People of God for the future are to be found in, for as that may, and certainly
will make us miss of the appearance of the Lord that is still to come, so do we
hereby limit the Holy one as much as is in our power, and such may as justly be
reproved as they was of old, to whom the Lord said by his Prophet, Heaven is my
Throne, and the Earth is my Footstool; where is the House that you will build
for me, or where is the place of my Rest?

Page 6. he asks, If there be not a Christian Body, and whether this Body
has not a Head, and whether Christ be not this Head, and whether this Head be
without Eyes, Ears, Smell and Taste, and this Body without Sense and Feeling;
if not, whether this Head bears, smells, sees, tastes differingly, and
contrary to it self; and whether this Body has a contrary feeling at the same
time, about the same thing; and if it be true, that the Church of Christ
redeemed by his most precious Blood, to live to him; see with the same Eye,
hear with the same Ear, speak with the same Mouth, live by the same Breath, and
are led by the same Spirit, where is this Disagreement, Contrariety, or dissent
about the things of his Church? We shall subjoin part of Page 8, and consider
them together. They that have Christ for their head, have one Counceller, they
disagree not in their Judgments in things relating to Christ and good of his
Church, they have one and the same guide, etc. Now to every Member is a Measure
of the same Spirit given to profit with u^, and though every Member is not an
Eye, nor an Ear, nor a Mouth, yet every Member has unity with the Eye, with
the Ear, and with the Mouth, in their proper and respective Acts, and they one
with another: The Eye sees for the Mouth, and the Mouth speaks for the Eye, and
the Ear hears for both, etc. it must be granted, that there are helps in the
Church as well as that there is a Church at all; and the holy Ghost has
compared those helps to several Members and Senses of a Man's Body, as an Eye,
an Hand, a Foot, Hearing, Smelling, etc. all then cannot be the Eye, neither
can all be the Hand, for then they would confound their Offices; and if I will
not comply with him that is made an Eye, because I am not that Eye, or an Hand,
because I am not that Member my self, nor a Party to the Action or Performance
of that Member, I resist the Lord, though under pretense of resisting Man for
the Lord's Sake, etc. with much more to the same purpose.

Answ. The most of all this is in the way of queries, but in short, something
or nothing must be intended by them; if nothing, they are vain and to no
purpose; if something, it is plain it is to gain a dependence upon what he calls
the Church, and that he makes infallible as she relates to Men, that she must
relate to Men is clear the difference being betwixt Men and Men, that he
intends her infallible is also clear if he writes his Mind; for as he makes no
provision in all his Book to the contrary, by allowing Conviction to preceed
Conformity to her Orders, so also he seems to make her immediately joined to
Christ for her Head, as the natural Body is joined to the natural Head; to
speak a little to all this, which might be subjects of many and large
Discourses; first it does not seem to hang well together; in the first part he
tells us, this Church hears with the same Ear, sees with the same Eye, and
speaks with the same Mouth; in the latter part, that Members of this Church,
except he means another Church, are made an Ear, an Eye, a Hand, etc. as may be
seen plainly above; is not this inconsistent? In the first they all seem to
hear for themselves, etc. in the latter, some hear immediately, and some
secondarily; the first hear immediately, not only for themselves, but for
others also; the second hear only for themselves by others; is this to hear
with the same Ear, see with the same Eye? we doubt not, but if it be, to say no
more to this, we desire it may be better explained.

In the mean time, as to the Church that is perfectly redeemed by the most
precious Blood of Christ, to be Bone of his Bone, and Flesh of his Flesh, and
so united to him as the natural Body is to the natural Head, we grant it may be
said in a good sense, that she sees with the same Eye, etc. but this is that
Church that is hid from the World, as Christ is hid from the World; yet he
knows who are his, and they know him and his Voice. All should travel for this,
and not fit down contented in any thing, till they know the white Stone where
the new name is writ, that none can know so well as them that have it; and
though the Bride, the Lamb's Wife, in this sense is making her self ready to do
the Father's Will, yet we find not that this Church has showed her self unto
the World, or that she may thus show her self we cannot determine; for her Life
is hid with Christ in God, but if she have or may be known by any infallible
Character; that so what is, or may be said of this Church, that is truly in
God, in which there is neither spot nor wrinkle, may be truly applied to any
visible Society; let him then set her forth as a City on a Hill, that she may
not be hid, which he ought to do, if there must be that dependence which his
Writings imply.

And then let us know, what Member is this Eye, that we must see by, and what
Member is this Ear that we must hear by, and what Member is this Mouth that we
must speak by, in those things that relate to Christ and his Church, that so we
may not be imposed upon by such as may pretend to be that Eye, that Ear and
Mouth, and are not; for if this be the Ordinance of God, it both may, and ought
to be done; for God yet never designed an end with respect to Man, but he
discovered the means: Therefore let us have what is certain, or we cannot have
Truth. Will he have us to depend, and not certainly tell us what on? He does
not intend that sure, for that would be to bring in as great a Chimera on a
Religious score, as we have ever heard of, when this is considered; if this can
be done that is insisted on above, let it be done, that so difference may come
to an end; but if this cannot be done, then that we may be quiet, let all
concerned consider, there is that to be done they yet cannot do, that so in a
sense of our Nothingness and Inability, we may wait on him that is able to do
all things; and in the mean time let us consider, if it has not been on this
foot, that all before us since the Apostasy have miscarried, hasting God's
work, taking that to themselves, God has not yet given to any visible Society,
if so we can only avoid that Rock by being more humble.

And therefore we desire such as do know what he means, and take themselves of
this Church, to consider seriously in their own minds, if they find themselves
thus qualified to take the Government of Christ upon their Shoulders, that so
others may certainly depend on them in the things of God, as infallible; and if
they do not thus find it, then to consider, if they certainly know who are thus
qualified, on whom, not only themselves, but others also may depend: But if
this be not known, then whether they are still to suppose, that there is some
that are thus qualified, and on that Supposition presumingly depend, seeing
where there wants Certainty, there must want Truth. This we commend to every
ones serious Consideration, for the good of their own Immortal Souls, that they
may not depend on Suppositions, Conjectures, or at best, but on Probabilities,
but that all may be established on God's everlasting Truth, manifested in their
own Souls, the Truth of all Shadows, and that which fulfils all Additions for
Righteousness sake.

But again, what does he drive at? What does he intend by placing Infallibility
upon this Church, as it relates to Men? To us, it must either be to set up the
worship of God, or not, if not, we cannot find it is worth his while; for if
God's worship may be known without their being set up, as infallible, there can
be but little, if any thing at all in it; for where God's worship is truly
known, such must love God with all their Hearts, and who so loves God, cannot
avoid loving his Neighbor as himself; and herein the whole Duty of Man seems
included.

But if any think the worship of God cannot be set up, but as direction comes
from Men, called a Church, and that because nothing can set up the worship of
God, but what is infallible, therefore we must accept the Church as infallible
in this matter; then we enquire if this be not to have two infallible Rules for
one and the same thing, for the Spirit of Truth is certainly one infallible
Rule, and if this Church be another, then here is two; but as this is improper,
so they cannot both stand together. However, we may distinguish the one from
the other, the one is to be looked for in the mind, the other from Men, called
a Church without, and so the one is inward, the other outward, but taking this
in the best sense, not as mere Men, but as they think, Men indewed with God's
Spirit, and thereby fitted for Government.

Now which of those must give way, for both cannot stand in equal Authority
together, will any venture to say, that the inward must give way, for a few, or
the lesser number cannot be so such as many, or the greater number, however,
not as this Church that is set up as the Ground and Pillar of Truth, then we
desire such to consider, if they do not justle Christ out of his Throne, or at
least, set up a Tutor or Governor over the Spirit of Truth, as some before us
have done, who begun well, and will still in the general, in a good measure
acknowledge, as we do to the Influences of God's holy Spirit; but then they
tell us, the Scripture is the Rule, and what difference is there to tell us the
Church is the Rule; the Heir while under Tutors and Governors, differing
nothing from a Servant, though he be Lord of all. We would by no means miss
your meaning, either you take your selves as infallible in the matter, or not,
if not, we say, why do you impose upon your Brethren? For if you're not
infallible, certainly you must allow Conviction to preceed Conformity, but if
you think your selves infallible, we tell you, notwithstanding that you are to
give way, for we hope all will conclude our Savior perfect, and every way
infallible, and as good, and as certain a Rule as any Church can be, while he
was in that Body prepared for him; and if his Disciples could not be made
perfect, while he so abode with them, we hope no Church will take more to
themselves, or think they can do more than he did. Well then, if you will seek
his Will, as he sought or did the Father's Will, you must do as he did, you
must tell your Disciples or those that depend upon you, that you must go away
as a guide to them in the worship of God, and a holy Conversation, before they
can be made perfect; for it is certainly as expedient for you to let all know,
how far your Ministry can go, as it was for him; did he tell his Disciples it
was expedient for him to go away, or else the Comforter could not come, the
Spirit of Truth, that only guide into all Truth? It Is as expedient, we are sure
for you, to let all know, that except Men come into their own minds, and there
wait to know the work and teaching of God for themselves, they can never be
made perfect by your Ministry.

We would not have you mistake us, do we hereby make void the gifts of God
given unto Men for the work of the Ministry? No, by no means; but we would have
all to know, that the best of gifts for this end, are but Additions, and are
not to be perpetuated as for ever, for that which is but until, has a limit,
and ends in him that gave them; and as all ought to look for Christ the hope of
Glory, to arise in their minds to fulfill every Addition, so should all that
have received any gift from God, direct all to him, in whom they all end,
otherwise such will be always learning, but can never know that Truth that
makes free; for though the light of a Candle is good, it is in the dark, it is
in the Night, and they that use it are sensible of its service, yet in in its
use wait for the Day to come, for the Sun to arise, where its service is
swallowed up and truly fulfilled; even so the light that comes from Men, as it
comes from God to them, is good and serviceable by way of direction, but its
chief service is to those that are in the dark; and therefore, if the Son of
Righteousness be not waited for through the use of it, to rise upon their
Souls, they still remain in the dark, notwithstanding all the teaching of Men,
let their Gifts and Abilities be what they will; therefore send all to Christ,
and leave all with him, seek his Honor truly, and he will certainly seek
yours, otherwise not.

He Quest. Page 6, and 7. But the Members of Christ's Church in the Primitives,
had different apprehension as the Apostle and the People gathered by them: To
this he answers, Pray let me know who they were, and in what cases, the Person
was Paul and Peter, and those Christians that differed about Meats?

Answer, As to that difference betwixt Paul and Peter, we believe it was more
the Author's own stating, than any bodies else, except some might bring it to
beat down that overvalue, which Men are ready to take to themselves, because
of their Eldership or Priority, considering that here an elder Apostle was
corrected by a younger, though the best of it is, he bore it well for any thing
that we hear.

As to that of Meats, it is true, it is an instance of weakness, but that does
not conclude them weak that made the Objection, but rather strong, that was
contented to be accounted weak rather than you should be unquiet; but whether
weak or strong, seeing we are sure, there are some that is conscienciously
dissatisfied, you ought to hear or forbear, and so avoid, or provide for the
cure of Dissatisfaction and Division. But to that of Meats, he has unfairly
avoided the weight of the Objection, by omitting days; it is true, he has an
etc. but his Answer is as foreign to it, as if no such thing had been.

As to Meats he pleased to say, It did not concern Church Communion, but was
private and personal Freedom, and centered here, as what I will eat, and when,
as a Man having power over his own Appetite; when it is plain from Scripture,
they were not free, but bound on the account of Conscience; however, we hope he
will not say they observed days too, under the same notion, but if he will, to
make way for blind Obedience, who can help it? However, it is plain from Romans
14. that the Church at Rome, or some eminently concerned therein, took things
under another notion, though wrong too, as all have been since, that have made
circumstantial things Terms of Communion, or how comes it that the Apostle bids
them receive such? By which it is plain, either that such had been rejected, or
could not be received on those Terms, so that the Objection if fairly stated,
is valid; and thus far to the case in hand, as to prove various Practices in
such things, tolerated by an Apostle, though contrary to a Churches mind, or
some eminently concerned therein, and if various Practices then in
Circumstantials, why not now? To say those then did not concern
Church Communion, but those now do, is to make the Church now, or some
eminently concerned therein, the Author of Schism or Dissatisfaction, as she or
they was then, the only difference that we can find, they could not then be
admitted, because they stuck too much to Circumstantials; and now some are
thrust out or rejected, because they cannot receive such like things.

But that we may accept of those things in question, whatever they are, he
tells us, They are not Jewish Rites; does it therefore follow, they are no
Rites, or because not Jewish Rites, they ought to be accepted as Christian
Rites? But further, as he tells us they are not Jewish Rites, so he tells us,
nor shadowy Ceremonies; does he mean they are no shadowy Ceremonies, because
not Jewish, or because in Christ's Government at last there is none? Therefore
he would not have those received as such, but if not shadowy Ceremonies, pray
let us know what they are.

For if not ceremonial or circumstantial, they must be essential, and if not
shadowy, they must be substance; cannot Men be true Christians without them, or
cannot Men's Lives and Conversations be such as adorn the Gospel, if they want
them? If not, we must confess, they are essential, otherwise they are but
ceremonial or circumstantial when all is done.

Again, will those things he speaks of lead into all Truth, those that observe
them, or at best, but into some things that is true? If into all Truth, then we
must acknowledge they are substance, but if but into some things that is true,
they are but shadowy: We find the great hurt and mischief among Christians is a
mistake, conceiving because Christ came to end the shadowy ceremonies of the
first Covenant to the Jews, therefore as there should be none in Christ's
Government, so there is none, and so under this mistake, contend for such Rules
and Forms as they have, not as shadows, but as essential things; while the
contrary is plain, for the best of outward Means, Rules and Forms, as they
direct unto God's worship, and unto Communion and Fellowship with him, are but
shadows; for they must be substance or shadow as above; if substance, they lead
into all Truth, if shadows, but into some things that is true. The substance is
God's Holy Spirit, that only and alone guides into all Truth, the outward rule,
the shadow; in Christ there is no shadow, and therefore all that are in him,
though they may do the same thing the shadow leads to, yet they do it not by an
outward Rule, but by his immediate Government; they do it naturally by
participating of the Divine Nature, Christ being truly, not only the object of
their mind, but the whole Government of the Mind and Soul is immediately upon
his Shoulder, one Spirit with him, by being joined to him, where every Addition
is fulfilled for Righteousness sake; but such as are under the shadow, though
Christ be their end, yet the shadow is the object of their Mind, thinking to
find Christ in this or that Duty, or serve him in this or that thing; and
though every thing that is observed for a good end, is serviceable, if that end
be looked for through the use of the outward things, but if a sitting down in
the outward Court, then it will not only be a shadow, but become a vail and a
snare, as well as the abuse of Moses Law did unto the Jews.

Page the 9th. he says, It Is true, the People of God ought to be left to the
guidance of the Spirit of God in themselves, etc.

Answ. This is as fair as a Man can say, but hitherto through-out his Book,
what he gives with one Hand, he takes away with the other; for he proceeds and
says, For this to be so applied, as to disregard the Preachings and Writings of
Christ's enlightened Servants, because by them properly applied to the Preaching
and Writing of false Prophets and Seducers, will by no means follow.

Answer. We are of his mind in this, and do say so too; but this is but a
beging of the Question, who are those Servants, and what are those Writings
that are true, that are rejected? We grant readily, to apply this, and such
like sayings as this, That I must mind the Spirit of God in my self, etc. only
because others have applied them, or against such as we believe are Christ's
enlightened Servants in the things that we believe they are enlightened in, or to
apply them to avoid the Cross of Christ in our selves, is extremely evil; but
to apply them against what we believe is wrong, and imposed, let who will be
concerned, may be a true Application; for the like cause will have the like
effect, wherever it appears.

But he proceeds, and says, the Doctrine is true, but not exclusively of all
External Counsel, etc. We say so too, for we are for agreeing with him as far
as we can; and therefore, that we may continue, we must mind him, there is a
vast difference betwixt excluding all External Counsel, and receiving all for
Counsel, that comes from this or that Man, or from this or that Assembly; and
we are sure we cannot find that he makes any good provision in his Book to the
contrary, by allowing Conviction to preceed Conformity; but he says, such
sayings as this, that I must mind the Spirit of God in myself, etc. are false
in Application, where Men are allowed (observe) to have had the fear of God,
and mind of his Spirit, and are not proved to have acted in their own Wills,
etc.

Answer, We did concur above as far as we could, but now we must dissent; it is
not therefore false in Application, for that were to say, because some have had
the fear of God and mind of his Spirit, therefore such have it now, or always.
Again, because some are not proved to have acted in their own wills, therefore
such have acted in the will of God, and therefore we must depend on such at all
times, in what they direct, because we believed that once they was right. O sad
Argument! How is it possible that we should believe his cause good, when we are
sure those are unsound Arguments; and are also certain, the Truth stands in no
need of what is untrue to defend it, much less can make use of what is false,
nay, that belong to what is wrong, or at best to what is but like Truth; and to
this purpose is the whole Page, nay the whole Book; for instead of proving
things, he takes for granted, that this Church must be right, and all she
differs with must be wrong; but the mischief is, we know not certainly what he
means by this Church, and therefore desires she may be set forth fairly; and in
the mean time we believe, he can no more prove her infallible as directed to
Men, than he can make this Argument good, that because some had the fear of God
as above, therefore such have it now; wherein there is no Evidence, no
Certainty to depend on; for such may have had the fear of God, and mind of his
Spirit, and for all that, may now be without it as well as himself, who used to
have good Arguments, but now wants them.

Again, every Fact must be committed before proved, therefore they may have
acted in their own will, and not yet fully proved; but what proof would he
have, and we will endeavor to provide; in the mean time, can any indifferent
Man think that all this Smoke can be without Fire? What, one part all right,
and the other all wrong; let them think so that can, we cannot, and not only so,
but if we have allowed any to have had the fear of God, and mind of his Spirit
in things offered to us, if that allowance was true, (observe) it was because
we had a divine sense, relish, and taste of it in our own Hearts; was not this
all the true Evidence we had, or could have, that such was right? And are we to
go any further for a proof, that such are wrong, then when the same Evidence
comes not along with them? Nay, instead of that Evidence, what we have is
either against the things, or manner of bringing them in, must not we stand or
fall here, or otherwise put our own Eyes out on purpose to be led and guided by
others, and that before we are either persuaded, that their sight is good, or
deputed to lead us?

Page 11. he says, The Enemy is at work to scatter the mind of Friends, by
those loose Pleas as leave me to my freedom, and to the Grace of God in my
self, etc. For he says, The plain Consequence is to go from ancient Principles
and Practices, as there set down, and to set measure against measure, as in
Page 12. which he says, is Confusion it self, Babel indeed; this is the very
Rock, he says, both Professor and Profane would long since have run us upon;
that a way is hereby opened to all the World, Libertines to plead the light
within, for their Excesses, etc. which he says, grieveth God's Spirit, and was
severely reproved by our Friends in the beginning, and is still reproved by
them that keep their Habitation, etc.

Answer. The ground of this great noise and clamor, was not a going from
ancient Principles or Practices, but your bringing in new things, and pressing
them to dissatisfaction, against which it was alleged by those dissatisfied,
as the Spirit of Truth was not only allowed, but was truly the only guide into
all Truth, they ought to be left to the Grace of God in this matter, and not
pressed to receive circumstantial or shadowy things, contrary to their freedom
and satisfaction; here such pleaded Conscience against Imposition. Now, will
you for this, criminate such with going into what is evil or immoral, or at
least with designing such things; is not this to judge before the time? What Is
this, but first to suspect your Brethren of evil, and then kill them in a
sense, to prevent it, a practice always judged by us in others, as evil and
unrighteous, and therefore every appearance of it ought to be avoided in our
selves; do such, or did they meet together? And then as a Church, agree what
Rules should be observed by you, and might not they do that as well as you? For
if Church Authority may be pleaded in the case, a few may be a Church as well
as many; for it is not the greatness of the number in a Scripture sense, but the
qualifications of the Persons that makes a true Church.

But if nothing that is simply evil or immoral, can be charged upon your
Brethren, nor yet any excess in imposing new things upon you, will you to make
way for Lordship and Dominion over your Brethren, join with the profane, and
Professors against them and the Truth, or at least, against those Testimonies
to it? For when he tells us, That this was the very Rock, Professors and
Profane would have run us upon, namely, that hereby a way was opened to all
the Worlds Libertines, to plead the Light within for their excesses; either he
makes some Friends, among which is himself, to be one with Professors against
the light within, or otherwise, does not he join what is unequal together? For
it is plain, that the Professors, though they owned the light within, and Spirit
of God in a sense, yet they denied, it was a sufficient Rule to be relied upon,
to guide into all Truth, and gave this for a reason, as it was an inward and
hidden Rule, if allowed sufficient, as Independent to any outward Rule, then it
opened a way for the Worlds Libertines to plead the light within, for their
excesses; and thus, though they owned the light within, and Spirit of God in a
sense, yet they set up the Scriptures as superior, and guide unto it, and do
not you in effect the same thing? For though you do not set up the Scriptures,
yet both by the management of things, and the tendency of our Author's
discourse, you set up the Church as a Rule and Guide to the Spirit and Light
within, and what difference is there, seeing both have equally been misapplied
by the cunning, crafty reasonings of Men?

Now consider, is there any cause for all this noise, save your Brethren
pleading the light within, against your forcing new things upon them? It Is
true, he says, This Plea is a Deviation from the ancient Testimony; but how
does he prove it? For forcing circumstantial, ceremonial or shadowy things, is
of the same nature with the imposing of such like things by others; the
difference of the the thing or Persons, do not alter the nature of Imposition.
Imposition is Imposition still, so that if you impose, it will be the same
thing; and you must either impose or not; if you deny that you impose, why are
not you quiet? But if you own that you do impose, to us you justify their
Pleas against you, to be short, you must bring those things in, about which the
difference is, either as Terms of Communion, or not; if you did not bring them
in as Terms of Communion, then why do you criminate your Brethren as evil
doers, whilst you have nothing against them, but refusing compliance with your
Opinions? As this shows the want of Charity, so it is no proof that your cause
is good; but as you bring them in as Terms of Communion, whilst they are no
essential things, you must be wrong, whether the things be wrong or nay; for if
brought in as Terms of Communion, whether right or wrong, they must be received.

Therefore, as the liberty of choice is taken away, our Understanding is
superfluous; such service indeed may be blind or worse, but can never be
reasonable: This appears as an excess in you, and as every excess is a wrong,
for which you must plead the light within, or some other thing; if some other
thing, pray let us know what it is in the mean time, as this is a wrong, must
it not be opposed by such as see it a wrong, by setting the measure of
Understanding God has given, against this wrong, how else shall wrong now, or
any for the future be redressed?

If this be what our Author terms Confusion, and setting measure against
measure, are not you first in the matter, by administering the occasion, setting
your measure not only against, but over your Brethren? For in the Truth, to us
it does not appear, but your Brethren have as much power to refuse things, as
you can have to impose; and where the power (...) equal, the difference about
Opinions in circumstantials ought to be discontinued by those that gave the
occasion; for we are sure it is more according to Truth, for you, to omit the
doing of what you may believe is good in this sense, than for others to receive
what they believe is wrong; it will not be your calling them requisite things
that can give you any Authority; for ceremonials or circumstantials, will still
be such, when you have said and done what you can.

But if this be Babel indeed, a Term of his own starting, are not you the
Master Workmen in this building, the cause for which the Language is divided?
And then, is not there a plain parallel betwixt your work, and that in the Land
of Shiner? They were there of one Language while they journyed, and till they
began to build, their end was Preservation as well as yours; but as they took
their own Counsel, and not the Lord's, he divided their Language, not for their
hurt, but that they might be stopped (which otherwise they would not) in that
fruitless labor, that as it could never be perfected, so it could not answer
the end designed.

And like to this, was not we of one language whilst we truly traveled for the
true rest of the Soul, to wit, Union and Communion with God, in that holy
Spirit of his Son Christ Jesus? But when we found Shinar a Plain, and took up
our dwelling there in the likeness of Truth, then did not we, as others before
us, begin to build, and bring in the Brick instead of the true Stone, and Slime
instead of the true Mortar, proper Materials indeed for a great Building, and
yet but the product of Man's reason? and though our end was Preservation, yet
forasmuch as those Materials that makes this our Building, cannot regenerate
the Soul, nor make the Mind holy, and as over-valued, has stopped our Travel
and Journeying, the Lord has looked down to behold our work, and because it
cannot answer the end designed, and we would not be stopped otherwise has he
not as of old, and often since, divided our language, not for our hurt, but for
our good, if we could but make the true use of it, which is to cease our
Building, our Works, and so return to him that did begin to work in us by his
holy Spirit; for he only can perfect it, and restore to us not only one
language, but the pure language which can never be done any other way; for no
hopes of doing it by our strength and work; for that caused the division, that
way we may become a Sect, but can never be born of God's universal Spirit,
where that one Original language is known, to which all that fear God must at
last be gathered; till this is known, as there has been turnings and
overturnings, on this account, so it must still continue till he come to rule,
whose right it is: We wish in the love of God it could be truly weighed and
considered, before it be too late.

And in the mean time, for you to call such Pleas as those, leave me to the
Grace of God, and to the Spirit of Truth loose Pleas together, with several
such like mentioned in his Book; we must say, we look upon it as of dangerous
consequence; what though some may abuse them, will you take them away, and with
them freedom of Speech? (...) you demolish those Fortifications that the Truth
has reared against Imposition, Innovation, and in some sort provided against
an Apostasy: This appears to us the forerunner of a Retreat, as others before
us have done, who begun with the Spirit, but after sought to be made perfect by
some outward way or thing.

For if such Pleas and Testimonies of truth as these, that nothing is a Duty
but what we are persuaded on, and that we ought to be left to the Grace of God,
because the Spirit of Truth is the only guide into all Truth, be discouraged so
early, and freedom of Speech taken away, what may we think the next Age may do,
when we consider, there was not yet any Christian Society, but did at long run
decline its Integrity, in which danger we seem as well as any that did go
before us? And his own words to us, seems to import as much, for he brings the
young convinced to be in most danger, and for whom those requisite things seems
mostly alleged to be serviceable, is this, because the Truth grows old, that
outward things are joined with it to assist it, nay, sure then it must be
because there seems a decrease; and if the young convinced seems in this great
danger, whilst the old are living, what must they do when they are gone beside,
if not an increase, there will be a decrease?

Well, since there is danger to go backward from the Truth, in the Mind and
Love of God in the Heart, either into the World, or into Form without Power and
Life, why should not liberty of Speech be allowed to all, yea, to such as think
themselves the Church? For if not suffered now, because you think you are
right, they will not be allowed when there is need, because they are wrong,
especially having your early Example to plead; and thus may Truth's Testimony
suffer in the future, by the cause which you now have given; wherefore we
think, since you seem to make so much Povision for future time, you ought in
this more especially, to have set Posterity a good President by your Moderation
and Forbearance, why may not you be cautioned to beware of Formality? We would
gladly have a satisfying reason for this, while we consider all before us have
failed ^^re, and what can you say more in our day, than others before us could
in their time? Have you received more? then more is required. Have you any
thing but what you have received? Must not the Roo^ bear yo^, and not you the
Root? Must particular Persons by our own Rule be humble and low, and think
others better than themselves, and must not Churches as they relate to
Assemb^^^^, read in the same book, for they are made of the same Men^

Are they holier for being assembled, or because the greater number? then let
them be more humble too. We believe it is as much the duty of Assemblies, as of
Individuals; for at best you know but in part, and there is yet that to know,
which you do not; and God is no more bound to many, than he is to one; as the
Wind blows where it lists, so may God speak or appear by whom he pleases:
Pray let us know why Truth's Testimonies may not be allowed, and pass current,
where the Life and Conversation is suitable; is it because you are the greater
number, or because there is some among this greater number that is infallible,
and then have received the whole Counsel of God, that nothing can be true but
what such allow of, and all must be so that they approve? Not the first surely,
for Truth never prospered in the World, while that was to be Truth, concluded
by the greater number; besides, it is from hence that the Whore takes her power
and strength, so that its not less than a scandal to speak of it, in the case;
but if the latter, we must confess it is rare if true, because without President
or Example; but on the contrary, that many have pretended as high things, and
yet have been wrong, is no news, why then should not you fear, that while you
think you stand, least you fall? For we believe you cannot make it appear, that
any pretended such high things but they failed.

So that by all we can find, you seem in more danger than safety, and
consequently more occasion to bear, if not receive those Testimonies, than
reject them, under the notion of loose Pleas.

Perhaps you will say, that those that use those Pleas are wrong, and therefore
the Testimonies are false and wrong, as used against you; but those that use
them will tell you, that they really concern you, and that they are for your
good to regard them, and indeed are so, for any thing that we can find that you
have said or done; but if some have been wrong, must all be condemned for that?
Will that make you right? We doubt not, but you say, they are wrong, if so, it
must be manifest in their Lives and Conversation or not. If manifest in their
Lives and Conversations, place your Judgment upon what is evil, and spare not,
for there it will stand; for we plead not for evil in any, but for what is
good; but let that which is true, live; you know where the Heart believes to
Righteousness, the Mouth must confess unto Salvation; so where the Spirit of
Truth is owned, and known the guide into all Truth, such may truly hold forth
those Testimonies which belong unto it, yea, for those Testimonies of Truth
ought to live, as outward Monuments of it through all Generations. But if no
evil manifest in their Conversation, nay, perhaps instead of finding any evil
there, their Lives and Conversations may be as good as yours, and such as
adorns the Gospel, against which Scripture says, there is no Law; will you
then make Laws against such as God has made none? What will you do now? Will
you say they are still wrong, though you have nothing against their Lives and
Conversations, nor yet against any principle or essential thing they hold, and
that because of that wrong, those Testimonies of Truth which they use, are
wrong and false?

For he says Page 9. That a saying may be false or true, according to the
subject or matter it is applied too; but that we believe is a mistake; for we
think Truth's Testimonies are not false, because some may mis-apply them. For
instance, this Testimony that the Spirit of Truth is guide into all Truth, is
always true, however mis-applied, to illustrate it in lower things, as Meat,
Drink and Clothing, then what is more abused or mis-applied; are they wrong or
false, because some abuse them? No such matter; no more do we think Truth's
Testimonies false, because some abuse them.

Will you then abuse and discourage those Testimonies, because you think those
are wrong that use them, though nothing that is immoral, or evil in it self,
can be proved against them? We think you cannot do this in the best sense, but
do evil that good may come of it; and though that may be a Maxim in a false
Church, we believe it is none in a true; are they wrong still in your thought?
then it is what you cannot right without doing wrong your selves. Now, if you
cannot right a thing without doing wrong, is it not your place to suffer? Nay,
is it not your Duty? And if the advice to the Church of Philadelphia was
thought on in this case, it might help to support: However, we know our Savior
overcame by suffering, and must not all that is born of his Spirit, overcome by
the same way, when they cannot do otherwise but do wrong? Otherwise do not you
put forth your strength, instead of waiting for God's, and that we believe will
spoil the work? Does. Truth's Government seem to totter? What then? Is not the
Government of truth God's? Cannot he establish it without your strength?
Remember Vzza put forth his hand to stay the Ark when it seemed in danger, he
could plead his end good as well as yours, and yet he suffered for it; there
may be an over-carefulness, as well as too little.

But might not a little Charity help all this, could you look upon such as
trouble you to be conscientious, which we think you might safelier do, than
make such Transgressors and evildoers, for refusing circumstantial or shadowy
things, while they own with you, that without Holiness no Man can serve the
Lord; for how can this preach to them that are not of our Communion, while you
give not unto your Brethren, what you desired to receive from others? This we
think you might easily do, while you differ not in essentials; for as you
differ not in essentials, there seems nothing but what might be dispensed with.
Remember they obtrude nothing upon you, nor seems to stand for any other
freedom but that wherein Christ has made them free; therefore, if you could
esteem them, or any of them conscientious, the work would be easy. You know
the Lord often spared those that are wrong, for the sakes of those that are
right, and it is our Doctrine, Tares should be suffered to grow, rather than
destroy Wheat; then how can your Government be like his, whilst that is
wanting? Certainly, you cannot think that all is wrong that are dissatisfied
with those new things brought in, at least, as made Terms of Communion. We
would persuade you better if we could, by assuring that some are right by being
sincere; could you but believe this, you would quickly find all that is lawful
is not expedient. Here the work would be easy, nay, your duty too, to omit the
pressing to dissatisfaction, some things that you might think good, whilst in
themselves no essential things, rather than put your Brethren upon the
receiving things that are not good, which all such things are that are not of
Faith; you know who has said it.

But if this difference cannot be ended, but that it must be like that of Judah
and Israel, manage it with more Moderation, and in that love of God, that it
may be showed the Lord is at hand, to gather different apprehensions into a
better tempe^; and thus in your difference, there might be true service by
showing the World that Christian Example, which as yet they never had, and do
as much want, otherwise you will dishonor the God of Truth and Peace, before
the People: It will not be the laying the blame one of another, that will do
the business, you must agree together quietly, or part friendly, or you are no
preachers of Righteousness, whatever your Principles of Truth may be: Abraham's
Family and Lot's, could not agree together, but they agreed in their parting,
nor did their separation lose their Friendship, as the Offices of love
performed after, do manifest, at least, on Abraham's part, who was the greater,
more by his Self-denial and Meekness, than his Eldership; for he was content
for quietn^ss, with what the other left or refused.

But why cannot you agree together, whilst you own one and the same righteous
Principle? You came out together, have you not done the greater, and cannot you
do the less? That Is strange; were it not worth your while seriously to
consider, that the Lord may have a hand in the matter, than still either think
of differing or dividing? Had not you need consider, that all before us that
have come out through the stiring of God in their Mind to a Reformation, was
not only tried by such as was wrong, but also by such as was right? In the
first, they stood, but in the latter have failed, and can we think to be made
perfect without the full Trial, if you think that therein is your danger? O
that this could be considered in that coolness, love and good will, that it is
written in! For certainly this is our Trial.

But that we may come to an end, seeing there has been so much said by him of
the Church, and power of the Church, we desire to know what is meant and
intended by this word Church, for sometimes the whole Communion is taken for
the Church, and sometimes every particular Society have the name of the Church;
and therefore, because of those diverse acceptations of the word Church, we
desire to have it set forth fairly, what is intended by the word Church, with
respect to the Controversy: In the mean time, we grant, that any may reprove
evil, and what is immoral, in any of the same Society, we grant, that any
Assembly that meets about the outward Affairs of the Community, may deal with
such as go from Truth's Principles, or goes into any thing that is immoral, or
that lays any other Foundation than Jesus Christ, and his holy Spirit, to be
guide into all Truth. But forasmuch as the difference is not about any of those
things, but about certain new things that have been brought in since our
beginning; on this account we desire to be satisfied, where that power remains
to bring new things in, and to make such things Terms of Communion; and to this
end, we offer, either such things must have a value in themselves, or they must
have a value set upon them by others.

If the first, they will speak for themselves without any unsound or untrue
Argument to defend them, or force them forward; for those are so far from
helping any good cause, as they really hurt it; for how should we believe that
cause good, which we know not, but by those Arguments which we are sure is
false, or at least not true?

But if the latter, then others must speak for them, and we must receive them,
not because we know they are true and good by their own worth, but for the
value of those that bring them in, which we think must be either some
particular Persons, or else some Assembly: If the first, who, and where are
they, and from whence does their Power and Authority grow? This can neither be
peremptory nor impertinent; for if any such thing, we should know it; and every
one that does well, is willing to bring his deeds unto the Light; nor does God
lay an Office upon any, but he will support them in it. But if the latter, then
it must be an Assembly of the whole Community, or some particular Assembly; not
the first, because they cannot meet to consult, not the particular meeting that
our Author belongs too, nor that which we belong too, nor any of that Order;
for then, as there is as many Churches as distinct Assemblies, there might be
as many Opinions as Churches, their Power being all alike.

If then some distinct Assembly, it must be such an one, to speak modestly, as
is superior to all the rest, according to Constitution, and then what comes
not in this way, can have no shadow of any Authority, for force or pressure of
new things, beyond satisfaction and freedom; but such a Church cannot be, but
either by a civil Compact, or by a divine Institution: The first is not
agreeable with the Truth, for we cannot delegate, or give power to any to make
Rules or Laws, to guide us, or oblige us in spiritual Matters, because we
cannot be bound by any thing but the Truth, and we must know it such, before we
can be bound by it; therefore no such Compact or Agreement can be, because
liberty reserved, and our power given away, are inconsistent. But if the
latter, that some one Assembly, according to divine Institution, is superior
to all the rest, who can make circumstantial or shadowy things Terms of
Communion? It Is necessary we should know that Assembly as well also, that their
Authority is divine, if we must rest upon their Determinations without Trial in
these matters, etc.

But this we think we cannot know but by a divine way, and that then must be
either by a divine sense in our own minds, or by the Authority of Truth which
such bring to convince in both cases; we conceive our Understanding is
concerned in our Obedience and Duty, but neither of those ways are known to us
at present; therefore, till set forth to press Obedience under the notion of a
divine Institution, implies a kind of Contradiction, being in effect to say, we
are to go out of the Truth to serve it; for to go into uncertainty, is not to
serve the Truth, if it be not to go out of the Truth directly; thus by all our
endeavor in searching into the matter, we cannot find according to the
Principles of truth, that Conformity is to go before Conviction, however, not
before Persuasion.

And yet we say for Peace sake, and that nothing might be hindered that is
good, as also that true liberty may be preserved, any Particular or any
Assembly of the Community, may offer what is new, if they sincerely believe it
good and serviceable, without breach of Unity, or at least of Communion; but we
cannot find to the bringing of new things in, as matters of Faith, or Terms of
Communion, that any Assembly have any more power than a particular Person; and
if mistaken, we would very gladly be better informed; and therefore till that
be done, we believe, to press new things, as matters of Faith, or Terms of
Communion to dissatisfaction, and endeavoring to get such things strengthened,
by geting the majority of Voices, either directly or indirectly, is a going out
of Truth to make Parties. And this being done, how easy is it for Men to be
hurried into that Uncharity, as not to dispense with those Dissenters which
themselves have made, without Characters of Indignity, as public marks of
Dis-favour, as though the thing was out of doubt Truth, because the most are
for it?

We shall endeavor to bring this long business to this short issue, either
such as believe the Spirit of Truth is the only guide into all Truth, have
liberty and freedom to judge of what they are to receive, or they have not; if
they have not power and liberty to judge of what they are to receive and
practice, as matters of Faith, etc. then the power over them is uncountable,
and such must submit to their Determinations, not because they know, or are
persuaded they are true, but because those that have this power over them, say
they are true; if this be not Usurpation, exercising Lordship and Dominion, as
well as the bringing in blind Obedience, and the begetting into an Implicit
Faith, we desire it may be fairly demonstrated to be according to Truth; this
cannot fairly be denied, because we believe the Truth will stand the Test, and
be willing to come to the Trial; we know that which is false, will not indeed,
because it cannot; therefore we are fully persuaded, where any is offended at
this fair and free Inquiry, for satisfaction, it is a sign, if not an infallible
one, that such are faulty.

But on the other hand, if we have liberty and freedom to judge of what we are
to receive and practice, as matter of Faith, on terms of Communion; that so our
Religion and Duty, may be according to our Understanding and Judgment, then we
may dissent, as well as assent to things proposed or brought in, according as
things or occasion may fall out, and this, without fear or hazard of being
proclaimed Delinquents; for Nonconformity, not only with respect to our private
Sentiments or Opinions, for that we might do in Turkey or at Rome, but with
respect to those of the same Communion, that would bring new things in to be
observed, otherwise we have neither true liberty nor freedom.

The Result is, if there be a power over us that can bring in new things, as
matter of Faith and terms of Communion, let it be fairly set forth and proved,
according to truth; but if we have power and liberty to judge of what we are to
receive, then allow it freely that dissatisfaction and difference may come to
an end.

To this we think can be but one Objection, and that is, that such as are
dissatisfied, are not conscientious, which we confess is an old Objection, but
yet not more old than evil, and never was to seek to abuse others, by such as
over-valued themselves; it is time therefore it were removed, being as well
unchristian, uncharitable, as unrighteous, to criminate Perfons before any
thing that is evil or immoral can be justly proved against them; and such
practices have always been so far from making difference less, as they made
them greater; for instead of restoring the Path of Peace and Truth to dwell in,
they always laid a sure foundation, both for dissatisfaction, and at last for
division, seeing every one that is truly conscientious, have not far to go for
an unerring Evidence, to reverse so erroneous a Judgment.

Those are some of those many things that we are dissatisfied with in his Book,
and we can say on a conscientious account, either then from a true
Understanding, or from some misapprehension of the matter; in both cases, we
conceive, we should be relieved according to Truth. And as our Author is great
in the Reputation of Men, we expect, and also hope, he will be great as a
Christian too, which is to submit unto the Truth wherever it appears
concerned, by amending what is amiss, whether it be with respect to himself, or
it be in our misunderstanding, so far as lies in his power; and that he may
proceed cheerfully in this undertaking, we are content to say, we know but in
part, and indeed, we think but in a little part too, nor dare we think our
selves so perfect, but what we have writ, may be objected against, by such as
will cavil on diverse accounts. Perhaps some may say, it wants Method; may be
some may say, there is seeming Contradiction, or it is full of Tautologies; nay,
perhaps some fault may be found as to the matter; for we confess and think,
that the day will still grow more clear, and then shadows will still be less:
However, as we are sure our end is good, there can be nothing done against us
in the same mind, that can hurt, or be of evil Consequence; for varieties of
Understanding, that stands in the fear of God, and are managed in his love, may
be some cause that more light is afforded; but however, we make our advice to
others, in the first place, a caution to our selves, to be always ready to hear
and mind, what, when, and how the Lord is pleased to speak or appear; for we do
not already count our selves perfect; yet one thing we do, forget what is
behind, and presses hard after the Mark that stands before, and think those
that do not so, seems not apt for the Kingdom of God; for the mind of Christ
must be sought for forward, and not back to his former appearances; and thus in
part we know what we are, but what we shall be, we do not fully know; but as
the living hopes remain in the mind, such truly wait for his appearing, which
as they cannot miss of his coming, so shall they see him, as he is, and be
purified by him that is pure, for he was, is, and is to come.

Lastly, we must confess, we do believe our Author might be really troubled
touching our Differences, as Israel was about Ruben, when he built his Altar;
but we believe also, he did not inquire the matter out fully as they did, which
if he had, we are fit to think, we should have found as few Objections in this
Book, as in his other Writings; or had he considered of what, of this nature
was, (as we were informed) communicated to him some time since, then perhaps
had been no occasion for this; however, we hope, shall be always as ready to
confess unto a Truth, as to oppose an Error.

In the mean time we conclude, truly desiring the good of Mankind in general,
but especially of them that have in any measure believed, or confessed that the
Spirit of Truth, or Light within, that comes from God, is the only guide into
all Truth; for those we are the more concerned, not only because they are
nearer to us by Profession, but also, because they have received more, and so
have more to give an account of, therefore we do earnestly desire, such may not
sit down in a Notion, or Profession of so holy a Principle, and thereby take
the name of the Lord in vain, but by a true Travel in their own Hearts and
Minds, with God's holy Spirit, may come to prove the Truth of what is
professed, then will they be established as Mount Sion indeed, that never can
be removed.

The END.

