THE Father's New-Years-Gift TO HIS SON.

CONTAINING Diverse Useful and Necessary DIRECTIONS how to Order himself both in
respect to this Life and that which is to come.

Written by the Right Honorable Sir MATTHEW HALES, Knight. and late Lord Chief
Justice of England.

Whereunto is added, Divine Poems upon Christmas Day.

London, Printed for William Booker, near the King's-head in the Old Change,
1685.

The Right Hon.ble Scroop Egerton Earl of Bridgwater Viscount Brackley Baron of
Elsmere 1703
SIC DONEC



The PREFACE.
Although Piety and Religion be the glory of Youth, as well as the Crown of Old
Age; And Solomon, to encourage Young Men to embrace and practice it, tells
them, That Wisdom has length of days in her right hand, and in her left hand
riches and honor, and that she will promote those who do exalt her, and bring
them to honor that do embrace her. Yet ^here is nothing more common than for
those of your Age to neglect and cast off the practice of Piety and Religion,
as things too mean and trivial for them to be concerned about, and employ
themselves wholly in pursuing the sensual pleasures and delights of sin and
wickedness, as though they were resolved to spend all their present time in doing
that which will be bitterness to them in time to come, and thought that their
Youth were to be employed only in treasuring up matter for repentance, and
sorrow in Old Age: Which renders the Advice contained in the following Sheets
very needful and necessary, especially at this Season, when too many,
especially Young Men, under pretense of rejoicing for the Birth of their
Savior, do all they can to dishonor Christ and gratify their own sensual and
luxurious Inclinations. I do not pretend (like some that have shamm'd several
Tracts upon the World, under pretense of their being written by the Reverend
Author of the whole Duty of Man) that the ensuing Sheets were written by the
Lord Chief Justice Hales, in the Method and with the same Title wherewith I
present them to thee; But yet thou may assure thy self, that they are all
the true and genuine Works of that venerable Author, and are the same Advice
which he gave whilst living to his own Children. And finding upon my perusal
of them, that they had something more of weight and excellency in them than I
had ever yet observed in any thing of that kind, I thought them very well
worthy and deserving of a more general reading, than they were capable of
whilst scattered up and down in several larger Volumes.

Abanishing the thoughts of Death and Eternity; An obscene, licentious and
extravagant liberty of the Tongue; An unthankful receiving and an ungrateful
forgetting the greatest Favors and Deliverances; And a violating and
profaning the Sabbath, are most natural and common sins of Youth, and are for
the most part the cause of all other Vices, in regard they viciate and debauch
the mind and dispose it for the engaging in and perpetrating the worst of
Crimes, as appears by the frequent Confessions of those whose Wickedness and
Debauchery brings them to an untimely Death. And therefore this wise and
prudent, as well as holy and religious Judge, took a more than ordinary care to
prevail with his Children to forsake and guard themselves against those leading
and foundation Sins. And I assure my self, that if thou will seriously read and
conscientiously practice the Directions which he gave them, in order thereunto,
thou will then acknowledge this to be the best New Years Gift thou ever yet
received'st.

THE Father's New-Years-Gift TO HIS SON.
SOlomon who was inspired by the Almighty, with a Spirit of wisdom above all
that ever went before him, or have followed after him, tells us, That it is the
indispensible Duty of all Young Men to Remember their Creator in the days of
their Youth, before the evil day come or the years draw nigh, wherein they will
say, they have no pleasure in them. Notwithstanding which it is lamentable to
see the Wickedness and Debauchery, Irreligion and Atheism, that generally
abounds in the Youth of our Age: But that thou may secure thy self from being
reckoned among their number, do thou seriously make it thy business to furnish
thy mind richly with the Knowledge, Nature, and Design of the true Religion,
which thou will find to be the greatest improvement, advantage and priveledge
of the humane nature, and that which gives it the most noble and highest
pre-eminence above all other visible creatures whatsoever. And when thou have
informed thy self, let not that alone content thee, but do thou seriously set
thy self to the Practice of it, and particularly, make Conscience of a due
ordering thy Speech, making Preparation for thy Death, returning suitable Praise
for Mercies received, and Sanctifying the Lords Day; for the better performing
whereof, observe the ensuing Directions.

And First of the Ordering of your Speech; which consist of two branches,
First, how to entertain the speech of others when they speak to you; and
Secondly, how to order your own.

As to the former of these, observe well what is the Temper and Disposition of
those Persons whose Speeches you hear; whether they be wise, grave, sober and
discreet Persons, for if they be such, their speech will be commonly like
themselves, and well deserves your serious attention, and strict observation.
But if they are light, vain, impertinent, or passionate Persons, their speech
is for the most part according to their Temper, and therefore the greatest
advantage you can reap thereby, is to learn their dispositions and discern
their failings, whereby you will make your self the more cautious, both in your
conversation with them, and your own speech and deportment toward them.

Secondly, If persons whom you do not very well know to be men of Truth and
Sobriety, relate strange stories, be not over ready to be Believe or Report
them.

Thirdly, If you hear a man report any thing to the disadvantage or reproach of
one that is absent be not ready to believe it (only observe it and remember it)
till you have heard what the accused person has to say for himself, for it may
be, the thing is not true, or not all true. Or it may be some circumstance
which the relater conceals, may justify, or at least allay and extenuate it.

Fourthly, If any man acquaints you with an injury that is done you by another,
either in words or actions, do not presently give credit to it, nor entertain
angry thoughts of the accused person, for possibly it may be only the malice or
mistake of the accuser, and how unseemly would it be if your credulity and
passion should carry you upon a supposed injury to do wrong to one who has
done none to you.

Fifthly, If any man whose integrity you do not very well know, makes you
exrtaordinary promises and professions, give him as kind thanks as may be, but
give not much credit to his words, for it is to be presumed he has somewhat
besides kindness to you in his intention, and when he has served his turn upon
you or finds himself disapointed, his pretended kindness will soon vanish.

Sixthly, If a man flatter or commend you to your face, or to one whom he knows
will tell you again, it is a thousand to one but that he either has already, or
else means to deceive and abuse you.

Seventhly, If a person be Choleric and give you ill Language, do you rather
pity him then imitate him in returning the like; and so you prevent the
kindling more heat, and find that Silence, or at least very gentle words are
the most exquisite revenge of reproaches that can be.

Eighthly, Some men are excellent in the knowledge of Husbandry, some in
Gardening, and some in the Mathematics; in all your conversation, therefore
learn wherein the skill and excellence of the person with whom you converse
lies, and put him upon talk of that subject, and observe it well, and remember
it, that so you may glean up the worth and excellency of every person you meet
with.

Ninthly, Converse not with a Liar or a Swearer, or one of Obscene or Wanton
Language, least he thereby corrupt you, or make you to be looked upon by others
to be of the same profane temper. Or if it should do neither, yet those kind
of Discourses will fill your memory, and so be troublesome to you in time to
come, for you will find the remembrances of the passages; which you have long
since heard of this nature, will haunt you, when you would have your, thoughts
better employed.

Secondly, As to the management of your own Speech,

1. Let it be always true; never speak any thing for a truth, which you know to
be false, because that is a great sin against God, who gave you your Tongue to
speak your mind with, and not to report a lie.

2. As you must not lie, so you must not come near it, neither by equivocating
or reporting that absolutely, which you have only by hearsay, or the relation
of others, or at best but by conjecture or opinion only.

3. Let your words be few, especially if strangers or men of more experience or
understanding, or that are any way your betters are in place. For else you will
do your self a double injury, 1. By betraying your own weakness and folly; And,
2. By robbing your self of the opportunity which you might otherwise have to
gain Wisdom, Knowledge, and Experience, by hearing those whom you silence by
your impertinent talking.

4. Be not over earnest, loud, or violent in your talking, for thereby you will
sometimes, for want of pondering your thought, over-shoot your self, and lose
your business.

5. Be careful not to interrupt another whilst he is speaking, but hear him
out, that so you may understand him the better, and be able to return him the
more suitable answer.

6. Always before you speak, especially when the business is of any weight and
moment, think before you speak, and weigh the sense of your mind which you
intend to utter, that so your Expressions may be significant, pertinent and
inoffensive.

7. Speak well of the absent, if you do not know they deserve ill.

8. Be sure you do not give an ill report of any, unless you are sure they
deserve it; and in most cases, though you know a man does deserve ill, yet you
ought to be sparing in reporting so of him, unless it be when you are called to
give testimony for the ending of a Controversy, or the concealing the Crime,
may harden the Man in his evil way, or bring another into danger, and then even
Charity it self obliges you to speak your knowledge.

9. Avoid Swearing in your ordinary conversation; and not only Oaths, but
Imprecations and earnest and deep Protestations too. For as you have the
commendable Example of good Men, to justify a Solemn Oath before a Magistrate,
so you have the Precept of our Savior forbidding it otherwise.

10. Avoid scoffing, and bitter and biting jesting and jeering, especially at
the condition, credit, deformity, or the natural defects of any person, for
such things leave a deep impression, and are a most apparent injustice; and if
you your self were so used, you would take it amiss: and oftentimes such
Injuries cost a man dear, when he thinks little of it.

11. Be careful, that you give no reproachful, menacing, or spiteful Words, to
any person, no not to Servants, or those who are your Inferiors. 1. Because
there is not the meanest person, but you may sometime or other stand in need of
him. 2. Because ill words provoke ill words again, and commonly ill words
gained by such a provocation, especially if they come from an inferior, affect
more, and wound deeper, than such as come with that provocation, or from one
who is our equal.

12. When you have occasion to speak in company, be careful, as near as you
can, to speak last, especially if strangers are in company; for by this means,
you will have the advantage of knowing the judgment, temper and relations of
others, which will give a great light into the nature of the thing you are
discoursing of, and help you to answer with the more advantage and the more
security against giving offense.

13. Be careful not to commend your self; you should shun flattery from others,
but especially avoid flattering your self, lest it makes others believe your
reputation to be small and sinking.

14. Abhor all filthy and obscene speeches, for thereby you will both discover
the corruption of your heart and corrupt it more.

15. Never use any profane speeches, nor make jest of Scripture Expressions,
but when you use the Names of God and Christ, or any Expressions of the Holy
Scripture, use them with reverence and seriousness.

16. Do not upbraid or deride any man for a pious, strict, or religious
Conversation; if he be sincere, you thereby dishonor God and injure him; or if
he be a Hypocrite, yet it is more than you know; or at least, his piety and
strictness, is not his fault, but his hypocrisy and dissimulation, and though
the one is to be detested, yet the other is to be commended, and not derided.

In the next place, see that you frequently meditate on and make preparation
for thy dying Hour. For although it be the most certain known and experienced
Truth in the World, that all Men must dye and come to judgment, yet most Men
being loath to entertain the unwelcome thoughts of their own latter end, forget
their mortality, and put far from them the evil day; As if a serious
preparation for death and an everlasting state, were no business of theirs, and
only concerned them that are actually dying and passing immediately to the
Tribunal of Christ.

But yet this their way is their folly, and one of the greatest occasions of
those other follies that usually attend their lives, and therefore that thou
may free thy self from this imputation of folly, and become wise, do thou
wisely consider thy latter End, and make it thy business to entertain thy felf
with frequent and serious Meditations of Death and Eternity; and for thy
encouragement in so doing, assure thy self that thou shall reap a double
advantage thereby, for first, it will help thee to Live well, and secondly, to
Dye easily.

First, It will teach thee to live better, which it does,

1. By warning and admonishing of thee to avoid and forsake thy Sins. For when
thou considers, that thou must certainly dye, and that thou know not how
soon it may be, thou will then think with thy self: Why should I commit these
things which if they do not hasten my latter end, yet they will make it more
uneasy and troublesome by reflecting then upon what I have done amiss. I was
for any thing I know die to morrow, why therefore should I commit this evil
which will then be Gall and Bitterness unto me, would I do it if I were sure I
should dye to morrow, if not O why should I do it to day, since I am certain
that though I should not dye to morrow, yet it will not be long before I must,
perchance it may be the last act of my life! O therefore let me not conclude so
ill, and close up the last Scene of my life with that which may peradventure
usher in my Eternal Death.

2. It will be a great motive and means to put thee upon the best and most
profitable improvement of thy time. There are certain Civil and Natural Actions
of our lives that the Almighty God has indulged and allowed to us, and indeed
Commanded us, with moderation to use, as the competent supplies of our our own
natures with moderation and sobriety, the providing for our families and
relations without coveteousness or anxiety, the diligent and faithful walking
in our callings, and the like. But there are also other businesses of greater
importance, which are attainable without injuring our selves in those common
concerns of our lives, namely, our knowledge of God and of his Will, of the
doctrine of our Redemption by Christ, our Repentance of sins past, making and
keeping our peace with God, acquainting our selves with him, living to his
Glory, walking as in his presence, praying to him, learning to depend on him,
rejoicing in him, and walking thankfully before him: These and the like things
are the great business and end of our lives and beings, and the reason why we
enjoy them in this world, and withal fit and prepare us for that which is to
come. And therefore the serious consideration, that our lives are short and
uncertain, and that death will sooner or latter overtake us, puts us upon the
resolution and practice to do this our great work whilst it is called to day,
that so we loyter not away our day and neglect our task, whilst we have Time
and Opportunity to do it, lest the night overtake us when we cannot work. And
if thou will wisely consider thy latter end, thou may then do this great
business, this one thing necessary, with ease and quietness, without any
neglect of what is necessary to be done in order to the common necessaries of
thy life and calling: For assure thy self, that it is not these that rob thee
of thy time, and prevent thy minding the one thing necessary, but it is thy
negligence, thy excess of pleasure, thy immoderate and excessive Cares and
Solicitousness for wealth and grandeur, thy excessive eating and drinking, thy
curiosity and idleness: These are the great consumptives, that do not only
exhaust that precious time which might be with infinite advantage spent in
working out thy salvation with Fear and Trembling, and finishing the great work
and business of thy life. But also when Sickness and Death comes and God calls
upon thee to give up the account of thy Stewardship, will perplex thy thoughts,
and fill thy soul with confusion, when thou shall find that thy work is not
half done, or it may be, not at all began, and yet thy day is spent, thy night
approaching, and thy lamp just ready to expire, so that what thou do then
will be with abundance of trouble, perplexity, and vexation and peradventure,
after all thy soul will take its flight before thou have brought it to any
perfection. Therefore do thou wisely provide against all that mischief at the
hour of thy death, by a due consideration of thy latte end, and a making use of
thy present time and opportunity to do thy great work in, whilst it is called
to day, because the night certainly comes when no man can work.

Thirdly, The wise consideration of thy latter end, and the employing thy self
upon that account about the one thing necessary, will most certainly render thy
life the most pleasant and comfortable life in the World: For as a man who is
beforehand in the world, has a quieter life in reference to externals, than
he that is behind-hand; so a man that takes his opportunity to gain a stock of
grace and favor with God, and has made his peace with his Maker, through
Christ Jesus, has done a great part of the chief business of his life, and is
ready upon all occasions, for any Condition which Divine Providence shall
assign him, whether it be of life or death, of health or sickness, of poverty
or of riches; for he is as it were beforehand both in the business of his
Everlasting State, and of his present Life too. So that if God lend him longer
life in this World, he still carries on his great work to greater degrees of
perfection, and that too with the greatest ease and facility imaginable,
without any kind of difficulty, trouble or perturbation whatsoever. And if he
cuts him shorter, and calls him presently to his Bar, his work being done
beforehand, and his accounts ready and fairly stated, he joyfully embraces the
message of death: And blessed is that servant whom his Master, when he comes,
shall find so doing.

Secondly, The frequent Consideration of thy latter End, will teach thee to dye
Easily.

1. In regard thy frequent consideration of thy approaching Death and
Dissolution will render it so familiar to thee that thou will not be afraid of
it when it comes. The fear of Death is often times more terrible than Death it
self, but by thy frequent meditating of it thou will learn not to fear it.

2. In regard by thy frequent Consideration of thy latter end, Death becomes no
Surprise to thee. The great Terror of death is when it surprises a man at
unawares, but by this anticipation of it, and serious preparation for it, thou will take away all possibility of thy being surprised or afrighted by it, in
regard thou will be always ready to receive it.

3. In regard the greatest sting and terror of Death, are the unrepented and
unpardoned Sins of the past life; the thoughts of whereof are the main strength
the Elixir, and the very venom of Death it self. But if thou wisely consider
thy latter end, thou will then take care to make thy Peace with God in thy life
time, and get the pardon of thy sins sealed in the blood of Christ; To enter
into Covenant with God, and to keep it by husbanding thy time, for the
promoting his Honor, observing his Will, and keeping his Laws, that so thou
may keep thy own Conscience always clean, and thy Evidences for Heaven
clear, whereby the Malignity of Death will be cured, the bitterness of it
healed, and the fear of it wholly removed. And if thou can but entertain it
with such an appeal to Almighty God, as once the good King Hezekiah made, viz.
Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee, with a
perfect heart, etc. it will make the thoughts and the approach of Death no
terrible business to thee at all.

4. But that which will above all other things render Death easy to thee, if
thou make it thy business to enter into a frequent consideration thereof, is
this, That by the help of this consideration, and the due improvement of it,
Death will become nothing to thee, but only a Gate to give thee admittance into
a better Life; it will not be to thee so much the dissolution of thy present
Life, as it will be the changing of it for a far more glorious, happy and
immortal Life, so that though thy Body die, yet thou will not, for thy Soul,
which is the most noble part of thee, only makes transition from her life in
the Body, to her life in Heaven, not so much as one moment of time intervening
between her quitting the one, and her entering into the enjoyment of the other.
And this is the great Privilege which the Son of God has obtained for us,
that by his Death he sanctified it to us, and by his Life has conquered it,
not only in himself, but for us too. It is true, this passage, through death,
is somewhat straight and painful to the Body, which is left by the way, but the
Soul passes through, without the least harm or any expense of time, and in the
very next moment acquires her estate of happiness and glory.

In the next place, when you have received great Mercies from the hand of God,
be sure that you return Praise and Thanksgiving to him, especially if it be a
recovery from some sore and desperate Disease, wherein Almighty God brings you
down to the very Gates, and shows you the Terrors of Death, and yet after he
has shown you the Spectacle of your own Mortality, wonderfully rescues and
delivers you from that danger, and gives you a new life, as it were from the
dead; Resolve therefore to live that Life to his Glory, that you have received
from his Goodness, and in order to your doing so, I would have you always
remember,

1. That Affliction comes not forth of the Dust, nor does Trouble spring out of
the Ground, but from the Wise and Overruling Providence of God, whose
Prerogative alone it is to bring down to the Grave, and raise up again.

2. That Almighty God being of most Infinite Wisdom, Justice and Mercy, he has
Wife and Excellent Ends in all the Dispensations of his Providence, and that
therefore he never sends an affliction, but it brings a Message with it; his
Rod has a Voice, a Voice commanding us to search and try our Ways, repent of
our Sins, humble our selves under his mighty Hand, and turn to him that strikes
us, which Voice be sure that you hear and obey.

3. How uncertain and frail a creature man is, even in his seeming strongest
age and constitution of health; For even then a Pestilential Air, some ill
Humor in the Blood, the Obstruction it may be of a small Vein or Artery, a
little Meat ill digested, and a Thousand other Accidents may upon a sudden,
without giving him the least warning, plunge a man into a desperate and mortal
Sickness, and bring him to the Grave.

4. That your condition can never be so low, but that God has power to deliver
you, and you ought to trust in him; nor is your condition ever so safe and
secure, but you are within the reach of his Power also to bring you down: and
therefore think not that now your turn is served, you shall have no more need
of him, and that therefore you my live as you list.

5. That Sickness, as well as Death, undeceive men, and shows where their true,
wisdom lies: When a Young Man especially is in the career of his Vanity and
Pleasure, he thinks Religion, the fear of God, and the practice of Piety, to be
but pitiful, foolish, low, mean, and inconsiderable Matters, and that those who
practice them are a sort of silly, brainsick, melancholy and unintelligent
Persons, that want Wit or Breeding, and understand not themselves or the World.
But on the other side, they think themselves to be the only Men that live
bravely and splendidly, in regard they can Drink and Roar, Whore and Swear and
Blaspheme, without the least fear. But so soon as ever a fit of Sickness seizes
him, and death looks him in the Face, and tells him he must die, that his Glass
is almost out, and has only a few Sands left to run, then his judgment of
things is altered and he cries out of his former Follies and Intemperance as
Madness, Vexation and Torment, and tells you, That he now sees plainly, that to
be truly religious is man's greatest happiness; to which he adds many Solemn
Promises of Amendment and Reformation, if God will be pleased to spare him. Be
sure therefore that you always keep this in your mind, and make conscience of
performing your sickbed Protestattons.

6. How pitiful and inconsiderable a thing the Body of Man is, and how soon the
strength of it is turned to saintness and weakness, its beauty to ugliness and
deformity, and its whole consistence to putrefaction and rottenness; and then
remember how foolish a thing it is to be proud of such a Carcass, and spend all
or the greatest part of thy time in trimming and adorning of it, or in
pampering and pleasing thy Appetite; and yet this is the chief business of most
young Men in this Age, but let it not be thine.

7. To avoid intemperance and sinful Lust, for although Sickness, Diseases, and
Death, are by the Laws and Constitutions of our Nature incident to all Mankind,
yet Intemperance, Whoring, Uncleanness, and Disorder, bring more Diseases, and
destroy more strong and healthy young Men than the Plague, or any other natural
or accidental Distempers; for they weaken the Brain, corrupt the Blood, decay
and distemper the Spirits, disorder and putrify the Humors, and fills every
part of the Body with putrefaction. And those Diseases that are not occasioned
but these Vices, yet they are rendered far more sharp, lasting, malignant, and
incurable, by that stock of corrupted Matter which those Vices lodge in the
Body to feed those Diseases, and by rendering Nature impotent and not able to
resist them.

8. That you ought, every Morning and Evening upon your Knees with all
reverence, to acknowledge the goodness of God in his Mercy to you, and return
him hearty Thanks for it, and to desire his Grace to enable you in some measure
to walk answerable thereunto. And that you ought to come as often as you can to
the Sacrament, and there renew your Covenant with, and offer up your
Thankfulness to God.

9. That you ought to be very moderate in your Eating, Drinking, Sleeping, and
Recreations, and that you ought to be very frugal of your Time, and account it
one of your best Jewels.

10. Beware of Gaming, and remember that it is one of the most certain and
sudden Ways of consuming an Estate that can be, and that it is a Vice which
seldom goes alone, but is visibly accompanied with all kinds of Debauchery, and
makes a Man of a wild, vast and unsettled mind, and impatient of an honest
Calling, or of moderate and honest Gain.

In the last place, be sure that you make conscience of Sanctifying the Lord's
Day; and for your better direction therein, observe, 1. What is the Reason and
Ground of your observation of this Day. 2. What things ought not to be done
upon that Day. 3. What things may be done upon that Day. And 4. What things
ought to be done in order to the Sanctification of that Day.

I. As to the Reasons why you ought to keep and sanctify the Sabbath, they are
these:

1. It is a Moral Duty, that since the glorious God gave you your time, you
ought to consecrate and set apart some portion of it to be spent in a special
manner to his Service.

2. Because God best knows what portion of time is fit to be peculiarly
dedicated to his Service, that so the morality of that time might be determined
unto some certainty, he has by the Fourth Command limited one day in seven to
be dedicated to him.

3. This seventh portion of Time which God has commanded us to set a part for
him, was both by his Precept and Example confined to the Seventh day from the
Creation of the World, till the finishing of the great work of our Redemption
by the Lord Jesus Christ, the Mediator of the New Covenant.

4. But our Savior Christ who is the Eternal Son of God, blessed for ever, and
Lord of the Sabbath, having fulfilled the work of our Redemption on the first
day of the week, translated the observation of the seventh day of the week to
the first day, which is our Christian Sabbath. So that as our Christian Baptism
succeeds the Sacrament or Circumcision; and as our Christian Pascha the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, succeeds the Jewish Passover, so our Christian
Sabbath, the first day of the Week, succeeds the old Sabbath of the seventh day
of the week. And that Morality which was by Almighty God confined under the Law
to the seventh day, is now under the Gospel transferred to the first day of the
week, and that which would have been moraly a violation of the morality of the
fourth Command before the Death of Christ, is a breach of that Command, and a
violation of the Christian Sabbath, if done upon the first day of the week.

2. As to what ought not to be done, you must take this as a certain Truth,
that what is not lawful to be done on another day, is much more unlawful to be
done upon this; besides which there are many things which are lawful to be done
upon another day, and some that are not only lawful, but also fit and necessary
to be done, which yet must not be done upon this day, such as following the
works of our Callings, Journeys, Recreations, and the like.

3. What things may be done upon that day is a Question of great latitude, in
regard Men's Circumstances vary, and renders that lawful to one man that is not
so to another: But yet things of absolute necessity, either in respect of Man
or Beast, may always be done upon the Lords Day; as the stopping the breach of
a Sea Wall, the supporting a house that by a sudden Tempest is like to fall
down, the pulling out a Beast that is fallen into a Ditch, setting a broken
Bone, Administering Physic, Milking of Cows, feeding of Cattle, the necessary
dressing of Meat for a Family, and many other things of that kind; but yet
therein, great Care and Caution is to be used, lest under pretense of
Necessity, you do what you please, For

1. That is not necessity that excuses a work upon this day, which might have
reasonably been soreseen and done the day before.

2. That is not necessity that may be forborne till to morrow without any
absolute destruction or loss of the thing.

3. Works of Charity, as Relieving the Poor, Administering Physic, Visiting or
Comforting the Afflicted, Admonishing the Disorderly, persuading Peace between
Neighbors offend, and endeavoring to compose differences which require not
much examination, or cannot well be deferred; these are not only permitted but
commendable upon this day, and we are commanded to perform them.

4. As for what is proper, fit and necessary to be done in order to your
Sanctification of the Lords Day, be sure that you Conscientiously observe and
practice the following Directions.

1. Meddle not with any Recreations, Pastimes, or the ordinary work of your
Calling, from Saturday Night at Eight of the Clock, till Monday Morning, for
although Saturday night be not part of the Sabbath, yet it is fit you should
then be preparing your Heart for it.

2. Rise at least three hours before Morning Sermon, and when you have made
your self fully readys and fitted your self for Solemnity of the Day, read two
Chapters in the Bible, and then go solemnly to your Private Prayer and desire
of God his Grace to enable you to sanctify his day and after that read another
Chapter, and let your read be with Attention, Observation and Uncovered on your
Head.

3. When you are in the public Worship and Service of God, be uncovered all
the time of Reading, Praying and Preaching.

4. Be very devout and serious at your Prayers, and very attentive in hearing
the Sermons, and to prevent your mind from wandering, you will do well to write
the Sermon, which will help to fix your Thoughts, and make you listen to the
Sermon with the more diligence and attention.

5. Let your Deportment at Church be very serious and grave, use no Laughing
nor Gazing about, nor Wispering, unless it be to ask those by you something of
the Sermon that you slipped in Writing.

6. Join with the Church in all the solemn and public Duties of the Day, and
Sing the Singing Psalms with the rest of the Congregation.

7. After Forenoon Sermon, eat moderately at Dinner, rather sparingly then
plentifully, that so you may be fit for the Afternoons Exercise, without
drowsiness or dullness.

8. After Dinner walk about half an hour in the Garden, or in your Chamber, to
digest your Meat, and then repair to your Closet, and peruse your Notes, or
recollect what you can remember of the Sermon, until it be Church time.

9. If you are well besure you go to Church Forenoon and Afternoon, and be
there before the Minister begin, and stay till he has done, and all the while
you are there, carry your self Gravely and Reverently.

10. After Evening Sermon, go to your Closet, and having read a chapter in the
Bible, examine what you have writ, or recollect what you remember, and
afterward if the Sermon be repeated either in your Fathers or in the Ministers
House, go to the repition thereof.

11. In all your Speeches and Actions on that day, let there be no lightness or
vanity, use no Running, Leaping, or Playing, or Wrestling, use no Jesting, or
telling Tales, or foolish Stories, nor talk about News or Worldly Business, but
let both your Actions and your Words be such as the Day is, Serious and Sacred,
and tending either to instrust others, or inform your selves in the great
business of your Knowledge of God, and of his Will, and of your own Duty.

12. After Supper and Prayers ended in your Fathers Family, repare to your
Closet, and there upon your Bended Knees, implore Pardon of God for what you
have amiss and beg his Blessing upon what you have heard, and his acceptance of
all your Performances for the merits and satisfaction of Christ.

And lastly, perform all this Cheerfully and Heartily, Uprightly and Honestly,
and account it not a burden to you, for assure your self that you shall find a
Blessing from God in so doing, and remember it is your Father that tells you
so, who loves you, and will not deceive you, and (which is more then that)
remember that the Eternal God has Promised, Isa. 58. 13, 14. If thou turn away
thy Foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy Pleasure on my Holy Daq, and call the
Sabbath a Delight, the Holy of the Lord Honorable, and shall Honor him, not
doing thy own ways, nor finding thine own Pleasure, nor speaking thine own
Words, then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord, and I will cause thee to
ride upon the High places of the Earth, and feed thee with the Heritage of
Jacob thy Father, for the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

ALmighty God, when he had raised the Frame
Of Heaven and Earth, and furnished the same,
With Works of equal wonder, framed then
A piece of greater Excellence, called Man.
Gave him a comprehensive Soul, that soared
Above the Creatures, and beheld their Lord;
Inscribed him with his Image, and did fill.
The Compass of his Intellect and Will,
With Truth and Good; gave him the Custody
Of his own Bliss and Immortality.
And justly now his Sovereign might Demand,
Subjection, and Obedience at his Hand.
Were only Being given, 'twere but Right,
His Debt of Duty should be Infinite.
But here was more, a Super-added dress,
Of Life, Perfection, and of Happiness.
Yet this Great King, for an Experiment
Of Man's deserved Allegiance, is content
To use an Easy Precept, such as stood
Both with his Creatures Duty, and his Good.
Forbids one Fruit, on Pain of Death, and give
Freely the rest which he might Eat and Live;
But Man Rebels, and for one taste does choose,
His Life, his God, his Innocence to lose.
And now Death stricken, like a wounded Dear,
Strictly pursued by Guilt, by Shame and Fear;
He seeks to lose himself, from God he flies.
And takes a Wilderness of Miseries.
A Land of New Transgressions, where his course
Is closer bound, his Nature growing worse.
And whilst in this condition Mankind lay,
A Man would think his injured God should say,
There lies accursed Man, and let him lie
Entangled in that Webb of Misery,
Which his own Sin has spun, I must be True
And Just, Unthankful Man, thou have thy due.
But 'twas not so, though Man the Mastery,
With his Creators Power and Will dares try;
And being overmatcht, will still disdain,
To seek a Pardon from his Sovereign;
The Great and Glorious God, the Mighty King
Of Heaven and Earth, despised by such a thing
As Man, a Worm of his own making breaks
The rules of Greatness, and his Creator seeks
His Froward Creature; not in such a way
As once he did in the Cool of the Day,
Wherein Man Sinned and hid; such Majesty
Had been too great for Man's Necessity:
But the Eternal Son of God, the Word,
By which all things were made, the Mighty Lord,
Assumes our Flesh, and under that he lays,
And hides his Greatness, and those Glorious Rays
Of Majesty, which had been over bright,
And too resplendant for poor Mortals sight;
And under this Disguise the King of Kings,
The Message of his Fathers Mercy brings;
Solicites Man's Return, pay's the Price
Of his Transgression by the Sacrifice
Of his own Soul, and undertakes to Cure
Their Sin, their Peace and Pardon to Procure,
To conquer Death for him; and more then this,
To settle him in Everlasting Bliss.
And now, O Man, could this access of Love
Thy Thankfulness to such a height improve,
That it could fire thy Soul into a Flame
Of Love, To him alone that bought the same
At such a rate, yet still it were too small
To recompense thy Saviors Love withal
Once did he give thee Being from the Dust,
And for that only Being, 'twere but Just
To pay thy utmost self: But when once more,
Thy Being and thy Bliss he did restore.
By such a means as this if does Bereave
Thy Soul of hopes of Recompense, and leaves
Thy Soul insolvent, twice to him this day
Thou ow'st thy self, yet but one self can pay.
Another.
REader, the Title of this Solemn Day,
And what it does import, does bid thee stay,
And read, and Wonder, it is that Mystery
That Angels gaze upon; Divinity
Assuming Humane Flesh; the Eternal Son
Of the Eternal God, is Man become.
But why this strange assumption? or what end
Equivolent, could make him to descend
So far beneath himself; and equalize
The Miracle of such an Enterprise?
Yet stay and wonder: Undeserved Love
To Man, to Sinful Man, did only move,
This stood from Heaven to Earth, and all to win,
And rescue Lost and Fallen Man from Sin,
And Guilt, and Death, and Hell; and reinstall
Him in that Happiness lost by his fall;
And greater everlastingly to dwell
In Blessedness; so that thou can not tell
Which of the two the greater Wonder prove,
Thy Savior's Incarnation, or his Love.
But both conclude thou do not give, but pay
A Debt in the observation of this day.
Another.
WHen that great Lamp of Heaven, the glorious Sun,
Had touched his Southern period, and begun
To leave the Winter Tropic, and to climb
The Zodiacks ascending Signs, that Time
The brighter Sun of Righteousness, did choose
His beams of Light and Glory to disclose
To our dark lower World; and by those Rays
To chase our Darkness, and to clear our Days.
And lest the Glorious and Resplendant Light
Of his Eternal Beam, might be too bright
For Mortals Eyes to gaye upon; he shrouds,
And clothes his fiery Pillar with the Clouds
Of Humane Flesh, that in that dress he may
Converse with Men, acquaint them with the way
To Life and Glory; show his Fathers Mind,
Concerning them how bountiful and kind
His Thoughts were to them; what they might expect
From him, in the observation of neglect
Of what he did require; and then he Sealed
With his Dear Blood, the Truth he had Revealed.
FINIS.

