The Good Samaritane. A SERMON Preached at the Parish Church of St. Magnus the
Martyr, by London Bridge, The 13th Sunday after Trinity, being August 25. 1700,
upon the Holy Gospel for the Day.

Printed at the Request of the Churchwardens, and others of the chief
Auditors, And Humbly Dedicated to Sir Charles Duncombe, Knight, And Alderman of
the Ward of BRIDGE, On Account of that most unwonted sort of Charity, and Noble
Generosity, which the City of London, and particularly the Parish of St. Magnus
has lately tasted of.

By RICHARD HOLLAND, M. A. Chaplain to His Grace the D. of Richmond, Curate of
St. Magnus, and Lecturer of Alhallows the Great.

LONDON, Printed for J. Back at the Black Boy on London Bridge, 1700.

To the Right Worshipful Sir CHARLES DUNCOMBE, Knt. Alderman, and High Sheriff
of the City of London, and County of Middlesex: And Mayor of the Ancient
Corporation of the Merchant Woolstaplers of ENGLAND.
IN such an Age as this, when Notions and Speculations Eat up the Practice of
Piety; when Noise and Clamor passes for Religion, Covetous Pinching for great
Sobriety and Moderation, and Unmerciful Severity for the Critical Clinch of
Justice; when Charity not only begins but always keeps at Home; and few are the
Examples of a Generous and true Evangelick Spirit, Permit and Pardon me ( Noble
Sir) to make use of your Great Name to Patronize this mean Discourse upon the
Good Samaritane, and Recommend to the World those Christian Doctrines, which
the last Sundays Holy Gospel proclaimed to all good Men: Doctrines which enoble
the Soul, and without the Practice of which Men cannot be Christians.

It Is Truth and Plainness is its best Recommendation, and wellcom'd it to those
Gentlemen who urged its Publication: and those qualifications will oblige true
Churchmen: For, the Holy Gospel of the Blessed Jesus needs no flourishes, and
when most naked is always most Rhetorical and Convincing.

And they to whom it was Preached are truly Devoted to you, as you have been
pleased highly to respect them; which that, Noble Benefaction to our Church,
yet of General use and service to the public, will prove a brave and lasting
Monument of.

They are of the Number of those who have done themselves the Honor to Elect
you their Magistrate: By which they have justified their Prudence, and exerted
a bravery equal to the Ancient Romans; who taking good care to choose Wise and
Noble Senators, secured their Liberties from all violence and alienation,
maintained a glorious Magistracy to the enriching of their Fellow Citizens, and
provided wonderfully for all their Poor and Distressed.

And thus you have already done, to the Honor of this great City, the Joy and
Satisfaction of all good Men in it, and to the Comfort and Delivery of many
Hundreds of the Indigent and Imprisoned Members of it.

This was a true Year of Jubilee to them; and a beginning of a New Life, when
they now can work for their maintenance without fear or disturbance; say their
Prayers, and thank God for their Deliverance without hurry or frightful
perplexity; and Contemplate Gods Mercy in raising them such a Benefactor, who
has delivered them from the dire usage, that horrid discipline of Cruel and
Imperious Jaylors.

And that thus it should be, that God in all Ages does raise up Men for the
Eminent Care of his, his little ones, his Poor despised and afflicted Members,
is a most admirable proof of his Goodness, a great Argument and Instance of the
Wisdom and Justice of his Providence.

It was perhaps the intendment of Almighty God in making such an In-equality in
the outward Condition of Men in the World, that those of Fortune on the Right
hand should take kind Notice of those on the Left; that so the Sick, Poor and
Naked may not seem to be forgot by their Maker, when they are nourished by the
Bountiful hand of those, whom he has enabled and given a Heart to do great
things.

You have been in a most Eminent degree already a Noble Patriot of your
Country; You have Fed and Clothed the Hungry and Naked; You have opened Prison
Doors, and released Captives of Ancient Date, You have been Physic to the Sick
and a Cordial to the Faint; a Father to the Fatherless, Protection and Counsel
to the Widow, and a Friend to all that you could have true opportunity to serve.

And here I must not omit that great part of your Character, (answering The
good Samaritane,) which the World ought to know and value you for; That in your
mighty Charities, you have not been like the Jews, to determine them to Party
or Sect or Country: But, as God commanded, who himself makes the Sun to shine,
and Rain fall on the Just and on the Unjust* And as Christ by way of example
Practiced, who Fed, Cured, and Relieved all manner of Miserable Men that came
near him; so nor has any ever been denied your Assistance and Relief (who was a
true Object of your Charity,) because he was not of your Faith and Opinion.

And all this is doing what God commands; it is doing what Christ came into the
World to teach Men to do; this is acting like wise Men and good Christians;
it is doing more than Scribes and Pharisees.

Go on ( Great Sir) who thus have devoted both your self and Estate to the true
Interest of the Nation, the Service of this City, the Encouragement of Justice,
and support of the Poor, all which does tend to the Glory of God; Go on, to
perfect these great Works of Mercy and Pity, of Justice and Generosity: And may
you never want Power and Authority answerable to your Will and Ability, whereby
these Great Works will be more easily and cheerfully finished.

The Members of a Wise Corporation have but the other day chosen You their Head
and Patron; it is a place of Trust, and of Ancient State and Honor; And by
their Election they have ensured to themselves a Valuable Protector, a Noble
Friend, and Faithful Governor.

And all Wisemen who love their Country will follow their example, and omit no
Opportunity of Advancing such Men to Places of Trust, Honor, and Authority, by
which the Grandieur of their Renowned City will best appear, the Citizens be
most easily Governed, the Affairs most Prudently and Honorably managed,
Generosity and Hospitality more Nobly maintained, and the Poor and Distressed
Cherished and Provided for: So that Foreigners may again admire, and our own
Natives Glory in the Restoration of our own English Courage, Hospitality and
Charity.

It has pleased God to Bless you with a better Proportion of Health, since the
Fateague of that great Office you have so Honorably and diligently performed:
And, That you may long enjoy a Continuance of the same to enable you to be yet
more Eminent in public Stations; and having served your Generation to the
Honor of the Rich, Comfort of the Poor, and good of all, for many Years, You
may then be Translated to Receive your Reward in Heaven, is the Prayer of,

Most Honored Sir, Your most Humble, And most Faithful Servant, Richard
Holland.
August, 30. 1700.
The good Samaritane:
St. Luke, 10, 37. Latter part, Go and do thou likewise.


THE Words are our Blessed Saviors Application of a great Doctrine inculcated
in one of his Noble Parables, which the Wisdom of our Church has appointed for
our Contemplation this Day and Week in the Holy Gospel; to which I must entreat
you to have some respect while I show you the import of them.

In the beginning thereof, our Savior acquaints his Disciples and Followers of
their Felicity above other Men, even Prophets and Kings, who had been before
them and had seen none of the things which they had seen.

The Intimations of the Messiah the Savior of the World, were all but dark to
them and obscure, when to these the Disciples Life and Immortality is brought
to light.

The Prophets and Kings of Old had seen him only by Faith. When these bodily
saw him and conversed with him; they Eat, Drank with, and discoursed him, were
Fed, and Cured by him; they heard his Voice, and were moved by his Example, and
had all Encouragements imaginable to their excellent Religion, both from the
Miracles they frequently saw, and the Doctrine they constantly heard from his
own Mouth.

All which is to advance and improve the Honor and Excellency of the New
Testament above the Old, the state of the Gospel above that of the Law.

When immediately comes to him a great Man of that Law, one well versed in the
Rites and Performances of the Old Religion, the Statutes and Rules of Moses: He
was very expert in that way; There he boasted his Perfection; And because he
thought that he knew enough, and that no one could instruct him* abounding in
Pride and Self-Conceit, he puts forth this tempting Question to our Lord, ver.
25. Master, what shall I do to inherit Eternal Life?

He was Pert and Brisk, and thought by his Art and Sophistry to impose upon, or
Silence our Blessed Lord. Who answers him only thus, ver. 26. What is written
in the Law? How read thou? that is, Thou ought thy self to be well known
in this, and it is thy Office to satisfy others in the matter; thou who
professes the Knowledge of the Law, and from whose Mouth other Men seek it,
thou should be able to satisfy Men from thence; and sure there thou can
find it, What is written in the Law? How read thou?

He answers directly now, and shows his Proficiency in the Law, and said, ver.
27. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul,
and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind, (because indeed he cannot be
sufficiently loved) and thy Neighbor also, thou shall love him as thy self.

Jesus allows and approves of this his discreet answer, commends him for it;
and adds, that since he knew his Duty so well, nothing remained but for him to
do it; ver. 28. This do and thou shall live.

The knowledge of the Law, and the best of all Religion is not enough; but to
live, to do accordingly, that is the Life of all Religion; Knowledge does not,
Knowledge cannot, but doing accordingly most certainly will give Life. And this
was a direct answer to his Question, What shall I do to inherit Eternal Life.

The Gentleman being Baulked, and not a little touched with this our Lord's
Reflection upon his answer; and being convinced that he did not live according
to his Knowledge; being puffed up with the usual affection and vain Glory of the
Pharisees, one of whom he was, he would not in the least own and acknowledge
any manner of defect; but as if he had been Perfect, very boldly he puts forth
a second Question, and demands of Jesus, who he esteems to be his Neighbor,
ver. 29. And who is my Neighbor?

The Jews you must know reckoned their own Nation and Brethren, the only People
to whom were due their affections, or any even the least assistances and
kindness: Foreigners and Strangers they persued with all manner of Hatred and
Scorn; and in afflictions, instead of relief, they practiced toward them
neglect only, and that to the greatest degree of Inhumanity.

This being the constant Course of their Lives and Conversation with all manner
of People but their own, our Blessed Savior ordered his Discourse so, that in
the answer, the Lawyer himself should acknowledge their Ill-natured folly, and
unreasonableness in that matter.

Which he does by a Noble Parable representing the whole of their Dispute, and
teaching that the great Duty of Love, of the true Christian Charity, is not to
be confined to Kindred and Country, to Nation and Religion, to Friends and
Acquaintance only, but to extend to all Men, of what Nation and Kingdom, of
what Persuasion or Relation soever, if they really be in Distress and Miserable.

The Parable runs thus, ver. 30. A certain man of the City of Jerusalem having
Business at Jerico, was upon his Journey thither: but Fortuned on the Rode to
be be-set with Thieves, who over-powering of him, robbed him of what he had,
even stripped him of his Cloths, and not content with that abused his Person,
Wounding him to prevent his pursuing of them, then went away leaving him almost
dead.



Now who should come by that way but a Priest first; who from his Order and
Profession of Priesthood, ought to have been an example of Mercy to others, yet
he passed by the other way; would not so much as inquire into the Poor Man's
Condition, or take the least Notice of him; but avoids him as if he had been an
infection, and as the Jews used to avoid and refuse all sorts of Men, be their
Condition never so bad, who differed from them in Religion.

The next Person that came that way was a Levite, ver. 32. A man of Moses also,
and Dedicated to the Temple; of the second Order of those who Ministered in
God's Service; a Man there of some Devotion, but yet of as little Charity as
the Priest; He also was not in the least moved at the dreadful Condition of the
Traveller, though he proved to be their Countryman and Fellow Citizen of
Jerusalem, but he passed on also, and gave no help at all.

After both these comes a certain Samaritane, ver. 33. Now the People of this
Town of Samaria, and those of Jerusalem, bore always a mortal hatred one to
another. The Jews have no Dealings with the Samaritans, St. John 4.9. They did
not so much as Trafick* together for any thing whatsoever; which was the Reason
why the Woman of Samaria wondered at our Savior for asking some Water of her.
How is it (says she) that thou being a Jew asks Drink of me being a Woman of
Samaria? The Jews always refused and scorned any thing from them.

The like we find from the Samaritans, their Humor was as Cross and Untoward
to all the Jews, as will appear by this Instance.

When our Savior with his Disciples was upon his Journey to Jerusalem where he
was to perfect his great Work; they being grown weary, thought fit to stay a
while and refresh themselves in this Town: accordingly our Lord sends
Messengers before to prepare for them: the Text says there, St. Luke 9.53. That
they did not receive him, because his Face was as though he would go to
Jerusalem: They denied him even common necessaries, because his purpose was to
go on thither, the place which they truly hated; which was a thing In-humane
and Barbarous enough, and moved in James and John that furious Question, Lord,
will thou that we command Fire from Heaven, and Consume them as Elias did?

As for the Cause of this Enmity betwixt the Jews and Samaritanes, whether from
the difference of their Worship; for, Samaria boasted an Altar upon Mount
Gerezim, about 400 Years before the Structure of Solomon's Temple at Jerusalem:
or whether from those Old Injuries the Jews received from their Invasions, when
Samaria was the Royal City and Seat of the Kings of Israel, after the defection
of the Ten Tribes: or whether from that Temple to Baal that Ahab after his
Ivory House built there, into which he decoyed all the Priests and Worshippers
of Baal and destroyed them: or whether from their gross Idolatries when mixed
with the Astirians after Salmaneser had taken their City and carried the People
into Captivity; For though there were many Jews amongst those Idolatrous
Gentiles, yet they retained such gross mixtures of Heathenism, Heresy, and
Idolatry, that our Blessed Lord did not think them worthy of his first and
early Call, and therefore gave in charge to his Disciples, when he sent them
out to Preach him and his Gospel, that they should not enter into any City of
the Samaritanes, St. Matthew. 10.5. Or lastly, whether from the words of David,
which seem to prove them neglected by the God of the Jews, Ps. 78.68, 69, 70.
He refused the Tabernacle of Joseph, and chose not the Tribe of Ephraim (where
was Samaria) but chose the Tribe of Judah, even the Hill of Sion which he
loved; and there he built his Temple on high, and laid the Foundation of it
like the Ground, which he established for ever: whether from these Reasons or
how many of them it matters not, since it is plain that the Jews always
Prosecuted the Samaritans with all the Scorn, Despite and Malice Imaginable;
And the worst Name they could devise on Earth to give any one whom they truly
wished Ill to, and hoped to ruin, was to call him a Samaritane; Hell only could
afford a Partner to it, which in the height of their Ranchor they joined to
this, and gave them both to our Blessed Lord, Thou art a Samaritane, and have a
Devil. St. John 8.48. Well, one of this City notwithstanding the Old Picque
betwixt them, perceiving this Poor Jews evil Condition and great Danger, was
moved with Pity toward him: and he effectually served him. He omitted his own
Journey at present, dressed his Wounds, searched them first, and cleansed them
with Wine, then poured in Oil to heal them: takes him to his own Inn, and
Orders him to be carefully looked to.

To comfort and assist him he stays with him there all Night, and on the morrow
(because he must have regard also unto his own Business) having done what he
could, he takes out Money, gives it to the Innkeeper aforehand to Oblige him
to better Care, and promises him at his return to pay more, even all whatsoever
he shall lay out for the Poor Man's good and recovery.

Having now told his Story, our Lord asks this discerning Lawyer, which of
these three was Neighbor (as he thought) to him that fell amongst the Thieves:
He answers, He that showed Mercy on him, ver. 37.

To which our Savior replies, thou say right again, Go and do likewise.
Thou understandest very well thy Duty, see that thy Conversation be answerable
to thy knowledge; thou know Truth, thou discernest what is good, see then
that thou take care to make it thy Business to do accordingly; to express and
demonstrate this good Learning and Knowledge, by Wise and Noble Actions, by a
Good and Holy Life. Go and do thou likewise.



Besides this great Lesson that our Savior instructs this Son of Moses in,
there is still a greater Inculcated by the Parable, and that is this, The
Insufficiency of the Law, and the works of it, to heal those that are wounded
by Sin: neither Priest nor Levite, in their own stubborn Rules were able to
work Righteousness, and Cure the Diseased in Conscience.

The Jews indeed thought themselves perfect in the works of the Law, that they
loved God sufficiently, and served him absolutely, by being constant in the
Temple, and exact in their Sacrifices; by wearing the Commandments in their
Garments, and the Name of God in their Foreheads, and using Lord constantly in
their Mouths; by being very punctual in the Observation of all their
Ceremonies, and by hating all other Nations and People who differed from them
in Religion.

But by this Parable is demonstrated, that God delights more in sincerity and
hearty affection than in Sacrifices; that he is more pleased with the Bowels of
Mercy and Love, than the multitude of Offerings.

And our Lord rebukes that stubborn self-love of the Jews, who lived to
themselves only and no more; who confined all their assistance and good wishes
to their own Nation, and Sect, and Family, who to these only would show their
Acts of Friendship and Religion: but behaved themselves like Turks to all the
rest of the World.

Therefore all that great pretense of the Jews Religion is discouraged, and
that Generous and Charitable one of the Christian is strongly enforced; which
teaches all its Proselites to look farther than themselves, and provokes them
always to do all the good they can, and that to all Men in Distress; as our
Lord himself came to Save the whole World, even all Mankind who would be
persuaded to accept of his Terms of Reconciliation.

Therefore he is the good and kind Samaritane, which signifies a Keeper: He was
the true Shepherd who kept his Sheep, and would not suffer them to perish.

All we were out of the way with this poor Jew, spoiled first and robbed of our
Innocence by Satan and his Thievish VViles; then we were Wounded by our own
many Sins, our constant Failures and infirmities; and laid aside half Dead,
destitute of Life as well as of ease; no relief could come from the works of
the Law, the Priest and Levite both passed by, and as they did not offer, so
neither were they able to save.

And here is the great Doctrine of the Parable, Health and Salvation only comes
from him: The Blessed Jesus himself, the only Savior, the true Samaritane, the
careful Keeper, he comes and relieves us, he comforts and restores us
effectually.

He searches our Sores and discovers our Corruption, then he heals and binds up
our Wounds.

He would not turn away his Face from us, but Remembered us in our low estate.

He did all that was possible to be done in order to the Healing and Restoring
of us.

And when he returned to Heaven, he left us still in very good Hands, his
Apostles and their Successors, to the End of the World: These he ordered to
Comfort, to Cure, and Preach Salvation to us, giving them at present a Reward
on Earth for looking well to us; appointing them who Preach to live also upon
the Gospel, but promising them still a better and greater Reward, when he shall
come again to make up his Jewels.

Then are they to receive the full Fruit of all their Labors, and for looking
well to their charge they will be doubly Paid and Rewarded for whatsoever of
their Pains and Care they shall lay out for the Recovery of his People.

And as the Parable it self was a sufficient display of the Folly of the Jews,
in determining their Love and Friendship to their own People, and obliged this
Cunning and Learned Man of the Law to acknowledge the same; And the only
application that our Lord makes of it to him was, that he should put in
Practice what he so well knew, and had there Ingenuously owned; being now
convinced that he should make it his Business to mend his Manners, since he had
good Learning, and knew the Law, it would leave him without excuse not to live
up to it, if he did not, Go and do likewise.

So the fuller discovery of that more Valuable Learning, the Christian Doctrine
in it, that that this Lawyer could not see, but the happy Disciples might: Nay,
that that the former Prophets and many Kings have desired to see and hear, but
could not; since all this is clearly revealed to us; since we with open Face
can behold, as in a Glass, the Glory of the Lord, how great will our
Condemnation be if we do not live accordingly; what will become of us, if after
so clear Conviction of our Sins and Misery, and perfect Demonstration of
Christ's Love and Mercy, we cannot, we will not yet be persuaded to Go and do
likewise.

For our further improving then of this Sacred Scripture, what I shall insist
upon at this time (with God's assistance) shall be the Proof and Application of
this great Doctrine.

That all our clear Convictions, and Knowledge of Christianity; our skill to
discover and find out our Duty, the Demonstrations and great Pretentions of our
Religion, and even Faith it self: these are all but nothing worth without our
Living and Doing accordingly.

To know, to own, and to commend is not enough, but our great Duty is to keep
God's Holy Will and Commandments.

To discern, to talk of, and to teach them is not enough, but to walk in the
same all the days of our Lives.

Behold, to obey is better than Sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of Rain,
said Samuel to the Men of Israel, 1 Book, 15 chapter 22. ver.

To keep Gods Law, to have just regard to his Precepts, and that with all
manner of sincerity; to be exemplary in Charity, and fruitful in all good
works; this is the Genuine offspring of the best knowledge, and the only
Demonstration of the true Christian Faith. Good works flow from thence as Fruit
does from the Tree; And without good works, in vain is the pretense of
Religion, knowledge is deceit, and a lie, and Faith it self quite Dead.

But from the discovery of the Goodness and Mercys of God the infinite Love and
Condescension of Jesus Christ; the Comfort, Assistance, and Refreshings of the
Blessed Spirit; from our Knowledge and Assurances of these in the Revealed
Word, for us to live accordingly, for us to Go and do likewise, is to Glorify
our God, to Edify and improve our Generation, and to declare and justify both
our Faith and Knowledge before Men.

When our Learning and Skill in God's Commands is seen by our Obedience, when
our Light so shines before Men that they see our good Works; when our Acts of
Conversation are such as we justify in Opinion; Then do we Glorify our
Heavenly Father, prove our Claim and Interest in the Merits of his only Son our
Blessed Savior, and then do we please and rejoice the Holy Ghost: then do we
answer the end of our Creation; become Ornaments to the Universe, while we
appear truly useful helps amidst the infirmities and failuers of a miserable
World; and as our example will tend to the Encouragement of others, provoking
them also to Glorify God, so more especially to the Justification of our
selves in the great Day of the Lord.

Holy David says, Blessed are those who are upright in their way, and who walk
in the Law of the Lord, Ps. 119. ver. 1. Blessed are they who keep his
Commandments, and seek him with their whole Heart, ver. 2.

He does not say that they are Blessed who can talk of God's Testimonies, who
know the best way, and are well instructed in the Law of the Lord, but they who
do accordingly, they who keep the Law, and seek him with their whole Heart.

He afterward says, ver. 6. Then shall I not be ashamed, or confounded, when I
have respect unto thy Commandments. Now, in knowledge a Man may be confounded,
in Opinion, and Fancy, and even in Faith it self: but in Obedience, in having
just respect to God's Commands, in doing likewise, three we cannot be
confounded.

And our Blessed Lord himself says, St. John 15.14. Ye are my Friends if ye do
whatsoever I Command you: it is not for knowing only, or believing; but for
doing what Christ Commands that demonstrates us to be his true Friends.

The Apostle St. John says expressly, in his 1 Ep. 3 chapter 10 ver. That Whosoever
does not Righteousness is not of God.

Therefore is it that the Man after Gods own Heart, prays for his Son in these
words, Give to Solomon my Son a perfect Heart, to keep thy Commandments, thy
Testimonies, and thy Statutes, and to do those things. 1 Chronicles. 29.19.

Wisdom and Knowledge Solomon himself had desired, and obtained from God in a
most Glorious abundance, above any Instance that the World had ever produced;
But this is his Godly Father's Prayer for him, that he might do likewise, that
he might live and act according to his Superlative Knowledge.

And it is the particular and highly Honorable Character of Zachary and
Elizabeth, that, They walked in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord
blameless, St. Luke 1.6. They lived up to their Religion, and obeyed the
Statutes and Laws thereof.

And this is that that was Comfort to King Hezekiah in the day of his Sickness
and Distress, when the Prophet was sent to him with this Doleful Message, Set
thy House in Order, for thou must dye and not Live, this then refreshed and
encouraged him therefore to appeal with it to his God, Isaiah 38. ver. 3. I
beseech thee, O Lord, Remember how I have walked before thee in Truth and with
a perfect Heart, and have done that which is good in thy Sight.

The Author to the Hebrews says, Chapter 11. ver. 6. That without Faith it is
impossible to please God: And St. James says, that Faith without Works, without
Holiness, without doing accordingly, is Dead, in the 2, chapter of his Ep. 17. ver.
good works therefore must revive and quicken our Faith. That same Apostle
therefore says in the 1, chapter of his Ep. 22. ver. Be ye doers of the Word, and
not hearers only, deceiving your own Souls: arguing it to be a mighty Shamm, a
Trick and an Imposition upon our own Souls, to be great Hearers of the Word and
not doers accordingly; that it will blast all our pretenses, cheat us of our
Salvation, and deny us all hopes of that Noble Hire, which that great
Husbandman will generously bestow on all good Workmen, the faithful Laborers
in his Vineyard.

And our Blessed Lord himself giving a Check to the rest of our Lawyers
Brethren and Companions, the Scribes and Pharisees, who boasted so much their
Perfection in knowing the Law, and naming the Name of God, says to them this
plainly, Not every one that cries Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven; (And now he tells you who shall) But he that does the Will of my Father
which is in Heaven. It Is, St. Matthew. 7.21. the Doer, the active Man, full of
good Works, has an easy and most Glorious admission into the Kingdom of Heaven.

It shall be our Righteousness (says Moses to the Children of Israel) if we
observe to DO all these Commandments before the Lord our God, as he has
Commanded us, Deuteronomy. 6.25.

And (says David) Blessed are they that keep judgment and do Righteousness
always, Ps. 106. ver. 3. This therefore, after his Conversion, he made his
utmost Care. I have inclined my Heart to perform thy Statutes always even unto
the end.

Therefore it is that St. Paul presses this very hard and affectionately upon
the men of Philippi, in the 4 chapter of his Ep. to them, the 8, and 9, ver. even
all brave and generous Actions, Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things
are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any
virtue, and if there be any praise, think of these things. Again, Those things
which ye have both learned, and received, and heard, and seen in me, those
things take you care to do.

And that mighty King and Prophet a little before his Death, in the last great
Meeting he had of his Princes and Nobles, the Heads of all the Tribes; being
about to take leave of them, and to give them some good advice at parting, this
is the only farewell admonition that his last Breath delivers to them; to
enforce which, and make them take the better notice of it, he adds so great an
Encouragement, that it would be the means to continue them in that good Land,
which the bounty of their great God had now placed them in, and to ensure also
a blessing upon their Posterity. His words in the 1 Chronicles. 28. chapter and the 8.
ver. are these, Now therefore in the sight of all Israel, the Congregation of
the Lord, and in the audience of our God, keep and seek for all the
Commandments of the Lord your God, that ye may possess this good Land, and
leave it for an inheritance for your Children after you for ever.

And when they had Forfeited Gods Favor, and lost that good Land, and were got
into Captivity; the Omission of this Duty is that that Nehemiah in his
Confession does attribute to be the great Cause thereof; Nehem. 1.7. We have
dealt very corruptly against thee, and have not kept the Commandments, nor the
Statutes, nor the Judgments, which thou Command thy Servant Moses: they did
not perform well, they did not act the Duties of their Religion; wherefore God
suffered them to be a Prey to the Heathen, that they that hated them were made
Lords over them; And as he further says, Chapter 9.36. Behold we are Servants this
day: and for the Land that thou gave to our Fathers, to eat the good thereof,
and the Fruit thereof, behold we are Servants in it: And it yields much
increase to the Kings that thou have set over us, because of our Sins, also
they have Dominion over our Bodies, and over our Cattle at their Pleasure, and
we are in great distress, ver. 37.

Whereas on the other side, for the Comfort of those who cheerfully obey and do
Gods will, they have their desires and enjoy true Peace; the Apostle St. John
says, That whatsoever we ask we receive from him, because we keep his
Commandments, and do those things which are pleasing in his sight, 1 St. John
3. chapter 22. ver.

And of all those things, the works of Mercy and Pity, the Business of the
Text, these are alalways the most pleasing in his sight: These are the
fulfilling of the Law, and the sum and substance of the Gospel: These are the
Honor of Humanity, and by these Men are known to be Christ's Disciples: The
best of Men were truly famous for them, and no one can be at all Religious
without them. Such a Power and Charm they have always had over the wise and
good, that rather than not to do them, they would even challenge Misery it
self, or choose not to be at all; which made that upright and perfect Man cry
out, Job 31.16. If I have withheld the Poor from their desire, or have caused
the Eyes of the Widow to fail; Or have taken my Morsel my self alone, and the
Fatherless have not eaten thereof; For ver. 18. of the Fatherless (he says)
From his Youth he was brought up with him, as with a Father: Of the Widow (he
says) I have guided her from my Mothers Womb. Again, ver. 19. If I have seen
any perish for want of Clothing, or any Poor without Covering; If his Loins
have not blessed me, and if he were not warmed with the Fleece of my Sheep; If
I have lift up my Hand against the Fatherless when I saw my help in the Gate.
Then ver. 22. Let mine Arm fall from tho shoulder Blade, and mine Arm be broken
from the Bone. And if he failed of a generous improvement, and honest use of
what God had blessed him with, then said he, Let Thistles grow instead of
Wheat, and Cockle instead of Barley: As then he should not deserve, so neither
did he desire any more increase of his Land.

And for the Encouragement of the Rich and Generous, the greatest Emperor, the
Richest Prince as well as the wisest Man says, Cast thy bread upon the Waters
for thou shall find it after many days, Eccles. 11.1. Give of thy substance
freely to those who are absolutely unlikely to return thy Bounty, and thy
reward shall be when both it and thy self shall be forgotten. The same Wiseman
says, that all is but lent unto the Lord, who will fully repay whatsoever is
laid out. Prove. 19.17.

And this is the Reason that the Prophets of old, who spoke the Mind and Will
of God, took care very earnestly to deliver this Doctrine to all great Men they
were sent to. The Prophet Isaiah charges them to loose the bands of wickedness,
to take off heavy Burdens, to let the oppressed go free, and break every Yoke;
to deal their bread to the hungry, to bring the Poor that wander to their
Houses, and when they see the naked to take care and cover them. Isa. 58.6, 7.

The Prophet Ezekiel commands them no more to oppress, but restore the Pledge
to the Debtor; to spoil none by violence, but to feed the hungry, and cover the
naked with a Garment; to withdraw their hands from iniquity, and execute true
Judgment betwixt Man and Man, Ezekiel 18.7, 8.

Holy Daniel advised the King himself in a great straight, that he would take
care speedily to break off his sins by Righteousness, and his iniquities by
showing Mercy on the Poor, Dan. 4.24.

Our Blessed Savior himself commands them that they would let their Light so
shine before Men, that they may see their good works, and glorify their Father
which is in Heaven, St. Matthew. 5.16.

And our great Apostle charges them who are Rich in this World, that they be
not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain Riches: But that they do good, that
they be Rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to Communicate;
assuring them that it is the way to lay up in store for themselves a good
Foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on Eternal Life, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19.

Nay, our Blessed Lord himself commands them to make to themselves Friends of
this Mammon of Unrighteousness, with so remarkable an Encouragement, that a
Generous and Charitable use of these Earthly things, will procure them true and
lasting Friends, when all else shall forsake them, such as shall Usher them to
Heavenly, even everlasting Habitations, St. Luke 16.9.

To Apply now what has been said.

1. Let this be a severe Check to all Sanctity in pretense only; to that
Devotion, that Religion that is more in Name and Noise than in Heart and Deed;
whose Proselites boast their Love of God, and yet hate their Neighbors; who
are formal, and constant, and open in the outward show and profession of their
Religion, but have nothing of the inward Life, and Power, and Vigor of true
Christianity, which rejoices in good works, and is always exemplary in showing
Mercy.

This our witty and Eloquent Mosaical Man, that could talk of loving God with
all his Heart, and all his Soul, and all his might, and all his strength; and
then, his Neighbor as himself: who perhaps was Zealous in his outward
Performances of the things relating to the Law; his Prayers and Sacrifices, his
Tyths and Offerings; and who could teach others their Duty, was well enabled to
give Rules, and direct his Neighbors in Goodness; was still but as a Dead Man;
he wanted to go and do likewise, to learn even of a true moral Heathen, a good
honest though a despised Samaritane, how he might attain Eternal Life.

So Idle and silly is all affected Holiness, when there wants real
Performances; so trifling is all outward show and glorying, that is without
Heart and Substance; so vain and presuming are all their pretenses to an
Eternal happy Life, who live not according to their Faith and Knowledge; who
though they can very glibly talk, yet are dull and heavy in acting the Duties of
their Religion; that their expectation is but a snare, their Profession a
perfect Cheat, their Knowledge and Glory is in shame, and their mighty boasting
will prove at last little else than Damnation to their Souls.

2. From this great Transaction, and those serious Checks given to the furious
sons of Israel by our Blessed Lord, we see the mistake of all those who affect
infallibility in this Life, and the wrong measures they take in pretending to
advance the Dominion of Religion, the Kingdom of Christianity, by destroying
and rooting up all those who are not perfectly of their mind.

'Twas the constant Practice of the Pharisees, one of whom our Lawyer was, to
pretend to the Love and Service of God exclusive of all others; and to pursue
those who came not up to their heights, not only with scorn and neglect, as the
Priest and Levite did the wounded Man, but with great violence also and
inveterate Malice.

Amongst the Apostles themselves there was a furious James and John (mentioned
but just now) who were ready to call for Fire from Heaven upon those who
refused them Entertainment. And in all Ages and Places of the World, as well as
at Jerusalem, there have been those Pharisees who studiously boasted themselves
and party, Condemning all others.

But Wisdom is justified of all her Children, and Righteousness is that that
will bring a Man Peace at the last.

It Is the integrity of the upright that shall preserve them; it is doing
likewise, not pretending and boasting only; it is showing Mercy and Truth, not
doing mischief and cruelty, that can assure us of all the Glories and
Advantages of our Religion, and at last will advance us to God's Right Hand,
there to enjoy Eternal Life.

3. This is Argument of great Comfort to the honest Hearted Christian to hold
up his Head, keep his integrity, mind his own Business, notwithstanding the
untowardness of his Generation, the multitudes of Thieves and Robbers, those
who lie in wait both to deceive and spoil them.

Though the Priest and Levite go by and leave them in their Distress; though those
who think themselves safe, and above the danger of Misery, show no Mercy at all
to them; yet the God of Israel, He raises them a Friend though of a Samaritane,
he sees and takes Pity on them.

He Remembers us in our low degree, (says David.) And again, When my Father and
Mother forsake me the Lord takes me up. Ps. 27.10. When therefore there
appears no probable Remedy, neither from the Men of Religion whose Profession
should Oblige them to Mercy; nor any relief from Parents, whose Bowels of
Compassion cannot fail; even then comes he to save, whose Arm is not shortened;
that God from whom alone proceeds all Deliverance, whose Mercies endure for
ever, Blessed be his Holy Name.

Lastly, Let this be Encouragement to all Men, to be Kind and Merciful,
Assistant and Loving, to all those in Misery, who stand in need of help and
Comfort.

He is our Neighbor whose Misfortunes and afflictions call for our assistance;
Let us then Go and do likewise: Not run away from such Opportunities for our
Charity; nor at distance stand and pity them only; but as the good Samaritane
here, have real compassion on them, serve them effectually; pour in Oil and
Wine, and then bind up their wounds, carry them to Lodgings to be taken care
of, and leave them money too.

These good works are they that will go before us into Judgment; this is that
Virtue that will be fullness of reward in the end.

So says our blessed Lord himself if he be to be believed: He tells us, St.
Matthew. 25.31. That when the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the
Holy Angels with him, and shall sit upon his Throne of Glory; and before him
shall be gathered all nations, that he will separate them one from the other,
as a Shepherd divides his Sheep from the goats: Under the Type of setting the
Sheep on the right hand he will advance all the righteous to Glory; And by
putting the Goats to the left will he doom the unrighteous to misery.

Now pray observe, that at that great Day when he will recompense all according
to their Works, these will then be those Great Works so particularly reckoned
for; these will then appear the Works that will stand by and justify us: ver.
34. Come now ye Blessed of my Father, receive the Kingdom prepared for you from
the foundation of the World: The reason follows; For I was an hungered and ye
gave me Meat: I was thirsty and ye gave me Drink: I was a Stranger and ye took
me in: naked and ye clothed me: I was sick and ye Visited me: I was in prison
and ye came unto me.

And to prevent mistakes and leave all unkind and unmerciful men without
excuse, he further adds, that it is not to his own person that he expects all
those performances, because he would withdraw that shortly from the Earth; but
that he would leave them there continual Objects of Love and Mercy, and all
that he expected was to be done to those Miserable Members of his, ver. 45. And
accordingly would reward them as done to himself; as he would also resent the
omission with certain punishment. In as much as they did it not to these, they
did it not to me; These therefore shall go into everlasting pain: But the
righteous into life Eternal; They who did it to the least of my Brethren, to
the most despised and ordinary of Men when in misery, they did unto me, I will
take care now of their reward. They shall go away into Everlasting Life.

Whosoever is Wise, shall ponder these things, will go and do likewise, and they
shall understand the Loving kindness of the Lord.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
A Sermon Preached in the Parish Church of St. Magnus the Martyr, by
London Bridge, On Sunday February 11 th, 1609/1700. At the Baptizing of some
Persons of Riper Years, brought up by Quakers and Anabaptists, but now
Conformed to the Church of England. Published at the Request of them and their
Friends. By Richard Holland, M. A. Chaplain to his Grace the Duke of Richmond,
Curate of St. Magnus, and Lecturer of All-hallows the Great; who has since
Baptized several others. The Second Edition. Printed for John Back, at the
Black Boy on London Bridge.


