THE LONG Parliament DISSOLVED.

Deuteronomy. 27. 17. Cursed be he that Removes his Neighbors Landmark: and all the
People shall say, Amen.

Printed in the Year, 1676.

THE Long Parliament Dissolved.
WISDOM says, There is as well a time to Speak, as a time to be Silent; And
though Wise Men are often hardly put to it, to know the Proper seasons of the
one or the other: Yet where Necessity has left no Choice, but absolutely
imposes One upon us, there can be no Srait upon the Judgment. And would to God
it could not be made most demonstrable that such a Necessity we are under at
this time. For no less than the Laws, and with them the Lives, Liberties and
Properties of every Englishman is at Stake; and we, with all other our Fellow
Englishmen, are under the highest Obligation to break our guilty Silence, or
with our Tongues in our Mouths, see all our Ancient Rights Raped from Us and
our Posterity for ever; and our Living Child of Liberty and Property, slily
stolen from our sides, and a Dead One of Vassalage and Misery laid in its room.

Wherefore on our own behalf, and the behalfes of all other the People of
England, we crave leave to speak.

As Reason differenceth Men from Bruits, so Laws (which are but the results of
Reason) does difference Freemen from Slaves: For it is Law only which makes
and secures our Liberties and Properties, that neither they nor we, are
Governed as Beasts by Will and Pleasure; but lays such a Restrant upon the
Government, as that it cannot do to us, or any thing that is ours, ad Libitum,
but must Govern as the Law directs.

Hence was it that the wisdom of our Ancestors laid out itself more, to Legally
secure our Lives, Liberties and Fortunes from all Wrongs from the Government,
than from the Private Injuries of one Man to another: For they knew that
occasional and temporary Laws would easily be made to restrain these, if they
did; But to secure the other, make sure provision of frequent Parliaments: For
they had so glorious a Value of, and kindness for our English Liberty, that
they would not trust the Guardianship thereof to any under Heaven, but to the
People themselves. And therefore that they might have a continued Assurance and
a perpetual Satisfaction that their Liberties should continue in statu quo, It
was Ordained, That for the maintenance of the said Liberties, and Remedy of
Mischiefs and Grievances that daily happen, A Parliament should be held once
every year, 36. Edw. 3. Cap. 10

It Is true, some of our Kings have omitted the holding of Parliaments for a
longer time than a year, and the People have silently waited, and born that
Omission. And in like manner so have we, notwithstanding his Majesty's
Coronation Oath, and his many most solemn and often repeated Promises for the
Keeping of the Laws; and yet continuing a Parliament of the prodigious length
of 15 or 16 years, till they were not the Representatives of the one half of
the People of England: Yet, we say, we held our Peace. And though we know, that
all the People of England have equal Right to be Represented, and could make it
demonstrable, that a Parliament of that length can never be the Representative
of half the People; for all from 21 years of age to 37, which are the Major
part of the People of England, both in number and vigor, and the Flower and
Strength of the Kingdom, and that are only able to Defend it from any Enemies
or Invasions, were never Represented in this Parliament; and that the major
part of those that were Represented, never so much as thought or intended that
the Trust they gave, should be continued to such a monstrous duration for the
Gentry of England, who think themselves born to have their share in Ruling as
well as being Ruled, judge it a very hard thing upon them, That they should be
secluded from their hopes of having the honor to serve their King and Country
in Parliament (the greatest Schole of Knowledge and improvement in the
Kingdom) be bound to walk in the Hall, or like Laquies, wait in the Lobby all
their lives long, and see 500 persons hold the Seats, as if they had each of
them a Pattent for his Place; whereas if we had annual Parliaments according to
Law, there might 8000 Gentlemen have served in Parliament since the Kings
restoration, which had been a great accomplishment to the Kingdom; And that
there being at least 20000 Gentlemen in the Kingdom, and many of them of as
good Brains, Families and Fortunes as any in the House, should be debarred from
that highest Trust and Honor, and should be forced to dance attendance all
their days on 500 only, would have provoked any Nation in the World to have
spoke but we. And yet for all this we were silent and resolved to wait with
patience: For we considered, though we had not what we ought to have, yet it
was but still a sin of Omission, and did think with our selves, that some
Circumstances of Affairs abroad, and the Poverty and Discontent of the People
at home, would at last reduce things into their old and proper Order, and that
we should at length see Parliaments in their Ancient Legal Channel again, and
both King and People reaping the Fruits and Blessings, that would flow from
thence.

But in stead thereof, to our great amazement, all on the sudden, we found our
selves plunged into a far greater extremity than ever; for whereas before
Parliaments were only omitted or continued longer than the Law intended, but
now by the last Prorogation, the King has positively Ordered that a Parliament
shall not be held within the time appointed by Law: So that the matter is come
to this narrow Issue, That either this Prorogation is Null, and the Parliament
as an End, or, All our LAWS are of no Effect. And therefore we Appeal to
Mankind in general, and more particularly to every Member of the late
Parliament, Whether we are not reduced to an unavoidable necessity of Breaking
our Silence.

For, our Law (Viz.) 4. Edw. 3. Cap. 10. 36. Ed. 3. Cap. 14. 5. Edw. 3. No.
141. 5. Ed. 2. No. -- 1. Rich. 2. No. 95. Do positively appoint The Meeting of
a Parliament once within a year. But directly contrary to all these Statutes,
this last Prorogation does Order the Parliament not to Meet within a Year, but
some Months after. And therefore either this Prorogation is Null and Void in
Law, and consequently the Sitting and Acting as a Parliament is at an End, or
else by your Sitting and Acting, you will Admit and Justify, That a particular
Order of the King is to be obeyed, tho contrary to an Act of Parliament, of
what importance soever; and thereby at once subvert the whole Government of
England by Law. The dreadful Consequences whereof would fill any true
Englishman with Indignation to consider.

For if a particular Order of the King is to be obeyed contrary to all those
Laws, made for holding Parliaments for the Maintenance of all the Laws of the
Kingdom, and Remedy of Mischiefs and Grievances which daily happen, then
another particular Order of the Kings, contrary to Magna Charta; and another
Order of the Kings, contrary to the Petition of Right; and another particular
Order of the Kings, contrary to the Statute De Tallagio non concedendo, must
also be obeyed. So that then the King may by his particular Order take away any
man's Life, Liberty or Estate, when ever he pleases: And our condition is
changed from that of Freemen, to be worse than that of Villains: For tho the
Lord had the power over his Villains Goods and Liberty, yet he had not a power
over the Life of his Villain, that the Law secured to him. But of the Kings
particular Order contrary to Law, must be obeyed, we have nothing to secure our
very Lives unto us.

For if our Lives, Liberties and Estates have their Security from the Laws
only, and the Laws have their Maintenance from Parliaments, then if a
particular Order of the Kings, concerning the Sitting of Parliaments must be
obeyed contrary to all these Acts, made for holding of Parliaments, the king
when ever he pleases may take away both the laws which should Secure us, and
Parliaments which should secure our Laws, and then in what a condition we shall
be left, (we conceive) both you and we may easily judge; For now if any
threatens to take away our lives arbitrarily, and without the legal Judgment
of our Peers, or our liberties without showing cause in law, we can answer
Magna Charta will not suffer you. If any threaten to violate our Properties, we
can now answer the Petition of Right will not suffer you. If any attempt to
raise money without consent in Parliament, we can yet say no, the law De
Tallagio non concedendo will not permit you. But if the kings particular Order
contrary to these laws must give supercedias to them, and be obeyed by us, What
have we to answer then? For you throw the whole People of England on their
knees to beg for their lives, and for what part of their liberties and
propeties Will and Pleasure will please to spare them.

The Laws are the Banks and Fence of our Lives, and all that we can call Ours,
so that no man can wrong us, neither in our Persons nor our Properties, but we
can strait run to them for Right, But if contrary to law, an Order of the
kings, that breaks down these Banks and Bounds, and like an Inundation
overflows all our Freedom, must be obeyed, What end will there be of our
Miseries? Where will it stop? or who, or what can stop it? Now it is injustice in
any person whilst our laws govern us, to take any thing that is ours
illegally from us, but if the kings Order against our laws must be obeyed,
'twill be Mercy that any thing of ours is left us. Nay to say truth, then all
is his, and we have nothing that we can call ours, for it is law alone that
makes Property.

Nor are our written laws and statutes only subverted, but the Common law may
also by the same Rule: For if an Order of the King must be obeyed, against Acts
of Parliament of the highest Importance, and most Universal concern, then also
may his Order be obeyed against the Common law; and then whereas by the Common
law every Member of Parliament is to have 40 days Summons before the Meeting
of Parliament, that he may have time sufficient to prepare himself to come up
and attend the discharge of his duty, that there may be a full Assembly, and
nothing done upon the catch, nor by a Party; the kings Order contrary to this
law may restrain the 40 days to 20, 10, 5, 4 days, nay 24 hours if he please;
and it may be easily supposed, he cannot want a Quorum of each House of his own
Servants and Officers who may dispatch what laws soever he pleases, though to
the total alteration of the Government, before any from the Country can come up
to hinder it.

And not only the Statute and Common law, but lex and consuetudo Parliamenti,
the laws and customs of Parliament, is likewise subverted. For whereas by that
law and custom of Parliament 40 Members and a Speaker makes a House, this or
any succeeding kings, may be the same Power, order that 24, nay 14, or any less
number shall make a House, and then a Parliament may be packt with ease at
pleasure. And the law and custom of Parliament allows freedom of debate, and
indemnisies every Member that speaks his mind, from any other Judgment but
that of their own Bar (from which freedom it has the denomination of
Parliament) But if a private Order of the king or his Successors must be
obeyed, the Members of either House may be brought to answer for their freedom
of speech at the kings-bench-bar and from thence at a worse place, and they
have no law left nor custom of Parliament to relieve them.

We might instance in many other Laws and Customs of Parliament, by which
extraordinary Privileges are given to the whole Parliament, and to every
Member thereof in particular, but that would rather be sit a Volumn than such a
Discourse: Wherefore we will shut up this Point with this Conclusion: That if
you do admit that the Kings Order, contrary to law, must be obeyed, you do
admit, that the king and his successors, may hold Parliaments only when they
please, and when they do hold them, may make them do what they please* Nay,
that they may with or without Parliaments make laws, or make their
particular Orders and Proclamations go for laws* raise Money, and do to
Parliaments, and all the people of England, to their lives, to their liberties,
in to their estates, whatsoever either the kings themselves, their ministers,
or the vvorst of evil Counselors can desire. An admission so Impudent that the
French Tyranny came in more modestly than this. For the French king introduced
his Absolute Rule by Courtship, He prayed a law to order him to raise Money
but till their next Meeting, and that neither but if there were occasion.
which the Parliament by Inadvertency granted and have never Met since. But he
did not issue out an Order contrary to the Laws, and barefaced impose his Will
upon them: For tho they were Frenchmen they could never endure that: And shall
Englishmen* not by Inadvertency, but upon Deliberation patiently suffer the
self same Yoke to be put upon them, on worser Terms?

This we say not, Gentlemen, by way of acknowledgement that you are in a legal
Capacity now, to do us either good or hurt, for your Day is done, and your
Power-expired, but that you may not like a Snuff, smell ill after you are out.
For the only reason why we more particularly direct our selves to you, is,
because of the Character you have born, that therefore you should not so much
as seem to give Prerogative the upper hand of the Law, That however you lived,
yet all may say and witness for you, that you dyec. well and made a worthy End.
For, it is now no time to flatter you, and therefore we deal truly with you;
Things are at their Issue, and either you are dead or our laws are so: But our
laws, we are sure are living, and we trust will live to all Generations, though
there are some Gentlemen of your Assembly, so desirous of longer life, that
they labor mightily to persuade the world, That the laws we mention for Annual
Parliaments, are Repealed: But if they are, it is this Prorogation has Repealed
them: Forthey were declared to be in force when the Triennal Act was made, in
16 Caroli primi; and so they are in the Statute for Repealing that Triennal
Act, in 16 Caroli secundi, in these notable words. And because by the ancient
Laws and Statutes of this Reals made in the Reign of king Edw. 3. Parliaments
are to be held very often, etc. And how this Act should title the^ the Ancient
Laws and Statues of this Realm, and say, that by them Parliaments are to be
held very often, if they were Repealed and were no laws and statutes of the
Realm, is wondrous strange. For if they were no laws and statutes, then
certainly Parliaments are not to be held very often, nor at all by them; but
that law affirms, They are the Ancient Laws and Statutes of the Realm, and such
Laws and Statutes that Parliaments are to be held by them: So that you see
these laws were declared in force, even by your se^ves in the sixteenth year of
his Majesty's Reign, and we are sure there has been no new Parliament since to
Repeal them, however we hope the whole Nation will strictly observe every man
among you* that to sit a little longer yet, would sacrifice to this
Prorogation, the very best laws (and in there all the laws and liberties) of
England.

Therefore let not any delude you with such little pitiful Objections, that
you your selves are ashamed to acknowledge for your own; and urge them only as
other men's opinions for these sorry doses will never do, no nor the highest
cordial they can propose, your voting your selves alive: for Miracles are
ceased, and if they were not, raising a dead Parliament to life again, is
beyond the power of any mortal, and one of those works that cease for ever.

It Is very strange to see how these Gentlemen wriggle about, and like drowning
persons catch at every straw to save them.

Yesterday they urged these laws were Repealed, and now they see they can do no
good there, to day they acknowledge that they are in force, and apply all their
wit to prove that the laws may stand, and this Prorogation too: For say they,
Those laws do appoint, we shall have a Parliament once a year, and so we shall
have for all this Prorogation; for we had a Parliament in 75, and we shall have
a Parliament in 76; This is a very fine account: But according to this
computation there may be 14, 16, or 23 months as well as 12 in a year: But he
is a very novice in our law, that knows not, that wherever a year, every year,
within a year, yearly, or once a year, is mentioned in any Statute, it is to
be understood twelve Months only, and not one day more or less: As may be seen
in the Statutes of Usury, Recusancy, Conformity, Appeals for Murder, and all
other Statutes, wherein a year is expressed.

And it is more repugnant to reason to understand by a year in these Statutes
more than twelve months, than in any of the former; for the following words,
And more often, if need be. And the urging the Reason of their frequency; For
the maintenance of the Laws, and the remedying of Grievances and Mischiefs
which daily happen, do plainly show, that the Laws do not intend that
Parliaments should always be intermitted for so long as twelve months, but
never longer. But these Gentlemen would rather alter out very Language, and the
Common acceptance of words, than cease to be a Parliament.

And therefore this last Prorogations is Null in Law, in ordering a Parliaments
shall not be held till fifteen months, contrary to the Laws that order, a
Parliament shall be held once every year, and if the prorogation be Null, you
are Nulled therewith.

Now do not think to salve your Authority by your own Vote, for we and all men
must tell you, That no Parliament that is not an^ocedently so, can make it self
a Parliament by Vote, and nothing can be the Cause of it self.

Well But now since neither the Laws are Recealed to make room for this
prorogation, nor the prorogation and the Laws are able to stand both together,
these Gentlemen hunt to find out a third expedient, and say, That if the
prorogation be null, because of its illegal length of time, yet they are not
thereby dissolved but only dismissed sine die, and to be recalled by the kings
proclamation; a subterfuge as vain as either of the former, and altogether as
unable to answer the ends of those that urge it; for if the kings prorogation
was Null in Law, because it ordered the meeting of the parliament at a day of
such an undue length as was contrary to the Law, then how can a proclamation,
ordering their meeting on the same day, make it good in Law? For the only thing
illegal in the prorogation was the length of time (for its not to be doubted
but his Majesty may prorogue parliaments, so it be not contrary to Law) and to
think that a proclamation for meeting at the same time (or indeed at any time)
can cure the illegality of the prorogation, is but an absurd opinion, Et uno
absurd dato, mill sequuntur.

And therefore we affirm, That a prorogation or dismission sine die, was one of
the ancient Forms of dissolving parliaments, for a parliament so dismissed,
never sat again, nor was it ever done in any other case. And good reason, for
otherwise all our Laws would be utterly eluded: For if the Laws appoint a
Parliament shall be holden once even year, and a prorogation comes and says
no; a Parliament shall not be held till a year and a quarter, and after you see
this prorogation Null and Void in Law, you can slide your selves from under the
Proroga^ion (and are content that there should be a Nullity) and shelter your
selves under a sine die, and urge that on your behalf: we say* could you do
this. Our Laws were of no avail but mere Ciphers only.

And therefore we say first, That it is not really so* for you were prorogued
to a certain day, and not sine die; and if the Law make that day (to which you
are prorogued) as impossible ever to come, as the thirtieth of February, we
cannot help that; but it is the only day upon which your being stands, and if
by the Law that day can never come, then by the same Law you can never come.

But were it so, yet still it were but as broad as long, for a prorogation sine
die, is nothing but a dissolution neither, for there is no other sine die in
Nature but that: so that look which way you will, whether on the Prorogation of
the fifteenth of February, or a Dismission sine die, the Law shows you nothing
but Death; and you love to be Members of Parliament a great deal better than
we, if you will adventure your Lives and Fortunes, to sit after the Law has
put a Dissolution on you.

Edward the Fourth held a Parliament the eighth day of April, in the
thirteenth year of his Reign, which he prorogued to the sixth of October
following, but being desirous to call them sooner, if the urgency of his
affairs should require it, no other expedient could be found to enable the
King to do it, but by a special Act of Parliament to adjorn them to that time,
and yet if occasion did require to summon them sooner, which Act was made with
that caution and legal formality, that in the very Record of that Prorogation
there is a Salvo for the Act of Parliament, and the Act it self recited, in
haec verba, an the Record. Rot* Parl. 13* Edw. 4. Cap. 47

Item, codem octavo die Ap^ilis, post gratiasreditas ex part dicto, Domini
Regis, and ejus mandato per venerabilem P^^re, Willm. Bathon. and Wellen,
Episcopum Cancellarium praefact is Dominis and omnibus tunc ibidem presentibus,
de eorum bonis diligentiis and laboribus circa ea quo sibi ex part Regis
injunct a fuerunt exhibitis and oftend. Idem Cancellarius ex mandato ejusdem
Dom. Regis ulterius declaravit qualiter Idem Dominus Rex, sacrum tempus
Quadragesimate tunc instans and fere praeteritum, ad sacrum Festum Paschae,
tune quasi in proxinie existens, quamque, necessarium atque placabile esset,
tam Dominis quam Communibus, dicto Parliament to intendentibus ad suas
Libertates existere, aliasque causas urgentes, ipsum Dominum Regem and Regnum
suum Angliae concernentes, debitae discussionis libramine, ponderans
Parliamentum suum predictum, usque sextum diem Octobris tunc proximum futurum,
ad idem Palatium apud Westminster, quo tunc erat tentam, tunc ibide^^te^end.
^ensuit prorogand. and adjornand. and illud realiter sic prorogavit and
adjornavit, omnibus and singulis quorum intersuir firmiter injungendo quod ad
dictum sextum diem Octobris apud dict Palacium Westmin. excusation quaerunque,
cessante personaliter convenient in negotiis dicti Parliamenti processurus. --
Salva semper praefato Domino Regi condition in quodam Actu authoritate dicti
Parliamenti super hujusmodi prorogatione and adjornatione edito contenta: Cujus
quidem Actus tenor de vero in verbum hic subsequenter inseritur, viz.

Formsmuch as the King intends to prorogue and adjourn this his present
Parliament to this his Palace of Westminster, Rot. Parl. 13. Edv. 4. No* 43.
unto the sixth day of October next coming, then, there to be holden. It is
Ordained by the authority of this present Parliament, that all-be-it any such
prorogation and adjournment be had, yet if for any urgent cause moving his
highness, it shall be thought to the same behoveful, to reasume, reassemble,
and have appearance of this his said Parliament, at any time or place, within
this his Kingdom, asore the said fixth day of October, that then at his
pleasure he may direct his several Writs to the Sheriff or Sheriffs of every
shire of this his Realm to make open Proclamation in every Shire-Town, That all
Lords spiritual and temporal, being Lords of Parliament, and all Knights of
shires, Citizens of Cities, and Burgesses of Broughs returned in this present
Parliament, Personally appear at such day and place, as in the same Writs of
Proclamation shall be specified: so always that every of the said writs be
made out twenty days or more before the said day of appearance limited by the
same: And that such appearance at that day and place, to be limited by the said
Writs, be taken and had of like force and effect, as if the same king had
prorogued and adjourned this his said Parliament unto the same day and place.
And that then the said prorogation and adjournment to be had to the said Palace
of Westminister unto the said sixth day of October to be void and of none
effect.

And in this Instance, there are these two things observable. First, How
careful our Ancestors were in all their concessious to their king; that they
did no: damage their Laws* and thereby hurt the people, who had entrusted them.
And next. That that was a very learned Age and had the assistance of Littleton
and Hussy two as great Lawyers as any one time has produced. And certainly
all this trouble, care and pains, both to King and Parliament might have been
saved, if either that Age or those learned men could have found out the
expedient of a Parliament prorogued or adjourned, sine die, but there was none.

And it is well that there is not; for if the king by prorogation, sine die, may
hold a parliament but in fifteen months, then by a prorogation sine die, he may
not hold them if he please but in fifteen year, nay not hold them (if he
please) but in fifteen year, nay but in twice or thrice fifteen if he will.

And on the other hand. If the king by a prorogation sine die, may hold a
parliament, then he may call them in together again in 7 or 8 days, when all
the Country members are returned to their homes, and none can attend by reason
of the suddenness thereof, but such as the King may hope for any thing from
(as we have already intimated): so infinite are the mischiefs that would attend
a sine die prorogation, that, God be thanked, our Laws and Ancestors would
never abide it (in any other sencethan we have said) And therefore do not think
the People of England will ever do that indignity to their Laws! That
dishonor to the Finger of God, which by so stupendous and overruling a
Providence has dissolved you! Or that dis-service to their own Interest, as
ever to acknowledge you any more for their Representative.

Sine die, being thus unable to help in this matter, these Gentlemen are forced
to return again to the Prorogation, as seeing a uecessity to stand or fall by
it, and either to make that good, or to be totally routed, and therefore their
last labor spends it self in tumbling the Records, to find out Presidents, as
if Presidents could prevail against Law, and it is boasted by them (with mighty
joy) that they have at Last found out one President in Q. Eliz Reign, wherein a
Parliament was Prorogued for three days more than a Year.

But we say, this is no President at all, but only one illegal Fact, and that
there is but one in nigh 400 Years: And 300 Prorogations make very little for
the honor of those that urge it. But if this were a President, what would it
avail, since it is directly contrary to so many known Laws* For if a President
can make an illegal thing lawful, there is no wickedness under the Sun, but may
bring a President to warrant it. And therefore the greatest Sages of the Law
have always asserted, That the Law is the Met-vvand and Standard of
Presidents; And that all Presidents against the Law, were to be rejected as
wicked and unvvarantable, or else you give Presidents the Mastery over the
Law; Nay null the Law, and set up a new Rule of our practice.

We have presidents, and very an^ient presidents to that that this kingdom was
of the Romish profession; what is it therefore warrantable for us to follow
those Presidents contrary to law and turn Papists* we have a president that
king John, contrary to law, resigned the realm of England to the Pope, Is it
therefore lawful for any other king of England to do the same? We have also a
president that Queen Eliz. (from whence your president is fetched) contrary to
law* Imprisoned some Members of the House of Commons for speaking their mind in
parliament, Is it therefore ever the more lawful for the king and his
successors to violate your privileges? Wherefore unless the presidents be
lawful, it is not lawful to follow your presidents, unless you your selves
would be made presidents to future Ages. And therefore it was well said by the
Lord chief Justice Brampston, We are not to stand upon presidents, but upon the
laws, and the presidents look either the one way or the other, they are to be
brought back unto she Law. And the Lord Justice Vaughan tells you thus; Though
Presidents have been so often that they may be called by the Name of Usuage,
yet that, if usuage has been against the obvious meaning of an Act of
Parliament, in the vulgar and common acceptance of the Word, then is it rather
an Oppression of those concerned, than an Exposition of the Act.

Wherefore unless you will stand upon record as the oppressors of all the
people of England (for no less than all the people of England are concerned
herein) you can never admit of any president against the obvious meaning of not
one Act alone, but so many Acts of parliament, and that not in a wrested sense,
but in the plain vulgar and common acceptance of the word.

Your duty lying thus manifestly before you, there is nothing worthy a man that
can obstruct you. For it is only the single fear, that the people will not
choose you again, that canmake you deny it, and to deceive any, in thetrusts
they have given you, because you doubt they will credit you no more, is but an
odd kind of honesty, neither does the policy thereof look over strong, for to
be sure your betraying your trusts, in opposing the Laws and the Interest of
the People, is never the way to be chosen again.

But on the contrary, your stout and faithful standing for, and defending them,
is an infallible way to have your trusts renewed. And to think to keep it
against the peoples will, is a weakness too great for any man, that would be
reckoned more than once removed. --

Pray remember your Elder Brother, the former long Parliament, they would sit
against the peoples desire, and yet, though they had a special Act of
Parliament for their sitting, and an Army to back that Act, yet you see when
the peoples minds were turned against them, do they and their Army what they
could, the people never left till they had unroosted them; they took such
vengeance on them, as cost many of them their Lives, their, Liberties, and the
Fortunes of almost all of them: All which it is possible might have been saved,
had they observed their season, and instead of imposing themselves, let the
People have had their yearly Representatives; for lack of which, the
dissatisfaction and revenge of the People was engaged against them, so that it
was engaged against them, so that it was themselves that first pulled dowin
ruin upon their own heads. For by their long sitting, they wearied the
Roundhead, as you have done the Cavalire, And the worst Omen that befa^ls a
Government, is, when its friend falls from it, And look what was the reason
that turned the Gentlemen that were on the Parliament side against them* and
you will find the self-fame reason turns your old Friend against you; for as
they stomack'd it then, to see a few of themselves, perpetuating their own Rule
to the exclusion of all others so do we now.

And if the Nation would not endure that parliament (though they had a Law for
their sitting, because of their strange and unwonted length, can you think the
same people will abide your longer sitting in express and utter defiance of all
the laws of the kingdom? And shall it be told to future generations, That
England chose a Parliament in sixty one, who after they had sat fifteen years,
and were by an illegal Prorogation, legally dissolved, yet out of a wretched
unconscionable desire to sit yet longer; Betrayed the People that chose them*
and sat upon a Prerogative account, contrary to the known Laws of the Kingdom.

Nor let any man think it strange that we account it Treason for you to sit and
Act contrary to our Laws: For if in the first parliament of Richard the second,
Grimes and Weston, for lack of Courage only, were adjudged guilty of Treason
for suarendring the places committed to their Trust; How much more you? if you
turn Renegadoes to the People that entrusted you? and as much as in you lies
surrender, not a little pitiful Castle or two, but all the legal defense the
People of England have for their lives, liberties and properties at once.

Neither let the vain persuasion delude you that no president can be found that
one English Parliament has hanged up another, (though peradventure even that
may be proved a mistake) for an unpresidented crime calls for an unpresidented
punishment, and if you shall be so wicked to do the one (or rather endeavor to
do, for now you are no longer a parliament) What ground of confidence you can
have that none will be found so worthy to do the other, we cannot understand,
and do faithfully promise (if your unworthyness do provoke us to it) that we
will use our honest and uttermost endeavors whenever a New parliament shall be
called) to choose such as may convince you of your mistake. The old and
infallible Observation, That parliaments are the pulse of the people, shall
loose its esteem, or you will find that this your presumption was overfond,
however it argues but a bad mind to (...) because it believes it shall not be
punished.

But all grand offenders against the Law ever were of that belief, but it has
faild them very often, For Andrew Horn in his Mirror of Justice, tell us, That
Alfred hanged Darling. Segnor, Cadvvine, Cole and 40 Judges more for judging
contrary to Law: And yet all those false judgments were but in particular and
private cases and concernments, not upon the Laws themselves. And our Histories
of later times say, That Sir W. Thorp, Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, in the
reign of Edw. 3. for receiving but one poor hundred pounds in Bribes, was for
that alone, adjudged to be hanged, and all his Lands and Goods forfeited, and
this reason rendered for his condemnation, Becruse thereby, as much as in him
lay, he had broken the Kings Oath made unto the people, which the king had
entrusted him vvithall. And in the 11th year of Richard the second, The Lord
chief Justice Trisilian was hanged drawn end quartered, for giving his
judgment that the king might act contrary to one particular Statute. And Black
the kings Council, and Uske the Unde-sheriff of Middlesex, with 5 more persons
of quality were also hagng'd for but assisting in that Case.

And in the first year of Hen. 8. Empson and Dadley (notwithstanding they were
two of the kings privy council) were hanged for procuring and executing an Act
of parliament, contrary to the Fundamental Laws of the kingdom, and to the
great vexation of the people. And in the of Hen. 8. Cardinal Woolsey was
accounted guilty of High Treasor. for endeavoring to sublert the Common Laws
of the land and to introduce the Civil Law in its stead. Diverse later instances
might be given, but that it is not prudence to follow Truth too close at the
heels, neither will it be necessary to name more, if these are well considered;
For if the Lord Chief Justice Thorp, for receiving the Bribery of a hundred
pounds was adjudged to be hanged, as one that had made the king break his oath
to the people, how much more guilty are they of making the king break his
Coronation Oath, that perswad him to actagainst all the laws for holding
parliaments which he is sworn to maintain? And if the Lord chief Justice
Tresilian was hanged, drawn and quartered, for advising the king to act
contrary to one Statute only, What do they deserve that advise the king to act
not only against one statute, but against all these ancient laws and statutes
of the Realm! And if Blake the kings Council, but for assisting in the matter,
and drawing up Inditements by the kings Command, contrary to law, though it is
likely he pleaded the kings Order for it, his duty to do it, and that it was
but pro forma, what he did, yet if he was hanged, drawn and quarterd for that,
what Justice is due to them that assist in the total destruction of all the
Laws of the Nation* And if Uske (the Under-Sheriffe, whose Office it is to
execute the laws) for but in deavouring to aid Tresilian, Blake and their
accomplices, against one single Statute, was also with 5 more hanged drawn and
quartered, what punishment do they deserve, that aid and endeavor the
subversion of no less than all the laws of the kingdom? Nay, if Empson and
Dudley tho they had an Act of Parliament on their side, yet that act being
against the known laws of the land, were hanged as Traitors for putting that
statute in execution, and if Woolsey was accounted guilty of high Treason for
endeavoring to exchange the laws of England for the Civil laws? How great must
be your condemnation, and of how much sorer punishment must you be judged
worthy if you shall but endeavor to sit and act as a Parliament upon this
prorogation? For you have not only no law to plead, as Dudley and Empson had,
but are directly contrary to all our laws, of every kind: And you will thereby
not only atempt to exchange our laws, as Woolsey did, but to put us into a
state of no law at all.

Having thus faithfully discharged our duty, and laid yours before you, that
through no inadvertency you may be surprised we have done. Not at all doubting
the issue thereof; for, if it be his Majesty's honor and true intrest to keep
the laws, he has so solemnly sworn and protested to do, as assuredly it is;
we have no Reason to doubt him, And if those worthy patriots in the lords house
whose names can never be mentioned, with that Honor, they deserve from the
people did desire to addrese to his Majesty fifteen months ago for the
Parliaments dissolution, and since, all the resons that moved them thereto at
that time, do still continue, and that this main reason is now also added That
this parliament can sit and Act no more as a parliament without the total
subversion of the laws, and the very constitution of the Government of England
we have no reason to doubt the lords.

And if the Commons shall but consider from whence and for what end they
received their trust we have no cause at all to doubt them neither, for
certainly among them as well as among the lords, are a greater number of
persons of honor wisdom and fortune, then of those that are Indigent of all,
and that will think with themselves, that if not above half the people of
England are represented by them, and that two thirds of that half that are
represented are weary of their siting and desirous of their dissolution, and
that 5. Parts of 6 do believe they can never more legaly sit as a parliament,
and that sixth seem doubtful; And since that worthy part of the Commons, can
get nothing to themselves in particular by sitting, and that if 5, 10, or 20
years hence, they should by another parliament be found to have usurped the
legislative power of England, to the Ruin of our laws, and the destructon of
the people, they would be sure to answer it, with no less then their Lives and
Fortunes; and since if they should presume to fit so many person of quality,
are resolved not to pay any taxes, or obey any other of their acts without
first trying their validity by due process of Law. And what pleasure or
advantage his Majesty can take, or they themselves can have, in their sitting as
a perliament, when their very Jurisdiction is like to be questioned in all the
Courts of England? And whether it be likely that English Juries should find
against their neighbors and therein against themselves, to uphold a parliament
that has so many years imposed it self upon them, contrary to their desire,
And that now is Legally dissovled, we leave to themselves to Judge.

FINIS.

