THE True Reformation of Manners, OR THE NATURE and QUALIFICATIONS OF True
Zeal: IN A SERMON Preached in the Parish Church of BRIDGWATER: Occasioned by a
more than ordinary Concourse of Dissenters there, upon that Pretense.

By MATTHEW. HOLE, B. D. And Vicar of Stokegursy in Somersetshire.

2 King. 10.16. Come with me, and see my Zeal for the Lord. OXFORD, Printed by
L. Lichfield, for Henry Clements, 1699.

TO THE READER.
THE design of the ensuing Discourse, is not to hinder, but promote
Reformation, by directing to the true way and means conducing thereunto:
Neither is there any thing in it to Reproach, but only to Regulate our Zeal,
which derives all its Goodness from the Object, or End to which it is directed;
and like Fire, is either useful or dangerous, according as it keeps, or leaves
its due place and bounds.

I know it is hard, and perhaps improper too, to treat coldly of this Subject,
which is apt to excite a Warmth in the Speaker, and to enkindle also some Heat
in the Hearers: And therefore 'twill require no small Skill, to know the true
limits and measures of this Virtue, and likewise no less Care to observe and
keep within them.

For private Persons to be very solicitous about the amending their own Ways,
and reforming their particular Errors and Vices, is a very commendable Property
and Duty of a good Christian: But for such to be over-busy and clamorous about
the Reforming others, is many times to go out of their Station, and to meddle
with things that appertain not to them. True Reformation, like Charity, begins
at home, and makes Men more careful to correct their own Faults, than to pry
into and censure the Manners of others: Such Censores morum had need have not
only sufficient Authority, but an exemplary and unspotted Integrity; lest their
own Miscarriages should upbraid the forwardness of their Zeal, and confute
their goodliest Pretenses.

They that can allow themselves in the heinous Sins of Schism, Division and
Disobedience, may indeed talk and pretend much to Reformation, but can never be
true Reformers: Such a preposterous Zeal has commonly very bad Designs
concealed under it; and it is well known what direful Evils have been contrived
and acted under this mask of Reformation: So that we are concerned to watch our
Zeal, as we do our Fire, lest it grow headstrong and exorbitant, and set not
only whole Houses, but whole Kingdoms in a Combustion; that we be not twice
deceived by the same Artifice.

I hope this warm Subject has not transported me beyond the Bounds of Reason
and Meekness in the handling of it; and that no wise Reader will see any just
cause to complain of it, as Satirical or Sarcastical.

To rectify a mistaken Zeal, and prevent the Danger of it, were the sole Ends
of Preaching this Sermon; and to answer the Requests of some, and remove the
Prejudices of others, were the true Reasons of its Publication.

FAREWELL.
A Sermon, etc.
GALAT. IV. Part of the 18th Verse. It is good to be Zealously affected always
in a good thing.


THE occasion of these Words, was from some false Teachers, that had crept into
the Churches of Galatia, with a design to destroy the Credit of the Apostle,
and the Doctrine delivered by him: To which end they preached up Circumcision,
and other Rites and Ceremonies of Moses's Law, on purpose to undermine the
Truths of the Gospel.

In this Attempt they prevailed so far, as to shake the Faith of many, who
began to decry the Apostle, and to cry up those deceitful Teachers above him.
This put St. Paul, in this Chapter, upon reasoning the Case with them, ver. 16.
Am I become your Enemy because I tell you the Truth? i. e. Am I become vile and
despicable in those eyes, which you would, not long since, have plucked out and
given to me? How comes this change to be made in you, that the great Love you
lately bore to my Person and Doctrine, is thus of a sudden turned into a Hatred
of both? Why, he found that an Enemy had done this; i. e. Those false Teachers,
taking the opportunity of his Absence, had planted their Tares, to hinder the
growth of that good Seed he had sowed among them; and therefore with great
earnestness cautions these Galatians against them, as the great enemies of
their Faith and Salvation; leting them know, that whatever show they might make
of Zeal toward GOD, or Affection toward them, there was nothing under it, but
Falsehood and Hypocrisy. They Zealously affect you, says he, ver. 17. but not
well: There is no Sincerity in their goodliest Pretenses, and in all they say
or do, their Love is not to you, but themselves; Yea, They would exclude you,
(says he) that you might affect them: meaning, that they would shut you out
from the true Faith, that you might affect their Persons, and embrace their
Errors. Wherefore he wills them to beware of them, and to shun them as Cheats
and Impostors; and from their false and counterfeit Zeal, takes occasion to
recommend True Zeal to them, in the Words of the Text: But it is good to be
Zealously affected always in a good thing. In treating of which Words, I must
enquire,

First, Into the Nature of Zeal, and show what it is to be Zealously affected.

Secondly, I must speak to the two Qualifications of true Zeal mentioned in the
Text; the one respecting the Time of its continuance, which must be always; the
other, the Object about which it is to be employed, which is a good thing.

Thirdly, I must show the Goodness or Excellency of true Zeal from those Words,
It is good to be Zealously affected, etc.

Fourthly, I must lay open some of the Mistakes and Miscarriages of Zeal, and
then conclude with an Inference or two from the whole.

I begin then with the Enquiry into the Nature of Zeal, that we may see what it
is to be Zealously affected; and here we may note,

First, That Zeal, in the general Notion of it, is a warmth of Mind, that
carries it out in an eager pursuit of its Object, accompanied with Indignation
at any thing that opposes, or lies in its way: And this is sometimes in
Scripture, and other Authors, taken in a bad fence, for Emulations, Wrath, and
bitter Envyings: St. James makes mention of (...), a bitter Zeal, proceeding
from an overheated and exasperated Mind, and is translated, bitter Envyings,
Jam. 3.14. St. Paul reckons (...), which is rendered, Emulations, among the
works of the flesh, Gal. 5.20. This is an inordinate heat of the Soul, whereby
it is carried out too eagerly after some earthly, sensual Objects or Designs.
But passing by this, we are now to treat of a Religious Zeal, which is a warm
and powerful Inclination of the Mind after Heaven and Heavenly things. For the
better understanding whereof, we must note,

2ly, That Zeal is not any one single Passion or Affection, but a mixture or
composition of more; it is made up chiefly of Love and Anger, together with
those intermediate Passions, of Desire, Joy, Indignation, and the like, that
partake of both. The first and great Ingredient of Zeal is Love, for none can
be Zealously affected to any thing, which he does not truly love; and where
that is, 'twill draw after it a desire of attaining and enjoying it; and
according to the degrees of love will the desire increase, and improve into
longings and impatience. Again,

Zeal is accompanied with Joy and Delight in pleasing and possessing what it
makes after, and where the Object is infinite, as when it is placed on GOD, it
advances into Ecstasy and Rapture. Furthermore,

Anger is an Ingredient of Zeal, which sets the Soul against whatever opposes
the thing Beloved; and proportionable to the opposition, does the Anger
increase, arising sometimes to Wrath and Indignation, and upon any frustration
it is attended with Grief and Sorrow.

Thus is Zeal compounded of various and different Passions, upon the well or
ill tempering and mixing whereof, does the goodness or badness of Zeal depend.
That Zeal that has the greatest mixture of the mild, loving and charitable
Affections is commonly the best; that wherein the harsh, sour and hot Passions
are most predominant, is very often inordinate: And that, where the angry
Passions not only exceed, but exclude the more calm and benign Ones, is
generally sinful. Moreover, Zeal is not only a composition of sundry Passions,
but a high degree and intention of them, and bespeaks not barely the reality,
but a fervency of Affection; it is such a warmth of Mind, as influences the
whole Man, and renders all the Powers of the Soul more vigorous and lively in
its desires and prosecutions; and so it is opposed to Coldness and Lukewarmness.

So that true Zeal is a gracious constitution of the whole Mind, and is rather
a constellation of Graces, than one particular Grace, it is what Health is to
Life, the spring of all its activity and motion; and resembles that Heroic
Virtue described by the Moralists, which is not so much a distinct Virtue of
its self, as the highest pitch and eminence of all other Virtues.

From this brief description of Zeal we may learn, what it is to be Zealously
affected; namely, to have the Mind warmly stirring or moving in earnest
desires, and an eager pursuit of some suitable and desirable Object, and
consequently two things must concur to this zealous Affection, viz. Light in
the head, and Heat in the heart.

First, To be Zealously affected implies light and knowledge in the Head, for
Ignoti nulla Cupido, None can affect that, of which he has no knowledge. Light
is the Director of Zeal, without which 'twill mistake its Object, and
necessarily go awry. It Is a blind Zeal, that is void of Knowledge, and
therefore what Light is to the Eye, that Knowledge is to the Soul, it shows its
way, and guides all its operations. Again,

Secondly, To be Zealously affected imports not only light in the Head, but
heat in the Heart; and therefore it is often compared to Fire, whose property it
is to warm and enliven, St. Paul styles it a fervency of Spirit, Romans 12.11.
which signifies such an inward warmth of Mind, as cherishes in it a spiritual
Life, quickens Virtue, and makes us grow in Grace, and the knowledge of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. In short, Zeal is a vehement Affection, or a
strong Bias and Propensity of the Soul toward its Object; and to be Zealously
affected, is to be carried out with earnest Desires and Endeavors after it;
not without some Hatred, Trouble and Indignation at whatsoever does hinder or
oppose it. This is the Nature of Zeal. But

How must it be qualified, that it may be good to be thus Zealously affected?
Why, our Text mention two Qualifications to make it so.

The one respects the Time of its continuance, it must be always; the other,
the Object, it must be in a good thing.

First, To be Zealously affected aright, it must be always, not now and then,
by sits and starts; but keeping up an ardent flame of Love, still burning in
our Breasts. The Apostle supposes here, that these Galatians were well enough
affected whilst he was present with them, but it did not continue in his
absence, it soon wore off, and therefore he wills them to be Zealously affected
always. They who still frequent and keep close to the Worship and Communion of
the Church, may be well enough supposed to be Zealously affected toward it;
but they who come to it only to serve a turn, may be justly thought otherwise;
yea, when they who seldom or never attend the public Worship, of a sudden, on
a particular occasion, flock in great Numbers to it; and with that Formality
and Appearance too, as if, with Jehu, they would alarm Spectators, to come and
see their Zeal for the Lord of Hosts: This is very suspicious, and looks more
like the result of Contrivance and Design, than the effect of true and sound
Religion. For true Zeal is permanent and lasting; it proceeds from a vital
Principle within, which will maintain a kindly and constant heat in the Soul;
it is not like the fits of an Ague, that come and go again, but like the Altar
Fires, that were always kept burning, or the Vestal Flames, that never went
out: it is true indeed, it may, and does admit of intermissions, but it is never
extinguished; but like the natural heat of the Heart, 'twill abide as long as
Life continues. All that seeming Zeal of the Hypocrite, that so often wears
off, and grows cold again, is but false Fire, it is only a painted, and no real
Flame.

If you observe it, you shall find some Men at some Times, and in some
religious Exercises, exceeding warm and zealous, their Affections seem all in a
flame, and themselves under the transports of Divine Love; who yet in a little
time grow cold again, and have no appearance of Life or Heat left in them.
These are only paroxysms of Zeal, and the preternatural heats of the
Hypocrite's Devotion, whereas true Zeal is ever more uniform and lasting; and
where the Spirit is truly touched with this Coal from the Altar, 'twill
preserve an habitual constant light and heat in the Soul. To this end, Zeal
must be sober and well tempered, not over hot and violent; for Nullum violentum
est perpetuum, No violent thing is lasting: Such transports spend the Spirits
too fast, to continue long; Nature struggles under any violence, and labors to
be eased and rid of it, and Religion too groans under such violent fits of
Zeal, and cannot long continue in such extremes; and therefore such transient
fiery heats are far from the sobriety of Religion, and the temper of true
Devotion. The Prophet resembles some Men's Righteousness to the Morning Cloud,
and the early Dew that soon passes away; and we may liken others to a flash of
Lightning, which gives a short blaze, but is quickly out. The Apostle observes
of some of these Galatians, that they ran well for a time in their Christian
Course; but they soon waxed faint and tired, and so lost the Prize, for not
holding out to the end of the Race. Christianity is often in Scripture styled a
Warfare, in which, you know, it is not the furious Charge, but the deliberate
Courage and Constancy that wins the Field: In like manner, it is Perseverance
only, that commends our Zeal, and crowns our Actions with success and victory.
And therefore the Apostle wills us to hold on in our Christian Course, and to
be zealously affected always, even to the end; which is the first Qualification
of true Zeal. The second respects the Object about which it is conversant, and
that must be a good thing: It is good to be zealously affected always in a good
thing; where we are taught to measure the goodness of our Zeal, not by the
height of the Passions of which it is composed; but by the goodness of the
thing, about which it is employed. And here two things are to be observed for
the better clearing of this Matter: As,

First, The object of our Zeal may be sometimes a thing that is evil, and yet a
Zeal about it may be a good and commendable thing; as for example, All Sin in
general, and particularly Atheism, Profaneness, Sacrilege, Schism, and the
like, are all very bad things; and yet to be zealous against these, is to be
Zealously affected in a good thing: but here the Zeal consists, not in the
love, but hatred of them, not in practicing, but punishing of them; yea, the
worse the thing is, the better is the Zeal that is employed against it: Thus
the more bold and daring any Sin or Wickedness is grown, the higher act of Zeal
is it, to oppose and suppress it. Again,

Secondly, A thing may be materially good, and yet a Zeal about it may be
sometimes a very bad thing; as for instance, All acts of Religion in general,
and particularly Praying, Hearing, Reformation of Manners, and the like, are
all very good things; and yet a seeming Zeal about them, may be sometimes a
very evil and pernicious thing; as when they are embas'd by bad Ends, and made
use of to promote evil Designs: you know the Pharisees made long Prayers, the
better to devour Widows houses; you cannot be ignorant, how some upon occasion
attend the public Worship, only to qualify them for an Office, and take the
holy Sacrament, to enable them to undermine the Communion of the Church. Do not
some talk much of reforming the Manners of others, without any regard at all to
their own? It Is no new thing to pretend Reformation, to carry on very bad
Designs; and we all know what vile things have been acted under a cloak and
color of Religion: so that a great talk and appearance for Reformation, may be
rather Collusion, than Zeal; and a pompous show of Religion about it, may be
rather a mocking, than serving of GOD.

In short, A thing may be materially good, and carry a fair show of being so;
and yet may want many Qualifications, that are necessary to make it really and
in truth such. It may proceed from a bad Principle, be carried on by bad Means,
and tend to a bad End; either of these may spoil the goodness of the thing, and
mar the Zeal that is employed about it. The Object then of Zeal may be good
and evil, and a hearty loving of the one, and hating the other, will justify
our Zeal in both: for as Goodness has charms enough to engage the Affections,
so Sin has deformity enough to beget dislike and aversation; and consequently
to be zealous for the one, and against the other, is in both to be zealously
affected in a good thing.

But to come to particulars: What are those good or evil things, about which
our Zeal may be thus lawfully and laudably employed? I shall mention some of
the chief of them, the better to direct you in these great and weighty Matters
of Religion. As,

First, To be zealous for the Glory of GOD, and the Honor of his Laws, is to
be zealously affected in a good thing. The Glory of GOD is the great end of our
Creation; and as the Almighty ever propounds it to Himself, so ought we to make
it the principal aim and scope of all our Actions: Whether ye eat or drink
(says the Apostle) or whatever ye do, do all to the praise and glory of God, 1
Cor. 10. This is to be the chief care and business of our Lives, in which if we
are sincere, we cannot easily exceed; for the highest degrees of all pious
Affections, are to be fixed on GOD: He is to have our most ardent Love, our
strongest Desire, our firmest Hope, our purest Joy; all which, when screwed up
to the highest pitch, fall vastly short of the infinite Perfections of his
Nature, and our great Obligations to his Goodness. And therefore our Minds
should be eagerly bent on things, whereby GOD may be glorified, that his Power,
Wisdom and Goodness may be celebrated in the World, and his Praises sound to
the ends of the Earth. Again, We are to set our selves with all our might and
main against those things, whereby GOD may be dishonored, his Name profaned,
his Worship neglected or contemned: we are to have a tender love and esteem for
GOD's Laws, and be deeply affected with the breach and violation of them: These
are proper Matter for our Zeal, and are to be prosecuted with the utmost warmth
and vigor of all our Faculties; and when we stand thus affected to the Honor
of GOD, and his Laws, then may we be truly said to be zealously affected in a
good thing; yea, in the chiefest good, and the best of things.

Secondly, To be zealous for the Honor of CHRIST, and the Doctrine delivered
by Him, is to be zealously affected in a good thing. This is the Zeal here
recommended by St. Paul, namely, To strive for the Truths of the Gospel,
against those false Teachers, that would subvert or undermine them. And herein,
we of this Age ought to be more than ordinarily zealous, when the Being and
Divinity of CHRIST are both called in question, and the Mysteries of the Gospel
not only denied, but derided. Is not a Crucified Savior once more become a
stumbling block to some, and to others foolishness? And do not too many use
their Tongues and Wits, in decrying all Divine Revelations? And is it not time
to appear for Christ, and his Religion, in such a profane and dissolute Age?
St. Jude exhorts Christians to Contend earnestly for the Faith once delivered
to the Saints; and elsewhere we are charged, not to let go, but to hold fast
the Profession of our Faith, without wavering; meaning, that we should not
betray it by Cowardice, nor corrupt it with Error, nor suffer it to be lost or
swallowed up by Infidelity; but to come forth in the defense of the Truth,
against all its Adversaries; to use our utmost endeavors, in our several
Stations, to vindicate the Honor of our SAVIOR, if ever we hope to be saved
by him: He that denies me before Men, (says Christ himself) him will I deny
before my Father that is in Heaven. Now to disown the Truths of the Gospel, or
to refuse to appear in the defense of them, when called in question, is indeed
no better than to deny him: And what can such expect, but to be for ever
disowned and denied by him at the last day? Wherefore it is both the Duty and
Interest of all that are called Christians, to be zealous for the Honor of
Christ, to vindicate his Truths, and to adorn his Doctrine with a holy
Conversation.

Thirdly, To be zealous for the Church of GOD, is to be zealously affected in a
good thing: And that as the Church is sometimes taken for the House of God, and
likewise for the orderly Constitution of Divine Worship performed in it; both
which are proper Matter to employ our Zeal. That ardent Love we owe to God,
requires us to love the things of God, and to have a due regard to all that
belongs to him; among which, we are commanded to hallow his Sabbath, and to
reverence his Sanctuary. David tells us, that the Zeal of God's house had even
consumed him, Psalm. 69.9. He was so passionately affected toward the reverence
and decency of those Places, that he thought he could not better show his
Honor to God, than by reverencing the place where his Honor dwells. After
that we read, what time, care and cost King Solomon bestowed in building and
beautifying the Temple; by which, he at once erected an Habitation for the
Glory of his Maker, and a lasting Monument of his own Honor.

But lest any should take this only for a piece of Old Testament Zeal, we find
our Blessed Savior so zealous for the honor of the Temple, that he never
discovered a higher act of Indignation, than against the Prophaners of it; for
himself whipped the Buyers and Sellers out of it, who had made the House of
Prayer a Den of Thieves, overturning the Tables of the Money Changers, and the
Seats of them that sold Doves; and that with an Indignation too, so much beside
his ordinary temper, that the Disciples could not but call to mind, and apply
to him, what was prophesied of him, The Zeal of thy house has eaten me up. By
this great example we learn, that a true Christian Zeal may be well employed
about the purifying of God's house, and securing it from all profanation.
Moreover, we find the Apostles extremely zealous for the Peace and Unity of the
Church, as also for the comeliness, order and reverence of the public Worship
used in it: So that to be zealous against Sacrilege, which is the polluting of
God's holy Temple; and likewise against Schism, which is the dividing the Body
of Christ, is a pious, well-grounded and commendable Zeal.

Fourthly, To be zealous in the Cause, and for the Honor of God's Ministers, is
to be zealously affected in a good thing; for these belong to him as his
Ambassadors, and therefore are to be loved and treated accordingly: Let men so
account of us (says the Apostle) as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards
of the Mysteries of God, and for that reason to be counted worthy of double
honor: The Kindness or Contempt showed to them redounds to him that sends them;
for He that despises you (says Christ) despises me, and he that despises me,
despises him that sent me; and therefore our Zeal for Christ and his Truth,
may and ought to be expressed by espousing the Cause of his Ministers, especially
when the great Contempt of Religion has occasioned too great a Contempt of the
Dispensers of it.

Lastly, To be zealous for the People of God, that is, for their Happiness and
Salvation, is to be zealously affected in a good thing: Next to the Glory of
God, and our own Salvation, we are to tender the Welfare and Salvation of
others; and this is to be done by our good Wishes, hearty Prayers, and best
Endeavors for them: we find Moses so far transported with love and desire
toward the Israelites, that he preferred their public Happiness and Salvation,
before the private welfare of his own Soul, praying thus in their behalf,
either blot out their Sins, or blot out my name, out of the book that thou have
written, Ex. 32.32. Under the like transport of Affection we find St. Paul
declaring, that his Hearts desire and Prayer unto God was, that Israel might be
saved; withal wishing himself accursed from Christ, for his Brethren and
Kinsfolk according to the flesh, Romans 9.3. which great Examples recommend to
us, if not so high a pitch of Zeal, yet a most ardent love and desire of doing
good to all men; and especially to use our best endeavors to save their Souls,
which is the greatest good that we can do them; herein we shall tread in the
steps of our Blessed Savior, who went up and down doing good both to the Souls
and Bodies of Men, which is such a noble, generous and beneficial piece of
Charity, as very well deserves our utmost Zeal and Vigor.

In a word, To be zealous in the Cause of Religion, against Atheism and
Profaneness; to be zealous for the Word of God, against Deism and Infidelity;
for the House and Worship of God, against Schism and Sacrilege; for the People
of God, against Seducers that lay in wait to deceive, is to be zealously
affected in good things, and is highly becoming all such as are called by the
Name of Christ, and would advance the Honor and Interest of Christianity;
which things require not only unwearied Diligence, but undaunted Courage and
Resolution to effect them; and therefore to engage and encourage you to set
about them, I shall proceed to the

Third thing to be considered in our Text, viz. The goodness and excellency of
true Zeal, from those words, It is good to be zealously affected, etc. It Is
good to our selves, for thereby we become like unto GOD, and imitate the Divine
Goodness; it is good unto others, for as one Coal kindles another, so one man's
Zeal helps to quicken another's, and blows up both into a bright and useful
Flame: it is good to a whole Church and Country, who share in the benefit, and
reap the fruits of a well-guided Zeal; yea, it is good in all the fences of
Goodness, for it is Bonum honestum, utile and jucundum, it is pious, profitable
and pleasant; it is the top and perfection of all Virtue, the beauty, strength
and ornament of all Religion, and adds, as I may say, a Grace to all other
Graces.

Indeed, what Heat is to the Body, that is Zeal to the Soul; the very life,
health and vigor of it, the source of all its activity and motion: and as the
Body without Heat, is but a heavy, lumpish Carcass, so the Soul without Zeal,
is sluggish and unactive, and little better than dead in trespasses and sins.
But the Goodness of Zeal may be best seen in the good Effects produced by it,
and the greatness of the Reward annexed to it.

First, I say, the Goodness of Zeal may be seen in the good Effects produced by
it: Great and noble things have been achieved by fervent Zeal; it has
inspired the Soul with vigor and courage, strong enough to conquer the
greatest difficulties, and to carry it above and beyond all opposition: by this
Lot deferred the destruction of Sodom, and had there been a few more such, it
would have prevented that direful Conflagration that consumed them: For as one
heat draws out another, so the fire of true Zeal weakens the fire of GOD's
jealousy, and keeps his wrath from breaking forth. Phinehas's Zeal stopped the
fury of the destroying Angel, caused the Plague to cease, and restored Health
and Peace unto Israel. The time would fail me, to rehearse the many and great
things that have been effected by it, for the honor of GOD, the welfare of his
Church, and the safety of his People: neither indeed can it be otherwise, for
Zeal kindles the flames of Love in the Breast of our Maker, and draws his
Affections to us; it engages him of our side, and if God be for us, who can be
against us? Nothing can be too great for his infinite Goodness to grant, and
nothing can be too hard for his infinite Power to effect for us.

But the Goodness of Zeal will more fully appear, in the greatness of the
Reward annexed to it hereafter; when our imperfect defires of promoting God's
Glory now, will end in the advancement of our own; when the little sparks of
Zeal here, will improve into a celestial Fire, which will still burn in our
Breasts toward GOD, and in His toward us. In a word, This zealous disposition
will prepare and qualify us for the blissful Regions above, where our present
faint Praisings of GOD, shall be advanced into ecstasy and rapture; and we, like
the Seraphims, shall dwell for ever in the pure and unquenchable flames of
Divine Love: Which, whoever well considers, will see abundant cause to say with
the Apostle, that It Is good to be Zealously affected always in a good thing.

Thus having showed the Nature and Properties of true Zeal, the Passions of
which it is composed, the things about which it is to be employed, together with
the goodness and excellency of it, when so qualified; I proceed now to consider
some of those dangerous Mistakes and Miscarriages of Zeal, that are to be found
in the World; and these are indeed but too many, of which I shall mention a
few: To which end you may observe,

First, That Zeal being compounded of the two ruling Passions of the Soul, Love
and Anger, may and often does admit of two extremes; the one in the excess,
when it is over-hot and eager; the other in the defect, when it is too cold or
lukewarm; and it is too frequent and easy for Men to fall into one of these: The
first is an inordinate heat in Religion, which transports Men beyond the true
bounds, and runs it into spiritual Fury and Enthusiasm; of this kind was that
of the Jewish Zealots, who pretending to a secret Impulse from above, did many
vile and enormous things, committing Riots, Rapins, Murders, and so destroyed
the Temple by an irregular Zeal in defending it; which intemperate heat of
theirs, occasioned great Troubles to that whole Church and Nation. And very
like to this is the furious and disorderly Zeal of Sectaries and Enthusiasts in
our days, who under a pretense of higher Illuminations, and divine
Inspirations, have greatly disturbed the peace of Kingdoms, and by their fierce
and eager Contentions about Religion, have endangered the loss of all: This hot
fiery Zeal our blessed Savior blamed in some of his own Disciples, who, in a
fit of Rage, called for Fire from Heaven, to consume the Samaritans; for which
they received that sharp Rebuke, that They knew not what manner of Spirit they
were of; they did not know or consider the true Spirit of Christianity, which
was not to destroy men's lives, but to save them. So that a Zeal that is void of
Charity, and insensible of the Public Good, is certainly irregular; and when
it transports Men beyond the bounds of Meekness and Sobriety, is inconsistent
with true Religion: and therefore to set it right, it must be tempered with
Wisdom, and abound more in the mild and good-natured Affections, than in the
more vehement and wrathful Passions, which are too apt to become inordinate:
And these extravagant heats and transports in Matters of Religion, are the
excess of Zeal, the mischief whereof is too visible to need laying open.

But 'twere well, if some Men did not offend as much in the defect, as others
do in the excess of Zeal; and that the evil of the one, were not as dangerous
as the mischief of the other: But alas! the miseries of both are too apparent
to be either denied or disguised: For is not some Men's indifference and
carelessness in Religion, as much short of true Zeal, as others fierce passions
and contentions are beyond it? And is not one of these too often the cause or
occasion of the other? Does not Religion suffer as much in the Lewdness, and
want of Sobriety in some Men's Lives, as by the inordinate Zeal, and
unnecessary Rigours of others? And is not Atheism the plain consequent of the
open looseness of the one, as well as the false and pretended strictness of the
other? Of both these our unhappy Age affords but too many Instances, which may
teach us to avoid both these Rocks, and to steer our Course between the fury of
some Men's Zeal, and the scandal of others Profaneness.

Secondly, Another Error in Zeal, is when it is void of Knowledge, or acts
contrary to it: this is a blind Zeal, which leads Men headlong into many
extravagancies; and this is in a great measure owing either to the ignorance or
subtlety of false Teachers, who seek to work on the Passions of Men, without
rightly informing their Judgment; by which means they are taught eagerly to
contend for, or against things, without understanding the goodness or badness
of either. If you observe it, you shall find those many times the greatest
Zealots, that are most ignorant; like the Andabatae fighting in the dark, and
contending for they know not what, or why. St. Paul bore Record of some in his
time, that they had a Zeal, but 'twas not according to knowledge: This is a
Heat without Light, which tends rather to destroy, than to direct; true Zeal in
the Heart is evermore guided by a true light in the Head, it begins with
Knowledge, and is conducted by it; whereas false Zeal begins with the
Affections, and commonly ends there, seldom going any farther than an ignorant
and violent Passion.

Thirdly, There is a counterfeit and hypocritical Zeal, which warms only the
outside, and consists in a superficial show of Piety and Devotion; it
resembles the heat of a Fever, that scorches the extreme parts, but leaves the
Heart cold and unaffected: Pone in pectore dextram, nil calet: There is no heat
or warmth at all within, even when it seems to burn and flame most without. Of
this kind was the Zeal of the Pharisees, who fasted and prayed, to be seen of
men, and did all their good Works merely for Vanity and Ostentation; they had
no inward Principle of spiritual Life or Motion, but were acted merely by
external Motives and Inducements: such are the superficial heats of too many
Zealots, who seem all on fire without, when the Heart, like Nabal's, is as cold
as a Stone.

Fourthly, There is a Temporary Zeal, which like a Vapor or Comet, appears
for a while, and then vanishes away: such was that of Jehu, who drove on
furiously for a time, and destroyed the Monuments of Idolatry; but being
settled in the Kingdom, his Zeal for Religion was at end, and turned only to
his own advancement. Such likewise was the Mercenary and Selfish Zeal of those,
that followed our blessed Savior for the Loaves, and kept with him while any
thing was to be gotten by him; but when that failed, they forsook and walked no
more with him: This is a Flame that is blown in and out with the Wind, and
varies with every blast. Again,

Fifthly, There is a partial Zeal, which makes Men warm in some Duties of
Religion, and cold in others of equal necessity and importance; and likewise
very earnest in suppressing one or more Vices, and yet very favorable and
indulgent to others equally crying and enormous. If you observe it, you will
find some hot enough for Preaching, but cold for Praying; and though they talk
much of reforming of others Manners, are yet but too careless and negligent of
their own. May we not see many great Enemies indeed to Idolatry and
Profaneness, who yet are well enough reconciled to Sacrilege and Schism? and
make up that with advantage to one Vice, which they seem to take from another.
This is to compound the Matter with GOD, and to make the keeping of one Law,
atone for the breach of another. True and thorough Reformation extends to the
hatred of all Vice, and the practice of all Virtue; without which, the most
zealous pretenses to Reformation, are but falsehood and hypocrisy.

Sixthly, There is a busy pragmatical Zeal, that carries private Men beyond the
bounds of their own Calling and Business, and makes them invade the Callings
and Business of others, intruding into the Offices of Princes, Magistrates,
Judges and Ministers; prying into and censuring the Actions of their Superiors,
and dictating to those by whom they are to be governed: These are those
busy-bodies mentioned by the Apostle, who meddle with things they understand
not, and belong not to them: True Zeal makes Men study to be quiet, and do
their own business, without thrusting themselves unseasonably into other Men's;
it puts Men upon the study of their own Hearts, mortifying their own Sins, and
reforming their own Lives, which is enough to employ the Zeal of the Best
Christian: whereas it is too apparent, how some Men's Zeal prompts them to
wander too much abroad, and to converse too little at home; hence you shall
find them very fierce and forward in declaiming against the Sins of others, as
if they had none of their own to amend or complain of; how frequently do they
call to Heaven for Vengeance on National Wickedness, as if they had no share in
the Guilt, and were secured from bearing a part in the Punishment of it? Yea,
it is no new thing for them, to condemn that in others, which they allow in
themselves; and to inveigh bitterly against others failings, when at the same
time they easily overlook their own enormities: This is the guise and practice
of too many Zealots, which may carry something of the show, but has nothing of
the substance and reality of True Religion.

Lastly, The Zeal commended in our Text, has respect to Things, not Persons:
it is good to be zealously affected always in a good Thing: A Zeal either for,
or against Persons is commonly factious and disorderly: The having some Men's
Persons in Admiration, and others in Contempt, has occasioned most of the
Schisms and Divisions in the Christian Church: This was the great fault of the
Corinthians, who by crying up one Teacher, to the decrying of another, fell
into sundry Parties and Factions, which St. Paul sharply rebuked in them, though
their Zeal ran mightily toward himself; for finding they had made him the Head
of a Party, he severely checked their partiality, and the more they sought to
magnify him, the more he endeavored to lessen himself: Who (says he) is Paul?
and who is Apollo? Who? (says an eminent Father on those Words) why, they were
some of the chief Apostles and Ministers of Christ: And yet we find St. Paul
not only stileing himself the least of the Apostles, but the greatest of
Sinners, to keep men from having too high thoughts and admiration of him. And
if it were strife and envying to set up for Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas;
certainly it can be no true Zeal to set up for far inferior Persons.

This is a Matter worthy the consideration of all such as have Men's Persons in
admiration, running after different Teachers, to the great disturbance of the
Church, which is the great misery and malady of our unhappy Age.

And now for the application of this Discourse; though many useful Lessons might
be inferred from it, yet I shall confine my self to two, which very naturally
and easily flow from it. For,

If it be good to be Zealously affected in a good thing, then 1st. It must be
bad to be Zealously affected in an ill thing; and 2ly, It can be no better to
be lukewarm and coldly affected in a good thing: Of both which, that I may not
trespass too much upon your patience, I shall speak very briefly. And,

1st. We may learn from hence, that it is bad to be Zealously affected in an ill
thing: It Is a double fault, first to espouse a bad Cause, and then to be warm
and zealous in promoting it; he that is out of the way, the faster he goes, the
farther he goes out of it; and to set him right, he must go it back again, and
mend his pace after: To rectify a bad Zeal, we must alter and unravel our
former Course, and labor to undo all that we have done amiss. True Zeal is
always against, and never for an evil thing; and therefore to be zealous for a
Party, and hot in promoting Faction or Division, is to employ it in a very bad
thing: To favor a wrong Cause, or discountenance a good one, are both equally
abominable; and he that is warm in either, is clearly out of the way, and can
never judge righteous Judgment: to spend our Zeal in encouraging of Schism, and
promoteing disorder and disturbance in the World, is to put one of the best
things to one of the worst uses; and therefore we find Zeal commonly compared
to Fire, than which as no Element is more useful and reviving, whilst it
remains on the Hearth, and keeps within its due place and bounds, so none is
more pernicious and destructive, when once refusing confinement, it breaks
forth and invades the Housetop: For the same reason it is sometimes compared to
the natural heat of the Body, which in its due temper and moderation, is the
spring both of Life and Health, and the source of all vital Operations; but
when it grows into excess, and breaks out into burning Fevers, it inflames the
Spirits, and sets on fire the whole Course of Nature: Just so is it with Zeal,
which, if duly placed and regulated, is the support and ornament of the Soul,
fills it with a lively and vigorous Heat, and fits it for brave and noble
Undertakings; but when it is misplaced, or runs into excess, it is no better than
Wildfire, and sets whole Countries into a combustion; which shows what great
care is to be taken, that it be guided with Knowledge, and placed upon right
Objects, such as may be not only materially, but in all its

(...) It being equally evil, to be zealous in a bad Cause, and lukewarm in a
good, let us endeavor to avoid both extremes; and learn so to regulate and fix
our Zeal, that it may be still placed on right Objects, kept within its due
bounds, and directed to good ends: So shall this Sacred fire improve into a
Celestial flame, that will be still burning in our Breasts toward God, and for
ever derive upon us the blessed Influences of Divine Love: Which God grant for
the sake of Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all
Honor, Might, Majesty and Dominion, both now and for evermore.

FINIS.

