D. E. DEFEATED: OR, A REPLY TO A Late Scurrilous Pamphlet Vented against the
Lord Bishop of Worcester's Letter, Whereby he Vindicated himself from Mr.
BAXTER'S Misreports.

By S. H.

Qui been audire velit, loquatur been.

Sen. LONDON: Printed for R. Royston, at the Angel in Ivy-lane. M.DC.LXII.

Preface to the READER.
Courteous Reader,
THink not that I have presumed to defend his Lordship's Letter, or arrogated
to my self the support of his Epistolary treatise. No, I know his Merits to be
out of the reach of Detraction, his Person beyond the venom of the most
maligning Spleen; and his Letter to transcend all rational Exception. My design
therefore is, to stop the mouth of this unmanner'd Coridon; whose Drift is to
build himself a Name in the Slander of Grandees, and to become notorious by
exposing deserts to the malice and misprizion of disaffected Persons.

There are, I know, many inconveniences that might have scared me from the
enterprise. I am not unacquainted with the Epidemical fate of those who have
engaged into Controversies, in that they commonly encounter an unhappy Dilemma;
for upon any (though never so inconsiderable an) Answer, they must either
gratify their Adversary by a resolved Silence, or else sweat in the invincible
Cacoethes of a frequent Reply. Besides this; to affrighten me, there was a Bear
in the way: for the Person (against whom I have raised the weapons) has
incurred an honorable: Scandal in the mouths of some, who have reputed him a
Makebate Jesuit; But this difficulty I vanquished in a short and easy
meditation, for (although I knew he might easily be induced to make as virulent
a Discovery of his Malice, yet) I could never be tempted to believe that a
Jesuit would ever have befriended us with such an ample disclosure of his
ignorance. And indeed this was the ground on which I overcame one of the
forementioned Praemunire's of the Press, not dreading even the quotidian
iteration of his Reply, whose indiscretion sufficiently satisfied me of my
Security. So that the encouragement which animated me to the closure with D.E.
(for that is all the ear-mark we have of him) lies obvious and visible. But yet
(Gentle Reader) the Suit that sent me to thy Courtesy, remans still
undiscovered.

Desiring thee therefore to know, that I have dealt more fairly with his, than
he with his Lordships Letter, (not snapping at a few gleaned Particulars; but
replying to the most considerable part thereof) I must forestall thy further
view with a double Request, (1) That I may be excused in that I have rebandied
language of his own Complexion upon him; finding no unsutableness in that
advice, viz. Answer a fool according to his folly, etc. (2) That I may be
dispensed with, in that I have not made it my business so much to entertain
thee with demonstrative Arguments, in behalf of those things which D.E.
scruples; as by satisfactory Answers to inform thee of the invalidity of his
exceptions. Since I thought it the strongest probation of those assertions, at
which he carps, to expose to thy view the vanity and emptiness of his
Allegations against them. Moreover, I should probably have wrought him into
some partial conceit of himself, had I answered his Pamphlet with a Volume.
However, waive not the reading of these few leaves out of any despondency of
satisfaction, till thy perusing eye shall acquaint thee with the Contents.

Thine, etc. S. H.

D. E. DEFEATED: OR, A REPLY TO A Late Scurrilous Pamphlet Vented against the
Lord Bishop of WORCESTER, etc.
I Am (says D. E.) to thank you for the last piece of Divertisement you gave
me in sending the Bishop of Worcester 's Letter. The Spleen of Democritus was
nothing to the humor of this fellow. His life (to whom such solid matters were
but Divertisements) was sure very jocular; and the merry temper of other
Naturals, falls much beneath it. But he proceeds: And I wish you would have let
me enjoyed the satisfaction I took in reading it without engaging me to give
you my sense upon it. Sense did he call it? I ever thought Sense to have been a
little more of kin to Reason. But I am ready to gratify him so far, as to
father the mistake on the Printer, and to suppose it should have been
Nonsense. But sense let it be; and let him give his Parron this his sense; I
think he was so generous in giving it, that he improvidently reserved none at
all for himself. But he annexe^h, For besides my unwillingness to engage in a
personal quarrel, I think it will not be very safe meddling with so angry an
adversary. Never fear it Man! Never fear it! Scaraboeos contemnunt Aquilae.
Think not that he will adopt to himself so much unquietness as to deam of you.
What though he be a Man of worth and eminence? yet, his Gravity will not
dispense with his entertaining fools in his thoughts, or encouraging a red Cap
with notice and observation. Next, D. E. resolves to speak nothing but truth in
the Character he intends to give him, and it is briefly this, That in fewer
leaves he never read more passion. Spectatum admissi risum teneatis? I thought
his sense would come to this anon. He pretends to give us a Character of the
Bishop, and he tells us the Contents of his Book. His preceding words promise
an apposite Description of his Lordships person, and his next syllables
acquaint us with nothing at all to the purpose, but only, that in fewer leaves
D. E. never read more passion. Well, for once then let me present the Reader
with a Character of the Bishop; and it is briefly this, That D. E. is an arrant
Ass. Both descriptions are alike to the purpose. But he tells us, that the
Bishops book is full of passion; And is there not in our Authors Reply, a
thousand times more of Malice and Rankour (I dare not say, Passion; for that is
soly incident to rational creatures)? But, the Bishops passion is so
predominant, that his disorderly and abrupt style does altogether partake of
it. He accuses a style composed of Gravity, as blended with abruption and
bitterness, whereas his partakes of either (the last especially) in a far more
intense degree. 'Twas an Errata sure in the Satyrist, Dum vitant stulti vitia,
in contraria currunt. For here is one over head and ears in Rayllery, whilst he
not only pretends to eschew it, but has the face even to declare against it.
Next we are informed, that the Bishops best way will be to get his heat
mistaken for zeal; for else it may justly be accounted somewhat of a worse
name, and which in the Dog-dayes will be very dangerous. Though D. E. belies
the Lord Bishop's Letter as savouring of heat; yet I Am sure it is far from abuse
or scandal, to pronounce the quintessence of D. E. his Pamphlet, vapor and
smoke. But may we not justly admire how our Pamphleter came acquainted with the
danger of the Dog-dayes, or the influence of a Star? unless perhaps by barking
against the Moon, to which custom he has not yet bid adieu. If I might be of
his Counsel, I should advise him, as his best course, not to pretend to
Astronomy, whom a Cudgel does better become than a Jacob's staff.

Our Replicant makes no long abode on the controverted Question, either because
he did not well understand the State, and was loath to display his ignorance:
Or else, because he could not find a plausible occasion to vent that Rancour,
from the exuberant supplies of which, he has borrowed a Ninefold Exception
against some particular occurrences in the Lord Bishop's Letter, where he
supposed himself capable of fastening. Indeed he would persuade us, that 'twas
his inclination to Favor the Bishop, made him waive the main Dispute. But
thanks be to his Ignorance, rather than his Clemency. However, though I cannot
believe him, yet I will not stand to question him, but wait upon him in his
Exceptions.

I. EXCEPT.
HE takes much in dudgeon that Asseveration of the reciprocal alliance between
Kings and Bishops, in the Proverb, No BISHOP, no KING. Neither does D. E. see
any Dependence they have each on other, thinking Episcopacy to contribute
little or nothing to the subsistence of the King's Authority. But we must
desire him to be informed, that this Cohaerence does (although something, yet)
not so much result from any positive respect in themselves; as from that
inconsistency which is between any other Ecclesiastical Government, and
Kingship. For either we must suppose an aequality of Degrees amongst
Ecclesiastical Persons; or else the praeeminence and superiority of Lay Elders,
(for I know no other Ecclesiastic state whereunto any have inclined) now what
a diametrical antipathy and opposition either of these two Conditions bear to a
Regal Supremacy, is easily demonstrated. For, as to the first, should we
suppose all Church-persons, or Ministers, empowr'd with equal authority, that
indistinction would redound no less to his Majesty's disadvantage in
Spirituals, (every man being in a posture to broach his own opinion, or promote
another's faction) than the Confusion of a secular power in Leveldom, would
endammage the Kings Temporal Domination. Or, secondly, Were we under the
py-ball'd disposing of Laics; how could they (according to the exaction of
their duty) devote themselves to the Churches benefit? Since their double
Interests would oblige them to distraction, and a damnable Neutrality that
would justify Erasmus his Anomalous state of being. Which, how far it would
impair the Churches happiness, and consequently plunder one balance of the
Kings Sovereignty (whose Ecclesiastical and Temporal State must counterpoise
each other, that the Crown stand even) I leave to the judgment of any rational
man.

But to inquire into our Animadverter's Reasons that prompted him to the
disavowing of any such relation.

1. Says he, Kings flowrished in all parts of the World, before Bishops were
ever heard of. And there can no reason be Given, why what has once been, may
not with the same terms of Covenience be again. As to the first assertion (
viz. that the Antiquity of Kings does far surpass that of Bishops) I must
needs acknowledge it the truest proposition in all the Pamphlet. For none can
be ignorant that Ninus the first Assyrian Monarch flourish't without the least
support of a Bishop. We know that Zoroastres Magus, first King of the
Bactrians, and the first writer that History presents unto us, neither had
Bishops in his Kingdom, nor yet ever mentioned such a Name in those books he
legacy'd to posterity. Neither do we read that Croesus, Cyrus, Darius, Philip
of Macedon, or his Son Alexander, made use of Bishops. So that had D. E. left
us nothing partaking more of falsity than this Position, I should never have
questioned him. But yet when all this is pro confesso, I wonder by what
Inference and deduction, he could tell us that we may with the same terms of
convenience admit the same posture of Government again? For (1) What though he
should tell us, that the Mogul, Prester John, or the Great Cham of Tartary, do
to this day preserve their Magnificence, without the least concurrence of an
Episcopal Jurisdiction? Does it therefore follow, that a Christian King may?
They may also subsist without a Church, yea and do; but, is there the same
Convenience for a King in Christendom, so to do? Where there is no
Ecclesiastic State, cannot be expected Ecclesiastic Government. But where a
Kings Prerogative has a double aspect (toward Spirituals, and toward
Temporals) there is required some jurisdiction in either; to which, States of a
contrary constitution can neither prescribe Names nor Method. Their Regimen
without Bishops, does not at all involve any possibility of the same among us.
(2) What though D. E. could (although he never can) prove, that even Christian
Kings have flourished without Bishops? Yet, does it follow that England (for
the Proverb was neither derived from nor is extended to, exotic Nations) may
with the same facility dispense with the privation of them? Why should the
Sequel be good? Why should other people become a necessary president to us? Or,
why should our Capacities be measured by their Discipline? Since our humors
are of another countenance, and (for the security of his Majesty) may require a
Government partaking somewhat of singularity in Church; as well as distinct
from others in State. Or (3), Should we suppose (for, demonstrationis gratia,
we may suppose (...) and impossibles) even in England, a Power called Kingship
without Bishops; yet the veracity of the Maxim ( No Bishop, no King) would
stand firm and unshaken. For the Authority of a King, (as a King) is unconfined
and absolute, without the least Apocope, mutilation, or restriction of Command.
And a King is not (...), or naturally called a King, when his luster is
eclipsed in the derogating from his Sovereignty. So that, I say, although we
should suppose a Monarchical Government, pretending to the name of Kingship, to
be destitute of Bishops; yet it would not follow, that it would shine in its
due splendor (and consequently be Kingship properly so termed) without them.
For the other two Ecclesiastic States (which some have dreamed of) would (as I
said before) if not ruin, yet, diminish his Majesty's Authority, and make his
Kingship and Regal Power dwindle into something of a more inconsiderable name.
So that, without his Bishops, he would not be a King properly so called. We
have seen that gross Non-sequitur of D. E. viz. Kings have flourished without
Bishops; ergo, they may still. But this is only the first of his Reasons which
made him Scruple the mutual Relation of Kings and Bishops.

2. Says D. E. Bishops, as they are by law Established in England, are purely
the Kings subordinate Ministers, in the Management of Ecclesiastical affairs,
which his Majesty may confer upon what order of men he pleases, though as much
lay-persons us you and I. Hence, he concludes that there is no necessity of
such a mutual respect between Kings and Bishops. Whether our Pamphleter be a
Laick or no? I list not here to enquire, although his Ignorance bespeaks him to
be somewhat worse. When he wrote this, he did it in so great simplicity, that
his left hand knew not what his right hand did. For the question is not,
Whether his Majesty may invest a Laick with Ecclesiastic dignities and
promotions? but, Whether he may do it without detriment to his Kingdom, and the
unavoydable ruins of a Glorious Church, without which his Kingship would be at
an ebb? We do not so far detract from his Majesty's Power, as to avow that he
cannot substitute Mechanicks' in Church Discipline; But we say, that if He
should do it, it would not a little tend to the disadvantage, prejudice, yea,
subversion of his Kingly Power. And whence then does D. E. conclude the nullity
of that coherence between Kings and Bishops? There is a difference between the
Kings doing a thing, and his doing it with safety. The King may infringe the
connection betwixt him and Bishops, by his discarding them; But he cannot
maintain his Regal Authority in such a disunion. Hence then, it is absolutely
false, and nothing deductive from his premises, which D. E. infers, viz. That
it is very injurious to the King's authority to averr, that he could not
otherwise uphold himself, than by preserving the undue, and (as some think)
Antichristian praelation of his inferior officers. Speak out man! Some think
quoth a? The Man is loath to accuse himself, but presents it to us under the
frantic conceit of his Brethren. Antichristian? Methinks, his own thoughts
might have convinced him of the falsity of that passion; and he might have
concluded a Bishop to have been no kin to Antichrist, since then, A Prelate and
D. E. would have been better friends.

3. He will have us believe that Bishops are so little useful to support the
Regal dignity, that none have been greater enemies to the Kings undoubted
Sovereignty than some Bishops. Where we may observe the weakness of his Reason.
Some Bishops have abused the Kings trust; therefore there is no reason why
Episcopacy should be entailed to Kingship. The same reason may be alleged
against Nobility, since some Nobles have employed their honors and capacities
to the distraction of the Kingdom and the endammagement of his Majesty; hence
might we conclude (did the method of D. E. hold good), that the King may
subsist without his Nobles. Or, what if we should recriminate, on those
Presbyterians who have surmis'd a Parliament essential to the Kingly
Government, and tell them that some of the Parliament have made Treason the
design of many consultations, therefore the King might and ought to subsist
without any such Butteresses and Appendixes of Domination? Sure, they would
much grumble at such an Argument. And D. E. would think little reason in it.
But let us see, what ground he had to blemish any of the Bishops, with styling
them Enemies to the Kings undoubted Sovereignty. They are so, says he, either
by their scarce warrantable intermedling in Civil affairs. Had he but
instanced in some of those affairs (as his malice would easily have done, had
not his ignorance countermanded it), I should have known better how to Reply.
For I know no Secular business wherein any of them have, or do Authoritatively
concern themselves, or wherewith they do intermingle; unless the things be
such, as, carrying a double nature, have a greater alliance with
Ecclesiastical, than Temporal Considerations; their by as directing toward the
Church-interest. And as for their meddling with such matters, I see not how D.
E. could term them Unwarrantable, or Prejudicial to the Kings undoubted
Sovereignty. But this is not all the reason of his abusing Bishops, but the
second way whereby he deems them the Kings Enemies, is, By their absurd and
insignificant distinguishing between Civil and Ecclesiastical Causes, whereby
they mangle the Kings Authority, leaving him no Supremacy, as to
Church Matters, but the Name. Whether our Author be a fit discerner of
insignificant distinctions, let any judge. Why should the differencing and
discriminating of Causes into Civil and Ecclesiastic, be more absurd than the
distinguishing of persons into such? Besides, who sees not what a Scandalous
lie he has here vented? Whith what face could he say that the King is allowed
no Sovereignty in Church Affairs, but only nominal, when his Majesty may and
does like, disapprove, regulate, determine, and dispose of them, how and when
he himself pleases? So that (although D. E. would falsely persuade us the
contrary) the Popes pretensions are of a nature contradistinct to those of our
Bishops; since his Supremacy admits of no acknowledgment of subordination. So
that, the Pope is no more of kin to our Bishops, than D. E. to Truth and
Honesty. If our Pamphleter be so good at lying. I should scarce trust him this
dear year, lest he should exercise his skill in another faculty. But he
proceeds: If the Bishop of Worcester's Rule hold good, -- Crimine ab uno, Disce
omnes, -- i. e. that all men of a party may be judged by the miscarriage of
one, then you may judge by the Bishop of Worcester, what the rest drive at.
What pains does D. E. take in an exposition? He would fain persuade us that he
understands Latin; when, it may be, he was obliged to the Civility of a Rider's
Dictionary. As for his retorting that sentence -- Crimine ab uno, Disce omnes
-- (urged by my Lord of Worcester upon The Presbyterians) let me tell him,
'twas done without the least dram of understanding. For, although we should
grant to D. E. that this one Bishop (though it can never be proved) is guilty
of Usurpation, yet the Phrase cannot with the same reason be rebandied on
Episcopacy through his default, who is far from engrossing the name of
Prelacy; as it was objected first against the Presbyterians because of the
misdemeanour of Mr. Baxter, who pretends to the Monopoly of Presbytery,
arrogating to himself the antesignation and representment of all the rest.

The Vanity of D. E. his first exception is sufficiently discovered; I shall
also make bare the insufficiency of the rest.

II. EXCEPT.
OUR Pamphleter takes it very ill that the Bishop of Worcester should call
himself the sole Pastor of all the Congregations in his Diocese. Deeming that
such a position must needs be defended by the Arguments produced in behalf of
the Pope's Supremacy. I wonder, what could introduce into his thoughts such a
conclusion? or what could suggest that the same must be the Reason for a
Bishops superintendency over one particular Diocese, and in subordination to
his Majesty's command; and for the Pope to assume the universal command of all
churches, without the acknowledgement of any higher Power to which he should
submitt? I wonder whence D. E. derives such dreams, as that there should be a
parity of reason and Convenience, for his Holynesse's governing the Church by
such a populous plurality of Substitutes, as that it is utterly impossible for
him to make particular inquisition into the execution of their functions; And
for A Bishop's adopting to himself a limited number of deputies, whose more
neighboring deportments he may with much facility survay and determine of them
according to their known actions? What will any man judge but that D. E. his
wits were at Rome all this while? But he informs us That he forbears to urge
how contrary this Practice is to the Doctrine of the Apostles Paul, and Peter (
hoping the Bishop will not take it angrily, that he did not call them Saints,
Since that these holy men did not need any style of honor out of the the
Pope's Calendar The Saints are very little obliged to the Charity of this
irreverent fellow, who will not give them what they deserve, but what they
need; And their Necessities, not their Merits, must prescribe a proportion to
their titles. But why do not Bishops follow the Doctrine of these Apostles?
Paul, says he, had sent for the Elders of the Church of Ephesus bidding them
feed the Church of God over which (not be himself by his sole authority as,
Bishop of the Diocese but) the Spirit had made them (...) i. e. Overseers. And
did the Spirit (I wonder) immediately without any isntrumental Cooperation of
St. Paul, make them overseers? Or does the Bishop now pretend to make Men
overseers without any respect had to the Influence of the Spirit? Wherein then
lies the difference between the Bishop's practice and the Apostles Doctrine? O,
but (...) and (...) with them signify the same. It Is true, sometimes they did
signify the same yet they were not always of the Same Extent. Every one that
was (...) and no more, might in some sense be called (...) but not e converso,
Every Bishop or overseer could not be called a Presbyter, and no more. For my
part I will not envy the term (...) to the most undeserving priest, in it is
genuine signification. But withal, I would have D. E. know, that a Community
of name does not always involve an indistinction of dignity, or a parity of
degree; Else would I enquire, why St. Paul) who was also (...)) did so
imperiously summon the rest? Or what plea St. Peter could produce for his
Commanding the ministers to feed the Flock (as D. E. himself tells us): Which
two occurrences are so far from patronizing our Replicant's Asseverations, that
they utterly defeat them; Manifestly holding forth a disparity of eminence and
command. I would desire him therefore to be informed, that Custom is guilty
neither of Blasphemy nor heresy (the Degrees being still the same with those of
the Apostles) in the restriction of the title. A Scholar (I will not say D. E.)
knows that (...) formerly was a word equally appropriated to men and Spirits,
employed in embassies; but now the eminence of the latter has engrossed the
Name, especially in it is translations; as likewise the (...) ^-ness of the
Bishops office has attracted the use of the title (...)

In the next place, we are told (to detract from the Episcopal power) that
Whoever feed the flock are under Christ ( Whom the Apostle terms the
Chief-Shepheard) the next and immediate pastors of the flock, though his wits
were gone a wool-gathering, and now I have found them among the flock. In the
first of his Exceptions he is strongly provoked against Bishops; as detracting
from his Majesty's Ecclesiastic prerogative: And yet here, he thinks it no
impeachment to the Kings supremacy, to give the most inconsiderable priest the
upper hand of him inspiritualls. It Was well he discovered no more of his name
than D. E. else this sentence might chance to have made his neck crack, since
it savours little better than reason. For I would willingly know of him,
whether the Pastor of the Flock be not the Governor of the flock? If that he
be (as he cannot deny it), then, whosoever feeds that flock is next and
immediately under Christ supreme governor in Ecclesiasticals, and the
immediate head of the Church next to God; for D. E. tells us that he is the
immediate, and, consequently, next to God, the supreme Pastor. So farewell to
one of his Majesty's titles. Is not this to be a most affectionate lover of the
Kings person and Government, as he elsewhere pretended? But he tells us
moreover, that, To extend the power beyond the actual care of feeding, is a
Notion altogether unscripturall. Unless I am as far out of the way as our
Author and Animadvertour is out of his wits, here is a false (...); wherein he
takes it for granted that a Bishops care is not actual. How unwarily does he
confound those two terms actual and Immediate (which last he would have said,
and so have excluded the Kings power from most parochial congregations in
England) thinking them of the same import and signification. If D. E. did
understand what, actual, meant, he would know that a mediate care (such as
Episcop^l) is likewise actual. The word signifying nothing else than, existent
and in Act. Let us a little (for illustration) suppose an owner of a great
flock dividing them into several parts, giving them to the tuition of one
Pastor; he distributing them to the Care of others, whose executing of their
office he supreviseth: Will D. E. say that this Supravisour does not take an
actual care of the flock? or that he is not the shepherd more immediate to
the Owner? Or that he may not dispose of the more inferior pastors pro
arbitrio, always respecting their actions and his Master's permission; Or that
there is the same reason for ones feeding by vicegerents, whom by reason of
their multitude and remotion he cannot oversee; and for another's deputation of
feeders, whom by reason of their paucity and vicinity he may easily survey? I
think he will not, although his indiscretion and malevolence might counsel him
to the assertion.

III. EXCEPT.
HE calls it A light and unseemly trifling with sacred Writ to understand the
words spoken concerning th^se that go not in by the door (and are therefore
thieves and Robbers) of such Ministers as preach to Congregations without the
Bishop's license. Little dreams he, that they are called thieves and (Robbers
not as preaching only to Congregations, for so they do but come in the wrong
way, but) as they preach out of a design to prejudice and plunder the true
Shepherd. And indeed such postick irruptions imply something of a malevolent
Complexion; and the ensuing practices of such intruders have bin an ample
Comment on those preceding designs that encouraged them to the Attempt. But he
tells us that, If besides ordination there must be a License, then (1) He knows
not what Ordination mean's. Indeed I am easily induced to believe this latter
Clause. He does not know, that there is a difference between the power and the
place of Ministration, the Capacity and the place wherein to execute the
Capacity. The Dignity and office of feeding is conferred at Ordination, but not
the power to feed where he list, but where he should have leave; lest he should
trespass upon other men's enclosures, and undermine and supplant other
pastors, (2) Says he, For one Minister of the Gospel (for Certainly a Bishop
is no more). No certainly, he is no more then one, unless he had the
Presbyterian faculty of a double heart and a double tongue: But yet this one is
of a more dilated power and pre-eminence; but what of him? For him to silence
his Fellow-Minister (But fellow-minister is not hayl fellow well met; they are
fellows in the same function, but not in the same degrees of Dignity in that
function), for no other reason but for preaching without a new license (A new
license? pray first let them have an old one) this is an abuse of dominion and
contrary to the first ages of the Church. This we must take gratis, D. E. being
as far unacquainted with primitive transactions, as he is at defiance to
sound Reason. What if D. E. never read of such a practice in the Church, does
it therefore necessarily follow, that there was no such practice? Or, what if
there was no such Custom? Are there no customs laudable, but adequately those
which decayed Antiquity has bequeathed us? Probably, the tender and
Infant-Church could not away with a discipline so accurate, as that which it is
more Virile-constitution does exact. The uninquisitive humors of men in those
days, contented themselves in the fruition of the Gospel, without any pronity
to Schism. Men being more sedulous in persuading to a downright faith, did not
then require such Cautions toward their preaching, as the now adays
unsatisfied Curiosities, which byass'd-men toward distraction, seem to call
for.

Our Savior (says our Animadverter) silenced the Pharisees by strength of
Argument, Which the Bish^p of Worcester may do, when he is able. I confess, he
would have a difficult task, and D. E. may defye all Christendom upon the Same
account. For the best hopes in such an enterprise would find unhappy
frustration. For they may as well presume to silence Thunder, as by rational
persuasions to stop the mouths of those clamorous Presbyterians; who before
they will, by a reasonable Silence, seem to relinquish their long since
defeated Cause, will not stick to crowd whole Volumes with absurdities; And
rather then they will appear destitute of a Reply, their Adversary shall hear of
them in D E. his railing Dialect, and in Hucksters Rhetoric. The only way
then, of silencing such, must be by constraint. O but, Our Savior was so far
from Silencing the Pharisees from preaching, that he commands his disciples
both to hear and obey their Doctrine. But it was to obey their Doctrine, as (1)
they preached the Law, not as they vented Schism and declared Faction. (2) It Was
comparatively, rather to square their lives by the Pharisees doctrine than by
their practse, that Christ enjoined his disciples* (3) 'Twas to vouchsafe the
Pharisees audience, as they were legally authorized, and because they sat in
Moses chair: so that the Reason is of a far different aspect for the not
forbidding of the Pharisees, and the toleration of Mr Baxter. Moreover (4) the
Pharisees preached the Prophets, which Prophets discovered the Messiah; and so
their preaching might advance Christ's Kingdom: whereas the preaching of
Nonconformists and such like, would be so far from promoting, that it would
bury Christ's Kingdom in the ruins of a distracted Church and a divided
Realm. But briefly, since the ends of our Savior's rolerating the Pharisees
are not fully known, convenience ought somewhat more to be respected, than
imitation in this matter. For, should there be a sufferance of preachers,
though (with the Pharisees) blaspheming; why might not there be an indulging
forbearance allowable to persons o^ ministers, though morally and notoriously
offending? Which thing D. E. himself (page 5. lin. 2.) acknowledges, as
sufficient ground of Silencing and ejection.

I wish therefore that D. E. and the rest of his tribe (if any be so simple and
inconsiderate to be of his Society) would remember, that as, they speak evil
of Dignities, and resist the Power which God has ordained: so, they shall
receive their due reward (though no satisfaction) for it? As likewise for all
such Pamphlets published by them for the propagation of Sedition.

IV. EXCEPT.
HOw consistent with the Civil Peace (for as to Christian Charity he thinks
the whole thing but a letter of defiance against it) the Bishops distinction is
about the Act of Indemnity, He Hopes his Majesty will in due time consider. For
the Bishop, says he, is so hardy as to tell us, that though the King had
pardoned the Corporal punishment; yet the Church ought not to remit the
Scandal till amends were made by Confession. It Is pity but D. E were of his
Majesty's privy Council, that he might prove his remembrancer. But I pray,
what Reason is there, why he who has bin prejudicial to the Church should not
make a due acknowledgment of his delinquency, before his readmission to his
former privileges? Is there not a grand discrimination between the remission
of a man's punishment, and the readmission into preferment? We ought to do
good to out enemies in forgiving private injuries, but not in promoting, them
so long as by their non-recantation they seem to avow their former fact, and to
maintain a posture contradictory to the Church's welfare. And how is this
Distinction repugnant to the Civil Peace? Or rather, Is it not more adversant
thereunto, to prefer the men or forget the injury, when they not confessing
do adhere to their former principles? This were for the Church, only to take
care that those (who are in a strong probability of doing her an injury) should
be put in a Capacity to effect any of their designs; or at least to contribute
to their security by taking no notice of them. The Church exacting a
Recantation respects not so much their past faults as their present posture of
Hostility. But Alas! what does this word, Church, mean? Here D. E. could have
wished thas the Bishop would have spoken out of the Clouds, and Plainly told
whether By the Church, he meant a Congregation of the faithful; or
Archbishops, Bishops etc. I see I am mistaken, for I thought that D. E. his
foggy brain could have apprehended things spoken in a Cloud, better than those
delivered in the clear Sunshine. Well: If I might presume to guess at the
Reverend Father's meaning, I would tell D. E. that by the word, Church, he
understands neither the Congregation, excluding Archbishops, Bishops etc. nor
yet these, abstracted from the Congregation, but both together. So that D. E.
(though ignorantly) play's the Sophister, arguing a been conjunctis ad male
divisa. Hence it is that he labors with a false Supposition, That Archbishops,
Bishops etc. did exact a recantation, as persons distinct from the
Congregation; whereas they only act as Chiefs, Governors, and Representatives
of the residue of the Church or Congregation. Now if D. E. will say that the
Congregation has no Coercive power at all (as he does assert), then would I
fain know, By what power the ancient Church excommunicated; whether it were not
by constraint and force? which (if, D. E. understands the word) is all one with
Coercive. Yea but,

Why should the Church force a Recantation for such things as the King and
Parliament commanded never more to be remembered? Alas man, we look not so much
on the Acts of hostility already preterlapsed and forgiven; as on those
whereunto they stand in a readiness, so long as they declare themselves,
unconvinc'd of their Crimes; I know that the non-conformists or others (who
have manifested their activity in the late commotions) have their actions
forgiven them; but the remission of past facts, does not secure the Church for
futurity, so long as their non-recanting seems to approve their precedent
actings, and to warrant any other proceedings to come, of the same nature. The
Church may and does forgive offenses past, but is not bound to dispense with
those present postures, that seem to allow the late extravagancies, and to
maintain the Scandal. But we are asked, What can more enrage men to take wild
and forbidden Courses than so see preachers strive to widen their wounds, and
contrary to their former professions pull off the plasters which the State,
Physicians had provided for our distempers? Had our Pamphleter meant this of
the Presbyterian faction, the expressions had been apposite, and well applied
to their Natures. But since his own construction, will scarce authorize or
assent to so much truth, We shall answer his Quaery with another Interrogatory.
What then can more force a Constraint than to see such preachers as Mr. Baxter,
(contrary to their iterated declarations) vent sedition, and not only widen the
wounds of the Church, but even make them stink? I Am sure, such Empiricks as
these, deserve a purgation. As for D. E. I think him to be dangerously troubled
with black Choler, for the remedy whereof he has vomited pretty largely against
the Fathers of the Church; And as soon as the humor shall increase to the
redintegration of his distemper, we must expect such another Evacuation.

V. EXCEPT.
WIth what irreverence does D. E. grumble, and call it bold and impious, to
assert, That if to command an act, which by accident may prove the occasion of
sin, be sinful, then God himself can command nothing? Since, says he, A
thing which by accident may be sinful, may be unlawful in another to command
for want of sufficient Authority. And so is every thing else; Though we should
suppose an Injunction utterly devoyd of Sin, either in it self or in it is
consequences; yet would be unlawful, if proceeding from an unlawful
Authority. So that we see that D. E. never speaks but when his Mouth's open. He
gives us a very good reason, why a thing may be unlawful, viz, because it may
be unlawful. The Question is, Whether a thing may be unlawful, as it may
ocasion sin? D. E. answers, that it may be unlawful as it proceeds from an
unlawful power. The Quaere is, Whether a thing that is sinful per accidens,
under that formality and eo quod sinful per accidens, be lawful to be
commanded? And he tells us, It Is unlawful, eo quod the Authority is unlawful.
We enquire, whether a command be illegitimate, because the thing commanded is
sinful accidentally and by consequence? And he replies, that the command is
illegitimate, because the Authority commanding is so. Which how much it is ad
Rhombum, let any rational man consider. And how little it impeaches the Lord
Bishops consequence, the weakest capacity may see. Still then it remains
unshaken, that if a thing being sinful by consequence be ground sufficient to
render a thing unlawful; God himself can command nothing, since he cannot
command any thing but what may by consequence be made sin.

Besides, D. E. goes against all rules of dispute falling upon the hypothesis
of the Question, for (the dispute being concerning his Majesty) they supposed
the power commanding to be lawful and beyond exception. Only, our Pamphleter
had a mind tacitly to hint out treason to us, and to whisper an illegitimacy
entaild on the Kings Authority, and consequently on all his edicts and
Mandamus's

VI. EXCEPT.
I Cannot but think it a reasonable and very solid Position of the Lord Bishop,
That an offense to which a disproportionable penalty is annexed, is not to be
measured by the abstracted Quality of the Act, but by the mischievous
Consequences it may produce. Since the forfeiture ought always to bear
proportion to the danger, and a greater penalty should be proclaimed to scare
men from such actions, which (though puny and contemptible in themselves) are
attended with populous and pestilent inconveniences. But our wise Pamphleter
is sure, that in Divinity nothing is more false and dangerous. Hey, pas,
presto! Here ye shall have me, and there ye shall have me. In the first
Exception, D. E. presents himself in a gray coat, and the false beard of a
Laick, But here he personates another man, and pretends to Divinity. How does
he make himself an Ambodexter, an Hermaphrodite of Religion: A two faced pump,
hinc Angelum ferens, illinc Cacodaemonem? He would serve for a good post in
crosse-waies, directing to several roads at once. I never took him for any
other than a Fool in a Play, and he to justify my conjecture has here
produced his Coat of several colors; I will not say, it shows like
Kiderminster stuff. But this I am sure, D. E. is a Linsey-Woolsey Pamphleter.
But pray let us hear the reason why his Lordship's asseveration is false in
Divinity? viz. Because to impose in the worship of God, as necessary
circumstances of it, things confessedly trivial and needless is not
justifiable. (1). I wonder to what old woman D. E. was lately Confessor? for I
think none else would ever have made an acknowledgment that the things were
trivial and needless, which should be, or are, imposed. Because that we assert
that things, though of small moment in themselves, may have annexed to them
dangerous consequences, therefore D. E. collects that we confess them trivial
or needless. But (2). Does not our Author admirably prove the falsity of the
Lord Bishop's position? Is not his consequence strong? To impose things trivial
and needless is not justifiable; Ergo an offense to which a disproportionable
penalty is annexed; must not be judged of by it is dangerous consequences. D. E.
speaks nothing to the purpose, Ergo, His Lordships proposition is false in
Divinity, And actions should not be judged of by their danger. Yea but

The Church and it is peace, is much more endangered by the pressing of such
things doubtful. I wonder who told D. E. That the indifference of any of these
things ( viz. imposed Circumstances) were questionable or doubtful? or if they
were doubtful, who told him that it was not in the Churches power, or that it
was not her duty to determine of them? Or that it would incur peril by
imposing them? I should rather suppose, that the not giving men leave to
dissent in small matters, would keep them from taking occasion to cause a
division in things of greater importance. Whereas the gratifying some with a
little toleration, has, and would again, animate either them or others to
attempt Schisms of greater bulk and proportion. The allowance of an inch makes
many presume on an ell. But I pray thee (candid Reader) lend me a little of thy
spleen to laugh at a pretty expression of our Pamphleter. From such
impositions, says he, it follows, that (though we ought not) yet we lawfully
may refuse to submit unto them. A man, it seems, ought not to rebel, but yet
he lawfully may rebel. D. E. ought not to show his back to the drum head,
and undergo the Lash, but yet D. E. lawfully may do it. But why may we
lawfully refuse to submit to impositions of this nature, viz. Because our
Savior did so, in not washing his hands before meat; And the Apostle (I think
he means St. Paul) in the case of Circumcision But I conceive, our Savior
refused to wash, not in disobedience to the Custom, so much as to show them
the falsity of the reason whereon they built their Custom, scil. Supposing
that eating with unwashen hands defiled a man; Which opinion our Blessed
Savior refuted by telling the Jews, that (not what went in, but) what came
out from the man occasioned his pollution. Besides we do not read that washing
of hands was ratified by Authority, but only introduced by frequent practice
and tradition. So that Christ only ran counter to a custom, and that will no
way authorize our contradicting an imposition. As for that of St. Paul's
refusing to circumcise, 'twas to show the abolition of that Sacrament by the
introduction of a new, and this is no president for non-conformists to refuse
subscription to circumstances of long continuance, and of necessary injunction,
having not the authority of the Messiah for the introduction of any new ones in
their room. Moreover we know that St. Paul did circumcise Timothy, Act. 16.1,
2, 3.
that he might not give occasion of scandal to the Jews, among whom he then
was. If then D. E. will needs make the Apostle a pattern for imitation in his
nonconforming to an abolished Sacrament, and refusing to circumcise Titus when
he was among the Gentiles. I see not but why I may with far greater reason
urge his Example on the contrary. And since St. Paul being among the Jews did
circumcise, therefore we may well conclude, that amongst Conformists we ought
to conform.

VII EXCEPT.
THe Sorites (which D. E. terms a Chayn of consequences) used by the Lord
Bishop to prove the necessity of imposition, are (to speak Mr. Baxter's
Language) the words of truth and Soberness. viz. From diversity in external
rights resulteth dislike, thence enmity, thence opposition, thence Schism in
Church, and sedition in State. The State not standing secure without the
Church, nor the Church without unity, nor unity without uniformity, nor
uniformity without strict imposition. To this D. E. answers, That it is a mere
rope of Sand (A pretty good Answer for one that was gravelled. Somewhat 'twas
that D. E. was angry with it, he standing not well affected to any Rope but one
of Hemp). But he proceds: And the parts of his chain (it seems, a Rope and a
Chain are all one with our Animal: Indeed they are something of Kin, and, if
he proceed in his begun courses, the Chain may chance to bring him to the
Rope). Well but what of the parts? why they do as little hang together, as
Samson's Foxes did before they were tied by the Tails (I thought something of
a Fox was nigh, the discourse did so stink) which course the Bishop has
imituted, not forgetting to put in even the firebrand it self to make up the
Comparison. So that this Fellow will needs make the Bishops book the firebrand.
Well, be it so, The firebrand came betwixt the two tails; The Lord Bishop's
book came between the Book of Mr. Baxter and D. E. his Pamphlet; how easily
then has D. E. proved that those two last were the fox-tayles. And indeed the
comparison is close and genuine, since either of them have left a most
abominable scent behind them. But to prove the insufficiency of his Lordship's
Sorites, we are presented with three observations.

(1.) That there ought to be diversity in external forms, since the Apostles
of the Circumcision gave the right hand of followship to the Apostle of the
Gentiles. What then? Because the Apostles of the Jews, and those of the
Gentiles did agree; ergo, there ought to be diversity of external forms. Still
the old conesquences! Yea, but they did agree, Although the external forms of
worship were far more different than those of England. (1.) I Will enquire of D.
E. where he heard, how he proves, or when he dreamed it? (2.) I Will ask him,
what of all that, though we should suppose a difformity in their worship?
Peradventure the State of an infant-Church required it. And (though, probably,
they did not approve of diversity in Circumstantials, yet) they would not
wrangle about Formalities, lest they should deterr others from the
Fundamentals. But now the case is altered, and a dispensation for recusancy in
Circumstance, is so far from gayning others to the Fundamentals, that it
encourages those who have already received the Faith, to the mangling of the
Church, and the disjoyning of Christ's Mystical Body.

(2.) He tells us, That the State may be preserved without the Church, as it is
evident in those 300 years before Constantine, when there was no Church at all
legally Countenanced. Still we are troubled with a gross Non-sequitur. As if
there were the same reason for a Church newly inoculated and a Church
concorporated with the State; when the Church, as such, bears an equal weight
with the State, as such. Before Constantine, though all the Church had been
massacred, yet might the temporal State have stood, yea and triumphed in their
blood; Since those that had the Management of Secular affairs were not members
of the Church. But now when discrepancy of worship proves matters of faction;
when all that rule in, or submit to, the temporal State, must (as also
Church Members) participate and share in the fortunes of one or other part of
the Church; the downfall of the one unavoydably involves the dissolution of the
other. So that when the frabrick of the Church, decays in a Voluminous ruin,
the State must also crack in a proportionable Emphasis of a broken frame.

3. Unity in heart and spirit does not in the least depend upon Uniformity but
on charity, i. e. A Christian and candid forbearance in things circumstantiall,
while we agree in essentialls. I admire, in what Author D. E. read this
definition of Charity? we use to term it, Amare Deum, supra omnia, propter
seipsum; and vicinum, aeque ac nosmet, propter Deum. So that the part of
charity looking toward our Neighbor, teaches us to love him as our selves,
but still for God's sake. Now, whether this Charity depends upon unity, and
consequently on uniformity, or else Unity and uniformity on Charity, will
easily appear. If the breach of charity hangs upon disunion, and disunion upon
difformity; then Charity dedends upon union, and union on uniformity: But the
Antecedent is manifestly true, that the rending of the Church breaks the bonds
of Charity, in that it detracts from the honor of God; without which, the love
of our Neighbor is no Charity: and that this rending or disunion depends on
difformity, in that difference of circumstantials causes heart-burnings, and
an mosities. Whereupon D. E. is clearly mistaken in the dependence; Charity
depending on, and being proportioned to Unity, not Unity to Charity. But what
if we should concede Unity to depend on Charity? yet still D. E. is in his old
non sequitur. For Unity would still depend (though mediately) on Uniformity,
since Charity (whereon he would have Unity depend) would be preserved by
Uniformity, and broken by Difformity. D. E. his candid forbearance then of one
another in Circumstantials, is so far from being Charity, that it is the
infringement of it; since such a forbearance or connivence at Non-conformists,
would, by the rending of the Church (which would unavoydably follow) tend to
Gods dishonor. But D. E. is not farther out in this, than in that which
follows: viz. The Wars did not arise from the Separation of Conscientious
dissenters (in this he speaks truth, for it was not Conscience, but Obstinacy
counseled them to dissent) but from the fury of unconscionable imposers. But
sure it was dissenting caused the rigid imposing. And then if it must be
Imposing that broached the Wars, it may thank forward Dissenting. Which same
dissenting practices whether they may not produce a relapse into their former
consequences, I would fain have those recusants consider; Unless they delight
in Animosities, and like Salamanders long bathed in flames disgust the
influence of a milder Element.

VIII. EXCEPT.
D. E. Pretends to have great insight into the Ecclesiastic laws of the French
and Dutch Protestants; (And probably he may, for his understanding has been
beyond sea, a long time). But yet he never read of any Imposition of standing,
sitting, or any other posture, at the Administration of the Eucharist. But yet
if there were, says he, it does not justify our imposition of kneeling. (1)
Because the question is, de jure, whether it be lawful for them to prescribe
any one posture. D. E. might do well to step over, and convince those Churches
of their Error. But why may not they enjoin one particular Posture; since an
Oleo and mixture of carriage at the reception of the Sacrament is not only
undecent; But (when every man shall adopt to himself a frame of deportment)
they will approach the Lords Table either with affectation, partially
applauding their own judgments, or else with regret malign the dissimilary
composure of others. Either of which are enough to render a Man an unworthy
receiver. Besides though some have made it their endeavor to prove the
carriage of the Apostles discrepant from ours; Yet none ever dreamed that they
had a plurality of postures among themselves. (2). Says D. E. None of those
postures, used by other Churches, are so liable to exception, as kneeling. I
answer, that they are more liable to exception, Sitting partaking much of
irreverence; and standing being not such an ample expression of humility and
devotion. In kneeling there is an obligation of Decency. For considering the
importance of the ordinance, and the Majesty of the person with whom we have to
do; I know no reason but that the most submisse and reverential situation of
the body should (even proscinded from an enjoining power) be obligatory, and
more than indifferent.

But why is kneeling so liable to Exception? (1) Because it varies most from
the old form. Believe him who will! Which, I pray, does standing, sitting, or
kneeling more border on discumbency? But what though it should most differ from
the old form? although D. E. cannot prove it. They in their demeanours
consulted convenience; we, to express our devotion. But (2) Kneeling has been
monstrously abused by the Papists to Idolatry. What though? does the abuse of a
thing argue the illegitimacy of it is use? I believe then that D. E. never says
his Prayers on his knees. Or probably he says them in his sleep, because
waking prayers were abused by Papists in their Vigils; and it may be, this made
many Presbyterians wink and pray. Or (which is most likely) D. E. never says
any Prayers at all, because Papists have made the Saints groan with their
innumerable Supplications, and have made Pictures the Objects of clamorous
Peritions. D. E. sure never puts the Bible to the penance of a consultation,
because the most damned Heretics have fathered their pretensions thereon, and
have had recourse to Scripture for the Patronage of their Positions.

IX. EXCEPT.
D. E. complains again of the injury was done in reviling the whole body of
Presbyterians for the faults of Mr. Baxter, upon supposition that he is a
Presbyterian. Supposition that he is a Presbyterian? Why will any think
otherwise? I cannot conceive but Mr. Baxter would repute it a Calumny of the
greatest Magnitude, for any to exclude him out of the number, nay not to
suppose him their ringleader. Do not others, (yea and his own overweening
fancy) look on him as the pillar of their reeling Cause? Do not all stand
indicted of He esie in the thoughts of the rest, who swarve from his positions,
and comply not with an eager subscription to what he deposes? It seems (though
D. E. scruples not to affirm it) the Age is not too wise to be gulled with an
(...). But our Animadverter would have every man bear his own burden. And
(although he does not express it, yet) he has a pretty good reason for such a
request, for he knows Presbyterians to be of that sort of Animals which is very
good at bearing. But he wonders, in what Bible the Bishop found that he might
asperse a whole order of men for the pretended miscarriage of one? I wonder in
what book (I will not say Bible, for I conjecture that he little troubles that)
did D. E. read that a man might not reprove a whole Society, for the real
misdemeanour of their supposed Chieftain? Or, where did he find that there is
reason to rebandy the phrase -- Crimine ab uno Disce omnes, upon the order of
Episcopacy, because of the Lord of Worcester's dreamed fault; since he pretends
not to such an universality on the one side, as Mr. Baxter does on the other.
But not to gratify the petulant and Saucy humor of our Pamphleter, I would
beseech him to know that the Sentence by him retorted, is so far from
extending to Disce omnes, that it is not yet come to Crimine ab uno. And D. E.
is so far from truly introducing the rest of the Bishops as guilty, that he
has not yet proved one of them Criminal.

Hitherto D. E. tells us, he was willing to propose his exceptions (or rather
to blazon his ignorance) but he will leave it to some abler pen (as he had
need) to convince the Bishop and the world that it is not now time to sow
tares. No nor any other seed, so long as there are such Geese as D. E. to
devour it. I wonder what Seed this is which our Pamphleter has sowed? It Is
scarce, so good as Infoelix lolium. It is some kin to hemp seed, and may in
time do him a courtesy in the return. But the Reason, I pray, why a man may
not in this Age sow tares? O, The Age is too wise to take every thing for
Oracle which the Bishop's passion dictates. No, nor yet whatever D. E. shall
proclaim; although there be some Reason for it, Since the Spirit in him, spoke
(like that of Jupiter Hammon) out of an Image.

But yet before parting, D. E. will give us a taste of the Reverend Father's
deep wisdom. And I will see how well his shallow wit will be able to fathom it.

1. Says D. E. The Bishop declaimes so fiercely, as if he would crack his
Girdle. Girdle? He was resolved amongst so much nonsense to have one word that
was Canonical. But in the space does he not strain so hard his railing vein,
that he has burst that point whereto the wastband of his Britches should
trust, which makes him so facily liable to the Lash? But what is that against
which there are such Declamations? viz. Against those who force all
Communicants to come unto them, and be particularly examined before their
Admission to the Sacrament. And what can D. E. say against any man's exploding
such a Custom? or in vindication of such a Practice? Only this, That they were
but examined once for all, as likewise the Bishop allows Catechizing. But I
hope there is not the same reason for Catechizing, and for Presbyterian
Examination; Catechizing being a facile and prescribed way of informing men in
their duty, and exhibiting to them a compendious means of knowing the opinion
of the Church in matters of faith and practice. Whereas (1). Examinations,
whereby Presbyterians sifted men, was many times in Questions unheard of and
peradventure scarce well understood of the examiner. As, How long have you been
converted? What method did the Spirit use in your Conversion? And a multitude
of Queries of the same Hackle. (2). The main thing that makes their Examination
obvious to exception, is; In that the Minister had recourse to his own private
principles and single persuasion for the Questions he proposed; Insomuch that
if the Answer were found to discover a glimpse of an opinion that swarv'd from
the Maxims of his private and picked Church, it did administer sufficient
Occasion of renunciation. Which practice how laudable it was, let any (but D.
E.) judge. This D. E. thinks himself ingenious when he tells us next, That the
Bishop did well this cold weather to set up a man of straw, and catch himself a
heat with threshing it. To see how much the Man's mistaken! It Is I have been at
the pains all this while to thresh this man of straw, although I have not sweat
for it.

2. D. E. thinks it inadvertency in the Lord Bishops wish, That the Authors of
all such books as defend the Covenant would burn them themselves to save the
Hangman a labor. But I cannot enough applaud the Counsel. For the Sacrificing
and devoting such Books voluntarily to the flames, might in some degree expiate
the Authors crimes in a burnt offering. But as yet I see no reason any man
has (though our Pamphleteer thinks the contrary) to bawk the repetition of the
Covenant to the infamy of such as perpetuate its remembrance, and keep the
memory thereof enshrined in those unhappy sheets, wherein they have wrapped
it is Apology. I would not have D. E. dread the Dilemmatical inconveniences that
would accrue to those who should attempt the defense of that Oath. Let him not
fear being goared with the horns (as he phrases it) of a Syllogismus cornutus,
since an Argumentum baculium does better suit with his capacity. But he has a
great tenderness for the lawful part of an Oath, after that it is solemnly
taken. Here he hints to us that some part of the Covenant was lawful, and gives
a silent approbation of something in that, which the wisdom of the Parliament
wholly disallowed. But it has been taken by those who have ventured their
lives to signalize their Loyalty. But have not many of them since given a
pregnant testimony how ill they have resented the thing it self, as also how
utterly they detested that compulsive power which forced it upon them, by a
spontaneous and unengaged care for its abolition? Wherefore, (though D. E. like
a friend, takes care for it is peaceable interment thinking it is Ashes might
have rested quietly better than have blown about by the Bishops furious breath,
since it was burnt by public Authority, yet) I would enquire, (Since THAT
which was the Cinders from whence great flames had their eruption, and
displayed themselves in a general conflagration, is now reduced to ashes) why
should those Volumes that have engaged in it is patronage preserve it is relics
unextinct, and gratify the Covenant in a posthume-life?

3. D. E. Can never enough commend the Bishop's wisdom in resolving never to
write again. And I can never sufficiently applaud our Pamphleteer, who took
courage to defy one, which not only scorned to foul his fingers with him, but
also had determined not to answer. But that which D. E. Ironically speaks; I
seriously repeat, as seeing high wisdom in his Lordship's resolve against
writing: For why should he grate his days, and waste his Spirits in replying
to the indefatigable Lungs and pens of any railing Presbyterians. Since he
might acquiesce in that plenary refuration of his detractour, and the full
satisfaction which his Letter contains and presents to any that should enquire
into his belyed proceedings with Mr. Baxter. And I think there is none can find
therein either error or insufficiency (as to the matter it comprehends)
unless such as are of D. E. his insolent and pedantique humor, which prompted
him so magisterially to vent his Nonsense, even to the glowing of a sober
ear. Such, I confess (if there be any such) as he may cry out (though
ridiculously enough) that the Bishops resolved Silence resembles a School boy,
who after a box on the ear lent to another, cunningly retreats. But I should
suppose it rather School-boy-like to give him a box on the ear whom he knows
to be peremptorily resolved against retaliation, and determined not to strike
again. How much does this Similitude of the Pamphleteer speak the Author, and
sufficiently evince his understanding to be sub ferula? How does his
extravagant and nil ad rem treatise, argue that his wits play Truant? And his
very name ( viz. D. E.) import that he is in his A. B. C.

But to see the vaulting and salacious humor of our Animadverter in the
skipping of his comparison: from a Schoolboy to a Giant. If says he, Goliath
(he means the Bishop) shall defy Israel, and retire from the field, with only
showing his teeth. The Philistines will hardly thank him. But I say, that if
Goliath (I mean Mr. Baxter) armed with a weaver's beam (though in his eye) shall
thunder defyance against the King and his Host, Why may not David retire upon
the conquest of his Monstrous foe?

But since D. E. pronounces it not the part of a Champion to show his teeth
only and and run away; I would advise him (when ever he is to engage with his
Adversary) not to show his teeth, but his ears, the more formidable and
scaring objects by far. Our Author hastening now toward an end, will not
stand to determine whether the deportment of the Bishop may make the rest of
the Prelates, judge him of kin to quickly-defeated Goliath or not? Neither will
I contest much about it. Only D. E. his impudence persuades me to believe
himself of some affinity with Goliath. For Goliath had an helmet of brass, and
our Champion's face is of the same metal.

Hitherto I have followed the Chase; But since the Dragooner has pleased to
retire to the protection of his pretended honorable Patron, I shall leave both
him and his Letter of intelligence to their Covert, expecting to hear farther
the next return. Till when I shall presume to retreat to the Garrison of the
Readers courtesy (from whence I first issued and) where I dare not despair of
Security and Shelter.

FINIS.

