A LETTER OF A Gentleman to his Friend, Showing that the BISHOPS Are not to be
JUDGES IN PARLIAMENT IN CASES CAPITAL.

Printed in the Year, 1679.

SIR,
SInce you desire that I would let you know my opinion whether or no the
Bishops may be present and Vote Judicially in Capital Cases which come to be
Judged in Parliament, either in giving the Judgment itself, or in resolving and
determining of any circumstance preparatory and leading to that Judgment, I
must tell you that this is now become Vexata Quaestio: The two Houses of
Parliament having therein been of different Opinions, the House of Peers
declaring, that the Lords Spiritual have a right to stay and sit in Court, till
the Court proceeds to the Vote of Guilty or Not Guilty, and the House of
Commons on the other side insisting, That they ought not to have any Vote in
the proceedings upon the Impeached Lords.

And this Difference between the Houses having been the unhappy occasion of
Proroguing the Parliament, may seem to lay an obligation upon every good
English man, (if to me your satisfaction were not in the case) as to wish and
pray heartily, that these differences may be well composed, that no more
Remora's may be to obstruct the proceedings of Parliament, but that the two
Houses may join with His Majesty to settle this distracted Kingdom, and agree
upon, then apply, all necessary remedies (and strong ones they must be) for the
prevention of those mischiefs, which the Enemies of the Protestant Religion and
of this Government had been long Contriving and Plotting against us, and were
now well nigh the atchieving and putting in Execution, if God of his infinite
Mercy had not looked upon us, As this I say ought to be every man's wish and
prayer, so it cannot but incite every man to satisfy himself and others, where
the Right is, and what he ought to have in his wishes: for that Right may
prevail, is the natural wish of every good man, but good men many times differ
in their apprehensions what is Right.

Therefore it deserves a strict inquiry into the Practice of the Parliaments of
former times in such matters, and well to consider upon what ground the
Prelates were prohibited having Votes there in Cases of Blood: For that is the
Question now before us, What was done heretofore, and what is now to be done in
Parliament, that is to say in their Judicial way upon Trials, not in their
Legislative capacity passing Acts of Attainder, in which I know that Bishops
have born a part, but that is not now the question.

Nor do I meddle with the General Question, How far forth Clergymen in Orders
are forbidden having any thing to do with Secular matters: Nor what in that
particular the Imperial Law requires, as that Rescript of the Emperors
Honorius and Theodosius, which Enacts, That Clergymen shall have no communion
with public Functions, or things appertaining to the Court; Or the Decree of
Justinian, That Bishops should not take upon them so much as the oversight of
an Orphan, nor the Proving of Wills, saying it was a filthy thing crept in
among them, which appertained to the Master of his Revenue: Nor what our Common
Law of England seems to allow or disallow, having provided a special Writ in
the Register upon occasion of a Master of an Hospital, being it seems a
Clergyman, and chosen an Officer in a Manor to which that Hospital did
belong, saying it was Contra Legem and consuetudinem Regni, and non consonum,
It was contrary to the Law and Custom of the Kingdom, and not agreeable to
reason, That he who had Cure of Souls, and should spend his time in Prayer and
Church-Duties should be made to attend upon Secular Employments. I meddle not
neither with what seems to be the Divine Law, as having been the Practice of
the Apostles, and by them declared to be grounded upon Reason, and to be but
what in reason ought to be, which was this, That they should not leave the word
of God and serve Tables, though that was a Church-Office: and yet they say, it
is not reason we should do that, for their work was the Ministry of the Word
and Prayer, much less then were they to be employed in Secular affairs.

None of this I say is my business, my task is only to inquire, what the Law of
Parliament is in this particular, and what is so, is the Law of the Land. And
my method shall be, to run through all the Parliaments that are upon the Rolls
in the Tower, and take notice of all the Trials there Recorded, as well in
Cases Capital as in those that were not so, and show the difference in the
Parliamentary proceedings upon them, how the Bishops and Prelates did commonly
join with the Temporal Lords in Judging such as were not Capital (and not yet
always so, when the Crimes were of a bigger magnitude) but never but once when
the Accusation was for a Capital Crime, which was in the Duke of Suffolks Case,
28. H. 6. when the whole proceeding was so irregular and Unparliamentary, as it
is to be wondered at, but certainly never to be followed, it is like the Bird
in the Poet, Rara avis in terris, nigroque simillima cygno, as shall be showed
more particularly, when I take it up in its Order, as it is mentioned upon the
Rolls. And so I come to my Narrative.

4. E. 3. Roger Mortimer Earl of March, Sir Simon Bereford, and others were
Accused and Tried in Parliament: And the Roll of that Parliament is so defaced,
as it cannot be read; but 28. E. 3. Roger of Wigmore Cousin and Heir of that
Earl of March desires that Attainder may be examined; and by the whole
proceedings there repeated, it appears, none of the Prelates were present, the
words are Don't le dit Sr. le Roi vous charge Countes, Barons, les Piers de son
Roialme, que de si come cestes chooses touchent principalement, a lui a vous and
a tout le people de son Roialme que vous faciez au dit Roger droit and loial
Iuggement come affiert a un tiel daver. Therefore our said Lord the King
charges you, who are Earls, Barons the Peers of the Realm, that as these things
chiefly concern him and you and all the people of the Kingdom, so you give upon
the said Roger a right and legal Judgment, as it belongs to such a one to have:
Then follows Les queux Countes, Barons and Piers les articles par eux examinez
revindrent, etc. Which Earls, Barons and Peers, having examined the Articles
returned, etc. And gave the Judgment, which was, that they should suffer death:
The Bishops cannot be understood to be comprised here under the general name of
Peers, since the Barons are first in rank, and besides they cannot pretend to
be Peers of the Realm.

5. E. 3. The Parliament was declared to be called for the redress of the
breach of the Laws and of the Peace of the Kingdom. Et pur ce que a vis feust a
les ditz Prelatz quil ne attenoit pas proprement a eux de conseiler du guard de
la pees, ne de chastiement des tielx malueis, si alexent mesmes les Prelatz,
etc. And because the Prelates were of opinion that it belonged not properly to
them to give Counsel about keeping the Peace nor punishing such evils, they
went away by themselves, and they returned no more. Et les ditz Countes,
Barons and autres Grantz per eux mesmes. And the said Earls, Barons and other
great ones went by themselves, and these return, and by the mouth of the Lord
Beaumont declare their opinions, what was to be done, Commissioners to be
appointed in every County of the best men ( des plus grantz) they to be
Gardens de mesme le Comte, Guardians or Conservators of the County. These
Commissions afterward brought into Parliament, were read and approved by
Nostre Sr. le Roi, les Countes, Barons, and autres Grantz, our Lord the King,
the Earls, Barons, and other great ones, no Bishops, so much as to hear the
Commissions read, because they were to enquire into all Crimes, as well Capital
as other, the Prelates must have no hand in it.

In the same Parliament Sir John Gray and Sir Will de la Zouch had quarrelled
in the Kings presence, Sir John had mis mein au cotel laid his hand upon his
Sword, they had been imprisoned, and the business brought into Parliament, Le
Roi chargea de par la bouche le dit Mr. Geffrey le Scrope toutzles Countes,
Barons and autre Grantz en les foies and ligeances queulx ils devoient au Roi
de lui conseiller ce quil devoit fair de si grand excess fait en sa presance.
The King by the mouth of Sir Geffrey Scrope charged all the Earls, Barons, and
other great ones in their Faith and Allegiance, which they ow him, to give him
Counsel, what he ought to do upon such an exorbitancy committed in his
presence; they go and consider of it, acquit Zouch, judge Gray to Prison: here
were no Bishops neither, to Judge so much as of a Battery.

25. E. 3. The proceedings and Judgment of death against Sir Will. de Thorp
Chief Justice, for Bribery, were brought into Parliament, which the King caused
to be read Overtement devaut les Grantz de Parliament pur saver ent lour avys,
and examine sur ceo chescun aprez autre si sembla a eux toutz, etc. To be read
openly before the Grantz, the great men, of Parliament to have their advice
upon it, and being all asked one after another, it seemed to them all, that
they were very just, Et sur ceo il fut accord par les Grantz de mesme le
Parliament, que si null autre tiel cas aveigne que nostre Sr. Le Roi preigne lui
des Grantz que lui plairra, pur per lour bon a vis fair ceo que pleise a sa
Roiale Seignurie, Upon this it was agreed by those Grantz, those Great men, of
the Parliament, that if any such other case should happen, our Lord the King
might take any one of those Grantz those Great men, whom he should please, to
do by their good advice what he should think good. It cannot be understood any
Bishops were here under the name of Grantz, and to be of the number of those
whom the King should take to assist and advise him in such other Judgments of
death for the time to come, if occasion were, which could be no employment for
Bishops, being to give Judgments of death.

42. E. 3. Sir John de Lee Steward of the Kings House charged with several
misdemeanors, the Record says, Et apres manger vindrent les Prelates, Dues,
Countes, Barons, and ascuns des Co^es and illoeques feust fait venir Mr. John
de Lee, etc. And after they had eaten, the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons and
some of the Commons came, and Sir John de Lee was fetched thither, etc. The
business was there heard, and he was sent to prison. Here the Prelates were
present, for the Crime was not Capital.

50. E. 3. Several persons are accused even by the Commons for misdemeanors,
and the Bishops present at their Trials and Judgments, as Richard Lions, who
had been Farmer of the Customs; the Lord Latimer, who was the Kings
Chamberlain, for Oppression in several places in Britain and in England, he was
by the Bishops and Lords adjudged to be imprisoned, and put to Fine and Ransom;
and then the Commons desired, he might lose all his Offices, and no longer be
of the Kings Council, which the King granted. (Yet after this, 51. E. 3. at the
request of the Commons themselves, he was restored to all, and declared
innocent, which I take notice of by the way.) At this Parliament of 50. William
Ellis of Yarmouth, as privy and accessory to the misdemeanors of Lions; John
Peach of London, for getting a Monopoly of sweet Wines; the Lord John Nevil, a
Privy Counselor, for buying some debts due by the King at easy prizes, to
make advantage to himself: At all these Trials the Bishops were present, and no
body says but they might.

1. R. 2. William de Weston and John de Gomenitz were tried for surrendering
Towns and Castles in Flanders to the Kings Enemies; they had put in their
Answers, Friday Nov. 22. Saturday they are brought to the Parliament, and Sir
Richard le Scrope, Steward of the Kings House, A commandment de Seigneurs
avant-ditz, By the command of the Lords aforesaid, told them, That the foresaid
Lords, (and the Record tells you who those Lords were,) cest assavoir, to wit,
the Duke of Lancaster, the Earls of Cambridge, March, Arundel, Warwick,
Stafford, Suffolk, Salisbury and Northumberland, and the Lord Nevil, Lord
Clifford, and plusours autres Seigneurs, Barons and Bannerettes esteants au dit
Parliament savoient assemblez and avisez, Many other Lords, Barons and Bannerets
being in the said Parliament had met and advised upon it, from the time they
had put in their Answers, and found they were not satisfactory; and then gave
sentence, saying, that those Lords had adjudged them to death: first Weston was
called, and this said to him, and then Gomenitz: Here was none of the Prelates
named, and it cannot be imagined they should be under the general expression
and autres Seignieurs, Barons and Bannerettes, And other Lords, Barons and
Bannerets, after the naming of two Barons, for if there had been Bishops, they
would have been named before them. Observe likewise, that no Bishops were
present from the time that the Prisoners Answers came in, to have Vote, and
determine concerning any part of their Answer, Pardon or whatever they had
pleaded.

In the same Parliament, and the very next thing upon the Roll is the Case of
Alice Perrers, accused for breach of an Ordinance made 50 E. 3. against Women's
meddling with State Affairs, there the Record says, that she was, Fait venir
devant les Prelates and les Seignieurs du Parliament pour y respondre, Made to
come before the Prelates and the Lords of the Parliament to make answer; and
then follows, Et sur ceo par commandment des Prelates and Seignieurs le dit Mr.
Richard le Scrope, rehercea l'Ordonance, And then by the command of the
Prelates and Lords, the said Sir Richard le Scrope rehearsed the Ordinance. And
then she was heard to the particulars with which she was charged, and at last
was adjudged to be banished, and forfeit her Estate.

Observe in the Trial of Weston and Gomenitz, that only those Temporal Lords
there named, had met and considered of the Answers put in by them, as
preparatory for the Trial and Judgment, and no Bishop present there: And here
in the Trial of Alice Perrers, which followed immediately after, it is
particularly expressed, that they were present, and did Vote and Judge as far
forth as the Lords Temporal.

3 R. 2. The two Merchants that had killed John Imperial, a Public Minister
sent from Genoa, an Act of Parliament passed to make it Treason, the Bishops
had no Vote in the passing of this Act; the Record says, Fait a remembrer que
cest darrein Ait issint faite si fust fait par les Justices en presence du Roy,
and des Seigneurs Temporelz en ce Parliament, Memorandum, that this last Act so
made was drawn by the Judges in the presence of the King and the Lords Temporal
in this Parliament. They were not so much as present when the Judges were in
the preparing of it.

4 R. 2. Sir Ralph de Ferrers arrested by the Duke of Lancaster upon suspicion
of Treason, for holding intelligence with the French, brought into Parliament,
and there tried; Semblast as Seigneurs du Parliament que le dit Mr. Rauf estoit
innocent: It seemed to the Lords of the Parliament that Sir Ralph was innocent.
Can any man think the Bishops were there, and comprised under the general
expression of les Seigneurs du Parliament? When they were present, it is always
particularly expressed, as in Alice Perrers Case, 1 R. 2. and all those
questioned and punished for misdemeanors 50 E. 3. the Lord Latimer and Lyosn,
etc. Alice Perrers was Fait venir devant les Prelates and Seigneurs du
Parliament, was made to come before the Prelates and Lords of Parliament; They
were Judged by the Bishops and Lords, the Record says.

7 R. 2. The Bishop of Norwich, who had undertaken an expedition into France
and not performed the conditions, was charged with several miscarriages and
misdemeanors in his employment, and one crime capital, which was betraying
Graveling to the French for 10000 Franks in Gold, of which yet he cleared
himself: Yet that being in for one of his charges, none of the Bishops were
present at his Trial, but Michael de la Pool gave this Judgment at the last, Le
Roi nostre Sr. a bien entendu ce que vous a vez dit, and ent a eu bone
deliberation avec les Srs. Temporalz and semble au Roi and as Srs. Temporalz
avant-ditz, que vos responses ne sont rien a propos, Parquoy del assent des
Countes, Barons and autres Srs. Temporelz en cest Parliament est assentuz and
accordez que vous soiez en la merci le Roy, and mis a fin and a raunceon, Our
Lord the King has well heard what you have said, and has with his Lords
Temporal well considered of it, and it seems to him, and to the Lords Temporal
aforesaid, that your answers are nothing to the purpose, Therefore by the
consent of the Earls, Barons, and other Lords Temporal in this Parliament, it is
agreed that you shall be at the Kings mercy, and put to fine and ransom.

The Chancellor likewise gave judgment in the same way that Parliament on Sir
William de Elmham, Sir Thomas Trivet, and others for giving up Holds and
Fortresses, and taking money for them.

10 R. 2. Michael de la Pool Lord Chancellor was accused by the Commons for
several misdemeanors devant le Roi, Prelatz and Seigneurs, Before the King,
Prelates, and Lords. Here the Prelates are Judges of misdemeanors together with
the other Lords.

11. R. 2. The five Lords Appellants, the Duke of Gloucester, Earls of Derby,
Arundel, Worcester, and Earl Marshal making their Protestations, that what they
attempted touching their Appeals was for the honor of God, safety of the King,
the Realm, and their own Lives, The Archbishop of Canterbury for himself and
the whole Clergy of his Province entered a Protestation, and the Bishops of
Durham and Carlisle did the like; That they absented themselves from
Parliament, in regard such matters were to be there agitated, but with a Salvo
to their right: Which some will have to be understood of a right to be present
even when those matters were in agitation, and that it was only upon some
prudential consideration that they did withdraw: But this could no ways be
their meaning, but they protested their having a right to sit and Vote in
Parliament upon all other occasions in the general, Though upon that occasion
they might not be present. The words of their Protestation make it evident: Nos
Willielmus Cant. Archi-Episcopus pro nobis and suffraganeis Coepiscopis, etc.
protestamur quod intendimus and intendi volumus in hoc presenti Parlemento and
aliis interesse, consulere, tractare, statuere, and definire, etc. ac cetera
exercere cum ceteris jus interessendi habentibus in omnibus in eisdem statu and
ordine nostro semper salvis: Uerum quia in presenti Parliamento agitur de
nonnullis materiis in quibus non licet nobis alicui eorum juxta sacrorum
Canonum instituta quomodolibet personaliter interesse, eo propter potestamur
quod non intendimus nec volumus sicuti de Iure non possumus nec debemus, dum de
hujusmodi materiis agitur vel agetur quomodolibet interesse, sed nos penitus
absentare, etc. We William Archbishop of Canterbury for our selves, our
Suffragans and fellow Bishops protest, that we do intend, and will be thought
so to do, to be present in this and other Parliaments to consult, treat of, and
determine, etc. and do other things together with others, who have right to be
here, in all matters, our state and order always saved unto us entire in the
same. But because in this Parliament some matters will be agitated, at any one
of which by the institutions of the holy Canon Law we cannot be personally
present, we do therefore protest, that we intend not, nor will not, as by the
Law we ought not, nor can we in in any sort be present, whilst any of those
matters are in debate, or coming into debate: but we will absent our selves
altogether, etc. It is plain by the Record, that what they will have to be
Salvum to them is their sitting and acting consulere, and tractare, and
statuere, To consult, treat of, and determine in that and all other
Parliaments, when such matters are not in question: But for such matters they
say, Non licet alicui eorum personaliter interesse, And de jure non possumus
nec debemus interesse* It is not lawful to be present in person at any of them,
and rightly we cannot, nor ought not to be present. Can it then be thought they
should lay claim to any right, to what they say Non licet de jure non possumus
nec debemus, It is not lawful, and by right we cannot, nor ought not? And to
say, their meaning was, that by the Law of the Land or Custom of Parliament
they might, and that it was only the Canon Law which hindered them, can have
little color, for the Canon Law was to them above all Laws, and what was
forbidden by that Law they could not have a thought, that it could in any sort
be lawful for them to challenge, as their right, upon any account.

It is further observable here, that they profess Quod de jure non possumus nec
debemus, dum de hujusmodi materiis agitur vel agetur quomodolibet interesse,
that is, all the time that such matters are in agitation; there is no exception
of Preliminaries, and Preparatories, and of being present and having vote
during all the debate, till the pronouncing of Sentence, for it is Dum de
hujusmodi materiis agitur vel agetur, the whole time from the beginning to the
ending, and when such businesses are to come on, that is, when they are going
upon them, and when they begin. And then consider the close of this Record,
Quelle Protestation leve en plein Parliament, al instance and priere du dit
Ercevesque and les autres Prelatz susditz, est enrolle, ycy en Roll du
Parliament per commandment du Roy, and assent des Seigneurs Temporelz and
Comunes, Which Protestation being read in full Parliament, at the instant
desire of the Archbishop and other the Prelates aforesaid, is entered upon the
Parliament Roll, by the Kings command, with the assent of the Lords Temporal
and Commons. Which is all the formality of passing Laws in Parliament, that was
used in those times, Which was only to have it entered in the Roll or Journal
Book, that such a thing was agreed upon by the King and the two Houses, then it
was drawn into the form of a Law afterward by the Justices and Kings Council,
when the Parliament was risen. So as whatever was the Law before, if it were
only the Canon Law, it is now come to be the Law and rule of Parliament, and
the Law of the Land; but in truth it was so before, and was always so.

20. R. 2. Thomas Haxey Clerk had preferred a Bill in the House of Commons for
regulating the outrageous expenses of the Kings House, particularly of Bishops
and Ladies, De la multitude d' Evesques and lour meignee and aussi de plusours
Dames and lour meignee qui demeurnt en l hostel du Roy, and sont a ses
coustages, Of the many Bishops, and their company, and also of many Ladies and
their company, that live in the Kings House, and at his charge. The King being
exceedingly moved at this, some Bishops and Lords were sent to the Commons to
let them know it, and to enquire who had made that complaint; the Commons
delivered the Bill, and his name who had exhibited it. Haxey was for this tried
and adjudged a Traitor, and condemned to death for it. Which Judgment by the
way was most unjust, and would not only have shaken, but wholly destroyed the
very foundation of Parliament, deterring all men from representing there, and
seeking redress of any grievance public or private, had it continued in force
and unquestioned, but 1. H. 4. it was complained of as erroneous and Encontre
droit, and la course qui avoit este devant en Parlementz, Against right, and
the course of Parliaments; and therefore Nostre Sr. le Roi del a viz, and
assent de toutz les Srs. Spirituelx and Temporelx ad ordeignez and adjuggez,
que le dit Iuggement soit du tout cassez, reversez, repellez, adnullez and
tenuz de null force n'effect, Our Lord the King by the advice and consent of all
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal has ordained and adjudged that the said
Judgment be wholly quashed, reversed, repealed, made null, and held to be of no
force nor effect. So this Judgment is damned with Bell, Book and Candle (one
may say) and at this the Lords Spiritual were present, and had vote, but not at
the trial and condemnation of Haxey, as appears by the Record, which says,
Fait a remembrer que mosquerdi aprez la Chandelure maintenant aprez le Judgment
rendu devers Thomas Haxey Clere^que fust ajuggez eu Parliament a la mort come
Traitor vindrent devant le Roy en Parliament ovek grand humilite l' Ercevesque
de Cantirbirs and toutz les autres Preiatz* and luy prierent de sa grace avoir
pity and merci du dit Thomas and de remitter l' execution, Memorandum, that
the Wednesday after Candlemas day immediately after that Judgment was given
upon Thomas Haxey Clerk, who was in Parliament judged to die as a Traitor, the
Archbishop of Canterbury and all the other Prelates came with great humility
before the King in the Parliament, and besought his Grace to have pity and
compassion on the said Thomas, and to remit his execution, which the King
granted. So we see, that after the Judgment given in Parliament, the Bishops
immediately came into the Parliament, to beg for his pardon, which shows they
were not there before.

21. R. 2. The Commons impeached Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury of
high Treason, and desired he should be put into safe custody; it was answered,
that because it touched si haut person, so high a person, the King would be
advised. Afterward they come and pray that Judgment may be given according to
their Impeachment and accusation of him, Sur quoy nostre dit Sr. le Roy, and
toutz le Srs. Temporelz, and Mr. Thomas le Percy eiant poair sufficient de les
Prelatz and Clergy du Roialme d' Engleterre come piert de record en le dit
Parliament adjuggerent and declarerent cest Article conuz per le dit Ercevesque
pur Traison, and le dit Ercevesque pur Traitor, and sur ce est agarde quil
soit banni and ses Temporaltees seisis en main le Roy, Whereupon our said Lord
the King, and all the Temporal Lords, and Sir Thomas le Percy being
sufficiently empowered from the Prelates and Clergy of the Kingdom of England
as appears upon Record in Parliament, judged and declared this Article
acknowledged by the said Archbishop to be Treason, and the said Archbishop to
be a Traitor, and thereupon awarded him to be banished and his Temporalties to
be seized into the Kings hands: Here the Bishops were not present in person,
but Sir Thomas le Percy, as their Procurator and Proctor authorized by them,
may be said to represent them; and so he did, but yet it shows that the Bishops
as Bishops and Clergy men could not be there in their persons, and that rather
than they should be there present such an unusual thing should be admitted, as
that one Layman, who else was no Peer nor had place in the House of Peers to
vote there, should be chosen by them, to have all their Proxies put together
and united in him; to be disposed of by him as he should think good. For it was
never done, but in this one Parliament, there never was in no Parliament before
or after such a Procuratorship or Proxy given. And in this Parliament of 21. R.
2. it was thrice done, first here to Sir Thomas Percy, then the Parliament
being adjourned to Shrewsbury, it was there given, it seems by vote only, to
William le Scrope Earl of Wilts, for the words are Sur ce les ditz Prelatz and
Clergy nomerent and ordenerent en Parliament per bouche William le Scrope Conte
de Wilts, commettant and donant a luy pleine poair aussi avaunt and en manner
come feust comys a Mr. Thomas le Percy per devant, Hereupon the said Prelates
and Clergy named and appointed in Parliament by word of mouth William le Scrope
Earl of Wilts, and gave him the same power, as full and in the same manner, as
before had been granted unto Sir Thomas le Percy. Now, Percy had it by
Commission enrolled; which happily was to make it more authentic, because he
was but a Commoner. The third time it was done, was in the business between the
two Dukes of Hereford and Norfolk, when by this Parliament sitting then at
Shrewsbury, that whole matter was referred to the King, to be by him determined
by the advice of certain Lords and Commoners there named, and to them were
joined the Earls of Worcester and Wilts Procurators for the Clergy. This I must
say argues a great unanimity in the voting of the Prelates, which it seems has
ever been, but I must say it was most Unparliamentary, never practiced, but in
that one Parliament of the 21. R. 2. which whole Parliament is repealed, and
all it did Nulled, and made Void by Act of Parliament 1. H. 4. so as it cannot
be urged as a Precedent to infer any thing upon it, nor can it make any thing
to prove a right in the Bishops of being personally present in matters of that
nature, but rather in my opinion strongly the contrary: And one thing more
would be observed, which is, that it seems by the Record, that the whole Clergy
of England joined in making this Proctor, and not only the Prelates, who were
Members of the House of Peers, which seems very strange. But more than all
this, whatever was done this Parliament signifies nothing, the whole Parliament
stands repealed by 1. H. 4. and all done in it declared Null and Void.

1. H. 4. The Commons had desired that Sir William Rikhill, (who had been a
Judge in the Common Pleas, and had been sent by R. 2. to Calais to take the
Confession of the Duke of Gloucester, who soon after was there murdered) might
be put to answer upon what account he did it: He was under arrest for it; and
was brought into Parliament before the King and the two Houses, the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons then assembled together: The whole
matter was examined, the conclusion was, says the Record, Sur ceo chascun Sr
Temporel esteant en plein Parliament examine severalment sur la response du dit
William, dit quil avoit fait loyalnent and quil ny avoit en luy aucun coupe,
Hereupon every Lord Temporal being in full Parliament severally asked
concerning the answer of the said William, said he had carried himself Loyally,
and that he had committed no fault. There was no charge, no impeachment against
him, so the Bishops might be, and were present at his examination, as the
Commons also were, but they must have no hand in giving any Judgment upon it,
because it might have been a preparatory to an Accusation and an Impeachment,
if he had not given so good satisfaction, as it seems he did in the account he
gave of his employment.

That Parliament John Hall a Servant of the Duke of Norfolk's, who had helped
to murder the Duke of Gloucester at Calais was tried before the King and the
Lords Temporal: The Record says, Il sembla au Roy and a toutz les Srs.
Temporels quil avoit deservi davoir si dure mort come la Ley luy pourroit
donner, Et sur ceo toutz les Srs. Temporelz per assent du Roy adjuggerent quil
seroit treinez del Tower Hill jusques a les fourkes de Tyburn, etc. It seemed
to the King and to all the Temporal Lords that he deserved as cruel a death as
the Law could inflict: And hereupon all the Temporal Lords with the assent of
the King gave Judgment that he should be drawn from Tower Hill to the Gallows
at Tyburn, etc. there to be hanged, etc.

2 H 4. The first Writ de Haeretico comburendo was agreed upon only by the
Lords Temporal, it was in the Case of William Santre, (our St. Stephen, the
Protomartyr of England,) the Record is, Item cest Mesquerdy un Brief fust fait
as Meir and Uiscountz de Londres per advis des Srs. Temporelx en Parliament de
fair execution de William Sautre, Item this Wednesday a Writ was framed, by
the advice of the Lords Temporal in Parliament, directed to the Mayor and
Sheriffs of London for the execution of William Sautre. I doubt not but the
Bishops and Clergy of those times were the chief promoters of this, though not
appearing to be Actors in it: Which yet would not have been a direct
condemnation of him, as his Judges, nor any thing to be determined by them
tending to his conviction, but only an advice given to the King to make it his
Act under the Broad Seal to order his execution; yet they then were not to have
a hand even in a matter of this nature.

The same Parliament the Earls of Kent, Huntington, and Salisbury, the Lord le
Despencer, and Sir Ralph Lumley, who for levying War against the King had been
taken and executed, were by the Lords Temporal declared and adjudged Traitors,
and their Estates to be forfeited, the names of the Lords that made this
Declaration, and gave this Judgment are there set down, the Prince of Wales the
first, and the Lord le Scroope the last, five and twenty in all; Not a Bishop
amongst them, so much as to declare and judge it a Treason, though the persons
who had committed it were dead before: So as it seems they must not have a hand
neither in the Antecedent, what is Preliminary and Preparatory to the death of
a Man, nor in the Consequent, what is to be done after, so far from being the
Judges to try or condemn him.

5. H. 4. The Earl of Northumberland had Petitioned the King for his Pardon for
having, contrary to his Allegiance, gathered Forces, and given Liveries: The
King gave this Petition to the Judges, to have their opinion of it; the Lords
Protested against it, and said, that the Judgment belonged to them, and
retained the business, Et puis leve and entendue la Petition les Srs. come
Piers du Parliament, a queux tielz Judgment. apperteinnent de droit,
adjuggerent, que ceo que fust fait per le Conte nestoit pas trahison mes
trespass tant seulement. Sur quoy le dit Conte molt humblement remercia le Roy
and les ditz Srs. ses Piers de lour droiturel Judgment. And then the Petition
being read and understood, the Lords as Peers of Parliament, to whom such
Judgments do of right appertain, did give their Judgment, that what the Earl
had done, was no Treason, but only a Trespass, whereupon the said Earl did most
humbly thank the King and the said Lords his Peers for their righteous
Judgment. Now the Bishops could not be said to be his Peers, which shows they
were not there.

7 H. 4. A Judgment was given much like to that in the 2 H. 4. The King
commanded the Lords Temporal to deliver their advice concerning the Earl of
Northumberland and the Lord Bardolph, who had been killed at Bramham More in
Yorkshire by the Sheriff of the County, who therewith the Posse Comitatus
encountered them in the field; There were proceedings against them in the Court
of Chivalry after their deaths, upon certain Articles of Treason there
exhibited against them. These Articles were brought into Parliament, upon
reading of which those Lords Temporal adjudged their Crime to be Treason.

5 H. 5. The Commons, Baillerent une Petition, delivered a Petition, directed
Al honorable Prince le Duc de Bedford Gardein d' Engleterre, and as tres sages
Srs. de cest present Parliament, To the honorable Prince the Duke of Bedford
Guardian of England, and to the most wise Lords of this present Parliament, that
Sir John Oldcastle might be brought before them, who was indicted and outlawed
in the Kings Bench for Treason, and excommunicated by the Archbishop of
Canterbury for Heresy; and that due execution might be done upon him according
to their discretion by authority of Parliament. Pur quoy agarde est per les
Srs. avaunt ditz del assent de le dit Gardein and a la priere susdit, que le dit
John come Traitor au Roy and a son Royalme so it amesnez a la Tour de Londres
and dilloeques soit treinez parmi la cite de Londres as novelles Fourches en la
paroche de St. Giles and illoeques soit penduz and ars pendant, Wherefore it is
adjudged by the Lords aforesaid, with the assent of the said Guardian upon the
foresaid Request, that the said John, as a Traitor to the King and his Realm,
be carried to the Tower of London, and thence drawn through the City of London
to the new Gallows in St. Giles Parish, and there to be hanged, and burnt
hanging. The question is now, if it shall be understood, that under the general
expression of Les Srs. de cest present Parliament the Bishops were comprised;
and so to have been parties in this Judgment, and I conceive not, first,
because I observe that generally throughout all the Records and Journals of
Parliament almost in all transactions, but especially and constantly I find it
so in matters of Judicature, where they were present, it is always mentioned
and expressed so, at That the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, or That the
Prelates, and Earls, and Barons did so and so, as it was in the Cases before
mention ed of Sir John Lee, Richard Lions, the Lord Latimer, and the rest,
accused of misdemeanors; And my other reason is, that in this particular Case
of Sir John Oldcastle I find the Clergy had done their parts with him before,
declaring him an Heretic, and turning him over to the Secular power, as the
words of the Excommunication run, where after having expressed a great
tenderness of the desperate condition of his Soul, and much bewailed his
obdurateness, they do condemn him for a Heretic, Relinquentes eum ex nunc
tanquam Hereticum Iudicio Seculari, Leaving him from thence forward as an
Heretic to the Secular Judgment. So certainly those good men, I mean those
Popish Bishops, would have no more to do with him as to his farther Execution,
that the world might see they were not Men of blood.

2. H. 6. Sir John Mortimer had been committed to the Tower upon suspicion of
Treason against Henry the Fifth, and made an escape out of prison, being taken
again he was indicted of Treason at Guild Hall: The Indictment by the Kings
command was returned into Chancery, then brought into Parliament by the Bishop
of Durham Lord Chancellor, and by him, Coram Humfrido Duce Gloucestriae (who
in the Kings absence was commissionated to call and hold that Parliament) ac
aliis Dominis Temporalibus in eodem Parliamento tune existentibus fuit
liberatum, Was delivered to Humfry Duke of Gloucester, and other the Lords
Temporal being then in Parliament to be by them affirmed, as it was, and Sir
John Mortimer then brought before them, and adjudged by them to be drawn,
hanged, and quartered: Et super hoc viso and before intellecto Indictamento
per dictum Ducem de avisamento dictorum Dominorum Temporalium, ac ad
requisitionem totius Communitatis in presenti Parliamento existentium
auctoritate istius Parliamenti ordinatum est and statutum, etc. quod ipse usque
ad Turrim ducatur, etc. And hereupon the said Indictment being seen and well
understood, it was by the said Duke, by the advice of the said Lords Temporal,
at the prayer of the whole Commonalty in this present Parliament, and by the
Authority thereof Ordered and Decreed, etc. that he should be led to the Tower,
and from thence drawn to Tyburn, and there executed. We see here the Bishops
did not offer to advise so much as concerning the Indictment, if it should be
admitted of and received by the Parliament, though a Bishop, being Lord
Chancellor was by virtue of his Office to bring it out of the Chancery, and
present it to the House, as he did, and there left it.

28 H. 6. is the sole single President of Bishops being present, and not only
so, but acting and bearing a principal part in a Judicial proceeding in
Parliament in a Case that was in it self Capital, though strangely shuffled
off, and Justice wholly eluded.

January 22. William de la Pole Duke of Suffolk preferred a Petition to the
King, complaining how he was defamed, as if he were other than a true man to
the King and the Realm, and desiring that any man would say wherein, that he
might give his Answer thereunto. Monday 26. the Commons sent some of their
Fellows to the Chancellor, who was Archbishop of York and a Cardinal, praying
him, that whereas the Duke of Suffolk had that same day in his own declaration
confessed, that there was a very heavy rumor and noise of infamy upon him, he
would let the King know it, that he might be committed to ward after the course
of Law in eschewing of inconveniences that may sue thereupon hereafter (they
are the words of the Record.) The next day Tuesday, the Chancellor acquainted
the King and the Lords with it, and asked the Lords what should be done upon
the Commons request. The Judges were asked what the Law was in this matter; the
Chief Justice answered for the rest, that in these general Terms of Slander and
Infamy many things may be understood which deserve not imprisonment, but he
desired more time to consider of it with his Fellows: The Lords staid not for
their return, but all of them from the lowest to the highest were of one
opinioa, that he should not be committed to ward till the Specialty of the
matter were declared. Wednesday the 28. the Chancellor and other Lords were
sent down by the Kings commandment to the House of Commons, and the Speaker
declared unto them, That seeing special matter was required, they had daily
information from several parts of England, that the Realm was sold to the Kings
Adversary of France by the Duke of Suffolk, and that he had fortified
Wallingford Castle to be a place of refuge unto them, and this the Commons do
think is special matter of suspicion of Treason laid to his charge, for which
he ought to be committed, and therefore it was the desire of the Commons that
he might be so, upon which desire he was sent to the Tower. The seventh of
February the Chancellor again and several Lords both Spiritual and Temporal
were by the Kings command sent again to the House of Commons, and the Speaker
William Tresham gave them a Bill containing several Articles of High Treason
against the said Duke, which Bill he in their names desired, Ut in presenti
Parliamento inactitaretur, to be enrolled in Parliament, and the Duke upon it
to be proceeded against. The twelfth of February this Bill was read in the
House of Lords, and it was thought fit by all the Lords, that the Justices
should have a Copy of it, and report their advice what should be done, but the
King would have it respited, till he was otherwise advised. The seventh of
March next following it was thought fit by the most part of the Lords, that the
Duke should then come to his Answer. The ninth of March the Lords were again
sent down to the Commons at their request, and another Bill was delivered to
them containing certain Articles of misprisions and horrible offenses committed
by the Duke, which they desired might be Enacted in this High Court of
Parliament, (so is the expression) and he to be proceeded against. The same day
the Duke of Suffolk was brought from the Tower, by virtue of the Kings Writ,
into the presence of the King and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in the
Parliament Chamber, both the Bills of the Articles were read unto him, of which
he desired Copies; which was granted: and to be nearer at hand to give in his
Answer, and come to his Trial, the King by the advice of the Lords committed
him to the ward of three persons, Esquires, to be kept in a Tower within the
Kings Palace of Westminster. The thirteenth of March he was sent for to come
before the King and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, to answer to his Charge,
which he did, denying all of Treason laid unto him, and excusing the rest. The
fourteenth the Chief Justice rehearsed to the Lords by the Kings commandment,
what had passed the day before, and asked them what advice they would give,
which they put off till Monday the sixteenth, and that day nothing was done.
Then Tuesday the seventeenth the King sent for all the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, who were in Town, into his innest Chamber with a Gabel Window over a
Cloister within the Palace of Westminster: The Lords are all named, viz. the
two Archbishops, the Duke of Buckingham, thirteen Bishops, six Earls, two
Viscounts, two Abbots, the Prior of St. John, and nineteen Barons, who being
assembled, the King sent for the Duke of Suffolk, who came, and was upon his
knees all the time the Chancellor spoke unto him, who by the Kings commandment
remembered what passed at his Trial, and particularly, that he had not then put
himself upon his Peerage, and asked him now what he had more to say. The Duke
said, that, not departing from his Answers and Declarations, he did wholly
submit himself to the Kings rule and governance to do with him as he list.
Whereupon the Chancellor (who, as I said before, was Archbishop of York, and a
Cardinal) by the Kings commandment said unto him, Sir, I conceive that you* not
departing from your Answers and Declarations in the matters aforesaid, not
putting you upon your Peerage submit you wholly to the Kings rule and
governance, wherefore the King commands me to say to you, that as touching
the great and horrible things in the first Bill comprised, the King boldeth you
neither declared nor changed; And as touching the second Bill touching
misprisions, which be not Criminal, the King by force of your submission, by
his own advice, and not reporting him to the advice of his Lords, nor by way of
Judgment, for he is not in place of Judgment, puts you to his rule and
governance, that is to say, that you before the first of May shall absent your
self out of the Realm of England unto the end of five years, but you may abide
in the Realm of France, or in any other Lordships or places being under his
obeissance, and you shall not bear malice to any man for any thing done to you
in this Parliamont. And forthwith the Viscount Beaument on the behalf of the
said Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and by their advice, assent, and desire,
recited, said, and declared to the Kings Highness. That this that was so
decreed and done by his Excellency concerning the person of the said Duke,
proceeded not by their advice and counsel, but was done by the Kings own
demeanance and rule, therefore they besought the King that this their Saying
might be enacted in the Parliament Roll, for their more declaration hereafter,
with this Pretestation that it should not be, nor turn in prejudice nor
derogation of them, their Heirs, ne of their Successors in time coming, but
that they may have and enjoy their Liberties and Freedom as largely as ever
their Ancestors or Predecessors had and enjoyed before this time.

I have been the more large in this account, which I have given of this Trial,
marking out every step of the proceedings in it, that whosoever reads it may
see how irregular and extravagant it was from the beginning to the end, from
the Commons first desiring that the Duke of Suffolk should be committed upon so
slight a ground as his complaining in the House of Lords, that he was ill
spoken of, and defamed, to the close of all, the Judgment given by the King by
the mouth of the Chancellor for his banishment, in regard he had not put
himself upon his Peerage, which yet the Chancellor said the King did not do as
his Judge, for that he was not in the place of Judgment. And it was an odd
thing and unusual, that some Prelates and some Lords should be sent down to the
House of Commons to receive the Articles of this Impeachment. All this was such
a Hodge-podge of a Trial, as no man can tell what to make of it, nor can it be
of any signification to be a president and a rule of proceeding in matters of
that nature in Parliament.

But admit it had been never so regular, it is but one single president of
Bishops and Prelates acting in a Judicial capacity in a Capital cause in
Parliament, against multitudes excluding them; it was once so, and never but
once: And can that be thought sufficient to alter and change the constant
course and practice of Parliaments, which has been otherwise? Had it been
questioned then, and upon a debate and mature consideration, been so resolved
at that time, this had signified something: but it was done and no exception
taken, which they call a passing Sub silentio, and more, it was never done but
once. But Sir Edward Coke goes further, and says, that two or three presidents
are nothing, if forty be contrary, and it is so here; he tells you too, when it
is that they signify nothing; that is, Quand les Presidents pass sans
challenge del party ou debate des Justices, When they be not challenged by the
party concerned, or not considered of, and debated by the Judges, as neither of
them was here done, it is in Slades case in the 4. Reports. It is a rule in
Law, A facto ad jus non valet argumentum, but it may withal be said, and truly,
A saepe facto ad jus contra semel factum valet argumentum. Upon the whole
matter, one may boldly affirm, that this President of 28 H. 6. is no ground for
the Bishops to build their claim upon, of having a right to sit and vote in
Parliament in Capital Causes.

31 H. 6. is the Earl of Devonshire's Case, the Record runs thus. Be hit
remembered that where the 14. day of March the said 31 year of this present
Parliament, Thomas Earl of Devonshire upon an Indictment of High Treason, by
him supposed to be done against the Kings honorable estate and person, before
Humfrey Duke of Bucks, Steward of England for that time assigned, and of the
same Treason by his Peers the noble Lords of this Royaume of England being in
this said present Parliament, was acquitted of all things contained in the same
Indictment. Now I suppose no man will say, That the Bishops were either his
Peers, or Lords of the Realm.

38 H. 6. The Lord Stanley was accused by the Commons for being in confederacy
with the Duke of York, and they desire he may be committed to prison; the
Answer is, The King will be advised; which is all was done: And this is the
last president of any Impeachment, or of any person questioned in Parliament in
a Judicial way, that is upon the Rolls in the Tower.

And I do not remember that I have read or heard of any Trial in Parliament in
a Judicial way since that time till the E. of Straffords in our memory, whose
Trial was completed in that way, but he was attainted and condemned by the
Legislative power; During all the Trial, from the beginning to the end, the
Bishops were never present at any part of it: And it yet appears upon the
Journal Book of the House of Peers, though many passages be razed, but this is
not, That upon the 9. of March 1640. upon a Report brought in by the Lord Privy
Seal of something concerning that business, and a debate arising upon it, the
Bishops withdrew, it being In agitatione cause sanguinis.

It is true, there was in that same Parliament the February before an
Impeachment of High Treason brought up from the House of Commons against the
Lord Keeper Finch, but it never came to Trial, for he fairly ran away, and got
beyond Sea, whereupon by the Order of the Lords Temporal, a Proclamation was
issued forth for him to appear the 10. of March following: the words of the
Proclamation are, Rex, Uice-comiti, etc. Cum Communitas Regni nostri Anglie in
presenti Parliament. Iohannem Dominum Finch de Fordich nuper Custodem Magni
Sigilli Anglie de Alta Proditione accusaverit and impetierit, Cumque per
Dominos Temporales in eodem Parliamento de assensu and advisamento nostris
Ordinatum existit, quod Proclamatio per totum regnum nostrum Anglie public
fiat, quoth. idem Johannes Dominus Finch in propria persona sua compareat, and se
reddat coram nobis and prefatis Dominis, decimo die Martii proxime futuro ad
respondendum and standum recto coram nobis and prefatis Dominis ex hoc part:
Nos volentes etc. The King to the Sheriff, etc. Whereas our Commons of this our
Kingdom of England have in this Parliament accused and impeached John Lord
Finch of Fordich, late Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, of High
Treason, And whereas the Lords Temporal have in the same Parliament with our
consent and advice Ordered a Proclamation to be published throughout our whole
Kingdom of England, that John Lord Finch do personally appear and yield up
himself to us and the foresaid Lords, upon the 10. of March next following, to
answer for his Treason, and stand to the Judgment of us, and the foresaid Lords
in that behalf; We willing that the Order have its due effect, do command and
strictly enjoin you, that upon the receipt of these presents, you do in all
Cities, Market Towns, and such other places within your Bayliwick, as to you
shall seem expedient, cause in our name to be publicly proclaimed, That John
Lord Finch do appear in person and render himself before us, and the foresaid
Lords in this present Parliament, upon the 10. of March aforesaid, to answer
for the Treason aforesaid, and stand to the Judgment of us and the foresaid
Lords in that behalf, according to the tenor of the foresaid Order. This was
the Proclamation, Ordered to be made only by the Temporal Lords, and no
Bishops present, yet was it no part of the Trial, but merely a course taken to
have him in Court, that he might be tried. But because it looked toward a
Trial, the Bishops must have no hand in it.

And it is further observable in this president, that the Kings learned Counsel
was ordered to draw up this Proclamation according to the ancient Parliamentary
way, which shows that it was the ancient Parliamentary way, That only the Lords
Temporal should be interested in such Proceedings, and have the ordering of
them, and not at all the Bishops.

And I can give you an ancient President out of the Placita Parliamentaria in
the 33 of Ed. 1. Nicolas de Segrave being with the King in an Expedition into
Scotland, had a quarrel with John de Crumbwell, left the Kings Army, and went
to fight with Crumbwell in France: He was for this by the Kings command at his
return summoned to appear in Parliament, which he did, Uenit in pleno
Parliamento in presentia ipsius Domini Regis, Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis and
plurimorum Episcoporum, Comitum, Baronum and aliorum de Consilio Domini Regis
tunc ibidem existentium, He came into the Parliament before the King, the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and many other Bishops, Earls, Barons, and others of
the Kings Counsel there present. The business is opened before them by Nicolas
de Warwick, who charged him with leaving the King amongst his Enemies, and
doing what in him lay to expose him unto their power; whether the Bishops
continued in Parliament to hear this, appears not by the Record, but it appears
clearly, that they were not to meddle in it, not so much as to advise upon it,
for it follows, Et super hoc Dominus Rex volens habere avisiamentum Comitum*
Baronum, Magnatum and aliorum de Consilio suo, injunxit eisdem in homagio,
fidelitate and ligiancia quibus ei tenentur, quod ipsum fideliter consulerent
qualis poena, pro tali facto sic cognito fuerit infligenda. Qui omnes habito
super hoc diligenti tractatu and avisiamento consideratis and intellectis
omnibus in dicto facto contentis, and per predictum Nicolaum plene and express
cognitis dicunt, Quod hujusmodi meretur penam amissionis vite, The King willing
to have the advice of the Earls, Barons, and other great men of his Counsel,
enjoined them upon the Homage, Fidelity, and Allegiance which they owe him, to
give him faithful Counsel, what punishment was to be inflicted upon such a
crime so confessed, who all upon a serious debate and advising upon the matter,
and well weighing all the particulars of it, and what was by the said Nicolas
expressly acknowledged, do say, That such a man deserved to lose his life, but
the King pardoned him afterward. Still you see Bishops are not so much as
advised withal in a Case of Life and Death.

This we see has been the usage in Parliament all along, since the Journals
and Records can give us any light of what was there done. And out of History I
can go further, and cite you an ancienter President than all these: In Edward
the Confessors time, who in a Parliament convened in London, as Brompton
relates it in his Chronicle, Col. 937. upon Earl Godwin's appearing there, who
was said to have formerly murdered Alfred the Kings Brother, presently cried
out, Proditor Godwine ego te appello de morte Alfredi fratis mei, quem
proditionaliter occidisti, cui Godwinus se excusando respondit, Domine mi Rex
salva reverentia and gratia vestra, pace and dominatione, fratrem vestrum
nunquam prodidi nec occidi, unde super hoc pono me in consideratione Curie
vestre. Tunc dixit Rex, Carissimi Domini Comites and Barons terre qui estis
homines mei legii hic congregati, and appellum meum responsumque Godwini
audistis, volo quod inter nos rectum judicium decernatis, and debitam justiciam
faciatis, Comitibus vero and Baronibus super hoc ad invicem tractantibus, etc.
Thou Traitor Godwin, I do accuse thee of the death of my Brother Alfred, whom
thou did treacherously kill; whom Godwin answered, excusing himself, My King,
with reverence to your Grace, and to your Government, and with your good leave
I have not used treachery to your Brother, nor have I killed him, and of this I
refer my self to the Judgment of your Court. Then the King said, Dear Lords,
Earls, and Barons of the Land, who are my Liege People here assembled, you have
heard my Appeal, and Godwins Answer, I will have you to decree righteous
Judgment betwixt us, and to do that Justice which ought to be done. And the
Earls and Barons debating this among themselves, some were of one opinion, some
of another, and at last they agreed to offer the King a great sum of money, and
to beseech him that he would take off his displeasure from Earl Godwin, and
pardon him. The Historian adds, Quorum considerationi Rex contradicere nolens,
quicquid judicaverant per omnia ratificavit, Whose opinion the King not willing
to contradict, agreed to, and ratified all that they had done: Here we see it
was only Ad Comites and Barons that he appealed, and they were only to Judge
of it, and no Bishops nor Prelates.

But some I hear allege a President in 11 H. 2. of Archbishop Becket, who was
at a great Council Solemn Consilium at Northampton accused of Treason, and
other misdemeanors, where Bishops were his Judges, as well as Temporal Lords.
This they fetch out of Mr. Seldens Titles of Honor, who cites for it a
Manuscript made by a Monk, called Stephanides, or Fitz-Stephen, and there it is
said, that the Archbishop was accused Lose Majestatis Regie Corone, quia est a
Rege citatus in causa Johannis neque venerat, neque idonee se excusasset,
Accused of Treason because being summoned by the King in the Cause of one John
le Marshall, and he neither came himself, nor sent a sufficient excuse, and
that for it he was sentenced to forfeit all his Movables, and that the Lords
and the Bishops could not agree upon pronouncing the Judgment, they putting it
off from one to the other, and that at last the King commanded the Bishop of
Winchester to do it: This is what that Manuscript says. But none of the
ancient Historians of those times say any thing of his being accused of
Treason. And which makes it the more unlikely, is, that it was soon after that
solemn ratification of the Constitutions of Clarendon, which all both Bishops
and Lords, had sworn to observe for ever, declaring them then to be the Law of
the Land, and to be Consuetudines and Libertates antecessorum suorum, The
Customs and Privileges of their Ancestors, (which makes me say, it was rather
a Declaring what was the Law before, than making a new Law; though what was
then done, was sufficient to make it a Law, if it had not been so before:) And
one of these Constitutions was, that the Prelates of the Church should not
Interesse judiciis Curie Regis, Be present at the Judgments given in the Kings
Courts, when loss of Members or Life was in question. This great Council or
Parliament was in February at Clarendon, and the other at Northampton was in
October following; so it is not likely they should so soon forget, and do
contrary to what they had bound themselves to so lately by a solemn Oath
publicly in open Parliament: And I think one may modestly affirm, that it was
a mistake in the Writer of that Manuscript to say, that the Archbishop was then
charged with Treason: Gervasius Dorobernensis says, he was charged with two
things; one, not doing Justice in his Ecclesiastical Court to one John, (who
was John the Marshall, that complained of the Archbishops detaining some Land
from him;) the other, that being sent for by the King upon occasion of
Mareschals complaint, he came not: The first he excused, laying the fault upon
Marshall himself for abusing the Court, bringing veterum cantuum codicillum,
and old Song-Book, to swear upon, and refusing to swear super Evangelium, ut
moris est, upon the Evangelists, as the Custom is, whereby he said he did
Curiam suam infamare, Defame his Court. The other he answered, proving by two
sufficient Witnesses, Per duos legales viros, that it was sickness hindered him,
and not any contempt. This is the account which Gervasius gives, and says not
a word of any Treason; neither does Matthew Paris, nor Roger Hoveden, who both
of them give a relation of that proceeding at Northampton against the
Archbishop. And to say the truth, it would be a strange High Treason, only not
to come being sent for by the King, though there had been no sickness in the
case, at most it could have been but a High Contempt, and punishable by Fine
and Imprisonment, or the like; and probable it is, that Fitz-Stephen, who was a
Creature of the Archbishops, might represent it so, only to draw more Odium
upon the King for his severity against the Bishop, even to an injustice, when
in truth there was no such thing. However we may look upon it, as but a weak
President for the Bishops to lay any weight upon to prove their right to sit,
and vote, and judge in a Capital cause, Causa sanguinis, being at the best but
out of a blind Manuscript of an Author justly suspected of great partiality,
against the tenor of all the ancient Writers that give an account of the same
business.

But we must go a step further to clear this matter in question, for it seems
some of the Bishops do say, that though they will have no part in the
Condemnation and pronouncing Judgment upon a Criminal person, as to loss of
Life or Member, yet they may and will vote and Judge in such things as are but
Preliminary and Preparatory to that condemnation, and yet think they have no
hand in blood, though they have a hand in doing that, which will infallibly
cause the taking away of of a man's Life, and shedding of his Blood, so they
would divide two things which in truth have so near a relation and dependency
the one upon the other, as they are only separated by a little time coming
between; one thing to be done first, and that being done, the other must
necessarily follow, and be done presently after: And they doing the former, may
be well said to do the latter; and if any Law prohibit them from having to do
with the latter, the same Law does and must prohibit them meddling with the
former. It is a rule in Logic, Causa causae est causa causati. If the
Judgments of the Bishops determine one thing, which is the necessary cause of
any other thing, their Judgment may be said, and really it does determine the
other thing.

As take for example the particular case upon which this Question has been
moved, the Earl of Danbyes Pardon, of the validity or invalidity whereof they
will be Judges: It is hoped they will be just Judges, and incline neither way,
but according to the merits of the Cause before them, so what their Judgment
will be till they have heard all, themselves cannot tell. Now, if by their
Judgment the Pardon be determined to be invalid and illegal, and that carry
with it a conviction of the Crime of which he stands impeached (as some will
have it to do, saying, that the taking of a Pardon implies a guilt, and is in
Law a confession of the Crime pardoned) and so his condemnation must
necessarily follow even for Treason, the impeachment being so, does not their
Judgment subject him to that condemnation? How then can they say, we will have
no part in condemning him? Is not this something like the Friar in Chaucer,
that would have, of a Capon the Liver, of a Pig the Head, yet would that
nothing for him should be dead: So they forsooth will take upon them to Judge
his Pardon to be no Pardon, which brings on infallibly his condemnation, and
yet say with that Friar, God forbid he should die for us, That we should have
any hand in his blood: But certainly this will not pass for current either in
Foro Iudicii, or Foro Conscientiae, to excuse them from being Actors in his
Condemnation.

To evade this, some say the Bishops may be present, and hear what will be said
Pro and Con concerning this Pardon, and those only shall deliver their opinions
and judgments of it, who are satisfied of the Validity and Legality of it, but
those amongst them who are of another mind, shall withdraw and give no vote,
and then it cannot be said that any of them have a hand in condemning him. But
how this will suit with the Office of a Judge let any man judge, whose duty it
is to condemn the Guilty, as well as to acquit the Innocent, and who ought to
do the one or the other in every business that comes before him, as he finds
ground for it upon hearing the Allegations, and Proofs: And besides, it is most
Unparliamentary, for in Parliament all who are at the debate of a business,
ought to give their vote to the Question one way or other, according to their
sense of it, and as they in their consciences think it just.

But to break thorough all at once they will have it, That it is only by the
Canon Law that this restraint is upon them, and that the forbearance of their
Predecessors being Papists, and so subject to that Law, was only in that
respect; which Law being of no force at present, and taken away by Act of
Parliament, they are now at Liberty, though in modesty they think sit sometimes
to withdraw, but have a right to continue sitting, if they please.

To which in answer I shall say, that I will not deny but that the Canon Law
might give the first rise, and a beginning to such an usage, and no Law could
be of greater force to introduce and establish such a thing, as being that to
which only the Clergy of those times would be subject, conceiving themselves to
be above, and not bound by any other: But it is most clear, that it came
afterward to receive a Civil Sanction, and to have not only the stamp of the
Authority of Parliament set upon it by the continual practice there, and we
know that Consuetudo Parliamenti est Lex Parliamenti, The Custom of Parliament
is the Law of Parliament: But that two several times there have been particular
and express Confirmations, and Ratifications of it in Parliament, which makes
it a Statute Law of the Land, as much as any other can be, which we have in our
printed Statute Books.

The first time was at a Great Council, which was then their Parliament, at
Clarendon about the 10 of H. 2. where were made that which they call the
Constitutions of Clarendon, which were not new things then first made, but a
recapitulation of some things that had been in use and practice in former
times. Matthew Paris and Gervasius Dorobornensis recite them at large, other
ancient Historians more succinctly: There were of them sixteen in number:
Matthew Paris gives the best account of them, and of the whole proceeding in
that affair. He tells you, how the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls,
Barons, and other great ones Aliis Proceribus being present, Facta est
Recognitio, sive Recordatio partis Consuetudinum and Libertatum antecessorum
suorum, A Recapitulation or a Rehearsal was made of the Liberties and Customs
of their Ancestors in the time of H. 1. and of other Kings; so it was not a new
Law, and but then enacted, but it was indeed a Declaration of what was the Law
before, yet then more solemnly enjoined, In regno observari and ab omnibus
teneri, To be in the Kingdom observed and kept by all men: and this in regard
of differences often times arising between the Kings Justices and the Clergy,
Propter dissensiones and discordias saepe emergentes inter Clerum, and
Iusticiarios Domini Regis, that Popish Clergy being still apt enough to
encroach upon the Civil power, which made it the more necessary to revive and
re-establish the old Law and Custom of the Kingdom. Sixteen Articles were then
agreed upon, one of which, the eleventh, runs thus, Archiepiscopi, Episcopi,
and universe Person Regni, qui de Rege tenent in Capite habeant possessiones
suas de Rege, sicut Baroniam, and inde respondeant Iusticiariis and Ministris
Regis, and sequantur, and faciant omnes Consuetudines Regias. Et sicut ceteri
Barons, debent interesse Iudiciis Curie Regis, quousque perveniatur ad
diminutionem membrorum vel ad mortem; The Archbishops, Bishops, and all the
dignified Clergy of the Land, that hold of the King in Capite, shall hold their
possessions from the King, as a Barony, and answer for their Estates unto the
Kings Justices and Ministers, and shall observe and obey all the Kings Laws.
And together with the other Barons they are to be present at all Judgments in
the Kings Courts, till it come to require either loss of member or life. And
this Article as well as the rest they are sworn to observe. See how the Author
expresses it, Hanc Recognitionem sive Recordationem de consuetudinibus and
libertatibus iniquis Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Abbates, Priores, and Clerus cum
Comitibus, Baronibus, and Proceribus, cunctis juraverunt, and firmiter in verbo
veritatis promiserunt viva voce tenendas and observandas Domino Regi and
heredibus suis, bona fide, and absque malo ingenio in perpetuum, This
Recognition or Recordation of these wicked Customs and Liberties did the
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and the whole Clergy, together with the
Earls, Barons, and all the Great men swear to, and firmly promise upon the word
of truth, by word of mouth, that they should be kept and observed to the King
and his Heirs in true faith without any evil meaning for ever.

Now, can there be a more solemn establishing, and a stronger confirmation of
any Law to have it inviolably observed and obeyed by the whole Nation that this
we find here? where besides the authority of the Parliament, (for these great
Councils were the Parliaments of those times) there is an Oath, which is the
greatest Obligation that mankind is capable of, making even God a party to it,
to see it obeyed, and punish the transgressors. And from whom have we the
testimony of these transactions to assure us of the matter of Fact? From
Matthew Paris a Monk, one that would not be partial for the Lords Temporal in
relating matters to give them more power in Judicature, and less to the Lords
Spiritual, than of right belonged to each, and looking upon this exclusion of
the Prelates from the power of Judging in such cases, to be some diminution of
their Omnipotency, which they were so ambitious of, he therefore ranks it
amongst the Consuetudines iniquas the wicked Customs of the former times. So we
have here Testimonium irrefragabile an irrefragable and invincible testimony,
upon which we may build our faith, and have a certain assurance that there was
really such an usage in ancient times, and that it was then in that 10. year of
H. 2. again ratified and confirmed, since these Monks have so recorded it, and
transmitted it to posterity.

The second time time that this received a Confirmation in Parliament was the
11 of R. 2. which I mentioned before, when the Archbishop of Canterbury and
the other Bishops upon their withdrawing then from the Parliament in regard
matters of Blood were to be there agitated, and determined, In quibus non licet
alicui eorum personaliter interesse, as they say, In which it was not lawful
for any of them to be present in person, did therefore enter a Protestation
with a Salvo to their right of Sitting and Voting in that and all other
Parliaments, when such matters were not in question: which Protestation of
theirs was at their desire enrolled in full Parliament (as the Record says)
Par commandment du Roy, and assent des Seigneurs Temporelz and Communes, By the
Kings command with the assent of the Lords Temporal and Commons. So indeed it
was here a perfect and complete Act of Parliament, and if it had not been a Law
bebefore, would than have been made one.

But it was a Law before, and this needed not, to make it more a Law than it
was before; yet certainly what was here done must be of some signification, and
add some weight, that it may be said at least, that it seems to enforce some
greater compliance with it, and to heighten the offense of such as will not
conform to it.

And by the way, let me desire to be well understood what I mean by saying,
This would make it a Law if it was not one before, I do not mean the
Protestation would be a Law, for a Protestation Modo and Forma cannot be a Law,
but the subject matter of it was then enacted; which did consist of two
Particulars, the one, That the Prelates had a right and a Privilege to sit and
vote in Parliament in all other businesses; the other, That they had no Right,
nor was it lawful for them to be present in Parliament when such businesses
were in question: Which one would think they might look upon as a Right and
Privilege, to be exempt from being obliged to attend in such Cases, Cases of
Blood: As the Lords Temporal, who are Peers of the Realm, challenge it to be
their Right and Privilege not to be returned in Juries upon the Trial of
Commoners. Though, to speak the truth, I doubt those Prelates did not much
desire this Privilege, but the Salvo to their Right of sitting in all
Parliaments to have been what they aimed at most in their Protestation, and
which they would have to be enrolled, but the one could not be without the
other; and upon no terms would they admit the least scruple should be of their
right to sit in Parliament, which their withdrawing at that time might seem
else to call in some question as they thought, and therefore they would make
that Protestation; For that Popish Clergy was very ambitious, and loved to have
the rule over all persons and things; we see it by Matthew Paris how he branded
those Constitutions of Clarendon with terming them Consuetudines iniquas, and
the Archbishop Becket himself after he had sworn to them, repented him of it,
and enjoined a severe Penance to himself, and suspended himself from the Office
of the Altar for several months, till he had the Popes Absolution. This makes
me doubt if the Clergy was of another mind in Richard the Seconds time, and if
they could not have been well enough contented to have continued sitting as
Judges in all Cases, if the Canon Law had not debarred them, but that being
they would make that Protestation, consisting, as I say, of those two parts,
both which being so approved of by the Parliament, and there enrolled, became
then, and so continue to be, the Law of the Kingdom: For in those times all
Laws were so made: Only the substance of the Law was agreed upon in Parliament
by King, Lords, and Commons, and entered in the Journal Book; And the Kings
Justices did afterward draw it up into form, and then publish it to be the
known standing Law of the Kingdom. But that was not needful here, because it
was not a new thing, that did then receive its first being. Neither, I say, was
it new before in Henry the Seconds time, it appearing by what was then
transacted, that it was in usage in Henry the Firsts time, only it was ratified
in that Great Council of Clarendon under Henry the Second with a little more
solemnity, and the addition of an Oath for the better observance of it. And we
may carry it yet a little higher to Edward the Confessors days, as appears by
his Appeal against Earl Godwin in a Great Council, which was their Parliament,
and how long it had been the use and practice before that, God knows.

In E. 4th. time it was the declared Law of the Land, you have it in the
Year-Book of 10 E. 4. Term. Pas. n. 35. the words are, Quant un Sr. est endite
ceo serra maunde en le Parliament and la le Seneschal d' Engleterre le mettra a
respondre and il dira De rien culpable, and se sera try per Pares suos, donque
les Seigniors Espirituelx, que ne poient consent al mort de home, ferront un
Procurator en le Parliament and donque le Seneschal doit examiner primes le
pluis puisne Seignior que est, sil soit culpable, and issint separatim a toues
les Seigniors queux sont la, etc. When a Lord is indicted it shall be returned
into Parliament, and there the Steward of England shall put him to answer, and
he shall say, Not guilty, and this shall be tried by his Peers, and then the
Lords Spiritual, who may not consent to the death of any man, shall make their
Procurator in Parliament, and then the Lord Steward shall ask the youngest
Lord, if he be Guilty, and so severally all the Lords that are there, etc. This
I allege to show that even by the Law of the Land, the Bishops cannot be
Judges in a Case Capital; it is true here is mention made of their making a
Proctor, which was Error Temporis, the Error of those times, grounded upon
what was so lately done, (as they looked upon it) though irregularly done in
the last Parliament of R. 2. whom they considered as their last lawful King;
and in truth he was so, the three Henry's that came between being but Usurpers;
and therefore they had, it seems, a deference for what was then done, though as
I have already said, it was never done before, nor is it in truth a thing very
practicable and not at all Parliamentary, to have one man, or two men (as we
see it was also done that Parliament,) represent the whole Bench of Bishops.
And more than all this (as I have already observed, which it seems, was not
then thought of) that whole Parliament of R. 2. stands repealed, and all that
was done in it declared by a subsequent Act of Parliament to be Null and Void.
But this is but by the way; my intent in quoting this Book Case, is only to
show that the Bishops were not excluded Judging in Capital Cases by the Canon
Law alone, but that the Law of the Land did likewise confirm it, and the Courts
of Westminster did so conceive of it.

So I think I may well conclude, and with some confidence affirm, that Bishops
now are not to be Judges to Sit and Vote in Parliament in any Trial, or part of
a Trial, that is, in any circumstance, which does any ways lead or conduce to
such a Trial of any Capital Offender, but the whole Judgment is singly and
wholly in the Lords Temporal, and to them only such Judgments do belong, as
was challenged by them in the Case of the Earl of Northumberland, 5 H. 4. and
is so declared to be in several other Cases upon the Rolls of Parliament. And
having thus delivered you my opinion, and my grounds for that opinion, I submit
it to your judgment and rest,

SIR, Your Humble Servant.
POSTSCRIPT.
SIR,
AS I was closing my Letter, two Papers were brought me, one in Written hand,
the other Printed, which maintain an Opinion clean contrary to mine; I shall
tell you what they say, and give my Answer to it, then leave it to you to
determine, who is in the right.

The written Paper, to prove their right of Judicature in all Cases, none
excepted, declares Bishops to be Peers of the Land, and a Third Estate in
Parliament, and therefore are not to be excluded from being Judges in all
Cases, as well Capital as other.

To prove them Peers of the Land he urges Statute Law, and Common Law; for the
Statute Law, he alleges the 25 of Ed. 3. c. 6. and the 4 of H. 5. c. 6.

First, For the Statute Law, let me tell you, It is not every expression Obiter
upon the By, that is in the Preamble of a Statute (as this is of Bishops to be
called Peers in these Statutes) that makes a thing pass for Law, except it be
by way of Declaration, declaring it to be a Law, or reciting it as a Law before
made: And then I shall show you how these two particular Statutes run, and what
they are. That of the 25 E. 3. it is true, has in the Preamble, that the
Prelates had prayed the King that their Temporalties thenceforth might not be
seized upon for such contempts, since they were Peers of the Land, that is, by
their own sayings they were Peers, for so it was only, the Statute does not
make them so. The Record is, that among the Petitions of the Clergy, one is
Come Ercevesques and Evesques tiegnent lour Temporaltees du Roi en Chief and
pertant sont Pieres de la Terre, come sont autres Countees and Barons, quil
vous pleise a eux graunter que null Justice pur soul contemptz puisse desoremes
lour Temporaltees fair prendre, etc. Seeing Archbishops and Bishops hold their
Temporalties of the King in Capite, and therefore are Peers of the Land as are
other Earls and Barons, that you will be pleased to grant unto them, that no
Judge may henceforward for mere contempts cause their Temporalties to be
seized: The Answer is, That the Law is so, and cannot be changed, but the King
is willing that in such Cases a reasonable Fine may be taken. So you see they
indeed call themselves Peers, which the King takes no notice of in his Answer,
but speaks to the matter of their Petition; And even in his Answer intimates,
that they are not in the same condition with Earls and Barons, for he says the
Law is so for them, that is, that they should forfeit their Temporalties for
such Contempts, which no man will say was the Law for Earls and Barons to
forfeit their Lands for any Contempt, but well were they liable perhaps to pay
a good Fine for it: So then I may say that those Bishops were a little
mistaken, to affirm that they were Peers of the Land just as other Earls and
Barons are.

The other Statute is of the 4 H. 5. and is only concerning Ireland, it says,
That by a Statute in Ireland, no Irishman was to be preferred to any Dignity in
the Church, and yet some were made Archbishops and Bishops, and they make their
Collations to Irish Clerks, then follows, And whereas they are said to be Peers
of the Parliament in the same Land, they bring with them Irish Servants to
Parliaments and Councils, who give intelligence to the Irish Rebels. That
Statute is now confirmed; And what this makes to prove the English Bishops
Peers of the Land, I see not, nor I think no body else can, at most it can but
declare them to be Peers of the Parliament of Ireland, and it is too, even for
those Irish Bishops, but that they are so said to be, that is, said to be
Peers, not that they are so.

But to prove that they are not Peers of England, I think we have a better Law,
even Magna Charta it self; It says, That every man who is tried at the Kings
suit must be tried by his Peers: Now, if a Bishop be tried for any Capital
offense, he is tried by the Commoners, and that is the Common Law of the Land,
it has ever been so, never otherwise; then must Commoners be his Peers, and he
and Commoners must be Pares. The Great Charter of Englands Liberties Magna
Charta declares them so: A Temporal Lord, Duke, Earl, or Baron cannot be Judge
in the Case of a Bishop, except it be in Parliament, where the Temporal Lords
be the sole Judges, and those to whom Judgment does properly belong: nor on the
other side can any Bishop be their Judge, how then can they be said to be
Pares, Fellow Peers? For my part I see not.

Then for their being a Third Estate in Parliament (for which that Writer
alleges Mr. Seldens authority) is a thing so contrary to Reason, as I can no
ways yield to it. First, let me lay this foundation, that I do acknowledge the
Subjects of England to be divided into three Estates, The Nobility, the Clergy,
and the Commonalty; these are the several Estates of the Kingdom, and the
Bishops are part, and the chief part of one of these, viz. the Clergy: And
sometimes these three Estates have joined in some transactions, as 9 H. 5. in
the ratification of a Peace with the King of France, Charles the Sixth, who had
desired it should be so, he having had it ratified in France by the three
Estates there; the Record says, Uolensque idem Serenissimus Dominus noster pro
part sua dictam pacem and omnia and singula contenta in ea modo consimili per
ipsum and tres Status Regni sui jurari, firmari and roborari, prout ex dicte
pacis tenore astringitur and obligatur, dictam pacem been and fideliter in
omnibus se observanturum in verbo Regio, and ad Sancta Evangelia per ipsum
corporaliter tacta juravit and promisit, ac dictos tres status, viz. Prelatos
and Clerum, Nobiles and Magnates, nec non Communitates dicti Regni sui secundo
Maii ad Palatium suum Westminst. ad majora firmitatem and robur Pacis predicte
fecit congregari, quibus quidem tribus statibus per Cancellarium suum tenorem
dicte Pacis and singulos Articulos ejusdem seriose exponi fecit, etc. The King
willing for his part, that the said Peace, and all the particulars of it should
in like manner be sworn to, confirmed, and ratified by Him and the three
Estates of his Kingdom, according as he was obliged by the tenor of it to do,
did swear and promise, laying his hand upon the holy Evangelists, in the word
of a King, that he would well and faithfully observe and keep it in every
circumstance; And the said three Estates, to wit, the Prelates and Clergy for
one, the Nobles and Great men for another, and the Commons for the third, he
caused to come before him the second of May at his Palace of Westminster for
the better confirmation and strengthening of the Peace, to which three Estates
he caused his Chancellor to declare what the Peace was, and every Article
thereof etc. Here indeed the Prelates, and all the Clergy together with them,
are declared to be one of the three Estates of the Kingdom, which is to be
understood as they are assembled in the Convocation, where all are present in
their Persons, or their Representatives, but this is no part of the Parliament,
nor is it any ways entrusted with the Legislative power, though it assemble in
Parliament time. And in 11 H. 7. the very same Case happened again, and the three
Estates of the Kingdom joined with the King in the Ratification of a Peace with
France in the same manner.

But the three Estates of Parliament are clean another thing, Each must have a
Negative voice to all that passes there. If the Major part of the House of
Commons be against any thing there proposed, there is an end of it, it is
rejected. It is the same in the House of Lords, and the Bishops are
intermingled with the Temporal Lords in making up that Majority, as part of
that Majority: whereas were they one of the Estates, reason would they should
vote by themselves, separately from the other Lds, which would make another
Estate; but they do not only not vote apart by themselves the whole body of
them together, but even that body is divided and separated within it self, one
part from another. For the two Archbishops give their Votes after all the
Nobility have given theirs, and the rest of the Bishops between the Barons and
the Viscounts, so that the Barons excepted, all the rest of the Peers, Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, and Viscounts divide the Archbishops from the Bishops: If
then they be an Estate, it is an Estate within an Estate, like a Nest of Boxes
one within another, which how agreeable it is to reason, let any man judge.

Besides, would it be for the honor of the House of Lords, that two Estates
must be put together to keep the balance even with the House of Commons, who
are but one Estate, and that their two should signify no more than that one?
And most clearly it would be a great disparagement to the Peerage of the
Kingdom, the Temporal Lords, and would make them to be a poor Estate, that
another Estate must be joined to them, to make up their Negative voice, and set
them upon even ground with the House of Commons.

But this is further to be said, were the Bishops one of the Three Estates, a
Parliament could not be held without them, no Law, no Act of Parliament could
be made, if the Major part of the Bench of Bishops did not agree to it; but we
know it to be otherwise in point of fact. Parliaments have sat without a
Bishop, and Acts of Parliament have been made the Bishops dissenting, and our
Law Books say it may be so in point of Law: That it has been so, Bishop Jewel
acknowledges it in his Defense of the Apology of the Church of England, p. 522.
he bids you read the Statutes of Ed. 1. and you will find, that in a Parliament
solemnly holden by him at St. Edmunds Bury the Archbishops and Bishops were
quite shut forth; and yet the Parliament held on, and good and wholesome Laws
were there enacted, the Record saying, Habito Rex cum suis Baronibus
Parliamento, and Clero excluso, etc. The King holding a Parliament with his
Barons, and excluding the Clergy, etc. Crompton has this likewise in his Book
of Courts under the Title, Parliament, p. 19. b. So certainly that King did not
believe his Clergy to be a Third Estate of his Parliament, or he would never
have left them out: for it must necessarily have followed that his Parliament
would have been lame and imperfect: But doubtless he knew the Law to be, as all
the Judges of England said it was in Henry the Eighths time when the question
was, as the Title of the Book Case runs in Keilways Reports, p. 180. b. Lou
Supreme Jurisdiction perteigne al Roy ou al Pape, To whom the Supreme
Jurisdiction belongs to the King or the Pope? For that has still been in
competition between the Crown and that Clergy, I mean the Popish Clergy. It is
in Dr. Standishes Case, 7 H. 8. p. 184. b. Les Justices disoient que nostre Sr.
le Roy poit assez bien tener son Parliament per luy and ses Temporal Seigniors
and per ses Commons, tout sans les Spirituals Seigniors, car les Spiritual
Seigniors nont ascunt place en le Parliament chamber per reason de lour
Spirituality, meis solement per reason de lour Temporal possessions, The Judges
said, That our Lord the King might well enough hold his Parliament by himself
and the Lords Temporal and his Commons, wholly without Lords Spiritual, for the
Lords Spiritual have no place in Parliament by reason of their Spiritualty, but
by reason of their Temporal possessions; that is, holding their Lands, their
Temporal possessions in nature of Baronies, sicut Baroniam, as it is in the
Constitutions of Clarendon, not that they were truly and really Barons, enobled
in blood, but by their Tenure of such Land dignified to sit in Parliament, and
do the King service there, as the Temporal Lords by their Tenure were bound to
do.

For this was the Policy of William the First, he divided all the Lands that
escheated to him by his conquest into so many Knights Fees, and so many Knights
Fees he erected into a Barony, the Temporalties of Bishops likewise, and so of
many Abbots and Priors he erected into Baronies, all to hold of him in Capite,
and upon account of those Baronies both the Temporal Lords and the Spiritual
Lords, not only Bishops, but also those Abbots and Priors had of right place in
Parliament, and were bound to serve him there: Now, I would ask if they all
holding by one Tenure, and by that Tenure sitting in Parliament could possibly
be imagined to be two different Estates? Certainly, they could not be then two
different Estates, for they were all Feodal Barons; And what has since happened
to make a difference? The change has been only this; The Temporal Lords
holding so by their Tenure grew so numerous, that King John put them into two
ranks, of Barons Majores, and Barons Minores, and only the Majores had Writs
of Summons to come to Parliament. Afterward in Richard the Seconds time Barons
were created by Patent, and so had Place and vote in Parliament. I ask now, if
it be probable, nay, if it be possible, that this should alter the constitution
of Parliament, that that House which before consisted but of one of the
Estates, should now be divided into two Estates. They are still qualified to be
Members of Parliament as before, a Baron sat as a Baron, an Earl as an Earl;
Being made by Patent, or by Writ, or by holding such a proportion of Land,
alters not the case as to their sitting in Parliament, for it is being of such
a degree, which makes them Peers of Parliament, how they rose to that degree is
not material. And what should make the Lords Spiritual, who have received no
change in their being called to be Members of that House, to be now an Estate
by themselves, which they were not before? I profess I see not the least color
of reason to think there should be any change, but as they were in the
beginning, so they are still, no other than Fellow Members of that House with
the Temporal Lords, and together make up one House.

But this is also to be considered, that if the Bishops were a Third Estate of
Parliament, not only the Parliament could not be held without them, but nothing
could pass in Parliament, that at least the Major part of them should not
assent to: But so far from that, not only what we find in the Journals of
former times, but daily experience tells us, that Acts have passed not only
when the Major part of that Bench was against them, but many times when the
whole Bench was strongly of another mind.

20 R. 2. The Bishops upon occasion of the Statute of Provisors enter a
Protestation against whatsoever should be done in derogation or restriction of
the power of their Holy Father the Pope, saying they were sworn to his
Holiness, and to the Court of Rome: These were likely to make a good Third
Estate of an English Parliament: And is it not then a wonder that any Engiish
man should desire to bring Popery in again, for Bishops to control both King
and Parliament? Would it not set even Monarchy it self one degree lower? Sure
it would: But this is by the way. Consider further, that if they had had such a
power of being a Third Estate in the days of Queen Elizabeth, those good Acts
for a Reformation in Religion had never pased, and the Reformation had never
been. 1 Eliz. The Bill for restoring the first Fruits and Tenths to the
Imperial Crown of England, which passed February 4. The Bill for restoring the
Supremacy to the Crown, and repealing diverse Acts made to the contrary, which
passed March 18. The Bill giving authority to the Queen upon avoidance of a
Bishopric to take some part of the Temporalties into her hands, recompensing
the same with Impropriate Parsonages, which passed April 7. All the Bishops
present were against the passing of these Bills. And before that, in Edward the
Sixths time, they were against the Bill for Priests to marry, which passed Feb.
19. 2 E. 6. So the Bill for ordering Ecclesiastical Ministers, giving power to
Six Prelates, and Six other men, learned in the Laws, to set down the form and
manner of their Consecration, which passed Ian. 25.3 E. 6. The Bill for
nominating thirty two Persons to peruse the Ecclesiastical Laws, which passed
Ian. 31. The Bill for abolishing and putting away diverse superstitious Books,
as Legends, Missals, Processionals, and the like, and taking away Images out of
Churches and Chapels, which passed also that Parliament. All these good Bills
the Bishops were against, yet they passed into Laws, and were the foundation of
our Reformation, which, had they been a Third Estate, had never been laid, for
those Bills had not passed. But you will say perhaps, that we need not fear
such mischiefs and inconvenience from our Protestant Bishops, and I grant it,
nor do I urge these things with any such apprehension; I only show you what the
Popish Bishops did then, and that if they had been a Third Estate, such
mischiefs would have followed upon it, and thence to infer, That they were not
in those times so accounted, and that our Protestant Bishops cannot then
pretend to it now, They then, and These now having Place and Vote in Parliament
upon the same terms.

But then we have good Authority to inform us which are truly the Three
Estates: King James seems to make it clear in a Speech he made at the
Prorogation of the Parliament in the year 1605. the words are these, As for the
thing it self (that is, the Parliament) it is composed of a Head and a Body,
The Head is the King, the Body are the Members of the Parliament; This Body
again is subdivided into two parts, the Upper and the Lower House. The Upper
House compounded partly of Nobility, Temporal men, who are Heritable
Counselors to the High Court of Parliament by the honor of their Creation
and Lands; And partly of Bishops, Spiritual men, who are likewise by the virtue
of their Place and Dignity Counselors, Life Renters, or Advitam of this
Court. The other House is composed of Knights for the Shires and Gentry, and
Burgesses for the Towns. But because the number would be infinite for all the
Gentlemen and Burgesses to be present at every Parliament, therefore a certain
number is selected and chosen out of the great Body, serving only for that
Parliament, where their Persons are the Representation of that Body. You see
that wise King makes the Body to consist of Two Parts, the Upper House, or the
House of Lords to be one of those parts, consisting of Lords Temporal, and
Lords Spiritual, who together make one part; And the House of Commons another
part: It is true, he calls neither of them an Estate, but most certain he
cannot be thought to understand the Spiritual Lords to be an Estate by
themselves, making them to be but a Part of one of the Parts of that Body: For
by the same reason he may be said to make the House of Commons consist of two
Estates, saying, it is composed of Knights of the Shires, and Burgesses for the
Towns. But King Charles the First is plainer in his expressions, in his Answer
to the Nineteen Propositions sent to him from the two Houses, June 2. 1642. He
tells them, That neither one Estate should transact what is proper for two, nor
two what is proper for three. And in that same Answer he says a little after,
It is most unreasonable that two Estates proposing something to the Third, the
Third should be bound to take no advice whether it were fit to pass, but from
those two, who did propose it. Nothing can be clearer than this, to show what
the opinion of that good King was concerning the three Estates in Parliament.

And 2 H. 4. n. 32. It is so declared by the House of Commons even to the King
himself, and to the Lords, That the three Estates of Parliament are the King,
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons, who should all be at an
Unity among themselves, and therefore hearing there were some differences
between the Lords, they humbly prayed the King to compose them.

And Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester, sometime Lord Chancellor, an
ancient Parliament Man in Henry the Eighths time, who well understood the
constitution of Parliaments, in his Letter to the Lord Protector in Edward the
Sixths time, which Letter is in the second Volume of the Book of Martyrs,
Printed in 1641. p. 7. does acknowledge it, and says, That the three Estates
make a Law, and compares the three Estates in Parliament to the three Christian
Virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity, and says, That it were the same absurdity
and untruth to say the Higher House and the Lower House exclude the King in the
Office of making Laws, as it would be in Religion to say, that Faith excludes
Charity in the Office of Justification. Here you have the Testimony of a
Bishop: I confess, a Popish Bishop, as you may see by his application of this
Simile, to make Charity (that is, works of Charity) to have a part in
Justification. But I meddle not with his Divinity: As to that which he says of
the Estates in Parliament, he is in the right, and he was one that knew well
enough what was due to the Order of Bishops, even to the full extent of it, and
would not have shortened it the breadth of one hair, yet he makes them not an
Estate by themselves, but as joined with the Lords Temporal.

Then for the Common Law, you have Finch in his Book of Law dedicated to King
James, the first Chapter of the second Book, p. 21. who says the very same
thing in very plain terms: His words are these, Lassemblie de ceux trois
Estates c' est assavoir, Roy, Nobility, and Commons, qui sont le Corpse del
Realm, est appel une Parliament, and lour decree un Act de Parliament, car sans
touts troys (come si soit fait per Roy and Seigniors, mes rien parle del
Commons) nest ascun Act de Parliament, The Assembly of the Three Estates, that
is to say, King, Nobles, and Commons, who are the Body of the Realm, is called
a Parliament, and their Decree is an Act of Parliament, for without all three
(as if it were done by the King and Lords, and no mention of the Commons) it is
no Act of Parliament. Can any thing be plainer?

You see now with how little appearance of truth the Writer of that Paper takes
upon him to declare Bishops to be either Peers of the Land, or one of the Three
Estates, and what ill Topics he has chosen to prove them to have right of
Judicature in all Cases Criminal and Capital, for that is his Assertion upon it.

For what he cites out of some Year-books, that in some pleadings their Counsel
calls them Peers, will not make them so; nay, should the Judges themselves
style them Peers, as perhaps they might complement the potent Clergy of those
days, it could not alter the Law of the Land, which makes Commoners their
Peers, seeing they are to be tried by Commoners.

As for matter of Fact, to prove that they have Judged in Capital Cases, he
cites the Protestation in the eleventh of R. 2. and then their making their
Procurator, and so Judging by Proxy in the 21 of R. 2. To which I need say
nothing in this Postscript, having so largely in my Letter treated of it.

Then he gives many Precedents of their voting in Bills of Attainder, which is
all Not to the purpose, for that is not in Question. Acts of Attainder are
Laws, and every Freeman is supposed to give his Consent to every Law, either by
his Representative, or in Person if a Member of Parliament; And Bishops being
Members may I think claim to do it Personally.

So I have done with the Paper, and come to the Printed Book, styled, The
Honors of the Lords Spiritual asserted; And Six Chapters are taken up in
blazoning their Honor, which no body endeavors to take from them, nor do I
think it to be any part or degree of Honor, to judge men to death. It is
certainly an employment which in my opinion no body will envy to any that has
it. Then for those great Places which the Bishops enjoyed here in England,
mentioned in the fifth Chapter, I no ways wonder at it; we know, that Popish
Clergy had ambition enough to covet to have the whole rule, and in those blind
and superstitious times power enough to obtain what they had a mind to, both
Prince and People in a manner awed by them; who yet sometimes would complain,
and break out a little, as Scholars sometimes rise against their
Schoolmasters. So 45 E. 3. The two Houses join, Countes, Barons and Communes,
and represent to the King, how the Government of the Kingdom had been a long
time in the hands of the Clergy, Per ent grant mischiefs and damages sont
avenuz en temps pass and pluis purroit eschier en temps avenir al disherison
de la Coronne, and grant prejudice du Royalme, Whereby great mischiefs and
damages have happened in times past, and more may fall out in time to come, to
the disherison of the Crown, and great prejudice to the Realm; And therefore
they humbly pray the King, that he would employ Laymen. So 20 R. 2. The Commons
complain, That the King kept so many Bishops about him in his Court, and
advanced them and their followers. Therefore you see it was not always pleasing
to the Kingdom: But all this is by the By; though that Author takes a great
deal of pains to enlarge himself upon this Subject, which is not at all to our
purpose, nor deciding the point in question one way or other.

In his two last Chapters, the seventh and the eighth only, he touches upon
it. He first gives this for a Rule, That it was the common usage and right of
the Bishops in ancient times to sit and vote in Parliament in all Cases, as
well Criminal as otherwise, either by themselves or their Proxies. As for their
Proxies, as I have already said, it was never done but in one Parliament, which
Parliament is repealed, and all that was done in it, of no signification. And
besides, as I have already told you in my Letter, if that Parliament had not
been repealed, yet that unparliamentary Nonsensical action of the whole Bench
of Bishops, and all the Clergy with them, empowering one Man, as they did Sir
Thomas Percy, to give one Vote for them all, shows the manifest indispensable
unlawfulness of their being Personally Present, that rather than that should
be, such an Irrational Unprecedented thing should be admitted of; which is my
Answer to all that he says, and to the Precedent that he quotes out of the 21
of R. 2.

Now let us examine what he says of their being in Person present at such
Trials. He quotes Bromptons Chronicle, reciting among the Laws of King
Athelstan this concerning Bishops, I will cite Brompton's words right as they
are, Episcopo jure pertinet omnem rectitudinem promovere Dei, viz. and seculi,
It appertains of right to a Bishop, to promote that which is right both
concerning God and the World. A little after he says, Debet etiam sedulo pacem
and concordiam operari cum seculi Iudicibus, He ought likewise diligently
together with the secular Judges to promote Peace and Concord. After he says,
Debent Episcopi cum seculi Iudicibus interesse Iudiciis ne permittant si
possint, ut aliqua pravitatum germina pullulaverint, The Bishops ought to be
present in Judgments with the Secular Judges, not to suffer any buds of
wickedness to sprout if they can hinder it. Then he tells you what they must do
in their Judgings, see that every man have right, that rich men do not oppress
poor men, nor Masters their Servants, and the like, and to look to Weights and
Measures, that there be no cozening nor cheating, but that they may live like
Christians. Here is nothing of judging a Capital Crime; far from it.

His next Authority is out of Sir Henry Spelmans Glossary upon the word Comes;
there it is, Comes presidebat foro Comitatus, non solus, sed adjunctus
Episcopo, hic ut jus divinum, alter ut humanum diceret, alterque alteri auxilio
esset and consilio, Presertim Episcopus Comiti; Nam in hunc illi animadvertere
sepe licuit, and errantem cohibere, The Earl did preside in the County Court,
not alone, but joined with the Bishop: He, to deliver what was Gods Law; the
other, what was Man's Law: And that the one should help and counsel the other;
especially the Bishop to do it to the Earl, for it was lawful for him sometimes
to reprove the other, and to reduce him, bring him into order if he went
astray. He leaves out what the Bishops work was, he omits that clause,
Episcopus ut jus Divinum diceret, for this was not to try Capital Crimes: But
Sir Henry Spelman tells us further, that that Court had cognizance but of petty
matters, De causis Magnatum and Potentiorum non cognovit Comes, nam he ad Aulam
Regiam deferende, Pauperum tantum and minus potentum judicabat. Hinc and
Legibus nostris hodie prohibetur debili aut injuriarum actiones in Comitatu
intendere, si rei litigate valor non sit minor 40 solidis, The Earl has not
cognizance of great men's business, for such matters are to be brought into the
Kings Courts, he only judges poor men's Causes. Hence it is, that by our Law
Actions for Debt and Trespasses are not to be commenced in the County Court, if
it be for above the value of 40 Shillings. Judge now I pray you, what all this
makes to prove that Bishops have right to judge of Treason, Felony, and those
transcendent Crimes which deserve death.

He then quotes Mr. Seldom, and makes him say, in his Introduction to his
Treatise of the Privileges of the Barons of England, that Omnes Praelati and
Magnates had this Privilege till the Prelates lost it by the Parliament of 17
Car. 1. I find no such thing there, he says, That the Prelacy had heretofore
the first place in the Summons, but that they had then lost it. And this I
observe further, that Mr. Seldom makes the whole upper House to be but one
Estate whether the Bishops be there or No; It was one Estate formerly when the
Bishops had the Privilege of sitting there, and when they had the first place
in the Summons, and it was one Estate then in Mr. Seldens time when they had
lost that Privilege, but our Assertor in the Printed Paper would take no
notice of this.

Now I come to his Precedents, he first begins with their Proxies, and cites
many Parliaments where Bishops gave Proxies, which no man denies, and they do
it still, only they give their Proxies now only to Bishops like themselves who
are Members of the House, not to such as are no Members, as it seems they did
then: But giving Proxies to represent the whole Bench of Bishops, or any one
Bishop in any Judgment of death, except in that one Parliament of 21 R. 2. I
utterly deny. Indeed he tells us of the 2. H. 4. and 2 H. 5. that they did it
it there in those Parliaments, but I dare say he cannot find it there, I am
sure I cannot, and I do verily believe he never looked there, but that he takes
it upon trust out of the Margin of page 125. of Mr. Seldens Book of the
Privileges of the Baronage, where indeed there is such a quotation, but
misplaced by the Printer, having reference to what is said at the end of the
Paragraph, of Thomas Earl of Salisbury, 2 H. 5. endeavoring to reverse the
Attainder of his Father, John Earl of Salisbury, who was attainted 2 H. 4. and
not at all concerning what is said of Proxies in the first part of the
Paragraph, as our Assertor would here apply it.

Then he cites a Precedent or two to make out that Bishops were personally
present at the giving of some Judgments of Death, which if they be truly
related, he says something, but I believe they will be found to be of as
little weight, as all he said before: His first is among the Pleas of the
Crown, 21 R. 2. of the Impeachment, as he calls it, of the Earl of Arundel, and
others, by the Lords Appellants, the Earls of Rutland, Kent, Huntington, and
others. He says the Earl of Arundel being brought to the Bar by the Lord
Nevil, Constable of the Tower, that the Articles exhibited against him by the
Lords Appellants were read, to which he only pleaded two Pardons, which Pardons
not allowed, the Lords Appellants demanded Judgment against him: Whereupon the
Lord Steward, by the Assent of the King, Bishops, and Lords, adjudged the said
Earl guilty, and Convict of all the Articles, and thereby a Traitor to the King
and Realm, and that he should be therefore Hanged, Drawn and Quartered. This
our Assertor says, who quotes Sir Robert Cottons Collections for it, and there
indeed it is so, but methinks one should not venture to quote a Record upon any
man's Allegation, without consulting the Record it self, and that I am sure he
has not done, for it says expressly, that it was only the Lords Temporal and
Sir Thomas Percy, Proctor for the Prelates, that gave that Judgment. The words
of the Record are, Sur quoy le dit Duc de Lancaster per commandment du Roy and
toutz les Srs. Temporels and Mr. Thomas Percy aiant poair sufficiant des
Prelatz and Clergy du Roialme d'Engleterre come piert de Record en le dit
Parliament per assent du Roy agarderent le dit Count d' Arundel coupable and
convict de toutz les pointz dount il est appellez, and per taunt luy ajuggerent
Traitor au Roy and au Roialme, and quil soit treinez, penduz decollez and
quarterez, Whereupon the said Duke of Lancaster by the Kings Command, and all
the Lords Temporal, and Sir Thomas Percy being sufficiently empowered by the
Bishops and Clergy of the Kingdom of England, as appears upon Record in the
said Parliament, did by the Kings assent declare the said Earl of Arundel
guilty and convict of all the points of which he was accused, and therefore did
adjudge him a Traitor to the King and Realm, and that he should be drawn,
hanged, his head cut off, and body quartered. You see the Bishops were none of
them present, but theit Procurator was, to which in my Letter I have largely
spoken, and need not repeat it here.

He urges also a Precedent in this same Parliament, of the Commons by the mouth
of their Speaker Sir John Bussy, praying the King, That for that diverse
Judgments were heretofore undone for that the Clergy were not present, that the
Clergy would appoint some to be their Common Proctor, with sufficient authority
thereunto. I have already showed, that this whole Parliament was repealed, for
the extravagant things that were done in it, of which this was one: And
therefore nothing that was then done can signify any thing to be a leading
Case any ways to be followed. And this as little as any, except it could be
made appear, which I am confident it cannot, that some Judgment had been
reversed upon that account because the Prelates were not present, and had not
given their Assent to it. Indeed 2 H. 5. Thomas Montacute, Earl of Salisbury,
attempted it, brought his Writ of Error to reverse the Judgment given 2 H. 4
against his Father, John Earl of Salisbury, and did assign that for an Error as
the Record says, Item Error de ceo que le dit John susdit Count dust forfaire
terres and tenements sans assent des Prelates, qui sont Piers en Parliament les
queux ne furent mye faits parties as Declaration and Iuggementz avandits, Item,
An Error in this, that the foresaid Earl John should forfeit Lands and
Tenements the Prelates not assenting, who are Peers of Parliament, yet were not
at all made parties to the abovesaid Declaration and Judgments. But this was
adjudged to be no Error, and the Condemnation of his Father to have been just
and Legal: And I am very confident that this is the only Precedent of such an
Attempt, and yet it makes a stronger argument against it, that it was
endeavored, and rejected, for now it is a Judged Case. And besides, as I have
already observed, this desire of the Commons, of their making a Proctor shows
what the opinion of those times was, that the Bishops could not be personally
present at such Judgments, which is all that is now in question between us.

His next Precedent is 3 H. 5. when Rich. Earl of Cambridge, and others were
tried for Treason for levying War against the King, the Bishops then personally
sitting in Parliament, as he says, and he bids us see the Record in the Tower,
which I dare say he had not done himself, for then he would have found it
contrary to what he asserts, that Richard Earl of Cambridge, and Henry Lord
Scroope with him were not Tried nor condemned in Parliament as he says they
were, but by a special Commission directed to the Duke of Clarence, and other
their Peers, Earls, and Barons at Southampton, and were there condemned and
executed; but the whole Proceedings against them were afterward brought into
Parliament at the desire of the Commons, and were there at their desire
likewise ratified and confirmed, and the Bishops then were and might be
present, for I look upon it as an Act of Parliament, yet not attainting them,
but confirming their Attainder, for they were Convicted, Condemned, and
Attainted before at Southampton.

His last Chapter of Precedents from H. 8. to the 29 Eliz. is only of Bills of
Attainder, and so acknowledged by him, and therefore Nothing to the purpose. As
I have said before those Bills are Laws, though Private Laws, whereto every
Freeman of England does consent either in Person or Represented; and Bishops
are or should be all present at the passing of them, for then they act as
Members of the House of Lords in their Legislative capacity: But for their
being Judges in any Trial of Life and Death, or part of a Trial, when the House
proceeds in a Judicial way, I see no reason by all that has been said on the
other side, to change my opinion, That they ought not. Sir, you see what is
said on both sides, be you Judge, who is in the right.



FINIS.

