ESSAY TOUCHING THE Gravitation, or Non-gravitation OF FLUID BODIES, And The
Reasons thereof.

LONDON, Printed by W. Godbid, for William Shrewsbury, at the sign of the Bible
in Duck-lane. 1673.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THe Introduction. Page 1 CHAP. II. Of Gravity and Gravitation, and
the true Reason of the latter. Page 9 CHAP. III. Concerning the Gravitation of
Solid Bodies, and there parts. Page 13 CHAP. IV. Concerning the Gravitation of
Solid Bodies in Contiguity, and not in Continuity. Page 19 CHAP. V. Concerning
the Gravitation of Fluids upon subjected Bodies; and first, of the Gravitation
of Water. Page 30 CHAP. VI. Concerning the Reasons assigned, by others for the
Non-Gravitation of Fluid Water upon Subjected Bodies Page 37 CHAP. VII.
Concerning the most probable Solution of the Phenomenon of the Non-Gravitation
of Water in its Fluid Consistence. Page 48 CHAP. VIII. The second and principal
Reason of the Non-Gravitation of Water upon it self, or a Subjected Animal, or
other Body. Page 58 CHAP. IX. Certain Consequences or Consectaries, drawn from
what has been before said. Page 78 CHAP. X. Concerning the Gravitation of the
Air. Page 83
Concerning Gravitation of Fluids upon Subjected Bodies.
CHAP. I. The Introduction.
I Have considered the noble Problem touching the Gravitation or
Non-gravitation of Fluids upon the Bodies subjected to them: And of those
several Solutions and Suppositions touching the same, given by the great Wits
of latter Ages, which I shall in their due place, more particularly examine.

And I must needs commend the Industry of this latter Age, in the inventing
and exhibiting of very choice Experiments, as in relation to some other
Philosophical Essays, so in particular, touching this Phenomenon of the
Gravitation or Non-gravitation of Fluids.

But yet I must further add, that though their Experiments herein have been
searched out, and formed with great Ingenuity, Industry, Curiosity and Expense;
yet their Solutions of them, and the Suppositions and Reasons whereunto they
have reduced them, have been (in my understanding) very unsatisfactory and
inevident, if not wholly untrue and inexplicable,

And the reasons hereof seem to be principally these, viz. 1. That men have
pre-ingaged themselves and their judgments in the assertion and maintenance of
certain preconceived Hypotheses and Principles which they have invented, and
are therefore extremely addicted to, and unwilling to hear or receive any thing
that may render their Labor herein vain and fruitless. And upon that account,
have, not without much partiality, misapplyed and misappropriated their
Experiments and the Solutions of them, in favor of such Hypotheses as they
have once invented or entertained, and with too much prejudice, reject any
other Solutions, that may either overthrow, or at least not gratify such
preconceived suppositions. 2. That men have not strictly enough considered of
the Nature of Gravitations, and the Reason thereof. 3. That they have not
enough taken into consideration those several accidental (as I may call them)
Interventions that abate, impede, advance, or direct the Gravitation of Bodies,
though in themselves heavy, and tending to the Center.

I do not intend to make a full Tract concerning Gravity or Gravitation; those
that mind to trouble themselves therein, may at their leisure consult those
Excellent Men that have written at large of this subject, as Archimedes de
insidentibus humido. Mersenius, and Stevinus their Hydrostaticks; and although
I cannot subscribe to all that the two latter have written in this subject, yet
I must needs say, that I think little of moment has been added to their
Principles and Demonstrations by later Writers, only some new Experiments have
been added by later Writers, bottomed upon the Doctrine and Experiments of these
Ancients.

I shall therefore direct all I have to say principally to this one matter or
point, namely, the Gravitation or non-Gravitation of Fluids upon subjected
Bodies, and the degrees and reasons of this Phenomenon.

And though it may possibly happen, that what I say herein may as little
satissie others, as their suppositions have satisfied me. And though my
Explications of my thoughts herein, and the application of my Experiments
thereunto may not be so clear and well worded as others of this Subject have
been, yet I have this Apology for these defects; 1. That what I now write,
though it has been long upon my thoughts, was written raptim and hastily. 2.
That I do not know that the Path I walk herein was ever before trodden by any
else. 3. It is but an Essay, and took not up many hours in writing, and will
take up much less in reading thereof.

And this I premise, not to arrogate singularity to my self, or to please my
self in being the first inventor of this Explication; for possibly it may fall
out, that it may bescarce worth the owning, when well examined by better
Judgments, and possibly I my self may retract some things in it, upon better
reason discovered: Yea, and possibly it may fall out, that some others have had
a more early conception of it than my self, and may have dressed it in better
order; and indeed it would be some confirmation to me, if it were so, though I
have not yet known or heard of any such Anticipation.

I have seen many men very confident in the suppositions which they have found
out; and yet upon on full examination, their mistakes have been discovered: And
although I think that I have laid down true suppositions, yet I will not be
over-confident of them; for I may be over partial to my self, as I find others
are to themselves and their suppositions; and it is not the confidence of the
Author, but the Evidence of Reason, that prevails with sober men; and therefore
I do propound them but as Essays, and submit them to further examination.

And the reason why I offer it to the public view is, that better Judgments
than my own may consider it; and though possibly they may not in all things
approve it, or the manner of its Explication, yet they may by this opportunity,
either improve it if they allow it, or make some useful superstructions upon
it, for the farther discovery very of this noble Problem; as Arithmeticians do
by the Rule of False Position, make true Conclusions, or at least may desert
the vanity of this or any other opinions formerly offered touching the Solution
of this quaesitum, and offer better.

Chap. II.
Of Gravity and Gravitation, and the true Reason of the latter.

GRavity if self seems to be an Intrinsecal quality of Bodies, whereby they
tend down wards to, or to wards the Center of the Earth.

I am not here to trouble my self with these Philosophical Questions, whether
there be any other Center of Gravity than the Center of the Earth for weighty
Bodies? Nor what is the prime cause of descent of heavy Bodies, whether any
Magnetical quality in the Earth, or any forcible extrinsecal Impression by the
Motion of the Heavens, or heavenly Bodies, or that Circumpulsion of other
Bodies, that some have imagined, or any Intrinsic form of the heavy Bodies
themselves, which is analogical to a vital principle, exerts this power. But it
serves my turn at this time to call it an Intrinsic Quality of heavy Bodies.
Gravitation is either Motion it self, or the conatus or nisus admotum; and
therefore it is (that according to that linea directionis, whereby, or
according to which the Motion of Bodies are directed) not improper to say, that
according to that Line of Direction, these Bodies do gravitare; and although
ordinarily the Line of Directions of heavy Bodies, naturally is toward the
Center of the Earth in a perpendicular descent, which is the ordinary motion of
Gravitation, and is greater or lesser according to the strength, weakness, or
allay of this nisus or conatus: Yet it is not altogether incongruous to say,
that every thing that has a nisus or conatus ad motum, does in some sort
Gravitate according to the Degree and Line of such Direction; and thus Fluids,
though the primitive Line of the Direction of their Gravitation, may be
perpendicular, yet Fluids have for the most part a natural Direction or
Gravitation otherways, and some Fluids may have an Accidental Gravitation
otherways. For instance, Water, though it have its primitive Line of Direction
of its motion downward to the Center, yet it has Lines of Direction of its
Motion otherways, as Laterally, or per declive, and in some instances per
ascensum, (whereof hereafter,) and consequently Gravitates every of those ways.
For, as I said before, Gravitation is nothing else but Motion, or at least
conatus or nisus ad motum.

And therefore it is no real incongruity to say, that Fire or Gunpowder does
Gravitate in its Lines of Ascension or Expansion; that the Bullet, when shot
upright, does Gravitate ascendendo, when it is shot level it Gravitates
horizontally, as long as that force prevails against its natural motion of
Descent. For as to this purpose, Gravitation is nothing else but motus, or
nisus ad motum secundum in line am Directionis ejusdem.

And therefore it is, that when a weight of 10 or 20l. is in the Scale A, and
nothing in the Scale B, a Percussion with a Hand or Hammer in the Scale B, that
moves the Scale A with its weight from the Horizontal Plane, wherein it stands,
is truly said praegravitare to the Weight and Scale at A.



CHAP. III
Concerning the Gravitation of Solid Bodies, and their parts.

IT is most certain, that every Solid Body, separate from the Earth, has an
actual Pressure or Gravitation, or conatus ad motum toward the Center of the
Earth, as its proper Line of Direction; (I speak not here of the Center of
Gravity of the Bodies themselves, de quo vide sis Galdinum Gondicburldum, and
Stephinum.) Yea, if a Body be a Fluid Body, yet if it be severed from a Body of
its own nature by a Vessel containing it, this Fluid Body in this consistency,
obtains the natural rule and reason of a Solid Body, consisting of the Water
and the Vessel containing it. As, for instance, Water in a Pail or Bucket, as
so stated, has in it the nature of a Solid Body, and the Gravitation thereof
is perpendicular to the Center, which is its proper Line of Direction. And so
Air included in a Bladder, though it swims in Water, yet does Gravitate in some
measure as other Solid Bodies do, and descends naturally to this Center: yea a
portion of Water by it self, being poured out of a Vessel from the top of a
Tower or Steeple, has its Line of Direction through the Air to the Center, and
will follow and Gravitate in that Line of perpendicular Descent. For though it
be a Fluid Body in it self, yet relatively to the Air, being a lighter Body,
through which it moves, it is in the nature of a Solid Body; and yet in a great
Descent the Acceleration of its motion, and the renitence of the Air will break
it into Drops or Dew, before it comes to the bottom in a great Descent.

But though Solid Bodies do actually Gravitate, yet if they be continued, the
parts thereof do not Gravitate one upon another, because mutually and
mechanically sustained one by another, and in a state of Continuity: as a Bowl
of Ebony that may weigh 10l, yet the upper Parts or Quarters thereof, whiles in
Continuity, do not gravitate upon the lower; for if a hole were bored through
the Bowl, yet the upper parts thereof would not gravitate upon the Cavity, for
the reason before given.

And therefore the vast body of the Earth does not gravitate upon its own
Center, because though all the parts thereof are perchance not simply continued
as a Stone or piece of Wood; yet partly by their mutual Compression one to
another, and partly by the Intervention of the cement of Water, they are quasi
unum continuum.

Again, if we should suppose that the vast body of the Earth were divided into
several solid inverted Cones or Pyramids, and that the Center of the Earth were
a lesser Globe of soft Wax or Quicksilver, or other soft Matter, suppose a
Mile in Diameter; and that each Cone or Pyramid, having a part of the acute end
cut off, to be contiguous to this Globe of Wax; yet it were impossible that
they should press or gravitate upon that Globe of Wax, because they would be
each supported one by another, as will appear by the following Figure.



A the Globe of Wax in the middle of the Earth, B the Earth, c c c the several
divided inverted Cones. For the upper Base of every Cone being larger than the
acute part thereof, every Cone will be supported by his fellow without any
gravitation upon the Clobe, as A.

Yea, and it would fall out to be in the same manner, though we should suppose
that the Globe of the Earth, which some have supposed to be 7000 Miles
Diameter, should be but 1000 Miles in Earth, and the other 6000 Miles to be a
Globe of Water, or some fluid Body, for the reason before given.

And this by the way may show the mistake of their supposition that think the
impendent Column of the Atmosphere, which they think to be seven Miles high, is
a bare Column commensurate in its top and bottom, for it cannot be so, but at
the most is an inverted Cone or Pyramid, considerably wider at seven Miles
distance then it is at the Earth: which if considered, would trouble their
Explication of the Torricellian Experiment, upon an account of the actual
Gravitation of a Column of Air.

CHAP. IV.
Concerning the Gravitation of Solid Bodies in Contiguity, and not in
Continuity.

THE laws of Statiques do infallibly demonstrate, that the weight A incumbent
upon the staff B, which at both extremities is supported by C and D, that C
bears but one half of the weight A, and D the other half.



And consequently if there were another Staff set on cross from E to F of the
same length, each Supporter would bear but a fourth part of the Weight.



This being premised, I shall now consider the Gravitation of Solids not united
and cemented together, either by Contunity of parts, or that which may be
equivalent, Lime, Cement, or Mortar, as in Brick-wals or Houses, but of such
Solids as are united only by Contiguity.

I will therefore suppose a Pyramid (or if you will a Pillar or Wall, for it
will come all to one pass) having a foundation of twelve Stones, every way a
Foot square, and piled up one upon another, breaking off joint according to Art
of Masoncy, but without Cement or Mortar; so that it will be twelve Foot square
at the Base, according to this Figure, 03 and consequently the Area at the Base
be 144 square Feet.



In this Figure these things are observable.

The upper Stone marked (1) is supported by the four next Stones upon which it
is bottomed, and each of these four Stones bear but a fourth part of its
weight; the next Row of Stones (being nine) bear each of them but a ninth part
of the uppermost; and the four next, which is proportionably abated to the
lowermost Rows. Now suppose, that the ground or basis whereupon it rests
subjected under the middle of the Pyramid namely the square of sixteen square
Stones, which make sixteen square Feet, were gently taken away; yet there would
not thereupon sink a Column of sixteen square Feet extending to the top of the
Pyramid, for two plain Mechanical Reasons.

1. Because that Column is not merely supported by the base of sixteen square
Feet, but by the residue of the whole Pile; and it would stand like an Arch
over that Cavity, which would happen upon the removal of these fourteen Stones,
and those that are entirely supported by them.

2. Because the weight and the renitence of the rest of the Pile would keep up
the Pyramid, if it had a sufficient weight by the residue of the Pile to bear
one against another.

And so the residue of the Pyramid would stand without any Gravitation upon
that Cavity, which would be left by the subsiding of those sixteen Stones, and
those that are merely supported on them, without any actual Gravitation upon
that Cavity that is left, but only upon the rest of the Base of the Pyramide;
only those Stones that were entirely supported by the sixteen subsiding Stones
would sink with it, and leave a Cavity like an Arch, maintained by the rest of
the Pyramid, according to this ensuing Figure, supposed to be the empty place
of those sixteen subsiding stones, with those entirely supported by them, viz.
nine, four, and one. And this Instance I have given of square Stones, to
explain the reason of the thing: for it will hold in smaller and more irregular
bodies.

Suppose there were a laying of a Floor of grains of Wheat, in a Floor of about
42 Foot circumference, and place an Egg, nay an Egg-shell, or Glass-bubble
perforated, that there may be the less pretense of resistance by its plenitude
of Air; let this Egg-shell or Bubble be placed in the middle of this Floor,
that it may not be injured merely by the hardness of the floor, then gently
cover it with more Wheat of about a Foot deep, then pour upon it 20 or 40
Bushels of Wheat; that the Egg-shell or Bubble may lie above ten Foot under the
top of the Heap; yet this Eggshell or Bubble shall not be broken: and yet take
a Glass or wooden hollow Cylinder, commensurate in base to the Egg-shell or
Bubble, and four Foot long, stopped at the bottom, and lay it gently upon the
Egg-shell or Bubble, it shall with its weight crush it to pieces.

And the reason is, 1. Because that every subjected grain of Wheat bears two,
three, or four above it, and so the Eggshell is not pressed with the weight of
a whole Cylinder of Wheat of ten Foot in height, and proportionable in the base
to the extension of the Egg-shell, but at the most with a small little Cone of
Wheat, perchance not two Inches high; so that the Egg-shell and its little Cap
or Cone of Wheat stands as under an Arch, supported by the rest of the Grains
in the whole Heap.

2. Although the Grains of Wheat are of visible and considerable bulk, yet the
position of the Heap of Wheat directs every Grain of Wheat poured upon the Heap
accidentally to a lateral pressure per declive, which refracts their
perpendicular Gravitation. But of this more particularly and evidently, when we
come to the Gravitation of Fluids.

And in conformity to these, or one of these Reasons, I took a Cylinder of Deal
boards nailed together, and open at both ends, of about two Foot long, and six
Inches square in the concave Diam, and took two halves of an Egg-shell,
emptied, and clapped them together, which would not sustein half a Pound weight
put upon them, without a total crushing of them.

This Egg-shell I laid in a little bed of Calice Sand, and then putting my
hollow Cylinder upon it, and poured into it gently Callice Sand, till I had
filled my Cylinder to the top, which contained about four Pound weight of Sand,
and that very dry, and then upon the Sand I placed about six or seven pound
weight of Lead, and carefully laying down my Cylinder of Sand, I found yet my
Egg-shell in the same state as at first, without the least bruising, yea and
lifting up the Cylinder of Sand, I found it so compacted, that it would not
wholly go out, but remained suspended in the body of the Cylinder, which I
attributed, and (as I think) truly to the lateral pressure of the Sand upon the
sides of the Vessel, whereby these minute Particles were driven to lean one
against another so hard, that they retained a kind of Solidity by this
renitence.

And I think in this Experiment I have no need to have recourse to an
Intelligent Hylarchical principle that suspended the Sand from Gravitation, nor
to that other difficult Solution from the Texture of the subjected bodies; but
merely to those two formerly mentioned, viz.

1. That each Particle of Sand sustained mechanically the incumbent Particles,
and left my Eggshell as it were under an Arch, being pressed not with a
Cylinder o^ Sand proportionable to its base, bu^ at most with a small Cap or
Con^ of Sand, that did not considerably gravitate upon it.

2. That though the Sand is no fluid body, yet the smalness of its Corpuscles
had an accidental lateral Direction per deelive against the sides of the
Vessel, which lateral Direction refracted the perpendicular Gravitation of the
Sand, as will be shown more, when we come to consider of the Gravitation of
Fluids, which may be illustrated by this Instance.

And because I proposed to prosecute this Trial farther, I made an Experiment
by a heavier body, namely Leaden Hail-shot.

I took a Cylinder of Latten ware, about two Inches in Diameter, and 10 Inches
deep, open at both ends, which held about six Pound of Shot. I placed it close
to a Table, and filled it, and then gently taking it from the Table, the Shot
subsiding expanded into a compass of a Foot Diameter.

I then took the end of an Eggshell, compressible with less than a Pound
weight, placed it in a little Box that was receptible within the cavity of the
Cylinder, and filled it up round with Shot, that it might not receive injury by
the fall of the Shot through the. Cylinder, and then clapping the Cylinder upon
it, filled it up with about six Pound of Shot; but upon the opening of it the
Egg-shell was not damnified.

Then I tried it by an Insect, namely putting in a Beetle into the box, and
covering him with Shot, so that the fall of Shot from a higher place might not
damnisie him; then putting my Cylinder over the box, filled it up with six
Pound of Leaden Shot, and then opening it, I found my Beetle as lively as
before, yet a weight of Lead in one solid body, commensurate to the base of the
Beetle would have crushed him to pieces.

So that the Non-gravitation of these sinall bodies of Sand, Granner, and Shot,
may sufficiently prepare our minds to apprehend one of the reasons of
Non-gravitation of Fluids, which though fluid, yet are not disjoined as in
those former Instances, but a continued body, and therefore the upper Particles
thereof more capable of support from those subjected Particles.

CHAP. V.
Concerning the Gravitation of Fluids upon subjected Bodies, and first of the
Gravitation of Water.

SOme things must be premised, before I come to the main matter lintend herein.

1. That it is certain Water has an intrinsecal Gravity of its own, as it is a
heavy body.

2. And consequently, if Water be considered separate from Water, as for the
purpose when it is put into a Vessel, as a Pail, Bucket, and hollow Cube, or
Globe, the Water and the Vessel wherein it is making now one body, does
actually gravitate, and has only one Direction of its motus or conatus ad
motum, as other solid bodies have, namely perpendicular to the Center of the
Earth, which is the Line and Term of its Motion. So that some have by
computation estimated that a Cubique Foot of Water weighs about 65 Pound; for
here the Water is not considered as a fluid Element, but is reduced into the
nature of a solid heavy body, by the Vessel wherein it is contained and
included, which together with it makes up one body, and consequently governed
by the rules of Gravitation incident to solid bodies, viz. to descend
perpendicularly. Therefore what I am now to treat of is touching the
gravitation of Water, as it is in its own consistency a fluid body; and herein
farther these things are to be admitted: 1. That the gravitation of the fluid
water is all one, whether it be in the great vessel of the Sea or Ocean, or in
any other artificial and smaller vessel, as a Tub, Trough, or Cistern, I mean
as to the main question; though there may be some various accidental
differences in respect of the strength, weight, or consistence of the waters
themselves; therefore the same reason will be of the Gravitation or
Nongravitation of Water upon a subjected body, whether it be in the Sea or in a
Tub.

2. That without all question, when Water has its passage out of a Vessel upon
or through a lighter medium than it self, it does actually gravitate; as if a
hole be made in the bottom of a Tub, it does gravitate upon that hole.

I shall not in this place dispute, whether Water in its fluid consistency has
not some degree of gravitation, for it has been experimented by many, that a
Tube of Quicksilver inverted into a vessel of restagnant Quicksilver immersed
into Water, has some Indication of the gravitation of Water, by the ascending
of the Quicksilver into the Tube, the deeper it is immersed in the water: and
there may be reason for it, 1. In respect of the interspersions in the water of
diverse terrestrial Particles, or granula arenae, that are in their own nature
heavier than the water; which is visible to the Eye in great Rivers, and much
more in the Sea. 2. There may possibly be supposed a small Cap or Cone of
water, that may be impendent upon the subjected body, that may endure some
inconsiderable and scarce perceptible gravitation. [ Vide quae dicta sunt in
fine Capitis 9.]

But that this gravitation is in any degree proportionable to the column of
Water, impending upon the subjected body, with a base answerable to it; or
indeed that it is any considerable pressure in the hundredth degree of such a
proportion, is most certainly untrue.

And if I should call hereunto the attestation of diverse, the Experiment of the
Tadpoles and Fishes, as well swimming in a great Profundity of water as in a
small, nay in a vessel of water compressed as much as possibly may be with a
Rammer; these and infinite Instancesmore would make it beyond contradiction,
that such pressure or gravitation is not at all considerable, though some it
may be.

And now my business is to examine the reason of this Phenomenon, namely why
the water in the Sea or in a Bucket does not gravitate in proportion answerable
to its intrinsic Gravity, or in proportion to a column of water, proportioned
in base to the breadth of the subjected body.

CHAP. VI.
Concerning the Reasons assigned by others for the Non-gravitation of fluid
Water upon subjected Bodies.

Though some contend for some gravitation of water, yet it is certain, that
fluid water does not gravitate upon subjected bodies in that prodigious
proportion of weight, that a column of water commensurate in base to the
subjected bodies, and extending from them to the superficies of the water,; for
if it should, it must crush the subjected bodies to pieces, or at least wholly
suspend their motion, for such a column of water, ten or twelve Fathom deep,
impending upon a Diver, would amount to some Tuns of Water, which if separated
in a vessel, would crush all his bones. But the Reasons that Learned men have
assigned for this matter, as they differ among themselves, so they are in
themselves very inevident and unsatisfactory, which, as near as I apprehend
them, are much of what follows.

Stevinus gives this reason, that the pressure of water is equal every way,
upward, downward, and laterally, and therefore the body of a man being thus
equally compressed every way by the circumjacent water, has his continuity
preserved, and is not crushed by the impending weight of water, neither feels
it, but is kept in an equal state and AEquilibrium.

But the truth is, this leaves the difficulty equal, if nor worse than before;
for an equal pressure of every side would crush his bowels, and breast, and ribs
into an intolerable condition, and yet leave him to the severity of the
perpendicular weight nevertheless.

Des Carts gives this obscure and scarce intelligible Reason of it, which, as
near as I apprehend him, is thus; Because when the man sinks into the water, as
he descends, the subjacent water takes the room that his body left. But this
salves not the difficulty of the Nongravitation of the column of water, when
once got above him.

Mersenius salves it, as he thinks, by the Doctrine of Archimedes, de
insidentibus humido, namely that any given portion of water suffers no weight
by the superior portion of water, because they are all of one equal Gravity,
and therefore every part of water sits quiet in any situs given, without
Gravitation or being gravitated by any portion of it self.

And that Bodies heavier than water, (as the body of man is) loses so much of
their natural weight, when in the water, by the weight of such a quantity of
water, as is commensurate to the bulk of that heavier body; so that it has no
more than what it exceeds the weight of the like quantity of water. As if the
body of a man weighs 200 Pound, and the like quantity of water would weigh 150
Pound, the body of a man would weigh in water but 50 Pound, and upon this
account a Diver might easily emerge out of the water, for he carries with him
but 50 Pound weight; and the intermediate water not being gravitated by the
portion of water above it, does not consequently gravitate upon the man, unless
some accident intervene, as where the body of the man stops a Leak or a Hole in
that vessel wherein he is.

But this, though it assert the thing, namely that Water gravitates not upon
Water, or upon any body of an intrinsic Gravity equal to Water, yet it leaves
us in the dark, touching the reason of the Non-gravitation of Water upon the
subjacent Water, or any body of an equal intrinsic Gravity with it; since he
seems to agree, that the whole Water gravitates upon the Fund or basis of the
Vessel, for some have thought it impossible that the whole body of the water
should gravitate upon the basis, unless every part gravitate upon what is
intermediate between it and the basis. Though by the way this is not
consequential, sequential, for a piece of Lead of a Pound weight does actually
gravitate upon the Scale, and yet the upper part of that piece of Lead does not
gravitate upon the subjacent parts thereof, so long as they are one continued
body; and so it may be, and probably is in fluid bodies, while they have their
continuity; for a Bucket of water is as much one continued body, as a Bucket of
Pitch or Wax, till it be actually divided; but of this hereafter.

A later Author, not content with these Explications, has supposed a middle
intelligent nature between Almighty God, and Matter, or Bodies, which he calls
principium hylarchicum, under whose regiment those various appearances of
Nature are managed, of which we cannot find any ready sufficient natural
Solution. And although the end of this learned Author be good, namely to
convince Atheists, and such as deny the Existence of separate or Spiritual
Intelligences, yet me thinks the medium, at least as to the particular in hand,
is not so suitable. The most important and surest Truths in the world never
receive so much detriment by the Arguments and Sophistry of Opponents, as they
do by those Arguments in their favor which have improper mediums to support
their Conclusions, or such as are capable of other Solutions.

Most certainly the Ever-glorious and most Wise God is the Author of Nature,
and of all the Laws thereof; they are his Institutions by which he orders and
regulates the Motions and Appearances in Nature. And he supports them as an
Universal Cause, by the constant influence of his Power and Goodness; and all
their Appearances are nevertheless ordinarily regular according to
hisinstituted Laws of Nature. And as it far more advances the honor and skill
of an excellent Artist, that has so framed and ordered an Automaton, that it
may be regularly guided to its end, according to the design of the Artist,
without the immediate hand or identifical act of the Artist to guide every
motion: so it far more advances the glory of the Divine Wisdom, in that he
has settled such a regular order in things of Nature, that may regularly
conduct them to their designed end; then if the Glorious God, or any
intelligent Power by him substituted, should by immediate and identical
interposition produce every Phenomenon in Nature, saving nevertheless to him
his Power and Pleasure pro arbitrio, and upon such occasions as he thinks fit
to interpose his own immediate power, either by the determination of his own
will immediately, or by the ministration of Angels or Intelligences, to
advance, correct, or alter his standing Laws in particular cases and
emergencies.

But yet farther, it seems to me that the particular instance of the
Non-gravitation of water deserves no more a recourse to an Hylarchical Agent,
than the Instance above given of the Non-gravitation of a heap of Sand, or
Corn, or Shot; for I think the Solution of one and the other are rational, and
much of the same kind, as to the Mechanical part hereof.

But yet farther, a very Late and Excellent man has endeavored to give a
Solution of this phenomenon, which seems less satisfactory than any of the
rest; for when he has abundantly demonstrated by his exact Experiments that
Animals do not suffer so great a pressure by the incumbent column of water,
that does considerably if at all impede their Animal motion, he attributes it
to the Frame and Texture of their Bodies, the ordering of their Bones, Muscles,
and other parts; and this I confess gratifieth the preconceived hypothesis of
the Gravitation of the supposed column of water, (as likewise of that of Air,
in the Solution of the Torricellian Experiment.) But it seems to me, that this
Solution savours more of a Miracle than the former supposition of the
Hylarchical Principle: that a Flownder should at Land be pressed to death by
the weight of a gallon of water in a Bucket laid upon him; and yet should not
be damnisied by the weight of two, or three, or ten Tun of water in the bottom
of the Sea yet he sustains it without detriment or impediment of his life or
agil motion: which I say were miraculous, if those Tuns of water did actually
gravitate in that measure. Therefore I think there had need be some other
Solutions than those thought upon, if we can hit upon them.

CHAP. VII.
Concerning the most probable solution of the Phenomenon of the
Non-Gravitation of Water in its fluid consistence.

IN matters controverted, though it be more easy to find faults with the
suppositions of others, than to substitute such in their room as may be less
capable of Exception; yet it is but just that (if it be possible) for every one
that excepts against another supposition, should exhibit one of his own, that
so he may run the same trial with others, as others have done with him. And
therefore in the former Chapter having (as near as I can understand them)
propounded the Solutions of other men, and laid them by, as seeming to me
either inevident, or not giving a reasonable account of the Problem, I shall
now exhibit my own Conjecture of the Reason of this Appearance in Nature,
wishing it no better success with others, than it deserves.

I have before premised, that 1. this question must not be understood of a
vessel of water, as the continens and res contenta make but one common Body,
for so it is but in nature of a solid and not of a fluid body, and there is in
that respect no more consideration to be had of its fluidity, than if the water
in the vessel had been congeled into a whole Kegg of Ice; for the Kegg of Ice
and the Water in the Bucket, together with the Bucket containing it; or the
Water in the Bladder, together with the Bladder containing it, descend by one
simple line of Gravitation, perpendicularly from its center of Gravity toward
the center of the Earth: but the question is touching the gravitation of the
water in its fluid consistence, though contained in the Ocean, or in a Tub or
Bucket. 2. That I do not in this place contend against all Gravitation of
water, for possibly there may be some little allowed it, as unto Air, and
especially by reason of the interspersions in the water (as likewise in the
Air) of some small Atoms or Particles of terrestrial Matter, which may be
heterogeneous to the nature of water as such, and as those Particles are in
their gravity heavier than water, so they may accidentally cause a greater
gravitation in the Particles of some water more than of other, as has been
before said.

But that which I contend for in this place, is first, that the gravitation of
water in its fluid consistency, whether in the Sea or in a Bucket, if any at
all, yet is so inconsiderable, that it does not considerably press upon
subjected bodies, nor incommodate Animals that live therein at any profundity,
and not in the thousandth part in actual gravitation proportionable to the
weight of a Column of water commensurate in base to the subjected body, and
extending from the same to the superficies of the water. Secondly, to assign
some reason of such Non-gravitation, and why it is not, no nor indeed can be.

The former of these is in effect confessed by all impartial Writers, and
evident to every days experience. The latter therefore, namely the reason
thereof, are the subject of this Chapters inquiry.

And I think the reasons of this Non-gravitation of the Particles of water upon
such subjected bodies, are especially two. The first is Mechanical, from the
structure of the fluid water; and the second is merely natural, from the nature
of Fluids. Touching the former of these, the Mechanical Solution of this
Problem, this has been in effect given before, in the Non-gravitation of the
parts of solid bodies while in Continuity, which it is plain though they all
together gravitate upon the Scale, yet one part does not gravitate upon
another: And water, though a fluid body, yet has its continuity, which is
undivided, and so gravitates not upon its own parts, nor upon any body within
it of equal or greater weight than it self. But 2. admit, that water, in
respect of its fluidity, should most participate of the nature or reason of
solute and separable bodies, that are only contiguous; yet even in those solute
bodies, as Sand, Granes, Shot, every Monad of such solute bodies gives support
to the superjacent Particles, though not united into one continuum, as in the
instances of a Pyramid of square Stones, a heap of Wheat, or of Callice Sand;
wherein a kind of Arch is made over the subjected bodies, that they by no means
sustain the whole weight of the incumbent column, proportionate to the base of
the body included.

But in case of the body of water, the same advantage is infinitely more
improveable for the ease and security of the subjacent bodies, whether animate
or not. For although I shall not take advantage of the imaginary configuration
of the Particles of water invented by des Carts, who supposes them to be like
small oblong filaments or fibers, not much unlike little Grigs or Eels, which
would easily make a consistency, that like an Arch would protect and cover the
subjacent body. Nevertheless I shall say this, that the union of its parts are
much closer than that of the Monads of Callice sand, for the water is quid
continuum, though fluidum; and therefore as the parts of one continued solid
body do not gravitate upon the other parts, but only upon the common base of
the whole body; so the parts of water do not gravitate upon themselves, nor
upon any particular base less than their own base, but one part sustains the
other without any gravitation: as the Arch of a well framed Vault, does not
press upon the subjected Vault, but each part is sustained by the other, and
the whole by those walls from whence the Ribs of the Arch are drawn. A very
little industrious trial of the suspension of Sand in a Tube framed for that
purpose, will make the Instance more intelligible, than words or writing can do
it.

It may possibly be true, that a more broad body, heavier than so much quantity
of water, may have a greater gravitation of water upon it than a narrower,
because the arch that is made over it by the water, is greater than that Arch
that is made over the narrower body. For instance, let us suppose that in the
bottom of a Bucket of water, three foot deep, and one foot in the
circumference, there be placed an Ebony rundle, of one Inch thick, and eight
Inches Diameter; and in the bottom of the like Bucket there be placed a rundle
of Ebony of four Inches Diameter, and of such a thickness as may make the
weight of it equal to the weight of the greater rundle, as in the subjected
Figures.

I say it may fall out, that the water may more gravitate upon the greater
Rundle, than upon the lesser, because that small Cone of water that is
incumbent upon the greater, which has the larger base, makes a larger Conical
body of water upon that which has the larger basis, than that which has the
narrower. This may be easily tried by a pair of Scales, industriously ordered
for such an Experiment. But however that fall out, it is most evident, that the
whole weight of the column of water, commensurate to the base of either Rundle,
and extending it self to the superficies of the water, does not in its full
weight gravitate upon either, unless we suppose a hole in the bottom of the
Vessel under either Rundle, and then indeed the water will gravitate upon the
Rundle, because it gravitates upon the hole.

But if the subjected body be lighter than the like quantity of water,
commensurable to its bulk, then it is true the water will undermine that
lighter body, and carry it to the superficies, notwithstanding the
superimpendent Cone or Column of water: but this is not to my present purpose
to explicate, and therefore I leave it.

CHAP. VIII.
The second and principle Reason of the Non-gravitation of Water upon it self,
or a subjected Animal, or other body.

I Come now to the second principal Reason of this Non-gravitation of Water,
either upon its inferior parts, or upon any subjected Animal or Body, either
heavier or equal in weight to the like bulk of Water; for if it be lighter, it
will swim, as has been said. And this I take to be the true natural specifical
Reason of the Non-gravitation of Fluids; though the former, namely the
Mechanical Reason before given is not wholly useless, but contributes its part
to it.

And here I must premise what I before said of that actual gravitation, viz.
that it is either Motion, or conatus or nisus ad motum.

And therefore let the body be never so intrinsecally heavy, yet if even by
accident (much more if by the natural consistency thereof) that nisus or
conatus be suspended or corrected, the Gravitation abateth. For instance, it is
most certain that the body of the Earth is intrinsecally heavy, and the
heaviest of all Elements that we know of; yet whether we suppose it to be the
Center of the World, or that the Sun is that Center, and the Earth in its
magnus Orbis moves about it, yet it has no Gravitation to incline it to change
its place, or its circular motion; and the reason is, because it has no nisus
or conatus to any other position or place then what it has.

Again, in matters artificial it is plain, that a Pound of Lead has its
natural motion by a perpendicular direction and line to the center of the
Earth; and this is the true cause of its Gravitation upon my Hand, namely its
nisus ad motum; and as any body has the greater nisus or conatus than another,
so it has the greater actual Gravitation, as Gold more than Quicksilver, that
than Lead, that than Tin, quantity for quantity.

But if I take a pair of Scales, and in one Scale put a pound of Lead, and in
another half a Pound, I check and abate its conatus, and consequently its
gravitation, and it has but half the vigor of gravitation as it had before;
and if I counterpoise it in the other Scale with a full equal weight, I suspend
totally its gravitation, and it shall ascend or descend with a small advantage
of a grane added to the opposite Scale, or to this, and still the reason is the
same, the nisus, or conatus ad motum, and consequently the actual gravitation
depending upon it, is checked by the Counter-motion of the opposite Scale. That
therefore which I must perform in the application of this Reason, consists of
these Parts or Propositions.

1. The first Proposition, which is this; That which has several Directions or
Lines of its conatus ad motum, must needs have several Directions of its
Gravitation.

2. That body which has several lines or directions of its Gravitation
variously directed, cannot entirely gravitate in one line, or by one direction.

3. That which does not gravitate by one line or direction, but variously, it
must necessarily follow, that every tendency, line, or direction of its
gravitation does correct and refract the force of its other gravitations
according to its other tendencies and directions.

4. That Fluids, and particularly that of Water and Air, have several lines of
its direction of gravitation, and therefore necessarily one must be refracted,
impeded, and abated by the other.

5. And consequently, the direction of its perpendicular or lateral gravitation
are corrected, and very near wholly suspended by the other tendencies or
directions of its motion. And although in order of reasoning I should begin
with the more general Propositions; yet because they will be the best evidenced
by beginning with the enquiry into the various directions of the motion,
conatus and nisus of Fluids, I shall invert the order of that Ratiocination,
and begin at the latter end, namely the various Directions of the conatus or
nisus ad motum of Fluids.

That there is a motion, and conatus ad motum in water, as a heavy body, in a
perpendicular line of direction toward the center, all do agree, and it need
not be questioned, for it seems it is the primitive conatus of this as of all
heavy bodies, and is an effect of its intrinsic gravity. But besides this
primitive motion as a heavy Body, it has diverse other motions and directions
as a fluid body, and those naturally belonging to it in that consistency. For
instance, 1. It has within the compass of its own superficies a lateral motion
parallel to the Horizon: which appears by the immersing of a Tube shut at both
ends, and placed horizontally below the superficies of the water, and then
suddenly unstopping one end, the water will as nimbly move into that Tube, as
if it stood perpendicular to the Horizon.

2. Again, within the compass of its own superficies it has a motion, and
consequently a conatus ad motum, and consequently a gravitation directly
vertical; as it a Tube stopped at the lower end, and immersed into the water, and
then the lower end artificially unstopped, the water will arise in that Tube to
the level of the superficies of the stagnant water, and drive out the Air that
was in it before.

3. Again, it is certain, that the water in any vessel has conatus ad motum
per declive, in all points between a line parallel to the Horizon, and the line
of its perpendicular gravitation, according to this rude Diagram in the vessel
of water A.



And although for descriptions sake I make these lines of direction per
declive, to be from the center of the superficies of the water, yet I think it
improper, and indeed impossible to show or define, from what point of the water
this conatus ad motum per declive begins. Nay farther, it seems evident, that
water being a homogeneal body, every assignable Particle of water has this
direction of descensus per declive, as all other directions incident to its
fluid nature, as well as the other there motions or conatus above specified.

And that the water has these lateral pressures, and conatus ad motumper
declive, is evident to sense; for, take a Barrel set upon his base, and filled
with water or any other liquor, it will with almost an equal force gravitate
upon the sides of the vessel, as well as upon the fund or base, and break out
the sides if it be not well guarded with Hoops or other strictures.

Now to apply this position to the former Propositions, I say this various
motion and conatus ad motum of Fluids, causes several kinds and species of
lines and directions of their Gravitation, some directly descending, some
directly ascending, some Horizontally lateral, some per declive, or medial
between a line parallel to the Horizon, and perpendicular thereunto.

And consequently in the very same fluid body every different direction
(whether lateral per declive, or perpendicular) of its Gravitation is
corrected, abated, and refracted by the other; and it is impossible it should
have its full swinge of motion any one way, or by any one line, since it has
its considerable motion or conatus ad motum, the same moment by another line,
either contrary or extremely different from the other, omnibus intentus minor
est ad singula. And consequently the gravitation of Fluids, whether lateral, or
perpendicular, or per declive, sive per modum lineae subtensae, is abated,
corrected, and refracted, by the various lines of its tendency: for it is
impossible that the same body can at the same time with its full swinge be
carried to any one point, which at the same time has very near an equal
conatus ad motum to a various point, and by a various line of Direction; or
that that Fluid should totis viribus be directed in its motion or conatus
thereunto toward the center, which at the same time is directed laterally, or
toward the North in its lateral motion, or motus per declive, which at the
same time has a direction or tendency toward the South-East or West, or any
other point of the Compass, either laterally or per declive.

It is true, that possibly that kind of line of Direction in a perpendicular
descent may be considerably stronger and more efficacious, and consequently the
gravitation that way stronger than in any one other line of direction of its
gravitation, because there contributes to that motion, not only the nature of
Water as a fluid body, but also as a heavy body, which always takes the
shortest line of direction to the center, which is the perpendicular.

And hence it is, that if there be an Engine consisting of a Base parallel to
the Horizon, and a perpendicular upon that Base, and a Subtense or decline
superficies from that perpendicular to the Horizon, as in the subjected Figure.



The weight A upon the Subtense does counterpoise to the weight B in a reversed
proportion, answerable to the length of the lines C E and C D. So that if the
perpendicular C D be half the length of the Subtense c E, the same weight upon
the line C D gravitates double to the same weight A, upon the line C E: because
it has the most expedite and short way to the center by the perpendicular C D;
and the other by C E is longer, and refracted, and broken by the inclination
and distance C E. But on the other side, if the line of perpendicular descent
of the Fluid be compared with all those various and many lines of its other
direction, when the center at least has any considerable depth, the
perpendicular motion of its gravitation as a heavy body, is either altogether
or very near altogether corrected, abated, and refracted by its other motions
or conatus ad motum, or gravitation as a fluid body, since there are as many or
more other species of lines directing its conatus ad motum in other lines, as
there are of its perpendicular descent.

And e converso, all the several lateral lines, or lines of Declivity of its
tendency ad motum are so far corrected and refracted by its perpendicular, and
other conatus ad motum, that they are as in the former instance of the two
equiponderating Balances, rendered in a manner in aequilibrio, and all of its
several lines of Gravitation and tendencies thereunto, are in a very great
degree suspended and refracted one by another.

And surely this consequence is abundantly evidenced by the instances before
given, Chap. 4. in the Column of Callice Sand: which is much more confirmed in
water. For the Monads of Callice Sand are actually divided one from another,
but the Particles of water are conjoined in one Continuum: the motion of
Callice Sand per declive is not simply natural, but aceidental in respect of
the position of those parts upon which it falls, which because they one hinder
another from the next and shortest way to the center of their motion, by a
straight line, therefore move per declive as well as they may. But Fluids have
all those varieties of tendencies incident to their nature; yet it is apparent
beyond all contradiction, that this accidental te^dency of the motion of Sands
per declive, does break the perpendicular gravitation, and makes it not to
gravitate upon the most fragile subjected body in its full weight.

But I shall yet farther adventure to add one farther Explication and
Enforcement of this Supposition: it is asserted by some, that a Foot square or
Cubique Foot of water, weighs about 65 pounds, which I have not Experimented,
and therefore cannot assert; But I will suppose (as making best for the
Explication of what I intend) it weighs but twelve pound, and this is the
entire perpendicular weight of this portion of water; for ex supposito it
weighs no more, being put into a Bucket, and weighed in a pair of Scales, with
due allowance for the weight of the vessel; and it is impossible it should be
more in the whole than the weight supposed.

But it is apparent, that the direction of this weight of twelve Pound, allowed
to the water while it is in the Bucket, is not only perpendicular upon the
Base, but laterally upon the Sides of the vessel that contains it: and every
side of this Cube of water has as many kinds for its Direction of descent
lateral or per declive, as the Base has for its perpendicular descent.

And yet here is but entirely cry twelve Pound weight of water, that must
serve as the common stock of all its Pressures, viz. lateral per declive, or
perpendicular, and must be distributed to all these lines as water from one
common Cistern, through so many Pipes to serve all these Gravitations, or
conatus ad motum; for it has not in all above twelve Pound weight to serve all
these conatus or Gravitations.

The consequence whereof is of necessity, that this common stock of intrinsic
weight of twelve pound, belonging to all this portion of water, is neither
entirely allowed as the supply or portion of the perpendicular weight or
gravitation, nor entirely allowed to the lateral gravitation, or the nisus ad
motum per declive, nor to any one kind of Line of either of these conatus; but
is indifferently, or very near indifferently communicated to every line of its
conatus ad motum, whether lineally descending, or collaterally, or per declive,
and the common portion of twelve Pound weight is very near equally divided to
every line of Direction in the water, which are as many as there be divisible
parts in the lateral or subjected base of the vessel of water.

And by this distribution it must needs fall out, that the weight of twelve
Pound of water is infinitely distributed according to various direction, and no
one line can pretend to the entire gravitation of that twelve pound of water,
no nor to the thousandth part thereof, considering its various distribution.

And now if any one shall ask, if the water in the Bucket has not one entire
gravitation toward the Center in the perpendicular Line, but has its weight
thus distributed to several lines of direction; how it comes to pass that the
whole Bucket of water weighs perpendicularly twelve Pound, and that weight is
not broken by the lateral pressure of the water.

The Answer is plain, and has been sufficiently insinuated before.

The water in the Bucket is as fluid a body as so much water in the Ocean, and
has the same kind of motion, and conatus ad motum, as well collaterally as by
direct descent, as is incident to its nature, though it receive an obstruction
in that motion, by the strong sides and contignation of the Bucket. But the
Bucket of water is now become as one solid body, and gravitates according to a
solid body, viz. per lineam descensionis, and not as a Fluid quoquoversum: and
though the fluid water within the Bucket press upon all parts of the Bucket,
according to its natural and various tendency, yet it goes no farther, nor do
the sides of the Bucket press upon the ambient Air, or medium, being
sufficiently secured by its strength and firmness, and not yiedling to the
conatus or nisus of the included water.

Many other Instances and Experiments might be added for the evincing of the
truth of this Supposition, but if I make my self intelligible to the Reader,
these are sufficient to explicate what I mean, and his own observation will
furnish him with Experiments either to confute, or to confirm what I have said.

And thus far touching the nongravitation of Water, and the reason thereof;
which may be (as I think) applicable to all other fluid bodies, as Oil, yea
Quicksilver it self, at least in a great degree, and by analogy of Reason,
though I have not had opportunity to Experiment it.

CHAP. IX.
Certain Consequences or Consectaries, drawn from what has been before said.

FRom what has been before expressed in the two former Chapters, these things
seem naturally to follow.

1. That the upper parts of a fluid body does not gravitate upon the lower
parts of that fluid body.

2. That if any body of equal weight with the Fluid be within the extent of the
fluid body, the fluid body does not gravitate upon it, nor it upon the
subjected fluid body, but every part holds its station.

3. That a fluid body contained within a solid vessel, does not with its full
weight gravitate upon the base of that vessel that contains it, as the whole
body of the Sea, or of the water in a Bucket, does not gravitate with its full
weight upon the entire base that sustains it; and this is in respect of the
natural consistency and frame of Fluids, not purely upon the account of
Mechanical Sustentation, which must be agreed somewhere to gravitate, though
not upon all parts, as has been shown.

4. Though it were granted that the entire bulk and weight of the water in the
Sea or a Vessel might gravitate upon the entire base, (which yet is not
admitted) yet the parallel parts of water do not entirely gravitate upon a part
proportionable to them. For instance, suppose a Cube of water in a vessel of
nine Inches square; if we should suppose the whole Cube should gravitate upon
the base, yet the column of three Inches square in the middle of the Cube would
not gravitate upon three Inches square in the middle of the base of the Cube,
even for the Mechanical reason above given.

5. That consequently, no body heavier than water in the base of Fund, does
sustain a weight of water proportionable to such a column of water as is in the
base and top, commensurate to the amplitude of the body in the fund or bottom.

I shall add this unpolished Experiment for the conclusion of this Chap.
namely, I made an Experiment touching the weight of a piece of Lead, in several
depths of water; I cannot build much upon it, because my opportunities for it
were not exact, nor such as others may have, yet I shall offer it: others may
make, or possibly have made it with more exactness.

I took a flat round Cake of Lead, of four Inches Diameter, and making four
holes in the four quarters of it, I suspended it parallel to the Horizon upon a
Packthrid of five Foot long, and hanged it to the end of a balance like the
Dish or Scale, and counterpoised the Lead and Packthrid by a weight imposed in
the other Scale, the Lead and Packthrid in arido weighed ten Ounces, and as
much as the Dish wherein the ten ounces were placed, which possibly might be
about two ounces more, in all about 12 Ounces.

In a vessel above four foot deep in water, I immersed the Lead four Foot deep
in water, and then (as it needs must by the grossness of the medium) it lost
part of its gravitation, and weighed only eight Ounces, besides the weight of
the opposite Scale. Then taking up the string shorter, I immersed it only in a
Foot depth of water, but yet it gained no more weight that I could perceive,
but weighed as before one Ounce.

But indeed immersing it only in one Inch of water below the superficies, it
increased its weight near of of an Ounce, for the Lead weighed one Ounce of an
Ounce, or very near thereabouts, besides the weight of the opposite Scale or
Dish.

By this rude Experiment it seems the Column of four Foot of water, gravitated
no more than one Foot of water; for if it had any accession of weight, it was
not perceptible, yet (according to Stevinus calculation, in his 4th book of his
Hydrostaticks, (which yet I do not altogether allow) that a Cubique Foot of
water weighs 65 Pound), the proportion of the Column of 4. foot amounts to
about 567 square Inches, which is about 8 pound; but the Column of one Foot is
but 144 Inches, which is but about two pound weight of water. I do not trouble
my self with curiosity in calculation; but it suffices, to give some account
of the Imperceptibleness, or at least Inconsiderableness of the difference of
the gravitations of Water in various Depths.

CHAP. X.
Concerning the gravitation of the Air.

I Do not intend here to make any large discourse upon this point, because
indeed it deserves a larger Examination than this portion of Paper that remains
will afford, to unrivet that Opinion touching the Gravitation of free Air, with
which many have pleased themselves, and thereby endeavored to reduce the
solutions of Problems and Appearances in Nature, but are therein as I think
deceived.

That the Air may have Gravitation, it being secluded from the ambient Air by a
Vessel (as well as Water) as in a Bladder, none that I know do much deny.

That the interspersions in the Air of halitus terrestres, and vapores aquosi,
may have and has some Gravitation more than what belongs to pure Air, I shall
not question. But that the Air, yea or Atmosphere has that prodigious
gravitation, that the late Masters of Experiments have attributed to it, is I
suppose a mistaken Assertion. As, for instance, that upon a restagnant vessel
of three Inches diameter, the weight of the incumbent column of Air, actually
gravitating upon that restagnant vessel of Quicksilver, and commensurate to
the base thereof, and extending from the same to the upper surface of the
Atmosphere, which they suppose to be 6 or 7 Miles) should counterpoise a
suspended column of Quicksilver, which may be 2, 3, 4, or 5 Pounds, according
to the bigness of the Tube. This, I say, seems to me but an Imagination, and
impossible to be true, and would choke all Animals on the Earth in two minutes,
if it were so.

For the plain truth is, the Air, no nor yet the Atmosphere, notwithstanding
its interspersions, has no considerable gravitation upon subjected bodies. And
the reason is in effect before given, in the case of the water, and its
gravitation, but with much greater advantage applicable to the Air.

1. The body of the Air is not only quid continuum, but the parts of it are so
contiguated, like a Net, that each part supports another; and its as impossible
that one part should gravitate considerably upon any subjected body, as the
Arch of Westminster Abbey should gravitate upon the people in the Church.

2. The conatus ad motum, and consequently the gravitation of the Air is
quoquoversum, viz. sursum, deorsum, dextrorsum, sinistrorsum, etc. it will come
down my chimney, and in at my door, and up my stairs, and these various conatus
ad motum of the Air and of its Particles, do necessarily refract any
gravitation that it may imaginably have per lineam perpendicularem descensus,
and renders it equable and disingaged from any one line of presence.

And by this conatus ad motum, I mean not that Imaginary Elaterium which some
have called in to the Aid of their solution of the Torricellian Experiment,
which I must needs say needs more help than one: for though Air violently
compressed, as in Wind-guns, has its conatus of restitution to its natural
staple, and being expanded by Rarifaction, has its natural motion or conatus
of restitution to its due consistency, as appears in the Torricellian, and
diverse other Experiments; yet the great Elaterium of the Air in its natural
consistence, called in by some to help at a lift, as it has little evidence,
so it contributes less to the solution.

Indeed it has a Fluidity greater than Water, and therefore is moveable to all
places for its reception. It is compressible, which water is not; but for any
Elaterium, or such considerable Expansion of it self, as to offer any force to
other bodies, seems unwarranted by reason or Experience, or common sense,
unless where by violence or accident compressed or expanded beyond its natural
size.

But I do not at present pursue this matter to all its Refuges, it requires
more time and Paper, and will exceed the bounds of my intended Pamphlet; and
besides, the Discussion beforegoing, touching the reason of Non-gravitation of
Water, renders that concerning Non-gravitation of Air easily intelligible, and
applicable to it, with much greater advantage of reason and evidence.

FINIS.

