DENSELL HOLLIS Esquire HIS SPEECH At the delivery of the PROTESTATION to the Lords
of the upper House of Parliament. 4. May, 1641. Wherein is set forth the
reasons that moved the House of Commons to make the said Protestation. Together
with a short narration of the several grievances of the Kingdom.

Printed, for I. A. 1641.

Densell Hollis Esquire his Speech at the devery of the Protestation to the Lords,
May the fourth. 1641.
My Lords,
THe Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons, having taken into
their consideration the present estate and condition of this Kingdom, they
find it surrounded with variety of pernicious dangers, and destructive
designs, practices and plots, against the well being of it, and some of those
designs, hatched within our own bowels, and Viperlike working our own
destruction.

They find Jesuits and Prests conspiring with ill Ministers of State, to
destroy our Religion, they find ill Ministers conioyn'd together to sobvert
our Laws and liberties. They find obstructions of Justice, which is the
lifeblood of every State, and having a free passage from the Sovereign power
where it is primarily seated as the lifeblood in the heart, and there derived
from the several Iudicatories, or through so many veins, into all the parts of
this great collective Body, does give warmth and motion, to every part and
member, which is nourished and inlivened by it. But being once precluded
stoppd, and reared as the particular must of necessity faint and languish, so
must the whole frame of Government be dissolved.

And consequently Sovereignty it self (which as the heart in the bo^^, is
pri^um movens, and ultimum moriens, must dye and perish in the general
dissolution, and all things as in the beginning in antiquum Ch^os.)

My Lords,

They find the property of the Subject invaded and violated, his estate rent
from him by illegal taxations, Monopolies and proiects almost upon every thing
that is for the use of man, not only upon superfluities but necessaries: and
that to enrich the Vermin and Caterpillars of the Land, and impoverish good
Subjects, to take the meat from the Children, and give it to Dogs.

My Lords, If the Commons find these things, they conceive they must needs
be ill Counsels that have brought us into this condition.

These Counsels have put all into a Combustion, have discouraged the hearts of
all true English men; and brought two Armies into our bowels, which is the
Vulture upon Prometheus, eats through, and sucks and gnawes our very hearts
out. Hic Dolor, sed ubi Mediei^a?


Heretofore Parliaments were the Catholicall, the balm of Gilead, which healed
our wounds, restored our spirits, and made up the breaches of the Land.

But of late years they have (...) like the fig tree in the Gospel, without
efficacy, without fruit, only destructive to their particular members, who
discharged (...) (...) and consciences no way beneficial to the Commonwealth.
Nobis exi^iale, nec Reipublico (...). As he said in Tacitus, being taken away
still as Elias was with a whirlwind, ne^^r coming to any maturity, or to
their natural end whereas they should be like the bl^ssed old man, who dies,
plenus dierum, in a full age after he had fought a good fight, and ourcome all
his enemies, Or as the shocke of wheat, which comes in due season to fill our
Granaries with corn, uphold our lives with the staff of bread, for
Parliaments are our prius quotidianus, our true bread, all other ways are but
Quelkachoes which yield no true nourishment, bread, nor good blood.

The very Parliament which has sat so long, has but beat the air, and
strive against the stream, I may truly say the wind and tide, has still been
against us. The same ill Counsel which first raised the storm, and almost
shipwrackt the Cummon-wealth, they still continue, they blow strong like the
East wind, that brought the Locusts over their Counsels, cross our designs,
cast difficulties in our way, hinder our proceedings, and make all that we do
to be fruitless and ineffectuall: They make us not masters of our business,
and so not masters of many, which have been the great business of this
Parliament, that we might pay the Armies, according to our promises and
engagements.

For my Lords, our not effecting of the good things which we had undertaken,
for the good of the Church and of the Commonwealth; has wounded our
reputation, and taken off from our credit.

Is it not time then, my Lords, that we should unite and concentrate our
selves, in regard of this Anteperistasis, of hurtful and malicious intentions
and practices against us.

My Lords, it is most agreeable to nature, and I am sure most agreeable to
reason, in respect of the present coniuncture of our affairs, for one maine
Engine by which our enemies work our mischief, is by infusing an opinion and
belief into the world, that we are not united among our selves. But like
Sampsons Foxes, we draw several ways, and tend to several ends.

To defeat the Counsels of these Achitophels, which would involve us. Our
Religion, our being, our Laws, our liberties, all that can be near and dear
unto an honest soul, in one universal and general desolation, to defeat I
say, the Counsels of evil Achitophels, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, of
the House of Commons (knowing themselves to be specially entrusted with the
preservation of the whole, and in their Conscience are persuaded that the
dangers are so eminent, as they will admit of no delay) have thought fit to
declare their united affections by entering into an assosciation amongst
themselves and by making a solemn protestation and vow unto their God, that
they will unanimously endeavor to oppose and prevent the Counsels and
Counselors which have brough upon us all these miseries and the fears of
greater, to prevent the ends and bring the Authors of them to condign
punishment and thereby discharge themselves, better before God and man.

The Protestation your Lordships shall have read unto you, together with the
ground and reasone which have induced the House of Commons to make it, which
are prefixed before it by way of Preamble. Then the Protestation was read by
Mr. Maynard.

FINIS.

