THE Catechist Catechized: OR, AN EXAMINATION OF AN Anabaptistical Catechism,
Pretended to be Published for the Satisfaction and Information of the People of
God in Lancashire, etc.

ALSO SOME OBSERVATIONS Both Old and New, Concerning the pretended Visibility,
Universality, Antiquity, Infallibility, Unity and Purity of the present Roman
Church and Religion.

Sent to a Gentleman upon his revolt to Popery, and now published for the
Churches good.

By RICHARD HOLLINVVORTH, Mancuniens.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Luke Fawn, and are to be sold at his shop at the
Parrot in Paul's Churchyard. 1653.

SIR,
THere is an Anabaptisticall Catechism that walks abroad, lately directed to
Lancashire; when it is of age and can answer for it self you shall know the name
of it; it is but newly brought forth to this County, and therefore not
Christened. If you meet with it, it would be a good work to Lancashire in which
you dwell, to the Town of Manchester the place of your Nativity and Ministry, to
make some Annotations of it; a few smooth stones out of soft Siloam hurled out
of your sling might lay it dead; a friendly arrow shot beyond it, may give
warning that there is danger: I would not engage you to the contest with this
A. B. C. but that Error is a springing Leprosy in contagious times: Worms in
children may turn to the Plague: a few vacant hours will serve the business,
and satisfy the earnest desire of

Sir, Your Brother and Fellow Laborer in the Work of Christ, Richard Heyricke.
January 1. -- 52. For Mr. Richard Hollinworth, with my Love, These.



To all in Lancashire, that love and seek the Lord in all his Soul-filling
Ordinances, especially them of the associated Churches about MANCHESTER.
Dearly Beloved, and longed for, our Joy and Crown;
YOu shall with more praise to God, light and stability to your selves, read
the ensuing Treatise, if you first consider, and lament, that (for abuse of
Ordinances) Satan, transforming himself into an Angel of Light, has undermined
all Ordinances of divine Light and Life: The Lord's Day not moral, public
solemn Assemblies turned into House-meetings, public Ministry exchanged for
private Conferences, public preaching of the Word common to gifted Brethren
with called Ministers; no prayer but when the Spirit moves, no communion in the
Supper, but in Churches newly gathered, and no Baptism for Infants. No wonder
if religious Ordinances be thus undermined, when the Doctrine of the holy
Trinity, the Deity of Jesus Christ, and of the Holy Ghost, the divine Authority
of the Scriptures, the Obligation of the Decalogue, and other Fundamentals of
Faith, Holiness and Righteousness, are, by the Ministers of the Prince of
Darkness, professedly overturned. No wonder that Children are unchurched, when
so many Churches are unchurched, many of them that have done the former having
begun at the latter. They who would not be saved by Ordinances, shall perish
for want of Ordinances; and they that would not unite themselves to the
Fountain of Life by Faith, shall be separated from the streams and conveyances
of Life, that they may apparently wither and dye: only, upon the living in
Jerusalem, that by the subtilty of delusion, or power of interest, are darkened
and benumbed, pray and weep, that the Sun of Righteousness may arise, with
healing in his wings. But the Ordinances being the purchase of Christ's blood,
as well as the Church, the gifts of his Princely Government, the Ensigns of his
Victory over the Kingdom of Darkness, and of his glorious Ascension, he will by
his sovereign Power maintain; And to that end successively enoble the spirits
of some with beams of heavenly light and courage, that they shall discover the
stratagems of Opposers, and adventure upon their Armies marshalled against
them, and triumphantly overcome by his glorious power, redeeming the captived
Ordinances of their King unto a just and glorious Liberty. This being so high a
favor from Christ, the glory of his Grace and Power, it is most thankfully to
be accepted, and his Instruments to be had in honor, by all that rejoice in the
glory of his Kingdom. His Ministers he has designed to be the Executors of his
last Will and Testament, to them it belongs by divine appointment, to give out
the several Legacies there bequeathed, and to put in suit all them, in the high
Court of sacred Scripture, who shall, upon any pretense whatsoever, detain any
Legacy bequeathed; and where will their faithfulness more appear, then to open
their mouth for the dumb, and to sue for Childrens rights, whilst they are
forcibly wronged, and unable to right themselves? where is greater Trust, and
more shining Fidelity? The right of Infants to Baptism has of late been openly
impleaded in reference to Lancashire, and the Bill printed to be published
there in special, with expectation of the concurrence of the godly; but,
blessed be God, one of the Lords Executors (in Manchester, where part-taking
was most desired and expected) has wisely and faithfully joined issue, and by
clear Evidence has procured a determinate sentence for the settling of their
undoubted right upon Infants, to our great comfort, and the honor of the
Kingdom of Christ, in the Right whereof Infants are rightly baptized. And our
hope in the Lord Jesus is, that the questioning of the Right of Infants, and
the shaking of their title, will have that influence upon all the godly in
Lancashire, especially Parents (peculiarly in Manchester, and the rest of the
associated Churches) that out of enflamed love to Christ, and the Souls of
their Children, they will so much the more settle their Judgments in this
Truth, by the conscionable and diligent use of this h^lp, provided by the Lord
amongst them, so seasonably in respect of danger, and so suitably, in respect
of clearness, brevity, and charge; that will happily lead to the believing,
repenting, and prayerful use of this Ordinance, which is the Covenant-way of
conveying to their Children the sure and saving Mercies of the Covenant: so
shall they, and others, who have seen the holy Seal set on in Infancy, clearly
behold, in their holy life, the lively characters of the Spirit of the
Covenant, the Image of the Lord Jesus in their riper years; To their own
abundant satisfaction, the silencing of Adversaries, the increase of the Church
mystical, the encouragement of them that have carefully and painfully pleaded
their Right; and above all, the honor of the Lord Jesus, who in their Infancy
opened unto them his Arms and Bosom in his Church, that in an hidden way he
might warm them with a spiritual Life, to be manifested in due time. In this
hope we pray for you, and labor amongst you, that we might present Parents and
Children in Covenant-obedience and blessing, at that great Day. This is the
principal Desire and Soul-travel of

The Lords unworthy Servants, who in reference to Infants do rejoice in our
Ministry: John Angier. John Harison. Nathaneel Rathband. William Meek.
March 10. 1652.
THE Authors Preface to the Christian Reader.
IN these times the Lords Builders are compelled while they with one hand work
in the work, with the other hand to hold the weapon: Some wise Master Builders
have been valiant for the Doctrine and practice of Paedobaptism, whilst others
have bent their tongues like a Bow against it: Some of them I have seen, and
made use of; some I have heard of, not seen; others (possibly) there are which
I have neither seen nor heard of. However, I desire that if any wisdom or
strength be discerned in this Examination, it may be esteemed first Gods, then
theirs; the weakness hereof is not theirs (much less Gods or the Causes) but
mine own; yet I humbly hope this poor pains will be acceptable to God, the
chiefest Master Builder and Captain of his Host, and also (thou helping
together with thy prayers) profitable to thee his servant and Soldier. Satan
our grand Enemy would prevail (if he could) for such a gross renunciation of
Baptism (received in Infancy) as Witches, Wizzards (his devoted Vassals) and
open Apostates, do make: but having no hope at first to prevail so far, he
endevors to bring-us by a pretense of purity to such denial and renunciation of
Infant Baptism as the Anabaptists do make, which has been very advantageous to
his Kingdom as well in Germany as in other places; the more sad it is to see
that some reputed, yea (possibly) real Saints, do in the simplicity of their
hearts act and argue for him in this business, as Peter did in another, Mat.
16.22, 23.

The various turnings, crooked ways and windings of the Serpent in this
Controversy (as I could in so short a time and piece) I have endeavored to
discover, and to make the paths of the Lord straight and plain to his people.
Repetitions (for brevity sake) I have avoided, even where they might have been
somewhat useful, by reason of which some parts hereof taken by themselves may
seem more dark and defective then (I hope) they will be found if thou compare
one place with another, and spare thy censure of any part till thou have read
the whole. I have kept close to the main matter, viz. Infant Baptism, not
omitting any Objection of the Catechist against it; but I have purposely
slighted by-matters, lest this Book should be voluminous, or I seem to be
contentious above what is meet. I have desired to speak rationally to the
cause, and durst not bring any railing accusation against persons. My comfort
is this, the testimony of my conscience that in simplicity and godly sincerity
I have managed this matter, not daring to talk deceitfully for God, or
willingly to wrong any. The worst I wish to my Antagonists in this cause, is,
that both they and I may be ready to receive every revealed Truth of God both
in the light and love of it.

THE Catechist Catechized: OR, AN EXAMINATION OF AN Anabaptistical Catechism,
Pretended to be Published for the Satisfaction and Information of the People of
God in Lancashire, etc.
ANABAPT. CAT.
Q. Who are fit Subjects for Baptism?

A. Only such as believe, Acts 8.12.37. lso Acts 16.34. also 18.8. Mat. 28.19.
And such as repent, Acts 2.38. and Mat. 3.6.

NOne of these Texts severally, nor all of them jointly, Exam. Chap. 1.. 1.
do prove, That only such as believe, and such as repent, are fit Subjects for
Baptism: nor do they so much as show, That any son or daughter of Christian
Parents (such as we baptize in Infancy) did believe, or repent, or make
profession of Faith and Repentance, before they were, or could be admitted to
Baptism.

Acts 16.34. does not evince, that the Jaylors house or family rejoiced or
believed, (as you seem to understand it;) for the Text ((...) and (...), being
of the singular number) may thus be read, He believing, rejoiced, or expressed
his joy (having believed) in all his house, by feasting Paul and Silas in his
house, whither he had brought them, verse. 34. Or (if by house be meant his
Family) he rejoiced in or amongst his Family, because of the Promise made to
him, v. 31. That if he did believe in the Lord Jesus Christ (as now he did) he
should be saved, and his house: And if any Infants of the Jailer might be in
the number of those that should be saved (as you will confess they might,) why
might they not be also in the number of those that were baptized? Besides, this
believing, of whomsoever it is spoken, is not in the Text expressed to have
been before they were baptized; for it is said, ver. 33. That he and all his
were baptized straightway, or immediately; after which, he brought them into
his house, set meat before them, believing in God. So this very Chapter, v. 14,
15. says of Lydia, that Paul preached to her, and she heard, and attended to
those things that were spoken of Paul; but none of these things are spoken of
her house, yet they were baptized as well as she. It it true, it is said, that
Paul preached to the Jailer, and to all that were in his house, v. 32. and that
Crispus believed in the Lord with all his house, Acts 18.8. Yet this (you know)
does not show that there we none but actual Believers in the household. Abraham
Genesis 18.19. is said to command his children and servants to keep Gods way; and
sure his house might be called a believing house: And now, we call godly
families, praying families, though there be children in them not capable of
understanding or obeying the Word, or of actual believing and praying. Now
seeing the Jailer, Lydia, and their, and other households, are said to be
baptized, (as Abraham and his house were circumcised, Genesis 17.) and seeing
children are part of the household, and often included (if not chiefly intended)
under that name, 1 Timothy 5.8. Genesis 34.36. and 45.18. and 46.5. with Exodus 1.1. 1 Samuel 20.15. 1 King. 17.12, 13, with 15. and that there are so few families
without little ones; Who dare affirm, and can prove, That there were none in
these families? or that they were excluded from Baptism? seeing the Scripture
does not exclude them, (as elsewhere upon just cause it expressly does, Genesis
50.8.) Nor do we read of whole households admitted to the Lords Supper, as we do
to Baptism, though your principles are as much for the one as for the other: So
that some Texts, by you brought to overthrow Infant Baptism, do afford at least
a very probable Argument for it.

Mat. 3.6. names confessing of sin (which is often too far from repentance,. 2.
) probably to God, not to John; or if to John, not a particular confession of
each of them by himself (which Papists from hence urge,) for it was not
possible for John to hear the particular confessions of so many, as for their
multitude deserved to be called, Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the region
round about Jordan, in any convenient time: But whatsoever confession it was,
it seems it was not before their Baptism (as you would have it) but after; for
it says, they were baptized, not (...), having confessed, but (...),
confessing their sins; and it is not said, they were baptized because they had
repented, but rather on the contrary, that John's Baptism was a Baptism unto
Repentance, v. 11. This, you know, is consistent enough with Infant Baptism. As
for Acts 2.38. it is probable, that repentance, to which (notwithstanding their
being pricked in their hearts, v. 37.) the Apostle exhorts, was in them only in
fieri before their Baptism, for immediately after this Exhortation they were
baptized; and there could not be time to question three thousand in one day
after Sermon (which, consisting of many main points, must needs be long, and
three of the twelve hours of the day being spent before it begun, v. 15.) so as
to make strict enquiry into, and to take distinct notice of the repentance of
each of them. Of Mat. 28.19. Acts 2.38. and Mat. 3.6. more hereafter.

Suppose your Texts do show, that the Samaritans,. 3.
the Eunuch. the Jailer, the Corinthians, and others, which were then adult,
and formerly either of the Jewish or Heathenish Religion, did believe, or
profess faith and repentance, and were baptized; that is nothing to
Paedobaptists, who never held, that a Jew or Heathen should be baptized without
profession of faith. But grant further, That actual Believers, or Professors,
are indeed the primary and immediate subject of Baptism, and in their own
right, and their children are but the secundary subject, and may not be
baptized but by a capacity derived unto them; and at that time Christian
Churches were but in gathering, not gathered: The foundation was not to be laid
in Infants, not in Infants only: And the sacred story, relating the manner of
founding Churches, has not so much occasion to speak of the Baptism of
Infants, the secundary subject, as of actual believers, the primary. God
created the first man and woman of a perfect age, though all their posterity
were born Infants: At first men of age were circumcised, Genesis 17.24. with
14.14. and again after some intermission of that Ordinance, Josh. 5.4. And if
any Nation had been Proselyted, their men of age must first have been taught or
discipled, and have made profession of faith before they should have been
circumcised, though in the settled condition of the Jewish Church
Child-circumcision was most in use. If Believers and Penitents ought to be
baptized, will it thence follow, that none but they only are to be baptized?
The rule is, A proprio primo modo ad proprium secundo modo non valet
argumentum: All Crows are black, therefore none but only Crows are black, is no
good argument. If it were granted, that Infant Baptism cannot be proved by
those Texts, yet it will not follow, that it cannot be proved by any other
Texts. Women's admission to the Supper, though it cannot be proved by Mat. 26.
Mark. 14. Luke 22. ( Christ admitting only men,) may notwithstanding be proved
by other Scriptures. Your notion [That none are to be baptized but such as they
were, whose Baptism is mentioned Acts 8.12, 37. and 16.34. etc.] is by some
further improved, saying, All those were such Believers as had been in person
Jews or Heathens, and therefore such only are to be baptized; and those that
have Christian Parents, and were educated in Christianity from their childhood,
are not (at least not by virtue of any of those Texts) to be baptized at all,
neither in Infancy, nor when they make Profession. As they in their case, so
also you in your case are to blame, to insert into your Answer the word [only]
which you find in none of your Texts. Our Scripture-grounds for Infant Baptism
you shall hear anon, Chap. 10.

ANABAPT. CAT.
Q. hat grounds have you against Infant Baptism?

A. Many; but chiefly Christ's Commission, Mat. 28.19. where the subjects of
Baptism are those that are made Disciples, and this Commission is to last to
the Worlds end, v. 20. and reaches to every creature that is to partake of
Baptism, Mark. 16.15, 16.

Matthew. 28.19. is not the first Commission for baptizing, Examinat. Cap. 2.. 1.
no more then for preaching. John Baptist, Mat. 3. and Christ's Disciples, Joh.
4.1, 2. did baptize before this, and had commission for it, Joh. 1.33. Mat.
21.25, 26. which Christ confirmed by his being baptized by John, Mat. 3.13. Yea
we have express Examples in Jewish Records of a Baptism, See Mr Seldom, Dr
Hammond, Dr Lightfoot, Mr Ainsworth, Mr Tombs.
which was a Rite of initiation into the Jewish Church, a concomitant of
Circumcision, if not ancienter: So Jacob, admitting the preserved Sechemites
into communion (all of age being women,) bad them, be washed or baptized, or
cleansed by washing, Genesis 35.2. which is the reason why a Jewish Proselyte is
in Arrianus called (...), a baptized person: Hence the Jews did not question
John's Baptism as a new and unusual Rite, (they were already well acquainted
with it,) but his Authority to administer it. Grotius on Mat. 3.6. conceives it
was begun upon occasion, and to preserve the memory of the purging of the World
by the Deluge, and that Peter, 1 Pet. 3.21. signifies so much, calling Baptism
the Antitype and figure of it. And the Infants of the Jews were thus admitted,
as well as the Proselyte, for one Ordinance was for both, Numb. 15.15. And thus
the Hebrew Doctors assert, (notwithstanding Mr T. to the contrary pretends,
that the Proselytes only were baptized because they were unclean,) That Israel,
as well as others, entered into Covenant, Males by three things, viz.
Circumcision, Baptism, and Offering; Females only by the two last. Now, as
Christ, abolishing the Passover, took the postcoenium, or common custom used at
the Passover, of the Master of the Family, his breaking a piece of bread, and
distributing it, and a cup of wine, amongst the company, to be materials of the
Lords Supper; so he (abolishing Circumcision and Offering) advanced this
ancient usual unquestionable concomitant of Circumcision, and of initiation of
Males, Females, Infants, or others, into the Church, to be a Sacrament of the
New Testament, the use whereof, and the persons to whom it should be
administered, being then ordinarily and commonly known, the Scripture did not
need to record the commission or warrant given to John, or that the Jews had
long before for their baptizing. It was enough, that there is not the least
hint in the Word, that Baptism, when advanced to be a divine Sacrament of the
New Testament, should not be applied to Infants as it was before. Indeed when
the Apostles Commission was to be enlarged to all Nations, (this being a new
thing, and rarely known or believed,) it was needful that it should be set down
in terminis, as it here is: And yet this Gospel was not written till about
eight years after the Ascension of Christ, and other Gospels were writ some
years after this, the Jewish Church all this while being guided by the Old
Testament, and observing the Jewish lawful Rites and Customs, and this of
baptizing doubtless amongst others.

You say,. 2.
The subjects of Baptism in the Text are such as are made Disciples, and
therefore Christ's commission is against any other being baptized, particularly
against Infant Baptism. But may not I as solidly argue, 1. The persons here
commissionated to baptize are such as were made Apostles, had the gift of
tongues, they were to go to all Nations, therefore none but Apostles are to
baptize? Or, 2. That none are to be baptized, but such as by teaching or
preaching the Gospel to them are made Disciples, though they be (as you know it
is possible) converted by other means? These Inferences, though weak, are as
strong as your: For suppose the Apostles being to Baptize the Nations or
Heathens (for to that (...) relates notwithstanding the gender here, as well as
Act. 15.17. and 28.28. and 13.48. Romans 2.14. 15.) were to preach to them, and
thereby make them Disciples does that forbid that those that are already
Discipled should have their children Baptized? None but Disciples were to be
circumcised amongst the Jews Act. 15.10. and yet children were circumcised. If
the Lord had given Commission to Isaiah and Jeremiah or any other to Proselite
all or some Nations, it had not been any whit incongruous and inconsistent with
child circumcision if the commission had run in these very words, go teach all
Nations, or this or that Nation, and Heathen people, and circumcise them, and
how then can the like speech be contrary to Infant Baptism, especially seeing
it was a thing so commonly known that Infants were Baptized as well as
Circumcised: see Sect. 1. And Infan's are as considerable a part of the other
Nations, as they were of the Jews, in reference to whom other people were
called (...) or Heathen: and all Nations ( i. e. some of all Nations or some of
each sort in the Nations, Infants amongst others should be blessed in Abraham,
Genesis 18.18. He says not, grown persons, much less does he say, grown persons
only; but, all Nations: nor is there any appearance of taking away by this Text
any privilege from Jewish Believers or their children, but only of enlarging
their privileges unto the Gentiles; The Apostles being commanded, that as they
had preached the Gospel, and Sacramentally initiated the Jews only, so now they
should do the same to others also.

If you insist upon the order of the words, and argne thence, 3.
that teaching (as the word is translated) must go before baptizing, you know
there is no necessity, that what is set first in Scripture must always be done
first; sometimes preaching is put before baptizing, and sometimes baptizing
before preaching, Mark 1.4. sometimes repentance before faith, Mark 1.15. glory
before virtue, 2 Pet. 1.3. etc. and here, as teaching is put before Baptism, so
it is also put after Baptism, verse. 20. To avoid tautology in the words, Go
teach-baptizing-teaching, some godly learned men conceive the word (...) should
be translated make Disciples, or disciple all Nations, which was the end of
their mission; baptizing and teaching them, were the means of discipling them;
whether they be set down in exact order of time or no, is not material. You (it
sems) urge the word in this sense, and say in effect, that Infants are not
Disciples. It is answered both, that the phrase to disciple, or make Disciples,
answers an Hebrew phrase among the Rabbis (the New Testament frequently using
their phrases in their sense) which signifies admission to be taught, though
they were not yet taught, and in common use. Children the first day they go to
school, before they know any letter, or have any actual willingness to learn.
are called Scholars (the same with Disciples) of such a Master: And he that is
listed in an Army is called a Soldier, though possibly he know little or
nothing of the art military: And Infants are Disciples in the sense and
language of Scripture, as Act. 15.10. Those upon whose neck the yoke of
circumcision (for of that te speaks, as appears by Verse. 1.5, 24.) was put,
were not only nor mostly adult, but Infants; nor did the Synod detertermine
against the circumcision of grown men only, but also of Infants: Children are
evidently called Gods servants, Levit. 25.41, 42. and they are as well
disciples, as servants. If Adam had not fallen, his children should have been
disciples and servants of God (and so was Christ in his minority) not
withstanding their infancy. Besides, it appears by comparing Mat. 10.42. and
18.3, 4, 5. Luke 9.47, 48. and Mark 9.41. that the same persons which belong to
Christ (from which privilege Infants in general are not warrantably excluded)
are also the Disciples of Christ, and that Infants are quickly capable of
knowing Mothers and Nurses from others of being taught actions and gestures by
them, and sensible of other things is very evident; much more are they capable
of being taught by Christ, whose Disciples they are, according to that promise,
a part of the new Covenant, Jer. 31.34. Isai. 54.13. (others being but Gods
ushers and petmasters, Ephesians. 6.2.) their Souls being as capable of being taught
by God a Spirit, and Father of spirits, in their minor, as in their riper
years; and experience teaches, that some (not to mention Jeremy and John
Baptist) being sanctified from their infancy (so far as can possibly be
discerned by men) have chosen the good, and hated the evil; a thing which
neither their own nature nor the art of man could teach them. When Parents
believe, God makes himself over to them and theirs to be their God, and to
teach them, and they make themselves and theirs over to him to be his people
and disciples, and so children are discipled when their parents are; and if
they be discipled, then by your own argument they are fit subjects of Baptism
by virtue of Christ's Commission. Thus that which you call your chief Argument
against Poedobaptism appears for it, not against it: Christ's Command of
discipling all Nations, and baptizing them, does not exclude a part, and great
part too, of the Disciples of the Nations: Et non restringendum ubi Scriptura
non restringit; If the Scripture does not limit it self, we must not limit it:
You could tell us of households without children, but sure you will not tell us
of Nations without children.

As for the lasting of this Commission to the worlds end, and the reaching of
it to every creature that is to partake of Baptism,. 4.
Mar. 16.15, 16. If you will maintain the very same Commission in Mat. 28. and
Mar. 16. to teach so far and to last so long, and to be inalterable in any
thing, you should clear up these three things. 1. That some persons are now
commissionated from God (as the Apostles hereby were) to go into all the world,
and to teach all Nations. 2. That casting of Dovils, speaking with tongues,
heating the sick, etc. mentioned Mark 16. are to be perpetually in the Church.
3. That Infants are there intended under the name of every creature, and that
of them God does require actual believing, as of as great or greater necessity
to Salvation then to Baptism:
The words are not, He that believes not, shall not be baptized, but shall be
damned: And are you as confident that all Infants are damned, as you are that
none of them should be baptized? I wonder you dare urge this Text against
Infant Baptism, which your own heart tells you is as much or more against their
Salvation, then against their Baptism. For my part, I conceive Infants are not
to be scrued up to that proportion which God requires of adult persons: The
Lord will take vengeance on them that know not God, that obey not his Gospel, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. Every tree that brings not forth good fruit is hewn down, etc.
Mat. 3.10. Must therefore Infants either know God, obey the Gospel, and bring
forth fruit, or he damned? May we not feed and clothe Infants, because the Word
says, He that will not labor, must not eat, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. Might not the Jews
admit Infants into the visible Church, because the Psalmist describes the
Citizen of Sion (you say, a Churchmember) Walking uprightly, working
righteousness speaking the truth in love, contemning vile persons? etc. Psalm.
15.1, 2, etc. The application is easy.

ANABAPT. CAT.
Q. What atker grounds have you against Infant Baptism?

A. Infants are not fit subjects for Baptism because they do not believe, they
have not reason to discern between good and evil, Deuteronomy. 1.39. Faith is an act
of the understanding, which comes by hearing, as well as an act of the Will;
and it is unlawful to baptize persons without they believe, Acts 8.37. if thou
believe, it is lawful, Act. 10.47. and 8.12. and 18.8.

ALL the Textt you now produce have been answered before in the first Chapter;
Examinat. Cap. 3.. 1.
save Acts 10.47. from which you may collect, That those that had the gift of
the Holy Ghost (as it is called v. 45.) and could speak with tongues, v. 46.
were to be baptized; but sure you will not infer thence, That those that have
not the said gifts are not to be baptized: If you do, you will deny all Baptism
that is now adays, and turn Seeker. But as by your Principles you hold
Confession of Faith and Repentance sufficient to Baptism, without those gifts;
so you should show, that the foresaid gift, and speaking with tongues, was in
stead of their believing and repenting; or else confess, that you impertinently
alledg this Text.

I must now ask you once for all,. 2.
what you mean by Believers? whether such only as have a true justifying Faith;
or all that make profession of Faith, whether indeed and in truth they have a
true justifying Faith or no? The first is requisite in foro Dei, and
conscientiae, and ex part baptizati, that our Baptism may be acceptable to
God, and comfortable to us, 1 Pet. 3.21. So the Eunuch desiring Baptism with
the saving benefit thereof, and asking, not, What does hinder thee from
baptizing me? but, What does hinder me -- was answered, If thou believe with
all thy heart, thou may. But in soro Ecclesiae, and ex part baptizantis, the
latter suffices for admission, your self being judge: No Scripture-rule was
transgressed when Judas, Simon Magus, Ananias and Sapphira were baptized. The
Eunuch's profession, That he believed Jesus Christ to be the Son of God,
sufficed to present admission of him to Baptism. And surely not the inward and
spiritual qualifications, but the outward and visible estate of persons to be
baptized is to be looked at; and we should descend to the lowest (personal
profession of Faith and Repentance being the highest) degree of visibility:
Suppose a Minister had a spirit to discern the inward estate of men as
certainly as Christ did of Judas, and possibly the Apostles did of some which
they baptized; yet were he not to withhold from any, for want of inward grace,
the privileges which they have right and title to by virtue of their visible
estate. Saint Augustine and others think, Judas was admitted to the Lords
Supper, though he but received panem Domini, not panem Dominum: and Mr
Cartwright also so judges, from that connection, Luke 22.19, 20, 21. Certainly
he was admitted to the Passover by virtue of his visible estate. Ishmael and
Esau were regularly circumcised, though Abraham knew that the one, and Rebecca
that the other, was not the Elect seed of the Covenant, Genesis 17.19, 20. with
23. and 25.23 Romans 9 12. We can but charitably judge, not infallible know, who
are Believers; and though Infants do not actually believe, yet by the judgment
of charity (if that he our rule) we ought to judge, that Infants born of
Christian Parents are regenerate, and have faith habitual, or the principle or
seed of it, so much as is absolutely necessary to their participation of
Christ, and Salvation by him, and that they dying in Infancy are saved: see
Chap. 5. For though they cannot actually believe, or at least not make a
profession of their Faith, yet they are not to be doomed Infidels, no more then
they are to be judged irrational or dumb, because they cannot actually reason
or speak; and therefore they (unless you can reduce them to a third party,
which will much strengthen the Popish conceit of a third place for them when
they dye, Limbus Infantum,) are to be counted Believers; and so methinks Christ
accounts of them, Mat. 18.6. with 4.

Ever since God gathered a distinct number our of the World to be his Church,
visible Kingdom, City and Household,. 3.
in opposition to the rest of the World, which is the visible Kingdom, City, or
Household of Satan, God would have the Infants of all who are taken into
Covenant, to be accounted his, and to belong to his Church and Family, and not
to the Devils. If Adam had kept the Covenant of Works, his Infant seed had been
righteous; Adam breaking that Covenant, his Infant seed was guilty of that
breach, and became sinners against the Law, though they knew not what the Law,
or sin against it, was: Adam being within the Covenant of Grace, his Infant
seed was so judged likewise: For by seed of the woman, Genes. 3.15. is meant
Christ in his minority, as well as in his grown years, who dyed for Infants as
well as others, neither are infants to be excluded from the benefit of that
Promise: The Infants of Noah, Abraham, and the Jews, were members of the same
Church with their Parents: As Infants of Jews, Turks, and Pagans, though
incapable of those Opinions or Practices, are esteemed Jews, Turks, Pagans; so
the Infants of Christians (though, as the children of men, they are born in
sin, Psalm. 51.5. dead in it, Ephesians. 2.1, 3.) yet, as children of the Church,
they are visibly Christians, not Insidels, Jews, Turks, or Pagans. Though a
Nobleman, a Freeman of a Corporation, a visible Churchmember, do beget
children as men, not as a person of Honor, a Freeman, a Churchmember; yet
according to their respective Charters, the Honor of the one, the Freedom of
the other, and Church Priviledges of the third, may descend on their children.

ANABAPT. CAT.
Q. What other Arguments have you to prove, That Infants have not Faith, and
are not to be baptized?

A. If they had Faith, they were presently to be admitted to the Supper, and
not excluded from communion therein, as many are, which are admitted to
communion in Baptism, whereas the communion in both is one and the same, the
same thing signified in both, viz. our fellowship with Christ in his Death and
Resurrection: So that all that are baptized into one body, are all made to
drink into one Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13. and the same preparations of Faith and
Repentance are required for both; and he that is cast out of the one, is cast
one of the other, seeing by excommunication he is like an Heathen or Publican.

IT is the Judgment both of Mr Rutherford, Exam. Chap. 4.. 1.
and Mr Hooker, and others of New England, That Infants of visible Churches,
born of wicked Parents, members of the same Churches, ought to be baptized: The
reason may be, We (when a Child is presented to Baptism) are to take notice of
the Parents Church Membership, not of his scandalousness: If the Church do not
cast out the Parents, why should the Minister cast out the Child? Parents,
where suspended, lose only their present fruition, not their fundamental right
to membership: It is right to membership, not the present fruition of it, nor
their worthiness of that right, does (as they conceive) transfer that privilege
to Infants. Mr Cotton in his Way, p. 115. conceives it is considerable, if the
Grandfather or Grandmother, making profession, be still living, and willing to
undertake for the Child; yea, that in some cases a Heathens child may be
baptized in right of its houshold-governor, Genesis 17. Yet it is very far from
their Opinions, That these children, or the immediate Parents of them should be
admitted to the Supper.

Amongst the Jews Infants were circumcised,. 2.
yet were they not presently admitted to the Passover; they could not come up
(nor do we read they were carried) from the remote parts of Judea to Jerusalem,
where only the Lamb was eaten, nor could they eat it standing with staves in
their hands, and with sour herbs, as was required, Exodus 12. nor keep it to the
Lord, verse. 46. with spiritual respects to Gods glory, to Gods ends and rules,
and to have their hearts prepared, as well as to be ceremonially clean, 2 Chronicles. 18.19. and the same males were as well to be at the feast of tabernacles
(as at the Passover) and to carry boughs (which was no Infants work) to make
booths or tabernacles to dwell in, Deuteronomy. 16.16, 17. with Levit. 23.34, 35 38,
39 40. The children, yea those that could speak and ask questions, did not
partake of the Passover, as is employed in that they did not say, what mean we,
but what mean you by this service? It was not allowable to count them for the
eating of the Passover that could not eat of it, viz. Infants, sick persons,
uncircumcised and unclean; see Ainsw. in Exodus 12.4. The uncleanness of a
Proselyte was no bar to Circumcision, but to the Passover it was, Numb. 9.6,
10. An adult Proselyte might in some case be circumcised and baptized, and not
presently admitted to the Passover: Ainsw. in Exodus 12.44.

The Rite of Baptism is after the common custom of washing new born Infants
from the pollutions of the womb,. 3.
Ezekiel. 16. 5, 9. but the elements of bread and wine are the food of riper
years. Baptism is a Sacrament of Initiation (as Bernard calls it,) the Supper
is the highest Ordinance, Christians (as such) are capable of. It is one thing
to be admitted a Scholar in a School, or to be matriculated into the
University; another thing to be of such a form, standing, or degree: It is one
thing to be a subject, a tenant, or free of a Corporation (which children may
be,) another to do homage, suit and service. Our Regeneration or birth in
Christ (whereof Baptism is the laver) Infants are capable of; but not of that
growth and augmentation signified in the Supper. To be baptized, is to be
passive (as in the first act of Regneration we are merely passive) the action
is wholly the Baptizers, I baptize thee, etc. but to eat and drink in
remembrance of Christ's death, and to discern the Lords body, is to be active,
and requires exercises of reason and grace. And as Christ himself did not
administer Baptism, but his Disciples, Joh. 4.1, 2. Paul faith, God sent him
not to baptize; the Apostles did not so usually baptize, as ordinary Ministers,
1 Cor. 1.14, 15, 17. but Christ did administer the Lords Supper, as also the
chief Minister present did usually afterward: So multitudes were baptized by
John Baptist, and the Disciples of Christ, which were not presently admitted to
the Supper when Christ instituted it. The Apostles were to teach all Nations,
baptizing them; but the communicating of all Nations is not expressed; of the
Samaritans and several households baptized, we read; of their present admission
to the Supper, we read not: So that though the communion in both the Sacraments
be one, and the preparations for them both in adult persons be the same for
substance, yet because of their different dispensations and degrees, Infants
may be admitted to the one, and not to the other. Yet I freely and confidently
assert, that to admit children to the Supper, is far more excusable then to
deny them Baptism; for they have jus ad rem, a right to it (as a young heir
has to his lands,) as Saints decayed in mind and body have a right to hear the
Word; and the communicating of Infants is of more antiquity and credit in the
Church, then denying of their Baptism; though I hold it not fit that Infants
should communicate, because they have not jus in re, they have not aptitude and
fitness for it: a child is not fit to manage his own estate; nor is it rational
to preach the Gospel to an holy man (what right soever he may have to it) when
he is destitute of capacity to hear or understand it: and hence it is, that the
Church having some while admitted Infants to the Lords Supper, did upon second
considerations discern her mistake, and lay it aside, but yet still continued
that other of baptizing Infants, seeing no cause to leave it off, but rather
more strictly to observe it.

ANABAPT. CAT.
Q. But what if an Infant, or any other in their childhood, should dye
unbaptized, are they not damned?

A. We know nothing out of the Scripture of their Salvation or Damnation, and
therefore we must not be too inquisitive; yet may such Infants so dying be
saved, through the presentment of the satisfaction of Christ to the Justice of
God for original sin, which Satisfaction, though it be applied through
believing in those that can believe, yet it may be applied without in those
that cannot believe, else how could any Infants be saved?

IF you know nothing of their Salvation, Chap. 5.
Christ does; Mark 10.14. Of such, says he, is the Kingdom of Heaven: He
means, not only those that are meek, humble, harmless, like little children,
(for he would not have blamed those that would have kept little children from
him, nor have blessed them when they came, if they were only mere emblems of
such as are blessed, as a Lamb or a Dove may be,) but little children
themselves. David judged, that his child, though adulterously begotten, and
whom God took away in his wrath, was saved, else he would not have eaten, and
drunk, and rejoiced that he should go to it, 2 Samuel 12.20. If any affirm, That
all Infants of Christians dying in Infancy are certainly saved, I know no
Scripture against it; and if there be no place punctually proving it, we are
bound to incline to the more charitable opinion, Mat. 7.1. especially when we
speak of this or that particular Infant. You say, they may be saved without
Baptism; true, there is a possibility of it: so if Infants of the Jews had not
been circumcised the eight day, and had dyed uncircumcised, they might also
have been saved, (their parents or governors being guilty of the contempt or
neglect of the Ordinance, not they; and why should their Salvation or Damnation
depend upon others doing or not doing their duty?) That phrase of cutting off,
Genesis 17.14. either concerns grown men only, or threatens only excommunication
or death, not eternal damnation. God had mercy on the penitent thief; yet it is
presumption in us to defer repentance till death, or to neglect Baptism. God
can bring a child into the world without a midwife; shall we therefore neglect
the means? Parents when their children are baptized before they dye, may not
only be comforted in the performance of their duty, but also have more grounded
hopes of their childrens Salvation: Your Antipoedobaptistical Doctrines do take
away all or most of the grounds of hope which Christian parents have of the
Salvation of their dying Infants.

ANABAPT. CAT.
Q. Whether do you think it were better for persons to have Baptism deferred
till they be able to make a profession of faith. A. Yes, it would be far
better, for hereby the Churches would have right matter. (i.e.) Saints in
profession, and persons would be careful to get knowledge and holiness, whereas
now they are careless of hoth: Infant-haptism brings many mischiefs, besides
that it fills the Church with rotten members, confounds the Church and the
world together, and is a groundwork for more tradition, and does so darken the
Doctrine of Baptism, that we cannot know the true meaning of it when we read it
in Scripture.

THe many mischiefs of Infant Baptism, and the benefis of such delaying of it,
Examinat. Cap. 6. 1.
were unknown to the Apostolic Primitive Church, else sure they would have
left us some Precept or President of their delaying the Baptism of the children
of Christian parents. The Jewish Church had Child Circumcision and Child
Baptism too as Rites of Initiation; had it been better they had been deferred?
was not the Jewish Church to be freed from mischiefs (as you call them) as well
as the Christian Church? If Childrens admission did not bring such mischiefs
upon the Jewish, how comes it to be so mischievous to the Christian Church? We
have a Command for Child-baptism, (not indeed such a direct express Command as
they had for Circumcision,) but a virtual, implicit and consequential Command,
as you shall hear anon, Chap. 10. and this is abundantly sufficient to clear it
from being a cause of it self of any mischief at all.

You hold and pretend to prove, 2.
that John Baptist and the Disciples of Christ did not baptize Infants; but
were no rotten members baptized, when Jerusalem, all Judea, and all the rigion
round about Jordan, came, and were baptized? Mat. 3. Mark 1. yea that people or
multitude whom, or some of whom, he called Generation of Vipers, Luke 3.7. with
21. Mr Cobbet, a New England Divine, says, John Baptist did and might lawfully
baptize those multitudes, albeit in the general he knew that many, yea most of
them, would prove false and frothy. Mr Nyes, another of them, says, The
Apostles for the baptizing of three thousand expected no testimonies, nor a day
(much less a month or years) experience, nor could they in so short time make
any inquisitions, or hear any persuasive relations. When all the Samaritans,
very lately bewitched by Simon Magus, Act. 8.9, 10. were baptized, verse. 12.
was there then no rotten members? Suppose all London, Middlesex and all the
region round about Thames or Trent, should be Jews or Heathens (and surely you
account them now much better) and should presently upon hearing of a Sermon
make some profession of faith, or confession of sins, and be baptized, would
you judge all these right matter, Saints, and that there is no rotten member
amongst them? What became of those multitudes and Myriads of baptized ones when
Christ suffered, or afterward if they were not rotten members? Were not Judas,
Ananias, Saphira, Himeneus, Philetus, and many others, rotten members? Were
there not amongst the Corinthians (though called Saints, a part meliore; as we
call a When it-field a Corn-field, though we see many tares and thistles in it)
known carnal Schismatiques Fornicaters, Idolaters, some that sacrificed to
Devils, drunken Communicants, Heretics denying the Resurrection, Despisers of
Paul, Admirers of the false Teachers, Men (as Paul feared) that had not
repented of the uncleanness, fornication and lasciviousness they had committed,
amongst whom were debates, envyings, wraths, strifes, backbitings, whisperings,
swelling tumults, etc. were none of these rotten members? It is the work of the
Ministry to convince rotten members of their rottenness, and by the blessing of
God to convert them, and make them sound, 1 Cor. 5. and 6. and 10. Gal. 4.19.
And if so be they remain incurable, and after much means, pains and patiences
are not reclaimed, the Church may cut them off. Though the draw-net does take
in both good and bad, yet the bad afterward may be cast away, Matthew. 13.47.48.

Are there not also amongst the Anabaptists (notwithstanding their rejection of
Infant Baptism) many rotten members,. 3.
Heretics, Blasphemers, such as deny the Trinity, the Divinity or Humanity of
Jesus Christ, the Immortality of the Soul, the Morality of the Sabbath,
Authority of the Scriptures, the guilt of original sin, the necessity, yea very
being of the Ministry, Officers and Ordinances; Assertors of the whole Body of
Arminianism, of immediate Revelations and Enthusiasms, of Antinomianism, of
Poligamy, perfection of grace? Who more then the Anabaptists (I had almost
said, who but they) have been given up by God to those strong and strange
delusions, to those damnable Opinions and abominable Practices mentioned in the
late Act? Where is there a more wicked and wretched Sect then the Ranters? But
(possibly) you that published this Catechism may be of the strictest Sect of
your Religion, (as the worst of these at their first separating from us seemed
also to be,) and do abhor to have communion not only with these, but with
Drunkards, Adulterers, Swearers, etc. To you I say, if there be not amongst you
Drunkards, Adulterers, Swearers, etc. (Satan himself is none of these,) but are
there not seditious, schi^matical persons, that say, all the Church is holy?
sacrilegious persons, that devour that which is holy, or dedicated to the
service of God and his Church, not by themselves (which was Ananias his sin)
but by others? Are there not Murderers, Railers, false Accusers, Liars, proud,
boasters, covetous, traitors, heady, high minded, lovers of themselves,
despisers of good men, having a form of godliness? etc. Such an one is Satan.
As for the rotten members in Paedobaptists Congregations, they are or should be
duly proceeded against, and much good is done that way in many Congregations
where Government is set up, and people help forward the work, (humane
infirmities both in Rulers and ruled ever have been, and will be:) And more
good had been done, had not the separation of some from us, the exemption by
the Civil Powers from Church Government, of whosoever will not freely own it,
the unjust clamors of Presbyterian Rigidness and Tyranny, together with the
Tumults and Troubles of the Times, hindered it.

As for Infant Baptism,. 4.
it is a consecrating of children to God, and formally initiates them into the
Church, which is a great benefit, (as casting out, or excommunicating out of
the Church, is a great censure,) it is an outward distinctive sign of
Christians children from Pagans, signifies their original sin, and necessity of
regeneration, even before the commission of actual sin, and the Salvation of
Infants, as well as grown men, by Christ: It makes Infants partakers of the
Ordinances, at least of the Prayers of the Church, as members thereof; it
pre-engageth them to a Christian Course, when they have the least prejudice and
obstruction against it; and as soon as they are capable to receive the nurture
and admonition of the Lord, to frequent Ordinances, to own Jesus Christ by
external profession; it binds Parents to be more careful and conscientious of
their Religions Education, it comforts their hearts (godly Parents may speak
this experimentally) to see their Children thus sealed, in assurance that God
is their God, and the God of their seed: Yea God does sometimes, yea always (as
we ought to judge, till the contrary appear) baptize them inwardly, or in^use
grace, or the seed of it, into the Soul of the baptized Infant: These, and the
like were counted great benefits in the time of the Law; and are they, or can
they be mischiefs in the time of the Gospel? You assert indeed, That delaying
of Baptism would make men careful to get knowledge and holiness, whereas now
they (viz. they that do not delay Baptism) are careless of both: But may they
not be as conscientiously taught, and as careful and apt to learn in Christ's
School in his visible Kingdom, as out of it? baptized, as unbaptized? Are not
many grown persons as forgetful and careless of the Promises they make on their
sick beds, and other occasions, as of those which were made in Infancy? Are
Anabaptists the only men that are careful to get knowledge and holiness? Are not
multitudes of persons, which were baptized in their Infancy, as careful to get
knowledge and holiness, and as good Proficients therein, as any others? Is it
better, not to put children into a lease or grant of a privilege, lest they
should be secure and careless to pay rent and do homage, then to put them in?
May not deferring of Baptism so long, make them despise it when they come to
age? Satan may more easily keep children, when grown up, from receiving
Christianity, then work them to renounce it; though he sometimes prevails with
Witches and Wizzards to renounce their Baptism (received in Infancy) that they
may be his vassals, and more assured to him. Keeping the children of Christians
out of the Church, is a strange way (sure it is none of Gods ways, nor is it
likely to prevail to make them in love with Christianity. If any good can be
done by such mediums, the warrantable deferring of the Lords Supper alone may
do it, as well as the unwarrantable delaying of Baptism. As for darkening the
Doctrine of Baptism, experience teaches us, that the Doctrine thereof was
clear enough in Scripture, and competently understood, as well as the Doctrine
of the Lords Supper, before such opposition has been made to Infant Baptism:
If it be now darkened, the darkness is not from Infant Baptism, but from your
opposite Opinion and Practice.

ANABAPT. CAT.
Q. But may not Infants be baptized, if they be Abraham's seed?

A. Yes; But we Gentiles are only Abraham's seed by believing, Gal. 3.7. so Romans
4.16. Gal. 3.29. They that would make the children of Believers to be the seed
of Abraham, are mistaken; for the Scripture speaks but of three seeds of
Abraham, viz. Christ, Gal. 3.16.2. The carnal seed: 3. The Believer, Jew or
Gentile, Gal. 3.28. And they add a fourth seed of Abraham, viz. the seed or
children of Believers amongst the Gentiles, about which the Scripture is silent.

EIther you do not sufficiently enumerate, Exam. Chap. 7.
or not rightly understand your enumeration of the Scripture-kinds of Abraham's
seed, or both. For, 1. Christ personal is not the whole of Abraham's seed, to
whom (though he be the whole in whom, 2 Cor. 1.20.) the Promises were made; but
Christ mystical, the whole Church of Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12, 13. all which,
whether Jews or Gentiles, bond or free, (I may add, young or old) are but one
in their Head Jesus Christ, Gal. 3.28. All that are Christ's are Abraham's seed,
verse. 29. and Infants are his, as well as grown persons; for he became an
Infant, suffered much in his very Infancy, was the Head of the Church while an
Infant (and therefore might well have Infant-members,) dyed for Infants as well
as for grown men, bad his Disciples to suffer little children to come to him,
(if not that he might baptize them, (for he baptized none at all, Infants or
others, Joh. 4.1, 2.) yet that he might bless them,) and said, that of such is
the Kingdom of Heaven. 2. As for the carnal seed of Abraham, their fleshly
relation was not sufficient to entitle them to Church Priviledges, except they
had a spiritual relation also, Rom 9 6, 8. Open Apostates, and Revolters,
though the carnal seed of Abraham, were not counted of the Church, but as
strangers, and Heathens, as David calls them, Psalm. 54.3. and 59.5. That Text,
Exodus 12.48. prohibiting strangers, did by the rule of proportion prohibit from
the Passover all such Jews as did forsake the Faith: The Caldee Paraphrast
says, No son of Israel, that is an Apostate, or fallen from the Faith, shall
eat of it. Cain and his posterity were rejected, Genesis 4.15, 16. cum Genesis 6.1,
2. So Ishmael cast out, and the Ishmaelites, Gal. 4 30. Genesis 21.10, 14. Psalm.
83.6. which last place mentions the Edomites also, which were the posterity of
Abraham; yea, all the twelve Tribes, which were the seed of Abraham, were cast
off at the last: and yet their being begotten after the flesh, and being
circumcised in the flesh, was an help, not an hindrance, to their being
begotten of the Promise, or to Circumcision in the Spirit. Jacob was of Isaac
and Rebecca after the flesh, and yet also the heir of Promise: And as then some
were born only after the flesh, as Ishmael, Esau; and some were also born after
the spirit, as Isaac, Jacob: So the Apostle (looking not only to the Parallel,
but to the History) says, So it is now; some, even in the time of the Gospel,
are born of Christian Parents only after the flesh, and some also after the
spirit, and these do persecute one another, Gal. 4.29. This difference may
discover it self in riper years, but in Infancy it is as undiscoverable now as
then. 3. It was not necessary that they should be the carnal seed of Abraham
that were in Covenant Relation, and initiated into the Church; for Abraham was
(as to this) not only the father of the Jews, but of many Nations, and upon
this account his name was changed, Genesis 17.4.5. Proselytes being Gentiles as
well as we, and not of his carnal seed, nor (many) so much as of his family,
yet they were the seed of Abraham by believing, as well as we are now; and they
were not only initiated into the Church, but those of them that were of
Abraham's family were the foundationals, and first members of the Church, as
constituted in Abraham's family; his 318 trained servants, besides others, were
not all (if any) of his carnal seed. 4. As for the Infants of Believers, which
you separate from their Parents (of which see before Chap. 3.. 3.) and make
them a fourth seed, you know that Proselytes became Abraham's seed only by
believing, as (you say) we Gentiles now do, and yet their children were
accounted Abraham's seed (though they be none of the three which you mention,)
and as such were initiated into the Church, Genesis 17.12, 23. Exodus 12.48, 49. In
the same sense that Abraham was a father to a Proselyte, or believing Gentile
and his seed then, he is a father to a Christian Gentile and his seed now, for
his Paternity abides the same; nor can you show a better warrant for his
Paternity over the one, then over the other, nor have the Gentiles lost any
privilege by the coming of Christ which they had before: The Scripture says,
The Brethren now are the children of the Promise, as Isaac was, Gal. 4.28. Now
Isaac was the seed of Abraham, and in the Promise as an Infant of believing
Parents, before he was an actual Believer, and his Infants wa^ within the
Covenant, and accordingly initiated into the Church. Abraham might say, God is
my God, and the God of my Infant seed, and so might the Gentile proselyted say
also; and why may not a Christian, who is blessed with faith-ful Abraham, Gal.
3.9. say so too? especially seeing Jesus Christ, the Minister of Circumcision,
did not abrogate, but confirm the Promises made unto the fathers, and that the
Gentiles might glorify God for his Mercy, etc. Romans 15.8, 9. God, alluding to
the outward Circumcision of his people, and their seed, promises to circumcise
their hearts, and the hearts of their seed, Deuteronomy. 30.6. and this promise is
Gospel, and a parcel of the Covenant of Grace, as appears by Deuteronomy. 30.6, 10,
11, 12. with Romans 10.6, 7, 8. and this circumcision of the heart is commended
Romans 2.28, 29. and is signified and sealed in Baptism, Colos. 2.11, 12. It is
observed, that Genesis 17.7. speaks not of Abraham and his seed (which (you say)
are actual Believers) abstractedly taken, but of his seed in their generations,
which words necessarily imply and include, as the Parents generating, so the
Children generated. Lastly, Abraham is not only called the father of particular
Believers, but the father of Nations professing the true faith, as well as of
the Jewish Nation: Every Nation receiving the true Faith as they did, and in
which there is a National Agreement in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, as was in
the Nation of the Jews, is an holy Nation, a peculiar people to the Lord, even
Egypt and Assyria, with Israel, and may call Abraham father, Isai. 19.21. Genesis
17.5. When the Gentiles were graffed into that stock from which the Jews were
broken off, and did partake of the root and fatness of the Olive tree, Romans
11.17. and Abraham began to be the father of many Nations, Romans 4.16, 17.
Regenerate Infants are Abraham's spiritual seed by Mr. T. his confession, and he
professes that he would baptize them, if he could know them. I am sure no one
dare say of this or that particular Infant, that it is not regenerate; yea, we
are bound to judge they are such, till something appear to the contrary.

ANABAPT. CAT.
Q. But are not the children of godly persons visibly in the Covenant of Grace?

A. No, the Covenant of Grace is an invisible thing, and we cannot know who are
in it, nor have we grounds to judge persons are in it, till we see some
profession of holy life of faith and repentance, which Infants cannot make.

NOt to spe^k of such as are only intentionally in the Covenant of Grace, as
children yet unborn may be, Examinat. Cap. 8. 1.
Deuteronomy. 29.15. Those that are Actually in the Covenant of Grace, are of two
sorts: Some are externally in it, as Ishmael, Judas, Simon Magus, and so all
such as own God to be their God, and themselves to be his people (as the Jewish
Church did, and every true Christian Church does) though but externally are
said to be within the Covenant: Your self say, that profession of faith and
repentance are grounds to judge some persons to be in the Covenant of Grace.
There is external being in Christ, Joh. 15.2. Vocation, Mat. 22.14.
Sanctification, Heb. 10.29. and purging from sin, 2 Pet. 1.9. But some are also
internally and savingly in the Covenant of Grace, as Isaac, Jacob, while
Infants, and when adult, also Zacheus, Lydia and her household, the Jailer and
all his. This distinction is grounded upon Romans 9.4, 6, 7, 8. We may know who
is in the Covenant of Grace externally; but the Covenant of Grace in the second
sense is invisible, and none could know who were in it in the time of the Jews
(though Infants were then visibly in it, and initiated as such) or amongst
Christians. If the invisibleness of the Covenant of Grace, and our not knowing
who are in it, does exclude Infants, it does also exclude adult Professors from
admission into the Church; for the signs of their being savingly in the
Covenant of Grace, are but conjectural, hopeful, and probable, not certain and
infallible: none can be sure, that he that makes profession at a ^^ll age,
which qualifies him for Baptism, is not an Hypocrite at this minute, and will
not be an Apostate the next; nor can we know that they are in the Covenant, for
then we should know they are elected, whereas this is a secret known only to
God, 2 Timothy 2.19. Deuteronomy. 29.19. And the little ones of the Church, though they
make no personal profession, as adult persons do, yet are as visibly within the
Covenant of Grace (parents having as much authority and reason to covenant for
their children now, as Deuteronomy. 29.10. with 30 6.) and as charitably to be
accounted of, seeing of adult Christians the weakest can hold forth no more
then the least degree of absolute probability, and the strongest no more then
the highest degree of probability.

Peter says, 2.
Act. 2.38, 39. The promise is to you and to your children: Concerning which
observe, 1. That hereby is not meant Christ is exhibited (as some gloss,) The
promise Is, id est, fulfilled, Christ is come; for this they had heard before,
verse. 36. and knew to their trouble, and therefore were pricked in their
hearts: and these words are not any where in Scripture so taken; nor is Baptism
a seal barely to Christ being come in the flesh, but to the benefits thereof
covenanted and promised; not is it a promise of the gifts of the Holy Ghost,
but the promise (...), Gospel promise of remission of sin, Heb. 8.10, 12.
signed and sealed in Baptism, Act. 3.19. which belongs to Gods people at all
times, might heal their being pricked in their heart, verse. 37. and is fitly
used as a motive to persuade them to repent and be baptized, and is a suitable
answer to their question, What shall we do to be saved? 2. He says not, The
promise is to you, and to as many as God shall call, whether of your children
or strangers; as he might have said, if he would have levelled the children of
Christians and Pagans: but he says, The promise is to you and to your
children, and to as many; making their children a distinct party, as from those
that then were, so from those that after should be called; the words holding
out their right, are in the Indicative Mood, The promise is to you: the like is
never said to Pagans, or to any out of the Church. 3. These words are the same
in substance with the reason and ground of Circumcision, Genesis 17.8, 10, 11.
That Promise and Covenant was a Gospel Covenant, In thy seed shall all the
Nations of the Earth be blessed; and was an everlasting Covenant, made four
hundred thirty years before the Law, and to be fulfilled in a great part of it
after the ceasing of Moses Paedagogy, and of Circumcision, Gal. 3.15, 16, 17.
Romans 4.12*16, 24. Heb. 13.20. Rev. 14.6. and the said everlasting Covenant was
not only with actual Believers, but with the lineal seed of Abraham, even
before they actually believed, till some open revolt did disable them, and with
the Infant Seed of Proselytes or Gentiles converted to the says. 4. His
motion, that every one of them should be baptized, does imply, they had right
to Baptism, (for he does not persuade them to be Usurpers of that, to which
they had no right,) and he grounds his motion not only upon their bare personal
interest in the Promise, but their childrens joint interest with them (as in
Genesis 17. God does for Circumcision,) which latter could not rationally be urged
as a motive to persuade the Jews to be baptized, and to embrace Christian
Religion, if the joint interest of their children with them were not (at least)
fully as great in the Christian as in the Jewish Church. Now if a Jew had a
child born before his Conversion to Christianity, that child was Sacramentally
to be initiated; but if he had a child after, you say it was not, but was in
the same condition with a Pagans child, viz. not to be admitted into the Church
till it were called: And if so, then where is the benefit belonging to the
children of Jews converted by virtue of their Christianity? If a Landlord
should move his Tenants to give up his old Lease or Grant (which has certain
immunities and privileges to him and his children) and to take a new one, in
which his children should have no more privileges then mere strangers; could
he rationally persuade him to surrender the old Lease or Grant, and to take a
new one, from the benefit that may accrue to the Tenant and his children by it?
5. Here seem to be three ranks and conditions of persons: 1. The Jews
themselves, then present and adult: 2. Their children, the present issue, which
already was, or should be born of their bodies, what ever they were, younger or
elder, Infants not excluded: 3. Those that were afar off, not in estate (for
the mystery of the calling of the Gentiles was not fully closed with by Peter
till Act. 10. nor could the Jews yet bear that saying,) but those that were
afar off in time: (...) (we with Piscator may add (...)) is a different phrase
from that used of the Gentiles, (...), Ephesians. 2.13, 17. and fitly may denote
the posterity of the Jews in after ages. 6. These Jews (it is likely) were
pricked in their hearts, not only for their crucifying of Christ, but their
cursing their children about two months since, Matt. 27.25. which curse did
include their very Infants then newly born, and others that should be born
afterward; and therefore if Peter had not included Infants in this Promise, the
plaster had not been large enough for their sore. Lastly, The Jews were apt
long after this to scruple lesser matters, Acts 21.20. and can it be thought
that they should not startle and be discontented to have both Circumcision and
Baptism taken from their Infants? nor enquire whether this seclusion of their
Infants was not a fruit of their cursing of them? or how it could be justified
by the Old Testament (there being then no other written Word?) or by what
warrant the Church Membership and Covenant Interest, which their children
formerly had, was repealed and taken from them? By all which, seriously
considered, it will appear, that the children of Believers are included within
the Promise, and to be baptized. Beside^, if Infants be not within the Covenant
of Grace, then they are strangers from it, and consequently without God, and
without hope, as Pagans children are; and if they dye (though in Infancy,)
their Parents may mourn over them as such that have no hope, contrary to 1 Thessalonians. 4.13. yea, while they live, they may lament over their children, as such
whom they have begotten and brought forth to the Devil, and not to God, in
respect of their visible estate.

ANABAPT. CAT.
Q. What is Circumcision?

A. It was an Obligation to keep the whole Law, Gal. 5.3. Romans 2.24. and showed
unto them, that it was their duty to circumcise their hearts, Jer. 4.4.

CIrcumcision in it self was but an Obligation to the Law as a rule of
Righteousness, Examinat. Cap. 9.. 1.
subservient to the Covenant of Grace (as Baptism also is, Romans 6.3.) not to
the Law in the rigor of it, as it was a Covenant of Works; for Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob were not so obliged, they were in the Covenant of Grace as well as
we, and Circumcision was to Abraham (by your own confession) a seal of the
righteousness of Faith. Christ did profit may hundreds and thousands that were
circumcised in the time of the Law, he was the Lamb slain from the beginning of
the World, and they were saved by Faith in him, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3. Heb. 11. but
when Christians were circumcised in the time of the Gospel, out of a persuasion
of its necessity, and their justification by it, then it did bind them to keep
the whole Law, and Christ in that case did profit them nothing; and this is all
can be inferred from your Texts, as to this matter. As Circumcision did show it
was their duty to circumcise their hearts, so Baptism shows it is our duty to
wash our hearts, Jerem. 4.14. Jam. 4.8. (between heart circumcision and
heart-washing is no great difference, if any.) And as there was a precept for
the circumcision of the heart, so God promised his people, that he will
circumcise their hearts, and the hearts of their seed; of which before Chapt.
7. Though Circumcision did show forth (you say) a Duty on our part, as well as
a Promise on Gods part, yet (you know) Infants were then circumcised, though
they had no actual knowledge of either. What you can gather hence (if any thing)
against Infant Baptism, I expect to know.

ANABAPT. CAT.
Q. Was not Circumcision also a seal of the righteousness of Faith? Romans 4.11.

A. Yes, to Abraham only; and if Abraham's believing children amongst the
Gentiles should be baptized as he was circumcised, then is must not be till
they have the righteousness of Faith as Abraham here had, at least they must
have it in profession.

The Text says, It was the seal of the righteousness of Faith,. 2.
which Abraham had, being yet uncircumcised; but it says not, that it was so
to him only: The Apostle brings it as an argument to prove the way of our
Justification to be by Faith alone, which were a mere inconsequence, if proper
to him, and not belonging to others. There was adult persons Believers in
Abraham's Family when Circumcision was first instituted, and many be-lieving
Proselytes afterward, which had Faith while yet they were uncircumcised, as
Abraham had, of whom their Circumcision also was a seal of the righteousness of
the Faith they had before; yea, Moses makes it to all a sign of the Covenant,
Genesis 17. which doubtless was the Covenant of Grace; or, to use Paul's dialect,
the righteousness that is by Faith, Romans 3.22 30. and 10.3, 6, etc. cum Deuteronomy.
30.6, 10, 11, 12. Phil. 3.9. this being the Tenor of that Covenant, Believe in
the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, Acts 16.31. Your passage,
implying, that there are some believing children of Abraham which have not the
righteousness of Faith as Abraham here had, I do not understand, except you
make actual believing and having the righteousness of faith two things, not
only distinct, but separable: But whatsoever your meaning be, I cannot see here
any show of proof, that children must necessarily believe, or make profession
of faith, before they may be baptized, as Abraham did before he was
circumcised. Abraham could not be circumcised in Infancy, nor before
Circumcision was instituted, no wonder therefore if he believed before; had
Circumcision been instituted in the days of his fathers, Abraham might have
been circumcised before he actually believed, as well as Isaac his son was.
Christ could not be baptized till John did baptize, which was about the
thirtieth year of Christ's age, nor did he receive the Eucharist till the night
before he suffered; yet some that pretend to imitate him, can be baptized, and
possibly preach too, at 15, 16, 20, 21, etc. years of age, though Christ was
neither baptized, nor did preach, till he was thirty.

ANABAPT. CAT.
Q. Whether does Baptism succeed Circumcision in the same Office?

A. No: Circumcision was to every Male (though reprobate) but Baptism only to
the Believer, Matt. 28.19. There being a change of the visible Church, and of
the Ordinances, this cannot succeed in the room thereof, nor has any
dependence thereon.

Your Argument against the succession of Baptism to Circumcision is weak,. 3.
viz. Baptism is not like Circumcision in some things, therefore it is not like
in any thing, therefore it succeeds not in the same office: By this you may
prove as well, That the Supper does not succeed the Passover, nor the Lord's Day
the Jewish Sabbath. The office of Circumcision was to show original sin, to
teach necessity of Regeneration, of Mortification, of Salvation by Christ, the
seed of Abraham; to sign and seal the Covenant, or the Righteousness that is by
Faith, to distinguish Jews from others, to initiate solemnly and formally into
the Church: And does not Baptism also initiate into the Church? 1 Cor. 12.13.
Yea, does it not (Circumcision being now abrogated) perform the foresaid
Offices? Indeed it is not every way the same, for then it were not a successor.
Add hereunto, that the Covenant was the ground of Circumcision, Genes. 17.7, 9,
10, 11. the equity whereof obliges to Baptism, as the equity of the fourth
Commandment extends to our Lord's Day. As for the positive command, verse. 12. it
only determines the time and day, which circumstance of day and time was not
built upon the Covenant of Grace (as Circumcision it self was) and therefore is
not perpetual; and without such a positive determination of the time,
Circumcision should and might have been administered to Infants: the Jews did
circumcise children bought with their money the same day they bought them,
though they bought them the same day they were born: See Ainsw. in Genes.
17.12. Oft-times Circumcision was not administered the eighth day, but deferred;
in which cases the command of circumcising the eighth day was not observed; yet
Circumcision was, and according to right reason ought, to be administered to
Infants by virtue of the naked institution thereof, as we contend that Baptism
ought now to be, both of them being (as was said) seals of the Covenant. But
you, in saying Circumcision was to every Male, though reprobate, do imply, that
it Was not to Females; true: but both Males and Females were then baptized, and
so they were in the New Testament, Acts 8.11. Gal. 3.28, 29. which is a
sufficient justification of our deserting Circumcision in that point: And the
Infant-females (as well as the adult) were counted members of the Jewish
Church; and though, by reason of their incapacity, or Gods respect to the
modesty of that Sex, they were not personally circumcised, yet they were
circumcised in the Males: Hence the whole Church of the Jews, consisting of
Females as well as Males, were called the Circumcision, in opposition of the
Gentiles, which were called Uncircumcision, Gal. 2.7, 8, 9. Again, It was not
administered to reprobates as such, not to every Male, but to the Males of the
Church externally in Covenant, some whereof possibly were Reprobates: So Simon
Magus, Judas, Ananias and Sapphirah were baptized, and yet it is (at least)
likely that they were Reprobates. Circumcision did belong to the Believer as
well as Baptism does; those that were strangers to the Jewish Church could not
be admitted, but they must be Proselytes, not of the gate only, but of
righteousness; they must disclaim Paganism, and profess the Jewish Religion: A
stranger continuing in his unbelief, was not circumcised, not did partake in
the Passover, Exodus 12.48. And by proportion that Text prohibiteth all such
Jews as should forsake the faith: See before Chap. 7. As for the change of the
Church and Ordinances notwithstanding it, the Lord's Day may succeed the Jewish
Sabbath, and those same persons which were bound to keep the Jewish Sabbath,
are tied to observe the Lords Day, viz. servants and children, as well as
Parents and Masters, though the persons be not so distinctly set down in the
New Testament as in the Old. Paul did use arguments from Analogy, from the
purging out of the old leaven at the Passover to the casting out of the
incestuous from the Supper, 1 Cor. 5. from the maintenance of the Priests to
the maintenance of Ministers, 1 Cor. 9.13. To argue a genere ad speciem
affirmative, is not good reasoning; The Church was changed, therefore it was
changed in this particular: The Church might be changed, and yet not in this;
the Sacrament may be changed, and not the subject: what belonged to the Jewish
Church as a Church, belongs to the Christian Church also; that which belonged
to it as Jewish, was altered, as High Priest, Temple, Sacrifices, Ceremonies,
etc. Infants Church Membership did not belong to the Church as Jewish, not was
it a Ceremony or Type; if you think it was, show what it was a type of, and
what was the antitype that has succeeded it, and prove it so you can. There
was a Church, before there was an High Priest, Temple, etc. in the Families of
Adam, Noah and Sem, which was alive in the time of Isaac: Melchizedek surely
had subjects and people, which were the Church (as well as he was a King and a
Priest) of the most high God; This Church might continue long, and not be
united to the Church in Abraham's family for ought we know: whatsoever the
extent of the Church was, Domestical, Congregational, or National, Infants are
reckoned of the same Church with their Parents: the Church before Christ, and
after Christ, is the same Church; as an Heir, While in nonage, and when adult,
is the same person. The Jews that believed were never unchurched; the Tree was
not broken down, but some branches broken off: some additionals to the Church
ceased, the Church it self ceased not; the partition Wall Was broken down, and
Jews and Gentiles made one Church, Ephesians. 2.14. and 3.6. And when the wall was
down, were their Infants turned out of the Church at one door, as the Gentiles
came in at another? was the Church so changed, that it lost so many materials?
and was the Covenant of Grace changed too? did it lose so many out of it?
Visible Professors and their Infants are alike in every age, and there is
nothing in them inconsistent with propriety in God, or interest in the
Covenant, or the Seal thereof, in one age more then in another: Baptism is the
seal of the Covenant now, and may be administered to visible Professors, and
their children, now, as Circumcision was then; if there should be any
difference, Reason would tell us, considering the painfulness and peril of
Circumcision, Genesis 34.25. and the easiness of Baptism, That only grown men
should have been circumcised, and Infants baptized, rather then contrary.

ANABAPY. CAT. Q. Whether may not Infants of Believers be baptized by virtue of
Covenant-holiness? A. No: for Baptism is not a sign or seal of any such outward
holiness, which may befall Reprobates as Well as Elect; but it is a sign of
Death, Burial, and Resurrection, Which the Believerthath with Christ. 2. There
is no command for baptizing such, if the Gentiles Were so holy.
BAptism is a sign and seal of Christ's, Death, Examinat. Cap. 10. 1.
Burial, and Resurrection, and of the truth and faithfulness of those exceeding
great and precious Promises bundled up in the Covenant of Grace, which are in
Christ Yea and Amen, a Cor. 1.20. but it is not an absolute sign or seal of the
baptized's Death, Burial, Resurrection With Christ, of his putting on of
Christ, of grace already Wrought in him, as you assert in your Answer to the
second and third question, but only conditional, Acts 16.30 31. if he believe,
as the Romans did, Romans 6.3.4. with 5.1.2. A Christian gathers the assurance of
his Justification and Salvation by this or such a like Syllogism, He that
believes, is justified, and shall be saved: I believe, therefore I am
justified, and shall be saved. The Major, or former Proposition, Baptism does
absolutely and universally seal; but not so the Minor, or second Proposition,
viz. I believe: If Baptism should seal to all baptized ones, as suppose Simon
Magus, Judas, etc. the truth of their Faith and their saving interest in Jesus
Christ, then should God set his Seal (for Baptism is Gods Seal, not the
Churches) to a lie and falsehood, or at least command Ministers so to do, when
they are bound by the Rules of Christ to baptize such as are not inwardly holy,
as Simon Magus, etc.

Children of Believers, sect. 2.
1 Cor. 7.14. are said to be Saints, or holy; whereby is not meant, that they
were legitimate only (for so had they been if both the Parents had been
Infidels, and children are not holy because they are not bastards,) nor only
sanctified to the use of the Parents, as the unblieving yoke fellow (though not
holy in se, nor sanctifying) is sanctified to the believing yoke fellow, (the
Holy Ghost neither here nor elsewhere speaking of any thing to be sanctified to
unbelievers,) but they are holy, a distinct phrase from being sanctified to
another, as birds and beasts may be, and this holiness proceeds from the
believing yoke fellow, which is the reason why he says, your children, viz the
children of you Christian yoke-fellows (the Infidel yoke fellows writ not to
Paul) are holy, which seeing it cannot be meant of internal and saving holiness
(for all children of the Church are not such, though we are bound to judge the
best till the contrary appear,) it must needs therefore be meant of outward
federal holiness, which is the privlledg of the children of believing Parents
above the children of Pagans, the Jews having had the like privilege before;
(See Gal. 2. 15. which I conceive runs parallel with this:) Or if but one of
the Parents be Christian, partus sequitur meliorem partem, the children are not
Infidels, but Christian.

But,. 3.
say you, there is no command for baptizing such, and you call it Will Worship
forbidden, Lev. 10.1. A tradition and groundwork for more traditions; others
call it the mark of the beast, one of the strongest holds of Antichrist, and
what not? To all which I answer, 1. If Nadah and Abihu's offering strange fire,
fire unsanctified, or not taken off the Altar, Was Will Worship (though the
Scripture does not call it so,) yet Paedobaptism (suppose it be not warranted
by the Word) cannot be will worship, because it is not an introduction of a new
Worship or Ordinance, but the misapplication of an old and unquestionable
Ordinance of God, or (if you put on it the worst name you can with any show of
reason) the Profanation of an Ordinance, as your self call it; some of your
party, which have in derision and contempt of Infant Baptism baptized Horses,
Cats, or Dogs, have been unquestionably guilty of horrible Profanation, but not
of will worship. 2. Infant Baptism is grounded on, and warranted by the Word of
God, and therefore is far enough from being a Profanation, or so much as the
misapplication of an Ordinance: That it is so grounded and warranted, needs no
other proof then what has already been produced in this Examination, upon
occasion of the Scriptures and Reasons brought against it.

1. They that are Disciples in Scripture-sence, are expressed in Christ's
Commission about Baptism, and are to be baptized. But Infants of the Church are
Disciples in Scripture-sence: Therefore they are to be baptized. See Chap. 2.
Sect. 3. 2. They that are Abraham's seed are to be baptized, as you confess: But
such Infants are the seed of Abraham: Therefore they are to the baptized. See
Chap. 7. 3. They that are visibly Within the Covenant of Grace are to be
baptized, (as you acknowledge:) But such Infants are visibly Within the Covenant
of Grace: Therefore they are to be baptized. See Chap. 8. 4. They that are to
be judged Church Members are to be baptized: But such Infants of the Church, or
born of members of the Church are to be judged Church members: Therefore, etc.
5. They of Whom the Kingdom of God is, are to partake of the privileges of the
Kingdom of God; But of Infants is the Kingdom of God: Therefore etc. 6. They
that are Saints, and holy, are to be baptized: But such Infants are Saints, and
holy: Therefore. 7. Christ knew that Baptism was an ancient Ceremony of
initiation into the Church, and applied to the Infants of the Church as well as
to adult Proselytes; yet he took up that Ceremony, and advanced it (as he did
the Postcoenium of the Passover) to be a Sacrament of the New Testament,
without prohibition of Infants from it; and therefore he did at least approve,
it should be administered to Infants. See Cap. 2. 1.
In these alone (to omit others,) conscientious enquirers into the mind of the
Lord Jesus may find satisfactory grounds of Infant Baptism, especially when
they are compared with the grounds of the contrary Opinion and Practice.

You cannot show any precept at all,. 4.
or president, or good warrant, in the Word of God, that children of believing
Parents should be kept from Baptism (as you require them to be) till they do in
their own persons actually believe, or make profession of Faith; or that any
such were baptized in riper years (as you would have them now to be:) Yea I
further say, that if you can show me in Scripture any son or daughter of
believing Parents baptized, I shall show you that he or she was baptized in
Infancy: Surely from the time that John Baptist begin his Ministry, to the
writing of the Apocalypse, great multitudes of Infants of Christians grew up to
maturity, yet amongst them all we read not of one whose Baptism was so delayed;
nor have we any solid ground to conceive, that God at the coming of Christ took
away Infants Covenant interest, Church membership, and Sacramental initiation,
and made their condition (as to this) as bad as the Heathen, and worse then the
Jewish children, seeing it cannot be said, that God did take these privileges
away in judgment, upon occasion of Christ's coming, from all Infants, even Elect
children of Elect Parents, seeing Infants in the time of the Gospel are not any
way more guilty, or incapable, then in former times: nor can it any way appear,
that God did it in mercy, (and sure if it was done, it was done either in
judgment or mercy,) for it was a mercy to the Jewish children to have these
privileges, and nothing more was conferred upon Infants which lost them, then
upon adult Christians which did not lose them. You cannot show a precept' or
president for your gathering Churches out of other true Christian Churches; for
requiring persons, before they can be admitted members, to give account of the
truth of their graces; for the Congregations judging whether they have grace or
no, and consequently whether they were to be admitted or no; for a solemn
explicit Church Covenant, for the erection of a Church without Officers; for
the power of such a Church, consisting only of unofficed Christians, to elect,
ordain, impose hands by one or more of them on their Officers, to censure or
excommunicate any member, yea any or all their Officers when they have them;
for maintenance of Ministers by Lords. Day-Collections, formerly urged as an
Ordinance of God, though of late much waved; for a sentence of non-communion
with Sister-Churches; for Synods only consultative, and not decretive; for
public ordinary preaching of gifted men, not so much as intending the
Ministry, and their receiving maintenance for their pains; and yet these are
asserted by men of the Congregational way (in which Antipaedobaptists are
generally found) to be duties, privileges of the Church, or Ordinances of God:
nor can you show any Church consisting of unbaptized ones (such as you account
your selves to be (your Infant Baptism being a nullity) till you be baptized
upon profession) und such a Church admitting members, commissionating some
Disciples to preach and dip: nor any precept or president for admission of
such, which are (in your opinion) unbaptized, to the Lords Supper, not for
rebaptizing such as were baptized (suppose in Infancy) in the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, or for renouncing such Baptism: nor can you show
any one Text of Scripture in which Infant Baptism either in express words, or
in the interpretation of any Apostolic or Primitive Church or Father in the
purest Times: nor can you show one visible Church, from the beginning of the
World, to the time when your Opinion was lately broached, which was of any long
continuance, and did neither admit into it, nor permit in it, any Infant-member.

Finally,. 5.
Should you or I be required a Command for admission of women to the Supper (as
you require a Command for Infant Baptism, though you can neither show command,
nor example nor good warrant for your contrary opinions and practices,) what
clearer command can we show for that, then for Infant Baptism? Women were not
admitted to both the Sacraments of the Old Testament: Christ did not admit
women, no not his own Mother, to the Supper: There is express uncontroverted
mention in the New Testament of women being baptized, but not so of women
communicating. If you alledg, that (...) (a name common to women, as well as
m^n) ought to communicate, 1 Cor. 11.28. it is early evaded, by saying, that
the Apostle confines it to the Male by (...) and (...), v. 28, 29. and the same
word is used of Circumcision, of which the Male only was capable, Joh 7.22.
General terms of Disciples, Church Members, persons in Covenant, will carry it
for Infants Baptism, as well as women's communicating: If you alledg, That such
and such Assemblies, in which there were women, did break bread, you know it
may be, yea it is doubted by some sober spirits, whether that breaking of bread
was Sacramental or no; and it may be said, that the company is said to do it
because the Males did it; as the whole house of Israel is said to be
circumcised, and called Circumcision, though the Females thereof were not
circumcised. If you should tell us of households admited to the Supper (though I
know not any such instance in Scripture) I might as well say, there was no
women there, or they were excluded, as you say, there was no Infants in such or
such an household, or if there were, they were excluded. Lastly, If men should
bend their strength that way, they might as plausibly except against your
admission of women (usually the forwardest part of your Societies) to the
Supper, as you do, or (I believe) can do against Paedobaptism. Oh that our good
God would in mercy to this distracted Church, and to the deluded Souls therein,
remove prejudice out of our hearts.

ANABAPT. CAT.
Q. Whether do you think Baptism administered in Infancy to be a lawful Baptism,
and sufficient?

A. To me it is not; for I think it to be a Profanation of an Ordinance, for
these Reasons: 1. Because it is taught by the precepts of men, Isai. 29.13. not
by God, Jerem. 7.22, 23.

YOu hold, Exam. Chap. 11.
it seems, that it is neither lawful nor sufficient, and (in plain English) it
is null, void, no Baptism at all: But consider (I pray you) could you prove the
nullity of Infant Baptism (as you have a great mind to do) what sad
consequences would ensue: 1. That the people of God, for the space of 1600
years using Paedobaptism, were destitute of one, if not (by consequence) of
both the Sacraments. 2. That the Churches in England, Scotland, France,
Denmark, Sweden, Germany, Geneva, Holland, New England, etc. which have usually
no other Baptism but Child-Baptism, are no Churches, the members thereof being
not so much as Christians outwardly, nor Sacramentally initiated into the
Church; in doing whereof you dishonor God, and do Satan great service, Gods
work being to disciple and enchirch the Nations of the World, Matt. 28.19. Mark
16.16. 2 Cor. 5.19. and Satan's to undesciple and He^thenize the Church, either
in realty, or in reputation, for the advancement of his own Kingdom. 3. That
these, and all others, must for ever (as the case stands) want the Sacrament of
Baptism, except a special and particular warrant come from Heaven (as to John
Baptist) for the setting up of this Ordinance; for no man, who is both
unseparated to the work of the Ministry, and unbaptized (his Paedobaptism being
a nullity) and ununited to the Church of Christ, can warrantably baptize
himself, or any other, any more then Saul might sacrifice, Vzzah stay the Ark,
Vzziah offer Incense; a Midwife, Turk, Jew or Pagan administer the Sacraments
of Christ's Church: for if Paedobaptism be a nullity because of default in the
subject, this also will be a nullity for want of commission; for you can show
neither precept, president, nor good warrant for the Word, for any man that is
unbaptized (having no special Commission from God) to baptize himself, or to
baptize any other; or for any man to accept of Baptism from such an one, which
is indeed no Baptism at all. John, as he had commission from God for his
baptizing; so he affirms, that a man can receive nothing ( viz. no authority to
baptize as he did) except it be given him from Heaven, John 3. 26, 27. as if he
would professedly caution the Church against such courses. 4. That the
Societies of the Independents and Separatists (notwithstanding their separation
from us) do yet (except they also turn Anabaptists) live within one of the
strongest holds of Antichrist, are guilty of observing traditions and precepts
of men, of will worship, of profanation of Gods holy Ordinance, of filling the
Church with rotten members, of confounding the Church and the World together;
yea (say some of you) they have the mark of the Beast in their soreheads, and
by consequence are in the high way to eternal damnation: And what worse can you
say of any? Your Texts prove, that God hates hypocrisy, and over much regard
of the commandments of men, and that God did command Obedience rather then
Sacrisice, as 1 Samuel 15.22. (for God did command Sacrifices and Offerings,
Levit. chap. 1. 2.3. etc.) What is this to Paedobaptism Will you acknowledge
that God has commanded it to us, as he did burnt-offerings and sacrifices to
the Jews? we our selves say no more for it: But if your Texts do forbid all
humane inventions in the Worship of God, Paedobaptism is yet safe enough; for
it has been proved in the foregoing Chapter to have as good warrant from the
Word, as some other (by your self acknowledged) Ordinances of God have, and
better then your opposite Opinion and Practicas.

ANABAPT. CAT.
A. Paedobaptism is done in a Wrong manner, by sprinkling in stead of Dipping.

THis exception you begin your Catechisun with, telling us, that Baptism
signifies Dipping; Examinat. Chap. 12.
By Dipping is never signified Sprinkling: whence you would infer, That Baptism
should be by Dipping only, and that it is done in a Wrong manner When it is
done by Sprinkling; wherein you much mistake: For. 1. Should the original
signification of other Scriptures words be so much squeezed, then because the
holy Communion is called a Supper, 1 Cor. 11.20. (the word signifying a whole
meal,) and the word (...), 1 Cor. 14. Ephesians. 5. signifies not simply to sing,
but to sing to a musical Instrument, and the original words for the gesture at
the Supper signify lying or leaning on a bed; you might with as good reason
collect, That the holy Communion should be a whole meal. That there should be
instrumental music in Churches as well as vocal, That men ought to lie or lean
on beds at the receiving of the Supper, or else the Ordinances are dons in a
Wrong manner. 2 The word Baptism by your own confession does signify washing
as well as dipping, and washing is the main thing, being the end, and dipping
but the means, especially with reference to this Ordinance, which is for
washing, or putting away the filth of the flesh, 1 Pet. 3.21. Acts 22.16. Hebr.
10.22. 1 Cor. 6.11. Now a thing may be washed, not only by Dipping, but by
Sprinkling, or by affusion or puring water upon it, which is mostly used by us,
and not Sprinkling. 3. The Greek word Baptism in Scripture signify, not only
washing by dipping or plunging into the water, but by sprinkling or affusion.
The Baptisms, or washings, mentioned Hebr. 9.10. were (at least some of them)
done only by sprinkling of water, Numb. 8.7. which was called the water of
separation, Numb. 19.9. and holy water, Numb. 5.17. or by sprinkling of blood,
which himself instanceth in, Heb. 9.13, 19, 21. See also Exodus 29.16, 21. Psalm.
51.7. Their washings (called baptizings) of hands, were frequently (at least)
by letting wate fall on their hands from a Laver, 2 King. 3.11. So their Tables
and Beds were not dipped into the water, but washing with pouring water on
them, Mark 9. They that were baptized with the Holy Ghost, and with fire, were
not dipped or plunged into the fire, (though, if they had, if seems it would
not have burned them,) but cloven tongues, as of fire, sat upon each of them,
Acts 2.3. with Matt. 3.11. They that were baptized in the Cloud, and in the
Sea, 1 Cor. 10.1. were not dipped or plunged into the Cloud or Sea, for it was
dry Land; but probably they were bedewed, besprinkled, or dropped on. The word
(...), baptized, (by the Translation rendered dipped) Revel. 19.13. is no other
in Isai. 63.2, 3. then besprinkled. 4. Baptism signifies Justification by the
blood of Christ, which is called the Blood of Sprinkling, Hebr. 12.24. 1 Pet.
1. 2. Hebr. 10.22. and Sanctification by the Spirit of Christ, which is called
sprinkling of clean water on them, Ezekiel. 36.25. Isai. 52.15. both which were
also typified by the aforesaid legal purifications or washings. 5. It cannot be
proved by the Word, nor is it probable in it self, that the three thousand
baptized in Jerusalem, Acts 2.41. were carried to a River, and there dipped one
by one by the Apostles; or that Paul, Lydia, the Jailer, and all theirs, which
(it is likely) were baptized in houses, were so dipped. Did they shift their
clothes, or continued they in their wet apparel? and how could their whole body
be washed (though it might be wet) with their clothes on? or were they all (men
and women) baptized stark naked? and was not this contrary to modesty, and a
temptation which mastered holy David? 2 Samuel 11.1. Much less can it be proved,
that be the person never so sickly, the season never so cold, yet dipping is
(though it may endanger men's lives) not only lawful in it self, (as we account
it, yea it has been commended above sprinkling or affusion,) but in all cases
and conditions necessary, and the omission of it upon any occasion is sinful.

ANABAPT. CAT.
Paedobaptism is done by an Officer, where there is a questionable Power, as
the Ministers ordained by Bishops deemed Antichristian.

THis exception is of no force against Child Baptism administered by such
Ministers as are not ordained by Bishops. Exam. Cap. 13.
2. You tell us not by whom, or whether truly or falsely the Bishops were deemed
Antichristian: certes the old Nonconformists (how ever they or some of them
might hold, that in the calling and authority of the Bishops there be diverse
things Antichristian,) agreed by joint consent, That they did not see (I use
their own words) how our Bishops could be called Antichrists, or
Antichristians: 1. Because the Word marks out Antichrist by his false doctrine;
nor do we find in holy Scripture any such accounted Antichrist, or
Antichristian, which holding the truth of Doctrine, swerveth either in judgment
or practice from Christ's rule for Discipline: now it is evident that our
Bishops do hold and teach all fundamental Doctrines and Truths, and some of
them have soundly maintained it against Heretics, converted many to it, and
have suffered persecution for the Gospel. 2. Their Hierarchy and other
corruptions charged upon the calling of our Bishops, were rather to be esteemed
the stairs and way to Antichristianity, then Antichristianity it self; for they
were in the Church before the Pope, who is the Antichrist, and the chief
Head-link of all Antichristianity, was revealed. 3. The Antichristian Bishops
hold their preeminence as from Gods Law, which is unchangeable; whereas our
Bishops, since her Majesty's reign to this day (for the most part) held their
superiority by no other right then the positive Law, which is variable; yea it
appears by the Institution of the Court of Delegates, and the continuance
thereof to this day, that they do and ought by Law to hold their Jurisdiction,
not as from God, but as from the Prince. Thus they. And as to Ministers
ordained by the Bishops, they say, Bishops are able to judge of such gifts as
are required for the sufficiency of Ministers, that many of them have been such
Ministers themselves, as to Whose labors the Lord has set to his Seal -- We
are persuaded, that (though it were not necessary, yet) it cannot be unlawful
for him that enters into the Ministry to be approved and authorized even by
them. And if our Ordination be in this behalf faulty, how will our Brethren
justify the calling of their own Ministers, that have received Ordination ever
from the people, who neither by commandment nor example can be found to have
any such authority, nor are in any degree so capable of it, as the Bishops? See
Mr Rathbands grave Confutation, etc. page 19. and 38. 3. Suppose it were
confessed, That the Bishops, as claiming by Gods Law sole power of Ordination
and Jurisdiction (if any so did) might in some qualified sense be called
Antichristian; had this such an influence upon an Ordination, in which others
joined as well as he, so as to make it void and null, both as from himself, and
from them? The Bishops were Presbyters, and so more enabled by Gods Word to
ordain (as the godly Nonconformists truly assert) then any Non-Presbyters; and
they came nearer to a Presbytery then two, three, or more members (which are
nothing like a Presbytery, or company of Presbyters) can do: and their
Ordination was judged valid, not only by the Parliament and the Assembly, but
also by all the Reformed Churches abroad, as by the Nonconformists at home,
notwithstanding they were opposers of, and were opposed by the Bishops; yea,
God himself added his own Seal, affording not only Ministerial Gifts and
Graces, but his gracious assistance, for Conversion of Souls, and edifying of
the Saints; and (sometimes) so gloriously working by the Ministry of the Church
of England, as he has not (that we know of) wrought so by any other. But in
your account the Baptism administered by such a Minister is neither lawful nor
sufficient, or at least it is the profanation of the Ordinance: Who you are, I
know not; but the general Opinion of your party is, that any Disciple
(especially a teaching Disciple) may baptize: (See Confession of the seven
Churches, Art. 41.) And does Ordination by a Bishop, and other Ministers, make
void such Discipleship, and make him that he cannot be so much as a private
Christian, yea make his Baptism Antichristian? We receive from God the Old
Testament by the hands of the Jews, and the whole Bible by the hands of
Papists; most Scriptures have some time or other been abused, must we therefore
disuse them? If a Bishop should baptize one at full age, making profession of
faith and repentance, yea suppose a Jesuit, pretending to be a gifted Brother,
or a teaching Disciple, (as it is lawful for the Jesuits to say or do any
thing that may tend to the weakening the true Reformed Religion,) and should
dip many, would his dipping be null and void, and to be reiterated? This I dare
say, Whatsoever is rational or religious, cannot be made irrational or
irreligious, whosoever uses or has used it: And if multitudes of persons
should cast away all that they have received by the Bishops and Ministers
ordained by them, they should with those things irrecoverably cast their Souls
into Hell. When Antichrist most reigned and raged, and the woman fled into the
Wilderness, God did preserve some Fundamental Doctrines, and the essence of
Baptism, and the essence of a true Ministry dispensing it; and they, that is,
her Pastors, did feed her there, Revel. 12.6, 14. 4. There are now more
Antichrists, then ever were before in our, or in any other Reformed Church; and
worse Antichrists, by how much Fundamental Errors in Doctrine are greater
abominations then Errors only in Discipline: All Heretics in
Scripture Language are Antichrist, 1 Epist. John. The Errors, Heresies,
Blasphemies, Treacheries, Hypocrisies, Perjuries, sacrilegious seditious
Actions, Divisions and Subdivisions, bitter and bloody Contentions,
Rebaptizations, Ordinations by the people, and other mere humane inventions of
these Times, do justify the Bishops, and all Episcopal men (that have kept
themselves free from these and the like crimes) from being so Antichristian as
we; do really dishonor the true Reformed Religion, delight the truly
Antichristian Faction, and make way for our reducing, not only to Prelacy, but
to that which all sober men count incomparably more dangerous, to Popery, yea
to the worst edition of it, Spanish, Jesuited, Inquisition-Popery.

ANABAPT. CAT.
Paedobaptism is done upon a wrong subject, who is not in Christ's commission,
Matt. 28.19. nor Mark 16.16. Believers and Repentants being the subjects
therein.

EXAMINAT.

You here beg the question; what you here alledg, has been answered Chap. 1.
and Chap. 2.

ANABAPT. CAT.
All the certainty I can have of such a Baptism, is only conjectural, not
infallible; whereas the outward sign of a Sacrament must be visible and
infallible, as the thing signified is; this Infant Baptism I take only in trust
from others.

THe Infants blessed by Christ could in their riper age have no certainty of
their being so blessed by him, Examinat. Chap. 14.
nor had the Jewish Infants any certainty of their Circumcision; for the
foreskin of circumcised Infants might be, and sometimes was, so drawn up, that
when they came to age they could not discern their Circumcision. To this Paul
alludes, 1 Cor. 7.18. If the flesh-mark was always discernable, yet it could not
teach them whether a friend or foe had done it, whether for sacred or civil
ends, whether duly or unduly, without instruction and information by word or
writing; and such instruction may assure us of our right Baptism, though it was
administered in Infancy. You may have such assurance of your Baptism, as the
Priests by the Registers had of their pedigree, Ezra 2.62. as Paul had, that he
was circumcised the eighth day, that he was of the stock of Israel, an Hebrew
of the Hebrews, of the tribe of Benjamin, Phil. 3.5. Yea, you may have as much
or more certainty that you were baptized, as that such an one was your father,
such a woman your mother: yet sure (if you will call that only a conjectural
and not infallible testimony) you will test so much upon it, as to call him
your father, and her your mother, that are testified and reputed to be so, and
without scruple of conscience honor them, as you are bound by the fifth
Commandment; and also keep that which is generally computed to be the first day
of the week, or the Lord's Day, though you take it but on trust from others:
Possibly he that is baptized at full age, may not infallibly know that he was
baptized; some have forgotten (through sickness) the greatest concernments, yea
their own names, must they thereupon be rebaptized? Possibly a man or woman, as
you are dipping them under the water, may be so damped, that they may not hear,
or not heed the words used by the Administrator, whether he baptize, or bless,
or curse; must they be dipped again, till they do hear, and heed, that they may
infallibly know themselves to be baptized? If a man should herein be deceived,
and think he was baptized in his Infancy, when he was not, the Error is not
very dangerous; Faith in Christ may supply the defect of Baptism: and he not
neglecting or contemning Baptism, nor knowing that he wants it, may reap
benefit by his supposed Baptism, as if it were re^l.

As for his resolution of the case (grounded on the suppose unlawfulness of
Paedobaptism,) whether a Christian may with good conscience be present at it, I
judge it unnecessary for me to discuss it, (having (I hope) cleared the
lawfulness of Infant Baptism,) yet I confess, I cannot approve sundry things in
it, though Paedobaptism were confessed to be unlawful.

SOME OBSERVATIONS Both Old and New, Concerning the pretended Visibility,
Universality, Antiquity, Infallibility, Unity and Purity of the present Roman
Church and Religion.
Sent to a Gentleman upon his Revolt to Popery; and now Published (with some
few Additions) for the Churches good.
SIR,
1. YOu do all confess the affirmative and positive Doctrines of the Church of
England and other Reformed Churches to be true and Catholic, and to have had
visible Professors in all Ages; only you superadd certain other Doctrines,
which (you say) are necessary to be believed unto Salvation:

For evidence whereof, observe,

1. Our Churches Doctrine, All the Books of the Old and New Testament,
mentioned in the 39 Articles, and in the late Confession of Faith, to be holy
and Canonical, are for such to be received. 2. Your Churches Additions. The
Books of Tobit, Judeth, Wisdom, Maccabees, and the rest (commonly called
Apocrypha) are also Canonical. The Scripture is the Rule of Faith and Manners.
Traditions of the Church are of equal Authority with the Scriptures. The
Originals, Hebrew and Greek, are Authentical. The Vulgar Edition is most pure
and Authentical. There are two Sacraments of the New Testament; Baptism, and
the Lords Supper. There are also five more, viz. Confirmation, Penance,
Extreme Unction, Orders (of which there are seven, viz. Priests, Deacons,
Subdeacons, Acolytes, Exorcists, Lectors or Readers, Ostiaries or
Door-keepers) and Matrimony. God is to be invocated, and Religiously
worshipped. Yea, and the Images of God also, Crosses, Crucifixes, Altars,
Angels, Saints, with their Relics and Images. Christ is the Head of the
Church. And the Pope also. Christ is our Mediator and Advocate. So are the
Angels and Saints likewise. Christ was conceived without original sin. And the
Virgin Mary also. Christ was once sacrificed on the Cross for the Redemption of
the world. Christ is daily offered up in Mass a propitiatory Sacrifice for the
sins of quick and dead. We are saved by the merits of Christ. And also by the
merits of the Saints. We are justified by Faith. And by hope, love fear of God,
good works, which merit Salvation. All the words and actions which Scripture
records to be used by Christ in the celebration of the Supper, are to be used
by us also. The sacred Host must also be elevated, adored reserved, carried in
solemn procession. Christ is truly present in the Eucharist. Christ is
corporally present by Transubstantiation, and may be received into the mouths
of wicked men, yea of Rats and Mice. There are two places for the Souls of such
as depart hence. And two besides, viz. Purgatory and Limbus Infantum. The three
Creeds, commonly called the Creed of the Apostles of the Nicene Council, and of
Athanasius, are to be received and believed. And Pope Pius his Creed also, or
his additions to the Nicene Creed, are also to be received and believed.

These and the like positive Points of the Reformed Religion (whereof I omit
sundry) are truly and properly Catholic, for in them not only Papists, but in
a manner all Christians in the world concur with us: but in your Additions you
stand single, and have multitudes of Christians in the Eastern and Western
Churches dissenting from you.

2. Peruse the Book of nine and thirty Articles, the Homilies, Leiturgy and
Catechisms, or the late Directory, Confession of Faith, or Catechisms, larger
or shorter, and find if you can the Doctrine of our Church contrary to any one
Article of those several Creeds which in the first six hundred years were
Badges of Catholic Profession, or produce any one of those Articles to which
we do not willingly subscribe.

3. Though the ancient Church did undoubtedly believe and profess all that was
necessary to Salvation, yet there is not one Creed of General or National
Counced, particular Church or Father, within a thousand or twelve hundred years
after Christ, in which the Articles of Pope Pius his Creed were imposed (as now
they are) for Articles of Faith necessary to be believed unto Salvation.

4. The Church of God (as might be proved by Scriptures or Fathers, if it were
not acknowledged by your own Authors) cannot make a new Article of Faith, nor
any addition to the Creed, save by way of Explication of that which was
formerly upon Scripture grounds believed and professed: But these additions of
yours were not believed (if you should say that they were believed implicitly,
this (suppose it true) would take away the Visibility of the Profession
thereof) by the Ancient Ca^holique and Apostolic Church.

5. None of your side hitherto has, or hereafter can produce any one visible
Church, which in the Apostolic and in all succeeding Ages did approve and use
Communion in one kind, Private Mass, Prayer in an unknown Tongue,
Image Worship, Pardons, Indulgences, which believed the Popes Infallibility,
his Superiority over General Councels, his temporal Authority over Kings and
Emperors to depose them, and dispose of their Dominions, the necessity of
auricular Confession, the determinate number of seven Sacraments, Purgatory,
and the Popes Power to deliver Souls from thence, which forbade Laymen
(without a special dispensation) to read the Scriptures, or Priests to marry,
etc.

6. Nay you cannot name any one person in each several Age, out of whose words
or writings (notwithstanding there were sundry Creeds, Confessions of Faith,
Catechisms, Sermons or Homilies, Summaries of Christian Doctrine) the aforesaid
particular Points of Popery may be collected, descending from the age of Christ
to the days of Luther.

7. Nay you cannot name any one Father or Catholic Writer for twelve hundred
years after Christ, that did hold all those Tenets which are now taught by the
Romish Church, and authorized by the Trent Council.

8. None of your side has or can prove, that any of the Primitive Martyrs or
Confessors suffered Death, Banishment, Torment, Confiscation, etc. for the
Popish Religion, or any particular thereof, in which they differ from the
Church of England; as Papal Supremacy, Communion in one kind, Image Worship.
etc.

9. You cannot show, that any one Article of your Faith in which we dissent
from you, is Catholic according to Vincentius Lirinensis his Rules, viz.
which was Ancient in his time, and in respect of the Arrian Heresy, which he
calls novellum dogma, a novel tenet; and that which you know, that not unus aut
duo tantum sed omnes, etc. not only one or two, but all, though living in
several times and places, have with one consent openly, frequently, constantly
held written and taught.

10. None of your side dare for shame affirm, that Communion in both kinds,
Prayer in a known Tongue, communion of Priest with people, Laymens reading of
the Scriptures, Worship of God without Images, Invocation of God without
mediation of Saints or Angels, and other the aforesaid affirmative and positive
Doctrines, were invented by Luther, or that they are not in themselves so
lawful and agreeable to the Scriptures, and practice of the first six centuries
of years, as Communion in one kind, Prayer in an unknown Tongue, etc.

11. There are few or no Points denied or affirmed against us by you, in which
you vary not amongst your selves; and if any of you will distinctly set down
(avoiding general and ambiguous terms) what he thinks to be the truth in any
Question or Exposition of Scripture controverted betwixt us, I verily believe I
can name him another Papist, new or old, that says the contrary: Bellarmine
does obiter discover to the world above three hundred several Opinions of
Papists, and those only in and about the Points controverted between you and
us; and Navane mentions about sixty Dissentions of your Doctors in one only
Point, to wit, Confession.

12. I shall hold, till herein I be convinced of Error by instance to the
contrary, that whatsoever titles are by the ancient Fathers given to the
Eucharist, whereby you would prove Transubstantiation, Adoration, Sacrifice,
etc. the same phrases, or some equivalent to them, may be found in the Fathers
concerning Baptism, in which you confess there is neither Transubstantiation
nor Sacrifice.

13. Also, that those glorious things which were spoken by them of the Bishops
of Rome, may be paralleled by such as read them thoroughly with the like
honorable mention of other Patriarchs and Bishops.

14. Also, that as good testimony may be produced out of the Fathers for the
absolute necessity of the Eucharist, as for the absolute necessity of Baptism.

15. Also, that though gemina or duo Sacramenta be sometimes found, yet septem
Sacramenta, or words equivalent to them, cannot be found in any ancient Father,
though they did call by the name of Sacraments, not only Ordination, Matrimony,
etc. but ablution of the feet, sign of the Cross, etc. which are not properly
so called.

16. I desire to be satisfied why you so frequently and suspiciously (the
matter being so mainly controverted) do in your allowed Manuals, Catechisms,
etc. leave out of the Decalogue all the second Commandment, or that large
passage prohibiting the worship of Images.

17. Also, how you can reconcile the two Bibles of Sixtus and Clement, between
which are so many and material differences; or if you cannot reconcile them,
how you can satisfy your Conscience whether of them is Authentical, seeing
they have equal Authority from the Sea Apostolic, equal Absolutions from
Oaths of admitting any other, equal Imprecations and Curses to them which
receive them not for Authentical; so that either you must use no Bible at all,
or undergo the curse of Pope Sixtus, if you use that of Clement; or of Pope
Clement, if you use the other of Sixtus.

18. For as much as Traditions are defined to be the Rule of Faith, and equal
to the Scriptures, and nothing is more necessary for the Church to do then to
deliver the Rule of Faith clearly and precisely; what is the cause I pray you,
that no Pope or Council, no not that of Trent, has given an exact Catalogue or
List of divine and infallible Traditions? is it because you are not fully as
yet agreed of them, or are they for some politic ends reserved in the Popes
Breast?

19. This Assertion [that the Roman Church is infallible in all her Decrees and
Definitions] is the Foundation of your Faith, and if it fail, your Faith fails
also; yet it is much doubted of, yea denied by some Romanists; nor (as I
suppose) was it ever declated, decreed or defined by the Church in any General
Council; if it was, I pray you show me when, where, and in what terms.

20. Suppose this was so defined, and thereupon you be assured that the Church
is infallible, yet you cannot be infallibly assured what is meant by the
Church, which some of your Doctors interpret to be the Church essential, some
the Church representative, (which, as some of them hold, is a General Council,
though without the Pope; others, the Council and the Pope together,) some the
Church virtual, the Pope alone; which yet are not agreed amongst themselves
when, where, and in what matters the Pope may or may not err.

21. If herein you were resolved, yet you cannot be infallibly assured that the
present Pope is a true and lawful Pope, seeing he may be promoted by Simony, or
his Baptizer or Ordainer, or the Baptizers or Ordainers of them, or some of
them, might miss the right intention of Baptizing or Ordaining, in which case
he cannot be in the sight of God a lawful Pope.

22. Put case you hope well of your Pope, yet it is possible you may mistake
Papal Decrees, Definitions, etc. and not understand them in their true and
genuine sense. Soto and Catharinus, who were present at the Trent Council,
could not agree what was the Councels meaning in the Points of Original Sin and
Justification, but writ Books one against another of that Subject.

23. You will say perhaps, The Pope is a living Judge to determine these or the
like doubts; which if it were granted, yet still you have no such infallible
certainty as you pretend; for you never heard the Pope preach, propound Truths,
or resolve Doubts; you only hear his Priests and Jesuits, whom I hope you will
not exempt from a possibility of deceiving, or being deceived, especially
seeing both Priests and Jesuits, Dominicans and Franciscans, do pretend the
Pope to be their Patron, and their Tenants, though contrary one to another, to
be the Tenants of the Church.

24. Lastly (to omit other Observations till further occasion) If proof of the
Churches Infallibility be demanded of you, you will alledg Matthew. 16.18. or
Luke 22.32. or some other Scripture. If again you be demanded, what assutance
you have that Matthew. 16.18. Luke 22.32. and the other Scriptures, are of divine
Authority, and that they are not corrupted nor mis interpreted? you must
answer, That the Church is infallible, which keeps and interprets the
Scripture. Thus you prove the Infallibility of the Church by the Scriptures,
and the Infallibility of the Scriptures by the Church, which is nothing else
but to run round in a circle to beg the Question, and in effect to prove the
Churches Infallibility by the Infallibility of the Church.

Imprimatur, Edm: Calamy.

March 4. 1652.

FINIS.

