OBSERVATIONS Touching the PRINCIPLES OF NATURAL MOTIONS; And especially
touching Rarefaction and Condensation: TOGETHER WITH A REPLY to certain REMARKS
touching the Gravitation of FLUIDS.

By the Author of DIFFICILES NVGAE.

LONDON, Printed by W. Godbid, for W. Shrowsbury, at the Bible in Duke-Lane,
1677.

The Right Hon.ble Algernon Capell, Earl of Essex, Viscount Maldon, and Baron
Capell of Hadham: 1701.


TO THE READER.
READER,
ABout Two or Three Years since, I was content that Two Small Books, or rather
Pamphlets, that I had collected, partly in my Youth, and partly at the
Recreations of leisure hours, should be published in Print; The one Entitled,
An Essay touching the Gravitation of Fluids; The other, Difficiles Nugae, or,
Observations touching the Torricellian Experiment.

In the Publishing of them, I did not set them off with any Ostentation; but
let them go with uninviting Titles, and not so much as bestowed upon them my
Name: For I thought that they were but Trifles, and such as were below the
Perusal of the Learned men of the Age, and at best, a Divertisement of some
leisure-hours, to young Students in Matters of this Nature.

But beyond my expectation, these Nugae (for so I must still call them) had the
unexpected honor to be perused and examined by Two especially of the most
Learned Masters in Philosophy and Mathematics, that this latter Age has
yielded; and not only so, but they have given them the honor to make
Observations, Animadversions and Remarks upon them.

Those which came out first were short and obiter, upon occasion of another
Discourse, which gave opportunity of a short Defense. Those that came out
since, were more large.

The Nameless Author of the Essay and Nugae, does return to them his thankful
Acknowledgment of thoir Favor, in taking Notice of such Trifles, and using
them and the unknown Author with that Civility that they have expressed in
their Remarks.

The truth is. the Controversy falls to be of that Nature, that among the
Three Contenders, every one opposes somewhat that the other two grant; and
asserts somewhat that the other two deny: For instance, I contend against the
solving of the Phenomenon in the Torricellian Experiment, by the weight or
Elasticity of the Air, or by a common Spirit of Nature; but that it is done
Mechanically by Tension.

My first Opponent supposes it not done by Tension, nor the common Spirit of
Nature, but by the Weight and Elasticity of the Air.

The Third contends that it is neither done by the Elasticity or weight of the
Air, nor by Tension; but by the Spirit of Nature.

Thus every one agrees and disagrees with the other; and every Opponent in one
kind, is in another kind the Advocate of the Party he opposes.

And this will both assist and justify me, in writing in the farther
Explication and Application of what I have asserted; which I shall do with
plainness and freeness: but without Arrogance to my self, as if I had wholly
confuted my Opponents; or detraction from my Opponents, or their Assertions, by
censuring them as absurd or contradictory. For in those cases, the Judgment is
the Readers, not the Opponents.

In Philosophical Enquiries and Conclusions, we may observe two kinds of
Methods used by some men.

Some begin at their Senses, examine particular Matters of Facts, how they are,
or fall out, search into Experiments and visible Trials, and those Appearances
of Nature that are obvious to our Senses, and from these they deduce their
Conclusions and Theorems.

And certainly he that attentively reads Aristotle, especially in his History
of Animals, of their Parts, Going and Generation, in his Meteorologicks, in his
Books De Anima; yea, in his very Physics, will find, that as he was the
greatest Master of Experience and Observation of this kind, so it was the great
Method of his Deductions and Conclusions. And therefore they that when they
would seem to cry up Experimental Philosophy, think they do but right in
decrying Aristotle, either have not considered him, or surely are too injurious
to him.

Again, There are some that lay the first Foundations of their Philosophy in
Notions, and Speculations, and preconceived Systemes of their own framing; and
then conforming the Solution of the Phenomenon in Nature, to those Notions. And
these most commonly do by Nature and Natural Appearances, as that Tyrant did by
his Prisoners that were too long or too short for his Iron Bed; stretched the
latter, and cut the former to its dimension; so these handle the Phenomenon in
Nature; torture and torment them into a consonancy to their Notions; or at
best, substitute new precarious Notions to piece out their Hypotheses, and to
render sensible Appearances to hold analogy with that Notional Systeme of
things that they have framed: And I must needs say, that I think the general
Mode and Fashion of the reassumed Philosophy of Lucretius, Epicurus and
Democritus, the Restitution and Reformation of it by Des Carts and Gassendus,
has too much of this latter Method in it, and is a very uncertain and
preposterous way of forming Conclusions. I have therefore chosen the former of
these Methods, and as near as I can, framed my Conclusions from the evidence of
Sense and particular Experiences and Experiments.

And although it is not impossible for me to be mistaken in some of my
Experiments, and the Inferences made thereupon; yet I think I have not much
mistaken herein; only one Experiment, which I call a double Trial, page 84. of
the Difficiles Nugae, is somewhat obscurely delivered by me, and not so much to
my purpose; of which I take notice in my Reply to the 6 th Remark upon that
Book.

I have in the Beginning of this Book spent Ten chapters touching the
Principles of Motion, Essential Forms, Rarefaction and Condensation; which have
a general influence into much of what is said concerning those matters, which
often occur in the Remarks; and thereby I at once give my sense concerning
those difficult points, and save my self the labor of often Repetitions or
Answers touching things therein delivered.

The Subject of the Controversy, I confess, is of no great importance, neither
is the fortune of Greece (as the Proverb is) concerned whether of the
Controverters Suppositions be the truest; or whether, it may be, some other may
be discovered truer than any of the former. All that I shall say touching our
Discourses of this nature, is this, That though they are not very profitable
expenses of time in the Writers or Readers; yet they may be innocent Diversions
to both, and may be of some use in the indagation of Natural Causes and Effects.

Some Favors I must desire of the Reader.

1. That he will be contented to bear with such vulgar Expressions which serve
my turn to give account of my Thoughts in a Matter of this Nature; such as are,
Architecture, Cones, Capes, Masonry, and twenty such vulgar Expressions, which,
it may be, Learned men may think too mean, and repeat them with some disdain.

2. That though I do many times use Expressions that are not polished according
to Grammatical or Scholastic Niceties or Modes, that I may be excused herein,
and that the Reader will look to the Scope and Drift; and mark at what I aim;
and not cavil at bare Terms and Expressions, so long as the thing they design
be laid open: This is an unhappiness that too often befalls men that are
inquisitive after Truth; that their Readers or Opponents miss the scope of the
Writer, and fall upon Criticismes about Words and Forms of Expressions. Words
are but Signs of Conceptions and Thoughts; and as I have elsewhere said, they
perform their Office well enough, when they render our Thoughts intelligible.

3. That he will be content to suspend his Censure upon Clauses or Sentences
apart, till he has perused all: It is not possible, especially in Discourses
of this Nature, to speak or write all at once. Some things that are but shortly
or obscurely delivered, or perchance omitted in one Sentence, Page, or
Paragraph, may be supplied or explained in another.

The CONTENTS.
CHap. 1. Concerning Motion, and its Original. Page 1 Chap. 2. A farther
Disquisition touching the immediate Cause of Motion. Page 7 Chap. 3. Concerning
some other more universal or common Causes assigned to Motions, viz. Anima
Mundi, Spiritus Naturae, and Principia Hylarchica. Page 25 Chap. 4. Touching
Rarefaction and Condensation, and their Kinds. Page 36 Chap. 5. Concerning the
Phenomenon of Rarefaction and Condensation apparent to Sense. Page 49 Chap. 6.
Concerning the various Solutions of Condensation and Rarefaction; and first, of
that which is by supposed interspersed Vacuities. Page 55 Chap. 7. Concerning
the Second Solution of Rarefaction and Condensation, and its insufficiency.
Page 67 Chap. 8. Further Considerations concerning the Deficiency of the Second
Solution in relation to Rarefaction and Condensation, and the Supplements that
have been devised to enforce or supply it. Page 77 Chap. 9. Touching the Third
Supposition of the Method of Rarefaction and Condensation according to the
Ancient Philosophy, which seems to be the truest. Page 87 Chap. 10. A further
Consideration of Rarefaction and Condensation, and of the Supposition of the
Penetrability or Impenetrability of Bodies, Material Substances, Quantity,
Extension, etc. Page 108
ERRATA.
Page 39. l. 4. dele appearing. p. 43. l. 10. r. it it makes spaces. p. 63. l.
25. abstracted, r. obstructed. p. 64. l. 18. r. and with great ease, if the
supposition be true. p. 65. l. 15. more, r. mere. p. 89. l. 20. Tube, r. Cube.
p. 94. l. 23. dele actual. p. 95. l. 13. cancelled, r. cantelled. p. 106. l. 7.
r. passion or quality of. p. 131. l. 21. r. in Condensation. p. 189. l. 6. r.
preponderation. p. 192. l. 25. Balance, r. Bottom. p. 204. l. 20. some, r.
sense. p. 239. l. 24. r. preponderated. p. 276. l. 17. r. foreign.

OBSERVATIONS Touching the Principles of Natural Motions; and especially
touching RAREFACTION and CONDENSATION.
CHAP. I. Concerning Motion, and its Original.
AS an Introduction to what follows, I shall briefly set down some Observations
touching Motion of Created Material Beings; for I shall not in this place
meddle with those more Noble Beings of Angelical or Spiritual Natures, nor the
Humane Soul, which is a Subject of another and higher nature, and not to be
measured by those ordinary Rules or Reasons that concern Bodies, Matter, and
Material Natures.

We may generally find in all Material Beings the thing called Motion; in some
of one kind, in some of another; some more simple, some more complexed and
various; some more conspicuous to sense, as Local Motion; some less
conspicuous, as Generation and Alteration; some things are moved by others,
some things seem to have the Principle or Original of motion in themselves,
which communicates motion to the Subject wherein that Principle resides, and
also to other things by contact of their corporeity or virtue. And therefore
Aristotle somewhere as I remember, calls motion or endeavors of it, to be
quasi vita quaedam quae omnibus inest, quae Natura constant.

The primitive Principle or Cause of all Motion is the first Mover, the great
and glorious Lord of Nature, from whom, as being so, all Motion is derived into
created Beings.

1. By way of causality; those created Beings that seem to have the immediate
Principle of Motions in themselves, have that Principle from his Fiat and
Institution. And,

2. By way of Concurrence and Concomitance. There is a perpetual flux from that
Fountain of Being that preserves and sustains those Principles of Motion which
he at first lodged in created Beings, according to their several ranks, kinds
and natures, and instituted Durations; and if this Concourse should withdraw it
self but one moment, all the Motion of created Beings would cease and expire.

Matter it self simply considered as such, though it be susceptive of Motion
(as we daily see) is not the immediate principle of Motion in those subjects
that seem to be self-moving, or primitive Movents of other things, according to
that Law of Nature instituted by the Sovereign Lord thereof.

And this seems apparent, among other Reasons, by these that follow.

1. Because Matter in it self, and simply considered, seems to be merely
passive, and receptive of active impressions from something else: It is true,
one portion of Matter once set in Motion, will by contact put another portion
of Matter into Motion. But we are not now upon the search of intermediate
Instrumentals of Motion, but upon the search of the Principles of such Motions
which seem primitively and immediately to be elicited in any Physical Subject.

2. Because Matter simply considered, seems to be one kind of uniform Entity,
but diversified by its Forms, Qualities and Modifications, as Weight, Color,
Hardness, Softness, etc. The Matter of a piece of Gold, and of a piece of Wood,
abstractively considered, seems to be the Materia prima of the Ancients, and of
the same nature; and consequently, if Matter simply considered were the
immediate active principle of Motion, the Motions of all things would be as
simple and uniform as the Matter it self. But we see by daily experience that
there are Motions of several Subjects, which have the immediate principle of
their Motion in and from themselves, or somewhat within them that obtains vicem
Moventis, and are various, differing, differently exerted, and differently
terminated from the Motions of other Bodies.

Therefore if there be any things in Nature, that have their Principle of
Motion in themselves, we must find out if we can, somewhat besides Matter, that
is the immediate root or spring of it.

It is true, the great Master in Natural Philosophy, Aristotle, tells us, that
whatsoever is moved, is moved by another, which would make one suppose that he
thought there were no immediate self-moving principle in those Beings we call
Automata, but only the first Mover; and truly with respect to the Sovereign
Cause of all things, that every thing is moved by him that is unmovable, as I
have before showed, cannot be questioned.

But that there are created Beings, that by the powerful and sovereign
Institution of Almighty God, have an immediate Principle of Motion in and from
themselves, is beyond Dispute.

A Brute Beast possibly may be put immediately into Motion by his Appetite, and
that Appetite excited by the presence of an Object; and here the Object has
(as I may call it) a Moral Principle of Motion exciting the Appetite, moving
the Brute to a nearer approach to the Object. But then in the Gressus Brutalis,
it is somewhat within him that gives the Local Motion it self, namely, the
Brutalis Anima.

And the same is evident in the Motions of Augmentation and Conformation of
Vegetables, the motions of Ascent and Calefaction in Fire, the Motions of
Attraction and Aversation in Magnetical Bodies, and the very Motion of Descent
in heavy Bodies; and infinite more instances of Physical Bodies, which have an
intrinsic principle of exciting and communicating Motion to the Subjects of
their inexistence, and to other things: Now touching this internal immediate
principle of Motion, is this Enquiry upon which I am.

CHAP. II. A farther Disquisition touching the immediate Cause of Motion.
IN the former Chapter I have supposed these two things. 1. That there are some
things that have an active self-moving Principle lodged within them. 2. That
Matter simply considered, is not that immediate self-moving Principle: It
remains therefore to be enquired what that Principle is.

The ancient Bi-partition of created Beings was into Substance and Accident.
But this seems to me to be too narrow (I am still speaking of created material
Existences) and I shall not be ashamed to own Helmont for my Instructor herein,
because he speaks with great evidence of Reason.

There seems therefore to be a third kind of Existence or Entity participating
in some respect of the nature of both, and yet differing in other respects from
both; for indeed it is an Entity among created Beings belonging to Matter, far
more noble than either of the two former, and is that which gives Life, Vigor,
Activity, and Motion, immediately next under the Lord of Nature, to every
self-moving Being.

And this Entity I call Vis, or Virtus activa, superadded to Matter, and giving
immediately those Motions to it, that are specifically appropriate to that Vis,
or Virtus Activa, and without which, Matter would be stupid, dull, unactive,
and always at rest in it self, unless accidentally moved ab extrinseco.

And although those Vires or Virtutes activae, the immediate Principles of
Motion in such things as are Automata, are various, and infinitely diversified,
yet I shall instance but in few; which nevertheless will be sufficient to
render my self intelligible in what I say. And those are principally of two
sorts; the first of those (the noblest below the humane Soul) are those Vires,
or Virtutes Essentiales, that are the principal Constituents of vital or
substantial Forms. The second are those which are usually called active
qualities, which seem to be of a lower nature and allay than the former.

Under the first of these Ranks, there are different Classes, not only
gradually, but essentially more or less perfect than others, viz. first, the
Vis sentiens and animalis of Animals. 2. The Vis vegetans and vitalis of
Vegetables, and possibly of many Minerals. 3. The Vis combustiva and
calefactiva of Fire. 4. The Vis attractiva, directiva and communicativa of
Magnetical Bodies.

These Virtutes or Vires Essentiales even of the noblest sort (I mean below the
humane nature) have this pre-eminence above the Matter or Substance whereunto
they are united, that they are the immediate, vital, movent principle, that
gives a kind of Life or Motion to the Subject wherein they exist, which would
otherwise be destitute of Life or Motion from it self.

Whether these Vires or Virtutes Essentiales are in themselves defectible or
not, may be questioned: some have thought that they have certain Termini
Temporales of their Existence, and Operations in themselves simply and
abstractively considered, and in process of time languish and finally expire
and cease, as the energy of the Spring of a Watch in its evolution, grows
languid, and at last utterly cease from any farther evolution or motion.
Others have thought, and with great evidence of Reason, that there is no decay
or natural termination of the Vis or Energia Essentialis it self, but only by
the decay or defectibility, or dissolution of the material Hypostasis to which
it is united, or of the Organs which it uses in its operations; which being
compounded Bodies, are subject to decay and dissolution. And therefore the
Philosopher tells us, that if an old man had a young man's eye, he would see as
well as in his Youth; for the decay is not in the Visive Faculty, or Vis or
Virtus Essentialis sentiens; but in the Organ, or Subject, or Substratum of its
Operation or Inexistence.

But in some respects it is inferior to Matter, and seems to participate of
the nature of Accidents; as for instance, It necessarily according to the
common Laws of Nature, requires a material Hypostasis or Subject in which it
may inexist, and to which it may be united: thus the Vis Sentiens and Animalis
is immediately united to the Animal Spirits, or the most refined parts of the
Animal Nature. The Vis Vegetans Vitalis of Vegetables is immediately united to
the Vital Spirits and Succus Vitalis of Vegetables. As to Fire, whether the Vis
Ignea have a proper Hypostasis of its own to which it is united (as the Vis
Sentiens has) or whether it has no other Substratum but the Body in which it
is, as the Cole or Iron, or as the common Body of the Air it self, through
which it is universally diffused, may, I confess, be questionable; yet
certainly it has some Hypostasis, to which it is united, and primitively
inexists, and without which, it seems it cannot be.

2. Whereas no portion of Matter is lost in Nature, or annihilable but by
Omnipotence, those Vires Essentiales are in their individuals extinguished and
lost, and no where in Nature upon the destruction, dissipation or dissolution
of the necessary Hypostasis or Subject of their inexistence: When the Animal
Spirits are wholly dissipated or dissolved, the Vis Sentiens of that Animal is
lost, and no where: When water is thrown upon the Cole of Fire, the Vis Ignea
that was in it, is extinct and nullibi, and (as it seems) does not facessere in
elementum commune Ignis, at least if it have not a special Hypostasis of its
own to which it is united; and when the Magnet is burnt in the Fire, the Vis
Magnetica in it is extinct. And the same is to be said of that other more
ignoble Principle of Motion hereafter mentioned, viz. Active Qualities.

And this, as I think, gives us a true notion of the Souls of Brutes, the Forms
of Vegetables, of Fire, and other substantial Forms below the humane Soul.

If any should ask me what I take the Soul of a brute animal to be, I should
say, it consisted of two essential parts; the one, this active Vis, or Virtus
Sentiens Animalis, the Root and Fountain of all its motions, of Sensation,
Perception, Fantasy, Appetition, and Local Motion. And the other is the
immediate Hypostasis or Substratum in which this Vis Vitalis Sentiens*
primitively inexists, and to which it is primitively united, and by which it
communicates it self to the whole Compositum; and these are some select Crasis
or Portion of the Animal Spirits: For the Animal Nature being a more curious
piece than inferior Subsistences, and fuller of variety, therefore there is a
more elaborate and curious method of the union of its Essentials than in
others: And next to Animals, there is a more curious method of union and
colligation of the Virtus Vitalis of Vegetables to the more pure and subtle
vital Spirits, or Latex Vitalis of Vegetables.

But the Vis Ignea and the Vis Magnetica seem to be immediately united to the
whole Fiery or Magnetical Mass: But yet still the activity of both is owing not
to the bare Hypostasis or Substratum wherein it is lodged, but to that
incorporeal force, virtue or energy which acts in it, upon it and by it.

And upon this account Aristotle is to be understood, when in 1. De Anima, he
styles the Souls of Brutes to be incorporeal, and yet in other places calls
them substantial, viz. they are immaterial and incorporeal with relation to the
Vis or Virtus Essentialis activa, which is the regnant and noblest part of
them; but they are substantial, and not only so, but material in relation to
the prima Hypostasis or Primum Substratum, the Animal Spirits, whereunto this
Vis Activa is united, or rather some Nodus or concrement of a refined
Substance, which is as it were the root or Focus of these Spirits, that like so
many Branches, are derived from it, through the Nerves, and by them
communicated to the whole Compositum.

And although I do here industriously omit the Examination of the Nature of the
Humane or Reasonable Soul; yet I cannot omit this special observation of the
discrimination of the Humane Soul from the Souls of Brutes, viz. that although
the appropriate faculties of the Sentient or Animal Soul be admitted
indefectible in themselves, yet their prima Hypostasis, or immediate subject of
their inexistence is corruptible, and subject to dissipation; but the
appropriate powers or faculties of the reasonable Soul, namely, Intellect and
Will, are not only indefectible powers, but also the prima Hypostasis or primum
Substratum of their inexistence is by the Divine Ordination an indefectible
Substratum; namely a pure, immaterial and incorruptible Substance, and the
union thereunto indissoluble; whereby it comes to pass that the Humane Soul is
immortal, and preserved both in its Essence, Existence, Personality and in
duration after the dissolution of the Body. 1. Its Virtus or Vis is
indefectible. 2. The Prima Hypostasis incorruptible. 3. The Union of both
indissoluble by natural power.

And thus far concerning the first sort of Active Principles in self-moving
Automata.

2. The second sort of motive Principles are Active Qualities, as they are
commonly called; which, though possibly some of them may be the same with the
former, essentiating Active Forms, yet some may be such as are of a second and
more inferior allay, as proceeding from the primitive forms themselves.

I shall instance in two only. 1. In that of Heat. 2. In that of Gravity.

As to the former, it is evident that Heat (not only that which is so to the
touch, but is such virtually, as in Vegetables and Minerals) has a power of
exciting Motion both in the Subject of its inexistence, and in other Subjects,
as appears in the Fermentation of Liquors and other things which are put into
motion by that virtual heat that resides in its particles, though not hot to
the touch.

Whether Cold be of any positive nature, and so have a positive activity of its
own, or whether it be an absence only of heat, either totally, as in sum
frigidis, if any such be; or partially, according to the degrees of heat abated
or removed, I shall not here dispute; for I only propound some Instances, to
render what I write intelligible.

2. As to Gravity, or that Principle in heavy bodies that inclines them ab
intrinseco, to descend, this seems to be a quality of most tangible bodies that
we converse with, if not of all; for some contend that there is no such thing
in nature as simple Levity (at least in any thing but Fire) but only some
bodies are minus gravia than others, and urged to ascend by the pressure or
circumpulsion of other bodies more heavy; this is not my business at this time
to examine.

This Gravity I take to be a quality intrinsic to heavy bodies at least, in
our inferior System of the world.

Gravitation, which is a kind of second act, may not altogether improperly be
applied to motions of different terminations, because it seems to be only nisus
or conatus ad motum, which may have different terminations; viz. upward, or
downward, or laterally, and arise from different causes; but Gravity it self,
as it imports a disposition, propension or inclination in heavy bodies to
descend, is not unfitly styled a quality, and an intrinsic quality.

For we may observe in the motions of natural bodies, some are from an
extrinsecal cause or accidental; sometimes arising from the pressure of other
bodies, sometimes from the position of the bodies themselves; as Water will be
driven up perpendicularly by a forcer; as in Water-Engines; it will move
collaterally or per declive, by reason of its own fluid nature, or by its
position upon a declining Plain. But when all Obstacles of that nature are
removed, a heavy body, as such, will move by a right Line to the Center, from
that inherent quality of gravity, which is intrinsic to it, and puts it into
motion; so that I am unjustly blamed for saying Gravity is a quality inclining
bodies to descend to the Center, and yet at the same time saying, that it is
not improper to say that things may gravitate upward or laterally, as well as
downward; for when heavy bodies have another termination than downward, it is
by reason of some other intervention of some external cause, or from some other
property in bodies, accompanying their Gravity, as Fluidity in Water or Air,
which gives them a Nisus ad motum (which is gravitation) of a differing
termination from that of bodies purely considered as heavy. But when the motion
proceeds simply and solely from that active quality of gravity, its nisus ad
motum, which is its gravitation, is simply in linea recta ad centrum, which I
often call a central motion or direction: This any fair Remarker might have
easily seen, without charging the Second Chapter of the Essay with a
contradiction, where indeed there is none.

And therefore in this place I cannot choose but take notice of two extremes in
the modern Philosophy: Some are so wholly intent upon vital and plastic
Principles, that they contend even almost against all Mechanical motions of
Bodies, which I shall have occasion hereafter to meet with.

Again, Others are so greatly taken up with the thoughts of Matter and
Mechanical Motions, that they wholly exterminate any intrinsic Principles of
motion, and resolve them wholly into Matter and its modifications, and
Mechanism and Mechanical motions; and therefore,

1. They suppose that there are no such things as I call Active Forms (at least
excepting the Humane Soul, though some venture hard at that also) but that all
Active Forms and their Originals are only various modifications of Matter, as
Size, Figure, Position, Texture, etc. This I think is impossible to be true;
for though the Modifications of Matter may give variety of accidental or
external Forms, naturally arising from the texture of Matter, as Figure,
Color, etc. And those various modifications may in relation not only to the
powers of the Sentient Faculty, but to other Bodies, make various impressions,
as we see is done in some tangible effects; as by smoothness, roughness,
hardness, softness, sharpness, bluntness, and the like: whereby sometimes other
bodies are affected; yet they can never arrive to those greater activities
which we see in Physical Bodies, as Sense, Life, Primitive Motions of several
kinds, nor can be productive of the principles thereof; for the modifications
of Matter can never raise it to such an activity, as of it self it is not
capable of, but requires the union of some nobler active entity to quicken and
actuate it.

2. They suppose that all the most noble motions, as well of Sense as Life in
Animals and Vegetables, are nothing else but Mechanism, and not from any
intrinsic active principle, which we usually call the sentient and vegetable
Soul; nay, some by a vain petulancy have gone so far as to resolve the noble
faculties and motions of the rational Soul, as Intellection, Ratiocination and
Memory, into a bare Mechanism, and Modification, and Motion of Particles of
Matter, such extravagancies as these need no other confutation but our very
Senses, in the observation of the curious properties, instincts, operations and
motions of the animal and vegetable souls and faculties, and the unevident and
unintelligible explications that these men offer for the support of their
Suppositions; which is not my business here at large to examine.

Now touching the production of these active self-moving Principles, which I
call Vires, or Virtutes activae.

1. As to their primitive institution and production, there cannot possibly, as
I think, be assigned any other than that constitution, institution and
communication which they received from the great Creator of all things, and
that Law which he annexed and gave them in their first formation.

2. But as to the subsequent and physical production of these active
principles, in the common and ordinary track of Nature, they are various,
according to the methods settled by the same Divine Law; such as are Generation,
the Irradiation of the Heavens and Heavenly Bodies, especially the Sun, the
various mixtures of simple and compounded bodies, and therewith of their
essential Forms and active Qualities, whereby there arise many times such Forms
and Qualities as are sometimes called equivocal, anomalous, or of various
modifications. But the origination of Forms and Active Qualities, is a large
Theme, and not intended to be prosecuted farther by me in this place.

CHAP. III. Concerning some other more universal or common Causes assigned of
Motions, viz. Anima Mundi, Spiritus Naturae, and Principia Hylarchica.
TO solve or give an account of diverse motions in Nature, there have been
those, that not content with the particular inherent active Principles in
particular Subjects, as is mentioned in the former Chapters, have supposed
certain more Catholic, and indeed nobler Existences, that manage the various
Phenomenon in the Universe.

Plato and his School and after him, the Arabian Philosophers, especially
Avicen, supposed an intelligent Nature subordinate to Almighty God, to preside
and manage the Universe; which they call Anima Mundi, as they assign one common
intelligent Nature, and depute it to the excitation, action and regiment of the
humane Soul in his intellective operation, which they call intellectus Agens.

Others that have assigned several Systemes of the world, each having a special
Province, which they style Vortices, or Systemata, assign a certain common
intelligent Nature to be, as it were, the common Soul of every particular
Vortex, and thus our Vortex, whose Center they suppose to be the Sun, and the
terms of extent to reach the remotest Limits of Saturn, and his Orb has its
Anima vorticis for the regiment of the Phenomenon and motions within that
Vortex.

Others again have substituted another Principle, not altogether unlike the
first; but differing in name, and some qualifications. This they call
Principium Hylarchicum, and sometimes Spiritus Naturae, which though they make
not an intelligent being, yet they make it plastic, vital, incorporeal, and
possibly sentient; but howsoever accommodated to the regiment of Matter in the
best and most orderly and convenient way; and this I take it, they suppose a
subordinate regent principle, somewhat resembling the Archeus of Helmont, which
is supposed a middle principle, intervening between the Souls of Animals and
their Body, and an immediate active instrument in its motions and operations.

If by this Principium Hylarchicum, these men would understand the Sovereign
Creator and Lord of the world (as many of the Ancients understood the Anima
mundi) who is intimately present with all his Works, and by a continual influx
supports them in their being and motions, according to the most wise Laws and
Institutions that he has established for them and fixed in them: Or if by the
Spiritus Naturae they understand those active essential Virtues communicated to
every created Being by the Glorious God, and that statuminated Law, and Order,
and Method, and Economy which he has given them, and according to which those
active principles which he has planted in them, do exert and operate; this
will be readily agreed to them as most rational, and in a great measure
evident, not only to our Reason, but to our very Sense and Experience, and the
Dispute about words, would cease, and be at rest.

But the substitution of such a vicarious, immaterial, common Principle, to
regulate, order, excite and govern Matter, and its motions subordinate to
Almighty God, a common Spirit, and different from the particular active
principles variously implanted in Physical Bodies, though it be a pleasant
supposition, yet it is difficult, if not impossible to evince to any tolerable
satisfaction. Only I must needs say, that as Suppositions of this nature, that
are founded upon Notions, are for the most part unaccessible by those common
Media whereby things are to be proved to humane understanding; so upon the same
account they are difficult to be confuted: If any man should tell me that the
Moon were a Globe of Water, as he could never prove it, so I could never
disprove it, unless I had such Media of access to that Body, that could to my
Sense and Experience confute it; and therefore in such cases the proof must be
cast upon the assertor

Yet there seem to be some things that render this Supposition not very
credible.

1. That it seems an unnecessary multiplication of beings, whose Offices are
well enough supplied without them; namely, by the energy of the glorious God,
and those special active Principles that he has lodged in almost all created
Natures, and those Institutions and Laws that he has alligated and annexed to
the particular Works of his Creation, and the Systemes and Syntaxes of the
World.

2. But principally upon a strict examination, it will appear that most of
these Phenomenon in nature and motion, are performed by the active principles,
residing in particular Subjects, or by the usual and necessary Mechanism of
bodies, without our calling to their immediate performance this supposed Spirit
of nature.

3. Again, It is very difficult to form to our selves a notion of this Spirits
Nature, that may have any probable certainty: let us take but these few
difficulties.

1. Is it a distinct, self-subsisting Spirit, separated from Matter? or is it a
kind of common Soul or Form residing in the Universe, as the Soul of a Brute
resides in his Body, and united to it by a wonderful union? If it be the
former, it is a kind of Angelick Nature, not united to Matter, but acting
separately upon it, subsisting without it, and is in all probability an
Intelligence. If the latter, it were fit to know whether it were an immaterial
Form, as the Humane Soul; and then perchance we should give it too great a
preference: Or is it a material Form, as that of Brutes? And then it will be
worth knowing whether it has the like perfection of Sense, or be of a lower
allay, and only vital, like those of Vegetables. Or is it a kind of connatural
Sense, suited to all material Beings, together with a sentient perception and
appetite, proportionate to the Nature of every material or substantial created
being, as Campanella and our learned Countriman has lately asserted. Whatever
it be, we are perfectly in the dark to form any conception of it with any
tolerable evidence or satisfaction.

Again 2. Are there other particular or specifical Forms in the several
Classes of material Existences, as Animals, Vegetables, Minerals, etc. that
exert the several operations that seem specifical to their Natures, but
individuated in the several individual existences, Or is this common spirit of
Nature that which exerts all these Operations which are therefore only
diversified by the diversification of the compositions of those bodies in which
and through which they are exerted, as the common Bellows in the Organ; and the
breath thereof gives the various sounds in the Organ-Pipe, according to their
Figures, Stops or Amplitudes? If we suppose the former, we seem to multiply
Entities without necessity; if the latter, we destroy all that we are building,
and make all the Animals, and Vegetables, and Material Beings in the Universe
(if this Spirit be universal) or in this lower World (if singly belonging to
this Systeme) to be nothing else but pure mechanical pieces, without any
sentient or vital principle of their own, but only are the dead Tools and
Instruments of this spirit of Nature; such difficulties as these would be
cleared, to give us some Idea or probable fixed notion of this Spirit of
Nature, or Hylarchical Principle.

But now if we should suppose the interposition of this common Spirit of Nature
in some Phenomenon or motions of particular Bodies, yet it seems necessary for
us to suppose these two things in the exertions thereof.

1. That it does not immediately interpose, unless upon great emergencies, and
to deliver the things of Nature from some important inconvenience, which
without so effectual an interposition would befall them; as to preserve the
continuity of the parts of the Universe, or avoid vacuity, and the like, and
not upon those little occasions which are of no consideration and importance,
whether they be relieved or supplied or not; such as are the emergency of a
Rundle of light Wood from the bottom of the Water, or the sustaining of a
weight, or attraction by the Embolus of a Syringe or Air-Pump, or the keeping
up of the Valve or Operculum in the lower end of a Tube immersed in Water.
These and the like Instances are of so small concernment to the good of the
Universe, or to the Nature of Physical Bodies, that they were scarce worthy the
access of the noble Spirit of Nature; Nodi vix tali vindice digni.

2. That if this Spirit of Nature does at any time interpose, yet it rarely, if
at all, acts by violent or convulsive motions, but pacately, and as much as may
be, in consonance to the regular disposition of Bodies; and therefore it is,
that even in Animals, where their motion is exerted by a clear, internal,
vital, sentient principle, it does for the most part act regularly, and in the
best Mechanism imaginable, their Bodies, Nerves, Bones, Muscles are ordered by
a rare and excellent Mechanism for the exerting of those motions, and the
motions themselves performed by those Organs, by the explosion and retraction
of the Spirits in their several vessels, with admirable order and artifice, as
will appear to any that will bestow the pains to read Galen, De usu Partium,
and Aristotle, De Gressu Animalium; and therefore we have much more reason to
think that this supposed noble Spirit, the Spirit of Nature, acts not at
random, or convulsively, or irregularly, but according to the best Rules and
mechanical methods applicable to such motions as it does occasionally exert.

So that if we should never so much allow of the Spirit of Nature, and its
interpositions, yet still the necessary instruments, modes and methods of its
motion according to Mechanical Rules, must still be sought after.

For it would be a pitiful refuge for a man pretending to Philosophy, to give
this general solution to all Phenomenon of Nature, that this is so, because the
Spirit of Nature thus orders it; without giving some probable account of the
particular means or method by which the Spirit of Nature effects it, and
likewise of the end, use and design of the Spirit of Nature in what it thus
effects.

CHAP. IV. Touching Rarefaction and Condensation, and their kinds.
BEcause much has been said by others touching Rarity and Density of Physical
Bodies, which I call Affections, Passions or Qualities of Physical Bodies; and
it may be conducible to the solution of many Physical Phenomenon; and to the
clearing of my apprehensions concerning it, and to the answering of most of the
Objections of any weight, made against the Suppositions which I have stated, in
the two Pamphlets above mentioned, I will endeavor to give that account
concerning this matter that seems reasonable to me; though I must confess it is
possibly one of the abstrusest Subjects in Natural Philosophy, wherein I shall
observe as near as I can, this Method.

1. To consider the several consistence of Bodies.

2. To show the various kinds of Rarefaction and Condensation of those Bodies.

3. To what kinds of Bodies, and to what kinds of Rarefaction and Condensation
this Argument in hand is applicable; that so we may come closer to the business
in question, and speak ad idem.

As to the first and second, Sir Francis Bacon in his Historia Densi and Rari,
has in a great measure fitted them to my hand; whose Method I shall herein
follow.

1. Of Bodies, some seem to be properly called Tangible, some Pneumatica; which
though they are not Spirits, nor void of Matter, no, nor yet totally
imperceptible to the Touch, yet are more subtle, and less obvious by any gross
contact, to that Sense, and therefore may be called Spiritalia.

Of the former sort, some are more fixed, and of a more settled consistence, as
Gold, Iron, Stone, Wood, etc. Others are fluid, either from the texture of
their Nature; as Water, Oil, Mercury; or by Art or Accident, as Gold, Silver,
Lead, etc. in Fusion or Dissolution.

Of the latter sort, viz. Pneumatica, there are several kinds, and of various
degrees of exaltation, as Ether, Air, Flame, Spirits of Animals or Vegetables,
Smoke, Vapors, etc.

Although tangible Bodies may be capable of Rarefaction and Condensation, at
least in some of the acceptations thereof hereafter described, yet I shall not
much meddle with them, unless it be such as be fluid, because not to my present
purpose; and because what is hereafter said touching the Rarefaction or
Condensation of some Fluids, and of those Pneumatica, will in some measure
explicate somewhat concerning the Condensation or Rarefaction of other tangible
Bodies.

2. Touching Rarefaction and Condensation, thus much first in general is to be
said, Rarefaction is when the same Body, or at least portion of material
Substance, takes up a greater external dimension, or a larger appearing trine
dimension, viz. of breadth, length and depth than it had before.

And on the contrary, Condensation is when the same Body or portion of material
Substance takes up a less external dimension than it had before; this may
suffice as the common Phenomenon of Rarefaction and Condensation, as it stands
objected to our sense; though when we come to particulars, this general
sensible description of either will not serve always the Subject, nor
sufficiently explicate it.

Some Appearances in Bodies look like Rarefaction, which indeed are not such,
but only in appearance; such as are Augmentation of Bodies by an unperceptible
accession of new matter, as in Augmentation; sometimes by assimilation of
contiguous matter into its own consistence, sometimes by the apertures or
distraction of the parts of a Body, and intrusion or intermission, or
attraction of other Matter of a different Nature, Quality, or Texture, or of
the same Nature, Quality or Texture with it self; these are not truly those
kinds of Rarefactions whereof our enquiry is instituted; for though the Moles
or Bulk seem to be extended and enlarged, yet the true Bulk of the same Matter
is the same as before, though it may be under a different configuration or
position.

Again, on the contrary, some appearances in Bodies, look like Condensation;
but in truth are not such; as when part of a Body is emitted either by
perspiration or dissolution of some of its more subtle parts, whereby that
which remains, takes up less circuit or bulk, or where some of its parts are
first subtilized, and then dismissed, and some other Instances of like kind may
be given; but these are not true and real Condensations; for the entire matter
remains not in the Body condensed, as was before, but is diminished: These
therefore are not the Rarefactions and Condensations whereof the Enquiry
proceeds; for the same Body in both instances hold the same true space it had
before, though the extreme appearing Limits seem to be altered.

3. The Question therefore in hand is, touching that kind of Rarefaction, where
the same Body or portion of material Substance, without accession of more or
other bodily matter, yet takes up a larger space than it did before.

2. And where it does not only take up a larger exterior compass, circuit or
superficies; but where it also fills those intrinsic spaces which are within
the circuit of that extent, as fully as it did before. For if for the purpose,
a portion of Air of a Cubique Figure six inches square, do swell to a Cubique
Dimension of seven inches square, yet if in that very dilatation there be as
great a disjunction or divulsion of the parts of the Air within the cubique
space of six inches, as amounts to that external accession of one inch, whereby
it becomes a Cube of seven inches square, here is no true Rarefaction, nor is
the space enlarged, but only the Figure of the same Body, and of its Extention
altered.

If an Artificer take a little Cylinder of Silver of two inches long, and half
an inch round, and guild it, he will by his Art draw out this little Bar into
40 yards or more of fine Silver Thread, though the length be increased, yet the
breadth is diminished, and the Silver Thread takes up no more true extent of its
trine dimension than it had before; nay, which is remarkable, the extent of the
Superficies of the Silver is not enlarged, though the figure be altered; which
appears by this, that every part of the Superficies of the Silver thread will
continue guilt as it was in the Superficies of the Ingot.

And upon the same account it is on the other side, when a Body or portion of
material Substance is said truly to be condensed.

1. It must be the same portion of matter that was before, without any
diminution of its parts, or of any matter in it that contributed to its former
Moles.

2. The same matter without any diminution, must really take up less room or
space than it did before; for if it only take up a less Superficies or external
extent, yet withal it makes up spaces or porosities within the compass of that
external extent, which before was not filled by it self, but either was simply
empty of any body, or only filled with such a body as now recedes, and gives
way to the body supposed to be condensed, to take it up, then here is only a
change of the space it had before, and of its configuration* not a less space
really taken up as commensurate to that body that is supposed to be condensed.
So that the Question between the ancient and modern Philosophy, is not so much
de modo, how Condensation or Rarefaction is made, as concerning the thing it
self, whether really and truly there be any such thing or affection in bodies
as Rarefaction and Condensation; the latter Philosophy in truth denying the
thing, when they give it such an explication as really and in truth consists
not with it; as we shall see hereafter.

This being therefore the state of the Notion of Rarefaction and Condensation,
in its true explication, we are to consider, what bodies, or motions in bodies
are such as are applicable to the Argument in hand.

The special Instances that I shall use are these.

1. The Rarefaction or Condensation of bodies by Transmutation; thus Water by
Rarefaction is sometimes changed into Air, which has thereby a greater
extension than it had before by about 900 times; and Air by Condensation is
changed into Water, and thereby loses by contraction a like proportion of
space than it had before. Thus Aristotle in 4. Phys. cap. 9. and the great
Verulam, in Historia Densi and Rari, page 88.

2. The Rarefaction that is caused by external violence, as in the Air-Pump, in
the Cacabus Evacuatorius, and the Magdeburg Engine, this is a Rarefaction by
Tension, whereby the Air is dilated, not only in its external Bulk, but in all
the parts of it, and in its internal, as well as external parts and dimensions.
And thus Mersennus and others tell us, Air may be dilated to near 70 times its
former and natural extent.

3. The Condensation that is made by Compression: Some there are that think
Water is thus contractible and condensible by compression: The same Verulam,
ubi supra, page 99. tells us, that taking a Leaden hollow Globe, and fill it
with Water, and then strongly stop the Orifice which took in the Water, and
compress the Globe in a strong Presser, whereby it may be reduced to an eighth
part of its former dimension, the Water will sustain that contraction; but if
it be pressed farther, the Water will discharge it self through the Globe ad
modum parvi imbris. It is not impossible but it might do so from its first
compression, though the streams, by reason of their exility, were imperceptible
to the Eye, as the emanation of effluvia through the pores of the bodies of
Animals, electrical effluxes, or the Odors of Herbs; for Water, though fluid,
seems very impatient of Condensation by compression; yet it is not impossible,
if under a very strong pressure; but to the very eye it appears capable of
dilatation by Tension in its discharge of it self by Bubbles, upon a strong
Tension.

But howsoever it is with Water, it is apparent that Air is capable of
condensation and contraction by compression; this appears visibly in the
compression of the Air by Wind-Guns, and the careful injection of water by a
well ordered Syringe in an empty Aeolipile, so that Air by these means may be
contracted into a seventh, nay possibly a seventieth part of its natural space
or dimension.

4. The Rarefaction and consequential dilatation of Bodies by Heat or Fire:
Thus Water it self is rarefied and extended into Vapors by Heat. The Lord
Verulam, ubi supra, page 28. gives us a notable Instance, by taking a
Vial-Glass holding an ounce, filling it half full of Spirit of Wine, then
taking an empty Bladder that held about 8 pints, and tying it about the neck of
the Vial strictly, the Spirit of Wine heated upon the Coals, the Aura Spiritus
Vini filled the Bladder, and yet only six penny weight of the Spirit of Wine
spent, which did not amount to the 40th. part of a pint, yet filled the Bladder
of 8 pints with its rarefied Air. And although this Instance be in the Spirit
of Wine, which is fuller of subtle Matter than the like quantity of Water, yet
it will hold its proportion with the Fumes or Vapors of Water.

And of the like kind is the Rarefaction by Ignition in the Gunpowder, where a
grain of Gunpowder fired, will expand above a thousand times its former
dimension and more.

But that which is most obvious to Sense, and most apposite to my purpose, and
therefore will be the Subject of most of my ensuing applications, is, the
Rarefaction of Air by heat, whereby it may gain an expansion of above 70 times
its natural size and dimension, as is easily found by the strong heating of a
strong Brass concave Globe, which if the included Air have no vent, will break
it, and if it have a vent, and after it is strongly heated, cast into a Vessel
of Water, it will soon discover the proportion of its dilatation by the
contraction that it receives from the cold Water, and by the quantity of Water
it sucks in upon that contraction.

5. The Condensation and consequential contraction that the Air receives by the
constipation of it by Cold, especially after a strong dilatation; but although
there be no such preceding dilatation or expansion of the Air by heat, yet it
is visible in Weather-Glasses, and other Engines of that nature, that the Air
is contracted in its dimension, by the ambient Cold, from what it usually has
at other times.

CHAP. V. Concerning the Phenomenon of Rarefaction and Condensation apparent to
Sense.
TO pursue all the Phenomenon of Condensation and Rarefaction in its full
Latitude, were too long a business, and not so much conducible to my purpose: I
shall therefore take up those Phenomenon that are apparently evident to Sense
in the Rarefaction and Condensation of Air; for the due discussion of that
single Subject will give an estimate and explication of other Rarefactions and
Condensations.

1. It is evident to our very Senses, that a smaller portion of Air, suppose a
Cubique Foot in a Vessel, being ratified by heat, will take up a far greater
space than it did before such application, and the like will be when it is done
by Tension, as in the Air-Pump, and the Magdeburg-Engin; for when a great part
of the Air is driven out by Heat, in the one Instance, and drawn out by
Traction, in the other; yet it is evident to Sense, that the Receiver or other
Vessel remains full of a very rare and extended Air; for sensibly no other
Substance supplies it.

2. It is evident to Sense, that this distension of the Air is not only in the
Extima Superficies, but in all the very internal parts of it; for it is
apparent to our Sense, that it has a visible effect as well upon the Birds,
Water, or other Body, placed in the middle of the Cavity of the Receiver, as in
those that are conterminous to the Sides of it, as appears in those many
Instances given by Mr. B. especially in 21, 22, etc. Experiments. And unless
the whole Body were extended every where and every way, it were impossible that
a little portion of Air included in a Bladder, should increase its bulk by
Heat, to ten times its extension, as it will do, and is apparent to our Sight
by the ample distention of the Bladder.

3. It is apparent to our Sense, that if the Air be rarefied by Heat in any
close Vessel, as the Heat, which is the cause of its Rarefaction, decays, so
the Air endeavors its contraction, to gain its primitive size, which it then
attains, when the Heat is perfectly gone out, if it be not impeded by the
closeness of the Vessel.

This is visible in Weather-Glasses of 22 inches long; whereby, when for the
purpose, the Water rises to ten Inches, and leaves twelve inches of Air in the
Head of the Glass, the warm hand laid upon the Head of the Glass, will depress
the Water, by expanding the included Air two or three inches; but the Hand
being removed, the Air will contract it self to its former Staple, and so the
Water will rise to ten, as before.

4. It is evident to Sense, that the Air contracting it self, does by that
which is called by some, Motus nexus, lay hold of the inward sides of a close
Vessel containing and strictly imprisoning it; and if they be otherwise
severable, yet the strong contraction of the filaments of the Air holds them
together, as appears abundantly by the Instance of the Magdeburg Hemispheres,
mentioned at large in the 18th. Chapter of the Observations upon the
Toricellian Experiment, and other Instances of the like Nature, given in that
Book.

5. It is evident to Sense, that in that strong cohesion of the Filaments of
the Air to the sides of the Vessel, when by the decay of Heat, it contracts it
self with a motus or conatus of restitution, and with it the ambient Vessel by
a motus nexus, yet if a small degree of Heat be moved to the Vessel, that
contraction is relaxed, and the Vessels fall asunder; and the like is done by
the smallest admission of the free or solute Air, though through a Pin-hole;
for by the Heat the included Air is again dilated, left lax, as before it grew
cold, and by the admission of foreign Air, the included Air is relieved
gradually to that expansion as is natural to it, and as it had before its
Rarefaction or Condensation.

6. It is evident to Sense, that upon the smallest Pin-hole made in the Vessel
where the Air is, that thus contracts and endeavors its restitution, either
upon Tension, or upon growing cold after Rarefaction, the Air thus tensed or
contracting it self, will greedily suck in the foreign Air, yea, or Water, for
its relief against that Tension that it is under.

7. In Condensation of Air, especially by compression, it is apparent, that the
Air takes up, or may take up a far less room than is natural to it, as appears
in Wind-guns or Aeolipiles.

8. It is also apparent to Sense, that the compressed Air in those Instances,
endeavors with great strength and force its relaxation from this compression,
in so much as if it can get liberty, it will cast out a Bullet with great force
in Wind-guns, and in Aeolipiles well made, and well charged with Water, by a
Syringe it will throw up the Water above twenty foot high.

These Phenomenon are as evident to our Sense of Sight and Touch, as any thing
we see or feel; and though there is difference among the Learned in the
solution or manner of explication of these Phenomenon, yet the effects
themselves are plain and sensible, and do give a sensible demonstration that
surely there is some alteration of the state of this Body of the Air, or of its
Texture or Fabric under these various Appearances, which are usually called
Rarefaction and Condensation. But whether they are really such, or how made or
ordered, will be the Subject of farther Enquiry.

CHAP. VI. Concerning the various Solutions of Condensation and Rarefaction,
and first, of that which is by supposed interspersed Vacuities.
RArity and Density of Bodies, although it terminate in a greater or lesser
dimension or extent, which properly respects Quantity, yet they seem in
themselves to be but various Passions, Affections or Qualities of Bodies
arising from their different Textures, either more crass or more subtle: And
Rarefaction or Condensation of Bodies seems to be those several Motions toward
these Qualities of Rarity or Density, caused for the most part by some external
or adventitious Agent, which changes and alters the Texture of any Body
whereby it assumes those Qualities of Rarity or Density different from its own
natural constitution, and suitable to the variety of the Texture they do for the
time undergo.

There have been various Solutions or Explications of these apparent Phenomenon
of Condensation and Rarefaction, which I shall in the next place consider;
holding my self to that of the Air, either by compression, in case of
Condensation, or by expansion by Heat, or by Tension by force, in case of
Rarefaction; because this Instance of Rarefaction and Condensation of the Air,
is most obvious to Sense, and does in a great measure explain the Rarefaction
or Condensation or other Bodies capable of those Affections.

These Methods of Solutions of Explications of Rarefaction or Condensation that
have been taken up by several parties, are principally three.

1. Of those that suppose the same to be performed by reason of interspersed
Vacuities, Porosities, or Spaces, empty of all body interposed between aerie
particles, which in cases of Rarefaction, are made wider by a kind of divulsion
or greater apertures of the particles of Air, or other bodies rarefied, whereby
the Interstitia of the aerie Particles are greater, and those empty
interspersed Vacuities made larger; and in case of Condensation, the aerie
Particles are crowded closer together, and those empty spaces or Interstitia
made less by reception of those particles of Air into those Vacuities, in a
closer posture or conjunction than they were before such compression,
constipation or condensation; and this I call the Epicurean Solution.

2. Of those that admit no Vacuities at all in the Universe, but that all
places or spaces are full of some body or other, but that in the Rarefaction of
the Air, whether by Heat (which I call simple Rarefection or Expansion) or by a
forcible distraction or divulsion of the particles of such rarefied or expanded
body by force, which I call Tension, those particles of the extended or
rarefied body, are removed to a greater distance one from another, and as they
are so removed, other more subtle, corporeal particles do interpose gradually,
and fill up those Interstitia; and in case of Condensation, the more subtle
parts with which all bodies are furnished, but especially the Air, are driven
out by compression, and take up a temporary residence at least in the
conterminous Air. And this I call the Cartesian Solution; though this, as shall
be shown, have some variation in the manner of its explication.

But though these methods differ in the application to the matter in hand, yet
they both much agree in this, that the first material Principles of Bodies are
certain minute Corpuscles or Atoms; which, though they are really bodies, and
therefore Mathematically divisible, yet they are so minute, that physically and
actually they are indivisible; and therefore in themselves hard and unfrangible
into lesser portions. This I shall examine hereafter in the seventh and eighth
Chapters.

3. The third Solution is that of the ancient Philosophers, and some other of
the Modern, which suppose that Rarity and Density are really natural Affections
or Qualities of Physical bodies, and that Rarefaction is a real expansion of
the very entire Moles of the body truly rarefied; and Condensation is a real
contraction of the whole dimension of the body condensed, namely, where it is
truly and formally a true Rarefaction or Condensation, as the Question is above
stated in the beginning of the Fourth Chapter? And this I call the Aristotelian
Solution; and seems to me the truest, in the manner hereafter dedescribed.

First therefore, Touching the first of these Solutions, by interspersed
Vacuities: This, though it does in truth take away the true Notion of
Rarefaction and Condensation, as it is before stated; for still the same body
holds but the same quantity of space, though in different position or ubication
of its parts, yet I must needs say, were the supposition of interspersed
Vacuities true, would in a great measure (though not altogether) salve many of
the Phenomenon of Rarefaction and Condensation.

But there are these two grand Objections, that I think render this Solution
impossible to be true.

1. It seems to me utterly untrue, that there are any such interspersed
Vacuities, wholly destitute of Body, either in the Air or any other Body, and
herein the Cartesians and I agree. And that which renders this Supposition
untrue, is that excellent demonstration improved by Sir K. Digby, in his
History of Bodies.

If there were such interspersed Vacuities, it must necessarily follow that
those Bodies of an equal Superficies, that are more rare, must have more or
greater interspersions of such Vacuities, than such as are more dense; or which
is all one, the same Moles of body that is more dense, must needs have more of
matter or body in it than that which is more rare; or which seems to be equally
consequential, that where the body is more weighty, the same external Moles of
the more weighty body must needs have more of body, and less of interspersed
Vacuities than that which is more light, where the external Moles of either is
equal.

And therefore a Cubique Foot of Gold must have more of Body, and less of
interspersed Vacuities than the like Cubique Foot of Silver, and that than the
like Cubique Foot of Water; and that than the like Cubique Foot of Air.

The Lord Verulam, in his Historia Densi and Rari, page 8 and 9, by an exact
computation, gives us the Estimate of the disproportion of Weight of the same
extrinsick Moles of several bodies; whereby he finds that a portion of pure
Gold reduced into a Cubical Figure or Moles, weighed 20d weight, and the like
Moles of of Mercury 19d weight and 9 grains; the like Moles of Silver weighed
10d weight and 21 grains; and the like Moles of Water weighed 1d weight and 3
grains; and upon a like trial, page 20. found, that the heavier any solid body
is, and more united its parts are, the lighter was the same body reduced into
Dust (though closely compressed together) in comparison to the weight of the
same body before its pulverization.

His Experiment goes not so far as the disproportion between the weight or
denseness of Air or Water, but Mersennus and some others that have been curious
in this Computation, tell us, that the same extrinsick Moles of Water is about
14 times lighter than the like Moles of Mercury, and the same Moles of Air is
at least 900 times, others say, 1300 times lighter than the like Moles of Water.

The consequence whereof is, that if we should suppose a Cubick inch or foot of
Mercury to be entirely full without interspersed Vacuities or other Matter in
it (which yet upon the account given, wants much) it must follow that in one
Cubique inch or foot, or other Moles of Air, for one particle of body, there
must be 11699 parts of empty space, each of these spaces equal to the space
that the real body of the Air takes up; such is the disproportion of the weight
between the like quantity or Moles of Air to that of like Moles of Mercury,
viz. as 1 to 11700.

The consequence whereof would be, that yet the Cubique foot, or inch, or other
measure or a Vessel containing nothing but Air, might receive a quantity of
Mercury that bears proportion, as 11699 to 1, and a quantity of Water as bears
the proportion of 899 to 1, without extruding any part of the included Air, or
overfilling or breaking the Vessel wherein it is included. And if we should
suppose that in the common Air we breath in, there should be but 891 parts of
Vacuities, for one part of true substantial Air (as there must be upon this
supposition) all respiration would presently be obstructed, and indeed all that
Motion which we see, especially in Meteors.

But as this is prodigiously incredible, so it is apparently untrue: For take a
Tube full of Air, and stop it at one end, immerse the open end into Water, and
press it down as low as may be, yet not one half of the Tube will be filled
with Water; nay take an Aeolipile of Brass with a Syringe to drive in the
Water, it will with great difficulty receive into it parts of Water; and
thereby the Air contracted into a quarter of its former room, and with great
pains and force it may be, into a much less room; but never any pretended it
could be compressed into the 899th part of its former room; and yet thus it may
be, and with great ease, because here are 899 empty spaces which may receive
the water with as much ease as if the Bottle or vessel were not empty only of
Water or Air, but perfectly empty of any other body, abating only 1/900 of the
room to receive the Air.

2. The Second difficulty in this Supposition seems to be this, that it does
not answer the Phenomenon, especially in condensation of Air by pressure, as in
Wind-Guns and Aeolipiles, which visibly with a great force endeavors its
restitution, as appears in the explosion of the Air in Wind-guns, and ejection
of Water pressed into Aeolipiles; for the Air upon this Supposition, has a
free room far more than sufficient for its reception, and therefore has no
need of any such violence in its motion of restitution, it having 899 empty
cavities, whereas it has need but of 1/900 part thereof for its reception, and
more vacuity can contribute nothing either to resist compression, or to cause a
sensible force of restitution, because nothing can have no activity or motion.

3. Again, if Air or Water be strongly rarefied by Heat, we see it takes up a
larger extention than before it had, and that with such an energy and force,
that it will break a strong Vessel enclosing it; which it could never do, were
there any considerable interspersions of Vacuities; because the body of the Air
would with much more ease break into those vacua Interstitia, which have no
resistance against it, than it would or could force its room upon the ambient
Vessel that contains it, and resists its dilatation with all the strength it
has. And this very reason does as effectually conclude against the second
Solution of Rarefaction by the admission of Materia Subtilis into the supposed
Interstitia, if duly considered.

CHAP. VII. Concerning the Second Solution of Rarefaction and Condensation, and
its insufficiency.
I Come in the next place to consider the Second Solution above offered, which
supposes these things.

1. That there is no empty space or interspersed vacuity in the Air or any part
of the Universe; with which I agree.

2. That the Principles of compounded bodies are certain minute Atomical
Corpuscles, physically indivisible, and yet for all this, these very minute
bodies are some grosser, like little Globuli, ground to as small a magnitude as
is naturally possible, and yet the Ramenta or Filings of these Globuli are
smaller than the former, and make that Constituent or Principle which they call
Materia subtilis, which interposeth between other grosser Atoms or Corpuscles,
and fills up the Interstitia between them; this Supposition I deny, and shall
show my Reasons against it.

3. That in Rarefaction or Tension of the Air, or other Bodies capable of
Rarefaction, there is only a separation or disjunction of the parts thereof to
a greater distance one from another, which does not at all increase its
extension, but only varies the position or vicinity of its parts; and hereupon
to fill the Interstitia between the parts thus divulsed, there is immitted into
those Interstitia subtle matter, or those subtle Filings of the Globuli that
fill those spaces which are therefore borrowed from the subtle matter of the
other parts of circumjacent Air; or finally from the Ether, which seems to be
the subtilest matter in Nature.

4. That in Condensation of the Air, etc. by compression that Subtilissima
Materia that resided before within the body of that portion of Air, is by
compression squeezed out, and driven into the conterminous Air, whereby that
which we call the condensed portion of Air and its parts come closer together,
and take up less room or space than it seemed to have before; namely, in the
external bulk or Superficies, though in truth and reality the Air it self thus
seemingly condensed, and its particles, take up really as much room or space as
before, though the figure, and position, and ubication of that space that it
takes up now, is only altered by its secession into the spaces wherein the
subtilissima materia now flown away, did formerly reside.

This Solution of Rarefaction and Condensation, I think is neither true, nor
does it in any measure answer the Phenomenon in Rarefaction or Condensation.

First therefore, I think the very Supposition it self of these solute Atoms is
but imaginary and the creature of the Brain, and therefore I think may deserve
the Title of Idolum Epicureum, or Cartesianum, never intended by the latter as
any real Truth, but only as a Supposition, Engine or Medium to explicate the
Phenomenon of Nature, though now unwarily enough taken up by many Virtuosi as a
Truth.

1. It robs all bodies of any real or possible continuity without a miracle, or
the substitution of some cementing matter, differing from Atoms or solute
bodies, to hold the parts of the Universe together; for how can really separate
bodies, such as the very least of Atoms are supposed to be, have any
continuity, or so much as mutual cohesion barely by contiguity? For as to the
Atomi hamatae, they savor too rankly of fiction and invention, and the Polar
Magnetism and difference of Sexes of Atoms seems as vain.

2. We see in many bodies not only a continuity, but a strong texture, whereby
they will not readily be broken, that yet at first arise from a thin watery
substance or concrement, as the Nerves of Animals, the Wood of Trees, the Barks
of Trees and Plants; as Withy, Flax, Nettles, nay the very Spiders Web, has
besides its continuity, a certain tenaciousness; so has Water it self, as
appears by the traction of the water in the longer Leg of a Siphon; this
tenaciousness, glutinousness, and strong cohesion of parts of bodies one to
another, could never be by the apposition of solute particles one to another,
though never so small, but from a kind of intrinsic contexture of the bodies
themselves.

2. Upon this Supposition, it were necessary that all bodies should be equally
hard, and equally weighty, and equally dense. Those Atoms, even those that are
the most minute, that are the Constituents of the Materia subtilissima, are yet
supposed to be bodies, and essentially divisible, though not divided, nor
indeed divisible physically by any force, and therefore hard and unfrangible;
and therefore, if we should take a Vessel of a foot square filled with Air,
this Moles, though we call it of Air, is yet really made up of those hard
particles, and then how is it possible it should be soft to the touch any more
than Brass or Steel? For the softness of dust of Gold or other solid Bodies, is
not from the dust it self, but from the numerous interspersed particles of Air.
Again this Cubique Vessel full of Air is entirely full of body, or not; if it
be not, then this supposition must necessarily admit interspersed Vacuities;
the thing that the whole Supposition of the Cartesians deny: But if it be full
of body in every imaginable space thereof, why should not this Cubique Moles of
Air thus constipated with a plenitude of body, be as weighty as the like Cube
of water, yea, or Gold; for as to solidity, the Atomical bodies themselves in
both, are of the same consistence, and all spaces are supposed full both in the
Cubique foot of Air and Water, for excess of weight, is but the effect of
excess of Matter or bodily substance.

4. Again, It is most certain that the smallest Atoms or Particles of matter,
even the Ramenta that are supposed the Constituents of the Materia
subtilissima, are yet bodies, and consequently have their Trina Dimensio, and
variety of configurations; some spherical, some cubical, some triangular; be
these never so little, yet it is impossible they can exactly touch one another
in all parts of their Superficies; a spherical body cannot be in all its
Superficies contiguous to another spherical or cubical body; and consequently
there must be some real, though small Intervals between these minute Particles,
and then the Cartesians, to make good their Supposition, must have yet another
matter more subtle than that which they yet call subtilissima, to fill those
Chinks: Et quis custodiet ipsos Custodes?

And it is not enough to say these fissures between the minutest Particles, are
inconsiderable: For if they be at all, it spoils the Supposition; but besides
that, certainly he that holds this Supposition, must yet admit that in the
Cubique Foot of Air, the Interstitia must needs be greater than in Water or
Mercury of the like Moles; for certainly otherwise the weight of Mercury, Water
and Air, would be all one; and so they fall in with the Vacuists.

Therefore upon the whole Matter, it seems more agreeable both to Nature, Sense
and Reason, that in the first production of bodies homogeneal, whether by
Creation by Almighty God, or by Generation, according to his instituted Law of
Nature, the consistency of things, and their several textures, to be the
immediate effect of their first production, and that they consist of parts in
union, and not separated till actual separation, and that these parts are of
the like consistence and texture with the whole in bodies homogeneal, as in Air
and in Water, and not of parts or principles quite of another consistence and
frame from the whole; all the parts of the Air to be Air; but yet some Air or
Airs at some times more subtle than others; and so for Water: And therefore all
this Apparatus of Atoms, and Globuli, and minute particles, are not of things
that ever really existed, but only the creatures and fictions of the Brain.

But if we should admit of any one common material principle of physical
bodies, it is most consonant both to the Doctrine of the Scriptures, and to
some of the ancient Philosophers, that it should be Water.

1. Thus it is declared in that admirable Narrative of the Creation, the first
distinct body we find mentioned, is the Water.

2. This was the opinion of the Learned Thales, Milesius, and others of the
Ancients, Ex Aqua omnia.

3. The accommodation of Water to the production of other bodies by the
transmutation of its texture, speaks much for it to be the common principle of
material bodies.

1. It is productive of Consistences rarer and more subtle than it self, as
Vapors, Fumes; yea and of the very Air it self, by the means of activity of
Heat.

2. It is productive of things more crass and solid than it self, as Leaves,
Fruit, Wood, Shells, Stones, which we see arise from certain concretions singly
of water.

3. It is productive of consistences that have greater tenaciousness and
connection than it self; as we see in the production of the Nerves, Tunicles,
Tendons, Muscles of Animals, which are at first but certain waterish
concrements, digested by the Animal heat into those Ligaments, and in the tough
and strong barks and filaments of Vegetables, in their trunks, rinds, etc.
which are at first but a kind of limpid juice or water sucked up into the
bodies of Vegetables; and that even where it has no other visible nutriment
but simple Water.

4. In the dissolution of bodies, either artificially or naturally, they seem
most readily to reassume a waterish Consistence: Water therefore seems more
accommodate to be the common material principle, much rather than these
imaginable Atoms, though I take not upon me positively to determine it.

CHAP. VIII. Further Considerations concerning the deficiency of this second
Solution in relation to Rarefaction and Condensation, and the Supplements that
have been devised to enforce or supply it.
IN the last Chapter I have considered the improbability of the Supposition in
general.

I shall now set down those Reasons and Evidences which render the whole
Supposition utterly inapplicable to the Phenomenon of Rarefaction and
Condensation.

1. As to Rarefaction, the intromission of these foreign particles of Matter,
to supply the supposed separation of the particles of the Air, or other body
rarefied, it is not possibly consistent with that motion which rarefied bodies
have in the time of their rarefaction, which is most apparently expulsive of
any foreign Matter, and not receptive of it.

Take a Corn of Gunpowder, and give it fire, it turns in a moment to a body of
flame above 1000 times larger than it self; it drives away the conterminous Air
from it; and if it be a good quantity of Powder, it will break the Windows.
Walls and Contignations next to it, and this done in a moment, and in the
moment of its expansion: Is it imaginable to any man that thinks twice, that in
that moment of its expansion, when it drives all before it and from it, this
Subtilissima Materia, which is so subtle and delicate, should have admission,
and admission in that moment, to make good an expansion of such an extent,
nature and quality?

Again, When Air in a Vessel, is brought near the fire, and warmed by this
Heat, the Air is expanded, and a great part of it driven out of the Vessel; and
if the Vessel be close, it will break, from the dilatation within; so that in
all this rarefaction, the Air, and all the particles of it, and within it, have
a pressure outward, not any motion of receptiveness of any thing from without,
and therefore must necessarily drive away those gentle particles of Materia
subtilissima, and can never admit them in the act of rarefaction done by Heat.

2. It is a very hard supposal that the subtle Matter should pass through the
most impervious bodies, as Glass, Brass, yea Gold it self, for the supplying of
the Interstitia of tense or rarefied bodies, as it must according to this
Supposition. But,

3. It is not only difficult to believe it, but the contrary thereof is most
apparently evident to the very Sense, especially in the Magdeburg Hemispheres,
described, cap. 18. Nugarum: If you take the two Brass Hemispheres there
described, and by heat rarefie the Air in them, then clap them together in the
manner there described, when the included heat is spent, they will cohere so
strong together, that 30 l. weight will not sever them, but let them receive a
moderate heat again from the fire, or let there be a hole no bigger than the
point of a Needle to let in any foreign Air, they will be quickly severed; for
the tension which the included particles of Air do gain by their motion of
restitution, and Motus nexus, is thereby relaxed: And it is observable, that
these Hemispheres, if they are kept from heat or perforation, they will remain
in this posture of cohesion an hour, nay possibly a day, or week, or more: Now
if this subtle matter, which must be the means of Rarefaction, or extension,
according to the Cartesian Supposition, pervades the Vessel so easily, how
comes it to pass that it is kept in this straight prison without avolation
through the Brass Hemispheres? Or rather, why does not a greater quantity
thereof pervade the Brass Hemisphere all this while, and release the Air from
its hard tension, by separating thereby the Hemispheres, and so restoring the
Air in all parts to its just and natural texture and position? And certainly if
the Spirit of Nature or Hylarchical Principle had any thing to do in matters of
this Nature, or were effective in it, here were a proper business and exercise
for it; But we see that without perforation or accession of Heat, nothing of
such relaxation is effected, notwitstanding the great stress that the Air is
under in the Hemispheres, and which yet would be inevitably relaxed, if a
considerable portion of subtle Matter did penetrate through the Hemispheres,
and mix it self with the included rarefied Air, as well as if a little Air were
let into it through a Pin-hole.

4. In the Instance last given, and many other of like nature, that might be
given, where the filaments of the Air in their relaxation from heat, have a
motion of contraction in themselves per viam restitutionis, and a consequential
attraction on the Vessel including them per modum nexus, it is impossible this
can be salved by the Supposition of the Cartesians and Lucretians, which
suppose the Air to consist of minute particles only joined together by
contiguity, for where there is only contiguity without continuity of parts,
that body can never draw another body per modum tractionis, it will be really
less tenacious than a Rope of Sand; so that such an intromission of particles
thus solute, as they state most bodies to be, by a bare contiguity of Atoms,
could never explicate this visible Phenomenon that ensues upon tension of the
Air, or after the avolation or extinguishment of Heat that first expanded it.

5. And as this Supposition by no means salves the Phenomenon of Rarefaction of
the Air, and what ensues thereupon, so it as little salves that of Condensation
or Constipation of Air by compression, as we see in Wind-Guns, and other
Engines, which upon a Discharge, or a Motion of that compression, do with a
force explode or discharge themselves, and press very hard upon bodies that are
in their way; so that a Wind-Gun will drive a Bullet through a pretty thick
piece of Wood, which could never be, if this Solution of Rarefaction and
Condensation were true.

1. If the Air it self, and also this subsidiary Materia subtilissima were but
a collection of minute bodies, joined only in contiguity one to another, all
the compression in the world would give it no more elasticity, or that
explosive motion, than if a portion of Calice-Sand were forced into a Gun or
other Vessel, with all the compression imaginable.

2. But again, in that elastical explosion by the Air compressed into a
narrower room, what is it that actually exercises that explosive Elasticity?
Is it the subtle matter that was mingled with the included compressed Air?
Surely no; for according to this Supposition, that is squeezed out and
permeated through the Barrel or Trunk of the Wind-gun: Or is it the grosser
Particles of the Air that is yet left in the Gun, and cannot get out till the
Obturaculum be removed? But there is no reason for that to have any Elasticity;
for by the avolation of the subtle Matter, there is room enough left for it;
and under that narrow dimension that now it has, yet has it as much room as
before; for the avolation of the Materia subtilis has made a perfect room for
it, and left it a space exactly commensurate to its corporeal Moles. But it may
be that the Materia subtilis that was driven out by the compression, now upon
the aperture of the Obturaculum, pervades the substance of the Gun with that
force that it gives the explosion. But it is apparent that neither this can
help it; for it does appear that the Motion of the Subtle Matter into the
Orifice of the Wind-gun upon the removal of the Obturaculum must needs run
counter to the explosion of the Air, and obstruct it. Again, it is apparent
that the subtle Matter is driven out gradually and with iterated force, and it
cannot pervade the Iron sides of the Gun, but gradually, and with great
straining, and to imagine that in a moment, the moment of a Motion of the
Obturaculum, the whole body of that removed Matter should pervade the strong
and close Metal in an instant to give that strong and forcible explosion,
exceeds all reason, sense and credibility. And therefore it was but necessary
for those that will maintain this Assertion to substitute a Spirit of Nature,
or an Hylarchical Principle, which for the preservation of Bodies in their due
natural state and position, should act little less than miraculously to supply
all these Difficulties, which yet notwithstanding must be supposed according to
this Supposition to act in contradiction to it self and Nature also. For when
in Rarefaction of Bodies this Spiritus Naturae sends supplies of subtle Matter
to fill the Interstitia, it must necessarily rob other parts of the Air of some
of that subtle Matter that properly belonged to its texture and natural
constitution; and so when one portion of Matter is gratified, another is
impoverished of what belongs to it, which seems wholly unsuitable to the office
which this vicarious Spirit of Nature (according to this new Supposition) is
substituted to exercise.

CHAP. IX. Touching the Third Supposition of the Method of Rarefaction and
Condensation according to the Ancient Philosophy, and seems to be the truest.
HAving examined the two former Suppositions, and as near as I can, discovered
their insufficiency, I now come to the Third, which I think to be true, viz. as
to that kind of Rarefaction and Condensation (which before in the 4th Chapter
is stated to be the true Matter of the Question) for in Rarefaction of a Body
(suppose Air) either by Heat or Tension, there is a real expansion or
dilatation of the same Moles of Matter of the Air, and all its parts to a
larger space, extent or dimension than it had before; and in Condensation, by
Cold, (but more evidently by compression) the same Moles of Matter, and all its
parts have a narrower or less space or expansion than before.

I suppose therefore that although Rarefaction and Condensation of any Body
from its natural size and dimension belonging to it, is for the most part, if
not always, by the agency or efficiency of some external cause, yet under such
circumstances: Rarity and Density are but natural affections, or rather
Passions, Qualities or Modes of such Bodies arising from their very texture and
make, and are as naturally belonging to them as Heat or Cold, Humidity or
Dryness, Smoothness or Roughness, or other tangible Qualities to other Bodies
that are more gross and corporeal.

2. I do suppose that whatever men have talked or wrote concerning Spatia
imaginaria, without relation to any Bodies to fill it, yet as time or
successive duration is a kind of Attendant upon successive Motion, so space is
a kind of Entity relative to Bodies, and dependent upon them.

3. To make way to what I have to say herein: It seems to me no kind of
repugnancy in Nature, but altogether consonant thereunto, and that it is
equally possible and reasonable that a Body that is much more rare than
another, and having in it less of solid corporeity, and consequently of weight,
than another, yet may as entirely fill the whole space within the compass of
its external Superficies, as a body of a denser consistence, so that although
Gold be 18000 times bulk for bulk heavier than Air, and near 20 times heavier
than Water; and although Water be near 14 times lighter than Mercury, yet it is
no way repugnant, but highly consonant to Nature, that all the particles of a
Tube of Air may be as closely united one to another, and as entirely fill that
Cubical space, as the like Cubical body of Water or Mercury, or Gold: And that
although it is inherent in the very nature of a rare body, not to have so firm
a consistency as that which is more crass and solid; yet such a rare body may
be wholly destitute of Pores or Interstitia between its parts, as the most
solid body imaginable; for porosity or distance of parts is not an effect
necessarily resulting from Rarity. For it would be a strange position, that no
Body that were not sum solidum or crassum, could have been created, that had
all its parts commensurate to all the space within the external dimensions, or
extima Superficies of such body, and yet this must necessarily follow, if such
a commensuration ex natura rei, were contradictory to, and inconsistent with
any body that is not sum solidum or crassum, whereof possibly there is no
instance that is or can be made; for Gold it self is not sum crassum or
solidum; for one piece of Gold may be solider, and have more of crass Matter
than another: which appears by the Disparity of weight between two several
kinds of Gold of the same bulk.

Nay, upon a strict search it may be found de facto true, that some kinds of
Wood or Metals that are more crass, and consequently more weighty than others,
may yet be more porous than some Woods or Metals that are lighter and of a
greater tenuity; yea, Glass or Crystal, that is lighter and less crass than
some other bodies, may be less porous than such as are heavier and crasser; or
if comparison be made between it and common Iron-Ore, the like between
Calice-Sand and yellow Wax, and many more, whereof the Table of the Lord
Verulam, in his Historia Densi and Rari, may yield us many Instances.

Again, we have no better measure of the Rarity or Density in Bodies than their
difference of weight, Quod Rarum, leve; quod Densum, grave. Let us resume the
Instance given supra, cap. 6. Wherein it appears that Air is at least 12000
times lighter; and consequently rarer than Mercury: Now if we should suppose
the Air in a Cubique Vessel of a Foot square, should fill but 1/12000 of that
space, and the rest, viz. 11999 parts of that space must be either totally
empty, or supplied with another kind of Heterogeneous subtle Matter, differing
from Air: This must be the consequence of the Supposition that the Moles aeris
is not commensurate to all the spaces within the Cavity of that Cube, and yet
it is so evidently against Sense, that it is not possible to be admitted, or
almost conceivable by any that duly thinks of it.

Water is subtiler than Mercury, by 14 times; Air is subtiler than Water by 900
times; and possibly the Ether above the Atmosphere, or the Elementa Stellarum
is as much subtiler than common Air of our lower Atmosphere. It were a wild
conceit to think that every given portion of the Ethereal world must
necessarily have forty thousand equal portions, either of Vacuity, or of subtle
Matter, more refined than Ether, and that no one given portion of Ethereal
Matter; suppose a Cubique Foot could be exactly commensurate to all the space
within that Cubique Foot, but must have forty thousand interspersed pores,
either wholly vacant, or filled with another more subtle Matter than it self.

I conclude therefore, it is equally consonant to the nature of Bodies, that a
more rare or subtle Body may be, and is equally commensurate to all the spaces
within the extent of its Ubication, as the crassest body in the World.

The thing I drive at is this real Truth, viz. that a Body though never so
rare, may be entirely commensurate to all the space within the compass of its
external Superficies, as well as the densest or crassest Body that is or can be
in Nature; and consequently that the same Body, if it have at several times
several textures, may in these several seasons entirely possess spaces
answering such textures; as, if Water gain the texture of Air, it may be
commensurate to all spaces within its Superficies.

4. It seems to me, that although some particles of Air included in the common
Body of the Air, may possibly be more subtle than others, yet as to point of
extension or contraction, all the parts thereof, even the minutest parts
thereof, as to the quality of Rarity and Tenuity, and the motion of Rarefaction
and Condensation, are of the same nature, and perfectly homogeneal; and the
like for Water; and although some imaginable parts thereof may be rarer, others
crasser, yet they are perfectly mingled together, as common Constituents of the
same Body we call Air; and therefore to suppose the first Constituent minute
particles of Air or Water, are hard, or of any other nature than the whole
Body, is a precarious, inevident and unreasonable Supposition.

5. I do suppose it as a certain, evident truth, that the actual existence of
parts or particles of continued Bodies (as most evidently Water and Air are)
are but only potentially, or by the operations of the Understanding in such
Bodies, and not really existing, as parts, or as divided, till a real and
actual separation of them with integral parts, though they may be bigger or
less, according to the method of their separation; yet,

1. Still remain Bodies.

2. Cannot be indivisible, no not physically.

3. Are of the very same nature, texture or make with the whole Body out of
which they are cancelled; and therefore when the external Superficies of the
whole bulk in Rarefaction is expanded, or in Condensation is contracted, the
like expansion and contraction happens in proportion in every particle thereof,
in a true and proper Rarefaction or Condensation, whereof the Question is
stated.

6. I do not think that corporeity or bodily consistence is the same thing with
quantity or trina dimensio; but that this is but an affection or consequence of
it; for otherwise all Bodies that have an equal trina dimensio, must needs have
the same Density, or an equal mass of Matter, or Corporeal Moles, which is
contrary to Experience; for a Cubique Foot of Water has less of Matter than a
Cubique Foot of Mercury, as appears by the disparity of their weight, the best
indication of the disparity of the Moles of Matter.

These things being thus premised, I now proceed to declare my thoughts
touching Rarefaction and Condensation, holding my self singly to it as it is
stated, to be the Question in the 4th Chapter, and principally applying my self
to those Bodies that are most Pneumatical or Spirital (I say not Spiritual.)

It seems therefore to me, that as several Bodies of the same external extent
or Superficies; as, suppose a Cubical Foot of Air, Water, Mercury, or Gold, may
have, and have yet a close continuity of all their particles without any
Interstitia of vacuous spaces, or of other Matter, to fill them up, and all
this arising from the various textures of those bodies, so the same body by a
various texture acquired by accidental emergencies either of heat, tension or
compression, may acquire a greater or less expansion, according to those
varieties of acquired textures, yet without any new accession of substance, or
deperdition of any its included particles, but still remaining individually the
very same Matter.

For if several bodies of various textures, may be some more rare, and some
more dense, from their very Make and texture, and yet as well those that are
more rare, as suppose Air or Water may as exactly fill all the spaces within
the compass of their extension, without the subsidiary help of vacuities or
other interspersed bodies, as well as those of a more condense consistency;
suppose Gold, Lead: or Mercury; the very same reason does enforce that the same
body, if its texture be either by force or accident, altered to a greater
Rarity or Density than it had before, may alter its space, and yet be entirely
and exactly commensurate to a greater or lesser space, according to such
alteration of its texture, as well as those several bodies that had primitively
the like variety of texture constant to their nature.

For Matter or material substance is of it self equally susceptive of a laxer
or crasser, a rarer or denser consistence or texture of parts; only when it is
lax or rare, the same portion of Matter takes up more space, when it is crass
or dense, it takes up less space.

For instance, in Distillation we will suppose that first by some moderate Heat
the distillatory Vessels, the Vessel (wherein the Roses for the purpose are
placed to be distilled) the Head of the Still, and the Recipient to be as much
evacuated of Air, or the included Air attenuated as much as may be, and then
the Vessels closely luted one to another, the moist Matter of the Roses by
gentle heat is resolved first into a subtle Fume or Vapor, and so rarefied
from what it was in the Rose-Leaves: Then again these Fumes or Vapors partly by
the coldness of the Head of the Still, partly by the collection and aggregation
of the Vapors themselves, resolve into drops of water, and so discharge
themselves into the Receivers: Here the very same body by the change of its
texture, namely, the watery or moist substance of the Roses is first dilated
into Fumes or Vapors, and then contracted into Water; and the first receive a
dilatation or expansion into Vapors, where it takes up a larger dimension in
all its parts, as well as in its ambient Superficies, and then a contraction
into a narrower compass, when resolved into Water, and yet continues still the
same body; but by variation of its textures, assumes a larger or narrower
dimension in all its parts without reception of new foreign particles to dilate
it, or emission of some of its substance in contraction or condensation.

Which Instance explains what I intend; namely, that the same individual body,
according to the variety of its textures, may acquire a larger or less space,
and yet continue the same body, though altered in the textures of Rarity or
Density; as Air has a larger expansion than Water, so if Water be converted
into Air, and thereby its texture altered into a more subtle expansive body, it
takes up the same dimension as if it had been never Water, but always Air. And
if Air again be converted into Water, it takes up the same contracted
dimension, as if it had ever been Water.

And this method of solution of Condensation and Rarefaction, answers all the
evident, apparent and sensible Phenomenon in Rarefaction and Condensation above
delivered, and that without any difficulty or strained supposition: For
instance, In Rarefaction by Heat, or by tension of a Cubical Foot of Air in a
Vessel, it is visible that the Air, and every particle of it, gains a larger
extent every way; for it will break the Vessel, unless it have vent, which it
could not do, unless the entire body were extended, and not barely the
Superficies, because unless the whole Moles were every way expanded, it would
have room enough within it self for its reception without breaking the Vessel
that contains it.

Again, when the Heat decays, and consequently the Air relaxed from that
extent, it endeavors its own contraction to its just and natural size and
texture which it lost for the time, by the foreign violence of expansion by
Heat or Tension, and this by a natural motion of restitution to its natural
texture; and because it cannot gain its relaxation to its former texture by
contraction, by reason of the vacuity that would thereupon follow, it does as
much as it may, and lays hold on the internal sides of the Vessels wherein it
is imprisoned, and pulls them together; but as soon as it gains a relaxation by
the admission of foreign Air into it, the very same portion of expanded Air
that under its expansion filled a Cube of a Foot square, will subside into a
space of less than six inches square, which was its true natural space
resulting from the texture it then had, by that admission of foreign Air.

Again, in Condensation a portion of Air, suppose a Cubique Foot in its just
and natural texture, entirely fills all the space within that Cubical Foot (for
its texture is suited to such a space) but being compressed forcibly into a
Wind-gun or Aeolipile, the texture is changed by this violence, and it takes up
perchance not the twentieth part of that space: The difference of its extension
arises from the alteration of its texture by this external compressive force
used upon it; and hereupon it gains an Elasticity, which is nothing else but a
natural motion or conatus to be restored to its former just and natural
texture, and consequently to that just extent, and Liberty, and position of
space that belongs naturally to it, as a Stick, or Branch of a Tree, or Spring
of Steel being bent beyond, or against its just position, has its motion of
restitution to its former position, with a force or resilition: For the Air in
its natural constitution, has a certain determinate texture belonging to it,
and consequently a just and natural extension proportionate to that texture.
And this it greedily endeavors to keep; and when disturbed from it, to
re-acquire, which is the motion of restitution which I often express by the
natural and spontaneous contraction of a Lute-string, after an extention beyond
its proper texture. And this is the genuine and true cause of that strong and
violent explosion that happens in those Pneumatical Engines of various sorts.

So that in these and all other Phenomenon of Rarefaction and Condensation,
this plain, and common, and ancient Solution squares exactly with them, as
might be instanced in infinite more Particulars, if it were needful.

And with this agree the best Philosophers both Ancient and Modern.

Aristotle, that great Priest of Nature, in 4 Physicor. cap. 9. wherein he
answers the Objections brought by others to prove Vacuities from the Phenomenon
in Rarefaction and Condensation, tells us that Rarity and Density properly so
called, are not by accession of new Matter, or loss of any of the old, but from
the potentiality of Matter it self, to undergo several textures, and
consequently several extensions, Si factus est Aer ex Aqua, eadem materia facta
est Aer, nulla re insuper alia assumpta sed quod erat potentia, id tandem facta
est actu; and simili modo si orta est Aqua ex Aere, eadem namque materia nunc
in magnam ex parva, nunc in parvam ex magna vertitur molem, etc. Qua re ipsa
Moles sensibilis non ideo extenditur aut constringitur quia materiae aliquid
insuper adjicit aut objicit, sed quia ipsa Materies utrumque subire potest, quo
sit ut idem sit rarum and densum, and utriusque Materia una, atqui densum est
grave, rarum autem leve.

Again, the Lord Verulam, a great inquisitor into Nature, and not very friendly
to Aristotle in his Historia Densi and Rari, after several Instances of
Pseudo-rarefactions, when he speaks of Rarefaction of Air by Heat, page 43.
tells us, Aer per calorem dilatatur simpliciter, neque enim separatur quippiam,
aut emittitur, ut in tangibilibus, sed simpliciter fit expansio.

This Rarefaction is not therefore by the distraction of the particles of Air
one from another to a greater distance, and interposing porosities or
interstitia either of perfect empty spaces as the Vacuists would have it, or
filled with adventitious subtle Matter, as the Cartesians would have it;
neither in Condensation are any parts of Air, or included in Air drawn out, and
thereby the remaining particles rendered into a closer order and contiguity one
to another:

But in the former the extension of the whole portion of Air, and of every
particle is thereof quaquaversum enlarged, and in Condensation the entire
extension of the Air and every part thereof is quaquaversum contracted, and
this variation is no other but a common affection, or rather position or
quantity of Matter necessarily arising from the various textures that it
successively acquires.

And therefore the great Objections that are made against this Method of the
Ancients in their accounts of Rarefaction and Condensation, fall to just
nothing; as for instance,

1. That in Rarefaction of the Air, it must be softer to the touch, and in
Condensation harder: I would gladly hear of that man that ever knew de facto
Air condensed but to its 100th part yet if it were condensed 900 times, it
would not be so dense as Water, or what disproportion to the touch he can find
between Smoke and Air, and yet the former is far more dense; for it is
conspicuous to the view: so that he had need be a man of exquisite sense, to
make any conclusion from his touch, touching the Rarity and Density of a
Pneumatical Body.

Again, if the Atomical Hypothesis were admitted, it is not conceptible but
that all bodies, whether in their natural texture, or under the motions of
Rarefaction and Condensation, must be hard and equally hard, because consisting
of a plenitude of Atoms, which are all supposed to be hard and infrangible.

CHAP. X. A farther Consideration of Rarefaction and Condensation, and of the
Supposition of the penetrability or impenetrability of Bodies, Material
Substances, Quantity, Extension, etc.
THe principal Objection against the method of Rarefaction and Condensation,
propounded in the former Chapter, is this, That it is impossible the same Moles
of Matter can assume a larger space and dimension, as in Rarefaction, without a
division of one part from another, and thereby leaving certain vacant
Interstitia between the parts separated, or without a supposition of a
pre-existent penetration of the parts of Matter, while in its former more
condensed consistence, and in Rarefaction thrusting out those parts that
formerly penetrated one another, being unfettered in Rarefaction, or by
admission of new porosities made in the rarefied Matter, and reception therein
of other foreign Matter. Again, Condensation of the same portion of Matter
cannot be without supposition of vacant empty Spatiola, which are closed up by
the strict coalition of parts, or by supposing a penetrability and penetration
of the parts of the same portion of Matter in its new acquired state of
Condensation, or by driving out from that portion of Matter some of its more
subtle parts, whereby the remaining parts are fewer, and take up less room or
space than before such Condensation: The first is the first way propounded by
the Vacuists, and is rejected. The second is in effect the way propounded by me
in the former Chapter, but is said to be inconsistent in nature, because
penetrability of bodies or of extension of Material Substance, is rejected by
almost all Philosophers; therefore the last, which is the middle way, contended
against in the 8th Chapter, must be the true Method of Rarefaction and
Condensation.

I answer, It is true, I have laid aside, and that justly, the Opinion of the
Vacuists, in the 7th Chapter, and likewise the Opinion of acquest of new
Matter, and expulsion of part of the old, in the 8th Chapter, and have
entertained the Opinion of the Ancient and some of the Modern Philosophers, in
the 9th Chapter. And it is true that this Opinion thus by me entertained,
cannot well be supported without a supposition of the penetrability of material
Substances, or somewhat analogal thereunto, viz. Contraction and Dilatation:
And it is true, that although I think that this penetrability of Material
Substance, be a great truth, yet it is some difficulty to explain it; which
nevertheless I shall endeavor to do; and in doing of it, the Answer to the
Objection will evidence it self. And I shall choose to do it this way, namely,
by explication of Terms and Words, and rendering my apprehensions suitable to
those Explications, though it may be in a different manner from the usual or
Scholastic expressions.

1. Concerning Penetrability and Impenetrability.

2. Concerning Material Substance.

3. Concerning Body, and wherein it differs from the Notion of Substance.

4. Concerning Quantity.

5. Concerning Rarity and Density.

6. Concerning Extension or Dimension.

7. Concerning Penetrability, how it is or is not applicable to the former
Subjects.

First, Penetrability or Penetration of Matter or Bodies, etc. is of three
sorts, viz.

1. The permeation or penetration of one Body into or through another, by
porosities of the penetrated Body, either found or made by the penetrating
Body; this is common almost to all Bodies, and is not the Penetrability in
question.

2. The separation, distraction or division of the parts of a penetrated Body
by the force and energy of another Body; as the Arrow through the Air, or the
Bullet through the sides of a Ship; this is also usual, and is not the
penetration or penetrability in question.

3. When one part or particle of Matter is taken into another portion of Matter
by a kind of contraction, and swallowed up and drowned as it were, in another
portion of Matter, by a stricter union than it had before; whereby the same
numerical portion of Matter has a less extension and space than it had before,
and yet continues the same portion of Matter without diminution or increase of
substance, and this is that which is the Subject of the Question in hand.

And this penetration of Matter or Bodies may be considered two ways.

1. When two distinct divided bodies or portions of Matter are said thus to
penetrate each other.

2. When the united parts of the same portion of Matter do penetrate and
swallow each other, as is supposed to be done in Condensation; and though the
former be considerable, yet this latter is that kind of penetration touching
which the Question grows.

Secondly, Matter or Material Substance is the Substratum of Bodies; and
although it is not possible for it to exist one moment without a determinate
extent and determination into some Body completed in Esse Corporeo, yet it is
of it self indifferent to any particular extension or bodily Concrement. This
is that Materia Prima, the Subject of all Generation and Corruption, yet it
self ingenerable and incorruptible; that Proteus which in various successions
is capable of various Forms, Extensions and Variety of Bodies; as we see in a
piece of Wood thrown into the Fire, that same material substance which but now
was Wood, assumes several Natures and Extensions, some more fixed than the
Wood, as its Salts; some more lax, as Ashes and Smoke, and accordingly
undergoes Varieties of Extensions different from what the very same portion of
Matter had before: the very same individual supposed portion of Matter is
capable of being determined into Air, Water, or some other Body; and if
determined into Water, it may be the supposed portion of Matter would make up a
Cubical Body of an inch square; but if determined into Air, it would make a
Cubical body of above 1000 times that extension, and yet the individual portion
of Matter simply the same, and neither more nor less under those different
textures and extensions; for Material Substance is naturally susceptive
successively of various textures and consistences, from whence do necessarily
result successively various extents or diminutions of that one individual
particle of Matter under those various consistences.

Thirdly, Body is nothing else but Matter determined into a Body of this or
that Nature, Figure, Texture, Plexus, Quality and Dimension; these are
superadditions to Matter, and being added to it, determine it into Body; and
when this Body by the power of the Agent, assumes another distinct consistence;
then is that Body, either essentially changed into another kind of Body, or
else accidentally altered in figure, dimension, texture, or otherwise, and yet
the Matter continues entirely the same, as in some Bodies; the very same
Cubique inch of Beeswax may be molded into a Globe, a Cone, a Trigone, etc.
and yet continues the same numerical and individual piece of Wax.

Fourthly, Quantity; and herein I shall take the Liberty to use this word
according to my own sense, abstracted from others acceptance: I call therefore
Quantity that Habitude whereby a Material Substance under any determination is
denominated more or less, and is a kind of proper inseparable Accident (if we
will call it so) of Material Substance, and intrinsic to it, and really
differs from Extension or Dimension: For instance, a Cubique inch of Water is
rarefied into 1000 Cubique inches of Air; or a Cubique Foot of Air is by heat
rarefied into five cubique Feet of Air; here is variety of Extension, and yet
the same quantity of Matter in the cubique inch of Water, and in the cubique
foot of Air, as is after Rarefaction in the 1000 cubique inches of Air, and 5
cubique feet of Air, Quantity being closely knit to Material Substance, but
this or that particular extension variable, though the quantity ( i. e.) the
Moles, the muchness of Substance be the same.

And herein, among other things, it differs from Extension, that Extension is
measured by artificial measures of Inches, Palms, Feet, Cubits; but Quantity,
in my acceptance, is measured by weight, which gives the discrimination of
Quantity or Muchness of Matter, where, it may be, the extent is equal; as a
cubique foot of water is equal in dimension to a cubique foot of Mercury; but
there is 14 times more weight, and consequently more Matter and Material
quantity in the latter than in the former.

Fifthly, Density and Rarity are various Qualities both of Bodies and Material
Substance; and they are equally susceptive of those qualities, as they are of
Color, Figure, variety of Texture, or the like, namely, in successive portions
of Time or Duration: and hence it is infallibly true that the same Material
Substance that is now actually rare, is potentially dense; or that which now is
actually dense, is potentially rare, without any admission of new Substance, or
deperdition of any of the old. And as several portions of Material Substance
are susceptive of, or actually under several degrees of Rarity or Density, as
Gold, Iron, Wax, Water, Air; so the same portion of Material Substance may in
successive portions of times be susceptive of several degrees of Rarity or
Density; for, as I said, they are but several qualities, or if you will, modes
of Matter.

The Motion to Rarity or Density, is that which is usually called Rarefaction
or Condensation; and though Matter or Body be susceptive of it (some more
easily, some more difficultly) yet it is most ordinarily the effect of an
extrinsecal Agent, as Fire, Tension, Constipation, Compression.

The Method whereby the alteration from Rarity to Density, or to a less degree
of Density, and e converso, is effected, is the alteration of the texture of
the Body so rarefied or condensed into a more dilate or contracted consistence.

And this Alteration is sometimes so great, that it alters the very nature or
Species of the Body, as when Air is condensed into Water, or Water into Air;
sometimes it only alters the texture, without altering the nature; as when Air
is compressed into a narrower compass in Wind-guns, or dilated by heat in
Aeolipiles, it remains Air still, though under differing texture from what it
had before.

The effects of Rarefaction and Condensation are neither increase nor
diminution of the Substance thus condensed or rarefied, nor of its quantity or
muchness: If a cubique inch of Brass were condensed into Gold, indeed the Moles
would be less in extent; but there would be the very same individual portion of
material substance in both; and the very same weight that the cubique inch of
Brass had, would the portion of Gold have upon such a condensation: For weight
and not extent is the best measure of equality or disparity of material
substance.

But indeed as to Extension, the measures would differ; the same Moles of
Matter condensed might not take up half the extent it did before, and being
rarefied, might take up ten times its extension or dimension.

Sixthly, Dimension or Extension; Though as Quantity imports much or little, it
be inseparable from the notion of material Substance, yet actual Extension in
this or that determinate measure or degree, is but purely accidental to
Material Substance; for it may have one extension one hour, and the next hour
have another, as its texture is altered: For variety of extension is
consequential, and necessarily consequential upon alteration of texture.

There are certain distinctions to be observed touching Extension, viz.

1. An actual, and an habitual, aptitudinary and potential extension, although
de facto every portion of matter is under some actual extension, yet, as I
said, this or that actual extension is not intrinsecal or essential to Matter;
for as it is capable of a variation of its texture, so it is capable of a
change, variation and alteration of its dimension. But that habitual,
aptitudinary and potential extension whereby it must necessarily be at some
time or moment under some determinate extension or other, is intrinsic to it,
though it be successively alterable as its texture is alterable.

Again, 2. We must distinguish between the extension in the superficial and
external dimension, and that which is the whole portion of Matter; the former
may be without the true and real increase of extent or dimension; for possibly
by the distraction and separation of the more interior parts of Matter, and the
production thereby of porosities, the external superficial extent may be
enlarged, and yet the whole extent continues the same, but only with a
diversified ubication of the more interior parts of Matter; but that extension
which is intended by me in Rarefaction, is an entire extension of the whole
Matter and all its parts, without which there is no true and adequate
extension; and that contraction or penetration of Material Substance to
Condensation, is the contraction of the whole triple dimension, length, breadth
and thickness of the whole Body and every part, yet retaining the same quantity
or muchness of Substance.

And as I have showed that in several portions of Material Substance, it is not
only consistent with the Laws of Nature, but evidently true in fact that a
portion of rarefied Matter (suppose it Air) may be, and is co-extended to all
the spaces within the compass of that Matter, and fills them as entirely as a
most dense Body or portion of Matter fills all the spaces within its
superficial dimension (as suppose it Water, or even Mercury or Gold it self) so
the same portion of compacted Matter, suppose it Water or Mercury, being
rarefied into a more dilated and expanded consistence, as into Air or Fumes,
may upon the very same account fill all the spaces within the extent of that
dilated extension, without any hiatus or interstitia of empty spaces, or the
acquest of any additional Matter, because the texture of that portion of Matter
is only changed, and a greater extension or dimension is necessarily
consequential upon, or concomitant with the variation of the texture of that
very same portion of Matter to a greater expansion in Rarefaction.

Seventhly, The Contraction or Evolution and Expansion of a Spirit or Spiritual
Substance, which is commonly called Penetration, is incident to Spirits and
Spiritual Substances, that are void of Matter; but this does not at all impeach
that natural penetration of Material Substance whereof I have spoken; for they
differ toto coelo one from another.

1. In the principle of each Penetration: In Material Substance it always, or
at least, commonly, proceeds from an external efficient or force, as in
Contraction or Penetration of Material Substances by compression, or by
constipations from without; but the penetration or contraction, or dilatation
of a Spiritual Substance, is from an internal principle, possibly the
determination of the will of such a Spirit to contraction or evolution.

2. In the Consequent, or rather Concomitant of such Penetration or Expansion:
In Material Substance, upon contraction or penetration, the Matter is
necessarily thereupon more dense; and in evolution or expansion, more rare; for
it cannot be one or other without the acquest of a new texture of its parts,
viz. more lax in Rarefaction, more close and compact in Condensation; but in
the contraction or evolution of a Spirit, there is no alteration in the
texture, or Rarity or Density of a spiritual substance: For Rarity and Density
are Qualities and Affections competible only to Bodies and Material Substances,
not to Spirits or Substances purely immaterial; therefore I do dismiss the
Penetrability of Spirits, as a thing wholly unapplicable to the Matter in
Question, and no way applicable to the Argument in hand.

Eighthly, Now to apply the business of Penetrability or Impenetrability to
what has been formerly delivered.

First, In case of several Bodies that are under several actual dimensions, and
not united one to another by continuation, this concerns not the present
Question, which is touching one common portion of Matter, whose parts are
united one to another, and so in a state of union: yet whether that a Body may
not be of so high a rectified purity and tenuity, that it may penetrate the
dimensions of a grosser Body without porosities for its transition, either
found or made in that penetrated Body, may be difficult to determine, because
we are unacquainted with the highest degrees of subtilty of Bodies, and
consequently of those Energies that are consequential thereupon: Only if Light
be a Body, or if the Magnetical effusion be corporeal effluxes as some of the
late Philosophers assert, it seems to favor such a penetrability of such
subtle Bodies; for Light will pervade every part of the Diaphanum, and
Magnetical Effluxes will pervade the solidest Bodies, even Gold it self, as
Experience shows us, without making porosities for its transition. But I
dismiss this as not to the Question in hand; and possibly the Supposition that
Light or Magnetical Effluxes are Bodies, is untrue.

Secondly, As to portions of Matter, Bodies and Extensions thereof, where its
parts are united in one common continuity, as in the case of proper Rarefaction
and Condensation, it seems that such a penetration of actual dimensions, or of
Bodies determined in or under actual dimensions, such a penetration either of
Bodies or actual dimensions, or extensions, is impossible and contradictory in
it self, so long as such actual dimensions continue unaltered by an alteration
of the texture of such Body, and consequentially of such actual dimensions; for
a cubique Body of 12 inches cannot be more or less in extension than it is, so
long as it is a cubique Body of 12 inches: This is that penetration of Bodies
and Dimensions that we do reject under that name.

Thirdly, But in as much as the very same portion of Material Substance is
successively capable of several textures, and consequently of several
dimensions, there is nothing in Nature or Reason that prohibits a successive
penetration of Material Substances under such a mutation of textures and actual
dimensions, so that one and the very same numerical portion of Matter that this
moment is under a texture accommodate to the nature of the most subtle Air,
being condensed into a degree of Air less subtle, or condensed into Water, its
parts will be constipated and contracted into a closer posture, and take up
less space according to the degree of its Condensation; which contraction or
constipation of its parts, may not improperly be called penetration of material
Substance, but is not properly a penetration of Bodies, or extension actually
determined, and remaining unaltered in its texture.

And this gives the difference between 1. Penetration of actual Dimensions;
and, 2. Penetration of Bodies. 3. Penetration of Material Substance. The two
former are impossible without an alteration of the dimension or texture of the
Body. The third is not only possible but necessary, and necessarily
consequential upon the alteration of the texture of the Body into a more rare
or dense consistency.

And the evidence of the Truth hereof is, because the same numerical portion of
Substance material in a state of Rarity, is as commensurate to all the
particles of Space within the compass of its external Superficies, and has as
perfect and undivided continuation of its parts one to another; as when it is
condensed into a consistence that bears not the 100th part or 1000th part of
the same superficial dimension; for otherwise it were not possible to conceive,
but that in the whole Body of Air and Ether, for one portion of Material
Substance, there must be 1000 portions of empty spaces or nothings, which is
against Nature.

And this Sentiment, though not warily enough examined and considered by some
Philosophical Heads, has made them run on with one common cry against all
penetration of Material Substances, under the name of penetration of Bodies and
Extensions, as a great absurdity: But of latter times, some more considerate
and inquisitive persons have searched more freely and impartially into this
business; and though they do reject that impossible and contradictory
penetration of Bodies and actual Extensions or Dimension remaining unaltered in
the sense before given; yet do not only allow, as possible; but also assert, as
natural and necessary penetration of the parts of the same individual portion
of Material Substance, consisting in a State of union, and under an alteration
of textures, and consequently a change of extensions, as any man may see in the
Learned Treatise of Bodies, of Sir K. Digby, page The large Dispute of
Guarinus, Guarini Disputatione 4to Expensione, 2. De Rarefactione and
Condensatione. And our Learned Countreyman, Dr. Glisson, in his Tractate De
Natura Substantiae Energetica, cap. 27, 28. Wherein, among other clear
Explications of this Matter of Penetrability of Material Substances, he has
these Passages, namely, the prejudice that men have taken up against
penetrability of Matter, is, Quod ab incunte aetate consuevimus cogitare and
dicere non dari penetrationem Corporum aut dimensionum quodque simul pro
concesso habuimus penetrationem Corporum and Substantiarum idem sonare. Again,
Impossible est, ut manente eadem Extensione, mutetur Densitas, aut ut hac
mutata, illa non mutetur; mutata dimensione, ut in Condensatione, Materia
parts aliquas sui quasi absorbet in seipsam. And again, Sola terminata
extensio est quae materiam durante eadem terminatione, and non diutius
impenetrabilem pr^stat.

Neither is this any Novel Doctrine, but the very Natural Sense of Aristotle in
4 to Physicorum, cap. 9. before cited, and those expressions of the
potentiality of the very same portion of Matter to become rare or dense, and
thereby the Extension altered, without any diminution of its Matter in
Condensation, or acquisition of new Matter, in Rarefaction; though it mention
not Penetrability in express words, yet asserts the thing, as it is above
declared.

Upon the whole Matter therefore it seems, 1. There is no necessity of a
Supposition of a penetration of Dimensions on Condensation; neither is it
indeed possible where the Dimensions continue the same, but would be a kind of
contradiction. And,

2. Consequently where the Dimensions continue the same without alteration, it
is impossible there should be a penetration of Bodies or Material Substances,
remaining under the same actual dimension unaltered.

3. But there is not only a possibility of the change of Extension, but the
same will necessarily follow upon the change of the texture of the Body or
Matter under such Extension: And,

4. Consequently the Extension there remains not the same, but is changed. And,

5. Under such a change of Dimension or Extension, or together with it, there
may be, and will follow that which is called a penetration of Matter or
Material Substance; for that which was the impediment thereof, namely, the
actual Extension or Dimension is not only changeable, but now changed. And,

6. Therefore it seems no absurdity in Nature or Reason, to suppose such a
penetration of Material Substances, in the case of Condensation, and is the
most reasonable Solution of it.

And thus I have given an Account of what seems probable to me touching this
dark and intricate Enquiry touching Rarefaction and Condensation; and therefore
I have been the longer in it, because I would be understood, and because in the
ensuing Remarks it is often urged against the Solution offered of the
Phenomenon of the Torricellian Experiment; and I shall remit the Answer of the
Remarks of that kind to this Preliminary Discourse; which, though possibly it
may not satisfy every Reader, yet it will at least render it evident, that the
Objections made upon these obscure and intricate Suppositions of
impenetrability of Material Substance, are not so effectual, nor indeed proper
to evince or prove, unless we had a clearer Discovery of the Nature and
Affections of Bodies, than we have yet attained. And therefore Objections made
from this Topique, lose their use, in as much as the Medium is more obscure
than the very thing contended about. And now I shall proceed to the Remarks
themselves.

REMARKS upon the Essay touching GRAVITATION of FLUIDS.
REMARK I. Upon the Second CHAPTER.
THis Remark fiercely, and in the first greeting, charge the Second Chapter
of the Essay with contradiction, in that in some places thereof, it is said,
That Gravity is a quality whereby heavy Bodies tend to the Center; and yet in
other places it is said, That Gravitation is but Nisus or Conatus ad Motum; and
therefore that it is not improper to say, that Bodies that have a Nisus or
Conatus ad Motum verticalem, do gravitate upward; which the Remarker thinks to
have been more properly expressed by Levitation; and to call it Gravitation, is
repugnant and contradictory to what is said of the quality of Gravity.

But to avoid a frivolous contention of Words, it might have been fairly and
easily observed, that in truth all kind of Gravitation is but Motion or Conatus
ad Motum.

But in that Conatus or Nisus ad Motum, we are necessarily to consider two
things.

1. The Principium Motivum. 2. The Terminus Motus, or Conatus ad Motum.
The Principium Motivum may be various, and tending to various terminations, it
may be extrinsecal and accidental; as when I throw a Stone into a Bucket of
Water, the motion of the Water is thereby caused upward, and raises its
Superficies, and the motion of the Water upward, is not altogether improperly
called Gravitation upward, coming from an external force.

Again, The Principle of the Motion, or Conatus ad Motum, may be intrinsic,
and from that intrinsic Principle, may have a motion or Conatus ad Motum
downward, which I call the intrinsic quality of Gravity; this intrinsic
quality governs and enclines the Motion and Conatus ad Motum, to a central
termination, when it has no collateral impediment. Any man with half an eye
may see here is a Conatus ad Motum of the heavy Body to a central motion, which
is its Gravitation, and yet the Principle that impresseth this kind of
termination of its Motion, is that which I call, and call truly, the Quality of
Gravity in the heavy Body.

In the very Instance of the Motion of Water in relation to the Rundle of Wood,
specifically lighter than Water, we may observe both these Gravitations or
Motions the Water presses downward from its intrinsecal Principle or Quality
of Gravity, and thereby undermines and gets below the Rundle; and then by a
relative, occasional or accidental motion, in relation to the Rundle of Wood,
it presses upward, and drives up the Rundle of Wood with a force and kind of
gravitation or motion upward to the Superficies of the Water: The same Water
has these various terminations, one downward, from its own intrinsic quality
of Gravity, though the exercise thereof be suspended till it find a lighter
Body within its dimension to exert it; the other, upward, in relation to the
Rundle of Wood, which by circumpulsion it drives upward.

And therefore the kind consequences that I hold, there is nothing but mobility
in Bodies, and that I use the phrase of Gravity according to the vulgar
acceptance, and as Idolum fori, or that the actual descent of Water or other
heavy Body, is from a distinct Being, as is inferred in the first, second and
sixth Sections of that Chapter, are but mistaken Collections, and have no
concession from me or any thing I have therein asserted, nor are at all true,
as I think.

As to the 4th and 5th Illation in that Remark, where it is said, The Water
has no Nisus ad motum upward into the Tube immersed, and stopped at the lower
end, till opened, that, in the Sequel of this Enquiry will appear not to be
altogether true: But if it were never so true, yet it impugnes not what is
above by me delivered; for the Water is driven up into the Tube by the weight
of the body of the Water in the Bucket, upon the Cavity of the Tube filled only
with Air, and so the rising of the Water into the Tube, is by the pressure of
an accidental Position, and the fluidity of the ascending Water, meeting with
an Element in the Tube lighter than the Water.

We see in a pair of Scales a weight of two pound in one Scale, makes the
weight of one pound in the other Scale, to ascend, though both are heavy
Bodies; and this by Mechanique and Statique Principles: So in the Siphon, A B,
Water poured into the Leg A, raises the water in the other Leg, to an equal
Superficies, upon necessary statique grounds, without calling in any subsidiary
Spirit of Nature to effect the ascent; for the Siphon is a kind of natural
Libra: And so when the Tube stopped with the Finger beneath, is immersed into a
Bucket of Water, and then opened, the circumjacent water being both fluid and
heavy, is driven up into the vacant Tube, till it come to an equal Superficies
with the rest of the water in the Bucket, by a kind of due Equipondium. And all
this is most regularly and necessarily effected according to the common
Mechanism of Statique Principles, without any help from the supposed Spirit of
Nature, to fetch out the Air out of the Tube, or to raise the Water into it.

There be many accidental causes of the motion of water vertically upward,
which yet consist with its intrinsecal principle or quality, which I call
Gravity, or Conatus to a central motion; For instance,

1. It is moved upward by casting into it a heavier Body, which takes up some
of its room; as throwing a Stone into a Bucket of water.

2. It is moved upward by attraction; as in Pumps and Syringes.

3. It is moved upward, when within its own dimension it meets with a lighter
body than it self; as in the instance of the Tube of Air immersed, and then
unstopped at the bottom; or where a Rundle of lighter Wood is immersed in it,
it is apparent the water raises it, and casts it to the Superficies with a
kind of Force; so that it will leap above the Superficies of the water, when it
comes thither. But these accidental vertical Motions do not at all take away
the intrinsic principle of its Gravity, but consist with it; and therefore it
is no contradiction to say that Gravitation is but Conatus ad Motum, be the
motion lateral or vertical, or central; and yet at the same time to say, that
Gravity is a quality in heavy bodies, that specificates and determines their
Conatus ad Motum to be central or perpendicular.

REMARK II. Descent of Bodies.
THis Remark would surely have have been spared, if the Author had been pleased
to have read the next Page; where it is affirmed, that Water powered through the
Air, has a direct central Direction and Gravitation, Page 14. of the Essay.

REMARK III. Touching the Gravitation of Parts of Solid Bodies one upon another.
THat every part of a Solid Body has its common quality of heaviness, and
would in a state of Separation, descend, and that every part contributes to the
weight of the whole, is no where questioned; only when the Body is in
continuity, and of an equal consistence, that there is a suspension of actual
Gravitation of one part upon another, is that which is affirmed: But where they
are of different Consistencies, there many times happens actual and sensible
Gravitation of one part of a Solid Body upon another. This is observed in the
Third Chapter of the Nugae, page 1. And had it been observed, the Remark I
suppose would have been spared.

REMARK IV, V, VI, VII. Upon the Fourth CHAPTER.
FOr the rendering my Thoughts more intelligible, touching Gravitation of
FLUIDS, and to make my Approaches to it the more easy and fair, I give in that
Chapter Instances of solute solid Bodies, and how the pressure of their parts
are refracted, I begin with mere gross Bodies, square Stones of a foot square;
then descend to Wheat, Shot and Sand; and in these latter, I make my
application to their own incumbency upon an Egg-shell, because not so easily
explicable by a perforation of their Base in respect of the exility of their
Corpuscles.

But yet I must tell the Reader, that allowing the proportion of their
perforated Hole in the Base, to be but answerable to the exility of their
Bodies, the coalition of more grains of Wheat, Shot or Granules of Sand at the
same Orifice so proportioned, would stop their subsiding; as appears to any
that thinks it not below him, to observe in Hour-glasses, where the passage,
though big enough for one Granule of Sand, will not admit the passage of two or
three crowded together; and Wheat will quarre in the Binn of a Mill if not
shaken by the Clack.

But as to the thing designed by these Instances, it is only to show how by
various, especially lateral pressures, the pressure of a Column of Stone,
Wheat, Shot or Sand upon a subjected Body, is much broken. And certainly in
solid Bodies, ita se habent minora ad minora, ut majora ad majora. If we had a
good Magnifying-Glass, we should find the piling of the Granules of Sand upon
Sand, though not so regular as is done by Masonry; yet holding a fair and
well-near equal analogy to it; one Granule of Sand would appear to support two
or three, and those again others; and the declivity of the motion of the Sands
would be conspicuous, and their bearing against the sides of the Vessel, and
their declination from the middle of the Vessel.

But the great Objection that is all along made, is, that the Corpuscles of
Water are not to be resembled to those of Sand, but are much more minute and
glib, and therefore the Instances hold no proportion to that of water.

If I should admit the Remarkers Assertion, that Water is no continued Body,
but consists of minute separate Corpuscles, yet it would not much advantage the
Objection, for these Corpuscles are not Indivisibles, but Bodies consisting of
trine dimension, and possibly there is not that disproportion between such an
Atome of Water and a Granule of Sand, as between a Granule of Sand and a white
Pease, much less a Cube of 12 inches square. And certainly in Bodies, ita se
habent minora corpora ad minus spatium, ut majora ad majus: But I must not
admit of this Supposition, that Water is no continued Body; for certainly Water
conjunct, though it be a fluid Body, is as really a continued Body, as Steel or
Gold.

But to render the Instances of Sand, etc. as reasonably explicative of this
Phenomenon in Water, I shall subjoin and explicate this rude Diagram.



Suppose C D a Vessel of Water, with its various Lines of Declivity, and
perpendicular direction, if you please, A, the Egg-shell, F, my imaginary Cone
or Cap, impending upon it, B A, and A D, a Circle of water in the Base of the
Vessel encircling the Egg-shell. I say it is impossible the Column of water
incumbent on the shell, could press upon it, unless it could press upon and
remove the circular Base of Water, encircling the shell, and unless that sink
or remove by the incumbent water, the Egg-shell can be pressed no more in the
instance of water, than that of Sand or Pease mentioned, page 7. of the
Additions to the Pamphlet. But since the encircling water B A D, is of the same
texture, weight and consistence with the rest of the water, it must remain
unmoved as a Rock, and bear the pressure both of the perpendicular and
declining water, which must necessarily protect the shell from the entire
pressure of a Column of water commensurate in Base to the Egg-shell, which
cannot be without pressing upon and displacing the circumjacent water, which is
not possible; for now the water incumbent upon the shell, and the circumjacent
water, make, as it were, one common Basis to the superior water.

The analogy therefore between the instance of the sand and water, and the
accommodateness of the former to the explication of the latter, in this
Phenomenon of the non-gravitation of Fluids upon included heavy bodies,
consists in these two Parallels.

1. Of the upper parts of the sand or water, in relation to the lower parts,
viz. premendo the lateral and inclining motion and pressure of both, breaking
and allaying their perpendicular or central pressure.

2. Of the lower parts of the sand and water in relation to the upper, viz.
sustinendo the Base of water or sand, circumjacent to the Egg-shell,
contributing to the sustentation of the whole superior mass of sand or water,
and every particle incumbent upon that Base, sustaining a numerous company of
other Particles, and those again others, so that the whole commensurate Column
of the superior sand or water (abating that small proportion, which, for want
of a better expression, I call a Cap or Cone) incumbent upon the shell, cannot
gravitate upon it. And thus I use my Masonry of cubique Stones to explicate the
manner of the gravitation of Sand, and the Arch of Sands, to explicate how the
perpendicular pressure of water upon a subjected body in a Column commensurate
thereunto, is remedied; only in Sand the Monads and their mutual sustentation
is more conspicuous to the Eye, than in Water; but in Water the advantage is in
some respect more effective of this alleviation by the continuity of its Matter.

Upon REMARK VIII, IX.
IT is thereby imagined, that the lateral pressure being checked by the sides
of the Tube should spend their direction perpendicularly downward, and so more
endanger the shell, which, as it is evidently contrary to the Sense and
Experience of the fact, so it is contrary to Reason; for the tendency of the
lateral motion is still the same as at first, and the bare obstacle of its
expansion cannot in a body of this nature, give it a motion of resilition to a
perpendicular gravitation; and if it could, it is impeded by the intervening
Sand.

As to the 9th Remark, it is answered in the Observations upon the 4th and 5th
Remark: But by the way, the jumbling of water hinders not its continuity, so
long as the parts thereof are in conjunction one with another.

REMARK X, XI.
IT is agreed between us, that Gravitation is Nisus ad Motum; but it never was,
nor ever can be agreed by me or any person, that thinks before he writes or
speaks, that such a Gravitation may not be excited and directed by a quality
inherent in the Subject, which may terminate that motion, and incline and
direct its motion to the Center. Gravity therefore is not of the same extent
with mobility, but it is a mobility determined in its termination by the
principle that puts it in motion, which, in the instance in hand, is the
quality of Gravity, which is a determinate specifical principle, determining
the mobility of heavy bodies naturally to a central direction, though it may be
some time accidentally impeded, and ordinarily impeded by the fluidity of a
fluid body.

REMARK XII, XVI, XVIII.
THat the parts of Water, when in conjunction one with another, are only
contiguous, I do admit by way of Argument; but I no where admit it by way of
Concession: for if I should, I think I should grant that which is by no means
true. I only therefore in that place argue, that were the parts of water
solute, and only contiguous, yet even there the actual gravitation of them
would be suspended as well as in Sand.

And because the business of continuity and contiguity often occurs in the
Remark, and great endeavors are therein used to prove the particles of Water
and Air only contiguous, I shall here once for all, make some Observations
touching Continuity and Contiguity, that I may avoid Repetition.

We learn both from the Ancient and Modern Philosophy, that Contigua sunt,
quorum ultima sunt simul in situ, and non est possibile quod inter ea cadat
aliquid quod habet situm. Continuum autem illud, cujus natura est quod inter
parts ejus reperitur unus terminus communis, or, quorum ultima sunt unum in
actu: which is a little clearer explained by the Moderns, that Continua sunt,
quando ex pluribus quantis fiat unum totum nulla sensibili commissura inter
parts remanente; or, implicatio and incorporatio partium unitarum; so that
they, as it were, run one into another without any sensible discrimination of
their Moles or Situs.

Although in grosser Bodies there is more required than contiguity, to make
them continuous, yet in Liquids, especially perfectly homogeneal, as Water and
Water, Air and Air, Mercury and Mercury, there arises a continuity of parts
merely upon their contiguity or contingency; for thereupon they presently
incorporate, implicate and mingle so one with another, that there remains no
possible distinction of the parts united, one drop of water touching another,
one portion of Air touching another, one little globule of Mercury touching
another, become perfectly continued bodies without more ado, though they were
before divided by their distance, and interposition of another Body; this is
apparent to our very Sense, that these are undistinguishably united,
incorporated and implicated one in another by their very contact, as closely,
though not so firmly as Lead, Iron, or Gold, after Hammering or Fusion.

In all Bodies that are in continuity, as there is a unity of Existence, so
(ordinarily, though not always) follows a unity of motion. It does not always
follow, because there may intervene something that may disorder or break it.

But in things barely contiguous, as they are not in themselves united so
regularly; ad motum unius non sequitur motus alterius, unless united by
alligation, as in Chains of several Links; by some other accidental
intervention, as in the cohesion of distinct contiguous bodies, for the
avoiding of Vacuity, as in polished Marble, etc. And herein we may easily
observe the continuity of Water.

Take a Siphon, and fill it with water, stopping both Legs with your finger,
till the shorter Leg be immersed into a Vessel of water, the water will be
entirely drawn out of the Vessel by a Funiculus of continued water, ascending
and descending from the first immersion, as is showed in the Additions to the
Nugae.

But fill the Siphon with the finest Powder or Sand, that traction will never
follow upon its immersion into a Vessel of the same or the like Sand or Powder;
for in the former there is a traction by the continued Body of Water: But in
the latter, the particles are solute, and only contiguous, and will not cohere,
but gives us the Proverb of a Rope of Sand.

And what is here observed touching the continuity of Water, and the traction
wrought in the virtue of that continuity, is observable touching the Air, and
the traction wrought by its filaments, as appears most evidently in the
Magdeburg Hemispheres, in the 18th. Chapter of the Difficiles Nugae, and in the
raising and holding up of water in the heated Tube or Glass, described in the
16th. Chapter, which could never be effected, did the Air consist only of
contiguous and solute particles, unless we should dream they were fastened
together by Hooks or Chains.

And upon what has been said, it is most apparent, that neither the softness
of the Air, nor its easy divisibility or separability by a Feather or a
Cobweb, nor the attenuation of the particles of water into vapors, by the heat
of the Sun, are so much as tolerable Reasons against their continuity; for
although the disjunction and separation of the parts interrupt the continuity
between the parts, when actually separated, yet the separability or easiness of
separability of the parts of it, are not so much as a shadow of Argument
against their continuity, till such an actual separation be made. No man that
thinks twice, can imagine that Lead in fusion, is less a continued Body, than
when it was solid; or that Gold beaten into Leaf, is less continued than when
in the Ingot, and yet the separability of its parts much more facile than
before. And therefore the Fancy of contiguity only of fluid Bodies, is the
effect of that Idolum Democraticum or Cartesianum, which with his imaginary
Globuli, and their Ramenta, the Materia Subtilis, has disordered men's
Sentiments, as in many other things, so in this, touching Continuity and Ratio
Continui.

REMARK XIII.
I Am very well contented to be rectified touching the Nature of the Principium
Hylarchicum of the Learned Remarker. I must confess, when I found so much of a
Spiritual Nature attributed to it, and that great and ready accommodation of it
to the solving of most of the admirable Phenomenon in Nature, whether
Mechanical or Vital, I thought it had been some intelligent Spirit or
Intelligence; but now I understand that it is only plastic and vital, not
intelligent, and doubtful whether sentient or not: But of whatever nature it be
supposed to be, it seems necessary to prove its very existence by such
instances as are not merely Mechanical; otherwise I fear more is asserted than
proved.

REMARK XIV, XIX, XX.
IN these Remarks lies most of the Elixir of the precedent Remarks. And
besides, they offer at somewhat of experimental proof of what they assert,
besides bare Notions; but how far these proofs are sufficient or effectual, we
shall see hereafter: And therefore I shall insist somewhat larger upon them and
the Observations that are to be made upon them.

Archimedes, in his Third Proposition De Insidentibus Humido, tells us, that if
solid Bodies, having a Bulk or Moles, be equally heavy to the Water wherein
they are placed, being let down into the Water, are so immersed, that nothing
of the Superficies of the Water is above them, yet they are not pressed
downward.

And in the Sixth Proposition, he tells, that a Solid Body, lighter than the
Water, being forced down into the Water, is driven up with such a force, as the
Water having an equal Moles to that immersed Body, is heavier than that Body.

And this driving upward of the lighter Body, is by that circumpulsion of a
heavier fluid Body upon another Body lighter than it self, which will (if it
can) take up the place that the lighter Body has invaded within its
Dimensions, and the Limits of its Province.

And the truth is, the reason of the motion of a Balance or Libra Artificialis
in the Air, wherein a heavier weight in one Scale, lifts up a lighter weight in
the other Scale, is in effect the same with this natural libration between the
heavier Body of the Water, and the lighter Body of the Wood; only here it seems
like a Balance inverted, wherein the counterpoise of the Moles of Water being
greater and more than the like Moles of a lighter solid Body, must needs
overweigh it, and if it be possible, get below and under it, as in this Scheme.



Suppose A, be a Cube of Wood of 6 inches square, immersed toward the bottom
of the Cubical Vessel of Water C D, and lighter than the like Moles of water,
this Cube takes up the room of 234 square inches, which (were not the Cube
there) would be in a great measure taken up by the Water. The Cube of wood is
environed with a quantity of water equal in Moles to this Cube of wood, but
exceeding it considerably in weight, the weight of the water must necessarily
preponderate the Cube of wood, and consequently must thrust it upward, that it
may possess the place the Cube of wood has invaded, and so in this Libra
Naturalis the heavier Moles of water must necessarily drive up the lighter
Moles of wood, as in the artificial Scale, the heavier Scale raises the
lighter.

And hence it is that without the aid of an Hylarchical Principle the Water
bears and carries up the Rundle of light wood in the Instance so often
magnified by the Remarker. For unless the Rundle were so closely fastened to the
Base, either by some glutinous matter, or by its strict jointing and adhesion
to the sides or Base of the Vessel, as would be too strong for the water, to
displace it, it is hardly possible by any art whatsoever to make the Rundle so
close to the Base of the Vessel, but the subtle particles of water will creep
between the Rundle and the Base, and throw it up in spite of the imaginary
Column of water, commensurate to the Rundle that is supposed to keep it down:
and herein, as I before observed, the water has accidentally, and upon this
occasion a motion upward, which yet is but the Consequent of its motion
downward below the Rundle.

And upon the same account it is, if you take a hollow Cane, suppose one inch
diameter, 12 inches long, let the Base thereof be filled with a quantity of
Lead for about an inch, then let there be powered in 6 inches of water, and then
there will remain 5 inches of Air in the upper part of the Cane, although the
Lead be heavier than so much water, and the water in the Cane equal in
specifical weight to so much water; yet as long as the whole weight of the Cane
thus compounded, does not equal the weight of a like Moles of water, this Cane
immersed into a Vessel of water 12 inches deep, will not subside or rest at the
bottom of the Vessel, but will be driven up to that height in the water, that
the parts of the Cane subsiding in the water, will countervail a Moles of water
equal to the weight of the whole Cane, and there it will swim erect. Experience
and the very Reason of the thing, makes the truth hereof apparent.

Stevin (that next to Archimedes, has written best of Hydrostatiques) in his
5th Book, Prop. 2. supposes nevertheless, that if this Rundle cover a hole in
the bottom of the Vessel, it will not rise, but will be kept down by the
impending Column of water commensurate to the Base of the Rundle.

Albert Girard, the Commentator, denies this; unless the Rundle be of equal or
greater weight than the like quantity of water.

But the truth lies between them both; for the Rundle lighter than the water,
will be undermined in the Rims and Edges, and so the water will get out, do
what the Artist can, if the Rundle be lighter than the like Moles of water.

But then when the water has thus gotten a passage to pass through the Orifice
into the free Air (upon which it has been shown, the Moles of water
commensurate to the passage it has now, presses with its full swing) and if
it meets with the Rundle in the way of its motion, so long as it stands in its
way, it will gravitate upon it till the water has wholly discharged it self
through the Orifice.

And therefore the reason is obvious why there is some impediment in the ascent
of the Rundle, when it is thus placed upon an Orifice, without calling in any
other principle than the natural pressure of the water upon that Orifice, now
giving it an access to an Element that it can press upon, viz. the Air below
the Orifice.

Just as we see in our Kettles and Brewing Furnaces, when they have a small
Leak, the Servant throws in a handful of Bran, which though perchance it would
not so readily sink, much less sink to the Leak, yet the motion of the water to
the Leak, will carry those light and small particles thither, which being
crowded in by the weight of that Column of water that is commensurate to the
Orifice of the Leak, stops it.

And the like is done upon a Leak in a Ship, where a light Fardel thrown out
into the Sea, will be carried down to the Leak, and crowded into it by the
water, and sometimes stop the Leak.

And therefore touching the gravitation of the Column of Water upon the Rundle
of light wood, where there is a hole under it in the Base (which I add as an
exception, page 57. and is no more than what Stevin tells us in the 5th Book of
his Practical Hydrostatiques) both He and I must be understood where any little
water passes under the Rundle to the Hole, and therefore to clear that
Experiment, and the reason of it, I made exact trials concerning it, as
follows.

I took a Cylindrous Bucket of about eight inches diameter, and five inches
deep, and made a round hole in the bottom, of two inches diameter, and a rundle
of light wood of 4 inches diameter, to cover it, with a stick in the midst, to
lift it up, or press it down, or to suspend the Rundle by it to a Balance,
according to the Figure in the Margin, and made it as smooth and even to the
Base of the Bucket as I could, and pressed it the Orifice, and filled the
Bucket with water, yet the water, do what I could, would press between the
sides of the Rundle and the Base of the Vessel, and so discharge it self in
some small proportion through the Orifice, and all that while it did so, the
Rundle, though lighter than the like Moles of water, was kept down by the
pressure and issuing of that small quantity of water, and so continued, till
almost all the water had thus run out; the reason whereof is before given, viz.
the motion of the water to the Orifice, kept down the Rundle. But then emptying
all the water, and rubbing the Orifice and Rundle dry, I applied Neats-foot Oil
to the Rundle and Base, which by its glutinous consistence kept the Rundle and
Base close together, and applied the Balance to the hook of the Handle of the
Rundle, and it was not severed from the Base by less than 7 ounces, though the
Rundle weighed not above an ounce.

Then oyling the Base and Rundle as before, and uniting them, I filled the
Bucket with water, which by reason of the glutinous Oil, did not pass, nor
sever the Rundle from the Base.

Then fixing the Rundle as before, to a Scale, I tried what weight was
sufficient to sever the Rundle from the Base, being under the supposed pressure
of that imaginary Colum of water of 5 inches deep, and I found that very near
the same weight would sever it from the Base under water, as did sever it when
it lay dry; and though in several trials there was some little disparity, which
might arise from the unequal strictness of the juncture, either by the quantity
of Oil, or position of the Rundle, wherein I could not possibly be exactly
uniform, yet the Rundle was separated under tnat Moles of water, sometimes with
seven ounces weight, sometimes with eight; but at most, with ten ounces. And
yet in the Column of water commensurate to the Rundle, were 55 square inches;
which, according to the exactest computation of the weight of water, amounted
to at least 24 ounces weight: And this shows that gravitation of the water
upon the Rundle, is to be understood, when there is some passage to give the
water motion. So that it seems to me, the Conclusion that the Remarker makes
from this Instance, in favor of the Hylarchical Principle, or the supposed
Gravitation of a Cylinder of water upon the Rundle where no water passes, must
be laid aside, as no way assisting his Hypothesis, in impugning mine.

And therefore, whereas Stevinus in his Practical Hydrostatique, ubi supra,
grants, that the Body of a man, or other Body, lying flat upon the bottom of a
great Vessel of water, feels no considerable pressure of the incumbent water,
yet if there be a hole in the bottom of the Vessel under that body, it shall
find a considerable pressure of the incumbent water; this is to be understood
cum grano Salis, viz. if the Body do not so entirely and closely stop the
Orifice in the bottom of the Vessel; but that the water finds a passage between
it and the Base, to discharge it self, the Body then indeed shall find a
pressure from the superior water at least, according to the weight of such a
Column of water as can thus discharge it self between the Body and bottom
through the Orifice. But if it stop the Orifice so entirely and close, that no
water can pass that way, there will ensue no Gravitation upon the Body, by
reason of that Hole or Orifice thus stopped; for it is as if it were not: the
body becomes as it were part of the entire close Base of the Vessel.

And thus much may serve to explicate the Phenomenon of the orifice or hole in
the Base of a vessel under the Rundle.

But now as to the Instance given in the 20th Remark, whereunto the Learned
Remarker appeals as an irrefragable Instance to take away at once the
Mechanical Accounts of Continuity and Architecture, I doubt the Author gives us
this Experiment without exact trial; for if he had tried it, I think he would
never have urged it.

The Experiment, as I take it, is this; Take a Cylindraceous Bucket of 63 parts
in the internal Diameter, and let another Cylindraceous Bucket be of 62 parts
external diameter, with 4 sloping holes at the bottom, and put the less into
the greater, and fill them up with Water to the Brims, then take away your
hand, and the narrower Bucket will emerge, leaving no more in the water than
what is equal to the weight of such a Moles of water as is equal to the whole
Vessel in weight.

I shall take this Instance in pieces, and then we shall see what is in it,

And for the better clearing of it, I shall make my way to it by Instances,
though not altogether like it, yet giving a great light to it, and it may be,
to other matters of this kind; and I shall first consider the comparison
between Bodies specifically heavier than the fluids, and then in Bodies
specifically lighter.

If there be a Bucket or a Cylindraceous Vessel, suppose 9 inches deep, then
take a Cylinder of 9 inches high, and narrower than the Bucket, but of a
Material specifically heavier than the like Moles of water, as suppose it Tin
or Ebony; if the Vessel be filled with a Moles of water of twice or thrice, or
ten times the extrinsick weight of that Cylinder, yet the Cylinder will still
sink to the bottom, by its advantage of its intrinsic or specifical
over-weight or heaviness more than water.

Now I shall consider the proportion where the solid Body is specifically
lighter than Water or other fluid Body in Which it is immersed.

I took a Cylinder of wood 4 inches deep, and 4 inches diameter, which weighed
18 ounces.

The like Bulk of Water equal in Bulk to that Cylinder of Wood, weighed 32
ounces.

So that the Water had a specifical or intrinsic weight near double to the
Wood.

And consequently the Wood being immersed in a Vessel of Water, near one half
thereof lay above the Superficies of the Water, as it must do according to the
Rule of Hydrostatiques. I took 2 Cylindrous Vessels, one of 6 inches diameter,
the other of 9 inches diameter; I put the Cylinder of wood into the Vessel of 6
inches diameter, and as much water as countervailed the Wood-Cylinder in
extrinsick weight, but not in Bulk, and the wood-Cylinder would not swim; for
though the intrinsic weight of the Water was near double to the weight of the
Wood, yet the extrinsick weight of both was equal, viz, 18 ounces, and so there
was an Equipondium between the Water and the Wood, and consequently that Water
would not raise the Wood from the Base of the Vessel.

But putting in so much Water more into that Vessel, as that the lateral or
ambient Water would rise so high as to cover a little more than one half of the
Cylinder of Wood (namely, such a quantity thereof as was equal to a Moles of
Water, equiponderating the weight of the whole Cylinder of Wood) then the
Cylinder of Wood would swim, though the Base of the Water between the Cylinder
of Wood and the bottom of the Vessel had not half an inch in depth.

And the reason is, because the entire water both lateral, and at the bottom,
is one continued body, and entirely presses the Cylinder of wood upward, in as
much as the lateral or ambient water has gained an height upon the Cylinder,
somewhat more than the immersed parts of the Cylinder of wood proportionable to
a Moles of water equal to the whole weight which that whole Cylinder of wood
amounts unto; for the Cylinder of wood weighed but 18 ounces, but the whole
weight of the water might be 20 ounces or more.

But again, put this Cylinder of wood into the Cylindrous Vessel or Bucket of 9
inches diameter close to the Base, and pour in four or five times the quantity
of water into the Bucket more than what was in the former Cylindrous Vessel of
six inches diameter; as suppose it be five pounds of water, yet unless the
Superficies of that water rise not to more than the height of half the Cylinder
of wood, viz. something more than two inches high upon the sides, the Cylinder
of wood will rest upon the Base, and will not swim: And the reason is, because
the water presses according to its altitude, and not according to its
amplitude, and therefore though the whole water in the 9 inches bucket be five
times more in weight than the Cylinder of wood is, if it rise not so high as to
take something more than half of the height of the Cylinder of wood, namely,
such a quantity thereof as is commensurate to a quantity of water equal in
weight to the whole weight of the Cylinder of wood, the Cylinder of wood would
not swim, but will stand upon its Base at the bottom of the Vessel. And this is
the reason why a Ship or Vessel that draws for the purpose 4 fathom of water,
will swim in a narrow Cut or Channel that has 5 or 6 fathom of water, though
the Channel be less than 20 fathom over in breadth; and if the Channel were 20
Miles over, and of a less depth than the Ships draught of water, viz. 4 fathom,
the Ship will be on ground, and will not swim, and yet the weight and quantity
of whole water in the broader Channel, is many thousand times more than that in
the narrow Channel.

And the like Instance may be given in Floats of Timber in a deep and narrow
Channel, and a broad and shallow Channel.

For the pressure of water is more or less according to the height or depth of
water, and not according to its amplitude or breadth, though the water with
ampler Superficies be a thousand times more in weight and bulk than the deeper
water.

Now to the Buckets instanced in the Remarks;

If there be a Bucket of 20 inches diameter, and another of equal height but of
6 inches diameter, fill the lesser Bucket with water, and place it in the
middle of the greater Bucket, and then fill the circumjacent sides of the
greater Bucket with water, though the greater Bucket hold 5 times the water of
the lesser Bucket, yet (allowing, as I must, the wood of the lesser Bucket to
be but of the same weight with the like Moles of Water) the lesser Bucket will
still remain contiguous to the bottom, and will not rise one inch, and the
reason is, because the water without, and the water within the Bucket, though
of a different Moles, yet have the same specifical weight, and (as to this
purpose) as if it were so much unvesseled water (I say, as to this purpose, for
as to the other purposes, there will be a difference, as I shall show
hereafter.)

But if the lesser Bucket be totally empty, or only filled part with water,
suppose half way, then the water in the greater Bucket, will drive up the
lesser; but not till only so much be immersed as countervails its defect of
weight, according to the 4 th. 5 th and 6 th. Proposition of Archimedes, ubi
supra.

But now to come to the Experiment of the lesser Bucket or Cylindraceous Vessel
perforated in the bottom, and then water poured into the greater or lesser (for
it comes all to one account) will the lesser Bucket emerge, unless held down by
the hand? By no means in the world; for the water will presently pass through
the perforations from one Bucket to the other, till they come to one common
superficial height, and still the lesser Bucket will rest upon the Base of the
greater, because they have an equipondium; supposing (as we must) that the wood
of the lesser Bucket is of equal specifical weight to the like Moles of water.
Indeed it is true, that if the holes be small, so that there must be a Mora
before the water can be conveyed from one Vessel to another, then if the water
be plentifully poured into the sides of the greater Bucket, the lesser will
rise till it have received so much water as equals the Superficies of both, and
then the lesser Bucket will subside contiguous to the Base; for the water in
both Buckets being of an equal height, was in aequipendio.

So that as the Instance it self conduces little to the ends propounded, were
it true; so I doubt it is mistaken, and upon trial will not be found true.

I did expect to have met with an Objection which may seem prima facie to
impugn what I have formerly delivered; yet upon a strict examination it would
not have any efficacy.

Take a Cube or Cylinder of wood of equal intrinsic weight with so much water,
suppose it a Cube of six inches diameter, and put it into a Cylinder or cubique
Vessel of water of eight inches deep, and twelve inches diameter, this Cube or
Cylinder would rest two inches above the Base of the Vessel, and would not
gravitate either upon the two inches of water in the Base of the Vessel, nor
upon any Body that were but two inches thick, and lay between the Cube and the
Base of the Vessel of water, yet here can be no lateral pressure or per declive
in the Cube, it self being solid, and having only a central gravitation; so
that it may seem the lateral pressure which is the Subject of the Eighth
Chapter of the Essay, applied to the Water, is no ingredient into its
Non-gravitation.

I answer, that the Fact is true, but the illation thereupon is not
consequential.

In my Observation upon the 4 th, 5 th, and 7 th. Remark, I say the
non-gravitation of Fluids is in relation to the pressure of the upper parts
upon the lower, which is per declive premendo: and in relation of the lower
parts to the upper sustinendo; now although in this Instance the former has no
part, yet the latter has.

In this instance the Cube or Cylinder is sustained and born up by the
subjacent water, which is as the pedestal upon which it is bottomed; and
therefore neither does nor can press below the position it holds: But suppose
the Body subjacent to it, were 6 inches deep, then it would be under the
pressure of that Cylinder or Cube of wood, as much as the weight of 4 inches of
the Cube amounts to in the water, and the body would be under a pressure
commensurate at least to so much weight as the Cube, or so much thereof as is
thereby driven out of the Superficies of the water, exceeds in its extrinsick
weight the like Moles of water, with so much of the Cube as lies in the water.

But on the other side, where there is nothing impending upon the subjacent
body but the superior imaginary Column of water, the subjected body is not
compressed at 9, 6 or 3 inches immersion below the Superficies of the water,
partly by reason of the Mechanism (I do not say Masonry of the water, though
that expression is frequently, but needlessly used by the Remarker) and partly
by reason of the various termination of the motions of fluid Bodies.

It shall not be altogether impertinent to subjoin the ensuing Experiment.

I took a Cube of wood 4 inches square, and very near of an equal specific
weight of the like Moles of water; for it did not rise half an inch above the
water, and being let down to subside freely in a Vessel brim-full of water, it
threw over a portion of water very near of the same weight with it self, viz.
28 ounces and a half.

This Cube being laid into a Vessel of 8 inches deep of water, therefore was
raised at his Base about 4 inches above the water in the Base of the Vessel,
which water sustained it. And now it had been unquestionable that if a body of
less than 4 inches thick, had been subjected under the Cube, it would have
sustained no pressure from the water nor from the Cube, which was entirely born
up to that height by the subjacent water.

But if the body subjected to the Cube, had been 5, 6 or 7 inches thick, it
would have been pressed upon by various proportions from the impending Cube.

For fixing a string and hook to the middle of the Superficies of the Cube, it
required near 12 ounces in the opposite Scale, to raise the Superficies 2
inches above the water; near 20 ounces to raise it 3 inches above the water;
and near 28 ounces and a half to raise the lower Superficies of the Cube equal
in height to the upper Superficies of the water, which answered the full weight
of the Cube of wood; and therefore according to these proportions, it would
gravitate upon a subjacent body that gave it the like elevations.

But in water we see the pressure different from the pressure of such a wooden
Cube; for in whatsoever depth the subjected body is immersed, whether deeper or
shallower, it sustains no sensible difference of the pressure of the Column of
water impending upon it, nor indeed any sensible pressure at all, though at
five or ten fathoms deep; which, as it gives us the difference between the
pressure of a solid and fluid body, upon a body in water subjected to it, so it
gives us the reason of it, viz. the pressure of the solid body is impeded only
by the subjected water, bearing it up, viz. sustinendo. But there are two
impediments that hinder the pressure of the superior water upon the lower water
on the body under it, viz. the sustentation of the superior water by the
inferior; and likewise the lateral and declivous motion of the water,
refracting its perpendicular pressure, while it is solute water.

And now because that the various habitudes of heavier or lighter bodies
immersed in fluids heavier or lighter than themselves, seems to be a pleasant,
and possibly a useful Speculation, and yet is difficult to be distinctly, and
explicitly, and clearly declared: And possibly in what is before said in this
Observation, the same is not so distinctly delivered as might be wished; I
shall therefore desire the Readers pardon, if I resume and repeat much of what
is before said, and digest the whole in somewhat a clearer method.

First, I shall declare the difference between the terms of intrinsic and
extrinsick weight, whether of fluids or solids, and what I mean by those terms,
and how one body is said to exceed another in intrinsic or extrinsick weight,
or both; That body which has more of bodily Moles or Matter than another body
of the same dimension, is intrinsecally heavier than that body which has the
same dimension, and yet has less corporeal Matter or material Substance in it;
and therefore is denser and crasser than the latter, and the indication of that
density and crassitude is by the overweight it has over the other body; as a
cubique inch of Gold is heavier, and therefore has more of material substance
than a cubique inch of Brass or Iron; and a cubique inch of Mercury is heavier,
and therefore has more of material substance in it than a cubique inch of
water.

And therefore a heavier body immersed into a lighter fluid, as a cubique inch
of Gold, Brass, Iron, etc. into water, though it take up but the room and
dimension of a like cubique inch of the water wherein it is immersed, must
needs sink into the water, and drive up that cubique inch of water in its
motion of descent; for it out-weighs it: and as in an artificial balance, the
Scale that is charged with the greater weight, raises up the other that has
the lesser; so it is in this natural libration between the heavier body and the
lighter fluid. And that I may here say it once for all, there is a most perfect
analogy between the artificial Balance and this natural Balance, in relation
to the motions of and in fluids; and he that means to have a true image of the
latter, must attain it best by comparison of it with the former.

A body that is specifically or intrinsecally lighter than another, yet by
accession, or accumulation, or acquisition of more parts of Matter than another
body intrinsecally heavier, has, may thereby extrinsecally, and in
denomination, and also in its effect of preponderation, be heavier than that
other; as two pounds of water is heavier extrinsecally, and in preponderation
than a pound of Gold, though intrinsecally heavier: And therefore, if a Cube or
Cylinder of wood be supposed intrinsecally lighter than water, yet if such a
Cylinder of wood, weighing 4 pounds, be immersed into a like cylindrous Vessel
of water, which water has not 4 pounds of weight, the cylinder of wood will
sink, and will not emerge, because in extrinsick weight it exceeds the
extrinsick weight of the water in the Vessel into which it is immersed. But if
the water be of the weight of four pound and a half (and in a due position, as
shall be showed) the cylinder of wood will rise and swim in the water, because,
now as well the extrinsick, as the intrinsic weight of the wooden cylinder is
over-weighed by the water.

If a body that is intrinsecally heavier, be immersed into a body intrinsecally
lighter, as Gold into water, it will subside, as has been said: But yet a body
intrinsecally heavier than the fluid wherein it is immersed, may accidentally
be extrinsecally lighter than the body wherein it is immersed, namely, when it
acquires a Bulk or capacity so large, that a like Moles of water will be of a
greater weight than such an immersed body specifically and intrinsecally
heavier, and then that body, though intrinsecally heavier, will swim upon the
water, and be sustained by it.

The most obvious Instances of this kind, are two, viz.

1. When that body intrinsecally heavier is mingled and concreted with other
bodies intrinsecally lighter than the fluid wherein it is immersed, and so the
whole concrete immersed body weighs less than the like Moles of water would
weigh; as where a small quantity of Gold or Lead is mingled with a greater
quantity of wood lighter than water, and so both make up a concrete body
lighter than so much water.

2. When the body intrinsecally heavier, is formed into a Cavity, as in Tin,
Silver or Lead-Bottles, though the Material be specifically heavier than water,
yet if they have such a dimension as that a quantity or Moles of water, of the
same external dimension, will exceed such Bottle (as it stands empty) in
weight, this body intrinsecally heavier, yet extrinsecally is lighter than the
water wherein it is immersed, and therefore will be sustained by it.

And upon this reason it is that Ships and other Vessels are born up by the
water, although they are often lad^^ with great Ordnance, Bullets, and other
things intrinsecally heavier than the like quantity of water; yet in as much as
the whole Ship or Vessel has a great Cavity, and takes up room in the Sea,
proportionable to that structure, and a Moles of water commensurate to the hull
of the Ship, as it has that concave posture, is of much greater extrinsick
weight than the Vessel, therefore it is born up and sustained by it. And thus a
body intrinsecally heavier than a fluid wherein it is immersed, may be
extrinsecally lighter.

1. In respect of its concretion or composition.

2. In respect of its structure and cavity, which gives a greater amplitude to
it. That body is said to be both extrinsecally and intrinsecally heavier, when
it exceeds another body in both respects, as an Ingott of Gold that weighs two
pounds, is both extrinsecally and intrinsecally heavier than an Ingot of
Silver, weighing only one pound.

And thus far concerning weight extrinsick and intrinsic.

Secondly, The Second thing which I intend, is, to declare the various
habitudes of heavier or lighter bodies, with relation to the fluids in which
they are immersed; whereby possibly much of the Learning and Experience De
insidentibus humido, may be explicated, namely,

1. Where a body specifically or intrinsecally heavier, is immersed in a fluid
intrinsecally lighter than it self, as Gold, Lead or Iron in water.

2. Where a body is immersed into a fluid of equal weight with it self, which
though it may be difficult to attain, yet attainable it is, as shall be showed.

3. When a body specifically or intrinsecally lighter, is immersed into a
fluid, and intrinsecally heavier than it self; as a Globe or Cube of Fir or Elm
into water, which is much heavier intrinsecally than such light Woods.

4. When a body intrinsecally lighter, y^^ extrinsecally heavier than that
portion of fluid wherein it is immersed, be equal in weight to it, as where a
Globe or Cube of Fir or Elm, weighing six pounds, is immersed into a Vessel of
water containing just six pounds weight of water, or any quantity less than it.
Therefore,

1. If a dense body being immersed in a fluid intrinsecally lighter than it,
that dense body will subside to the bottom, though the fluid body in
extrinsecal weight be more than forty times of greater extent than such a dense
body; as if a Cube or Globe of Lead or Mercury, though but of an inch diameter,
be cast into the deep Ocean, for the Reasons before given, where I treat of the
difference between extrinsick and intrinsic disparity of Gravity: Only it has
those Exceptions before given, touching the mixture of such heavier body with a
lighter, and the configuration of such dense body into Cavity or hollowness,
for the Reasons there given, which I need not repeat.

2. If a dense body be immersed into a fluid of an equal intrinsic weight with
such dense body, it is generally thought that such dense body will keep any
position that it is put into, if placed near the top, or in the middle, or near
the Balance of the Vessel containing the fluid (though I have for the most
part observed it to rise toward the Superficies of the fluid, and hold its
upper Superficies equal to it) as suppose a Cube of water six inches square
weigh 14 pound, a like cubique piece of wood of the same dimension and weight,
will stand at all positions in a Vessel of 7 or 8 Gallons of water; for such a
dense Body is as so much water in this respect, they being of equal Bulk, and
equal intrinsic weight. But it is a very difficult matter to find just such an
equality between Solids and Fluids, being of such different textures. The best
Expedient is by a hollow Vial-Glass, reduced to such an equipondium by
immission of small leaden Shot into it, till the Glass and Shot arise to the
just equipondium of a Bulk of water equal to the whole Superficies of the Glass.

3. When a Body intrinsecally lighter than a Fluid is immersed in such fluid,
part of that lighter Body will rise above the Superficies of the water, or
other Fluid into which it is immersed, and will leave so much of it self under
the Superficies of the water, as is equal to a Body or Bulk of water fully
commensurate to the whole weight of such immersed Body. For instance, Suppose a
Globe of light wood of six inches diameter weigh 5 pound, and a globular
portion of water of the like diameter weigh 10 pounds, this globe of wood
immersed in a large Vessel of water, will rise so that one half thereof will be
above the Superficies of the water and the other half will be below the
Superficies of the water; for the intrinsic weight of the water is double to
the intrinsic weight of the wood; so that a portion of water equal to half the
Globe of wood, weighs as much as the whole Globe of wood. And the like
proportion will hold where the Globe of wood is lighter than the like portion
of water by one third, or one fourth, or one sixth part, mutatis mutandis.

4. If a gross Body (suppose of wood) specifically lighter than the like
quantity of water, be immersed into a quantity of water extrinsecally lighter
than that immersed Body, that Body, though specifically and intrinsecally
lighter, will not rise from the bottom of the Vessel, but will sink down to the
Base or bottom of the Vessel, and remain contiguous to it, notwithstanding the
intrinsecal overweight of the water to the immersed Body; as if in the former
instance, a Globe of wood of 6 inches diameter, and 5 pound weight, be lighter
by half intrinsecally than the like portion of water, if this Globe of wood be
immersed into a cylindrous Vessel of 7 or 8 inches diameter containing 4 pound
weight, nay 5 pound weight of water, the Globe of wood shall not swim nor rise
from the Base of the Vessel, and the reason is apparent, because though in
intrinsic weight, the water is double to that wood, yet in extrinsick weight
the Globe of wood in one instance exceeds, in the other instance equals the
extrinsick weight of the water, and so the intrinsic weight of the water, is
over-matched by the extrinsick weight of the wood, and therefore cannot
preponderate it, nor consequently drive it up; as in a pair of Scales, if there
be two pound of Feathers in one Scale, and but a pound of Lead in the other,
the pound of Lead, though intrinsecally heavier than the Feathers, will not
raise the Scale of the Feathers, but will be raised up by them; and if in one
Scale there be two pound of Feathers, and in the other two pound of Lead,
neither Scale will be raised by the other, but stand in a state of rest,
because in Aequilibrio.

5. If a Cube or Globe of wood of six inches diameter, and weighing six pound,
be but half so heavy as the like Globe or Cube of water (weighing for the
purpose 13 pound) and be immersed into a Vessel of water ten or twenty foot
square, which is filled with water only to two inches deep; though this water
be of an intrinsic double weight to the Cube or Globe of wood, and
extrinsecally it may be above forty times more weighty than that Cube or Globe
of wood; yet that Cube or Globe of wood will subside to the Base of the Vessel,
or rest there in contiguity to it, without any swimming or bearing up above the
Base of the Vessel. And the reason is, because the strength of the pressure of
water is always secundum altitudinem vel profunditatem, and not at all
secundum latitudinem vel amplitudinem; and the water in the Vessel rising but
two inches high, does not equal the half weight of the Cube or Globe, which
requires somewhat more than three inches of water to overmatch the extrinsecal
weight of the Cube of wood, without which, it will not be moved by the
preponderation of the water; but the wood will preponderate the energy of that
expanded water, or at least be in aequilibrio with it, and so not moved from
the Base of the Vessel.

6. But if in the Instance last given, a Globe of wood of six inches diameter
and six pounds weight, being but of half the weight of the like Globe of six
inches diameter of water (weighing therefore 12 pound) be immersed into a
cylindrous Vessel of water of 7 or 8 inches diameter, and of such a depth as
may hold 7 or 8 pound of water, without being forced over by the immission of
the wooden Globe into it, and let there be but 7 or 8 pound of water powered
into it, and then let the Globe of wood of half the intrinsic weight of the
water be put into it; or let the wooden Cube be first put in, and then the 7
pound of water; here the water between the Base of the wooden Globe and the
Base of the Vessel, it may be, will not be an inch deep; but the water in the
sides of the cylindrous Vessel may rise four, five, or six inches higher. In
this Instance, this wooden Globe will swim, and the reason is plain.

1. Because the water in the Vessel is not only intrinsecally, but also
extrinsecally heavier than the Globe of wood, this weighing only 6 pounds, and
the water in the Vessel 7 or 8 pounds; but that over-weight of water alone
would not be sufficient to bear up the Globe of wood, as is showed in the next
precedent Observation. Therefore,

2. The immediate reason thereof is, because the ambient or lateral water
between the Globe and the Vessel, rises to above half the diameter of the
wooden Globe, and presses secundum altitudinem, upon the little portion of
water next the Base of the Vessel, as a weight of water of near 7 or 8 pound
and so exceeds the whole weight of the Globe of wood.

But if by reason of the amplitude of the Vessel, the lateral water encircling
the Globe of wood, had risen but an inch or two above the Base of the Globe of
wood, that would never raise the Globe of wood from the Base of the Vessel, but
there it would stand contiguous to the Base of the Vessel; or if the Globe of
wood were put into such a Vessel of water, it would sink to the bottom, for it
preponderates the weight of the water in such a position; these Figures will
explain it.



In the lesser Vessel A B, where the 7 or 8 pound of water rises never so
little above the diameter of the wooden Globe C, the wooden Globe of six inches
diameter, and 6 pound weight, will swim: But in the greater Vessel, or where by
reason of its amplitude, the lateral water does not arise above the diameter of
the Globe, the Globe will not swim, but rest contiguous to the bottom, though
the water in that Vessel were 20 or 40 pound weight.

REMARK XXI.
THis Remark is sufficiently answered before, where I say that heaviness in
bodies, is an intrinsic quality, that it is not mobility at large, but a
special or specific mobility, whereby its Gravitation is naturally determined
to be central. That mobility upward in heavy Bodies, is occasional and
accidental, and not purely natural, as a heavy body.

I must confess, I do not understand what the Remark means, when it says, that
Water has no tendency to motion downward, but when it is out of its place,
what is meant by the place of Water? Is it a place determinate with relation to
the position of the Universe? If so, we find no place in Nature, but the Water
will descend from it, unless it be in the very indivisible Center, which though
it be the termination of its motion, was surely never intended for its place,
because never ample or capable to receive it; let the water be in the Ocean, or
in the middle Region of the Air, or in the Bowels of the Earth, it will still,
as a heavier Body, descend, if it be not impeded: Or, is the place of it, that
place where any portion of water is placed; suppose in a Vessel upon my Table,
or upon the top of my House, or on the top of a Steeple; yet there this water
will still descend if it be not impeded? Or is it, that the Water having gotten
into any place in its fluid consistence, it is now become its natural place per
occupationem, and all other Bodies invading that place, are intruders, and put
it out of its place, and so give it a Nisus downward? But the Water it self,
when I remove a Vessel of it out of the River, into a Boat, or upon the Shore,
invades the place that the Air before had, and so cannot be the proper place of
the Water.

So that upon the whole account, the Water unless otherwise impeded, must
necessarily move downward in all positions, though sometimes it has an
accidental or consequential motion upwards; and by reason of its fluidity, a
lateral motion: therefore I confess I am to seek what is meant, when it is said
that the Nisus of Water downward is occasional, and pro re nata as well as
upward, namely when it is out of its place.

REMARK XXII, XXIII, XXIV, XXV, XXVI, XXVII, XXVIII.
I Answer to the Demand, the Mobility of the Water downward, is natural, being
thereunto, as a heavy Body, determined by the Principle thereof, viz.
intrinsic Gravity, but the other Motions are either from its fluidity, or
occasional.

Though it be not pertinent to the Debate, yet it is plain that at the same
time Water may have an occasional motion upward or laterally, and yet a natural
motion downward. The Bucket of Water weighing 12 pound, will weigh as much when
a Tube stopped below and immersed, and then opened below, gives an occasional
motion to part of the Water upward into the Tube. And the same is apparent when
it drives up a light Rundle of Wood from the Base to the Superficies.

The rest of the Remark is principally levelled against Continuity of Water;
the contrary whereof is here affirmed to be proved in the former Remarks.
Indeed I find this often said, but without any proof that I can find. And
indeed it requires a very evident proof; for its Continuity is affirmed by all
others that I know of, and is evident to some.

Concerning the motion and pressure of Sand, I have said enough; only where it
is said, that an Animal is not damnified under a high heap of Sand, may have
some such reason as the suspension of Fluids; I freely agree herein; for, as I
take it, the Animal is protected in both by the Mechanism of the incumbent
parts, but not by such Hylarchical Principle as the Author supposes.

REMARK XXIX, XXX.
THat the natural gravitation downward, is not inconsistent with an occasional
gravitation lateral; yea, and in some cases vertical, is most evident by what
has been said upon the last Remark: And therefore those other actual
gravitations are not bare imaginations, but may be as real effects in Nature;
as when a Bullet is shot out of a Gun in a horizontal Line, at the same time
there is a conatus ad motum Horizontalem and Centralem (for otherwise the
Bullet could never sink from a straight Line) the former is conatus ad motum
violentum, and the latter ad motum naturalem.

But as to the distinction that I make between the fluid Water in the Bucket
and the Bucket, containing an entire Cylinder, constituted both of the Bucket
and Water in it, and that the latter has one simple motion downward, as a
heavy Body, or as a Keg of Ice; but the fluid water in the Bucket, had as a
fluid Body, those various motions, which in this Chapter I assign unto it. I
must confess, when I wrote it, I thought, and still think it so plain, and
intelligible, and evident, that I wonder it should not be understood, or should
be thought a repugnancy in Nature.

The Water in the Bucket is perfectly a fluid Body, and has its perpendicular
motion downward; which is simply natural to it as a heavy Body, and its lateral
motion belonging to it, as a fluid Body; by which it would drive out the sides
of the Bucket, near the top, especially, were it not well fenced; and though by
the strong gards of the Bucket, it be kept in, that it cannot effect what it
endeavors; yet it has still its conatus ad motum lateralem; but that conatus
is still kept in by the strong sides and bottom of the Bucket.

But the Bucket of Water is now one entire aggregate Body consisting of Wood
formed into a Cylindraceous form, and Water contained within it, and so
presses simply centrally, as if the Water were congealed into Ice; or as if
Water and Earth were mingled together into one solid Mass, in which Instances
the Bucket of Water presses not as a fluid Body of Water, but as a common
solid aggregate Body.

And now if you ask, But why does not the Bucket of Water press laterally as
well as the Water in the Bucket? The Answer offers it self, even before the
Question asked; because the sides of the Bucket are solid, and not fluid, and
can no more press laterally upon the circumjacent Air, than if they were empty
of Water; the Water within the Bucket presses upon the interior sides and
cavity of the Bucket, but is restrained from pressing farther by the
contignation of the Bucket, but the convexity of the sides of the Bucket do
not, cannot press upon the ambient Air; and so the whole weight is discharged
from it in a central direction, as in truth it does always in a solid Body.

And the consequence that would be drawn from hence, that then Water congealed
should be heavier than the same Water solute, is the vainest inference
imaginable; for the Water as one common Body, had the same, and possibly a
little more weight before its congealing, than after; and though its congealing
hinder the various motions of it as a fluid Body, it does not increase nor
considerably impair its weight upon the Scale as a heavy Body.

Methinks the Reasoning of the Remarker in this Case, is just as if a ship were
sailing from North to South, a man should say it were unconceptible that a
Passenger should walk upon the Deck from South to North; for then he should be
moved with two contrary motions, and of contrary terminations at the same time,
and yet is apparently true, that at the same time he is moved ad motum Navis,
from North to South, and ad motum proprium, from South to North: so the same
Vessel of water, as it is one entire heavy bulk, has simply its central
termination; yet the several included fluid parts in their fluid consistence,
have and may have various terminations, as well lateral or inclining, as
perpendicular or central.

But to put a period to this Debate, when I speak of the various motions of
fluids as fluids, I speak of the motions of the parts of that common body which
is fluid, and those are horizontal, per declive, lateral and central. But when
I speak of its motion as one common body, then it is true the motion is
central, which is its motion of natural gravitation upon the Scale; and
therefore 12 pound of water without relation to the Vessel wherein it is, will
weigh still 12 pound upon the Scale, and yet its parts have those several
motions before described, which abate not the weight of the whole Mass, but
correct the particular pressures of it, and the several parts thereof while in
fluore.

And by way of illustration of what I say, take these few Instances; a Barrel
of new Wine or Beer, suppose it weigh 100 pound, after a little time, it will
gain a motion of fermentation; which by reason it proceeds from heat, is
principally upward, toward the Superficies, yet notwithstanding this motion,
the Barrel of Beer or Wine, will as a heavy body, weigh as much as before the
excitation of tha^ motion, unless some of the Liquor b^ spent at a vent, or
break the Barrel.

In Animals there is a great variety of the motions, not only of the Spirits,
but of the Blood, the Chyle, the Lympha, and most considerably upward toward
the Head and superio^ parts of the Body, whereupon it wa^ supposed by some
Learned men, tha^ the Body of a dead Animal that by such death had lost none of
his blood should weigh more than the same body living; but upon strict trials
it has been found that the weight continues the same upon the Scale; so that
the various motions of the Blood, Humors, Chyle and Lympha, which are of a
different, yea, and in many respects, of a contrary termination to that of
natural gravity, does not only consist with the proper motion of gravity of the
whole Moles Corporea, but does not so much as abate it; yet these particular
partial motions of the Blood, Humors, Chyle and Latex, may one correct the
other.

And the same I say of Water; though there be particular motions of its parts,
as a fluid body, and those correct and refract one another; yet the motion of
the entire Moles Corporea, as constituting one entire body, retains its entire
weight upon the Scale, viz. 12 pound, and this without any repugnancy to, or
diminution of the Laws of Nature, in relation to the descent of heavy bodies to
the Center.

Take a Balance, and charge one Scale with 3 pound weight, the other with 2
pound weight, the preponderation of the Scale with 3 pound weight, will raise
up the Scale with 2 pound weight, so that in a relative consideration between
the weights, the latter has no sensible gravitation, and yet the hand that
holds the Balance, will sustain and feel in both Scales together the weight of
5 pound; and it were an unreasonable way of argumentation to urge, that because
the lighter weight has lost its actual gravitation in relation to the heavier
weight, therefore the weight of both should be but 3 pound, which is the
preponderating weight of the heavier Scale.

If there be a triangular body made of Boards, Latin, or any other like Matter,
whose Basis A B, is parallel to the Horizon, and the Cathet B C, perpendicular
to it, and 3 foot high, the subtense C A, 6 foot long, as in the Figure
following, which is double the length of the perpendicular, it is demonstrable
that a weight E, of 2 pound weight, will counterpoise the weight D, of 4 pound
weight, and that as the distance C A, is to the distance C B, so the momentum
of the weight E, is to the momentum of the weight D. The moment of the weight
therefore in the perpendicular descent C B, will be double to the moment of the
same weight upon the declive subtense Line A C. That which I would observe in
this Instance, is this.

1. That notwithstanding this aequipondium in this Instance between the 2 pound
and 4 pound, whereby the relative weight of each is abated, yet the entire
Engine with its weights, will weigh 6 pound besides the weight of the Engine.

2. That by the declivity of the motion of D, it loses half of that weight
that it would have in a direct descent from C to B; and so this accidental
interposition of a motion per declive, corrects that natural gravitation that
is truly central and perpendicular.

3. But yet it does not wholly remove or take it away, only the declive
termination or direction takes off one half of the actual perpendicular or
central gravitation. And this Instance explicates, and in a great measure
proves what I have said, and evinceth that these 29, 30 Remarks are not of that
moment as the Remarker takes them to be.

So that upon the whole Matter, though a Tun of Water in a Vessel, weigh 2000
pound weight, and that a man being laid upon his back in the bottom of that
Vessel, be subjected to a Pile or Column of Water, equal in Base to the half of
that Tun of Water, yet the man shall not be pressed with 1000 pound weight of
Water, nor the 1000th part thereof; and yet the whole Vessel of Water, or the
whole water in the Vessel, shall nevertheless weigh 2000 pound, upon the
Reasons given in the 7th and 8th Chapters of the Essay, without the help of an
Hylarchical Spirit, whether intelligent, sentient, or plastic only.

And thus I have done with the Remarks upon the Pamphlet, called, An ESSAY
touching the Gravitation of Fluids: The Brief of what I have herein and there
delivered, are as follows.

I. That there seems to me a double Reason of the Non-gravitation of Fluids
upon Bodies within them of a narrower Base at least, than the Base of the whole
Moles of the Water incumbent upon them; namely,

1. Mechanical, which is principally sustinendo; the inferior parts of the
Water sustaining and bearing up the superior, as analogical to the sustentation
of the superior parts of Sands or other minute Bodies by the inferior.

2. Natural, premendo; which is the motion of the parts of Water it self, as a
fluid, though withal a heavy Body; which being per declive, and very near
horizontal, corrects the central gravitation.

II. That although the Moles of Water, considered as one common Mass or Moles,
moves as a heavy Body, in a central termination, yet the Water and its parts
considered in their fluid consistency, have differing motions, as a fluid body,
and with various terminations, viz. central, lateral, and per declive, which
check and refract the pressure of each other; so that the entire pressure of
the parts of water is not all one way, because a fluid Body, though as one
entire Moles, it press with one single central termination as a heavy body, yet
the parts thereof in their common consistency, have various motions or Conatus
ad motum.

III. That although the various Conatus ad motum of the parts of water in
fluore, do correct the motions of water, in relation to their terminations, as
a fluid body, whereby Diverse ( Urinatores) are not pressed to death, yet these
motions of its parts, as a fluid body, do not abate or alter the common motion
of the whole Moles, when in one collection, in its central termination, as a
heavy body.

IV. That besides these motions incident to Water, as a heavy or a fluid body,
there are or may be certain accidental motions ab extrinseco, which may give
water a vertical ascending motion of pressure, by an external force, as that
motion which arises by circumpulsion, where it meets with a lighter body below
the Superficies, as in that of the Rundle of a lighter body, as a Rundle of
Wood, the rising up of Water into a Tube full of Air, the instance of the value
given in the ensuing Remarks; all which, though they partly happen from the
fluidity of water, yet they are effected from an accidental interposition, and
most ordinarily are consequential upon a descent of the Water first, all which
motions of parts of fluids arising either ab extrinseco, or from its fluidity,
yet are consistent with its intrinsecal quality of a heavy body, and the motion
or Conatus ad motum of the entire Moles thereof in a central termination or
motion toward the Center, which I usually express by a central motion or
termination.

Touching the REMARKS upon Difficiles Nugae.
REMARK I.
I Now come to the Second Course of Remarks upon Difficiles Nugae, and begin
with the first.

In this Remark the Learned Author has fallen upon one of the subtillest
Subjects in Philosophy, and such as would require more than a small Treatise to
give a tolerable account touching it, namely, Rarefaction and Condensation.

I have more largely given an account of my thoughts touching it, in the
beginning of this Book; whereby it will appear whether the Principles I take
up, are unproved; or whether they or the Remarkers Principles be, or can be
proved by any Experiment or Reason in Nature, or whether his Principles or mine
are such as are repugnant to Reason, and absurd, if we closely canvass them,
and more considerately search into them.

It was not in that place here remarked upon, necessary to prove them, but to
suppose them; the proof was therefore there omitted: I having therefore now in
the beginning supplied that defect in some measure.

REMARK II.
THe Learned Remarker mistakes the Scope of the Assertion; it is true that the
conjunction of solid heavy bodies contribute to their weight, and consequently
to the motion of the whole solid body downward. But the actual gravitation of
one part upon another, is suspended by their continuity, the lower parts
receiving, and sustaining, and so de facto suspending the actual gravitation of
the upper parts upon the lower; so that although the superior parts contribute
to the total weight, yet they do not superately and actually gravitate upon the
lower parts.

REMARK III.
I Must confess the substiturion of an Hylarchical Principle to perform all the
Phenomenon of motions in Natural Bodies, is a compendious and easy way for the
answering of all difficulties: But he that but observes the Instance here
endeavored to be confuted, will find (as in many others, that I shall
hereafter mention) they do not stand in need of such a help; for it is merely
Mechanical, from the various Librations of the Water and Oil, at various
immersions, by a kind of inverted natural Balance between the Water and Oil in
these various positions; therefore I shall refer the truth of the Solution to
the Readers trial, and what has been before said upon the former Remarks.

REMARK IV.
IT is cautiously said, that (in a manner) I acknowledge what is endeavored to
be proved in the first Remark: For in the Atmosphear the Air is more compounded
than above it; and yet all are connexed together by continuity, and so, in a
manner, I do not acknowledge it also. Touching the continuity of the Air, it is
said by the Author to be sufficiently disproved; but it is only said so: And I
think the continuity of the Air is sufficiently proved, and in it self most
evident, if no proof were offered of it.

REMARK V.
THe exclusion of innate Gravity, because the parts compressed will sensibly
gravitate, but do not sensibly gravitate before compression, seems to me as
strange a consequence, as if a man should say, a Feather has no sensible
gravitation, but a peck of Feathers put together, have a sensible gravitation;
therefore there is no such thing as intrinsic gravity in the Feather.

REMARK VI.
ANd I have before noted, that Continuity consists not in the facility or
difficulty of separation of parts, which yet till such separation, are in
continuity, and when that separation is past, may grow together into continuity
again, by the first contact of the separated parts, as the Air and Water do
upon removing of what separates their parts.

REMARK VII.
IN the 4th Chapter, page 64. of the Nugae, I have given an account touching
the various pressure of solute and included water; namely, that in a Siphon
there described, the Water in the open Air poured into the longer Leg, being 24
inches, depressed the Mercury 2 inches and, and drove it out of the short Leg;
but the solute water in an open Tube incumbent upon the shorter Leg, drove back
only one inch, the longer Leg being empty: Now if the impelling down of 2
inches and of Mercury by the 24 inches of Water in the longer Leg, be no more
than the pressing down of one inch of Mercury, by the solute Water of 24 inches
deep in the shorter Leg, the Remarker is in the right, and I was in the wrong;
but if these be differing pressures, and the pressing down of one inch of the
Mercury by the solute Water leaning upon the short Leg, be less than the
pressing of two inches and by the 24 inches of Water included in the longer
Leg, then I was not mistaken; and a little Arithmetic will serve to discover
it.

The Remark gives this Answer to this part of the Experiment, That more was
impelled up by the solute Water, because the shorter Leg was wider, and so
required more Mercury in the other Leg to counterpoise it.

But to give the Remark satisfaction herein, I have made a most exact scrutiny
into this part of the Experiment; and to the Objection I give these Answers.

1. The Cavity of the Siphon in the shorter Leg was parts of an inch, or of
half an inch, the breadth of the Cavity of the longer Leg was not the 40 th
part of an inch less than the shorter, which is so small a disproportion that
it could scarce be sensible, and this upon an exact admeasurement: And again,
when the Mercury in the shorter tube was depressed an inch by the solute Water
incumbent upon it, there was not any visible difference between the extent of
the Mercury driven up in the longer, and depressed in the shorter Leg, both
being indistinguishably the same, viz. an inch subsiding in the shorter, and an
inch only rising in the longer Leg, which evidenceth the imperceptibleness of
the difference.

2. If it gave an advantage of raising of the Mercury, it must be to the
shorter Leg, because it had a greater Moles of Mercury in it, and of Water upon
it.

3. But the truth is, the pressure of Water or Mercury in an inverted Siphon,
is equal, though the amplitude of the Legs differ; for Fluids in that Instance,
press secundum altitudinem or longitudinem, not secundum amplitudinem. A Siphon
inverted, having one Leg of 6 inches diameter, and the other but of an inch
diameter, filled with Water or Mercury, will have their Superficies of equal
heights, notwithstanding the disproportion of their amplitude.

This part of the Experiment therefore stands unshaken by the Remark, and
therefore surely the Experiment it self, nor the Collection thereupon made by
the Remark, gives little countenance to the magnified demonstration mentioned
in the Remark, but concludes effectually against it.

Indeed as to the second Instance or Trial, which I call the double Trial, page
66. it has reasonably given a just cause of exception, yet not without some
Mistake in the Remark, because it was tried when two inches and more of the
Mercury was first driven out of the Siphon, by the Water poured into the longer
Leg, and therefore I lay no weight upon it; yet even there, there is a
disparity in the pressure of the solute and enclosed water, there being a
greater height of water pressing upon the Mercury in the shorter Leg than in
the longer: But because this second trial is less evident, I lay it aside; yet
howsoever this does not impeach the former trial, nor the Conclusion which I
lay upon it, viz. that the force of the same Column of water contracted in the
longer Leg of the Siphon, and having no other Base but the Mercury it self, is
of greater force than the like Column of solute Water in the open Vessel
impending upon the shorter Leg, especially since in the one case and the other,
the open Air gives the most fair trial to the energy of both: and therefore the
disparity of the pressure of enclosed and solute water, which the Remarker is
pleasantly disposed to call the Masonry of the water, is not hereby impeached,
nor the notable demonstration in the Enchiridion Metaphysicum, by the Rundle of
wood any way relieved.

And for evidence of the truth of the pressure of water secundum altitudinem,
and not secundum amplitudinem, and also the disparity of pressure of solute
water, and water under a constriction to a narrow Basis, I have observed that
if a Tube of half an inch diameter, and 4 foot high, with a Lumen of a quarter
of an inch diameter in the side near the Base, be filled with water, the
parabolical Line that the water will make out of that Vessel in its first
exsilition, will be as long, yea, and somewhat longer than the like parabolical
Line made in the first exsilition, by the like Lumen out of a Vessel of six
inches diameter, and the same height, which must needs proceed from the greater
pressure by that Column of water that has an equal height, but a Base of more
equality to the Lumen, according to the subjoined Figure.



REMARK VIII, IX.
THe true reason of the rising of the Rundle of wood is neither from the Spirit
of Nature, nor from an Hylarchical Principle, but from the plain common known
Rules of Hydrostaticks, whereby necessarily a fluid Body drives up a solid Body
lighter than it self, to the Superficies, if it can by any means in the least
proportion, insinuate it self between the Rundle and the Base of the Vessel,
and this is done by circumpulsion.

But as touching Stevinus his Experiment of the Rundle covering a pertuse or
hole in the Basis of the Vessel, I must needs say, Stevinus delivers it in his
Observations upon the 10 th. Proposition of his Hydrostatiques, from whence I
transcribe it, page 94. of the Nugae.

I have said enough touching this Business before upon Remark 19, 20. upon the
Essay; I shall therefore shortly collect somewhat of what is there more fully
delivered.

If the Rundle of Wood be specifically lighter than a portion of water equal to
its Moles, and the Rundle be pressed down as contiguous as may be to the plain
Basis of the Vessel, yet it will rise; for by reason of the porosities and
chamfers of the wood, all the industry imaginable will not press it so close,
but there will be some interstitia between the Rundle and the Basis or bottom
of the Vessel into which the Water will creep, and so undermine and drive up
the Rundle to the Superficies of the Water, by an ascending pressure of the
Water, which ascending pressure is nevertheless wrought and effected first by a
descent of the water round the sides of the Rundle, and so by a kind of
Balance, overweighing the Rundle of wood, and thereupon necessarily weighing
it up.

2. If the Rundle be closely fixed to the bottom by a viscous, or glutinous, or
thick Oily matter, that the water cannot get under it, the Rundle will not
rise, upon this double account.

1. Because that adhering Oil by the mutual adhesion to the Rundle and Base,
renders the Rundle consequentially, and effectively, and extrinsecally heavier
by its adhesion, than the like Moles of Water, whereby the Water cannot raise
it.

But, 2. and principally, Because the interposed viscous Oil does obstruct the
migration or insinuation of the Water between the Rundle and Basis or bottom of
the Vessel, and so it cannot get under it to drive it up; but stands now as one
common fixed Base of the Vessel united to the true Base thereof,

3. If there be a hole in the bottom of the Vessel, suppose of two inches
diameter, and the Rundle of light wood be 4 inches diameter, and so overlap the
Orifice, the Rundle will not rise, because the Water, notwithstanding all the
care imaginable, will creep under the sides of the Rundle, and discharge it
self gradually through the hole; for the water having never so little passage
through the pertuse or hole, though not commensurate to the 40th. part of its
amplitude, will contend and press that way, and so gravitate upon the Rundle
that lies in its way, by its Conatus ad motum to that Orifice, where it finds
never so little vent that it may discharge it self; for the water pressing upon
and through the Orifice, does necessarily press upon the interposed Rundle.

4. And if the Rundle of wood could be kept so close to the bottom, either by
its own exquisite smoothness (which is hardly possible) or by any viscous Oil,
or by any fixation to the bottom or Base of the Vessel, now it stands as one
common Base to the water, as the rest of the bottom of the Vessel does, and is
of no use to explicate the Phenomenon; for it is all one as if it were one
continued solid Base to the Vessel, unmoved and unmovable by the water.

And this upon more than one trial, I find true; and when duly weighed, it
makes nothing in favor of the Remarkers Hypothesis, or to the disadvantage of
my Supposition in the Essay, though I confess it does more distinctly and
clearly explicate the Phenomenon.

REMARK X.
THe adequate Reason is truly given by me, if the Glass were excessively
strong, or if it were filled with water, it would not break, because the
internal water bears as strongly against the external pressure of the external
water, as that can downward against it.

As we see in making new Cuts and Rivers; if there be a River with a small or
weak bank on its South side, and another Cut of Water be made on the South side
of that slender Bank, the water in the River will not break the Bank; for the
adjacent Cut filled with water, strengthens the Bank by its renitence; but if
the Cut be empty of water, the Bank of the River will break, because the
conterminous Air is not of strength enough to balance it. The sides of the
Glass-Bottles of themselves being too weak to protect them, and the included
Air capable of compression by the heavier Element of water, it wants strength
to protect it, and so breaks.

But as for the Air being out of its place when under water, I have observed
enough before of the vanity of that Reason, and the ensuing Remarks will give
me occasion to reinforce it.

REMARK XI.
IF the Remarker had been pleased to take notice of what is so often mentioned
in both the Tracts upon which he remarks, and is of infallible truth, that the
pressure of water in this Instance and diverse others, is never secundum
amplitudinem, but secundum altitudinem: Much of this Remark might have been
spared, and the censure of absurdity would have been reserved to better
purpose; for the water in the Pipe of one quarter of an inch diameter, must be
counterpoised with a Cylinder of external water, of equal height and length to
that in the Tube. And if the height be less, though the amplitude of the Water
be more, it will not counterpoise it in this motion.

REMARK XII, XIII.
I Come to the Instance which I call the Valve, he calls the Obturaculum.

I have given my reason of that Phenomenon, why the Obturaculum will not
subside in such an immersion into water; this is the Subject of Cap. 6.
Nugarum, page 102, etc. and in the Observation upon the Remark; which is this
in effect.

When the whole Tube with its Valve closed, is counterpoised with a portion of
water of greater, or at least, equal weight to the whole instrument, and of
equal Bulk to so much thereof as is immersed in the water, the whole Engine must
necessarily swim; for it is in aequilibrio with, or preponderated by so much
water, which it displaceth by its immersion. And it is in effect no other, than
if a Cylindrical Body, suppose a Cane, were of two inches diameter, and of two
foot long, the bottom filled about an inch with Lead, and then 11 inches with
Water, and the rest with Air, and suppose the whole Cane were lighter than the
like Bulk of Water, so that a Moles of water countervailing 12 inches of this
Cylinder, would counterpoise it, it is absolutely necessary that this Cylinder
must swim perpendiculary and erect in the water at an immersion of twelve
inches; for the water bearing against its Basis, must necessarily sustain it at
that height.

And perfectly the same reason is that which keeps up the Obturaculum, by
pressing against it at the bottom; which now is as it were one common piece of
the whole Latin Cylinder or Valve; And this aequilibrium is the true Cause of
its sustentation.

But the Remarker has given us another kind of Solution; which if I understand
aright, is to this purpose, that in this Instance the Air is out of its place
being in the Latin Cube below the Superficies of the Water, and that the Spirit
of Nature, or the Principium Hylarchicum, to rescue it from this inconvenience,
draws up the Air, and drives down the contiguous water, and therewith draws and
drives up the Obturaculum, which by the Abituriency (as it is called) of the
Air, is sustained: And as a strong proof hereof, it is said both in the Remark,
and in the Enchiridion Metaphysicum, that if the Tube be stopped near the
Sucker or Obturaculum, it will by no means be sustained; because now the
Obturaculum is not concerned in the abiturience of the Air thus separated from
it by the interposed obstruction.

This I call an obscure Solution; and had I then searched into it, as I have
done since, I should have styled it a mistaken Solution; for so it is.

1. I do not understand how the Air is out of its place, when it fills the Tube
below the Superficies of the Water, any more than if the Vessel were placed
upon a Steeple, the Air on either side reaching below the fund of the Vessel,
it may be 40 yards, were out of his place, because the Bucket of Water stands
above it.

2. Neither do I understand how the Spirit of Nature is concerned to fetch up
the Air out of the Tube, or to bring the water into the Tube; but it is
performed by a plain statical necessity, and the relative pressure of the Water
upon the Basis of the Tube, being lighter than the like Moles of Water.

3. Be it in his place, or out of his place; if the instance given by the
Remarker of the falling off of the Valve or Obturaculum, when another
Obturaculum is interposed, were as true as it is confidently affirmed, there
might have some relief thereby been given to the Solution, which I called
obscure: But most plainly it is not true; and by frequent trials I have found
that notwithstanding that interposed stopping a little above the Sucker, or
Obturaculum, the Obturaculum will continue suspended as well as if there were
no such interposed stoppage. I took a Latin Tube of two foot five inches long,
and one inch and a quarter diameter, with its Valve and Obturaculum closely
fitted each to other, but so as with its own weight the Obturaculum would
subside in the open Air, the weight of the whole Engine weighed 12 ounces and a
half and 9d weight.

I stopped the Tube within less than ah inch above the Obturaculum with Cork,
so every way encompassed with a strong Cement, that all possible intercourse
between the superior Air and the lower brazen Obturaculum was entirely stopped.

The Valve or Obturaculum being put up, and the Tube immersed into a full
Vessel of Water, subsided to 18 inches depth, and thereby drove over a portion
of Water equal in weight to the weight of the Engine, and equal in Bulk or Moles
to the 18 inches of the Engine immersed in the Water; and all this while the
Obturaculum stuck fast; I therefore gently raised the Engine till it came within
5 or 6 inches of the Superficies of the Water, and yet it continued sustained
till it was raised to such a height as the weight of the Obturaculum
counterpoised a Column of Water commensurate in weight unto it, and so long the
Obturaculum continued suspended; but when the Tube was lifted higher, so that
the aequipondium between the Obturaculum and the like Moles of Water was lost,
then the Obturaculum fell down, as in the instance of the Valve, that had no
such interposed obstruction.

This was the event of this Experiment often made, and will doubtless fall out
upon any other man's Trial, if it be carefully and soberly put in ure.

Only this must be remembered, if the Obturaculum be not very true and exact,
but that the water comes in considerably between the Obturaculum and the Valve,
the Obturaculum will fall off after a little while at least, as well in this,
as in the unstopped Tube described in the Fifth Chapter of the Nugae, partly by
reason of the laxness of its adhesion, and partly by reason of the additional
weight of water getting in above the lower Obturaculum.

And yet it must be remembered also, that though there be the greatest care
imaginable used, if the Obturaculum be so lax as to fall from the Valve in the
open Air, though it be so close as to stick together in the Water, the Water
will creep between the Fissures of the Obturaculum and the Valve, with a force,
if it have any room to receive it. And whether even that very pressure of the
water upwards through that Fissure, may for a while contribute to the bearing
up of the Valve (as in the instance of the Rundles of Wood covering the Orifice
in the Base, it contributes to the keeping down of the Rundle) may be
considerable. But howsoever, if it receive too much water, it presses the
Obturaculum the more downward, and thereby in time weakens the adhesion thereof.

And now what part has this Spiritus Naturae to act in this case?

I shall therefore conclude this Remark upon which so great a stress is laid to
prove the Hylarchical Principle, and the manner of its sustaining the
Obturaculum, by evocating the Air, and its ready obsequious abituriency, to be
not so much an obscure, as a mistaken Solution, and bottomed upon a mistaken
Experiment.

REMARK XIV.
IN this Remark, the Author is pleasant with his Hylarchical Principle,
attributing to it a pretty kind of Intelligence, only where he says, that it
is the Pulp, not the Skin of the Finger that feels the monition of the
Hylarchical Principle; it is certainly both; for the Pulp cannot be attracted,
unless the intervening Skin be attracted.

The 15 th. Remark will come to be considered hereafter.

REMARK XVI.
EXception is taken because I say, regularly bodily effects are wrought by
contact of some active body upon the Patient: The Remarker might, if he had
pleased, have taken notice that I often say, In bodily motions some things act
from an inward active principle inherent in them, as the descent of heavy
Bodies. Other things there are that are moved by an external or foreign active
principle, or at least, some other body put into motion, as in a Clock, the
descent of the weight of Lead is ab intrinseco principio, and not by any
contact, but the turning about of the Wheels of the Clock, is by the connection
of the Line to the weight, and its circumvolution about the wheel per
contactum. To the former I never apply this Axiom, as he calls it, as he
himself after in his 37th Remark fairly confesses. This active intrinsic
principle I call the Law of Nature alligated to heavy bodies; and if he had
called it an Hylarchical Principle, I should not have contended with him about
the word: But in these motions ab extrinseco, I dare think at least, he will
not deny it to be regularly true.

REMARK XVII, XVIII, XIX, XX.
THere is no great matter in these, but only touching the porosity of Glass;
and the difficulty of the transition of the Materia Subtilis through it, by the
renitence of the Air; upon which little more need to be said than what occurs
before.

Only where the Remarker subjoynes that upon the gentle gradual inclining of
the Tube of Mercury, yet when it comes to an erect posture the Mercury subsides
to 29 inches, is an Argument that there are no such effluvia from the Mercury,
to supply the derelicted space in the top of the Tube. This, though often
repeated by him in the subsequent Remarks, seems to be no Objection; for
whether the subsiding be more gradual, or more sudden, the compression of the
Mercurial parts, and traction upon them, are equal when it attains its
perpendicular pressure; as to use my old comparison, if a man strain a
Lute-string from a lower to a higher Note, suppose from an Eighth to a Third,
if he do it rapidly, he shall indeed endanger the Lute-string; but whether it
be wound up swifter or slower, the tension of the Lute-string is the same at an
equal height, in both motions of the Pin: Indeed while the inclination
continues, the pressure and gravitation of the Mercury upon it self, is less,
and consequently the tension weaker; and therefore the portions of Effluvia
sent or drawn out in that posture, are less; but when it comes to an erect
perpendicular posture, the pressure and gravitation, and traction and tension
is equal, whether that posture be attained suddenly or more leisurely.

As to the length of the Tube, or its capacity in the top to receive more
Mercury, as I have made the Objection; so the Answer that I give, that the more
Mercury descends, the more effluvia are emitted, seems to me a sufficient
Answer, whether the Tube be leisurely or suddenly brought to a vertical posture.

REMARK XXI, XXII, XXIII, XXIV, XXV, XXVI, XXVII.
THere is in these Remarks no difference between us; for it seems I write
herein according to his Sense; only in the Solution by me given by Tension, and
Rarefaction, and Attraction thereby wrought, It agrees not to his Judgment, as
contradicting the instance of the sustaining of the Embolus of the Air-pump,
upon which the Enchiridion lays great stress to prove an Hylarchical
Principle; therefore most of the ensuing Remarks are levelled against that
Solution.

REMARK XXVIII, XXIX, XXX, XXXI.
TOuching the various position of the Mercury upon the top and bottom of a
Hill, I need not say more than what is said in my 14th Chapter of the Nugae,
and therefore I spare repetition. Touching the reason assigned by the Remark of
the swelling of a Bladder, and the raising of Bubbles out of Water and Spirit
of Wine in the Air-pump, by me attributed to Tension and Attraction, thereby
wrought; but by the Remarker to a tumultuary agitation of the parts of Water,
etc. As he is little satisfied with my explication, so I am as little satisfied
with his; both indeed produce an agitation of the Water in the Glass; but that
which I assign, is regular, orderly and suitable to the effect produced; but the
tumultuary agitation of the Remarker, is confused, irregular, and unproductive
of such regular motion; and besides, is unevident, and contradicted by
Phenomenon of like nature; as we shall see plainly in the Magdeburgh
Hemispheres.

The Ludicrous Instance, as I call it, of the Attraction of Tobacco through
Water, is properly brought in by me in this place, to show that in many
Instances, Attraction may be made through Water, which was seasonable in that
place, and proper enough.

REMARK XXXII, XXXIII.
IN these two Remarks the Remarker endeavors to show,

1. The Groundlessness of the Solution offered by me to the Torricellian
Phenomenon. And, 2. Its Repugnancy.

The former he says he has shown in Remark 32. But all that is done to show
it, is to substitute certain inevident, and I think, mistaken Suppositions: As,

1. The perviousness of Glass to the subtiler aerial particles; this indeed he
has often said, but no where proved; and if it were admitted, would not only
perfectly destroy the apparent Phenomenon in that Instrument, but would utterly
confound his Answer to the resiliency of the Mercury upon a sudden lifting up
and separation of the Tube from the restagnant Mercury: For what need such a
violent resilition where the top of the Tube admits the subtiler aerial
particles to pervade the Glass?

2. The gentle inclining of the Tube to prevent the tumultuary agitation of the
Mercury. But what I have shown in my Observation upon Remark 17, etc. I think
sufficiently discovers the impotence of this Objection.

3. The gravitation upward by a Circle of motion, is utterly unapt to salve the
resilition; for that circulation can be but a slow, gentle motion, and cannot
possibly have so rapid a motion by the imaginary straightness of the Channel;
as we may suppose in the Streights in the Sea; upon which the Ocean presses;
but this neither can nor need receive a greater portion of subtle Air to
relieve it than possibly 2 inches in height, and the 8th part of an inch in
Diameter, where the amplitude of the Tube is no greater.

As to the Second, namely, the repugnancy which is assigned.

1. In that I deny a Vacuum, which he says cannot be by another way prevented,
but by the transition of the subtle particles of Air through the Glass; but
such a course of argumentation seems to be of kin to that which is called
Petitio Principii, he knows I assign another cause, though he dispute the truth
of it. Then he proceeds to the leisurely inclining of the Tube; which I confess
is often repeated, but I think need not be more than once answered, which I
think is done in my Observations upon Remark 17, etc.

Then he proceeds to the Argument touching Rarefaction, and the inconvenience
of the penetration of dimensions, and so endeavors to prove repugnancies in
what is said by a Problem that deserves more discussion than the Argument in
hand, as has been showed in the beginning of this Book, wherein I have
nevertheless expressed my thoughts touching it.

I cannot tell what the Remarker imagines or conceives against the cohesion of
grosser Bodies by the tension of lighter bodies, but I can tell what is evident
to my sense, and so may any that will give his Senses leave freely to determine,
without stifling them by Notions, namely, that there is as plain a cohesion in
the Magdeburgh Hemispheres; yea, and in the Torricellian Engine, as there is
between things fastened each to other by a string: And therefore I cannot so
over-readily change the conviction of my Senses, for a Notion or Conception
asserted and magnified, but not proved.

But to infer that because Water, which is above 900 times crasser than Air, is
not compressible to a sensible smaller room by a great weight, therefore a
portion of subtle Matter cannot be extracted out of it or Mercury, with so
small a weight as the Mercurial Cylinder, or that the effluvia of Water or
Mercury, which are as subtle as Air, cannot be expanded by a less weight than
Water compressed into a sensible narrower room, seem hard illations, and very
inconsequential; for we see the heat of a man's hand will expand Air in
Weather-Glasses to near a double extension.

REMARK XXXIV.
I Do prove the attraction of tensed Bodies by the plain evidence of Sense, and
I assign the preservation of the continuity of the Universe, as the end
thereof, and the supreme efficient cause thereof to be, the most wise and
powerful Creator of all things, and the immediate effective cause, that
instituted Law that he has placed in things natural; the immediate
instrumental cause in many motions that are not primitive in their Subjects, to
be from the singular disposition of the part of the Universe, and their
admirable mechanical adaptation each to other. And as to the vicarious Spirit
of Nature, as a distinct incorporeal subsistence, when the Author has given us
better proofs thereof than the suspending of Mercury in the Torricellian
Experiment, the driving up a Rundle of light wood by the Water, and potentia
attractiva of the Embolus of the Air-Pump, and such like petty Instances,
together with his bare Notion touching it: It may possibly obtain a better
entertainment than yet I find it does, at least with me.

REMARK XXXV.
THis Instance in the Bladder and Cupping-Glasses, is passed over in this
Remark very lightly, and it was necessary so to be dealt with, because too
troublesome to be explicated otherwise than by Tension and Attraction, and it
would require an admirable process in the Hylarchical Principle; to effect
this, and some proof besides single Notions and Conceptions of such explication
by such a principle.

REMARK XXXVI.
THe Instance here given, has put the Remarker to a great deal of pains to
find a solution for it and the consequences of it (for the Hypothesis of
Attraction is confidently said to be fully confuted, though it be only so said,
but not so done.) But yet the Hylarchical Principle is at length furnished with
an Hylostatical Libration and Hylostatical power of union of the several parts
of Water, Air and Glass: And at this rate I confess there will never want a
ready solution to any difficulty; for it is but asserting that the Spirit of
Nature is furnished with that effectual power, and the knot is untied or cut,
though there be not a Syllable of proof offered for it; but it is only graffed
on to the Hypothesis of the Spirit of Nature by the wit of the Assertor, to
accommodate the Hypothesis.

REMARK XXXVII.
I Refer my self to what is said before in the first Chapter of this Book, and
upon the same Remark, there need not be said more.

The Laws of Nature were the Laws of God imprinted upon the nature of Physical
Beings by his Almighty Fiat; and though as to particular Beings, he has
substituted particular active principles, usually called Essential and Vital
Forms; yet as to the Universe it self, it seems to be too great an Empire to be
put into the vicariat hands of that which is here called the Spirit of Nature.
The great God that gave the Laws of Nature, is sufficient without such a
Substitute, and is only sufficient for the regiment of so great an Empire; and
this may serve also to Remark 38. We are not disputing whether such a Spirit of
Nature be possible to be, but whether de facto it be or not, or that it is
necessary that it should be, at least as to those motions which have so evident
explication from other principles.

REMARK XXXIX.
HErein we differ not as to the rejecting of the great Elasticity of the Air.

REMARK XL.
I Confess when I read the beginning of this Remark, I hoped to meet with such
a Solution to the Instance remarked upon, as would be close and clear; because
this Instance bears so hard against most of what the Remarker has before
affirmed; but I was deceived herein.

In this Instance of the Magdeburg Hemispheres, these things are most evident
to any man's Sense.

1. That the included Air is certainly expanded and rarefied by the heat,
beyond its natural size.

2. That while they are so hot, and the Air so expanded and lax, they do not at
all cohere.

3. That as they grow cold, they do most evidently cohere; so that they will
not be divulsed without a considerable strength.

4. That most necessarily as the included Air grows cold, and the heat which
was the cause of its expansion; decays, so the Air must needs endeavor its
restitution to its natural dimension, by contracting it self inward to its
natural size.

5. And yet if it have such a degree of heat, as again gives a more lax state
to the included Air, the cohesion will cease, and the Hemispheres fall asunder.

6. And as the Remarker confesses, and the most clear evidence of Sense
evinceth, those Phenomenon are not wrought, nor indeed possible to be wrought,
either by the weight, pressure or elasticity of the external Air, as the
Elaterists would have it.

The Consequence of all which is, that certainly as far as Sense can lead us,
the Air is rarefied by the Heat; and as the Heat decays, the Air endeavors
its own contraction, and there necessarily follows, even to our Sense, an
attraction upon the sides of the Hemispheres, whereby they cohere; and that
cohesion will continue till relaxed by another accession of Heat, or admission
of more Air.

But now what does the Remark propound in this Instance? Marry, an Hylostatical
Spirit, which, pro re nata, works these various Phenomenon, which is only a
conjecture, and has no evidence to prove it besides Notion or Imagination; but
the method of the effecting it by this Hylostatical Spirit, is more admirable,
though it is pleasantly offered, that thereby all goes off glibly. And it is to
this effect, as I take it.

The Hylostatical Spirit finding the subtilty of Matter imprisoned in an undue
place between the Hemispheres, presently makes up an occasional Gravitation or
Elasticity in the ambient Air to squeeze out the included subtle Matter, and
give it liberty, and thereby presses the Hemispheres together. And so in this
glib Hypothesis the Remark does two things. viz.

1. It creates a weight or elasticity in the ambient Air pro re nata, which as
it is in effect contrary to all that he has before delivered against the
weight or elasticity of the Air, so it has this disadvantage, as is proposed
by the Remark, that it is infinitely more incredible than the common
Supposition of the Elaterists, and indeed little less than miraculous.

And 2. It is a Conatus of this Hylostatical Spirit to no purpose at all, and
merely frustraneous, unless by such an admirable condensation of the ambient
Air it could break the brazen Ribs; whereas indeed it makes the Prison the
stronger. I must confess, this Fetch goes not down so easily with me, nor I
believe with many more.

REMARK XLI.
I Come to the Remarks upon the Phenomenon of the Glass-Pump, wherein I
attribute the raising of the Water in the Glass to the traction made by the
tensed Air in the Shank of the Pump, and the dilatation of the Air in the top
of the Glass, by the extraction of the Water. And the reason why after iterated
evacuations of the Water by that suction or traction, no more will rise, to be,
because the Air in the Bottle has undergone as great a tension or dilatation
as a Pump of that length can give it.

These things I must observe touching this Pump.

1. The length of the Shank or Pump if self above the Glass, was not much above
fourteen inches, and the Embolus proportionable thereunto, if it had been
longer, the attractive force must have been greater, and would probably have
given a stronger traction, and consequently a greater expansion, tension or
rarefaction to the Air in the upper part of the Glass.

2. That in this Instance here is no misplacing of the Air or Water; upon which
the Author builds much of the activity of his Hylarchical Principle in diverse
of his Remarks; for the Air in the Bottle, and in the Shank of the Pump, are
both above the situation of the Water in the Bottle. And here the Author,
after some recourse to the impossibility of penetration of dimensions, which he
so often inculcates, gives us his Solution, returns to the activity of the
Hylostatical Principle, which because the subtle Matter misplaced, invigorates
the external Air to do something in this business, but tells us not expressly
what, or how, in this place: We shall hereafter, it may be, find what is meant.

Only he tells us two things. 1. That it is impossible so heavy a Body as
Water, should rise so high into so extreme a thin Body in the Glass, and that
without fresh Air succeeding. 2. That the Embolus that at the first pumping,
overcame the consistence of the Air should as reasonably overcome it still.

As to the first, It seems he is now pleased to admit an intrinsic Gravity in
the Water, which renders it unwilling to ascend; but besides, according to the
Authors Assertion in his Remarks, the more subtle parts of the Air will pervade
the Glass, if that were true, there would be supplemental subtle Air at least,
to supply the evacuation of the Water to the last drop.

As to the Second, There is nothing more plain to our very Sense, than that any
extendible or tensible Body till it be broken, does more easily yield to the
first attempts of its extension, which yet with more difficulty, succeeds
afterward as is evident in the Air-Pump and a Lute-string, which is an Instance
I frequently use, I confess; but it explains my meaning; so that this Remark
concludes nothing against what I have delivered in relation to my Glass-Pump,
nor to evidence the interposition therein of the supposed Hylarchical Principle.

REMARK XLIII, XLIV, XLV, XLVI.
BEfore I come to my Observations upon these Remarks, it may be convenient to
give an explication of the dimensions of the Glass-Pump that I made use of;
referring my self to the Figure thereof, described in the Nugae, Fig. 21.

The whole length from the upper end of the Embolus to the bottom of the
Glass-Globe, was near 21 Inches; whereof the Embolus reaching to D, near as low
as H, where the Water was to be pumped out, was about 8 inches from H, to the
upper Surface of the Glass, near 4 inches; from the upper Surface of the Glass
to the bottom of it, about 9 inches, which was the diameter of the globular
Glass; the continued Pipe of the Pump being less, running into the Glass about
7 inches, and so at E, opening and ending about 2 inches from the bottom of the
globular Glass; consequently from the lower end of the Sucker at D, to the
middle of the globular Glass about 8 inches and a half or 9 inches; the cavity
of the Pump it self near two inches diameter or thereabouts; so that the Air
between the bottom of the Embolus and the top of the Glass, might be a Cylinder
of near 2 inches diameter, and about 4 inches long; by the tension whereof, the
Water in half the Glass is by me supposed to be attracted and raised. The other
and upper half of the Glass contains the other half of the Globe, and is filled
with Air, which contained about 5 pints; which was more than twenty times the
quantity of Air contained in the Pump, between the lower end of the Embolus and
the top of the Water. I say, by iterated pumpings I drew out a quart of Water,
which made the water subside in the lower half of the Bottle above an inch and
an half; and consequently the Air in the upper half of the Bottle expanded so,
that now it contained about 7 pints of Air; after which, it was not capable of
a greater expansion by my small Pump: The Engine it self is more punctually
described in the 19th Chapter of the Nugae; but the dimensions not so fully
mentioned there as here.

This Instance I use as an evidence to prove the attraction of the Water by the
tension of that little portion of Air in the cavity of the Pump and the
sequaciousness of the Water to relieve that tension, and to preserve the
continuity of the Mundana Materia which in these Remarks is opposed by my
learned Antagonist.

And the Instance is opposed upon this account, that the Air in the Glass is
tended from 7 to 5; whereas the Air in the Pump is tended from 1 to 5 spaces at
least, which is said, is an evidence that there is no such tension; for if
there were, the Air in the Glass would receive a greater tension than from 5 to
7, when the Air in the Pump is supposed to be tended from 1 to 5, which is ever
proportionate to the tension of the Air in the Glass.

But surely this is an Objection of no force, for apparent Reasons: Though the
expansion of 5 to 7, is not in proportion the same with the expansion from 1 to
5, yet such a proportion need not, nor indeed is possible in this case; for as
the Body of the Air in the Glass, is above 20 times the quantity of the Body of
the Air in the Pump, so such an expansion serves its turn, as may make good the
space that is left by the evacuated water, which being no more but one quart,
the Air in the Glass can receive no greater amplitude of expansion than one
quart of space more than it had before. The measure of the extension of the Air
not being governed by the bare proportion which happens in another distinct
portion of Air, and that of a less dimension: But by the room or space that is
left by its next contiguous Body that must be supplied by its expansion.

In the 45th Remark, that which was before wanting, seems now to be supplied,
viz. The method which the Hylostatical Spirit uses in raising the Water in
this and in other Pumps, viz. by a circular pressure and gravitation of the Air
and Water incumbent upon the Superficies of the Water that the bottom of the
Pump is on, which jointly gravitates upwards, in regard of that subtle Element
in the top of the Tube, that there may be no bare subtle Matter in the Pump;
which gravitation and circulation is carried on by the Hylostatical Principle,
that there may be no misplacing of the Elements of the Universe, whereof the
Materia Subtilis is one. This is the Solution in substance, and very near the
words of the Learned Author.

This Solution, in my understanding, is not only wonderful inevident, but also
very improper.

1. Here is granted an occasional Elasticity of the Air and of the Water also,
though supposed to be effected by the Spirit of Nature or Principium
Hylarchicum; which Elasticity I had thought the Author would not have granted
to Air, much less to Water.

2. But the Supposition of this Circulation encounters it self: For either the
Materia Subtilis (which is supposed subtle enough to pervade the Glass, though
the crasser parts of the Air cannot) is either a distinct Element of it self,
not incorporated with the Air, but of a distinct consistence; or else is part
of the aerie concretion of the Air, the subtle part thereof, and mingled with
the Air as one constituent part thereof, though in some cases severable from
it; which way soever we take it, the difficulties of the Authors Supposition
are unanswerable. It is plain, the Air in the upper part of the Glass, upon the
exsuction of a quart of Water, takes up a quart more of room or space than it
had before: If this be caused by the perforation of the Glass by the Materia
Subtilis, as a distinct Element, and so uniting it self to the Air in the
Glass, then this Materia Subtilis (which in respect of its purity, must needs
have its proper place rather above the place of the Air, by the Laws of Nature,
and not below it) is called down by the Spirit of Nature, from its proper
position into the cavity of the Glass, and so the natural Order, Position and
Taxis of the parts of the Universe disordered and discomposed.

Again, if the Materia Subtilis be but a constituent part of the Air, then is
the fas;ter external Air robbed of part of its constitution, and impoverished
of what naturally belongs to it, to supply the space in the Glass derelicted by
the exhausted Water, and that portion of Air in the Glass furnished with a
greater portion of the Materia Subtilis, then belongs to it; and all this done
by the Spirit of Nature, which is supposed to be an active plastic principle
to conserve the order of the Universe, and not to disorder it; which according
to the Learned Authors supposition, must yet be the necessary consequence of
this imaginary transposition of the Materia Subtilis in this Circulation.

3. Again, in this Circulation and circular pressure, we shall find the Chain
broken, and the Circulation interrupted, or a worse inconvenience; the Air in
the Glass moves upon the Water, and that again presses upward, and moves upon
the subtilized Air in the Pump, and then it is thrown out in the open external
Air, and so moves upon that: It remains therefore, for the completing of the
Circle, that now at last by there interposition of the Hylostatical Principle,
the external Air must circulate by a pressure upon the Air in the upper part of
the Glass, and so the Dance is finished.

But 1. We must note that even the Author himself agrees that the grosser parts
of the Air cannot pervade the Glass, but it must be the Materia Subtilis. I
demand therefore, whether this Materia Subtilis pervades the Glass, and is
united to the Air in the top of the Glass or not?

If it do not, surely the Circle is broken, and with it, the circular pressure
or gravitation.

If it do pervade the Glass, and be united to the Air included in the Bottle,
these insuperable difficulties ensue.

1. The Hylostatical Spirit, whose Office it seems is to keep the Universe in
its due Libration, and to preserve the Air it self in its just size and
consistency of gross and subtle Matter, as is above observed; breaks that order
that it is placed there to conserve; for it takes too great a proportion of
subtle Matter from the common external Air which is due to it, and crowds it
into the Air in the top of the Glass, which has already more, or at least, as
much as belongs to it.

2. It would follow that by such a Current of subtle Matter through the Pores
of the Glass, that the Water should rise into the Pump even to the last drop;
for here is a perpetual spring and supply of subtle Matter, strained every
where through the Glass into the Air or aerie space that was in the head of the
Glass, and no fear of any Vacuum to ensue by the passing away of the Water; so
that it may (to use the Authors word) as glibly pass to the last drop, as at
the first, which is evidently contrary to experience.

This Circular Gravitation therefore is but a supplemental Invention, to help
the Flaws that arise from the Hypothesis of the Interposition of the
Hylarchical Principle, as the true cause of this Phenomenon.

REMARK XLVII.
I Shall not need say any thing upon this Remark; for herein we are very much
agreed; and he uses me and my Book with much Civility, and is pleased to
contribute his own Learned Observations in favor of it.

THE CONCLUSION.
I Shall not spend many words touching the Conclusion.

In some things therein mentioned, we very well agree; namely, in the exclusion
of that prodigious Gravity and Elasticity of the Air, whereunto the late
Philosophers attribute the Solution not only of the Torricellian Experiment,
but many other Phenomenon.

In some things we differ; he from me, in my Solution of many of the Phenomenon
mentioned in my Pamplets, by Rarefaction, Condensation and Attraction.

I differ also from him, and the state of that difference I set down shortly
thus, both in the Negative, and in the Affirmative.

1. I do not deny, but do really assure my self, there are created Spirits,
some simply void of all corporeal or physical matter; others, that though
possibly they may have a material or physical Hypostasis or Substratum; yet it
is so subtle, that it may deserve the name of a spiritual being in common
expression.

2. I do not conclude it impossible in Nature, but that there may be such a
kind of common Spirit of Nature as the Author would have, and not much unlike
to Helmonts Archeus, which he puts into a middle Office between the Soul and
Body, or the Colcoda of Avicen.

3. But yet I do say I am not satisfied that there is sufficient evidence
clearly to evince the same; and the rather, because I see no necessity for such
a being, in as much as Almighty God and his intimate presence with all his
Works, and the Laws that he has alligated to the natures of things, abundantly
supply all the general Offices for the common good and order of the Universe,
deputed to this Spirit of Nature: And the particular active Forms or Principles
of Life or Motion, placed by the God of Nature in the several Ranks of Beings,
supplies what is necessary for their particular motions, operations and
instincts.

4. That the existence of a Spirit of Nature is not at all proved by those
Motions and Effects in Nature, that are either purely mechanical, or that have
any other immediate cause of greater, or but as great probability as such an
unseen Spirit of Nature.

5. That consequently the rising of a Rundle in the Water, or the suspension of
a weight in the Embolus of an Air-Pump, the Phenomenon in the Torricellian
Experiment, or in the Magdeburgh Hemispheres, or in Pumps or Siphons, are non
only invalid Arguments to prove such an Hylarchical Spirit, but very improper
and disadvantageous to the Supposition it self.

6. But if there be any such Hylarchical Spirit, the proofs thereof should be
made from such things as seem to have in themselves the Principles of their own
motions, or at least, no other visible or probable immediate external cause of
such their motions.

7. That if there be such an Hylarchical Principle as is contended for, and
that he does interpose in many things that are not Automata, yet it is most
reasonable to suppose that the most exquisite methods of Mechanism are the most
probable Media whereby it performs such operations.

8. That therefore the Author of the Remarks should not be too much averse to
the Mechanism of those Motions in Nature, as purely inconsistent with his
Hylarchical Hypothesis; for hereby he renders it less credible, by denying
things that are evident to Sense, and transposing them beyond credibility, lest
they should seem to prejudice his Supposition of an Hylarchical Principle. It
is too much the fashion of men engaged in Suppositions, to run into extremes,
and that even in this Instance of Mechanism and Mechanical Motions in Natural
Bodies; as I have showed in the second preliminary Chapter of this Book; some
attributing too much to the Mechanism of things in Nature, and some too little.

And it seems to me that the Learned Author of these Remarks, out of the zeal
he has for the asserting of a most certain Truth, namely, the existence of
incorporeal Spirits, has gone farther than was either fit or needful, in the
attribution of these Phenomenon in Nature, whereof we have been debating, to
the immediate operation of an incorporeal vital Spirit; which he calls the
Spirit of Nature; which yet are reasonably salved by the Mechanism of Bodies,
and the most wise Order, Institution and Laws settled by the great Creator of
all things, which Laws are called the Laws of Nature.

FINIS.
Books printed for, and to be sold by William Shrowsbury, at the Sign of the
Bible in Duck-lane.
AN Essay touching the Gravitation or Non-Gravitation of Fluid Bodies, and the
reasons thereof; in 8.

Stereometric, or the Art of Practical Gauging; showing in two Parts, 1.
Diverse facile and compendious ways for Gauging of ^uns and Brewers Vessels, of
all Forms and Figures, either in whole, or gradually from Inch to Inch, whether
the Tun or Vessels Bases above and below be Homogeneal, or Heterogeneal,
parallel, and alike situate or not. 2. The Gauging of any Wine, Brandy, or
Oyl-Cask; be the same assumed as Sphaeroidal, Parabolical, Conical, or
Cylindrical, either full, or partly empty, and at any position of the Cask, or
Altitude of contained Liquor; performed either by brief Calculation, or
Instrumental Operation. Together with, a Large Table of Area's of a Circles
Segments, and other necessary Tables, and their excellent Utilities and
Improvements; with a copious and methodical Index of the whole; rendering the
Work perspicuous and intelligible to Mean Capacities. By John Smith,
Philo-Accomptant: in 8. Franconis Burgersdicii Idaea Philosophiae Naturalis,
sive Methodus Definitionum and Controversiarum Physicarum. Editio Novissima.
Huc accessit Idea Oeconomicae and Politicae Doctrinae, Eodem Auctore. Opus
Posthumum. 12. De Antiqua Ecclesiae Britannicae Liberate, atque de legitima
ejusdem Ecclesiae exemptione a Romano Patriarchatu Diatribe per aliquot Theses
diducta: Autore I. B. S S. Theol. Professore. 4. Contemplations Moral and
Divine, First and Second Part; in 8. Spadacrene Dunelmensis; Or, A short
Treatise of an ancient Medicinal Fountaln, or Vitrioline Spaw near the City of
Durham. Together with the Constituent Principles, Virtues and Uses thereof. By
E. W. Doctor in Physic.

