Dr. HOLLINGWORTH'S DEFENSE OF K. CHARLES the First's Holy and Divine Book,
called EIKON ASILIK Against the Rude and Undutiful Assaults of the late Dr.
Walker, of Essex.

PROVING By Living and Unquestionable Evidences, the aforesaid Book to be that
Royal Martyr's, and not Dr. Gauden's.

Imprimatur.

Maii 2. 1692. Carolus Alston, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris.



London: Printed for Samuel Eddowes, under the Piazza of the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill, 1692.

To the READER.
Reader,
IT is a thing of very sad consideration to all wise and good men in the
Nation, to think, that at this time of the day, when we have a noble Prince
brandishing his Sword abroad, and as noble a Princess indefatigably attending
the public Affairs at home, in order to preserve the Religion and Laws of
their Country; that there should be a Generation of Men at the same time
rendering them their Thanks for all Their Care and Pains, by villifying their
Grandfather, and extolling every scurrilous Pamphlet that lessens the deserved
Honor and Reputation of that great and good man. What this means, and what it
is designed for, every man that has but half an Eye in his Head may easily
see: And though many of their pretenses of Love and Duty to Their present
Majesty's are very great, yet it is plain these Attempts upon the Name and
Memory of K. Charles I. are in order to a Commonwealth, or else to bring the
Monarchy to the Standard of Venice or Genoua, and therefore I think no man is
to be blamed, at this time, for standing up for the ancient Constitution of the
Kingdom, and in order to it, for defending that Prince who (notwithstanding all
unjust Reflections) did grant as much, nay more, for preserving it, than any
King that had reigned before him; which he that reads over his History
impartially, must needs confess, or else I am sure he must wilfully shut his
Eyes against the clearest Light; for, I am certain there was nothing offered
him, that could make the Kingdom truly happy, but he was willing to hearken to
it, and comply with it.

By what means all his Condescentions proved in vain, it is the easiest thing
to understand; a few proud and ambitious persons had got the Power in their
Hands, by their Interest in a corrupt and enthusiastical Army, and rather than
return to their old stations again, they chose to break through all the Guards
and Fences of Law, all the Oaths they had taken, and against the Sense, the
Petitions, and earnest Desires of the Nation in general, to imbrew their Hands
in their Prince's Blood, an action for which the Honor of the Kingdom has been
stained ever since.

But that after all this, and the Ruins that one Act has brought upon us, we
of this Age should be so mad and intoxicated, as to vindicate it, and appland
every thing that justifies that horrid Murder, is a thing, I may say, without a
parallel, and causes great thoughts of heart amongst all disereet and thinking
men; and withal, that such a Book as Dr. Walker's late Book against King
Charles's incomparable Writings should be so magnified and applanded, has to my
own knowledge as much amazed as well as grieved a great part of the Subjects of
this Kingdom; and therefore I thought it necessary, for the casing the minds of
those good men, to let the World see what a Forgery that Book of Dr. Walker's
was; and if honest, plain, and living Testimonies will convince his Admirers, I
am sure I shall now do it.

I have omitted in this Answer many Inconsistencies in the Dr's Book, because I
was resolved to dwell upon matter of Fact; and withal, I have forborne returning
those Scurrilities and Scorns he has loaded me withal, upon himself, for I
considered him as dead, and therefore have been as civil to him as the nature
of my Undertaking would allow me; and I wish with all my Heart he had survived
the publishing his Book, that he might have had time to have repented of such
an unseasonable, false, and undutiful a Book as this of his is, whereby he has
gratified none but the great Enemies of Monarchy and Episcopacy.

Reader, I have but one thing more to add, and that is, if any man question the
Truth of those living Evidences I have quoted, if he pleases to come to me, I
will wait upon him to them, and he shall have satisfaction from themselves of
the Truth of what I have writ.

The God of Heaven and Earth restore all the People of this Nation to sound
Minds, to impartial Considerations of Persons and Things, especially of the
Person and Cause of King Charles the First, that so we may not be disappointed
of our hopes and expectations of Success this Summer, by Sea and Land, by
provoking God, by vindicating the barbarons dealings of a base Faction with
him, for he that vindicates them repeats, and as far as he is able, commits
them over again; which, I am sure, is a great Sin, and without great Mercy,
will have a suitable Punishment one time or other from Heaven.

Farewell.
King CHARLES the First's IKON ASILIK: OR, THE Portraiture of his Sacred
Majesty in his Solitude and Sufferings, VINDICATED.
THERE is a Book lately published, that has made a great noise in the City and
Country, and has occasioned a great many false and spiteful Reflections upon
my self, which, I must tell the World, I am so far from being really burdened
with the Thoughts of, that I look upon them as the greatest Honor done to me,
and to my Memory when I am dead and gone, considering it is for an honest and
seasonable Zeal for the Honor and Reputation of King Charles the First, whose
Name (notwithstanding all villainous and designing Reflections) will smell sweet
to all Ages and Generations to come. How this Book has been bought up, and
carried up and down in Triumph, all men of any Observation know, and all good
men are grieved at it: And now the Point is gained, and that for which that
Great King was so highly venerated, so deservedly applauded, and indeed upon
the score of which the greatest part of his Actions were vindicated, is now
proved a Cheat, and a Forgery, and therefore he truly is guilty of what by the
then Parliament was laid to his Charge, and made the reason of their War
against him, and, at last, of the Murder of him. This is sad News in deed, if
it can be unquestionably made out, and those many of us, that have defended the
Interest and Innocence of this King, have great cause to lay our Hands upon our
Breasts, and say, What have we done?

But stay a little, bare Assertions and Accusations were never yet amongst Wise
and Good Men admitted as satisfactory Proofs; and therefore this Book must be
considered, and examined, and weighed in a just and proper Balance, before we
down upon our Knees, and acknowledge our Faults, for defending and standing up
for this good and admirable Person.

And therefore I, so far as I am concerned, must beg Leave to tell the World
what I have to say for my self, and what I have to say in Bar, to the Truth and
Credit of this Book, so much admired by a Party of men, who will cry up any
thing that serves their Lusts against Monarchy and Episcopacy, for that is, in
short, the sum total of the thing; and was there no Hopes of overturning the
Government once again, and engrossing the whole Power of the Nation into their
hands, King Charles's Ashes might lie still in the Grave, without any
disturbance or molestation.

The Title Page of the Book is, A True Account of the Author of a Book
entitled, (...); or, the Portraiture of his Sacred Majesty, in his Solitude
and Sufferings: With an Answer to all Objections made by Dr. Hollingworth, and
others, in defense of the said Book.

The Author is Dr. Walker of Essex, who, if God, the Avenger of the Injured and
Oppressed, had not called him to an account, before his Book was published, I
should have been so bold as to have given, and that by undeniable Proofs, such
Instances of the man, as would have invalidated his whole Testimony, and made
him and his Book too a Scorn to the World; but he is dead, and therefore I
will, as much as I ought in this Case, forbear him, and let his Ashes lie
easier in the Grave, than he has the Ashes of King Charles the First.

The design of the Book is to tell the World, that that Book, that has for 43
years together gone under the Name of King Charles, was none of his, but drawn
up by Dr. Gauden.

Well, But how must we be satisfied in this? For, truly there ought to be
mighty clear and home Proofs, that a Book writ in so lofty, noble, and so
agreeable a Style to all the other acknowledged Writings of this great King; a
Book so full of Accounts of Political and State Affairs, that no man hardly
could be acquainted withal but himself; a Book so full of Divine Thoughts and
Meditations, so suited to the various Conditions and Afflictions he was in, and
indeed a Book, as the present Bishop of Rochester said in a Sermon, must needs
be his, because it was impossible any one should write it but himself.

I say, there ought to be mighty clear Proofs such a Book was none of his;
Witnesses upon Witnesses, and those very honest, and known upright men, who
make Conscience of the Appearance of Evil, ought to be brought into Court to
make this good, to convince the World this so celebrated a Book was none of
his. I, but here is no such thing, Dr. Gauden made the Book, and told Dr.
Walker so, and therefore it is true, and who ought to doubt it? And this most of
the Dissenters about Town say too. Why truly, with the Worlds good Leave, I am
one that doubts it, nay, that scorns to believe it, and the more, because Dr.
Walker asserts it, who was he not dead (which upon this account and no other I
am truly sorry for) as I said before, I would give Reasons sufficient to
satisfy any man why I do not believe it upon his Authority.

Well, further Dr. Gauden showed him some of the Heads of Chapters, and
afterward told him, that he had made Bishop Duppa acquainted with it, and sent
it by the Hands of my Lord Marquess of Hartford, to the King. This is all fine
indeed, and yet, notwithstanding both the Marquess and Bishop Duppa survived
the Calamities of the War, and saw King Charles the Second's Restoration, and
felt the good Effects of it, the one by being made Duke of Somerset, and the
other Bishop of Winchester; yet poor (and yet so highly deserving) Dr. Gauden
was fain to sit down contented with the small Bishopric of Exeter, though
over-and-above he had wrote against the very Covenant, he, as Dr. Walker said,
had taken, and never durst desire, as by the Sequel appears, either Marquess or
the Bishop to recommend him to the particular and great Opinion of King Charles
the Second; for, the Dr. tells us, page 5, that Dr. Gauden did not know whether
the King knew it, yea or no; nor yet did he ever (as by Dr. Walker's further
Account appears) give himself the Pleasure and Satisfaction, to understand from
the Marquess, whether King Charles the First received it, approved it, and made
use of it in his Retirements, as he pretended to design it, which certainly he
might have done by a word speaking to the Marquess, after the Restoration, for
he lived till October following.

And this to me makes it a plain Case, that it is all Sham, and that if Dr.
Gauden had dared at that time to have told such a Falsehood, he must have sat
down contented with his Living at Barking, without any Expectations from the
Court, without either being Bishop of Exeter, or living in hopes of the
Bishopric of Winchester.

And Sir Dennis Gauden might have spared the Cost and Charges of building an
House upon Clapham Common, for his Brother the next Bishop of Winchester that
was to be. A Story, all things considered, enough to make a very melancholy man
to smile, but it is such a one as Dr. Walker was accustomed to; That Sir Dennis
Gauden should lay out five or six thousand pounds upon an House for his
Brother, when Bishop of Winchester, which he was to have for writing a Book,
and yet neither he nor his Brother knew, neither King Charles the Second had
nay knowledge of his writing the Book at all.

So that, in short, the whole thing lies within this compass; Dr. Gauden made
the Book, and told Dr. Walker so. I say on the other side, if Dr. Gauden said
it, he did but jest with him, or else did something worse, which I will not
name; for, I will prove by and by, under the hand of a more creditable man than
ever Dr. Walker was, without any Disparagement to his Memory, that Dr. Gauden
had another opinion of the Author of that Book, and did so declare it.

Well, he says, he believes upon this Say-so of Dr. Gauden, that it was his
Book, and would have others upon his bare credit believe the same; and there
are Thousands of Designing men have, upon this man's Assertion, greedily
swallowed it down, though I hope either to shame or silence them before I have
done: And therefore on the other hand I say, I have better and greater
Testimonies to the contrary, which I now come to offer to the World, which when
I have done, I will leave my self in the hands of all unprejudiced,
dispassionate, and uninterested men, to judge which of us, upon true Evidence
and Proof, ought to be believed. And thus I begin.

I tell the World in my Postscrip to the Defense of King Charles the First,
that being in Conversation with Sir John Brattle, a worthy person, and who has
long enjoyed a considerable Office in the Royal Mint, and discoursing with him
about King Charles the First, and particularly of the Suspicions of the Truth
of his Book, he frankly told me, and assured me the Truth of this Story.

That in the year 47, the King having drawn up the most considerable part of
this Book, and having writ in some loose Papers, at different times, desired
Bishop Juxon to get some Friend of his, whom he could commend to him as a
trusty person, to look it over, and put it into an exact method: The Bishop
pitched upon Sir John's Father, whom he had been acquainted withal for many
years, who undertaking the Task, was assisted by this his Son, who declared he
sat up some Nights with his Father to assist him in methodizing these Papers,
all writ with the King's own Hand.

Which Story, upon the coming out of my Book, did so nettle the Enemies of King
Charles, that Sir John was presently pestered with Penny-Post Letters, (the
usual way of that Party, when any thing crosses their Designs) and gave him
such a disturbance, that presently they raised a Story about Town, that Sir
John had denied the thing, and consequently I had abused the World with a Tale
of my own inventing; upon hearing of which, I went the next morning to Sir
John's House, in the Tower, and not finding him at home, by good Providence, in
my return, met him under Aldgate, and walking with him down toward Crouched
Friars, I told him what I had heard, and desired to know whether he had said
any such thing, Sir John presently, without haesitation, told me, that all I
had printed was true, but was troubled at my printing of it, because of the
Trouble he had with these Penny-Post Letters, at which I was not so much
concerned, because I thought it an Honor to Sir John, to have any hand in
vindicating his old Master, and did think the Cause I was engaged in would
defend me from any Imputation of Undecency, in not asking his Leave to print a
Story which he told without any Obligation to silence, and in company of
another person, a worthy Citizen, as well as my self; but to do Sir John
Justice, I must acknowledge, that what he said to me, as to the truth of what I
writ in his Name, he has said to all my Friends ever since, that have had the
opportunity of conversing with him, and talking about this Affair.

And now let us see what Dr. Walker says to this; why truly he does as good as
tell me, that I have contradicted my self, when I assert, the Book was
delivered by the King to Bishop Juxon, and the same Book sent by the King to
Mr. Simmons: He says, They cannot both be true; if that, not this; if this, not
that; they are so contrary, page 2. Good God! how fast will some men shut their
Eyes, when seeing the Light would make them write and speak Truth! A man of
very ordinary Parts, and of an honest Mind, might at first sight fee no manner
of inconsistency in these two Stories; for, in plain terms I tell you, Bishop
Juxon received the most considerable part of the Book to methodize, by his
Friend Dab, as he in familiarity called Sir John's Father in 47, and the King
sent it to Mr. Simmonds in 48, so that here is a full Years difference betwixt
the one and the other. But poor Dr. Walker knew very well what sort of men's
Cause he was carrying on, and that a bare telling of them I had contradicted my
self, would be enough, for they presently run away with a Scandal, though never
so gross and groundless, without any further examination. Further, he questions
Sir John's Memory, and talks of his Youth to invalidate the Story, but that is
so great an Affront to all the young Gentlemen and Apprentices in London, who
at the age of Nineteen are so very much employed and trusted in their Masters
Books and Accounts, that I leave them to vindicate Sir John upon the score of
helping his Father in a thing of such a Nature as this was, at such an Age. And
as for his doubting whether Bishop Juxon ever saw the King, from the beginning
of the War till his Murder, pray who can believe that a person who had been so
obliged by his Master, as Bishop Juxon was, would not take a days Journey to
visit his Royal Master at Hampton Court, when the Army caressed him at that
great rate, and suffered access to him by all forts of Persons, even the
Marquess of Ormond himself, who had so stoutly appeared against them.

And this is all I have to say as to Sir John Brattle; and that he told me
this, I will depose upon Oath, whenever I am lawfully recalled.

The next thing I shall discourse upon, is the Story of Mr. Simmonds. I say in
my Postscript, That King Charles sent his Book to Mr. Simmonds, to peruse and
correct, he having writ so excellent a Vindication of him, as indeed it is the
best I ever saw, and which I wish were reprinted, and that Mr. Simmonds, upon
the reading of it, sent for Dr. Gauden, showed it him, and who was so taken
with it, that he borrowed it, transcribed it, and so returned it back to his
loving Neighbor again, which Story I had from the Reverend, and my Worthy
Friend, Dr. Meriton, who does not use to tell Stories of this high nature,
without very good Grounds; but that which confirmed me in the belief of this
Account, was this, namely, That Dr. Meriton dining the latter end of the last
year with the late Lord Mayor Sir Thomas Pilkington, happened to meet with Dr.
Walker, at the same Table, where Dr. Walker was pleased, with his usual
Confidence, to assert Dr. Gauden the Author of the King's Book, upon which Dr.
Meriton turned upon him with this Story of Mr. Simmonds, communicating the
whole thing to Dr. Gauden, upon which he was so confounded, that he had nothing
to say for himself; and though if none but Dr. Meriton himself had declared to
me the issue of their Debate, it would have satisfied me: Yet the further
satisfaction I had from my Worthy Friend Mr. Marriot, then Chaplain to the Lord
Mayor, and Minister of the Parish Church in Rood Lane, who stood by, and heard
the whole Discourse, and withal the Silence he put Dr. Walker to; which he
professed to my self, gave me so full a satisfaction, that upon that account I
ventured to give the World an account of it in Print. After this, in January
last, a Reverend Friend Mr. Jonas Warley, Vicar of Witham in Essex, coming to
Town, was pleased to let me know by a Paper of Directions, where Mrs. Simmonds,
the Widow of the aforesaid Loyal Sufferer lived, whom according to the
Directions I found at the same place, where after telling her, that I heard she
was such a man's Widow once, and she acknowledging it, I asked her, whether she
knew any thing of the King's Book, and how far her Husband was concerned in it;
she presently answered me, that going into her Husband's Study, she saw upon
the Table a Book in writing, which she knew was not her Husband's Hand, and
therefore asked him whose it was, which he turning her off with bidding her
mind her own Business, she desisted from any further Enquiry; after which he
sending, or else giving it with his own hands to Mr. Royston to print. The said
Book was printed, as I shall show by and by, and the Proofs corrected by
himself; but the thing getting some Air, the Soldiers came, and seized upon a
great part of the Impression, so that what were left of that Impression, were
sold for Twenty Shillings a piece. The King's Murder quickly after following,
she told me, her Husband never joyed himself, (those were her very words) but
fell sick, and died the 29th of March following, and throughout his whole
Sickness declared the Book was the King's Book, which upon reading, the Spirit
and Temper, the Religion and Piety, the holy Courage and undaunted Zeal, the
Simplicity and Sincerity of the man throughout all his Writings for King
Charles, I am confident he would never have attested upon his Deathbed, if the
Book had been composed by any but King Charles himself, and which upon the
Characters I have read of the Lord Marquess of Hartford and Bishop Duppa, I
also firmly believe of them, both of them, no doubt, scorning to assist their
Royal Master's Righteous Cause by such a Cheat as a Book writ in his Name by
Dr. Gauden; for true Church-of- England-men, governed by conscientious
Principles, scorn to carry on their Designs by Lies and Forgeries, by Tricks
and Devices, that are only fit to serve a bad and wicked Cause; the King
himself was a man of too great Wisdom and Piety, of Understanding and Learning,
to want the help of such a man as Dr. Gauden; and I dare say, the two aforesaid
Lords scorned to propose such a thing to him; or if they had, he would with all
worthy Disdain have rejected it.

But to put this thing further out of doubt, understanding who composed and
printed this Book, and they both being now alive, I went to the one, and sent
to the other; he I went to, was Mr. Thomas Milbourn Printer, just by
Jewen-street, and enquiring of him what he knew of King Charles's Book, he told
me, before a sufficient Witness, That in the year 48 he was Apprentice to Mr.
John Grisman, a Printer, at which time Mr. Simmonds, by Mr. Royston, sent the
King's Book to be printed, and that his Master did print it; and that Mr.
Simmonds always had the name of sending it to the Press; and that it came to
them as from the King, and they understood it no otherways; and that they had
printed several other things with C. R. to them, and that it looked to them
like the same Hand, and the same sort of Paper with others that were so marked,
and looked upon as the King's Papers, for the King (as all Kings no doubt do)
kept the Original by him, and Mr. Odert the Secretary transcribed them.

Which after I writ down, I read to him, and he before witness declared to be
true; but withal, he informed me, that there was one Mr. Clifford belonging to
the Church of St. Paul's, and Reader of Prayers at Serjeants-Inne in
Fleetstreet, that assisted him in composing and correcting the aforesaid Book,
who could give me a further account of the thing; upon which the same day April
the 28th, in the Afternoon, I sent a Letter to Mr. Clifford, desiring him to
give me the favor of his company that Afternoon, or to come to me the day
following; who sent me an Answer, That his Business was so, that he could not
come that Evening, but he would come to me the next day; which accordingly he
did, and after Dinner, before Witnesses, I writ down what he said to me upon
Knowledge of the King's Book, which I after read to him, and he set his Hand
to: The words were these.

I James Clifford do, upon my Knowledge, declare to Dr. Hollingworth, that I
was an Actuary in several things published by King Charles, particularly the
Letters between him and Mr. Alexander Henderson, who endeavored to seduce the
King to favor the Presbyterian Government, and that there was a man of known
Fidelity, Mr. Simmonds by Name, Chaplain to the then Prince of Wales, who was
employed by the King to take care of his Book, because he had writ the
Vindication of the King so well; and that the King entitled his Book The Royal
Plea; but Dr. Jeremiah Tailor coming accidentally to Mr. Royston's Shop, he
having a great and assured Cofidence in him, showed him the first Proof from
the Press, which when the Dr. viewed under that Title, he told him that the
Title would betray the Book; whereupon Dr. Tailor did undertake to write a
Letter to his Majesty, to let him know it would be in danger of being
suppressed for the Titles sake, there being, as he understood, two crafty
Informers, by name Cheltenham and Jones, who would understand the Book by the
Title, and therefore he thought (...) would be a better Title, and the less
taken notice of by the Informers, being Greek, and withal, it agreeing with the
Title of his Father's Book, called (...); upon which Letter the King
immediately consented to the alteration of the Title as Dr. Tailor proposed.
And withal, I do declare, that the King, for fear the Original should miscarry,
ordered Mr. Odert, Secretary to Sir Edw. Nicholas Principal Secretary of State,
to transcribe it, and lodged the Original in the Lord Marquess of Hartford's
own Hands, and by the Copy of Mr. Odert's, Mr. Milbourn and my self, (it being
the way of Livelihood I took to, being turned out of Magdalen College in Oxford
for my Loyalty) did print the said Book, after the printing of which a great
part was seized in Mr. Simmonds's Lodgings, and he, though in a Shepherd's
Habit, was so far discovered, as that he was pursued into Great Carter-lane, by
the Rebels, where he took Refuge, and the bloody Villains fired two Pistols at
him, which frighted him up Stairs, and out of the Garret Window he made his
escape over the Houses. And I do further say, that I never heard, nay, that I
am sure, that Dr. Gauden never was concerned in that Book, by which Mr.
Milbourn and my self printed it, and that we had no part of the Copy from Dr.
Walker, for it was that transcribed by the aforesaid Mr. Odert we printed it by.

Test Jac. Clifford,
In the Presence of Luke Milbourn, Clerk, Margaret Hollingworth.

And now I think this is enough as to Mr. Simmonds; there is but one thing
worthy of Remark, (for the other about Colonel Rich is trifling) and that is,
That Mr. Simmonds was gone from Rain some years before 48, and therefore could
not send for Dr. Gauden as a Neighbor, to communicate the King's Book to him.

This Story, though true in the main, was not so punctually delivered as it
ought to have been, and I quickly saw my Error, after the Book was out, though
I did not say that Mr. Simmonds sent for the Dr. to Rain, the Living out of
which he was sequestered for his Loyalty in 43.

Now, you must understand, that Dr. Gauden was presented to the Living of
Bocking in 41, and as I am well informed, he had his first presentation from
the Parliament, but not looking upon it as a safe Hold for so great and
reputable a Benefice, which is called a Deanery, he, by the Intercession of
Friends, at last, procured a Presentation from Archbishop Laud, the rightful
Patron to it, then in the Tower, at which place he contracted a Friendship
with, as well as became a Neighbor to Mr. Simmonds at Rain, which I am told
is not Two Miles from Bocking, and it was in London, after he had received the
King's Book, that he sent for his former Neighbor Gauden, and communicated,
and lent him for some days that Book: And, pray what mighty Error is there in
this, for Dr. Walker to take such an Advantage from? I wish he had committed no
greater throughout his whole Book, and then I am sure it would have not swelled
to 37 Pages; for, if he had writ nothing but Truth, a Nut-shell would have held
it all.

And thus much for Mr. Simmonds's Story, in which, I hope, by Living
Testimonies, I have made good what I asserted, and proved Dr. Walker's Say-soes
but mere Fictions of his own.

I, but still Dr. Gauden said he composed and framed the whole Book to serve
the King, and that Good, that Pious man Dr. Walker does assert it, and his
words weigh more with us, say the Common-wealths-men, than a Thousand (though
living) Testimonies to the contrary. I, but soft and fair Gentlemen, I say and
will prove it by a better Evidence than Dr. Walker's can be supposed to be,
that Dr. Gauden, after he was Bishop of Exeter, did say the quite contrary, and
did justify it to be the King's Book; and that if ever he told Dr. Walker he
made it, he spoke that which is false to one or the other, and therefore his
Credit ought not to be relied on at all.

Dr. Walker has forced me to this, or else Bishop Gauden's Ashes should for me
have lain peaceably and honorably in the Grave; but Dr. Gauden's Reputation is
a mere Trifle when put in the Scales with the Honor of King Charles the First.

Know therefore, Reader, that understanding the Reverend Mr. Long, Prebendary,
as I take it, of Exeter, was well acquainted with Dr. Gauden, when Bishop of
Exeter, and had many free Discourses and Communications with him, and sometimes
about King Charles the First, and more particularly about his Book, to whom
Bishop Gauden declared, it could be the Book of none but the King himself;
hearing of which before I ever thought of so bold a Man and audacious a
Slanderer as the Essex Dr. proved afterward by his Book to be, I made bold the
21st of April, the very day after the publishing of Walker's Book, to write to
Mr. Long, desiring him to let me know whether Dr. Gauden had ever declared and
asserted any such thing in Conversation with him? who was pleased to answer
mine by the next Post, and to referr me to his Letters he had sent to Dr. Good
all, the Physician in Charterhouse-yard, upon whom I waited, and who was
pleased, upon my desire, to give me out of Mr. Long's two Letters these two
Transcripts.

I Had the Hap to be acquainted with Bishop Gauden, as long as he was our
Diocesan, and I have heard him often affirm, that he was fully convine'd, that
the (...) was entirely that King's Work.

Exon, March 23. 1691/2 Tho. Long.


And in another Letter thus:

I Can affirm on my own Knowledge, that Bishop Gauden did affirm it to be his
full Belief, that the (...) was the King's own Work.

Exon, April 15. 1692 Tho. Long.


And if the Reader of these two Accounts be desirous to know who Mr. Long is, I
must tell him, that he is an Ancient, Grave, Reverend Divine, well known for
his Truth and Honesty; one who, as he is a professed Member of the Church of
England, so he has always been true to the Doctrine and Discipline of it in
his Preaching and Practice, and not like my Adversary, who I know (for I was
personally acquainted with him) was an Encourager of, and a Comrade principally
with those who had no kindness for the Church at all.

I have but one thing more which is matter of Fact to answer, and that is his
Story about Major Huntington: He tells you how he met him at Tunbridge, upon
what account he visited him, and what passed betwixt the Major and himself,
when the rest of the Company were engaged in their Divertisements; in which he
takes great care of not being contradicted by any Stander by, for still his
bare Word and Credit are the only things to be relied upon, so vain a thing is
Man.

Well, the purport of the Discourse is, That the Major denies all that was said
of him by Sir William Dugdale, or any others, as to the Papers relating to the
King's Book. Well done Dr. Walker; if thou ever had a man alone with thee,
undoubtedly he was always on thy side, and thou were always in the right, and
when the man was dead, would assume the confidence to print it.

Now, What must a man say in this case? Must he give the famous Dr. Walker the
Lie, and say, the Major never said these words; and that because he said the
contrary to others, who have attested it in the most solemn and serious manner?
Truly this looks very hard upon the Memory of such a man, say the
Common-wealths-men, as Dr. Walker.

Well, but by the good Leave of all Dr. Walker's Believers and Admirers, I will
here, in the Fear and Presence of God, tell this Story:

That the last year, when Dr. Walker, by living in London at Alderman bury, had
been by his vain and rash, his false and undutiful Talking, an occasion of the
Clergy-mens and others Defense of the King's Book, amongst other Confirmations
of the Truth of the Book, this Story was told me by a certain Nonconformist
Minister, to wit, what Major Huntington told him with his own Mouth, that he
procured some Papers that made up part of his Royal Book afterward, from the
Hands of my Lord Fairfax the Parliaments General, which were taken after Nazeby
Fight, and kept by my Lord Fairfax himself; and that afterward he the said
Major Huntington presented them to the King with his own Hand. This Story I
remember as well as any thing I saw done or heard spoken all the last year: I
spare the man's Name for particular Reasons; but if ever I be called by
Authority to name him, I will do it, and depose the Truth of his saying so,
upon my Oath.

I have now, and I hope to all good men's satisfaction, made out Matter of Fact
against Dr. Walker's Assertions, and doubt not but from henceforth, if the
Party, that have taken occasion to triumph over the Dust of King Charles the
First, from this vain, shuffling, proud, and inconsistent Book of Dr. Walker's,
will not believe what I have said yet, that they will have either the Modesty,
the Prudence, or Henesty not to rail at and revile him, who was one of the
best, wisest, and most pious Princes that over sat upon a Throne, and
consequently least deserved the hard Fate that he met withal from Sons of
Belial.

I have but two things more to add, and then I have done.

I am very well assured, and that from a very good Hand, that Dr. Dillingham
many years Fellow and Master of Emanuel-College in Cambridge, did wait upon the
King after he was seized by the Army in 47, and when the King was walking in
the Garden, had by a special Favor from those about the King, admittance into
his Bedchamber, where he saw and read under the King's own Hand, fresh writ, a
whole Chapter of the King's Book; which is a great Testimony, considering the
Truth and Piety of Dr. Dillingham, throughout his whole Life, who never was a
vainglorious man, hunting after Popularity. And further, I have a Commission
from the present Bishop of Gloucester, Dr. Fowler, to present the World with
this Narrative, from an Original drawn up and attested by himself, which has a
great deal of weight in it, considering the former Testimonies.

About Twenty eight Years since, I received the following Account from Mrs.
Keighly of Albro-Hatch in Barking Parish in Essex, viz.
THAT she had a Servant, who went from her into the Parliament Army, and was
made a Captain, who giving her a Visit, some time before the Murder of the
King, told her, that he laid down his Commission; and she demanding the Reason
why, he replied, That his Conscience would no longer permit him to keep it. She
again asking him what it was that had dissatisfied him, he replied, That
whereas he had been made to believe that the King was a very bad man, he was
now abundantly assured, that he is an excellent good man. She enquiring what
induced him to judge so well of the King, he told her, That he was appointed to
stand every Morning at His Majesty's Bedchamber Door, when he was a Prisoner
in the Isle of Wight, and observing for several days after he was set at his
Post, that the King went into his Closet quickly after he was dressed, and
there staid a considerable time, and then went down into the Garden, and walked
there a pretty while, and perceiving that he still left the Key in his Closet
Door, he adventured to go in, and found that he had been penning most devout
and pious Meditations and Prayers, which he fell to reading, and read on till
he saw the King return into the Walk that leads toward his Chamber, (for the
Closet Window looked into the Garden.) And thus he the said Captain did for
several Mornings after, and read from time to time the King's Mornings Work,
till he came to a Resolution, no longer to be such a Prince's Jailer. Mrs.
Keighly farther told me, that he gave such an account of these Meditations and
Prayers, that she was confident they were printed in (...), after she came to
read that Book. This Mrs. Keighly was a very religious and pious Gentlewoman,
and as discreet and prudent.

This I attest, Edward Fowler, D. D.
June 15. 1691.
And now I leave the whole thing in the Unprejudiced Reader's Hands, to judge
betwixt me and the late Dr. Walker; and if some men will be still incredulous,
I here offer my self to stand to the Verdict of Twelve Neighbour-Ministers, of
Dr. Walker in Essex, and will give up the Cause if they bring me in guilty; and
I am sure it is a Corner of the Kingdom, wherein live as learned and virtuous
Clergymen as any are in such a spot of Ground in the Kingdom.

POSTSCRIPT.
READER,
THere is one thing I omitted which in my Conversation with Mrs. Simmonds she
acquainted me with, and that was being at Dinner some years since, at a
Citizens House, he like one of the Faction, and greedy to lessen Monarchy by
aspersing King Charles the First, told her, if she would confess the Truth,
that her Husband made the Book called the King's, there were some Hundreds of
pounds at her Service; which she, knowing her Husband's Honesty in his
Deathbed Assertions scorned, and told him she was not to be bribed by never so
much, to so great a Lie.

I wish Dr. Walker had been as stout to have resisted Temptations to Revenge
and Vainglory, Revenge against a Church to which he was never true; for he was
an Enemy within our Gates, and then I am sure the World would not have been
pestered with a Book stuffed with so many notorious Falsehoods.

FINIS.

