THE HOLY TIME OF CHRISTMAS Defended, Against NON-CONFORMISTS, and all others
its Prophaners and Opposers.

OR, A Discourse, showing, That a Religious Observation of CHRISTMAS is
Apostolical, and Worthy every good Christian.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCLXXVI.

Christmas Defended against it is Prophaners.
UNhappy times in which we live! That we should all believe, that sixteen
Hundred years ago, a certain Man, who was also God, called Jesus, was born in a
Stable for the Salvation of Mankind; and yet, that there should be certain
amongst us, who should count it a piece of Religion, not to keep Holy the Day,
on the which our said Great Redeemer was born: O unhappy Times! O cross Manners
of mis-instructed Zelots! Does not Reason, the Light of God within us, tell us,
that if the Consubstantial Son of the Almighty, has been so Good, as for our
sakes to become Man, clothing himself with the Rags of our Mortality: We
ought with Joy and Thanksgiving to remember so high a Favor? And does not the
same Reason and Experience teach us, that the setting a part that particular
Day, as near as we can guess, on which some notable Accident has happened, in
Memory of it, does strangely help us, more livelily, freshly, and affectionatly
to commemorate the said Wonder? Tell me heartily your Thoughts. Should we by no
other Memorial but the History of Boscobel, relate to Posterity, the wonderful
Restoration of our Gracious Sovereign, how little knowledge, and how faint a
Belief think you would there be all over England, of that strange Wonder and
all it is circumstances a thousand years hence? We cannot reasonably imagine, but
the generality of the common People would be wholly ignorant of it; and we may
without rash Judgment surmize, there would not want Cavilling Wits, who would
call in question the whole Story, and for some seemingly, unlikely
circumstances, condemn the whole Narration as fabulous, or at best, of very
doubtful and uncertain credit: So that in effect, Posterity some Ages hence,
would have little more Belief of that undoubted History, than we have now of
the Fable of Guy of Warwick, But let us go on as we have begun, to commemorate
that strange accident, with a Day set a part on purpose, Religiously to be
observed in all the Parishes of England, by public Prayers, and Sermons,
suited to the occasion, and it is not possible, but till Doomsday come, there
shall be an assured Belief, and fresh Memory of it in the generality of all
English Hearts. Has Nature then made us so cunning for ever to keep in memory
what we have a mind should never be forgotten? And can you think Grace, or the
Holy Ghost was wanting to make the first Planters of Christianity so wise, as
to think upon a happy Expedient; how all Generations all the World over, might
have a fresh Memory, and assured Faith of the wonderful Nativity of their Lord
and Savior; especially when the lively Memory of the said their Lord's
Nativity, with all it is circumstances is strangely conducing to the Salvation
of the World? But why do I urge the authority of Reason and Nature? Did not
infinite unerring Wisdom, and the God of Nature use this very Means, to
propagate to posterity the Memory of the stupendous Wonders, he wrought amidst
his beloved People the Jews, by the hand of his Servant Moses? Read from the
sixth Chapter to the fourteenth, in the Book of Exodus, and take notice of
those strange Wonders Almighty God wrought, to compel Pharaoh, to let his
chosen People go into the Wilderness to worship him; turning all the Rivers of
Egypt into Blood, filling the whole Country, in their very houses with Froggs,
etc. and finally, killing all their Firstborn both of Man and Beasts. And now
because a lively Memory of these Wonders to all Generations, would be of
admirable benefit to every Age; as well to preserve in them a strong actual
Faith of the true God, the Author of all those Miracles, as a Holy Dread of the
same Divine Majesty, and care to observe his Commandments: Almighty God
ordained that for ever, that very day, on which his People came out of Egypt,
should be Solemn and Sacred, and observed with such Ceremonies, as might make
Posterity even see their Ancestors going out of Egypt many hundreds of years
before. They must kill a Lamb, and eat the flesh of the same Lamb with
Unleavened Bread, etc. in token of what their Ancestors did in like manner in
Egypt, and to remember the great haste in which they departed, with unleavened
Dough on their backs: and for ever offer to Almighty God their Firstborn, both
of Man and Beasts, in memory of his killing the Firstlings of the Egyptians,
and sparing theirs. And this account they were to give of this Ceremonial
observance; when they should in future Generations be asked the reason of it by
their Children. Exodus 13. v. 14. When thy Son shall ask thee to Morrow, saying,
What is this? Thou shall answer him; in a strong hand the Lord brought us out
of the Land of Egypt: For when Pharaoh was hardened, and would not let us go,
the Lord killed all the Firstborn in the Land of Egypt, from the First born of
Man to the Firstling of Beasts; therefore I sacrifice to the Lord all that
opens the Womb of the Masculine Sex, and all the First-begotten of my Sons I
redeem. Such a provision as this, made it utterly impossible to the Jews, ever
to forget for all Generations, what the Almighty had wrought in favor of their
Ancestors in bringing them out of Egypt. And he must be out of his Wits, or
devoid of common sense, that could question a matter of Fact, so solemnly
immemorially commemorated, and so particularly recounted in a Book; which a
whole People time out of mind has venerated as a most true History. For had the
Rivers of Egypt not been turned into Blood, (the like I say of the rest of the
Wonders) no man could have had the impudence to have committed to VVriting as
most certain Truths, what thousands must necessarily have known to be most
notorious Lies. Much less could any one have prevailed with many thousands, in
a most serious and solemn manner to commemorate yearly with thanksgiving to
God, what they all knew had never happened.

And can it now enter into any Christian man's heart to think, that Moses was
more faithful and careful to preserve in the Memories of the Jews, the Wonders
the Almighty wrought to deliver that particular People from under the Bondage
of Pharaoh: Then was Jesus Christ and his Apostles, to keep in the fresh memory
of all Christians, the stupendous Wonders wrought to deliver the whole
World, from the Eternal slavery of Sin and Devils? Let it be. Four of our
Lords followers, have left written Memorials of his Birth, Life, Death,
Resurrection, and Ascension into Heaven. But had all his first Missionaries to
the World, ordained in every County converted by them to the Christian Faith,
that they should yearly spend the Day of his Nativity (which they might easily
learn from his Holy Mother) in Prayer, Reading, Hearing, and Meditating that
Mystery with all it is circumstances, and the ends for which it was so wrought:
Would not such an Observation as this in every Christian Parish in the World,
have strangely conduced to a pious, profitable, grateful memory of that Miracle
of Love, of God's becoming a little Infant for the Salvation of the World? And
this methinks should be sufficient to satisfy any reasonable man, that the
keeping Holy, by a yearly Observation, of the sacred time of our deer Lord's
Nativity, was not only worthy the Holy Apostles Institution; but also that it
cannot be well understood, how they could be faithful in their Office, without
the making of such an Ordination, or at least without leaving Power and Charge
to their Successors so to ordain. Such Ordinations being absolutely necessary
to posterity at a long distance; howsoever, less needful they might be, to them
who lived so near the time, when that and the other Mysteries of our Lord Jesus
were acted. Nor let us deceive our selves and posterity, by pretending to
remember our Lord's Nativity every Day; too sad Experience telling us, this is
the way seldom or never, soundly and heartily to think of it. In our own
Country, what is become of all memory of Gowry's Conspiracy, for want of a day
to remember it? And had not the fifth of November been set a part particularly
to remember the Gunpowder Treason, but had every one been left to remember it
every day in all likelihood the memory of that horrid Plot had been by this
time quite lost in the memories of the vulgar people.

But all that I have hitherto been saying, only shows, that the appointment of
a particular time to remember our Lord's Nativity, was worthy of the Holy
Apostles; but what evidence have we that the Holy Apostles have actually made
any such Ordination? Why, what evidence would you have? Indeed they have
written no Book to recommend the Observation of any particular day to
Posterity; but if they have taught such an Observation by word of mouth, to all
the Countries in the World, where they preached the Gospel; is not this
sufficient? Let us then in our thoughts, Travel into the several Christian
Countries of the World, and see what they observe. And first let us take a view
of our own Native Country, and enquire when we began, upon the 25th. of
December, every year particularly, to lay aside all our worldly Affairs, and
with Prayers, and other Holy Exercises, to remember our deer Lord's Birth? The
oldest man alive, can tell us no beginning of this our practice. No Chronicles,
no Annals give us any account of it is beginning neither. They tell us indeed,
that St. Joseph of Arimathea, not long after our Blessed Savior's Departure
into Heaven, brought Christianity into our Country; but they do not tell us of
any one since that time, who enjoined us to keep Christmas Day Holy. The same
Annals tell us, that about the year six hundred, one Austin, with certain
Companions came from Rome to convert our Nation, the overrun by the Infidel
Saxons, from Paganism to Christianity. They tell us also, that the same Austin,
found certain British Christians driven into Wales by the Saxons; and make
mention also how the said Austin, and the Christian Britains, differed about
certain Ceremonies in the administration of Baptism; and moreover, upon what
Sunday they should keep Easter Day; both agreeing Easter Day was to be kept;
the one holding upon the 14th. of the Moon of March, in case it happened on the
Sunday, the other not till the Sunday following. But now had they differed
about the keeping of Christmas Day, and that so, as one should have said, a day
was to be kept, and precisely the 25th. of December, and the other should have
contended no Day at all was to be kept: This would have been a more notorious
Disagreement, than upon what Sunday Easter was to be solemnized; and
consequently would have been taken notice of by our Historiographers. Hence I
infer, the Britains kept holy Christmas Day, before the coming of Austin. For
it cannot be doubted, but Austin brought from Rome the Religion that was then
practiced at Rome. And it is manifest that at Rome, they then, and many years
before kept Holy the day of our Lord's Nativity. For we have Sermons preached
at Rome upon the day of our Lord's Nativity, by St. Leo Pope, above a hundred
years before. Nor let any one be afraid of Rome, and her way of Worship thus
early; the Church of England willingly appeals to the Faith and Practice of
Rome, and other Christian Cities, for the first six hundred years after our
Blessed Savior. Besides, had the Observation of Christmas in our Nation, been
begun since our Conversion to Christianity by Austin, our Chronicles would make
mention, what National Synod or Council, commanded it to be so universally
observed, as it has been time out of mind in every Parish in England. Should
any Forreiner that comes into our Country, take notice of the standing of our
Plows, the shutting up of our Shops, and the frequenting of Divine Service in
every Parish, upon the fifth of November, he would instantly conclude, we never
fell upon such a Practice by chance; but that it was so commanded and ordained
by some Sovereign power Ecclesiastical or Civil. The like Discourse will every
rational man make, upon the general Religious Observations of Christmas Day: To
wit, that we never fell upon such an Observance by chance; but either we were
all taught so by the first Planters of Christanity in our Nation; or enjoined
so to do by some Supreme Authority since; but our Annals making no mention of
any such Ordination, it is rightly concluded, we were so taught by our first
Christian Masters.

But if you give a little more scope to your Thoughts, and Consider that not
only England, but Holland, Germany, France, Spain, Italy, and other Christian
Country's, have Immemorially from their first Conversion to Christianity, kept
Holy the Day of our Lords Nativity: Nor is there any mention of any General
Council, or other Universal Authority's imposing any such Observation upon
them: this Reflection will compel you to acknowledge this Practice must needs
have been taught, the several Nations of Christendom, by the first Preachers of
the Gospel the Holy Apostles. And remarkable to my present purpose, is the Rule
of the Great St. Augustine: Whatsoever we find, universally practiced over all
the Christian World, we safely Conclude, either to have been Ordained by the
Apostles or some General Council, for that it cannot be presumed, that whole
Nations could by chance fall upon the Religious Observation of the same Day, or
other Ceremonial Right. And he whom such a Discourse as this does not satisfy;
but he still Doubts and Disputes; How can he be sure the Apostles ever taught
any such Observation? Such an one I say let him take heed; for he is
dangerously disposed to throw away the whole New Testament. For how can he tell
St. Matthew wrote this Book, St. Luke that, and so of the rest, but by the
universal immemorial Testimony of several Christian Countries. If Almighty God
will Oblige me to keep such Days Holy, as were so appointed, and reverence
such Books as Divine, as were by Divine Inspiration written, sixteen Hundred
Years before I was born, he cannot reasonably expect I should know and
distinguish either the one or the other, but by the immemorial Testimonys of my
Ancestors in several Countries. But how at the Day of Judgment I should Answer
the refusal of such a Book, or the Non-Observance of such a Day; So
immemorially recommended by my Ancestors, I cannot tell. It belongs to the
providence of our Blessed Savior to take care, that no Age should be so
devilishly malicious, universally to tell their Children, a Book of their own
forging (the like may be said of a Holy Day or other Ritual Observance) was
written by a Holy Apostle of Jesus Christ, some hundred of Years before. One
Man may be presumed to be so Malicious, whole Nations never did, nor ever can
do any such thing. Nor does the Church of England in this differ from the
Church of Rome, as if she thought what the Apostles Writ, was of greater
Authority then what they Taught, or Ordained. She willingly admits all
Traditions, of which she can have good proof, that they come from the Apostles.
Such are the Observations of Christmas, Lent, Easter, etc.

But if Christmas Day was taught the World by the Apostles, how comes it to
pass we have no mention of it in all the New Testament? What days were to be
Observed by the Jews, are made mention of, over and over in the old Testament;
how comes it to pass, if Christmas Day, or other Days be to be Observed by
Christians, we find no mention of them in any of the Books of the New
Scripture, Reflect upon the nature of the Books of the two Testaments, and the
Reason is Manifest For if you consider the Old Testament, you will find not
only Historical Books, such are the books of Judges, the Kings etc. and moral
Books which treat of good Life, etc. such are the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes and
others: But besides these, there are Ritual Books, which by the very subject of
them every one sees, their Design was to describe the external Mosaical
Worship, as to Observation of Days, Priestly Garments, Sacrifices, etc. Such
are the Books of Exodus, Leviticus, and Deuteronomy. And therefore no wonder if
you find exactly set down, what Days that people was to keep Holy, How their
Priests were to be Consecrated, and how Vested in time of Divine Service, etc.
But now cast your Eye upon all the Books of the New Testament, and you will not
find one that you can reasonably presume, the Author of it had a Design in it,
to Describe the External Worship of the Gospel: What days for Example, we
Christians are to observe in memory of Christian Mercies and Misters, what
Garments our Priests are to use in Divine Service, etc. And yet the Light of
God within us tells us, such Institutions are very useful to increase Piety,
when Religiously Observed: and all History tells us, that immemorially in all
Nations, there have been certain external Christian Rites, not mentioned in the
Holy Scriptures, ever since the first planting of Christianity amongst them.
The four Gospels are a History of our Blessed Saviors Life and Death, who
lived as to the external Rites of Religion according to the Jewish Law, and so
we cannot reasonably in any of them expect, what Days we Christians are to
observe in the time of the Gospel. Indeed had the Acts of the Apostles been
intended as an exact Narration, how the Apostles lived as to the whole course
of their Life, what Days they kept Holy, and what Days they Fasted, etc. We
might reasonably have expected some mention there of Christmas Day and Lent:
But that Holy Book making mention only, of some few particular passages, of two
or three of the Apostles Lives; the Apostles might well keep Christmas Day and
Lent too, and teach them also to their first Converts, and yet there be a
profound silence of such Observations in the Book of their Acts. As for St.
John's Prophetical Book, it were no ways proper in it, to treat either of
Christmas Day or Lent. Though I must tell you, for ought you or I know, when
St. John says he was in the Spirit on the Lords Day, he may mean the Day of our
Lords Birth, or the yearly Easter Day of his Resurrection, as well as our
Weekly Sunday. The rest of the New Testament are certain Epistles or Letters
of spiritual Counsels written by St. Paul or some other Apostle, to particular
Persons or whole Cities, already instructed in the Christian way of Worship:
But why they should needs make mention therein of Christmas Day, I understand
not, unless perchance the Persons they wrote unto, had been deficient in
keeping it Holy.

But, does not St. Paul expressly deery the keeping of Christmass-Day, in one of
his Epistles, and tells the Christians he wrote to, he was afraid he had
labored in vain amongst them, by reason of their Superstitious Observation of
Days. Gal. 4.9, 10. How are ye Converted again to weak and beggarly Elements,
which you will Serve again? Ye observe Days, and Months, and Times and Years.
I am afraid of you, lest I should have labored amongst you in Vain. Was then
the Holy Apostle afraid, lest the Galations should leave Christianity, and
return to Judaism or Paganism, because of their Observing Christmass-Day, in
Memory of our Blessed Savior's Birth, or Lent, in Memory of his Fasting forty
Days, or Easter in Memory of his Resurrection? Is this a likely Story? Or is
it not evident from the Context, Of their returning again to weak and poor
Elements, that because of their returning to the Observation of Jewish-Dayes,
Commanded by Moses, or Pagan Days, in honor of Jupiter, Mars, or Saturn, he
was afraid they would Relinquish the Gospel, by them Received, and become Jews
again or Pagans. But, still methinks, I am afraid of Superstition, and
Will Worship, by observing a Day, which, I fear, God has never Commanded me.
But you have more reason to be afraid of Prophaners, in neglecting a Day which
you have all reason to think God has Commanded you to keep Holy, if you Reflect
well upon what I have said, above. Seeing you are Commanded to keep Holy
Christmass-Day, by doing only such Actions, as you acknowledge to be
Christianly and Good, What danger can there be of Superstition? Especially,
when you are not Taught neither, that such Actions are then more acceptable to
God Almighty, than at another times. Only, you are Commanded at that Set-Time
to do them, lest, otherwise, you should wholly omit Them. My dearest Relations
(whom I pity with my Soul) take heed whilst under pretense of Opposing
Antichrist, you be not one day found Abettors of Antichrist. Consider,
Antichrist is to Deny and Oppose Christ; and then think, Who are more like
Antichrist, those who piously observe certain Days, in Memory of the Birth,
Death, and Resurrection of Christ, or those who profane and decry all such
Days as Superstitious? Who are most likely to promote Anti-Christ's Design,
that is, to Abollish and Root all Memory of Christ out of the World, the Devout
Observers, or Irreligious Prophaners of Christian Solemnities?

But were it not better, to remember and ponder the Mystery of our Lord's
Nativity, with it is circumstances every day? No, He that would grasp many
things together, holds fast few, or perhaps none. The capacity of our Souls is
so limited, that if we would have the Thoughts of our Lord's humble Nativity
sink deep into us, and efficaciously work the spiritual Fruit they are apt to
work in us, we must entertain them, and no other but them for a good season
together, and repeat them over and over. He that will pretend to have all sorts
of spiritual Thoughts every day, will I fear, upon no day, have any to any
Spiritual purpose. Let us not pretend to be wiser than God Almighty. He ordered
the Jews, and he has ordered us Christians also, a grateful Variety of
Spiritual Seasons. Let it therefore be concluded against the Nonconformists
(the All-Merciful Jesus open their Eyes) that a Religious Observation of
Christmas, has nothing of Superstition, but a great deal of Christian Piety in
it.

And now, we are resolved Christmas ought to be kept, but how must we keep it?
If any Man keep a day, let him keep it to the Lord: So as his keeping of it may
not Contristate, but Recreate, and Rejoice his Dear and Greatest Lord: So, as
his keeping of it, may make him all the Year after, more strong and ready, to
imitate and tread in the Steps (as near as Humane-Frailty will permit,) of his
same Lord Let now this Holy time be spent, as to the far greatest part of it,
in devout Prayers, frequent Meditations upon the Mysteries of the Solemnity,
Reading Spiritual Books, Hearing Sermons suited to the occasion; Giving large
Alms to God Almighty in his poor and needy, in gratitude to him, who at this
time gave as no less than his only Son, etc. And the truth is, that which makes
many well meaning, and tenderly Conscientious Christians, to make no
distinction of this Sacred Time, from another, was the intolerable abuse of it,
by its pretended Religious Observers. Time would fail me, if I should go about
to enumerate the Debaucherys, with which this Sacred Time has been profaned.
May they never be Remembered, unless it be to VVeep for them, and to excite our
selves to make amends for them, by a double diligence in all Holy and Christian
Exercises, these Days of Christ. Had this holy Time been ever spent, according
to its Primitive Institution in more abundant Works of Piety and Charity: And
when our Spirits had been wearied out with Spiritual exercises; had we
refreshed Nature by a Festival Reflection, or some harmless Disport; but still
with a vigilant Watch in honor of the Sacred Season, so to play, as our Pastime
might not make our Great little Jesus VVeep: Had, I say, this Holy Time been
ever thus holily Observed, the Devil himself could not have had the Impudence,
to have declared against it, as Antichristian. But indeed, as it has been of
late Observed, or rather Profaned, we may without a slander, say, it was
become a truly Antichristian Time indeed.

But what Remedy then? Abandon the new profane Abuse, and tetrive the first
pious Use. But what Fruit may we expect from a Religious Observation of this
Holy Time? Observe it, as was said above, and you will be better able to tell me
afterward at Twelf-tide, then I can tell you before, on Christmass-Eve.

Gloria in Excelsis Deo.

