Magnetismus Magnus: OR, Metaphysical and Divine CONTEMPLATIONS ON THE MAGNET,
OR, LOADSTONE.

Written by Sir MATTHEW HALE, Knight, some time Lord Chief Justice of the
King's- Bench.

LONDON, Printed for William Shrowsbury, at the Bible in Duck-lane, 1695.

The PREFACE.
THE Author of this has written Three Tracts concerning the Subject of the
Magnet, or Magnetism; whereof this is the last. The First is of the Magnet it
self, which he calls Magnetismus Magneticus; the next is concerning other
Magnetisms observable in other Natural Bodies, which he calls Magnetismus
Physicus: and the last is this, which he calls Magnetismus Magnus, for what
Reason it is plain in the Book. He had received very early a special Touch of
the Divine Magnet; and from his Youth, had not only studied the Holy
Scriptures, but had moreover very industriously studied the Great Book of
Nature, in all its Particles; and besides that, that large Volume of
Providence, in the History and Chronology of the Actions and Occurrences of
Mankind upon Earth from the beginning; and all this for the very same end, for
which this little Tract was written. He is well known to have been a most
industrious Man in his own Profession of the Law, and to have made himself a
complete Master of it; and yet notwithstanding I am very well satisfied, that
the Industry and Time, which he employed in these Studies, was nothing less, if
not much more, as I verily believe, than what he employed in that laborious
Study and Practice. Hardly a Day passed over his Head, in the Times of most
pressing Business in his Profession, even the Term and the Circuits, wherein he
did not rescue some portion of time, more or less for those Studies, which he
employed in Writing or in Reading of some Book or other, in order to this end.
It was his Diversion and Recreation, if he had no Company with him, after his
Labor and Pains in his Civil Employment. The Effect of all he has left behind
him in diverse Volumes in Folio, besides many other small Tracts. Whereof this
may serve for a Specimen of his Physical Considerations; or rather of the Use
and Improvement which he makes of his Physical Observations; which he here
calls the Best and Noblest Part of True Philosophy; and very truly: though I
doubt not but we have some Pretenders to Philosophy, and to Divinity too, who
will be apt to censure him to have gone too far, and to have given too much
advantage to Enthusiasm in the latter part of this Tract. And therefore I think
fit to say something of that in this place.

We have here his Judgment and Belief of a Divine Efflux upon the
Understandings and Wills of Men, and that even among the Heathen, those so
famed for Wisdom, Justice, Piety, and Knowledge, were Illuminated and Guided by
a Divine Influence. And we have here also the Ground of this his Judgment: 1.
Observations in Nature. 2. The Sentiments of Learned and Understanding Men,
Philosophers in all Ages. 3. The Authority of the Sacred Scriptures; to which,
he elsewhere adds his own Experience. And whereas he had in some things changed
his Opinion, as he saw cause, from what it was in his younger time, this he
received early, as appears by some of his first Writings, and retained
constantly to the last, as appears by his Tr. of Humility, which he wrote upon
my Motion not long before his last Sickness. In his Tr. of Wisdom and the Fear
of God, after other Particulars of the Wisdom of the Fear of God, he adds in
the 10th. place: But besides all this, there is yet a Secret, but a most
certain Truth, that highly improveth that Wisdom, which the Fear of the Lord
brings, and that is this, That those that truly fear God have a Secret
Guidance from a higher Wisdom, than what is barely humane, namely by the Spirit
of Truth and Wisdom, that does really and truly, but secretly prevent and
direct them. And let no Man think that this is a Piece of Fanaticism. Any Man
that sincerely and truly fears Almighty God, relies upon him, calls upon him
for his Guidance and Direction, has it as really as the Son has the Counsel
and Direction of his Father: and though the Voice be not audible, nor the
Direction always perceptible to Sense, yet it is equally as real as if a Man
heard the Voice saying, This is the Way, walk in it. And this Secret Direction
of Almighty God, is principally seen in Matters relating to the Good of the
Soul: but it may also be found in the Great and Momentous Concerns of this
Life, which a Good Man, that fears God and begs his Direction, shall very
often, if not at all times, find. And in his Tr. of Humility, speaking of this
Guidance and Direction of Almighty God, in relation to a double End; 1. The
Salvation and Happiness of the Soul. 2. In all the Walk and Concern of this
Life: As to this latter he says; The Air does not more naturally yield to our
Attraction in Respiration, or to insinuate it self into those spaces that are
receptive of it, than the Divine Assistance, Guidance, and Beneficence, does to
the Desires, Exigencies, and Wants of an humble Soul, sensible of its own
Emptiness and Deficiency, and imploring the Direction, Guidance, and Blessing
of the most Wise and Bountiful God. And then adds, I can call my own Experience
to Witness, that even in the External Actions, Occurrences, and Incidences of
my whole Life, I was never disappointed of the best Guidance and Direction,
when in Humility and Sense of my own Deficiency, and diffidence of my own
Ability to direct my self, or to grapple with the Difficulties of my Life, I
have with Humility and Sincerity implored the Secret Direction and Guidance of
the Divine Wisdom and Providence. This he speaks of the secret Guidance by the
Spirit of Truth, by Illumination of the Understanding and Inclination of the
Will; but there is another Secret Guidance by a Providential Disposal of
Occurrences, which he does not here exclude, yet seems more especially to
intend, when he afterward appeals to the Experience of others.

I have also observed as well from what he has said upon several Occasions, as
from diverse Passages in his Writings, that he had from his younger time, in all
his Life, not only a great respect to this secret Guidance of the Spirit of
God, but also so great a Sense of the Malice, Subtlety, and Energy of the Evil
Spirits, as made him very vigilant against them. And I doubt not but his
constant and reverend Attendance to that Holy Conduct, and his Vigilance
against the Wiles and Devices of those invisible Enemies, were a principal
Means whereby he became so Great and Good a Man as he was.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Reason and Order of this Tract Page 1 The Magnetical Manuduction unto the
Sovereign Being in Ordine Causarum Efficientium Page 7 The Evidence of the
Existence of the Glorious GOD, from the Supposition of a Self-moving Principle
in Nature Page 13 The Evidence of the Existence of a Deity from the Excellent
Ordination of these Powers to their several Ends and Uses Page 30 The Evidences
of the Wisdom, Power, and Goodness of GOD resulting from the Consideration of
the Parts of the Universe, and particularly of the Magnetical Parts. The First
Instance Page 37 The Wonderful Wisdom and Power of God appearing in the
admirable and various Motions of the Magnet Page 52 Touching the Reason and
Method of the ensuing Discourse Page 64 Concerning Divine Magnetism Page 68
Concerning the several Instances and Means of the Conversion of the Soul to God
Page 74 Concerning the Natural Means of the Soul's Conversion to Almighty God
Page 77 Concerning the Reasonable or Intellectual Means of Converting the Soul
to God Page 83 Touching the Rational Instances and Motives of the Conversion of
the Soul to God, upon the Account of the Works of Nature and Providence Page 88
Touching the Second Means of Conversion of the Soul to God, namely Divine
Revelation Page 101 Touching the Reasonableness of the Christian Religion, and
the sutableness thereof to the Reduction of the Soul to its due State, Position
and Happiness Page 120 Concerning the Supernatural Means of retaining the Soul
in its due Respect and Position to Almighty God, and of the Reduction thereof
unto it Page 131 The Conclusion Page 141 Upon Psalm. 86.8. Neither are there any
Works like thy Works 151
Magnetismus Magnus: OR, Metaphysical and Divine CONTEMPLATIONS Upon the
Consideration of the MAGNET.
CHAP. I.
The Reason and Order of this Tract.

WHEN I look into the Writings of the Ancient and some Modern Philosophers,
that have written touching the Works of Nature, I find in them very many and
excellent Enquiries into Causes and Effects, and excellent Natural Discoveries
touching them: And I need go no further for the Evidence thereof, than the
Books of Aristotle, de Naturali Auditu, de Meteoris, de Anima, de Generatione
and Corruptione, de Generatione Animalium, de Partibus Animalium, and the rest
of his Physical Discourses.

But in most of their Discourses, that which is short in them, is indeed the
best, and truest, and noblest part of true Philosophy, namely, the carrying up
of the admirable Works of Nature, and their Regiment, to the Supreme Cause of
all Things; and the Glorifying of that God that has instituted, and still
continues that Law and Order, which we call the Law of Nature, but is in truth
no other than the wise Institution of the Supreme Legislator, fitted to every
Being in their Creation, in the greatest Beauty and Convenience, and to several
excellent Ends.

The Universe, and all the Parts thereof, as they had their Origination from
God, so they are all of them full of admirable Order and Usefulness, and do all
proclaim, as well as they can, the Power, Wisdom and Goodness of their Author.
It is a goodly and glorious Temple, which in every particular, and in the whole
Compagination of it, shows forth the Excellence of the Architect.

But because all these Works, though made with admirable Order and Wisdom, yet
every Integral thereof has not Understanding to consider their Own or the
World's Beauty and Order, nor actively to carry up the Praise and Glory of
their Being and Beauty to their Author, the Glorious God has placed in this
goodly Temple certain Intelligent Beings, Angels and Men, for these great Uses.
First, To behold the goodly Frame of the World, and intellectively to consider
it. Secondly, To carry up these Works of God to their proper Cause and Author.
Thirdly, To Admire and Magnify the Power, the Wisdom and Goodness of God in
all his Works.

Man therefore is endued not only with a Sentient Nature to behold the Works of
Nature, but also with an Intelligent, Inquisitive, Reasonable Soul, to observe
and consider them, and the admirable Wisdom and Order that appears in them, and
to carry them up to their Wise and Bountiful Author, and is placed in the
Temple of this Lower World, as the Priest of that part of the Creation, for
himself, and in the behalf of the rest of the Creatures, to Magnify and
Glorify the Great Creator, and to carry up to him their common Tribute of
Praise and Glory.

And indeed, this is the best Part, and truest Use of all Philosophy. And
although a due Attention unto the Works of Nature will readily prompt any
considerate Man to this part of Philosophy, yet herein the Excellency of the
Holy Scriptures, and the true Philosophy, that we may learn therein, exceeds
all other Philosophical Discourses of the Ancient Philosophers: It carries up
all the Works, which we usually call Works of Nature, and their admirable
Order, Laws and Regiment, to the Great Creator and Governor of them, and
teaches Mankind their Duty thereupon, and to present the Glory and Praise of
the whole Creation, and all the Creatures therein, to the Sovereign Lord of all
Things. Psalm. 104.24. O Lord, how wonderful are thy works! in wisdom have thou
made them all: the earth is full of thy riches. Psalm. 107. O that men would
praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children
of men. Psalm. 111.2. The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them
that have pleasure therein. Psalm. 92.5. O Lord, how great are all thy works!
and thy thoughts are very deep.

It is a True and Wise Saying of that Excellent Person, Sir Francis Bacon, That
though a little Philosophy may make a Man an Atheist, yet a deep Search into
it, will bring a Man to the Acknowledgment and Veneration of God. He therefore
that rests in the bare Search and Prospect of the Phenomenon of Nature, without
running of them up to the Author and Lawgiver of Nature, is not gone half way
in true Philosophy, nor has attained that End, that ought principally to be
minded in his Natural Enquiries.

Some of those that have gone before me in Magnetical Philosophy, as
Grandamicus, Kircherus, and Mr. Ward, have left me an Example of improving this
little Portion of Natural Philosophy into Divine Speculations: I shall
therefore take the liberty to close my Magnetical Observation with something of
the like nature, though I shall not go altogether in the same Path that they
have gone; as will appear in the several succeeding Chapters, and their
Contents.

There is not the least Rivulet, but if I follow it downward in its course, it
will bring me either mediately or immediately to the Ocean, as the Term of its
Motion: And yet if I follow it upward, first to its apparent Fountain, and then
thorough those Anfractus Terrestres, that feed that Fountain, it will bring me,
by necessary consequence, to the Ocean, as its Original. Eccles. 1.7. All the
rivers run into the sea, yet the sea is not full; into the place from whence
the rivers came, thither they return again.

As all Secondary Beings are directed to the Honor and Glory of Almighty God,
and of his Goodness, Wisdom and Power, as the chief End of their Being; so they
all recognize him, as the Original of their Being. And therefore he that duly
considers the least Work in Nature, as he shall find in it the Footsteps and
Indications of an admirable Wisdom and Goodness; so, if he follow it upward,
and trace it through the various Meanders of Causes, he shall be constrained to
fix and terminate the Original of that Being, and of that Goodness and Wisdom
that is discovered in it, into the Efficiency of the Infinite, Glorious and
Eternal God. Every spire of Grass, every the most inconsiderable Molecula
Seminalis in Nature, will teach us this Lesson.

And I shall therefore apply my self to this petty Particle of Nature, the
MAGNET, and see whether, by the unwinding of this little Bottom, I can arrrive
at the same Discoveries.

And first I shall begin with the Manuduction that this small Clue lends me, to
bring me to the Acknowledgment of a Deity, a Deity of most admirable Wisdom,
Power and Goodness, as its Cause.

CHAP. II.
The Magnetical Manuduction unto the Sovereign Being in Ordine Causarum
Efficientium.

WHEN I take into my Hand a small Versorium, that turns its Cuspis always to
the North, wherever I put it, and I have another of the like Metal and Make,
that stands at whatsoever Position I put it, I presently think with my self,
that there is some Cause which makes the Difference in the Motions of these
Versoria, that in Matter and Figure are entirely the same. And upon a further
Enquiry, I find the former was touched with the South Pole of a Magnet, which
gave it this North Verticity. I then enquire how the Magnet came by this
Virtue, not only to convert it self to a Polar Position, but to infuse the same
Quality, though with a different Termination, into the Versorium, by its Touch.
And upon further search, I find that this Magnet was taken out of the Earth;
and by several other Instances, I find, that the Earth has not only a Polar
Direction of its own to the North and South, but is effective of the same in
the Magnet, and in some other Bodies, that are receptive of such a Virtue and
Disposition: And therefore I do without any great difficulty conclude, That the
Earth is surely a Magnetical Body, endued with a Magnetical Virtue, which gives
it self a Polar Direction, and gives the like to my Magnet.

Hitherto now I have made a fair progressive Discovery of Efficients: The
Versorium receives its Magnetism from the Magnet, and the Magnet from the Earth.

But now, from whence has this vast Body of the Earth acquired this Magnetical
Vigor?

To say it has it barely from the Modification of its Matter, as its Figure,
Texture of Parts, Site, Position, is utterly unsatisfactory to any Man
unprejudiced by Fancy. For, 1 st. Virtue and Power is a thing quite of another
nature from Matter: Matter is a dull, unactive Thing; if it have Motion, it
must be put into Motion by somewhat else, or it will everlastingly rest. 2 dly.
Again, since the Motions of the Particles of Matter, when put into Motion, must
needs be tumultuous and various, it is impossible that they should produce such
a regular, stable and fixed determinate Direction in the Earth it self, much
less produce such regular, yet various, Motions and Inclinations in the Magnet.

It remains therefore, that either the Earth has this Virtue primitively and
simply from it self, or it must be impressed upon it by some other Powerful
Effective Agent.

It is impossible that the Earth should be primarily Effective of its own
Magnetism, for these Reasons. 1 st. It is apparent, That as the Earth it self
is determinated in its Moles, and Figure, and Position; so its Magnetism is
determined to these, and these Directions, Dispositions and Inclinations. It
must needs be, that whatsoever is determined in its Existence or Operations,
must be determined by somewhat else than by it self. 2 dly. Which is an
Inforcement of the former Reason, That which can from it self communicate to it
self an intrinsic Virtue of this kind, what hinders, but that it may
communicate to it self an Intrinsic Power of any other kind, and so in effect
to be Infinite in Power? For why should it rest in this or that particular
Modification, or Extent of the Power it gives it self?

And it will be all one as to this, whether we should suppose the Earth, were
it possible, to be Eternal, or made up in some determinate portion of Time: For
whatsoever has Limits of its Being or Power, must have a Cause of his Being,
that must give it its Determination and Limitation. If any thing that is finite
and limited in Extent, Figure, Virtue, Vigor, though it were possible to be
Eternal, must yet be an Eternal Effect, and have an Eternal Cause, that must
give it its bound and circumscription. And therefore Aristotle, though he
erroneously held the Eternity of the World, in the same consistence as now it
is, yet always concluded it to be but an Effect of an Efficient, though a
necessary Effect of an Efficient necessarily productive of it.

It remains therefore, that if the Earth had this Intrinsic Virtue, Vigor or
Magnetism, it must have it from some other Efficient: Its Motions are indeed
the Effect of its Virtue, but its Virtue is the Effect of something else. And
if it had it from an Efficient, 1 st. It had it from an Intelligent Efficient;
for it is a Power or Virtue ordinata ad Finem, as we shall see hereafter; and
consequently, whatever Being it was that gave the Earth its Intrinsic
Magnetism, it must be such an Efficient or Agent as acts ex Intelligentia and
Intention. Though Irrational Agents are directed to an End, yet the Prime
Agent is that which directs to that End.

2 dly. It must be an Agent of a strange and admirable Power and Strength, that
could dart such an Activity or Virtue into the vast Body of the Earth, of above
Twenty two thousand Miles circumference. And if it be said, Though we know not
what that Agent might be, that might impress this Vigor Magneticus upon the
Earth, yet it may be some Natural Agent, without having recourse to a Deity,
though we know not what this Cause is: possibly it may be an Effect of the Sun;
possibly it may be some Polar Influence from the Heavens; possibly a kind of
Irradiation from the common Axis of the Universe; possibly some Magnetical
Points in the Heaven, that may influence the Earth with this Magnetism.

I answer; Though such things as these may be supposed, yet they are not
proved; and therefore we cannot easily assent to any of these Suppositions,
without Proof: but still it must remain as an unshaken Truth, That the Earth is
Primum Magneticum; that its Magnetism is implanted in it, as part of its
Nature, or Formal Being.

But suppose there were any of these Causes assigned, or any other Cause of its
Magnetism, though unknown to us, yet still the same Enquiry will hold, What, or
who gave that Magnetical Virtue to that Cause? And we must be forced to walk
from one Natural Cause to another, till at last we must come to a Supreme
Infinite Efficient, that has no Limits or Bound of his Power, Wisdom, or
Being, even the Great, and Infinite, and Glorious God.

I confess, this way of Argumentation is applicable to any other Effect or
Motion in Nature, and concludes the necessary Existence of a Being absolutely
Perfect, as it does in this Instance of the Magnet, and is no more peculiar to
this Effect in Nature, than to any other: But yet it may be usefully, and with
great Evidence of Reason and Plainness, deduced from the Consideration of the
Magnetism of the Earth, though it exclude not the like Improvement of any other
appearance in Nature to the same Conclusion.

CHAP. III.
The Evidence of the Existence of the Glorious GOD, from the Supposition of a
Self-moving Principle in Nature.

THAT there are such Beings in Nature, that exert their Motions and Effects
from an Internal Principle, we have sufficient Evidence, which way soever we
look in the World, and I shall further instance from the Subject in hand.

Now, a Being, that has the Principle of his Actions and Motion in himself, I
suppose to be of Two Kinds.

I. That Being, which is absolutely Independent, the Original of all other
Beings and Powers, Infinite in Essence and Power, the Great and Glorious GOD,
in the virtue of whose Presence, Influence and Activity all other Active Powers
have their Being and Operations, whose Existence is not demonstrable a Priori,
or from his Causes, (for he is the Sovereign Primitive Cause of All Things,)
but is demonstrable by his Effects, Works and Operations. And this is that
which I am endeavoring to evince, even by this little portion of Nature, which
I have in hand.

II. Again, There are other Beings, that although they have the principal
Motions and Operations within themselves, yet, 1 st. Have it not from
themselves, but either mediately or immediately from that Great Sovereign
Fountain of Being and Power abovementioned. 2 dly. Nor have it independently:
For as in their Original they have it from God, so they still have it
dependently upon Him. If the Sovereign Influence should not uncessantly be
communicated to their Beings and Operations, both would cease. And
consequently, although when they are once settled, they have the Root of their
Motions and Operations within themselves, so that no other Created Cause does
Physically contribute to them; yet the Sovereign Cause, and his Influence, has
still a most Intimate Co-efficiency with them in all their Motions and
Operations; and such an Efficiency, that is far greater and more intimate to
them, than those Self-moving Principles themselves. For though these
Principles, as in relation to the Effects these Self-moving Principles produce,
habent se per modum primariorum efficientium; yet, in relation to Almighty God,
habent se per modum Instrumenti vel Causae subordinatae.

Now, these Self-moving Intrinsic Principles are not unfitly called Essential
Virtues, or Essential Forms; and in respect of their Production, are of Two
kinds.

First, Such as were lodged primarily in some Nature or Body, without any
Traduction from any other Created Being: such were the Virtutes Essentiales, or
Forms, of the First Animals; such is also the Magnetical Form, or Essential
Virtue of the Earth, which could no otherwise be derived to it, but from the
Efficiency, Ordination and Institution of the Sovereign Creator and Architect
of the World. And this has been the Business of the former Chapter.

Secondly, Such Forms, or Essential Virtues, as have their immediate
Origination by some other Productive Cause; either by way of Ordinary
Generation, as is done in the Production of Animals and Vegetables ex Semine;
or by way of Irradiation, as Fire produces Fire, or as the Magnet is produced
in the Bowels of the Earth.

Now, although these Productions of Essential Virtues, Forms, or Self-moving
Principles, recognize another Natural Immediate Efficient in their first
Production; yet being once produced and perfected, they act, and move, and
operate immediately from themselves, and independently upon the Immediate Cause
of their Production. The Egg of a Hen would be hatched into a Chicken, and the
Form or Essential Virtue of this Chicken would exert its own Operations proper
to its Species, though the Hen were dead. And I make as little doubt, that a
Magnet once fully perfected in the Earth, would have its Magnetical Attraction,
though we could suppose the Earth it self annihilated, or its Magnetism extinct.

For though there could be no Union of a Vis, or Forma Magnetica, to a Magnet,
but by the Irradiation of the Earth; yet when it is once perfected into a
complete Magnetical Nature, and the Magnetical Virtue once radicated in it, it
would then act many of its Motions independently, as in relation to the Earth,
from which it had its first Production, though possibly some of its Motions,
which are relative to the Earth, would be lost.

Now the due consideration of these Essentiales Virtutes, or Forms that have in
themselves a Principle of their Operations, are in their kind as effectual a
demonstration of the Existence of Almighty God, as the series, and connection,
and dependence, and subordination of Efficients, or Efficient Causes.

And therefore in this place I shall not make use of that way of Argumentation,
namely, the necessary reduction of all Powers or Essential Virtues, either
mediately or immediately to their First Efficient, which was the method of the
former Chapter; but shall consider them barely as active self-moving Virtues,
or Forms, or Powers, and shall thereupon examine what Evidence that naked
Consideration affords us of an Existence of a Sovereign and most perfect Being.

1. In the pursuit of the Effects and Appearances of Nature, when we come to a
self-moving Principle, we are come to the uttermost term and limits of our bare
Physical enquiry into the Cause of any such Motions and Effects. When I see the
Index of a Clock point to the Hour of the Day, I can trace that motion to the
next Wheel that moves it, and so to the next, and then to the Rundle, that is
moved by the Spring, and then to the weight of Lead, that from an inward
self-moving principle moves downward, and there I am at a stand, I can carry my
Series of Physical Causes no farther; for if I enquire why this Weight moves
downward, I get no higher but only to the Ordination of the Sovereign of the
World that had impressed that intrinsic self-moving Power into this as all
other heavy Bodies. And therefore Aristotle, after he had established that
Principle that quicquid movet movetur ab alio, when he comes to the Motion of
heavy Bodies, wherein he could find no other impulsive Physical Cause of their
Motion without them, but in their very own intrinsic Nature, has only this
solution for it, quod movetur a generante. But this Solution of his solves not
the business, without recourse to the Sovereign Cause of all things; for
although the Generans was that which conveyed the Principle it self into the
heavy Body to move it self, yet when that Principle is once settled, namely, a
heavy Body once constituted, it moves now independantly upon its generative
immediate Natural Cause, which it may be is corrupted and dissolved, yet that
active and self-moving Principle exerts its Motion from its own intrinsic
Nature.

If it be said that the Spring of the Watch does the like, and yet it is
performed but mechanically; for the Spring of Steel made strait at first, and
then rolled up into a spiral consistence endeavoring its own restitution,
gives as effectual and regular Motion to the Wheels, and so to the Index, as
the weight of Lead does.

I Answer, It is true, it does so; but yet it does not avoid nor answer the
Instance 1. Even that disposition of the Spring requires an Intelligent Agent
to bring it about and order it, and certainly no less is required even to the
impression of this Motive Power to a heavy Body. 2. Again, in that disposition
of the Spring, we can and must necessarily arrive to a Natural Cause of that
Motive Principle of the Spring, namely the conversion of that Body into a
Consistence contrary to its Nature, whereby it endeavors its restitution to
its natural state, and so Evolves it self, and by that Evolution moves the
String, and that the Fusee, and that the Wheel: But the Motion of heavy Bodies
to the Center has not any assignable mechanical Cause of its Motion, but its
own intrinsic Propension. 3. And this Propension is not to be annexed unto it
by any humane power, no, nor by any other assignable Cause, but from the
impression and signature of the Supreme Lawgiver, whose Law and Constitution,
which we call Nature, or the Law of Nature, has implanted in heavy Bodies that
habitude between them and the Center of the Earth to move thither.

But this descensus Gravium, is but one single Motion: if we look upon the
Magnetical Body of the Earth, which is the Primum Magneticum, or that which is
the natural issue of the Earth, namely, the Magnet, we shall see a greater
variety of Motions; as that of direction, attraction, and other Magnetical
Motions, and all these proceeding from a self-moving principle in these
Magnetical Bodies; and higher than that we cannot go in the Assignation of
Natural Causes. Let any Man living of the greatest Perspicacity, use all the
diligence imaginable, he shall never be able to assign any mechanical or other
Natural Cause of these Motions, but must fix only in an internal self-moving
Principle lodged in the Magnet or Earth it self, and all the reason he shall
give, is only this, Ita fert vis naturalis ipsius Magnetis.

And although it is true, the common Hypothesis allows an actual Motion to the
Earth, yet the composing of it self in its Polar Position arising immediately
from its Magnetical Nature, and the production of Magnetical Virtues in Magnets
and other things, is not unfitly called a self-moving or at least a
self-disposing or ordering Principle.

But yet this is much more evident in the Perception, Appetite and Motions of
the Sentient Nature, and yet still much more in the Intellectual or Rational
Nature. Whither, or to what else, than to an internal self-moving Principle can
we attribute the sentient Perception of Animals, their Instincts, their Memory,
their Appetites? And when we come to that admirable Creature Man, to what other
immediate Cause can we attribute those more admirable Instances of
Intellection, Ratiocination, Freedom of Will, than to an internal self-moving
Principle, that excites and exerts these admirable Operations? And if any one
shall say, that these Faculties and their Operations are moved extrinsically by
their Objects. It is true, they are so; but these are not Physical Movers, but
only Moral or Objective Movers; the Physical Motions are still performed by
that internal Vis or Virtus movens. When a Child sees an Apple, it is the Apple
that he sees, and either by the beautifulness thereof, or the former experience
that he has had of the like Object, he remembers it is good and pleasant to
the Taste, he thereupon desires it, and then reaches and moves after it, and
tastes it: It is indeed the Apple that excites all these Motions of Sight,
Perception, Memory, Appetite, Local Motion; but still the Apple only moves
objectively and morally, not physically; but still the Perception, Memory,
Appetite, Local Motion is performed by the inward Principle, that moves it
physically and actively in and from it self.

But yet further, there are certain Motions that are exerted by Inanimate
things, and much more by things Animate, that have not so much as an Objective
Motion from without, but are wholly and entirely exerted from this inward
Principle, without any previous Excitation, or any external Document, Custom or
Instruction; such as are the Motions of heavy Bodies to the Center of the
Earth, the Magnetical directions and motions of the Magnet, and especially the
great Magnet of the Earth, the specifical Virtues of Vegetables, the admirable
Instincts of Animals, which they obtain, and according to them, move and
dispose themselves without any previous Instruction or objective Excitation,
but barely and primitively from that implanted Inclination, Form, intrinsic
Principle, the very Signature and Character implanted in their very Natures;
and we can carry their Operations no higher in a Series of Physical Causes than
that Internal self-moving Principle. And if we attempt to carry them further,
we must at last rest and fix in that Sovereign most Perfect Being, the Glorious
God, that imprinted this active Signature upon their Natures, as I shall
further in the next place evidence. Therefore,

2. Upon the Consideration that there are these active self-moving Principles
in many, if not all Beings, that we are acquainted with in the World, let us
but now consider where we can fasten the Origination of them, and what, or who
it was that imprinted these admirable active Characters at first upon things in
Nature.

It is impossible they should have them from themselves, and their own
activity: For, 1 st. That were to suppose them to be before they were. Again, 2
dly. Since it is apparent they are determined in their Being and Operations, it
is necessary they should have a Cause of such their Determination, as I have
showed in the former Chapter. 3 dly. Again, since it is apparent there is an
admirable variety of these self-moving Principles specifically differing one
from another, and yet all observing and containing themselves within their
several specifical Bounds and Limits of their Kinds and Natures, it must needs
follow that they have their several Species, and are contained within them by a
superior Disponent, and not from themselves; otherwise what should hinder but
that that which disposed its specifical Power in the rank of a Vegetable,
should not as well dispose of it self into the rank of an Animal, or Humane
Principle? For it were as well effective of the one as of the other, if it
disposed it self, and probably would take up the most perfect Form, or Vis
Essentialis. It remains therefore that those Forms or Essentiales Vires aut
Virtutes, were primitively and in their original are a Disponente, from some
Superior Power, that at first imprinted this Character upon them with great
Wisdom and Goodness.

Therefore it remains that this Vis or Virtus thus specified and determined,
has its Origination and Determination from some other Being. And if we shall
suppose that this Vis or Virtus Essentialis and Specifica has its Origination
from Matter it self, and its various Modifications, we are still besides the
Mark; 1 st. Because that Vis or Virtus Essentialis is a distinct Entity from
Matter, and though it resides in it, it is a differing Entity from it. 2 dly,
It is a Nature or Entity above the power of Matter, and therefore the Eductio
Formarum e potentia Materia is an unconceptible Hypothesis. If it were in the
Body of Matter before, how came it thither? If it were not there before, it is
impossible that it should be educible out of it by the force of any bare
natural Agent: Indeed the Agent may modifie and dispose the Matter, so as to be
a convenient Instrument for the Vis or Virtus that before resided in it, to act
and exert its Activity; but it can never give it a Being, but either it must
find it there, or bring it thither; for dull unactive Matter, that seems to be
purely Passive, can never yield it. 3 dly, But suppose that the various
Modification of Matter were sufficient, so as from thence that active
Principle, which we call the Form or Essential Virtue, might emerge, yet still
it leaves us in the dark without the Supposition of such an Agent of that
admirable Wisdom, Knowledge and Power, that could and did at first so
dexterously modifie that Matter, that it could produce those Exquisite Exertions
of Motions, Propensions and Appearances, so uniformly, regularly, and
unerringly, as we see in Vegetables, Animals, and this little Particle of
Nature, the Magnet. Let us search within the whole compass of Nature. What Man,
or Counsel of Men can, or ever could effect it? The Dove of Architas, and the
Clock of Strasburgh are poor inconsiderable Automata in comparison of a Fly or
a Flea.

But the truth is, it is neither the Modification of Matter, nor any other
Natural Agent, that upon the score of its own Strength, or the single Activity
of any Natural Agent, can alone produce this self-moving Principle, which I
call the Vis Essentialis, others call Form. It is an Entity of another Nature
from Matter: And although the Origination of Matter it self, and the moulding
of it into those admirable Orders, Positions, and goodly Structures, which we
daily behold in the great Integrals of the Universe, are evident Indications of
the Power and Wisdom of the Great Architect of the World; yet these are not to
be compared to most of those self-moving Powers, that the God of Nature has
disseminated, and sent abroad into these and most other of the Particles of
Nature.

And this Vis or Virtus, these Principia Motiva, I look upon as the most
Glorious and Wonderful part of the Creation: Neither is it possible by any
means to deduce their first Original but from the Divine Power and Efficiency.
Let all the Men in the World put their Heads, and their Wits, and their Skill,
and their Hands together, they can never originally imprint upon any Matter the
Magnetical Motions of a poor inconsiderable Loadstone, much less those
self-moving Principles of a higher Nature, as those of Life, Sense, or Reason,
which we daily behold in the Vegetables, Sentient and Rational Province.

What a stir have the Chemists made to make Gold, though it have none of those
self-moving Principles in it that we see in a Magnet, and yet how pitifully
therein they delude themselves and others. But who ever could de novo frame a
Magnet with all its Magnetical Motions, unless it were by putting together some
Particles of the same Stone, that had a prior Magnetical Virtue infused in them
by Nature, or by the Earth, the primum magneticum?

And if any Man shall tell me, that we need not go so high as Almighty God in
the Production of Natural Automata; for Vegetables and Animals daily propagate
their Kinds, which, when propagated, have within them their self-moving
Principles, which yet they had a generantibus; and the Magnet it self has its
Production by the Earth:

I have prevented this Objection in the beginning of this Chapter, wherein I
have taken notice, that some Natural Automata have their Origination
independent upon any other Natural Cause, as the Magnetism of the Earth, and
the Primogenial Productions of Animals and Vegetables. Others have their
Origination by Propagation, etc. as Magnets, and things produced ex Semine: But
in all those the illation of a Sovereign Cause of them is equally necessary in
respect of the Nature of the self-moving Principles themselves, which in their
primitive Constitution require no less than the Sovereign Cause of all things:
And in their mediate Production still the Producents are but his Instruments,
and are productive of them in the vigor of that Law and Institution that the
God of Nature has given and established for them. All the Communications of
these Vires or Virtutes Essentiales, either ex semine, or by propagation, as in
Vegetables and Animals, or by contact or irradiation, as of Fire or Magnets,
are but a continuation of the first primitive Virtutes Essentiales, that were
at first lodged in the primitives or first Individuals of their Species by the
immediate Power of Almighty God; yea, the very Vis Productiva of them was but a
part of that primitive Essential Virtue that was lodged by the Finger of God in
their primitive Natures and first Individuals. And therefore in all the
successive Specifical and Essential Virtues, and self-moving Principles that
now are, or ever have been in the World by Seminal Propagation, Contact, or
Irradiation, we must have the same recourse to the Supreme Cause no less than
in the first Individuals or Subjects in which they were at first lodged.

CHAP. IV.
The Evidence of the Existence of a Deity from the Excellent Ordination of
these Powers to their several Ends and Uses.

HE that attentively considers all the Works of Nature, will find Four Kinds of
Adaptations in them.

I. An Adaptation of their Organs to their several and respective Essential
Powers, or Faculties, or Inclinations and Motions.

II. An Adaptation both of their Organs and Faculties to their own Good, and
usefulness of their Being.

III. In many of them an Adaptation not only to the Convenience of their
Individuals, but to the Preservation of their Kinds or Species.

IV. An Adaptation and Accommodation of their Organs, Powers, and Motions to
other parts of the Universe, and the common Good of other parts of Nature; and
the Order, Beauty, and Use of all the rest.

This a Man might easily see in the whole Compages and several Parts of the
Universe, that occurs to our Sense or Observation; in the Heavenly Bodies, in
the Elementary World, in the several Provinces of the Mineral, the Vegetable,
the Animal, and the Rational Nature: The Induction of Particulars in each of
these would make an Immense Volume: I will therefore confine my self to the
Subject in hand, namely, Magnetical Bodies.

The Earth has a double Magnetism, 1. One that is only such Analogically, as
it is the Center of heavy Bodies. 2. The other is really such, whereby it
composeth it self to a Polar Direction.

The former or Analogical Magnetism; it is marvelous to see that their should
be such an habitude and adaptation between heavy Bodies and the Earthly Globe.
1 st. That all heavy Bodies of what Kind or Nature soever within this Verge of
the Elementary World, should move to the Earth. 2 dly, That this Motion should
not be at random or obliquely, but regularly, uniformly, and perpendicularly to
the Center of the Earth, and this from all Parts of this Inferior World
circumjacent to the Earth. 3 dly, That this Motion of heavy Bodies to the
Center of the Earth, should not be indifferently and equally from all Parts of
the same heavy Body, but precisely the Center of Gravity of every heavy Body
should be the Point, and make up that Line of its Motion; so that if the Line
of its Motion could be exactly observed, it would be a straight Line terminated
at the one extreme with the Center of the Earth, and at the other extreme with
the Center of Gravity of the descending Body. And consequently, 4 thly. That
the heavy Body has not only a Motion to the Center, but its Motion is directed
in the shortest way toward its Journey's end, viz. by a straight Perpendicular
Line, which it always observes in its Natural Course without any Variation,
unless accidentally impeded. And this Course they constantly hold. And this
mutual habitude between the Center of the Earth and the Center of heavy Bodies
is fixed and settled in them with an unerring Appetite and Tendency, without
any previous Knowledge of the one or the other: The Center of the heavy Bodies
knows not the Center of the Earth, yet thither it moves with a connatural
Inclination, and never errs in its Journey. And certainly he that will but take
the pains to think, shall find that this unobserved habitude admirably
conduces; 1 st. To the good of the heavy Bodies themselves; 2 dly. To the
maintaining of the due Consistency of the Parts of this Lower World; 3 dly. To
the Conservation of its Figure, which is most suitable to its firmness and
stability, and the use of the Creatures in it; 4 thly. To the enriching and
fortifying of it by Rain and other Meteors; 5 thly. To an infinite number of
Mechanical Services for the necessary Use of Mankind, as building Houses,
Navigation of Ships, mutual Commerce. And all this, and much more, results from
this habitude and correspondence between the Center of the Earth and the Center
of heavy Bodies in their Motions, whether we entertain the Common or the
Copernican Hypothesis.

2. The real Magnetism of the Earth: By this it is always kept in the same
Polar Position, which it can never vary from by any Created Force whatsoever.

And by the advantage thereof, it becomes a fit and settled Habitation for
Mankind; it receives a constant and regular Influx from the Heavenly Bodies;
the Measures and Discriminations of Time are thereby settled, the Seasons of
the Year fixed and orderly disposed, a sufficient part of habitable Ground set
out and accommodated for Men and Animals; all which would be put into a
confusion and disorder, if the Earth should Fluctuate from its Polar Position.

Come we again to consider this lesser Earth, the terreaea, or filius terrae.
It is admirable to observe how all his Inclinations and Motions are fitted for
its own preservation, and for the common good of Mankind: As for Instance, 1
st. That it should so strongly incline to the Earth, from which it had its
Magnetism, never resting till its Axis is conformable to the Axis of the Earth,
and joining to it. 2 dly. That it should affect such a Position to the Earth,
and other Magnets, which though seemingly contradictory, yet most naturally
maintains and preserves its Magnetical Virtue, viz. by obverting its dissimilar
Pole to the dissimilar Pole of another Magnet or Magnetical Body. 3 dly. That
it should with all imaginable Industry fly and avoid that Position with
another Magnet, that would hurt and injure its Magnetical Virtue, namely, the
Similar Face flies the Similar. 4 thly. That it should with an Appetite little
less than Sensient reach after these Magnetical Effluxes from the Earth or
other Bodies, that may feed and preserve its Magnetical Virtue, as in its
attraction upon Iron, and Motions of Declination. 5 thly. That, whereas the
habitude of other heavy Bodies is by a direct Line from the Center of its
Gravity to the Center of the Earth, this has a habitude to the Axis and Poles
of the Earth, from whence it has the most convenient access and supply of
Magnetical Virtue. 6 thly. That it should have an Orb of its Virtue both
Directive and Attractive, thereby the more effectually to supply its Magnetism
and Magnetical Virtue at a distance, and without any immediate Contact. And all
this, and many more Accommodations to its self and its own Preservation it has
by a connatural implanted Inclination and Virtue. And, which adds to the Wonder;

1 st. That though these admirable Instincts and Inclinations have as great an
Analogy almost as is possible to an animate Nature, yet we cannot find any
other Footsteeps of Sensation or sensible Perception in it more than what the
bare Inclinations themselves exhibit.

2 dly. And, which is yet more Wonderful, that whereas Animals and Vegetables
have Organs accommodated to their Powers, this exerts all these Motions merely
by the strength and vigor of its Innate Virtue, without any Organs, that we
can perceive, fitted to these Motions: It sucks and attracts without any Mouth;
moves without Feet or Hand; knows its Friend and Enemy without Eyes to see, or
Nostrils to smell it.

The Habitudes and Respects, that weighty Bodies bear to the common Center of
the Earth, and that Magnetical Bodies bear to the Axis of the Earth, cannot
possibly arise from any Natural or Physical Virtue, that is either in the
Center of the Earth simply as such, to attract heavy Bodies, or in the Axis of
the Earth simply as such, to conform the Motions of Magnetical Bodies to it.
For the Center of the Earth is but a Mathematical Point, and the Axis of the
Earth but a Mathematical Line, and therefore simply as such, are wholly void of
any Activity, Power or Agency. But it is that most Intelligent, Infinitely
Wise, Powerful and Beneficent Being, that has institued and settled those
admirable Powers, Habitudes and Respects in those Integrals of the Universe,
whereby that admirable Order is kept between the several parts thereof, for the
Beauty of the World, the Mutual Good of all its parts, the due Compagination of
them each to other, and for the Glory of the Great Architect and Lord of the
Universe.

CHAP. V.
The Evidences of the Wisdom, Power, and Goodness of GOD resulting from the
Consideration of the Parts of the Universe, and particularly of the Magnetical
Parts.

The First Instance.
AS the due Contemplation of the Works of Nature, and particularly of this in
Hand, carries us necessarily to the acknowledgment of a Supreme Cause, and the
Existence of that most Perfect Being, which we call GOD: so the like
observation will give us some Strictures of the Nature of that most Sovereign
Being, namely, his Wisdom, Goodness and Power.

It is a vast and goodly Portion of the Universe that is every day objected to
our Sight and View, and yet in all probability even that which we daily see and
view, is but a small Portion of the vast Continent of the Universe. The Ancient
and Modern Astronomers have calculated the number of those Stars and Asterisms
that are ordinarily seen, yet if a Man does but consider with himself what an
Immense number of Stars do at some times appear in clear Nights, over what do
ordinarily appear; if a Man does consider what Multitudes of Stars are
discovered by Telescopes, as in the Milky-way, the Pleiades, and other
Asterisms, which without such helps, are not discoverable to our Sight; if a
Man considers that possibly those Stars, which seem of the least Magnitude, may
yet have that appearance, in respect of their vast distance from us; and
possibly there may be such which are not Conspicuous to our Sight in respect of
their distance, which may yet be greater and more in number than those that by
reason of their greater Vicinity to us are ordinarily seen: I say he that
considers these things, may have reason to think that Maxima pars eorum quae
videmus, est minima pars eorum quae non videmus.

But again, let us consider those Parts of the Universe which we see, the Sun,
the Moon, the Planets, the visible Stars, etc. yet God knows we see but a
little part of that we see. We know not their Natures, their Furnitures, their
Motions, their Ends, their Uses; how many complicated Ends and Uses there may
be and are of their Motions, Influxes and Dispositions. There is not a Star in
Heaven but may have thousands of Uses and Ends, which we can never by all our
observation discover. If a Man should be supposed to be rapt up into a Star as
soon as he were born, and should from thence behold the Earth on which we live,
he would indeed have the view of this Massy Globe of the Earth, as we from
hence do behold the great Planetary Bodies of Saturn or Mars, but he could
never know the huge variety of Rational, Animal, Vegetable, Mineral, Elementary
Bodies that are in it, nor that Excellent and Useful Disposition of the Parts
thereof, of the Meteors of all kinds, that are subservient to it, and infinite
more, that we that inhabit it, do daily observe: And it is not impossible, no
nor unlikely, that in those great distant Planetary and Heavenly Bodies there
may be Concrements of infinite more Excellencies than this Lower World affords
our daily view and observation.

But yet in that narrow Prospect that we have, of these vast distant Celestial
and Planetary Bodies, we cannot choose but observe, 1 st. Admirable Beauty; 2
dly. Singular Order in their Motions, which they constantly observe; 3 dly.
Admirable Accommodation of one part thereof to another, and of all of them to
the Beauty, Order and Convenience of the Universe and all its Parts.

I confess I never was of that narrow Thought that the Sun, Moon, and Stars,
and Planets, were made singly for the Use of this Lower World wherein we live,
muchless for the single and sole use of Man: The infinitely Wise God has the
Prerogative in all his Works to have various Complicated Ends in all his Works,
which we can never attain to the full Comprehension of: yet thus much I must
ever acknowledge to the Glory of the Wisdom and Goodness of that Sovereign
Being, that all things are so ordered to the good of every thing in the
Universe, that it could not possibly be better; and all things are so appositly
framed for the use of each other, as could not possibly be better if no other
end but that end had been singly aimed at by him that made them. What a
Condition were Mankind in, if he were destituted of all the Influences of the
Heavens, the Light, Heat and Motion of the Sun; the Accommodations of Fire,
Air, Water, Earth, Vegetables, Animals, Minerals, Meteors, and infinite more?

If we come down to the Consideration of this Lower World, which is more within
our view and prospect, it is admirable to consider the singular Subserviency of
all the Inferior sort of Creatures to the more Noble and Superior; how the
Elementary Bodies, and Meteors, and Minerals; are subservient to the Vegetable
Province; and how the same Bodies and also Vegetables are subservient to the
Use of the Animal Province; and how both Minerals, Elementary Bodies, Meteors,
Vegetables, and Animals, are subservient to the Humane Nature.

If a Man consider how some are for his Food, some for his Clothing, some for
his Habitation, some for his Defense, some for his Delight, some for his
Medicine and Physic; how adequately some Animals are in all respects fitted
for Portage, the Bunches of Camels, the Foot and Swiftness of the Horse, the
Strength of the Ox for Draught; nay, what admirable Efficacies pitiful little
inconsiderable Vegetables, Insects, parts of Living Creatures, have for the
Health, and Preservation, and Restitution of the Humane Nature from Sickness,
and Hurts, and Pains: I say, if a Man consider distinctly these little things,
he must acknowledge an admirable Wisdom and Goodness, that thus accommodates
the Works of Nature each to other, especially to that Noblest of the Visible
Creatures of this Lower World, Man.

These admirable Accommodations could never happen by Chance or blind Fortune.
One single Occurrence or Consistence may have some pretense to an Origination
by Chance; but a Connection of several Accommodations could no more come by
Chance, than (to use Tully's Expression) the casual Coincidence of the several
Letters of the Alphabet could make up one of Ennius his Poems. This Order
therefore and Accommodation of things of several Natures one to another, do
invincibly Evidence, 1 st. A Supreme Goodness and Wisdom that has thus
established every thing in the Best Order, and for the Best Uses. 2 dly. An
Infinite Wisdom, Power and Goodness, that concerns not it self singly in the
greater and nobler Concerns of the Universe, the Regiment and Order of the
Bodies and Motions of the Stars, and Planetary Bodies, which are the greatest
and most Majestic Pieces of the Universe that we know, but states and settles,
and orders and disposes the Economy of the very meanest Particles of Nature,
Vegetables, Insects, Animals, and adapts them to their own accommodation, to
the accommodation one of another, and to the Service and Convenience of Mankind.

And the reason of all this admirable accommodation of things even unto the
very lowest Rank of Beings, by the Wise Disposer of the Universe, is because
his Understanding is infinite, his Prospect into all things exquisite, perfect
and indeficient. That Idea that he had in his Sovereign Mind, was not only of
the great Integrals of Nature, the vast heavenly, planetary, and elementary
Bodies, but also of the smallest Furnitures thereof. The great Architect of the
World had in his View and Design, not only the great Contignations of the
Universe, but every little Pin, every Flourish and Interstice of it. And that
as in the Design of the Jewish Tabernacle, Exodus 24.1, etc. the Lord gave out a
perfect Pattern or Figure of the whole Fabric thereof, unto Moses, even to the
smallest Integrals thereof, according to which that curious Structure was
formed; so the Great Creator in the Creation and Disposition of the Universe,
had the full and complete Idea thereof, even to the smallest Integral of it,
and according to which, he made and disposed it. And this is that which the
Prophet insinuates, Psalm. Known unto the Lord are all his works from the
beginning. He gives all things their meat in due season. But I shall lose my
self in this vast Contemplation. I shall therefore bring my self nearer to my
Subject in hand.

If a Man considers the Earth and its Inhabitants, he shall find some such
Observables as these: 1st. That although almost every Island and Continent
afford sufficient store of Things of absolute Necessity for its Inhabitants,
yet one Country affords some things for Delight, other things for Convenience,
that other Countries want; as may appear in Minerals, Fruits, Wines, Spices,
Jewels, Gums, Physical Herbs, Materials for Clothing, and infinite variety of
Manufactures. 2. That from hence arises a mutual Habitude and Intercourse
between the Inhabitants of the World, as far as the Opportunities of visiting
each other's Country will permit, whereby one Country may supply the Defects
and Wants, and answer the Conveniences of another. 3. That from hence it comes
to pass by mutual intercourse thus occasioned, the more civilized Part of the
World become like a common Ferment to the rest of Mankind, derive to them the
Knowledge of Religion, Learning, Arts, Sciences, Manufactures; have opportunity
to rectify their Errors and Mistakes in Religion, in Government, in Laws, in
Arts and Sciences; whereby a mutual Communication and kind of intervenient
Society is or may be propagated and preserved in the World, and every part
thereof the better cultivated, civilized, ordered and reduced. 4. If the whole
Earth were one entire Continent of firm and dry Land, it were not possible this
Intercourse, mutual Habitude, and Conversation could be maintained, especially
by those Countries that are more remote, as the Western Parts of Europe, with
those of Asia, or with those of America. 5. Again, although when the World was
but scantly Peopled there was room enough, and more than enough for them, in a
narrow Spot of that great Continent, and they were not soon dispersed into
great Distances one from another, and so might with more facility maintain
Converse and Communion each with other by Land-Journeys: but when in process of
Time they were multiplied and sought out remoter Parts for Habitation, their
Distances would make Communication by Land-Journeys more difficult. 6. It is
therefore admirable to observe how the World is ordered, that partly by the
numerous great Rivers that discharge themselves out of all Countries into the
Ocean, partly by the Inlets of the Ocean into the Land by Creeks and smaller
Seas, as the Mediterranean, the Arabic, and other Seas, but principally by the
alluency and contiguity of the Ocean, to the sides and Shores of great
Continents, and its encompassing in of Islands and Isthmi; the Sea is a near
Neighbor unto every Country, and holds a great Communion with the greatest
part of every Continent. 7. Again, by the Advantage of this Situation and
Vicinity of the Ocean and its Parts to all Countries, the mutual Communication
and Commerce between Countries most remote one from another is maintained with
great Facility by the help of Navigation, which were otherwise impossible to be
effected: and as all Things in Nature are full of Motion, and particularly
Mankind has and must have his share therein, even by the very Law of his
Creation, and the Condition of his Nature; so hereby Mankind is in a great
Measure put into Motion, and kept in it by Navigation, Trade, Commerce,
Interviews, and Intercourse for the Maintenance and Improvement of Humane
Society, Arts, Trades, New Discoveries of the great Works of Nature, and
infinite more Advantages. 8. It is observable how the same Providence that has
thus disposed and configured the Earthly Globe, and indented, as it were, the
dry Land and Seas for the common Convenience of Mankind, has furnished it also
with Materials and Accommodations for Navigation, as Pitch, Tar, Hemp, Cordage,
Trees fitted for Masts and Sail-Yards, Ship-Timber, and (which is the thing I
aim at) with this admirable Stone, whereby the Mariner's Compasses are
influenced and directed in their Polar Verticity, without which it is scarcely
possible with any safety or certainty to steer a Course in a long Voyage at
Sea, where many times the darkness of the Weather excludes the Mariner from the
direction of the Sun or Stars for many days together.

It is true, 1st. That there are other Helps of Navigation besides the Pixis
Nautica, as namely, the Use of the Astrolabe, or great Circle, the Observation
of the Position of the Cynosure, or North-Star in the Northern Hemisphere, and
of Canopus in the Southern Hemisphere; but yet as the former, namely the
Astrolabe, is very uncertain, and requires admirable diligence and exactness,
so the latter, the Positure of those Stars, is not always conspicuous in
respect of the Weather. 2. That the Pixis Nautica, and its use, was not fully
known in the Western World till about 1200 years after Christ, when Paulus
Venetus brought it from the Sineses: But yet 1st. it is certain that as many
Arts and Discoveries were far more ancient in China, and other Eastern Parts of
the World than they were among us, so particularly this of the Pixis Nautica
was very ancient there, so that we know not the Date of its first Discovery and
Use among them. 2. If we may believe the Tradition of the Ancients, especially
among the Arabians, they carry up the use of it to the Times of Solomon and
David; Albertus Magnus to the Times of Alexander and Aristotle: and it should
seem not unlikely that the Tyrians and Phenicians, who were great Masters of
Sea-Affairs, and made great Voyages, were not without the Help of the
Magnetical Director.

And though it may possibly be true, that the Use of it was either restored, or
possibly first brought into the Western World not above 400. or 500. years
since, and yet some Navigation was in use in this Western part of Europe before
that time; yet this is to be said, 1. Their Navigation was not safe, so
expedite, so certain as it has been since the use of the Pixis Nautica brought
hither. 2. The Voyages and Discoveries were in those ancienter Times
hereabouts, but short; they crept along near the Shores, guided themselves by
Sea-marks, the Voyages to the Eastern and Western World, and the Discoveries of
the American Continent and many Western Islands, having been since the
Reformation of Navigation by the Help of the Pixis Nautica, and the great
Intercourse between the West of Europe and the Easterly and Western Indies
being but of late, and could never be maintained without the help of this
Director.

So that the late Discovery thereof to this part of the World was yet in a
seasonable time, and such wherein this Expedient was most useful and suitable
to the Exigence and Convenience of Mankind. And the Divine Providence is no
less conspicuous in exhibiting this to the World in its due and suitable Season,
than if it had been known and in use from the beginning of Time. A little
Observation will give us Instances of Providential Discoveries of things for
the use of Mankind at such Seasons and under such Circumstances as render the
Providence it self the more admirable.

And though possibly the first Discovery of the Magnetical Properties and Uses
may seem accidental, yet in relation to the Divine Providence, those things
that seem to us accidental, are designed and ordered by an unerring Guidance.

When I have many times considered the many useful Discoveries of the Virtues
of Herbs, and many inconsiderable abject Simples, that are of singular use for
the Health and Medicine of Mankind, which no Man could reasonably suspect
beforehand to be in them, and therefore could not in probability be designedly
and industriously experimented: And when I likewise consider by how many
unthought of Accidents those Virtues and Energies have been found out, I have
abundantly satisfied my self that those seemingly accidental Discoveries have
yet been made by a secret intelligent Dispensation of the Divine Providence for
the Good of Mankind: and that the same Wisdom and Goodness that first implanted
those Virtues and Energies in Vegetables and Minerals, did it designedly for
the use and benefit of Mankind: And as their first Endowment with those Virtues
was not accidental or at a venture, but by Design for those Ends, by the Divine
Wisdom and Benignity, so the strange and unthought of Discoveries thereof to
Mankind were no less designed Methods of the same Wisdom and Goodness, though
to us they seem merely casual and accidental.

I do therefore upon the whole Matter look upon this little Stone, so
inconsiderable in outward Appearance, and that admirable directive Virtue
thereof, its Polar Verticity, and the Power of communicating that Verticity to
a piece of Iron or Steel, and the singular Use thereof to Mankind, as a great
Instance of the Divine Wisdom, Goodness, and Power of Almighty God, and of that
Care and Providence he exercises over and toward the Children of Men, and as
a Design of his Goodness and Wisdom, 'specially levelled at the Good and
Benefit of Mankind, and that in the most seasonable and necessary Time.

CHAP. VI.
The Wonderful Wisdom and Power of God appearing in the admirable and various
Motions of the Magnet.

ALL the Works of God, which we commonly call the Works of Nature, are full of
unimitable and inexplicable Wisdom. The very Contemplation of a Fly, or a Worm,
does nonplus all the Wit, Reason, and Understanding of the most profound
Philosopher in a thousand Instances, and exceeds all his Inquisitiveness, Skill
and Industry to give a satisfactory Account of them. So true is that of the
Wise Man as well in the Works of Nature as of those of Providence, Eccles.
8.17. Then I beheld all the Works of God, that a Man cannot find out the work
that is done under the Sun: because though a man labor to seek it out, yet he
shall not find it. Yea further, though a wise man think to know it, yet shall
he not be able to find it.

And as the Works of God are done with that unsearchable Wisdom, so they are
much more unimitable by any Humane Skill or Understanding. When we see the
choicest Mechanical Engines, that the skilfullest Artists have invented, what
are they in comparison of the curious Mechanism of the Body of a Grasshopper or
a Gnat? But suppose the Mechanical part might be imitated by some skilful Hand,
what is that to the Motiva potestas and virtus, that from it self fets it in
Motion? Archytas his Dove was so framed, as they say, by Engines, that it would
perform a Flight; but yet when that was done, the Spring must be wound up,
before it could attempt another. But the little busy Fly, that in the
Summertime plays upon my Face, performs a thousand various spontaneous Motions
in the Compass of an hour, and thousands more it will perform with as great
variety, diversity, multiplicity and agility, from that little internal
self-moving Principle lodged in it, we know not how, nor where, and moving its
well ordered Mechanical Body we know not how, nor wherewith, and that with an
admirable connatural Dexterity, which she never learned by Books, Instruction,
or Imitation. But I shall keep my self within the Compass of my Subject, the
Magnet and its Motions.

Among many other strange Motions and admirable Phenomena's that it exhibits,
these are worth our Observation:

First, That an inanimate, and, as it appears to us, inorganical Stone should
compose it self by its own free Motion just to a North and South Position, that
point of the Stone, that has its North Verticity, always turning to the North,
and not to the South, unless enervated by the prevalence of another Magnet, and
that which has its South Verticity always converting it self to the South,
when it enjoys the Liberty of its own Motion.

2 dly. That this Magnet should always carry about it, even without the limits
of its own Body, a certain Orb of its own Essential Virtue, that pervades the
most obstinate and gross interposed Body, and Communicates it self through it.

3 dly. That the same Magnet, or Magnetically excited Body, should in a Moment,
in the twinkle of an Eye, convey and derive the entire Idea of its own Vigor
and Virtue to another piece of Iron by one single contact or touch.

4 thly. That the same Magnet or Magnetical Body should derive from it self a
Force or Energy at the same time from one Extreme thereof to the other, by
Vertual Radii extremely contrary and repugnant each to other: that one and the
same Iron Rod A B should convey a Flux of Magnetical Vigor entirely from A to
B, and at the same time the same Rod, and every part thereof should send a
Radius from B to A extremely contrary to the other, and yet neither to retund
or abate the Energy of the other.

5 thly. That every smallest Particle of this Magnet, every little Dust thereof
should have the very same Conformation that the entire Magnet had, every little
Particle having his Poles, his Equator, his Direction, Attraction, Inclination,
etc. perfectly Analogal to the great Magnet, whose Dust it is.

6 thly. That all these Various Motions should be thus Regularly and Uniformly
exerted by its own Strength and Vigor without the assistance of any Organ,
that we can by any means perceive. An Animal has a Local Motion and Conversion
of it self to this or that posture; but then it has Spirits, and Nerves, and
Tendons, and Muscles, by which it begins its Motion, and Legs, and Feet, and
other Organs, by which it compleats these Motions: but the Magnet converts its
self to its Polar Position without any of these Engines to perform them. An
Animal attracts his Nourishment, and unites it to it self by its Natural Heat
digesting it, by its Veins and Arteries again perfecting and distributing it,
and has accordingly Vessels fitted for Attraction, Digestion and Distribution,
as Mouth, Ventricle, Liver, Heart, etc. but the Attraction and Distribution of
Magnetical Influxes is performed without any so much as Visibe Pore for their
Reception, nay, the more solid and unporous it is, the better and stronger it
performs its Motion.

7 thly. That all this is performed Regularly, Uniformly, Constantly, without
any Deviation in the Magnet it self, unless it be by an accidental
Interposition of some other Magnetical Body, that gives it a Variation. The
same Magnet performs its motion in the same manner in a Tract of 40, 50, nay
100 Years, without any sensible Change. I have had by me a Magnet above 30
Years, that a former Owner had above 50 Years before that, that is as lively,
regular and vigorous in his motions, as when I or he became first Owner of it.

8 thly. That a Magnet, wherein there is no pret^nsion of a Life of Sense, nay
not a Life of Vegetation, should have a kind of judiciary discrimination
between that which is hurtful and mischievous to his Magnetical Nature, and
what is beneficial and congruous to it, and by a connatural Appetite should
unite it self to the latter, and fly from and chase away the former, that the
similar Pole of one Magnet should chase away the similar Pole of another
Magnet, and if it be too strong, should fly from it; and that the dissimilar
Pole of one Magnet should reach after, and unite it self to the dissimilar Pole
of another Magnet, and that with so vigorous a Prosecution, that it should lay
aside and suspend for the present its own natural Verticity; and all because by
this Conjunction and Union it receives a Fortification and cherishing of its
Magnetical Vigor in this congruous Position: and all this performed
constantly, unerringly, and uniformly, and that notwithstanding the
interposition of another gross and unporous Body: that it should thus discern a
polus amicus, and a polus inimicus, without any Eyes to see the one or the
other, without any Sense of Smelling to distinguish the Fracedo or Air of one
from another, without any Nerves to give a tractile discrimination of one from
another.

These, and many more Instances of a like Nature, as they discover a strange
and wonderful Combination of Motions in the Magnet, so they do much more
advance the wonderfulness of that unseen vis or virtus residing in the Magnet
by which they are exerted; but above all, do give us admirable Instances of
that wonderful Power and Wisdom of that great Author and Lord of Nature, that
should so frame and implant one Simple invisible, and, I may not amiss say,
incorporeal Principle of all these strange and various Motions, that simply,
and from it self and its own Fabric and Vigor performs them even without the
help of Organs to assist it.

The Skill and Art of Men has arrived to a great Advance in contriving and
making curious Mechanical Engines with great variety and regularity of Motions,
as is specially observable in Water-Engines, in Watches and Clocks, especially
in that famed Clock of Strasburgh, wherein there are great varieties of
Motions: But all these Mechanisms are still by various Modifications,
Appositions, and Applications of Particles of Matter; this Wheel is fitted to
that Wheel, and this to another; and the variety and constancy of the Motions
arises still from the due Frame and Position of material Organs.

But the Mechanism that is used by the great Master of Nature both in things
animate and inanimate, and particularly in this of the Magnet, is the admirable
Fabric and Modification of that internal, insensible, immaterial Power, or
active Principle it self; it is the curious, various, admirable Modification,
Disposition, and Ordination of the primitive Vigor and Power that is implanted
in the automata of Nature, that gives and directs their Motions.

It is true, the Mechanism of Animals, yea and Vegetables also is most
admirable, and exceeds the imitation of any humane Artist, as might easily be
evidenced by an Induction of Particulars. He that reads Galen de Vsu Partium,
will find admirable Instances thereof in all, even the most inconsiderable
Parts of the Humane Structure.

But even this Mechanism of the Parts of Men or Animals, is not to be compared
to the admirable Mechanism, if I may so call it, of Essential Powers and
Faculties:

First, They are of several kinds in some Natures, and particularly this of the
Magnet, there is an admirable disposition of essential, primitive, self-moving
Powers, and of admirable variety, when yet, as before I have observed, there
appears no disposition or accommodation of Organs for the exerting of those
Powers, but the Magnetical Virtue, though it is beholding to the Magnet for its
Habitation, yet it uses it only as a Lodging, or as a Shop or Laboratory
wherein to work, but exerts its Motions primitively and immediately by its own
intrinsic, essential Power and Energy.

Secondly, In those Beings that are endued with Organs fitted and accommodated
to their Operations, as Men, Animals, Vegetables, yet herein is apparent the
great Pre-eminence of that internal, essential Vigor whereof I speak, and the
high demonstration of the admirable Composure and Modification thereof, and
consequently the wonderful Wisdom and Power of him that first molded and
framed it; namely, 1. That it is prior in operation to the Completion, yea to
the very inception of any organical Parts of the Body. That little punctum
saliens in conceptu begins the Dance of the Sentient Life, when it had no other
Organ but a thin Film to keep it together, and that of its own spinning also.
Again, 2. Because the very Organization of the Parts of Animals and Vegetables
is the immediate Effect of that vital Principle which we call the vital or
animal Soul, which moulds the Body to its specifical Shape.

And certainly had Descartes, and others of his too adoring Followers, but
taken so much leisure as to have thought of this, they could not have been so
stupid as to think that the whole Motion of Animals was but from an Organical
Disposition of Parts, or a piece of material Mechanism, when it is apparent
beyond Contradiction, that the vital, animal Principle is precedent to the
Organization of the Body, and is that which it self originally and immediately
Organizeth the Body according to a kind of specifical Idea, lodged in that
animal and vital Principle by the Law, Institution, and Ordination of the
Sovereign Lord of Nature.

Upon the whole Matter, I therefore conclude, that in all the Works of Nature,
which exhibit an internal regular Principle of their Motion, and particularly
in this of the Magnet, but more eminently in vital Beings, the Mechanism, if I
may so call it, or the Frame, Texture, and Disposition of self-moving Powers,
especially those that exhibit so great variety, order, and congruity of their
Motions, the Wisdom, Power and Goodness of Almighty God, is more signal and
admirable, than in the best Pieces of corporeal Mechanism that Nature or Art
can Exhibit; and therefore I must still conclude with the Psalmist, Psalm.
104.24. O Lord how wonderful are thy Works! in Wisdom have thou made them all.
All thy Works show thy Wisdom; the Fabric of the World, of every particular
Vegetable or Animal; but the transcendency of thy Wisdom is yet more
conspicuous in the Structure and Composure of self-moving, vital, sentient,
intellective Faculties than in the most elegant Composure of organical Bodies.
Take a Rose, a Grape, the Kernel of a Nut, an excellent Painter will give a
very lively Shadow of it in Colors, but he gives it not its bulk and figure: A
good Artificer will make its figure, and adorn it with Colors representing it,
but he gives it not its Smell or Taste: A good Confectioner may possibly
influence it with some weak imitation of its Smell and Taste; but yet in all
these Attempts it falls infinitely short of that vivid and lively Color,
Shape, Taste, or Smell, of the Prototype it self. But suppose that Art could
equal Nature in all those Appearances, yet still there is something, aliquid
intus, that all the humane Skill in the World can never reach to effect,
namely, the Vital Principle, by which these Vegetables exert the vital Acts of
Conformation, Growth, Vegetation, and seminal Production.

And thus I have done with these Contemplations of the Divine Power, Wisdom and
Goodness, that this small Portion of Nature, the Magnet affords, or occasions
to me. But if this little Particle of Natural Powers yields such a Stock of
Exhibitions of that Wisdom, Power, and Goodness; Lord, what a Store would a
distinct and accurate Consideration of the other more Noble Portions of the
Universe afford? viz. the Consideration of the curious Structure of the animal
Bodies, and their admirable Faculties of sentient Perception, Fantasy,
Memory, Appetite, and Motions of their sentient Principle; the Majestic and
Noble Fabric of the humane Body, the admirable Faculties of Intellect and
Will, the orderly Position and Frame of the Elements, and Elementary World; the
goodly, vast and beautiful Structure of the Heavenly Bodies, their orderly
Positions and Motions, their wonderful Influences: and yet all these put
together falling short of a full Exhibition of the infinite Glory, Wisdom,
Power, and Goodness of him that made and ordered them, who has still an
infinite, unexhaustible residue of Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, beyond what the
whole Universe can fully and adequately render or represent.

Still therefore I must conclude as I began, O Lord, how wonderful are thy
Works! in Wisdom have thou made them all. And now I shall proceed to some
further and. more useful Considerations that imports us in the highest kind.

I cannot say that Magnetical Speculations are my Instructions or Guide in
them; for they are of a higher Nature, and a nobler Use than Magnetical
Appearances are fitted for. These are therefore but Occasions and Exercitations
of my ensuing Thoughts and Meditations.

CHAP. VII.
Touching the Reason and Method of the ensuing Discourse.

SImilitudes and Symbols have their use to explicate even Divine Matters. Our
great Master Christ Jesus was frequent in the use of them, and so long as we
keep within due Bounds of Sobriety and Modesty we may imitate him herein: but I
confess it is easy and too usual for Men herein to transgress their Bounds,
and then the Discourses of this Nature become dangerous, or at least, slight
and trivial, and unworthy of, and unsuitable to the excellent Subject, that Men
intend to serve or explicate thereby. And possibly some that have gone before
me in the bringing Divine Mysteries to the Rule and Model of Magnetical
Observations, have gone too far herein.

These are commonly the Faults that escape Men in Symbolical Divinity, and
explicating Divine Truths by natural Appearances or Reduction to them:

1. When they use those Symbolical Media not barely as Explications, but as
Proofs or Demonstrations of Divine Mysteries, which is certainly a Fault; for
surely things Natural and things Divine, are of a different nature and order,
and in many particulars of quite a different Reason one from another.

2. When Men think to give a full and adequate Explication of Divine Mysteries
by Natural Appearances.

3. When they follow the Analogy between them too far, and beyond their just
and due Measure and Proportion, and beyond the Terms and Limits of Sobriety,
which oftentimes occasions this Inconvenience; that other Persons perchance
observe other Instances wherein the Analogy holds not, or at least draws some
absurd Consequences with it, which many times renders the overstrained
Analogies, that the former have given, vain and sometimes ridiculous.

And these Errors we may observe in many Persons, that have addicted themselves
to some kinds of Secular Knowledge and Observations, and are so deeply affected
with it, that they fondly reduce even Divine Things to the Measure and Reason
of those affected Parcels of Secular Learning, and thereby make an unhandsome
and unseemly Medly thereof. Thus Behem and Paracelsus, and some others, that
have been transported with Chemistry, have reduced even their Notions of
Divinity into a Conformity thereunto: Others, that are very much affected to
some Parts of Natural Philosophy digested into their own Method, have done the
like, as the Author of the Teutonick Philosophy: the like has been done by the
Affectors of the Jewish Cabalistiques; and possibly some that have much
traveled in Magnetic Philosophy.

I am not therefore of their mind, that the sublime Mysteries of Divinity are
to be governed or measured by Magnetical Motions: all I shall do shall be to
borrow some Instances from the latter to explain my Conceptions of the former,
and to make use sometimes of those Terms that are used in Magnetical Learning,
to explicate those Conceptions where they bear a just Analogy to them, such as
are Magnetism, Attraction, Conversion, Aversion, Position, Verticity,
Direction, Motion, Rest. And although I do not in the least manner imagine that
the Penmen of the Sacred Scriptures had any respect unto, no nor perchance any
cognizance of Magnetical Natures in their various Expressions, yet certainly
the Sacred Scripture has diverse Expressions, that in themselves bear a great
Analogy with the Terms above used; which (is) a tolerable Excuse, if not a
Justification, of me, in applying these Terms to signify or express the things
I mean; and in making use of that Analogy which they bear with them. Such as
are, Turn us, Jer. 31.18.
and we shall be turned; Convert us, and we shall be converted; their hearts
were turned back from following the Lord: My soul follows hard after thee;
Psalm. 63.8. Cant. 1.4. Jo. 12.32. Psalm. 78.37. Psalm. 25.15.141.8.
Draw me, and I shall run after thee; If I be lifted up I will draw all men to
me; His heart was not right with the Lord; My Eyes are always toward thee; and
infinite more Expressions of that Nature.

CHAP. VIII.
Concerning Divine Magnetism.

IT is certain that every thing in the World has its Beauty, and that
Perfection and Felicity that it is capable of, in holding that place, state,
position and order, that the Glorious GOD instituted for it; and when it is out
of that state and position, it contracts Deformity, Disorder, and Discomposure;
as a Bone out of Joint, or as the Blood or Spirits in the Body being out of
their proper Vessels, from whence follows Corruption, Discomposure, Pain, and
Disease.

And therefore Aristotle was not out of the way, when, as I remember, somewhere
he tells us that cuj^^que locus naturalis est sui conservativus; and therefore
every thing has a kind of innate and connatural Appetite to his own Place.

The Humane Soul, as it proceeded from God by a singular and special kind of
Efflation, not common to the production of other Creatures; Fecisti nos,
Domine, ad te, and inquietum est cor nostrum donec requiescat in te. Aug. 1.
Conf. c. 1.
so by the Law and Constitution of its Creation, the true, genuine, and proper
position and respect thereof was, and is to be, to that God, from whence it
thus marvellously at first proceeded; and in that state, respect, and position,
it had and has its Happiness, its Perfection, its Composure, Quietness,
Serenity, and Rest, both in this Life and that which is to come.

And I call the due Position and Respect of the Soul to God, when it is
frequently taken up with the Thoughts of him; when it fears, loves, honors,
and obeys him; when it is inquisitive what his Will is, that it may obey him;
when it is sensible of his Presence, Majesty, Greatness, Power, Wisdom,
Goodness, and Truth; and comports its self before him, suitable hereunto, in all
Piety, Righteousness, Justice, Sobriety, and Integrity. And when the Soul is in
such a Frame, it is in its due state, position and respect to God; and when it
is out of this Frame it is out of joint, disordered, and unhappy.

And we need no clearer Evidence hereof than a due consideration of this double
State of Mankind; namely, in this life, and that which is to come, in a State
of Aversation from this his due Position.

First, Let us consider a Man in this life, in his State of Aversation from
God, and from that due position and respect that it should have to God, in
Subjection to him, Obedience unto him, Fear and Love of him.

As soon as the first Man, by the Suggestion and Temptation of Satan, and by
giving way to Lust and Pride, averted himself from God, presently there
followed in his Soul, Guilt and Shame, the bitter Reflections of his own
Conscience, sorrow, vexation, disorder, and disquietness within, and a curse,
labor, and crosses without.

Again, look upon the State of any Man at this day, forsaking his due respect
and position to Almighty God, and converting himself wholly or chiefly, to the
Pleasures, Profits, or worldly Contentments of this Life, we shall find him
restless and unsatisfied in all his Pursuits; when he has attained one
pleasure or profit, he is tired and weary with it, and restless in it, still
pursuing others, and in the midst of all his Enjoyments full of Fears,
Anxieties, and Discontents, and still wants that Satisfaction that his Soul
would fain enjoy, but cannot, for it is out of its place, order, and due
position, that the true Law of his Nature has stated for him, namely, his
knowledge of God, his love to him, his endeavor to serve and obey him, his
delight in him. Hither the bent, the tendency, the cuspis, the apex of his Soul
should be directed, but it is unnaturally turned off from that position, and
converted to that which cannot satisfy. And this makes the Soul restless and
uneasy in the midst of the Enjoyment of what it desires.

2. Consider it with relation to that future Life of the Soul, which will
certainly be after the Death of the Body. In that State the Pleasures, Profits,
Honors, Contentments of this World, are wholly insignificant; they are
Entertainments fitted only for the Meridian of this Life, and are in no sort
accommodated to the next: For, of what use can carnal Delights, sensual
Pleasures, Bags of Money, great Continents and Tracts of Land, Titles of
Honor, and these other things, that the Men of this World make their
expectation, of what use can these be to a separated Soul? And yet when the
Soul has in this Life by long Custom changed, as it were, its true position
and verticity, and wholly or chiefly converted it self to these Enjoyments, and
wholly estranged it self from God and his fear and love, as it falls so it
lies, and has no other relish of any other Delights or Expectations, than what
it made its Business and Felicity here; whereby it comes to pass that she is
wholly disappointed and at a Loss in that other Life, finding nothing there
which she made her Enjoyment and Felicity here. And certainly, were there no
other Hell to be expected or feared, this miserable Disappointment of a Soul
that has thus changed and lost its true Verticity, is Hell enough.

Therefore whatever Men may think, it is most certain that the true, natural,
and genuine State of the Soul consists in a most sincere and hearty Conversion
of it self to God; and the Conversion of the Soul from God to the Creature, is
a most unnatural State and Position of the Soul.

And if any Man now enquire, how it then comes to pass that at any time the
Soul of any, especially that the generality of Mankind should be thus befooled
and bewitched with this World, as to convert it self and its position wholly or
principally to it?

I Answer, though there may be many other Reasons also given, yet this shall
serve at present: The humane Soul, as it stands united to the Body, has two
principles in it; the one, that which should be indeed the regnant governing
Principle, the Intellectual Power; and this has a secret Bias in it toward
Almighty God, and his Love, Fear, and Obedience: the other that which indeed
should be in Subjection, namely, the sensual part, which naturally respects the
pleasures, contentments, and delights of this World, and such Provisions as may
be subservient to them, as Riches, Honor, etc. Now if the intellectual Part be
so servile and base as to be overmatched by the sensual, or to be carried and
governed by it, the true genuine Verticity or Direction of the Soul is in a
manner altered and transposed; especially if that prevalence be strengthened by
long Custom and Usage, which gives a kind of other Nature to the Soul, than
what is truly natural to it; whereby it comes to pass in process of time, that
the whole Soul, even the intellectual part thereof, becomes sensual, and is
entirely leavened with a sensual Ferment, if I may so call it, and so
habituated to a constant Conversion of it self to the World, as if indeed it
were no other than a sensual Soul, the innate and connatural Characters of even
Natural Religion being wonderfully obscured and weakened in it.

CHAP. IX.
Concerning the several Instances and Means of the Conversion of the Soul to
God.

THe true and natural state and position of the Soul of Man, consists in the
entire converting of it self to God, the Author and End of its Being, in all
Submission and Obedience, in Gratitude and Thankfulness, in Resignation and
Dependence, in Worship and Adoration, in Sincerity and Uprightness. And in this
Position and State it first stood before the Apostasy of the first Man. And
besides what is mentioned in the former Chapter, there were three things
especially that carried off the Soul from this state and position, and still
very much obtain among the Children of Adam.

1. A want of due Attention to those Natural and implanted Principles of
Religion and Piety, that are connatural to the Soul, radicated in it, and with
due Attention capable of great Advance and Improvement.

2. The Bias and Inclination of the sensual Appetite to present and sensual
Delights, and affectation of the present worldly Advantages, which are a sort
of Provisions for these sensual Lusts, as Wealth, Honor, Worldly Power, Glory,
Splendor, which wheel about the Soul toward them, avert it from its Duty
unto, and Delight in God, and corrupt and imbase, and prostitute the humane
Soul. And thereby it comes to pass, in the Soul thus displaced from its true
position, that these very external Blessings that Almighty God lends us to draw
us to him, as Health, Strength, Wealth, Reputation, Honor, Abundance of all
external good things, are made so many Means of averting the Soul from that God
that gives them, and makes us place our whole Desires toward them and delight
in them, and to forget that God that gives them.

3. The Temptations and subtle Insinuations of Satan, that Enemy of Mankind,
who being irrecoverably fallen from his Duty to his Maker, uses all the Means
he can to avert the Souls of Men from God, and to render them as irrecoverably
lost as himself.

There seems also to be Three great Means to retain the Human Soul in its just
and due Respect and Position toward Almighty God, and to reduce him to it, and
thereby to attain that Happiness and Felicity, that is suitable to his
Condition: For it is a certain Truth, as I have before observed, That every
created Being then, and only then, attains that Felicity that it is capable of,
when it stands in that Place, Station, Position, and Order, that the Wise and
Glorious God has appointed and instituted for it; and when it loses that
Station or Position, it is like a Bone out of joint, full of disorder,
discomposure, and Pain.

The First is that Connatural Propension and Bias, that is implanted and
tincted in the very Texture and Fabric of the Human Soul, whereby it is
secretly inclined to an Acknowledgment, and Veneration, and Subjection unto a
Supreme Being.

Secondly, The Rational and Intellectual Sight in the Soul, not considered
simply and singly in it self alone, but as it stands furnished by the Divine
Goodness with Objects attracting and bringing about the Soul unto God, and
containing and keeping it in that Position.

Thirdly, A Secret and Sweet and Efficacious Influx of the Divine Spirit upon
the Human Soul, soliciting, moving and inclining it to the Love and Obedience
of Almighty God.

The First Means I call Natural, the Second Rational, and the Third Spiritual
and Supernatural.

CHAP. X.
Concerning the Natural Means of the Soul's Conversion to Almighty God.

THERE are implanted and characterized in the Human Soul certain common Notions
and Inclinations, which seem to be the first Rudiments of Natural Religion and
Conversion to God, even antecedently to any actual Ratiocination. And as the
Glorious God has planted in the Animal Nature certain Animal Instincts and
Inclinations, whereby they are guided and governed to the conserving and
perfecting of their Animal Life, so he has engraven on the very Fabric of the
Human Soul certain Characters and Inclinations, which may conduct or assist him
to the perfection of his Rational and Intellectual Life, which consists in the
Conversion and due Position and Respect of the Soul to the Glorious God and his
Will. And among many of these common Notions, that might be observed, this is
the greatest and the most universal, and of the greatest Importance, namely
that there is a most Sovereign Being, the Cause and Governor of all Things, of
perfect Power, Wisdom and Goodness, that Loves, and will reward them that fear,
honor and obey him; and will punish them that neglect or disobey him: And that
therefore he is to be Feared, to be Worshipped, to be Invoked, and to be Praised.

And these common imprinted Notions have been a great Means of the establishing
a Natural Religion almost in all Nations of the World, though Ignorance and
Evil Custom have oftentimes corrupted these Notions, as to the manner and
object of their Worship. And this is that which Tully, Lib. 2. Cap. 24. de
Legibus observed to my Hand: Nam quod aliquibus cohaerent homines, e mortali
genere sumserunt, quae fragilia essent, and caduca: Animam esse ingeneratam a
Deo; ex quo vere vel agnatio nobis cum Coelestibus, vel genus, vel stirps
appellari potest. Itaque extot generibus nullum est animal, praeter hominem,
quod habeat notitiam aliquam Dei; de ipsisque Hominibus nulla Gens est neque
tam immansueta, neque tam fera, quae non, etiam si ignoret qualem habere Deum
deceat, tamen habendum sciat.

This secret connatural Bias, as I may call it, of the Human Soul toward God,
seems to arise from Two sorts of Principles: The former sort of Principles are
such as are in their kind common to all created Beings; the latter more
specifically applicable to the Make and Frame of the Human Soul.

Touching the former sort, those Inclinations, Propensions, and Dispositions of
all created Beings, are these, whereby, by a kind of connatural Instinct, one
thing has a special Inclination or Propension to another, by the very
Institution and Law of their Nature, antecedently to any distinct perception of
the Reason of such their Inclination.

And this kind of Natural Propension of one thing to another, is principally
observable in these ensuing Instances:

First, Every thing has a natural Kindness, Propension and Conversion to that,
from which it immediately received its Being. This we see daily in Animals, in
Vegitables, in some inanimate Beings: The stupid Magnet pays a kind of
obsequiousness and sequaciousness to the Earth, from which it received
immediately its magnetical Nature; and the Needle to that Pole of the Magnet,
that touched and animated it.

Now although All created Beings received their Beings from the Fiat of
Almighty God, and therefore in their several kinds pay a constant observance of
that Law of Nature, which he at first gave them; yet the Human Soul, in its
first Production, had a more special, and immediate, and signal Production by
Almighty God, than any other created Beings, (at least the Angels excepted;) He
breathed into him the Breath of Life, and Man became a living Soul.

And whether the Origination of the Souls of Men, propogated by successive
Generation, be the same as was at first of the Soul of the first Man; or,
Whether the Souls of Men in succeeding Generations be by a kind of Irradiation
or Participation of the first created Human Soul, it alters not the Matter; for
both in the one Supposition, and in the other, the Human Soul had a special
admirable singular emanation from Almighty God above all other created Beings,
the Angels excepted.

And upon this Account, even of that natural Respect and Propensity between the
Principiatum, and its immediate Principle, there arises an inbred natural
Propension and Tendency of the Soul to God, wherein she does recognize him as
the special Author of her Being.

Secondly, Similitude and Likeness is a natural fund of Propension and
Inclination of one thing to another, This is one of the most common Grounds of
all Sympathies in Nature, as might easily be made out by induction of
Particulars. Now the Humane Soul bears the greatest Similitude to the Divine
Nature of any created Being that we are acquainted with. The Scriptures tell,
That Man was in a special manner created in the Image of God; and Reason tells
us, That the most lively Impression of that Image was upon the Soul: and
although a contracted Corruption has in many eminent Respects defaced that
Image, as to the Habits of the Soul, yet still it retains its Natural, and, as
I may call it, its Essential Similitude in the Purity of its Substance, its
Indissolubility, and Immortality; in its admirable Faculties of Intellect and
Will, and the Liberty thereof. And upon this Account, as it has a similar
Congruity to its Prototype, so it must needs have a natural Love, Propension,
and Inclination to it.

Thirdly, We see in all created Beings a natural Propension, Love, and
Conversion of every thing to that from which it receives its Protection and
Defense, its Conservation and Perfectibility: and this is a great Reason of
most of the Sympathies in Nature, and of those Conversions and Motions of one
thing toward another; and this not only in Things endued with a sensible
Perception, but also in Beings destitute of Sense: Thus Vegitables will reach
after the Water and moist Particles of the Earth to receive their Nourishment,
and toward the Sun and its warm Rays, to receive heat and advance of their
vital Principles; and the poor senseless Magnet will reach after the Earth, and
its Magnetic Effluxes, to receive a Preservation, and farther increase of its
Magnetic Vigor.

Now the Soul, though it be a noble Being, yet it is a dependant Being; and
though it be created Immortal, yet it has a passive receptive Power, whereby
it is perfectable to a higher degree of Excellence and Perfection, which no
Being in the World, but the Being of Beings, can satisfy and fill; and though
it be immortal, yet in its state of Union with the Body, it is affected with
the Good and Evil that befalls the Body, and stands in need of an uncessant
Protection and Supply from the Author of her Being: And therefore by a kind of
natural Instinct and Dependence, reaches after him. And this is that which I
call the Natural or Connatural Means of Converting the Soul to God, even by a
kind of innate Propension, antecedent to any Acts of Ratiocination, or rational
Argumentation, Illation or Conviction.

CHAP. IX.
Concerning the Reasonable or Intellectual Means of Converting the Soul to God.

BEsides that Natural Bias or Tendency of the Soul to God, spoken of in the
last Chapter, there is yet another and more vigorous Principle placed in the
Human Soul, principally for that purpose, namely, the Intellectual and Rational
Nature and Faculties planted in the Soul, and the conduct and guidance thereof.

And this certainly is highly necessary for that end; for although the natural
Bias and Propension of the Soul be of great Use to convert the Soul to the
Original and Fountain of her Being, yet it is but a tender and choice Plant,
and stands in need of a continuing cherishing and due Attention to it: and
therefore we see by Experience, as the Case now stands with Mankind, it is
easily checked, discouraged, and impaired by Evil Customs, and the present
Allurements and Importunities of our Lusts: And therefore that Mankind might be
furnished with more effectual Means to retain the Soul in its due Position and
Habitude to Almighty God, he has furnished the Soul with certain Faculties and
Affections, that might more effectually bring it to its true, natural State, to
its due respect and habitude unto God, and thereby to attain its Everlasting
Happiness.

There are therefore placed in the Humane Nature these Three great Reasonable
Faculties: 1. The Intellective Faculty. 2. The Will. 3. The humane Reasonable
Affections.

1. The Intellective Faculty, which has not only a Perception of things
represented through the Senses, but by a Rational Process to deduce and frame
Conclusions from them of a higher and nobler Nature than the bare sensible
Objects in themselves amount unto; and also to improve those natural Congenite
Sentiments, whereof in the former Chapter, to a greater Degree and Perfection
than they are in their first Appearance; to find out another kind of Good than
what barely appears in the Objects of Sense, namely a Moral and Intellectual
Good; to examine, consider, and determine of the disparity of things, that are
in themselves Good, and to give a due Prelation and Preference to that Good,
which is the chiefest and most valuable.

2. The Will, which is not a bare irrational, peremptory Faculty to will or
refuse what it pleases, but in its true regular Constitution and manner of
acting is a rational Faculty, and acts according to the reasonable Dictate and
Conclusion of the Understanding, and when it acts otherwise, it acts
inordinately, frowardly, and perversely; and the natural Object of the Will,
unto which it is properly ordinated, is to will that which is Good, and to will
that chiefly which is the chiefest Good, and that subordinately, which is a
less or subordinate Good.

3. The Affections, which, whether they are distinct from the Will, or but the
more intense Motions of it, is not necessary here to dispute; but certainly
they have a great share in the bringing of the Soul to its just Position and
Respect to Almighty God.

And although the Brute Animals have certain Passions analogal to these
Affections in Man, yet there is a great Disparity between them: 1. Because
there are some Affections that seem most peculiar to the Humane Nature. I shall
name but those of Hope, Dependence, and Gratitude. And although there are some
extraordinary Examples and Instances of such Affections in Animals, yet in
truth they are but Shadows of these that are in the reasonable Nature, as the
Fantasy of Brutes is but a kind of Shadow of the Humane Intellect, and the
Appetite but a Shadow of the Will. 2. Because even in all the Affections or
Passions, which seem most common to the Humane and Animal Nature, as Love, Joy,
Fear, Anger, etc. there is this great difference, 1. That the Affections of the
Humane Nature are naturally under the Regiment of Reason and Understanding, and
so are, or ought to be, governed by it, and are therefore in Man, Reasonable
Faculties; but the Passions of Brutes, as they are excited merely by their
Sentient Fantasy, so they are at best but under the Regiment of it: so that
the Humane Affections have another kind of formal Nature, or Tincture, as I may
call it, than the like Affections in Animals. 2. That the Affections in Animals
and Men, that come under the same denomination, yet are distinguished by their
Objects: The Affections of a bare sentient Nature, as Love, Hatred, Fear, Joy,
etc. are always terminated in a sensible Good to be desired, or Evil to be
avoided: but the Affections of the Humane Soul have not only for their Objects
sensible Good or Evil, but also Good and Evil of a higher and nobler Size,
namely Moral or Intellectual Good to be prosecuted and entertained with Love,
Joy, Delight, Complacency, and Desire; and Moral and Intellectual Evil to be
shunned or avoided, or born with Hatred, Detestation, Grief, etc. and these
Objects of this latter Nature, strike upon the Humane Affections with more
vigor and energy, by how much they are greater, and of greater importance than
sensible Good or Evil.

And as thus the Divine Goodness has furnished the Humane Soul with these
excellent Faculties and Instruments to keep and bring about the Humane Soul to
her due Position to her Maker, so he has furnished these Faculties with such
Objects as are highly serviceable and conducible to this End.

And these are contained in those two Books or Volumes, (...). That of the
Works and Providence of God. 2. That of Divine Revelation; both which do afford
to the Humane Reason, Intellect and Nature, admirable Motives to incline the
Soul to its true Habitude and Position toward Almighty God, but especially the
latter of these.

CHAP. X.
Touching the Rational Instances and Motives of the Conversion of the Soul to
God upon the Account of the Works of Nature and Providence.

ALthough Almighty God has so ordered the Frame of the Humane Soul that it
has many Handles, as it were, whereby it may be kept and turned about to its
due Position unto Almighty God, which is its Happiness and Perfection; and he
that made us, knows so well our Frame, that he can, and does, daily apply fit
Attractives to those Ansulae humanae Animae; yet amongst them all, there are
three principal Affections of the Soul, that are of great moment and use in
this matter: viz. Love, Gratitude, and Dependence.

1. Love is the strongest and most vigorous Affection of the humane Soul; it is
the great Spring that excites and governs all the Wheels and Motions of the
Soul, and is in truth the natural and proper Verticity of the Humane Soul: The
Soul moves entirely after that which it entirely loves; and that does as
naturally carry the Motion of the Soul toward it, as the Magnet governs the
Motions of the Needle; so that it is somewhat more than morally true, Anima est
ubi amat. If a Man entirely loves Wealth, or Pleasures, or Honors, the Soul
entirely moves after it, uses all means to attain it, is disquieted and vexed
if she miss it, and is in effect wholly governed and managed by the strength of
his Love to it: It commands all the rest of the Affections and Actions of the
Man; his Reverence, his Care, his Vigilance, Attention, Obedience. Love is as
strong as Death; and that Object that has once gotten this Affection, leads
the Man as it pleases, and therefore, Hos. 11.4. styled the Cords of a Man,
the Bands of Love. And if this Affection be principally set upon the Glorious
God, the Soul is placed and settled in its due Position, and is entirely under
his Government.

Now there are two great and powerful Attractives of this Affection, viz. 1st.
Excellency, Beauty, or Goodness, which are but different Expressions of the
same thing: and, 2. Love, and the Effects or Indications thereof, Bounty and
Beneficence.

1. As to Excellence and Beauty, it is in all Instances a Motive and Excitation
of Love: Every thing in Nature, so much as it has of Beauty and Excellence, so
much of our Love it does obtain.

Now the admirable Order and Beauty of the Universe does not only convince the
Understanding that there is a God, the Sovereign Cause of this Order and Beauty
of the Universe, and the several Parts thereof, but does necessarily conclude a
Transcendent Beauty and Excellence in that Sovereign Cause; namely, an immense
Power, Wisdom, Goodness, and Perfection in him who made, and continually
orders and disposes it in that excellent Frame and Order.

2. Beneficence and Bounty unto allthings, especially to that Subject wherein
this Affection lodges.

And although it be true, that the innate, intrinsic, appropriate Goodness and
Perfection of any Being does, upon a true rational Account, deserve our Love,
though it were not at all extrinsecally communicative of Goodness to us: yet it
is certain that Love and Beneficence in any Object does more vigorously work
upon our Affection of Love, than the simple intrinsic Excellence of the Object
it self. And the Reason is, because Beneficence, Love, and Communicative
Goodness has not only an intrinsic Beauty and Loveliness, but also gives us
an Interest and Benefit in it, and by it: and so upon the Account of Self-Love,
of Love to our selves, it increases our Love to that beneficent Object; and
Self-love, that has a great Interest in every Man, renders his Love to a
beneficent Object more vigorous and active.

Now if any Man considers the incomparable Bounty and Goodness of God to the
Humane Nature, upon the account of the things of this Life, he cannot want a
powerful Incentive to draw out his Love to such a Benefactor.

Let a Man but consider the noble Structure and Frame of the Humane Body, the
admirable Faculties of his Soul, the Dominion that thereby he has over all
things in the inferior World, the Provision that is made for his Food,
Clothing, Habitation, Medicine, Delight, the Accommodation of Animals,
Vegetables, Minerals, Elements, Meteors, nay of the very Motions and Influences
of the Heavenly Bodies, to his Use, Contentation, Convenience, Health,
Pleasure, Delight, and infinite more Topics of this nature, he has reason to
conclude, even upon the Account of the Works of Nature, and of the common
Effects of Divine Providence, that Almighty God is a most Bountiful Benefactor
unto him, and therefore deserves his highest and intensest Love. And most
certainly, it is the want of due Attention and Consideration that all the Good
we have is from his Bounty and Beneficence, if we do not return unto him the
greatest Love and Observance imaginable, even upon the bare Account of this
liberal Beneficence. And this is that which the Apostles intimate, even in
relation to the Heathens, Act. 14.17. Nevertheless he left not himself without
Witness in that he did good, and gave rain from Heaven, and fruitful Seasons,
filling our hearts with food and gladness.

Therefore the Divine Love and Beneficence to Mankind is a great Attractive of
the Love of the Soul to God. Magnes amoris amor. And what is said by the
Apostle as to those greater Indications of the Divine Love (whereof hereafter)
1. Joh. 4.10. the antecedent Love of God to Mankind, even in these common
Administrations of his Providence, does not only deserve, but upon a kind of
natural Attraction draws out our Love to him.

2. The second Affection that I principally insisted upon, is that of
Gratitude, which seems to be an Inclination, or Rational Instinct of the Humane
Soul, and so naturally radicated in the Soul, that he that is without a kind of
natural Cogency (as I may call it) to it, seems to have put off the very humane
Nature, and Apostatized from it. The Obligation to it is so natural, so
universal, and so operative, that Ingratitude is both odious to Mankind, and
breeds in the Person himself a secret Shame and Self-Condemnation.

And the Effects of Gratitude are, 1. A secret Connection and uniting of the
Soul to the Benefactor. 2. An Endeavor by all due Means to requite the Benefit
with all the Offices of Love and Duty. And, to say the truth, Gratitude is but
a kind of Instance and Indication of Love to a Benefactor, and arises upon the
same Account, namely, as Benefits received inviteth Love, so it raises
Gratitude to the Benefactor.

And therefore the very same Communicative Goodness of God, that naturally
exciteth our Love, exciteth our Gratitude, and therefore need not again to be
here repeated. And because the Goodness of God to Mankind, even in his common
Providence, does exceed any commensurate Retribution or Recompense to him, we
cannot by any Means advantage him that is All-sufficient in himself; therefore
the natural Effect of Gratitude is to make the best Retribution we can, namely,
to Observe, Honor, Glorify, Praise, and Acknowledge his Goodness and Bounty,
to Obey his Will with all Cheerfulness and Alacrity, to convert and turn the
Aspect and Tendency of our Souls to him, which is the true state, position, and
verticity of the humane Soul.

3. The Third Affection, which I shall instance in, is that of Trust and
Dependence, which arises upon Four Premises: 1. A daily Sense and Experience
of our own Wants, Deficiencies, and Dangers, and of our own Insufficiency to
overmatch or avoid them. All the Instances of our Lives furnish us with
Experiences of this Nature. And, 2. A due Sense of a Sufficiency of Power in
some other Being to relieve or supply us. 2. A due Sense of abundant Goodness,
Beneficence, and Good Will, in the same Powerful Being, to be propitious unto
us. 4. A Sense that that Powerful and Beneficent Being is or may be acquainted
with our Exigencies and Extremities. And upon this Account it is, that in such
Instances, which Men ordinarily suppose are governable, or to be mastered by
other Means, Men ordinarily fly unto them, as to their Wits and Contrivances,
to their Riches and Wealth, to their Friends and Relations, to Princes and
Magistrates, to Physicians and Surgeons, according to the various Conditions of
their Needs or Wants: but when Extremities or Fears rise above the Relief of
ordinary Means, there are few People in the World but have recourse to the
Sovereign Power of God for their Relief. Jonah 1.5. When the Mariners (the
roughest and boldest Generation of Men) were in a Storm that exceeded their
Pilot's Skill, then the Mariners were afraid, and cried every one unto his God,
and reproved Jonah for not calling upon his God: so that the Affection of Fear
also has its part in the Exercise of this Affection; and though the Saying of
the Poet savours too much of Atheism, Primus in orb Deos fecit Timor; yet in
this Sense it has a Truth, that Extremities and invincible Fears and Dangers
draw Men to the Recognition and Veneration of God, which possibly could not be
so easily drawn thereunto. In their Affliction they will seek me early.

And not only Extremities are the Motives of this Conversion to God in
Supplications and Dependence, but also the common Experience of the Deficiency
and Disappointments, that do so commonly happen in ordinary Means, does carry
the Minds of Men to the Sovereign Power of Almighty God, to bless and prosper
the Means, to supply the Defects thereof, to interpose in their
Disappointments. And this in all Ages and Nations we may observe to be usual.

And now although the Divine Beneficence, even in these external Benefits, is
in it self a sufficient Attractive of our Love and Gratitude to God, and our
Dependence upon him, since all these are Acts of his free Bounty and Goodness;
and as without him we cannot procure them, so neither can we at all deserve
them, or the least of them: yet these Means had not that effect, that might
reasonably be expected by such a Benefactor. And the Reasons or Occasions
thereof were principally these:

First, Because by Evil Education and Customs, and by the subtlety of the Enemy
of God and Man, and his Instruments, the Notion of God was greatly corrupted in
the Minds of Men: they fell to Idolatry and Polytheism, making Creatures and
Idols their Gods: This is that which the Apostle learnedly and truly describes,
Romans 2.

Secondly, The Commonness and Assiduity of these Benefits rendered them less
observed and valued, and Mankind thereby grew almost as senseless of their
value, or of the Author of them, as the Brute Beasts; they were either not
taken notice of, or not considered, but enjoyed as things of Course, and a
common Natural State of things, and so Men enjoyed them without any value or
admiration of them, or of the Goodness, Bounty, and Beneficence of God that
bestowed them. Certainly the Circular Motion of the Sun or Stars is a greater
Miracle of Wisdom, and Power, than either of their Rest can be, and of greater
Benefit and Advantage to the Children of Men: And yet because it is common and
usual, Men are not affected with the Admiration of it, or Gratitude for it: But
if the Sun should stand still but a day, it would presently put the World into
Admiration. Great Works and Benefits are lightly valued or observed, when
common and ordinary.

Thirdly, But although these were but the dull Apprehensions of the common sort
of Mankind, yet there were many considerate and observing Men in the World,
that had a better Advertence and Valuation of the Divine Beneficence even in
these external Dispensations of Providence, and they took notice of Almighty
God to be the bountiful Author of all these external Benefits: And yet there
were some Considerations that made them set the less value upon them, which in
truth were of moment; and they were principally these:

First, They did observe that these Benefits were promiscuously distributed to
Good and Bad; so that as the Wise Man tells us, Eccles. 9.1. No Man knows
either Love or Hatred (the Divine Favor or Displeasure) by all that is before
them: and Eccles. 8.14. Just Men to whom it happens according to the work of
the Wicked; and Wicked Men to whom it happens according to the Work of the
Righteous.

Secondly, Which is yet more, they observed that according to the usual
Occurrences of the Divine Providence, it most ordinarily happened that Bonis
Male, Malis been which has staggered even Men of great Wisdom and Piety: Job.
21.7. Psalm. 73.3. Jerem. 12.1.

Thirdly, But yet farther, upon a strict Observation by inquisitive Men, they
found much dissatisfaction in the most plentiful Enjoyments of External
Benefits; insomuch that they wrote Vanity and Vexation of Spirit upon all the
best Enjoyments of Externals.

Fourthly, But let a Man have the most plentiful Enjoyment of the good things
of this Life, and a most high Gust and Relish of them, yet still Men were under
the Praesensation and Apprehension of Death, which would infallibly put an end
to the best of these Enjoyments, and allayed and abated the Contentment of
their present Enjoyments; so that according to the signicant Expression of the
Apostle, Heb. 2.15. through fear of Death, Men were all their Lifetime subject
to Bondage, even in the midst of their most exquisite Enjoyments.

Fifthly, But this was not all, the more serious sort of Mankind began to
consider the Excellence of the humane Soul, and the great disproportion that
there is between the best Externals of this Life, and the Capacity, Desires,
and Delights of the Humane. Neither did they rest there, but they had not only
strong Suspicions, but high Persuasions of the Immortality of the Intellectual
Soul; and they very easily found that those things that we ordinarily set a
great Esteem upon, as Bodily Pleasures, Wealth, Riches, Fame, Power, Honor,
must needs be very insignificant Things to the State and Condition of a
separate, immortal, intellectual Soul; but somewhat else was to be reached
after, more suitable to such a Nature, and such a State; and therefore these
remporal Benefits, though they were of use for the State of this Life, were not
of so true a Value as ordinarily Men thought; and yet for all this, even the
Wisest and most perspicacious Men were in the dark, and knew not how with any
certainty to frame to themselves an Idea of the State of a separated Soul, or
wherein its Happiness consists, or how it was to be certainly attained. And
although the more Mercurial and Poetical Wits ran out into a Thousand Fancies
of Elysian Fields, of the Migration of Souls, of the various Periods and
Peragrations of the Soul; yet the more Judicious, though satisfied in the
Opinion of the Immortality of the Soul, yet were not satisfied with these
uncertain and conjectural Suppositions touching the manner of its future State
and Condition.

Upon all these Accounts, the Divine Wisdom and Goodness took another and more
effectual, and yet a most rational Means, highly suitable to the Nature and
Exigence of Mankind, to retain him and reduce him to the true and just Position
of his Soul in relation to the Almighty, and consequently to Happiness and
Blessedness.

CHAP. XI.
Touching the Second Means of Conversion of the Soul to God, namely Divine
Revelation.

I Come now to that other great Means of the true Conversion of the Soul to
God, and placing it in its true and right position, in relation to him; namely
Divine Revelation.

And although in respect of the manner of the Discovery, this Means is Divine
and Supernatural, yet we shall hereafter see that it is not improperly ranked
among those Means that I call rational, because when discovered, it bears a
high Congruity to true Reason, and the Faculties of the Reasonable Soul of Man:
And because the most signal and important Revelation, and that which concerns
universally all Mankind, is that of the Redemption of Mankind by Christ Jesus
the Son of God, the Doctrine of the Gospel revealed and published in him and by
him, and the Christian Religion, I shall principally apply my self thereunto;
and upon the due consideration of this admirable Attractive, we shall find that
it was not for nothing that our Savior said, And if I be lifted up, I will
draw all men to me.

And here I must again briefly resume what I said in the former Chapter, viz.
That the Three great Hinges of the humane Soul, the ansulae humanae animae,
which in a special manner convert and turn about the Soul, are Love, Gratitude,
and Dependence; and those Cords of a Man that lay hold of these Affections
first, is Beauty Excellence, Beneficence, and Bounty; that which lays hold of
the Second, is also Beneficence; and that which lays hold of the Third, is
Power, Goodness, and a certain Knowledge of our Exigences, Fears, and Wants,
which draws out the Soul into Trust, Dependence, and Invocation of that
Powerful Good, and All-knowing Being.

And although these Affections of the humane Soul do principally and more
immediately move and turn about the Soul to the suitable Objects of those
Affections, yet in as much as the humane Soul is an intellectual and reasonable
Nature, and all its Faculties in their due, orderly, and regular Actings and
Motions, act upon a presupposed Intellection, and with Reason and Deliberation:
We must therefore suppose, that antecedent to the Motions of these Affections,
there must be a due Discovery and Apprehension of that Object to which they are
thus directed.

Now upon a just and impartial Consideration and Reflection upon the Christian
Doctrine, the Revelation of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, we shall find the most
powerful, effectual, and rational Means contained and discovered in it, of
converting the humane Soul to God, and placing it in its just and true State
and Position, and thereby attaining that Perfection, Happiness, and Everlasting
Blessedness, and Rest, that is possible for any reasonable Man to desire or
expect.

Only I must add this Caution, that when I speak of the Doctrine of the Gospel
and Christian Religion, I do by no means exclude the Divine Revelation of the
Old Testament; for both Testaments make but one entire System of the True
Christian Doctrine: the Old Testament is preparatory to the New; and the New
Testament Explicative of the Old, and takes in, either in express Terms, or by
necessary admission, all the Truths of God delivered in the Old, and is
recommended by Christ himself to his Disciples and Followers, together with
those other additional Discoveries and Precepts that he made and gave.

But yet thus much must needs be added, That the Doctrine of Christianity, as
it is singly revealed in the New Testament, gives a much greater Light, makes
more full Discoveries, and contains more effectual Instances to bring about the
Soul to Almighty God, than that Old Testament alone did or could do: And I
shall now proceed to some of those most Eminent Particulars and Instances for
this purpose.

1. Whereas the Notion of God was greatly Corrupted in the Minds of Men, as is
shown in the former Chapter; the Christian Doctrine rectified those Notions,
and gives us a true Discovery of the Divine Nature, so far as our finite
Understandings are capable of it, Acts 17.23. Whom ye ignorantly worship, him
declare I unto you: here we have the great Discoveries of the Perfection,
Excellency, and Beauty of the Divine Nature, and therefore an Object infinitely
deserving the greatest Excess of our Love, and of our Dependence and Reverence:
his Eternity, Unity, Purity, Holiness, Goodness, Wisdom, Power, Justice, Mercy,
Placability, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Faithfulness, Truth; in a word, that
he is the Perfection of all Excellencies, the Chiefest Good, and the most
Sovereign Object of all our Love, even upon the single Account of his own
transcendent Perfection and Excellence. But I come to things more specifically
applicable to the Redemption of Mankind by Christ Jesus: Therefore:

2. I have in the former Chapter mentioned the Suspicions and Inclinations of
Mankind to think the Soul is immortal, and that there is a Future State thereof
for Rewards and Punishments; but this Supposition was much clouded with
uncertain Conjectures and Imaginations: But Christ in the Gospel has given us
a full Discovery and Assurance of the Immortality of the Soul, and a full
Prospect of the future State of Rewards and Punishments; and therefore is truly
said to have brought Immortality and Life to Light by the Gospel.

3. Whereas in the former Chapter I have showed that although the External
Blessings distributed among the Children of Men were greatly Valuable, and more
than any Creature could either deserve, or by his own Power procure; and
therefore Almighty God in respect of these, highly deserved our Love, as our
greatest Benefactor: yet that many wise and considerate Men, considering the
promiscuous Dispensation of External Blessings, and the great Excellency of the
humane Soul, did reach after Blessings of a higher Nature and Use, than such as
only served the Meridian of this Life.

Here we have a Discovery of the immense Beneficence and Love of the Glorious
God, unto Mankind, and therefore the highest Attractive of the Soul, namely,
Immortal Happiness, Glory, and Blessedness, freely and bountifully offered by
Almighty God, through Jesus Christ, to all that will be but converted, and turn
unto him; and this done upon the Account of his own Beneficence and
communicative Goodness unto the Children of Men, that were Enemies, and
estranged from God, by Evil Works, as well as to the rest of Mankind. Certainly
if Love, undeserved Love, be the greatest Attractive of Love; if the free
Collation of the greatest Benefits that the humane Nature is capable of,
namely, Immortal Glory, Life, and Blessedness, be the greatest Allective of
Love and Gratitude to our Benefactor, then here is such an Attractive of the
Soul to God as its chiefest Benefactor, that cannot be elsewhere matched or
equalled. But this is not all: Therefore,

3. There is yet farther such an Instance of Love, in the manner of procuring
this Benefit, that seems to equal the very Benefit it self; namely, God
Almighty sending his Son, his only Son, into the World, so far to humble
himself, as to take our Nature upon him with all its Natural Infirmities, Sin
only excepted. 2. In that Nature to live a poor, despised, persecuted Life,
reproached with the most odious, though undeserved Calumnies. 3. In that Nature
to be betrayed by his own Disciple, condemned by his own Countrymen that were
of highest Esteem among them, the Priests, Scribes, and Sanhedrim; mocked by
the Soldiers, Crowned with Thorns, his Flesh torn with Scourging, delivered
over to the Gentiles to be Executed, and then exposed to a most painful,
ignominious Death, among Thieves and Malefactors.

And, which yet was more than all this, his very Soul made as it were, an
Offering for Sin, heavy unto the Death, astonished, and in an Agony, by the
Eclipsing for the time, of the Comfort and Influence of the Divine Presence and
Love.

And all this done to expiate the Sins of Men, to become a Sacrifice for the
Sins of his very Enemies, and purchase and impetrate for them, this greatest
Benefit of Everlasting Life and Glory; and all this thus done by the very
Design, Counsel, and Contrivance of the Offended God, to satisfy his own
Justice, to magnify his own Mercy, and to save his undeserving Creature: These
are Instances of a strange and stupendous Love, and do Aggrandize the very
Benefit it self, than which yet there could not be a Greater.

So God loved the world, that he sent his only begotten Son into the world,
that as many as believed on him, should not perish, 1 John 4.10. Here is Love!
not that we loved him, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the
propitiation for our Sins.

Herein the Love of God is manifest, that when we were yet Sinners, Christ dyed
for us.

And now, if any be so inquisitive as to ask, Why was all this ado? Could not
God have saved Men without such a hard and bloody Scene? or if he would not
give Mankind Everlasting Life without Conversion of the Soul to him, could he
not by the Empire of his Power, have overruled the Hearts of the Children of
Men to such a Temper and Position?

I Answer, It is true, he could and might have done so: but he that made Man an
intellectual and a free Agent, and placed all those Affections in his Nature,
which I have beforementioned, was not minded to abrogate nor alter the humane
Nature; and at once to show both his Constancy to those Laws, he has most
wisely settled in Nature, and yet to bring about this Great Work of Conversion
of the Soul to God without offering Violence to the Laws that he had settled in
Nature; and therefore in this Great Work of the Conversion of the Soul to God,
draws it with the Cords of a Man, with the Bonds of Love, and deals with the
humane Soul more humano; and by those admirable and stupendous Instances of his
Beneficence and Love to Man, attracts and draws the humane Soul to love this
incomparable Benefactor, and consequently to that Duty and Obedience which he
owes to God, and to Felicity and Happiness, which Almighty God thereupon freely
and bountifully will confer upon the humane Soul and Nature, by such Means as
were exactly suitable to the Laws of Nature settled by him.

4. But yet farther: If this greatest Benefit, Everlasting Happiness brought
about for Mankind by so Stupendous a Means, should yet not be attainable by the
Children of Men without very difficult Terms and Conditions on their part, the
Mercy it self, though Signal and Great, possibly would not be attainable.

But to obviate this Difficulty, the Terms and Conditions on the part of Man
are very fair and easy; namely, to believe this Message from Heaven, brought
by the Son of God, and to use our sincere and best Endeavor to obey the
Precepts of a Sober, Righteous, and Godly Life, enjoined by the Son of God, and
thereby to perfect and rectify the Soul to its just State and Habit.

5. And because this Evangelical Message seems to be very strange, that the Son
of God should come into the World and take our Nature, and dye for the Sins of
Men, and procure for them Everlasting Life and Happiness, the Glorious and
Bountiful God has not spared to obviate this Difficulty also, and provided
those great Evidences of the Truth and Credibility of the Evangelical Doctrine
and Message, that are most suitable to work upon the humane Reason and
Understanding, and greater than which no Truth in the World ever had, or can
have: And though I am not minded in this place to make a Collection of all the
Evidences of the Truth of the Christian Religion, which has been already
abundantly done to my hands by others, yet I shall summarily mention some of
those Evidences that render the Truth and Divinity of the Evangelical Message
highly credible upon the most rational Accounts that can be desired by any
reasonable Man.

First, The Prophecies of former Ages recorded in the Old Testament of the
Mission of the Messiah, and the Great Ends and Success thereof fulfilled
exactly in Christ Jesus, and the Success of his Doctrine.

Secondly, The Miracles which he performed for the Confirmation both of his
Mission and Message above the Power of Natural Causes to Effect, are a Seal
from Heaven of the Truth thereof; and the greatest and most convincing
Testimony that can possibly be expected or given for the confirming of the
Truth thereof: There is not any thing that does more vigorously strike upon the
humane Assent, or Affect it, than Miracles exceeding the Course and Power of
Nature.

Thirdly, And above all those Miracles, the Miracle of his Resurrection and
Ascension into Heaven, which as it is above the Course of mere Natural Agents
to effect, so the Truth of the Fact, as to both, is confirmed by abundant
Testimony of many Eyewitnesses of it.

Fourthly, The laying down and pledging of his Life, in Witness and Testimony
of the Truth of what he had taught; he could not possibly have any Design to
deceive Men, that would give such a Testimonial of the Truth of what he had
delivered.

Fifthly, The admirable Success of this Doctrine, which quickly obtained
through the most part of the then Habitable and Learned World, notwithstanding
the great Disadvantages that attended the Promulgation of it: As, 1. The
General Opposition of the Jewish Doctors. 2. The great and deep Root that
Idolatry had in the rest of the World. 3. And the severe Persecutions by both,
against it, and the Professors of it. 4. The Meanness and Unlearnedness of the
first Promulgators of it, Fishermen and Mechanics. 5. The Author of it,
publicly Crucified and supposed dead by those that opposed it.

Sixthly, The Sutableness of the Doctrine delivered to the best Sentiments of
the rectified humane Nature. But of this hereafter.

Seventhly, The Obedience required from those that were to expect the benefit
of this great Redemption, had these singular Advantages, viz. The Precepts of
Christ and his Gospel were most Excellent and Perfect Precepts, such, as if
deeply and seriously considered, were most highly suitable to Reason, and truly
rectified humane Nature; such as admirably conduce to the Peace and common Good
of Mankind, to the tranquillity of the Mind, and to the perfecting of the
humane Nature; there is no one true Moral Precept of Virtue among the most
Polite Heathen Moralists, but here it is to be found, and some others far more
Noble and Generous than they ever dreamed of: Piety toward God, Submission to
his Will, Obedience to his Commands, Righteousness, Justice, Fidelity,
Innocence toward Men, Sobriety, Humility, Lowliness of Mind, Patience in
Tribulation, Neglect and Contempt of Wealth and Greatness, Contentation with
our Condition, Forgiveness of Injuries and many such like.

And really I must say, that if I had neither Miracles nor Tradition to assure
my Faith of the Truth of the Gospel of Christ, in all Particulars thereof, yet
the admirable Purity, Rectitude, and Excellency of the Evangelical Precepts,
their high Congruity to rectified Reason, the great Perfection that they give
to the humane Nature where duly observed and practiced, are an Evidence of most
high Credibility of the Truth of the whole Evangelical Doctrine: So true is
that of our Savior, If any man will keep my words, he shall know whether the
Doctrine be mine, or his that sent me.

Secondly, Not only the Precepts but the Example of Christ Jesus was suitable to
a Doctrine of high Perfection: Learn of me, for I am meek; and ye shall find
rest unto your souls.

Thirdly, The Motives and Helps to Obedience of this most Excellent Doctrine,
and the imitation of this unexampled Example, are high, powerful, and
efficacious; namely, an Eternal Recompense of Reward.

Fourthly, The Remedies and Allowances for our Deficiencies from the Exactness
of an Obedience in all things to all Evangelical Precepts, are great and
encouraging; Almighty God accepting a sincere, diligent Endeavor of an exact
Conformity thereunto, and pardoning the Defects therein, that happen through
humane Frailty, and all for the sake of that Great Sacrifice of his Son.

And therefore to close up all that I have said, I find the Method of the
Evangelical Dispensation to reduce and bring the Souls of Men to their just
Habitude and Position toward Almighty God, admirably effectual to that End: I
find also, that this Reduction of the Soul to its due Habitude to Almighty God,
the most natural and suitable way of attaining its True Happiness. I find the
Precepts of the Gospel full of admirable Congruity to the perfecting of the
humane Nature, to the good of humane Society, and to the enriching and enabling
the humane Soul: So that upon the whole Matter, the whole Design of the
Evangelical Dispensation is ordered and contrived with most singular Wisdom and
Forecast, with most admirable Congruity to the most refined Reasons, and with
singular Advantage to affect the Souls of Men, and to bring them about to the
great End designed by it, namely, the stating of the Soul in its due Position
and Habitude to Almighty God, the perfecting of its Nature and Habits, and the
final Fruition of Everlasting Felicity.

And the Truth is, that the Divinity of this Evangelical Dispensation is herein
manifested; for if all the wisest Men on Earth, yea, or all the Angels of
Heaven, had set themselves to have contrived a Method of the Redemption and
Salvation of Mankind, they could never have found out so exquisite an Economy
suited to this End, as is delivered in the Revelation of the Evangelical
Mystery: And therefore it is, those glorious Creatures the Angels look upon it
with Admiration. 1 Pet. 1.12. unto whom the manifold Wisdom of God is herein
declared and manifested.

But yet besides the admirable Wisdom of this Dispensation in the Matter and
Ends thereof, there are two great Circumstances in this Revelation that
signally declare it to be no less than a divine Contrivance and Message from
the God of Truth and Wisdom.

1. In that the Ends propounded in it are not of any Secular or Worldly
Advantage: Had the Gospel promised its Disciples and Followers External Wealth,
Honor, Grandeur, Temporal Delights or Pleasures, it might have been suspected
to have been a Politic Contrivance of some sagacious Men, to conduct Men,
under pretense of a New Religion, to secular Advantages: But the Business of
the Gospel is quite of another Nature, directed to the attainment of Ends that
are quite of another kind; nay, is so far from it, that it tells its Disciples
they must not expect the Splendour of this World, but must neglect, deny, and
contemn it; that instead thereof, they must expect persecution, neglect, and
contempt, from the World: and accordingly it succeeded to them, especially in
the first and purest Ages of the Christian Church.

2. In that the Means and Instruments of its Promulgation to the World, were
the most disproportioned to a politic humane Contrivance, and the most
unlikely in all humane Appearance to attain its End or Acceptance with the
World: Had the Evangelical Economy been the Product of a Consultation of a
Conclave of Learned Rabbi's, or of deep Philosophers, or of Politic or Wise
Statesmen, possibly it might have given an Occasion to the rest of the World
to have said or thought, that it is true indeed, it is a well-polished System
of a Religion, but yet it carries a Suspicion with it, of a humane Contrivance,
considering what Wise Men were emyloyed in the digesting or promulgation of it.

But the glorious God to prevent any possible Surmises in the Minds of Men, of
this kind, and to let the World see and know that it was not a Contrivance of
Humane Invention, Wisdom, or Policy, but a Method of Religion, and Salvation,
instituted and manifested by Almighty God himself, and by his own immediate
Ordination and Wisdom; in the whole Method of the Evangelical Dispensation,
does industriously decline all Instances and Contributions of humane Helps and
Advantages, and chooses those Circumstances and Instruments therein, that had
the least semblance of any Contribution of worldly or humane Wisdom or
Advantage: Christ, the Messenger of the Gospel, a poor, obscure Man, hated and
persecuted by his Countrymen, and at length Crucified: his Apostles poor
Fishermen, unlearned, and ignorant Men, Acts 4.13. the whole World of Learned
Philosophers, of Jewish Masters, of Great Princes and Statesmen, opposing this
Doctrine, with the greatest Industry, Skill and Power, vilifying it with
Reproach, Scorn and Contempt: a Stumbling Block to the Jews, and to the Greeks
Foolishness. And wherefore was all this? Certainly, next to the Excellency of
the Evangelical Doctrine it self, there could not have been a greater
manifestation of the Divine Wisdom, and a greater Indication that the Christian
Religion was really and truly a more divine Institution than this manner of its
Mission into the World; namely, That by this it might appear in the Success it
had in the World, that the Power thereof is of God, and not of Men: And
therefore he chose the foolish things of the world to confound the wise; and
the weak things of the world to confound the things that are mighty; That no
flesh should glory in his presence, 1 Cor. 1.27, 29. That in the admirable
Success of the Christian Religion in the World, all Men might see and
acknowledge, that it was neither the Contrivance of Wise Men, nor carried on by
the Wisdom or Power of Men, but by the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God.

And thus far touching this great Means of Reduction of the humane Soul to his
just Habitude and Respect to Almighty God, viz. The Redemption of Mankind by
Christ Jesus.

CHAP. XIII.
Touching the Reasonableness of the Christian Religion, and the sutableness
thereof to the Reduction of the Soul to its due State, Position and Happiness.

THere are many Truths both in Nature and Divinity, that have not, neither
indeed can have their first Discovery unto Mankind, but by supernatural
Revelation, which yet being discovered, have a high Congruity and Consonancy to
true Reason: As for Instance, The manner and order of the Creation of the
Universe, as it is delivered by Moses, if it be duly considered, is greatly
consonant to the Nature and Reason of the things in the World, and yet it is
impossible that it should at first be discovered, but by supernatural
Revelation; for no Man was, or could be a Witness to the Creation of things
that were pre-existent to his Being, neither is it possible for humane Reason
to search out by bare Ratiocination, the distinct order, method, periods, and
other Circumstances of that Great Work of Omnipotent Power, and Wisdom: And the
same may in a great measure be asserted, touching many of the important Methods
and Circumstances of the Redemption of Mankind, and Evangelical Doctrine: Some
things therein delivered, I confess, were before believed, either by the Light
of Nature, or at least by some ancient Tradition; as the Existence and
Perfection of Almighty God, the Immortality of the Soul, and a Future State of
Rewards and Punishments; though the Notions thereof were troubled and confused:
But the Evangelical Revelation has these great Preferences: 1. That some
things are discovered therein which were never before discovered, nor
discoverable but by Divine Revelation; as, the Miraculous Conception and
Mission of the Messiah; the Expiation for the Sins of Men, and the Impetration
of Eternal Life for Mankind, by his Death; and diverse other great Evangelical
Mysteries. 2. That as to those very Points of Truth that in some measure were
before apprehended and believed by Mankind, yet they are more distinctly,
plainly, and evidently discovered, in and by the Evangelical Revelation; so
that as to both these, it is truly said, that life and immortality are brought
to light by the Gospel. But although this be true, that the Contrivance of
Man's Redemption could only be by infinite Wisdom, and the Discovery it self is
supernatural, a divine Message from Heaven, and published to us by the Son of
God, Heb. 1. yet the Truths thus revealed do bear a great Consonance and
Congruity to the True Light of Reason, to the true State of the humane Nature.
For to say the Truth, True Reason in the Souls of Men, is but a Ray or Beam of
that transcendent Wisdom that is in God; and it is no longer true Reason, than
as it bears a Congruity and Consonance to that Divine Reason (as I may, with
Submission, call it;) namely, the Divine Wisdom: And though in relation
thereunto, the humane Reason bears not so great a Proportion as the Light of a
Candle does to the Sun, yet certainly, if it be True Reason, it holds an
Analogy and Conformity to its Fountain and Original, and cease to be Reason
when it suits not to it. And in this respect I have adventured to range this
means of Conversion of the Soul to God, among Means that are rational, and to
call them reasonable and intellectual Means. And indeed they are so: there is
no Religion that is, or ever was professed in any Age, that has so great a
sutableness to True Reason; no Means or Method of bringing the Soul into its
true, genuine State and Position, as the Christian Religion and Doctrine.

I shall not pursue this Subject at large: but shall give some Instances,
making good my Affirmation.

1. The Evangelical Doctrine gives us a clear Account of the Immortality of the
Soul, and this is a Doctrine highly suitable to the very Sentiments of our
Souls. 1. The Consent of the most Learned and Judicious Sects of the
Philosophers, the Platonists, and many of the Stoics. 2. It seems an utter
unlikely thing, that the Noble Creature Man, of such admirable Endowments and
Faculties of Mind, a Mind of that great Capacity, furnished with Conceptions
that are of an Extent beyond a Life of Sense; a Mind reaching after
Immortality, and Communion with Almighty God, or at least, with those Noble
Creatures the Angels: I say, it is highly incredible that such a Nature, such a
Mind, should be placed and made, only to take a Turn for a few years upon the
Theater of this World, and then die and perish, and vanish like a blast of
flame or smoke, and have a lesser Privilege of Duration, than many Vegetables
and Brutes.

2. The Evangelical Doctrine gives us a distinct Account of a Future State of
Rewards and Punishments: This is also a Truth highly consonant to natural
Sentiments of Mankind, and to the ordinary Appearances in the State of humane
Nature. 1. There is scarce any Sect of Learned and Judicious Men, nay, scarce
any Nation under Heaven, but is highly persuaded of the Truth thereof in
general, though they labor under differing manners of explicating it. 2. The
whole Frame of the Universe do proclaim Almighty God to be delighted in the due
Order and Disposal of all things; every thing is full of Order, Congruity,
Beauty, and Comeliness: only the Dispensations of External Good and Evil to
Mankind, seem very confused and disproportionable to the Conditions and Deserts
of Men; Good Men to whom it happens according to the work of the wicked; and
wicked men to whom it happens according to the work of the righteous:
therefore it is not conceptible but that there must be a time to set things at
rights; a day of the manifestation of the Righteous Judgments of the God of
Order: this was the natural Conclusion of the Wise Man, Eccles. 3.16, 17. when
he saw the Disorder that was in the Dispensations among Men, I said in my
heart, God shall judge the righteous and the wicked; for there is a time for
every purpose, and for every Work.

3. The Gospel teaches that the Way and Means to attain a State of Blessedness
and Glory in that future Life of Immortality, is, by converting the Soul to
Almighty God, by Faith, Love, and Obedience; by Purity and Holiness, by
Righteousness, and Charity, by Sobriety, and Patience; and all these Christian
Virtues recommended to us by the Precept and Example of Christ Jesus: And
certainly if we examine this impartially by Reason, such a State and Position,
and Temper of the Soul is most suitable and agreeable to a Life of Immortality
and Happiness.

And we may take a measure of it by the contrary: Let us but suppose a Soul
entirely addicted to a Sensual Life, and the love of this World, placing its
Felicity in Carnal Pleasures, Eating, Drinking, Wantonness, Recreations,
Bravery of Apparel, Splendid Houses and Furniture, Great Retinue, great Store
of Lands, Money, Flocks, Herds; in Delights of the Ear, the Eyes, and other
Senses; in Power and Rule over others, and in the Sense and Delight of these
Enjoyments, the Soul to be wholly immersed: let any Man but think with himself,
how it is possible for such a Soul, thus addicted and habituated, to be in any
kind of Congruity, with the State of Happiness of a separated immortal Soul;
nay, how it is possible for such a Soul to be without extreme Vexation, Sorrow,
and Perturbation, when it comes into such a State as is wholly unsuitable to,
and incapable of such Enjoyments, which once it made its Felicity; and if it
had a Capacity to relish and taste such worldly Contentments, yet they are not
in that State to be had, they are quite gone, and out of date, and vanished
away.

4. The Doctrine of the Gospel commands and commends unto Mankind, Piety
toward God, Virtue, Charity, Righteousness, Justice, Veracity, Fidelity,
Sincerity, Integrity, Purity, Holiness, Humility, Sobriety, Temperance,
Patience, Longanimity, and all other excellent Virtues; and certainly if we
take a Measure of these Precepts even by the Light of Nature, and True Reason,
we shall find them admirably consonant thereunto, though there were no other
future Life to come. 1. If once that most radical and natural Notion of the
Existence of a Deity, and of his great Perfection be but deeply digested in the
Soul, the greatest and most divine sort of Evangelical Precepts are and would
be as naturally consequential thereupon, as the most necessary Conclusion of a
Logical Demonstration: such as are the Love and Fear of God, Reverence and
Veneration of him, entire Obedience to him, Patience and Resignation of our
Wills to his Will, Sincerity and Uprightness of Heart, Thankfulness to him,
Dependence upon him, Trust in him, a vigilant Conversation becoming his Sight
and Presence; an imitation of him in all things that we are capable to imitate
him in. Again, 2. Tranquillity of Mind and Conscience was accounted among the
Wisest of the Philosophers, the greatest Pitch of Happiness attainable by Man
in this Life; and I dare confidently assert, That no Precepts, no Practice
under Heaven is more conducible to the Tranquillity of the Mind of Man, than
these Evangelical Precepts beforementioned, as might be made easily evident by
Induction of Particulars. 3. The Peace and Good of Mankind, and of humane
Societies, is a thing justly valuable by all Wise and Good Men: And what in the
world is more conducible thereunto, then Veracity and Truth, Fidelity,
Righteousness, Justice, Temperance, Sobriety, Charity, Beneficence,
Longanimity, Goodness, Forgiveness, Meekness, Humility, Contentation, and all
this bound on to the Soul, by the strictest Bond of the Love, Fear, and Duty we
owe to the God of Heaven? The greatest part of the Disorders in humane Society,
arise by those Vices that are contrary to those excellent Virtues, as by Pride,
Ambition, Covetousness, Falseness, Dissimulation, Churlishness, Injustice,
Unrighteousness: These and the like Distempers of Soul, fill the World with
Rapine, Violence, Oppression, Contention, and Deceit, which are cured and
remedied by an Observance of the Evangelical Doctrine, than which there cannot
be any thing more conducible to the perfecting of the humane Nature, and
benefit of humane Societies.

5. The Evangelical Doctrine evermore inculcates these two great Qualifications
of the humane Soul; namely, the True Knowledge of God, and the true Love of
God: the former is that which excites the latter, and the latter is that great
commanding Affection of the Soul that fully brings about the Soul to God, and
to a cheerful and sincere Observance of him and his Will: The Love of God is
the First and great Commandment, and draws along with it the Whole Duty of Man
to God. And this is most consonant to what Reason it self dictates, and
Experience evidenceth; he that has but the firm hold upon this Affection,
governs a Man as he pleases.

6. The Evangelical Doctrine, in order to bring about Man to love God, gives us
the highest, most transcendent, and obliging Instances of the Love of God, the
antecedent, undeserved Love of God to Man, especially in the admirable Economy
of our Redemption by Christ, as has been before-shewed: And certainly this is
the most rational way that can be imagined, for the gaining of this great
Affection, and the Conversion of the Soul to God. 1. It is in it self a most
effectual Means to that end; Love and Beneficence is the great Attractive of
Love, as has been before shown; and that Great God that formed the humane
Soul, and placed it in its several Habitudes and Affections, and therefore best
knows what does most vigorously strike upon those active Strings, the Soul, did
therefore choose this effectual Magnetism to bring about the Soul to him, 1
John 4.10. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us first.
Again, 2. This Method of Attracting the Soul to God by the great and primitive
Instances of his Love to Man, is most suitable to the Frame and Mould of the
Nature of the humane Soul, and offers no Violence to it. It is true, the
Glorious God is not necessarily bound to the Laws that he has established in
Nature, they were Laws given to his Creatures, and not to himself, and he may,
and sometimes for great Ends, derogates from those Laws by the Interposition of
his own immediate Power, as in Miracles. And upon the same Account may or might
if he please, break in upon the Laws that he has instituted in the humane
Soul, and might infringe the Liberty of his Will, and turn him about to him, by
an irresistible over-powring Necessity: But the Wise God has settled and
established the Rules and Laws of the Natures of things, with so great Wisdom
and Foresight, that he rarely violates them, but ordinarily proceeds in the way
of his Providential Regiment of all things, according to those Laws and
Institutions which he has fixed in the Natures of things: in things simply
Natural, he usually proceeds by Natural Applications; and in Rational Beings,
by Means suitable to a Rational Nature, and therefore has chosen this Means to
draw the Soul of Man to him; namely, by the Cords of a Man, and the Bonds of
Love, as most suitable to the Complexion, Nature, and Constitution, settled by
his own Ordination in the humane Soul.

Upon the whole Matter therefore I conclude, that as the Apostle, Romans 12.
styles the Consecration of the Body and Soul to God a reasonable Service; so I
do with the same Evidence of Reason style the Doctrine of the Gospel the
Christian Religion, a reasonable Religion, a Religion fitted and ordered with
the most exquisite Reason, and sutableness thereunto, to bring the Soul to its
due Position, Respect, and Habitude to Almighty God, and thereby to have an
Everlasting Happiness.

CHAP. XIV.
Concerning the Supernatural Means of retaining the Soul in its due Respect and
Position to Almighty God and of the Reduction thereof unto it.

I Have hitherto considered of those two Means of Reduction of the Soul to its
due Position and Respect to Almighty God, which I have styled Natural and
Rational.

It now remains that I should consider the Third Means, which I call
Supernatural.

It appears in the consideration of the Natural Causes and Effects in the World
that, besides the Intrinsic Powers, and Propensions of things, there are
certain Extrinsick, common, adjuvant Causes, that have a great Influence in the
Effects and Appearances in the World.

The Magnet has not only its intrinsic, active Principle, its Form from which
its Motions proceed, but there is also a common Magnetism of the Earth and its
Effluxes, that greatly assist, excite, and direct its Motions.

Animals and Vegetables have not only their intrinsic, specifical, vital
Principles of their specifical Motions and Operations, but the Sun and its heat
and influence is an universal, adjuvant, exciting Principle of all vital and
sentient Operations.

And not only the ancient Philosophers, as Aristotle and Plato, and their
several Commentators, as Simplicius, Themistius, Alexander Aphrodiceus, Avicen,
and Averroes, but also the Jewish Doctors, and the Christian Philosophers and
Divines, for some Ages after Christ, did think that, besides the individual
intellectual Soul of every Man, there was also a certain common intelligent
Nature, or Being, substituted by Almighty God, whose Office it was to
illuminate the humane Soul, to excite actual Intellection in it, and to
communicate unto it these common intellectual Principles, which ordinarily and
generally obtain in all Men, and stood in relation to the humane Intellectual
Soul, as the Sun and its Light and Influence stands in relation to vital
Natures in the Lower World: And this they call Intellectus Agens, which
Averroes supposes to be Vltima Intelligentiarum separatarum, and deputed to
the actuating and exciting of Intellection in Men.

This Opinion has been (possibly upon Reasons probable enough) laid aside for
many Ages in the Christian Church: the Use therefore that I make of it only is
this, that though this Opinion seems to be dark and obscure, and not bottomed
upon a clear Evidence, yet it carries with it and under it an Adumbration of a
great and real Truth, though they attained not a full clear distinct discovery
of it: Therefore as the Apostle elsewhere in another Case told the Athenians,
that that God, whom they ignorantly worshipped, him declare I unto you, Acts
17.23. so, with some variation, I may with humility say, that secret, unseen,
and spiritual Power, which these ancient Philosophers did not distinctly
understand, but groped after it, and celebrated by the Name of Intellectus
Agens, I am now endeavoring to declare.

Almighty God, as he is every where by his Essential Presence, so he is every
where by his Powerful Influence; and as he is the Universal Productive and
Conserving Cause of all things in the World, so he is more intimate unto, and
effective of every thing in the World by his Efficacious Influence, than any
second created Cause in the World; for they are all but his Instruments, and
therefore their Causality is still but in and from the virtue and influence of
the first Cause.

And this Influx of the First Cause, the prime Efficient, Almighty God, is by
him ordinarily communicated, effused, and proportioned according to the several
Natures of Created Beings; though, according to his wise good Pleasure, he
sometimes is pleased to do it in a different manner for excellent Ends, pro
imperio voluntatis.

And therefore in Matters that are simply natural, this ordinary Efflux of the
Divine Influence is suited to that common Law of Nature, that he has settled
in the World, and governs such things according to those instituted, regular,
natural Laws.

But unto an Intellectual Nature, such as is that of Man, endued with
Understanding and Will, this Divine Efflux is communicated in a kind
proportionable to those Faculties of the humane Soul; and therefore these
Effluxes of the Divine Influence are communicated in two kinds, 1. By way of
Illumination, in relation to the Understanding Faculty. 2. By way of
Persuasion, Inclination, and Incitation, in relation to the Will and
Affections, although there are many other kind of Effluxes of the Divine Spirit
and Influence: as the Gift of bodily strength, as that of Sampson, Judges
16.20. the Gift of curious Workmanship, as that of Aholiab, and Besaliel, Exodus
36.1. the Spirit of Majesty and Government, as that of Saul, 1 Samuel 10.9. the
Gifts of Prophesying, Tongues, Miracles, 1 Cor. 12.4.9. for these were
extraordinary Effluxes given out upon special Occasions, and for special Ends,
though even in most of them, and other extraordinary Gifts of the like nature,
the Understanding and Will were much concerned and wrought upon.

1. As to the Illumination of the Understanding, certainly what the Sun is to
the sentient Eye, that, and much more, is Almighty God to the Mind of Man:
Psalm. 36.9. In thy Light shall we see Light, John 1. 9. This is the true Light
that enlightneth every man that comes into the world.

2. As to the Inclination and Bending of the Will, it is true, the Will is
naturally free, but yet it is essentially Subject unto the God that made it;
and the operation of the Divine Influence upon the Will ordinarily is but
persuasive, and therefore ordinarily resistable: thus the old World resisted
the merciful striving of the Divine Influence, Genesis 6.3. My spirit shall not
always strive with Man. Acts 7.51. Ye always resist the holy Ghost: but the
Powerful God has so great an Efficacy, and has so intimate an Access into the
Minds of Men, that he can when he pleases, and doubtless sometimes does,
irresistibly bend and incline the Will unto himself, according to his good
Pleasure, Psalm. 110.3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power. It
is an excellent Expression, Prove. 21.1. The heart of the King is in the hands
of the Lord, as the rivers of water he turns it whither soever he will: A
good Artist will guide a stream of water to what place, and in what manner, he
pleases, in the same Level, and yet without any violence offered to the
natural Motion of the Water, which in all those Motions is kept entirely
suitable to its Nature: And with the same and much greater facility the God of
Heaven can, and often does, infallibly Guide the Hearts of Men, yea of Kings,
and yet without Force or Violation of its natural Liberty.

There was never any Age nor People in the World that was wholly destitute of
this Divine Efflux upon their Understandings and Wills: it is as Universal and
Common as the Light and Influence of the Heavens; only upon some in all Ages it
was more special and effectual than upon others, even in the Gentile World. I
have always esteemed those Excellent Men among the Heathen famous for Wisdom,
Justice, Piety, and Knowledge, as Men illuminated and guided by this Divine
Influence, though possibly communicated to them in a more signal manner than to
other Men: Such were Socrates, Plato, Zeno Citticus, Solon, Lycurgus,
Pythagoras, Tully, Seneca, Aristotle, and diverse other excellent Philosophers,
Moralists, and Lawgivers, among the Gentiles; who were by the Influence of the
Divine Spirit excited, illuminated, and instructed for the Benefit of
themselves and the rest of Mankind, and to prepare the Heathen World for the
Reception of greater Light.

When it pleased God to select unto himself and his special Government, the
Family of Abraham and his Descendants, the Jewish Nation, he sets them in the
middle of the Habitable World, like a Beacon upon a Hill, to be a kind of
Common Instruction to the rest of Mankind; and for that purpose, made them
signal to all the World by his special Government over them, by Miracles, Signs
and Wonders; by giving them Laws from Heaven in great Majesty and Terror; by
committing to them the Divine Oracles; by raising up Prophets and Men specially
inspired by an Extraordinary Spirit, and by effusing among them a greater
Measure of the Influence of his Sacred Spirit. For (that I may say it once for
all) it has been always the Method of the Divine Wisdom and Goodness, when he
sends out the greater Measure of this Influx, whereof I speak, the Divine
Providence accompanies that Efflux with suitable external Means to render it the
more effectual, and the more agreeable to the manner of the Reception of the
humane Understanding: But when the Messiah came into the World with the Message
of the Glorious Gospel, the Sun was as it were in its Meridian; and as the
means of Illumination and Conversion of the World unto God was more effectual
and universal, so was also the Efflux and Irradiation of the Divine Influence
upon the Souls of Men more vigorous, diffusive, and universal.

And as the miraculous Gifts of the Spirit of God appeared in the Miracles of
Christ and his Apostles, the Gifts of Tongues, of Healing Diseases, of
Prophecy, and the like, to confirm and establish Men's Minds in the Faith,
Belief, and Obedience of the Gospel; so neither was this all: but the secret
and effectual Influence of the same Blessed Spirit appeared in Illumination of
the Minds of Men, in persuading and mightily subduing their Wills to the Belief
and Obedience of the Truth, in converting Men's Minds unto God, and placing them
in their just and due Habitude to Almighty God. And this, according to the
various Workings thereof, is sometimes called the Spirit of Regeneration, the
Spirit of Renovation, the Spirit of Sanctification, the Spirit of Holiness, the
Spirit of Adoption, the Spirit of Prayer and Supplication, the Spirit of Life,
etc. according to the various Energies that this great Effusion of the
Influences of the Blessed Spirit had upon the Minds of Men.

And this great and more diffusive and effectual Effusion of this Influence
under the Gospel was no other than what was prophesied of by the ancient
Prophets, Isa. 25.7. I will destroy in this Mountain, the covering cast upon
the face of all people. Isa. 11.9. The Earth shall be filled with the knowledge
of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea. Isa. 54.13. All thy Children shall be
taught of the Lord, Isa. 59.20. This is my Covenant, that I will make with
them, my Spirit, that is upon thee, and the words which I have put in thy
mouth, shall not depart from thee, nor from thy seed, nor from thy seeds seed.
Ezekiel. 36.27. I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
Statutes, and keep my Judgments and do them. Isa. 44.3. I will pour out my
Spirit upon thy Seed. Joel 2.28. I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh. And
this Energy of the Divine Influence appears first by a secret Irradiation and
Illumination of Understanding. 2. By a powerful Persuasion and inclining of the
Will; both which, as they were with a more vigorous and effectual Dispensation
under the first breaking out of the Light of the Gospel, so they do accompany
the Publication of it unto this day, and shall unto the end of the World;
though by reason of the Corruption of the Lives and Manners of Mankind, not
with equal Success in all Ages.

And thus far concerning the Supernatural Means of converting the Soul to God,
and consequently restoring it to its true Felicity and Blessedness.

CHAP. XIV.
The Conclusion.

AND thus I have taken Occasion upon this small Particle of Nature, which has
been under my Consideration, to make this not unprofitable Digression touching
the true, genuine, and natural Position and Conversion of the Soul toward
Almighty God.

I have shown what it is, namely, The humble and sincere Love of him, Trust in
him, Obedience to him, and Delight in him.

I have shown that this is the most natural and reasonable Habitude of the
Soul, that wherein consists her Duty, Happiness, and Rest.

I have shown the great Reasonableness and Obligation of the Soul unto it, the
Means instituted by the God of Heaven for our Attainment of it; And that every
thing in the World attains and enjoys its suitable Perfection and Felicity, when
it attains and keeps that Position, State, Station and Place, which the great
and wise Creator and Disposer of all things has appointed for it: and
consequently there is no way for the humane Soul to attain its suitable
Perfection, and Tranquillity, here in this Life, and everlasting Happiness and
Glory hereafter, but in its holding that due Habitude and Respect to Almighty
God before described.

And that this (next to the Glory of his Great Name) is the principal Reason
and End of all these admirable and special Methods of his Providence toward
the Children of Men, both in their Creation, Preservation, and that stupendous
Work of their Redemption by Christ.

If we shall now look into the several Parts of the Universe, we shall find
that every thing in nature intensely affects that Station, Position, and Order,
that the God of Nature has instituted for them; and in the holding thereof,
they attain and enjoy all that Felicity (if I may so call it) that their Nature
is capable of, and when by any Accident they are out of that Station, they are
in discomposure, and therefore by a strange, regular, connatural Appetite, they
endeavor to recover it again.

If we look up to the Heavenly Bodies, they constantly and regularly observe
and keep those Stations and Motions that the God of Nature by the Law of their
Creation has instituted for them.

If we look unto the Planetary and Elementary Bodies, we shall observe no less.

If we look upon the Animals we shall observe them regularly to comport
themselves according to the several instituted Laws of their Species, and those
admirable fixed Instincts that are rivetted into their Constitutions.

If we look upon Vegetables, they all regularly in all their vital Appearances
do follow strictly and regularly the Laws and Methods of their several Kinds.

Nay, this pitiful, inconsiderable Mineral, the Magnet, in all his Motions and
Affections, regularly and exactly follows those Laws and Directions that are
implanted in his Nature.

But if we cast our Eyes or Thoughts upon the Children of Men, and their Ways
and Walks, whose immortal Souls are directed to a nobler End than most of other
visible Creatures, and have Capacities fitted to have a Reception of the
noblest Object in the World, the Glorious and Eternal God, and to have an
humble Communion with him, which is his True Position, Habitude and Happiness.
I say, if we look on Mankind, we shall for the most part find it quite
otherwise; like Babies, Idiots, and Fools, they fix their Souls and the whole
Verticity of them, (pardon my borrowed Expression) upon Rattles, Baubles and
Toys, and imbase their Souls and Faculties with poor sordid Vanities, and
Trifles, and neglect that Magnum oportet, wherein their Perfection and
Happiness consists, so that we may justly take up the Prophet's Complaint both
against our selves and others, Jer. 8.7. The Stork in the Heaven knows her
appointed times, and the Turtle and the Crane, and the Swallow observe the time
of their coming: But my People know not the Judgment of the Lord.

And were this in the time of Paganism, those times of Ignorance, which the
Apostle says, Acts 17.30. God winked at, the Wonder were not great: But this
happens in the Christian World, where the Gospel and Holy Religion instituted
by the Son of God, is published and professed to be believed: as we shall
easily find, if we take but an Estimate of the Ways, Designs, and Delights of
Men, even in the Christian World.

1. How many there be that bid open Defiance to Heaven; Atheists that account
it the Glory of their Wit and Courage, to make a Scorn of Religion, and of the
Life to come; and this not only by their Actions but even by open Professions
and Words as far as they durst do, for fear of Humane Laws.

2. How many there be that wholly give themselves up to sensual Pleasures,
Debauchery, Incontinence, Gluttony, Drunkenness, that make little or no
Improvement of their Reason, but in making Provision for their sensual Lusts,
and fulfilling of them with more advantage than Brutes; the whole Bent and
Current and Tendency of their Souls is after Sensuality, and wholly averted
from that God that gave them their Souls for better Purposes.

3. How many there be that set the whole stress and tendency of their Souls to
the getting of Wealth, sometimes indeed by Lawful Means; but at other times by
all kind of Oppression, Cousenage, Deceit, Rapine and Violence, and make their
Wealth, their only Delight, Hope, and Confidence.

4. How many there are that make it the whole Business of their Souls to gain
Honor and Preferments, great Offices, Titles, Power, Pre-eminence, and
Authority over others; wherein if they are disappointed, their Souls as it were
dye within them, and if they obtain, they wholly bless themselves therein, till
another Opportunity of farther Acquists be found, and then their restless,
ambitious Souls press on farther for higher and greater Acquists of the same
nature.

5. How many there be that pretend to the Profession of Christianity falsely and
hypocritically, for base and secular Ends; that make a Gain of Godliness, when
they have not one Spark of True Religion in their Hearts.

6. Nay, yet farther, among those that are the greatest Pretenders to Christian
Religion, I mean the Romish Clergy, how universally they imbase the very Nature
of God and Christ, in their Image Worship? How do they even under a Disguise of
Religion, turn away the Souls of Men from the Worship, Honor, Fear, and Love
of God, by substituting the Adoration and Veneration of Angels and Saints,
Shrines, Relics and Toys, and carrying over that Love, Honor, Service,
Dependence and Confidence, which the Soul should repose in the Glorious God,
and his Son Christ Jesus, unto Creatures contrary to the Express Will of God
revealed in his Word, and contrary to the whole Design of the Christian
Religion, and the whole Economy of the Wise and Glorious God to unite the Soul
unto him, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve:
so that although there be many great Errors in the Profession of that Church,
yet this does in a most special and direct manner steal away the Soul from its
due Habitude unto the God of Heaven.

7. Nay, yet farther, even in those that have a true Sense of Religion, and
their Duty to Almighty God, yet the Pleasures, Profits, Preferments, and
Gaities of this present World, starve that Fervor of the Love, and Conversion
of the Soul to God, and leave but a small Portion of the Heart, for the Ever
Glorious God: Nay the Great Searcher of all Hearts knows, that if our Love to
the Glorious God were strictly weighed with that First and Great Commandment
repeated by our Savior, Mat. 22.37. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy mind; which is most
certainly our Duty; our Love to God would be generally found to stand in need
of many Grains of allowance from his Mercy and Goodness to make it accepted.

All therefore that I shall say, is, To remind my self and others of the Saying
of the Prophet in another Case, Isa. 46.8. Remember this, and show your selves
Men: Men that have or should have Reason and Judgment to steer their Actions
and Affections: Remember that we have in our Bosoms Immortal Souls, Souls that
will survive all our sensual Pleasures, all the Wealth, Riches, and Honors of
this World, which when this Bodily Life cease, will have no Gust or Relish to
an Immortal Soul, or if any, but to trouble and vex it: Remember that this
Immortal Soul is capable of an Immortal Fruition of the greatest Good, the
Vision and Love of the Glorious God: Remember that the Means to attain this
blessed and beatifical Vision of God hereafter, is the Conversion of the Soul
to God by true Love of him, Obedience to him, and Trust in him, while we enjoy
a Life here on Earth: Remember, that this is the true, genuine, natural
Habitude and Position of the Soul, and its Perfection and Happiness. Remember
that it is not necessary for us to be rich, to be great, to enjoy an Affluence
of all Worldly Contentments, nay possibly, yea probably this may be our
greatest detriment and estrange our Souls from God: But it is of absolute
Necessity to us to have our Everlasting Souls everlastingly happy: And now
Remember this, and show your selves Men, Men and not Children, to lavish away
our Time, our Lives, and Souls in Trifles, in things that will not be of any
use or convenience to our Everlasting State, but if they last so long, will
last no longer than our Lives in this World, which may be but a Year, but a
Day, but an Hour. Show your selves therefore Men, Men that understand the Worth
and Value of your Souls, your Everlasting Souls, and do not imbase them into an
Employment and State below their worth and value: Show your selves Men, Men
that have or should have discretion to consider, that your Everlasting State of
Happiness or Misery depends upon the well or ill Management of your Lives and
Thoughts in this Life, which is but a State of Probation in order to Eternity:
Remember, and show your selves Men; Men that understand your Interest and your
greatest Concernment; and while you live here in this World, set your Hearts
upon that, which is the Chief End of your coming into the World, and as in
reason you would wish to have done when you come to dye; namely, the entire
Conversion of your Souls to the Ever-Glorious God, the Beginning and End of
your Being, in all Humble Love, Obedience, Faith, Dependence, Honor, and
Service, in the frequent Thoughts of him, and Applications to him, in
Veneration, Worship, Service, and Devotion to him, in all humble Imitation of
him, in what he is imitable by you, viz. in Holiness and Purity, in
Righteousness and Justice, in Mercy and Beneficence, in Truth and Veracity; and
this will be the Perfection, the Happiness and Everlasting Blessedness of your
Souls to all Eternity.

PSALM lxxxvi. 8. Neither are there any Works like Thy Works.
THE Consideration of the Excellency of the Works of Almighty God, is as large
as are the very Works themselves: which as they are of almost insearchable
Number and variety, so the Excellencies of the Divine Wisdom, Power, and
Goodness, appearing in almost every Work of his, are of an unsearchable Number
and Variety. If a wise and industrious Man should spend all the days of his
Life in the search of the admirable Structure and Faculties of the least Fly,
or of one Organ of our Sense, the Eye, or the Ear, he must conclude even such a
particular Enquiry with that Complaint: The greatest part of what I have
discovered, does not equal the least part of what I am ignorant of,
notwithstanding all my Inquiry and Diligence.

I shall therefore content my self with the comparing of some few of these
Works of God, that seem most ordinary and common, with some of the choicest
Works of the most exact and curious of the Children of Men, and by that
Comparison, we shall see how much these Works of God exceed the Works of Men,
even the Choicest Works of the Choicest Men.

The Wise Ordination of Almighty God has lodged in a Grain of Wheat, or
Barley, (as in the Seeds of all other Vegetables,) a small imperceptible vital
Seminal Principle, which, unless corrupted by some Accident, will lodge and
rest in it a year or two; I take this little Grain and cast it into the Earth,
the ordinary Matrix for this seminal, vital Principle to exert it self, and
observe the procedure of it.

1. It has not lain there many days, nor possibly many hours, but by a kind of
sensible Sagacity, it seems to perceive that now it has attained a proper
Place for the Exercise of its vital and seminal Activity, and seems to perceive
the warmth, moisture, and suitable Fertility of the Lodging it has got, and
begins to rouse and agitate it self, and to put forward to that motion, which
is proper for it to exercise, in order to the preservation of its Kind.

2. Then it sends forth from its narrow Receptacles, little Fibers or Roots, to
lay hold on that Moisture, that may be useful for its farther Germination.

3. These little Fibrous Roots it sends not forth at every part of the Grain,
but only at one determinate part thereof, namely, from that part of the Grain,
at which it was first joined to the Stalk, and at which it received at first
its vital Nourishment, namely, the lowest part of the Grain by which it was at
first joined to the Stalk.

4. By these little Fibrous Roots, as by so many little Veins, or Venae
Vmbilicales, it attracts the moist, fertile nourishment, from the Earth or
Water; and by these it is conveyed to the Seat of this little, vital Principle,
which seems to answer to the Heart of Animals.

5. This little vital Principle in the Grain of Corn, though it take not up so
much room as the point of a Needle, extends its vital Power through all this
little Mass of acquired Moisture, and perfectly assimulates it to the
specifical Nature of that Grain wherein it is thus received, and as it were
leavens it, and gives it a Tincture conformable to its own Nature.

6. This little Agent having thus gotten to it self, and assimulated this
Portion of Moisture that it has thus attracted, it presently distributes and
digests it, partly for the enlargement and increase of its little fibrous Roots
for its farther Supply of Nourishment; but principally it sends it out in a
little Bud, visible in the top of the Grain of Barley, and in the side of the
Grain of Wheat, which is the first visible Rudiment of its ensuing Stalk and
Ear.

7. This little Bud, that is thus thrust forth, is most perfectly and
infallibly of the same specifical Nature with that Grain from whence it
springs; of the very same Nature, Kind, Figure, with all the Original Buds that
spring from Grain of that Nature. Neither does the Wheat send out a Bud of the
Kind of Barley, nor the Barley of the Kind of Wheat; but each sends forth a Bud
suitable to its own specifical Nature.

8. This first little Bud is continually supplied from this vital Principle
with fresh Supplies, attracted continually and incessantly to it self, and from
thence transmitted into this Bud, for its Growth and Increase.

9. This little Bud thus thrust forth and supplied, makes its way through the
solid Clods and Earth, into the open Air, and displays it self into a Blade.

10. After this Blade thus thrust forth, it sends up from the bottom of that
Blade a more compact and firm Consistency, namely, the Stalk or Stem, which
from its several Joints sends forth Blades, which enclose and compass the Stalk
or Stem for its better safety and preservation.

11. After this little vital Principle lodging in this Grain of Wheat or Barley
has furnished it self with a stalk, it gives not over its Business, but still
by its little Emissaries, its fibrous Roots, it attracts continual Supplies of
Moisture, which it sends up through the Stalk, and unto the very Extremities
thereof, for the production of Seeds of its own Kind, namely the Ear.

12. And being come to that Maturity as to be ready for the Production of the
Ear, it begins the Rudiments thereof within the enclosure of the Blade that
compasses the top of the Stalk, which they commonly call the Hose: and upon
the upper end of the Stalk within this Receptacle or Hose, for the better
securing of the Ear from foreign Injury, it begins, and in a great measure
perfects the first Rudiments of the Ear.

13. When the Ear is so far formed, as to get out of the Hole, it provides
admirably, 1. For its Location, and fastening of the several Grains to the
Stalk, whereby they may receive continued Supply from the Root. 2. Disposes
them in such order that none may be a hindrance, but each a Support to the
other. 3. Clothes the little Grains with Husks to preserve them. 4. And
generally sends out certain Spires, commonly called the Beard, which are a
Means of their further Security, and also a kind of excrementitious evaporation
for the purging and perfecting of the Grain.

14. And till the Ear, and the Grains in it, be grown to a due hardness and
maturity, never gives over the Supply thereof with convenient Nourishment,
which it attracts by its roots, and sends up by the Stalk to the several
Grains, which partake of it in a just and equal proportion, till they come to
their just Growth and Maturity conform to their Species or Kind.

Now in all this admirable Process of this little Vegetable, there are these
Things observable, which do let us know that all this is not without an
admirable Destination or Ordination of the Great and Wise God:

1. This Process is Constant and Uniform. The very same Method that this Grain
of Corn takes, the very same will another Grain of Corn of the same kind take
and observe; and hence it is, that for the most part, a whole Field sowed at
the same time with the same Grain, will be ripe together, excepting some
accidental Matters make a variation in some few Stalks.

2. That it never errs, or is mistaken in its effect, unless by reason of some
preternatural Accident.

3. That every Grain produces its own specifical Grain, and not a Grain of
another kind.

4. That all this Procedure is in order to an excellent End; namely, the
preservation of its kind, and yielding a Supply of Vegetables for the Use of
Animals.

5. That this End is accomplished by Means exquisitely suitable to this End,
and there is nothing superfluous, or idle, or unnecessary, nothing wanting or
deficient in all this Process for the attaining this excellent End.

If all the Men in the World would lay their Heads together, they could add
nothing to it, nor take any thing from it, without disappointing the whole
Effect.

6. Nay yet farther, though the Vegetable Process is obvious to us every hour,
and we see and observe it; yet it is not possibly imitable by all the Art and
Skill of all the Men in the World, without the help of this little vegetable
Principle of Life, namely the vegetable Seed.

7. Yet this is performed by this little poor, inconsiderable Principle of
Life, with great Ease, and admirable Exactness and Uniformity without any
Disappointment or Error.

8. Yet this little vegetable Principle has neither Sense, Reason,
Understanding, nor Knowledge what it does, how it does, why it does it. My
Child cannot learn to spin or to knit, unless it be taught and instructed, or
have some Example or Instruction to guide it: but this poor, little,
imperceptible, irrational, senseless Principle of Vegetable Life, does all this
at the first Essay, without Instruction, Example, or Rules of Imitation.

9. Therefore the Resolution of this excellent Artifice, in this little
senseless Particle of Life, must be into that excellent Wisdom of Almighty God,
which 1. has implanted in, and given unto this small Particle of Life that
excellent manner of operation, which this Particle it self understands not, yet
performs it by an unerring Method: 2. That has directed and guided all this
admirable Process to a more admirable End; namely, the Preservation of the
kind, which yet this little senseless Particle of Life neither knows, nor
knowingly intends. And this is the Reason why this Process of this poor,
inconsiderable Particle of Life exceeds the Invention and Imitation of the
wisest Philosopher, or most curious Artificer, because this little thing works
according to that Law, that Power, that Rule, which is impressed upon it, and
communicated to it by the most Infinite Wise God: it is his own immediate Stamp
or Signature upon it; but on the other side, though the Reasonable Nature in
Man be the Impression of Almighty God, and of a far nobler Perfection than the
Vegetable or Animal Nature, yet the Art, Wisdom, and Exercise of that Reason in
Men, is but the Work and Actings of Men, derived from their own Choice and
Abilities, and not so immediately from the Impression of Almighty God, but
comes from him more mediately and secondarily, than those first and primitive
Powers, Instincts, and Faculties, through the less perfect and blind, vegetable
Nature.

FINIS.

