THE Lord Holles HIS VINDICATION Of Himself and of his Son Sir FRANCIS HOLLES,
FROM Some Foul Aspersions cast upon them by Mr. Justice Ellis, in some
Depositions of his taken in the High Court of Chancery.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1676.

The Lord Holles his Vindication of himself and his Son Sir Francis Holles,
from some foul Aspersions cast upon them by Mr. Justice Ellis, in some
Depositions of his taken in the High Court of Chancery.
HAving seen some Depositions of Mr. Justice Ellis taken in Chancery, in a
Cause there depending, between Sir Francis Holles and Sir Robert Carr,
concerning a Portion due (but denied to be paid) by the said Sir Robert, to the
said Sir Francis, who had married his Sister; in which the said Justice is
pleased to say things very much reflecting, both upon Sir Francis, and upon me
his Father; where there are great mistakes, and much said by him as upon
hearsay; which though insignificant as to be matter of Proof and Evidence, yet
serving much to make a noise, and possess standers-by, who shall hear his
Depositions read, with a prejudice and ill opinion of us, as if we were really
guilty of those foul Things which are there said of us; I shall therefore do
that right to my Self, my Son, and to Truth, as to make some Observations upon
those Depositions, to discover the very great improbability (to say no more) of
what is there delivered: My method shall be, first to set down the
Interrogatory, and his Deposition verbatim; then to show briefly, where in it
he has varied from Truth by his own mistake, and where upon hearsay from
another Body.

The Interrogatory is thus: Do you believe, or have you heard that the said Sir
Francis Holles had preconveyed those Lands so to be settled for an additional
Iointure as aforesaid to other Persons, to other uses, so to frustrate the said
Settlement? Or what discourse have you at any time had with Sir Francis Holles
about the Premises? and whether did not the said Sir Francis Holles confess to
you, that he had so preconveyed the said Lands, that were so to be settled for
an Additional Iointure as aforesaid? Declare, etc.

The Deposition follows: To the 5th Interrogatory this Deponent says, That
after the said Deed was so executed by the said Complainant, the said Lady Carr
came to him this Deponent, and acquainted him that the said Complainant had
made some Settlement and Conveyances of his Estate, he had so made to his Wife
for an Additional Iointure, after his said Marriage, and before the Sealing of
the said Deed for an Additional Iointure, on purpose to avoid the said
Iointure, and that the said Iointure was worth nothing; at which he this
Deponent was much surprised, and did take himself concerned in it, for that he
this Deponent had drawn, or caused his Man to draw the said Iointure; and
persuaded the said Lady Carr, that she should have no apprehensions, that the
Complainant would do any such thing; and that he this Deponent did conceive,
that he the said Complainant had a good Estate in himself, when he this
Deponent saw the said Deeds: but the said Lady Carr did insist upon it, that it
was true, that he the Complainant had done such an Act; and that not many days
before he sealed the said Iointure, he had conveyed away his Estate to others:
Whereupon he this Deponent took an occasion to acquaint the Complainant with
what he had heard, who to the best of this Deponents remembrance did
acknowledge the same. But this Deponent well remembers, that upon that
discourse with the Complainant, he this Deponent was well satisfied, that some
short time before the said Complainant sealed the said Conveyance of an
Additional Iointure, he had conveyed over his Estate therein to some other
Person or Persons, whereat this Deponent was much troubled.

This concerns only my Son, who has in his Answer upon Oath to Sir Robert
Carr's Bill in Chancery, said positively he made no such Preconveyances; The
words of his Answer are these:

This Defendant denies that before his Sealing and Executing the Deeds of Lease
and Release in his former Answer mentioned, he had made or granted any Estate
or Conveyance of or in the Lands or Hereditaments therein mentioned, or any
part thereof, to any Person or Persons whatsoever: Nor does this Defendant
remember or believe he ever declared or confessed, he made or granted any
Estate or Conveyance thereof precedent to the said Deeds of Lease and Release;
nor had he any reason so to do, for that this Defendant at the time of his
Sealing the said Deeds of Lease and Release, was seized of such Estate in the
said Premises, as that he had (as he conceived and was advised by Counsel) good
right and power to convey the same, as by the Deeds of Lease and Release was
mentioned and intended.

Now, if there never was any such thing done by him, certainly he could not
acknowledge that he had done such a thing as is set forth in the Deposition: It
is true, Mr. Justice Ellis something qualifies his Assertion by putting in
these words, That to the best of his remembrance he did acknowledge it. But he
must give me leave to remember him, that a Man of his gravity, who has the
honor to be one of the twelve Judges of Westminster Hall, (whose words even
doubtfully spoken are of great weight, and do sway much to lead other Men's
Opinions and Judgments to a concurrence with his, even with what he enclines to
believe) should not utter any thing tending so much to the disparagement of
another, give such a wound to the Honor and Reputation of a Gentleman, as this
Accusation (if true) would do to my Son, but upon a very great certitude: For,
I say, if this were true, that my Son had done such an Act, so unworthy of
himself, so unbecoming an honest Man, much less a Gentleman, I would never own
him more for my Son, but should think him fitter for a Goal or a Bridewell, and
there to end his days, than to come into any honest Company; and truly I look
upon it as such an injury done him, as that it passes almost all Reparation.

And Mr. Justice Ellis goes something further, and says, He well remembers
that, which is, That upon that Discourse he was well satisfied there were such
Preconveyances, and that he was much troubled at it. And saying what he said
before, I do not much wonder that he says this; For I see he is resolved to
lead others into a belief that there were such Preconveyances, whether there
were any or no; and I am most confident, so as I durst almost swear it, as much
as I would swear, for any thing that I do not of my own knowledge certainly
know, that there never were any such Preconveyances, nor never any such
discourse, or ground for such a discourse. For, first, my Son has denied it
upon his Oath, and I never observed but that he was one who made a Conscience
of his Ways, and Conscience of an Oath. But admit him to be a Knave, and that
it had been true, that he had done such an unworthy fraudulent Act, in all
reason he would not have been so weak, as to have acknowledged it in his
Discourse to one, who he knew came to pump it out of him, or have given him any
ground to be satisfied that it was so, and that he had so played the Knave:
Such Works of Darkness use not to be owned and avowed, since it is the secrecy
of them that they owe their Being unto, and which renders them advantageous to
their Contrivers. Therefore it is not probable my Son would make such a
Confession to him: And if Mr. Justice Ellis did but gather it from
Circumstances, and by Inferences upon what was said, he should have done well
to have declared those Circumstances, and have expressed in his Deposition the
Particulars of that Discourse, upon which he grounded his being so satisfied;
which certainly he could not but have remembered, (if there had been any) as
well as that he was so satisfied upon it. And methinks he should have asked
the Lady Carr, what ground she had to say so, before he had gone any further,
especially so far as to speak with my Son about it, which he could not but
think would be to him a very disobliging discourse taxing him with, and
questioning him about such a piece of knavery; of which yet nothing appeared,
and of which there was no sign, no Vestigium, but in the Lady Carr's Fancy; and
(it seems) a desire in Mr. Justice Ellis to have it so believed by others,
whether true or not true.

But I may ask, Did Mr. Justice Ellis do the part of a faithful Friend to the
Lady Carr, and Sir Robert Carr, for whom he says he was entrusted, as their
Learned Counsel, to draw their Writings, and take care that good Assurances
should be made, and all things well settled? That he should know, or but
believe, or fear, there was such double-dealing used toward his Clients and
Friends, such a Fraud and Cheat put upon them, instead of an Additional
Jointure to a Daughter of their Family, and he be silent so long, and say
nothing of it, whereby it might be put into some way, to discover all that foul
play, and prevent the mischief and inconvenience which must of necessity have
come of it; For that Wife of my Son's, whose Portion they would now not pay,
lived with him several Years, and a Daughter he had by her lived about a twelve
month after the Mother; and all that time Mr. Justice Ellis said not one word
of this, nor I know not of how long after, not until his examination in this
Cause in Chancery: And to say the Truth, I have reason to believe, that both
his Satisfaction and his Trouble (which he speaks of) began but when Sir Robert
Carr took up the Resolution to keep back his Sisters Portion; and that he had
no thought before, that ever there had been such discourse between my Son and
him, or any thing like it, to cause either his Satisfaction, or his Trouble.
And so I come to his next Deposition.

The Interrogatories were the 5th, 6th, and 7th: The 5th; Did you at the
instance of Dame Mary Carr prepare a Draught in pursitance of the said
Settlement, to tender to the Lord Holles, and the Plantiff Sir Francis, and
what was done therein, and whether was the same accepted or no? Declare, etc.
6th, Do you know that the Lord Holles did refuse to appoint his own Counsel, to
draw a Book in pursuance of the said Articles of Agreement; and was there ever
any Settlement made according to the said Articles? Declare, etc. 7th; Do you
know, or have you heard that the said Lord Holles did ever deliver a Copy or
Draught of such Settlement to the said Dame Mary Carr, or to her Counsel for
that purpose appointed? Declare, etc.

His Deposition to those Interrogatorics more immediately concerns me, it runs
thus:

To the 5th, 6th, and 7th Interrogatories, This Deponent says that he does
well remember, That the said Lady Carr was often with him this Deponent, to
prepare a Conveyance for to make a Settlement, according to the said Articles
of Agreement upon the said Marriage; and did very much complain she could not
get the said Lord Holles to do it; and did often importune him this Deponent to
draw a Book to that purpose: Whereupon this Deponent told her, That he could
not well draw a Book without sight of the said Lord Holles his Writings, which
she could not procure. But this Deponent remembers, at the said Lady Carr's
importunity, he this Deponent did draw, or cause to be drawn, a rough draught
of a Paper Book with Blanks, to the Effect of the said Articles, the said Lady
Carr often telling him this Deponent, that she had the Money for the Portion
ready if she could but have the Assurances performed. And this Deponent had
often discourse with Sir William Constantine, the said Lord Holles his Counsel,
who did except against something in the said Articles, and said they were not
reasonable; whereupon this Deponent told him, that they were drawn by the said
Lord Holles himself with his own hand, and that they were not to make Articles,
but to draw Assurances, according to the Articles already made, and desired him
the said Sir William, That if he did not like the said Draught, which he this
Deponent had drawn, that he the said Sir William would draw a Book himself; and
if there were any thing in the said Articles unreasonable, (so as the Substance
and Effect of them might be performed) he this Deponent would persuade the Lady
Carr to agree to them. But this Deponent did not perceive that the said Sir
William Constantine was willing to do it. And this Deponent says that
afterward the said Lord Holles was with him this Deponent, and did complain of
the said Articles, and said it was never his intention such Settlement should
be made; whereupon this Deponent told his Lordship, That he this Deponent could
not, nor had any power to make any new Articles; but if any thing were
unreasonable or hard upon him in them, he this Deponent would do his endeavor
to persuade the Lady Carr to have them rectified; but this Deponent does not
know that ever any Conveyances were made and executed according to the said
Articles, or otherwise, or any tendered by the Lord Holles or his Counsel,
although the said Lady Carr did often desire, and was very importunate to have
had the same done and perfected.

The Matter of this is far from Truth; yet it may be true, that the Lady Carr
told him so; But that good Lady would sometimes mistake, and I am sure she did
so now, if she said any such thing to Mr. Justice Ellis, as he says she did:
For upon the Faith of a Christian it is not true, that she did press me to
perfect those Assurances, and as little true that I ever refused it, or was
backward to do my part in it. So far from it, that it was still desired and
pressed on by me; and it stuck at her, and those of her side, who would never
perform what was in the first place their part to do, which was to secure the
Portion. For which purpose, she was tied by the Articles to get a Fine levied
of her Husband and Son, of certain Lands there specified, in the Michaelmas
Term following after the Marriage of her Daughter, which was about the latter
end of August 1661. This was not done. And my Engagement for settling the
Jointure, was to do it some three months after that Fine levied: for this I was
to do but in six months after the Marriage, which time did not expire till
about the end of February. So then the Portion not seemed, as I was not at all
bound, so it had been a very imprudent thing in me to have settled Land for a
Jointure gratis, without any hopes of ever seeing a Portion, which by their
dealing I had cause to apprehend might be their intention, or at least to put
us to trouble to recover it.

For though Mr. Justice Ellis is pleased to say, That the Lady Carr told him
the Portion was ready; She nor he never told us so: It is what we never heard
of, neither my Son nor I, and I am confident no Man nor Woman did ever hear so,
but the Justice himself; And sure we were most concerned to have had the notice
given to us: Nay, the Justice, who by his own saying was entrusted with the
care of procuring those Settlements to be made, and seeing all things
performed, that were requisite thereunto, was bound in Duty and Conscience to
have signified so much to us, as that which would have removed the sole
Obstacle, and brought the Business to a happy conclusion; or at least it would
have justified to all the World the sincerity of their Proceedings, and laid
open past all denial the tergiversation and insincerity which they met with
from us.

I am sure that with much ado, after long waiting, and several solicitations
of mine, being then upon my Journey into France, I got a meeting at my House in
Westminster with the Lady Carr's Agents, a Counselor at Law one Mr. Cox, and
some others whom she employed; And all the Writings on my part were there
ready, and were examined and approved by them, and I began to Seal, and had
sealed one or two; and I had acknowledged a Fine of the Land in pursuance of
the Articles, and I delivered it to them: And as I was Sealing, I asked what
Order they had for the Portion; to which Mr. Cox answered, He had none at all;
whereupon I replied, I would then settle no Jointure, till I had satisfaction
in that Particular, and accordingly stopped my hand from further Sealing, and
there it rested.

Soon after that I went into France, where I continued near three years; whilst
I was there, I received a desire from Sir Robert Carr, that I would write to
some of my Friends in the House of Peers (the Parliament then sitting) for
their favor and assistance to him in passing a Bill to settle his Estate, and
enable him to pay some Debts, and particularly to discharge and pay his Sisters
Portion: Accordingly I did write to several Lords, to the Earl of Arlington by
name for one, who was then Principal Secretary, is yet alive, and can witness
if this be true that I say.

My last treating about this Business, or rather I may say my last endeavor to
have treated, was when I went once to have visited the Lady Carr at her House
in Lincolns-Inn-fields, with an intention to have moved her, that she would at
last perfect things relating to it. And I stayed near an hour in a low Parlour,
spoke to several of the Servants to acquaint her with my being there, but could
have no answer; So I came away, and I never went to see her more, nor never had
any more to do with her.

By these Passages it appears no Portion was ready, whatever the Lady said to
Mr. Justice Ellis; And whether she said it or no, I durst almost positively
affirm, he could not believe it was so; for he, who knew that Family so well,
and the Necessities, Difficulties, and Distractions which it labored under, by
reason of the Distemper of Sir Robert Carr the Father, the opposition of the
Lady to her Husband, and to all that he did, their drawing several ways,
sometimes the one prevailing, sometimes the other, one undoing what the other
did; he, I say, who knew all this, could not but know that six thousand Pounds,
was a Sum not to be there so easily gotten together, and that he was not
presently to believe it to be so because that Lady said it.

Indeed I have heard she had a Suit in Chancery with her Counselor Mr. Cox,
about some Money that she had put into his hands; which Money, she in her
Answer to my Son's Bill in Chancery, says was for the payment of this Portion;
but how likely this is to be true, that it was for that use, let any Man judge.
Cox, as I have hear, confessed only two thousand Pounds, and that it was in
trust for one Mr. Fleetwood, a Gentleman whom she then much respected; and
besides this was in 1667, or 1668, several years after all treating about
either Portion or Jointure, or any thing else relating to her Daughters
Marriage, was absolutely broken off and laid aside, and her Daughter then dead,
of whom, or of any thing concerning her, she then certainly had no thought at
all; so as this is but a mere Fancy, that it seems she then pleased her self
with, when she was Sued by my Son, of which he nor none of his Friends had ever
heard before, whom (as I have already said) she should chiefly have acquainted
with it.

Yet this Deposition of Mr. Justice Ellis even so framed, but upon a Hearsay,
may have its operation, and perhaps much to my disadvantage; for though the
Justice speak it but upon the Lady Carr's Credit, who should tell him such
things, That I refused to perform Covenants, and that the Portion was ready,
but I would do nothing of that I ought to do; yet this coming from him, and
being vented and published by him, a Person of that Weight and Authority, who
bears such a Figure as he does, will make an impression upon some Men's Minds,
as if I were in truth such a Man as I am there deciphered to be. Therefore I
have cause to complain of his readiness upon so slight a ground to utter things
so much to my disparagement; and which he could not but know to be no legal
Evidence in the behalf of Sir Robert Carr, who had produced him for a Witness,
and shows more a good will and a desire he had to please him, than that it
could be any real service to him, for the carrying on of his Cause.

He goes on and tells a Story, first of a Discourse between him and Sir William
Constantine, then of one between him and me; What Sir William Constantine said
to him I do not know. I do not remember that ever I employed Sir William
Constantine to treat with him about that Business; nay, if I were to die at
this present, I would take it upon my death, that I cannot call to mind, that
ever I knew that Sergeant Ellis (for so I think he was then) was employed, or
made use of, in any part of all that Negotiation between the Lady Carr and me;
so I may very well say, that I do not believe it to be true, that I ever was
with him to complain of the Articles, and that I should say it was never my
intention, that such a Settlement should be made.

And I do verily believe he goes upon a mistake, confounding another Business
with this: For I do acknowledge, I was with him about a Marriage propounded for
the Earl of Lincoln, which was long after that of my Son's; and I am very
confident it was upon that occasion, the first time that ever I was at his
Chamber, or ever had to do with him; for I do very well remember, that when I
went to speak with him about that Business of the Earl of Lincolns, I did not
know where his Chamber was till it was showed me; which could not have been, if
ever I had been there before.

But be it how it will, that he was employed or not employed in that business,
and that I was or was not with him about it, it matters not much; I wish he had
dealt more clearly in his Testiony, and not have spoken in the Clouds, laid a
general Charge, which makes a sound, as if it signified some great Mattter;
That I should complain of the Articles, and say, I never intended to make a
Settlement according to them, though the Articles were of mine own drawing, as
he says; Which if true, I had been certainly a very unworthy Man, not fit for
that common dealing which is between Man and Man, one upon whose Promises, nay
Covenants and Engagements no Man could put trust nor confidence; And for such a
Man he endeavors to make me to pass; and therefore tells not, wherein I was
unsatisfied, or what the particular was which I complained of.

For it is true, I did complain of one Particular, (yet I think not to him, for
as I say) I do not believe I ever spoke with him in all that Business) nor was
it of the Articles I complained; But this I complained of, that the Lady Carr
would have something to be done by me, which was not in the Articles, as I
supposed: It was concerning three Leases which I held for Lives, one from the
Earl of Salisbury, the other two from the Bishop of Salisbury: I had Articled,
that after my Decease my Son should have them, and was willing to yield to any
thing, whereby they might be secured to my Son, that it should not be in my
power to dispose of them from him: But nothing would serve the Lady Carr, but
that I should presently assign them over to him; which I could not give way to
for two respects: One was a little Point of Honor; for two of these Leases
being of two Manors, I could not afterward keep Courts, nor grant Estates in
my own Name, but must do it in my Sons: The other was a real Inconvenience,
that when any of my Lives should die, it would not be in my power to renew my
Estate, without having him present to join with me, or rather to be himself the
taker of it in his own name, who lived not with me, might be an hundred miles
off, when an occasion of renewing should present it self, and I by that means
might lose the opportunity, which would have been a great prejudice unto me,
and even to my Son and his Wife. to whom those Leases were to come after me.
This I did not conceive at all to be the sense and meaning of the Articles;
which on the other side I did conceive would have been fully pursued and
performed by what I proposed, and what I was willing and ready to do: And
therefore Mr. Justice Ellis would not tell the Particular, what it was that I
complained of, which would have carried with it its own Justification, but laps
it up in general terms, to make me appear a falsifier of my word, and of my
Covenants. This I think was not so fair, and seems to me to argue rather a
desire in him to do me a mischief, and serve a turn, than to give a full and
clear Testimony to the Truth.

One thing more I must observe, which I cannot let pass without some Remarque
upon it, he says, The Articles were of mine own drawing, and makes use of that
Circumstance to aggravate my ill dealing, that I should go against my own Act,
and have the impudence my self to proclaim it, and say I never intended the
Settlement should be made according to the Articles which my self had drawn.
Which had been a folly in me even beyond the knavery, for few that play the
Knaves will be so very Fools, as to say they intended it.

But in truth Mr. Justice Ellis has ill luck to mistake in all he has deposed
from the beginning to the end; For this is as true of my drawing the Articles,
as all the rest which I have before spoken to: It was Sir Orlando Bridgman that
drew them, or caused them to be drawn: All the hand that I had in them, was to
insert the name of Sir Robert Carr the Father, whom they would have left out,
saying he was mad, and that the Lady managed all, both the Person and Estate of
her Husband being committed to her, and governed by her in the nature of his
Guardian, so that it was not at all needful (as they said) to make him a Party;
yet I desired he should be made a Party, and therefore put in his Name in
several places, where I conceived it necessary.

And one Passage more I find there written with my own hand; It was to have
4000 pounds of the Portion laid out in Land to be settled upon my Daughter in
Law for an Addition to her Jointure; and further to declare how the remainder
of the whole Estate should go in case of no Issue.

This is all I did as to the drawing of the Articles: but I do not say, nor did
I ever think, that I was the less bound by them, because I did not make them my
self, for I did agree to them, and was still ready to have performed them, if
the Lady Carr would have performed her part concerning the Portion, which (as I
have said before) was at least to have been secured in the first place.

However I was resolved still to take care of her Daughter, and do all that I
was bound to do, or indeed could do (whether bound to it or no) for her good,
after she was once married into my Family, who I must say did deserve it, and
proved a very excellent good Woman; though before she did come into my Family,
that is, before I knew her, and was acquainted with her, I was not at all
desirous my Son should marry there. It was Sir Edward Rossiter that first
proposed the Match, who did manage the treaty of it and perfect it; And if my
Son would have been ruled by me, and followed my advice, he had not been
married before he had received his Portion, and then all the trouble that has
since followed would have been prevented; but this is not much to the purpose:
To return then to Mr. Justice Ellis his Deposition and so make an end.

In his conclusion of it, he goes beyond all that he has said before, he
says, He did not know that any Conveyances were made by me according to the
Articles, although the Lady Carr did often desire the same, and was very
importunate (...) to have it done and perfected. Here he seems positively to
swear, that the Lady Carr did often desire it, and was importunate with me to
have it done. I would fain hope, that there was some mistake in the Examiner
writing down his Deposition, and that he omitted what he had fully expressed in
the former part of it, which was, That the Lady Carr had told him so; and so
indeed he may swear truth, though she did not say true; For I am sure the thing
is very false, if there be any truth in me: It was I still that desired her and
importuned her, and not she me, I was still ready but she would do nothing. And
upon the whole Matter I must say, That I am as much wronged by Mr. Justice
Ellis in his Deposition throughout, as a Man can be; yet as a Christian I will
say, God forgive him, and I do; though he has done me all this wrong; which is
a better conclusion of my Remarques, than his of his Deposition.

FINIS.

