THE HONOR OF THE GOUT:

OR, A Rational Discourse, demonstrating that the Gout is one of the greatest
Blessings which can befall Mortal Man; that all Gentlemen who are weary of it,
are their own Enemies; that those Practitioners who offer at the Cure, are the
vainest and most mischievous Cheats in Nature.

By way of Letter to an Eminent Citizen, Wrote in the heat of a violent
Paroxysm, and now Published for the Common Good.

By Philander Misiatrus.

LONDON, Printed for A. Baldwin, in Warwick Lane. MDCXCIX.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
THis Piece, which I present you, [as appears from many Passages in it,] was
Wrote toward the beginning of the Reign of King William; whether or no the
Author be living, I cannot satisfy you; but this I will engage, greater
Profit, and more agreeable Entertainment were never purchased, of a Bookseller
Cheaper.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Author is of Opinion, That some Epistles Dedicatory would do best standing
after the Pamphlet, therefore, good Reader, pass on, and expect mine in its
proper place.

SIR,
I Owe you a greater Observance, more profound Respects, and hearty Thanks, for
Favors to which I had not Merit to pretend, than I am able to express, should
I make Words and Phrase my Study; but I am not like to do that at present; for
you have used me so of late, that you tempt me to think, you are going to put
as much Despite into one Scale, as ever you put Obligation into the other.
Why! Sir, I am informed, that your Worship, not having a right sense of things,
nor the Fear of God before your Eyes, should, to the disgrace of your own
Virtue, give your Tongue the liberty, in an open Coffee-House, to speak ill of
the Gout. Of the Gout, Sir! which if you look on as a Disease, you ought to
welcome as the most useful and necessary thing, that could have happened to
you: But if you consider as becomes you, then, with me, you must reverence it
as a Power Divine, On whose Sacred internodial Altars, I
Each Spring and Fall, at least, will sacrifice,
Morbisick painful loads of Matter tartarous,
With Recrements of nervous juice impregnate.


Would you your self, Sir, patiently endure the Honor of our Great Master, our
Rightful and Lawful King, to be contemptuously reflected on, by e're a recreant
piece of Conscientious Priestcraft that infests the Town? Then, why should not
I be concerned for the Honor of my Great Master, the Gout, who claims not,
it is true, the power he exercises over me, by any Hereditary pretense; but from
an Origin altogether as Sacred and Indisputable, viz. some voluntary Acts and
Deeds of my own. Yet you could say, that when the Almighty God had out of rude
Chaos built this goodly frame of Nature, which we see, and formed his Noble
Creature Man; he indulged the Devil to Create some one thing, and his damned
Envy gave Being to the Gout. Now I am confident, Sir, and have great
Authorities for it, that if the Devil ever created any thing, it was the
Doctor, of whom since you have made so much use; I know not, but it may be
rationally inferred, that you have dealt with the Devil. The Gout, Sir, whether
you know it or no, was postnate to the Creation, and younger something than the
Fall of Man, who having incurred the Sentence of Death, the friendly Gout was
sent in Mercy down from Heaven to lengthen wasting Life: By my consent you
should never have the Gout, who have no more consideration in you than to
blaspheme it.

I always took your Worship for a Person the most accommplished our City has
ever bred; I imagined that you thoroughly understood most things, but it could
never enter into my head, that you should fall into so Profane an Error as to
think, into so rash a Practice, as to speak ill of the Gout. But because my
Soul has been full of humble Deference to your Worship, I will be at some pains
to recover you to your right mind, and a due veneration of that Friendly
Demon, the Gout. For though you may value your self, and reckon that no
girding Satyrist can take up the Old Proverb against you, and say, That you are
afraid of your Friends, when there is none near you; yet, what is worse, they
may reproach you with this disgraceful Truth; You are afraid of your best
Friend when he Kisses your very feet.

Now upon this Subject, having no need to use the inveagling Arts of Oratory; I
shall not with Tropes and Metaphors, with Flourishes and Amusements of
insinuating Words, seek to divert your Mind, and cheat your Judgment; but to
make my Work the shorter, and do it effectually, press you with plain
Demonstration. Your Error, Sir, was this, That the Devil Created the Gout. I
prove he did not. You know, Sir, that the Man of Sin, the Son of Perdition,
best known by the Name of Antichrist, is the Pope. You must not doubt of this,
for till the days of that Excellent Prelate, Archbishop Laud, the whole stream
of Protestant Interpreters gave it so; a learned Chaplain of his has put that
Character upon the Grand Seignior, and a famous Annotator has taught our Church
to split Antichrist into Simon Magus, and his Gnostick Followers. I must
confess, I have a sort of a respect to these Authorities, but the Body of
Modern Dissenters, and the general Agreement of Interpreters, Whig and Tory, in
the Age before, weighs them down: Take in then the Lay-mobility of the Nation,
who should know something, but are confident of nothing more, than that
Antichrist is the Pope; and your Worship will agree it with me, that that is the
plain Truth of the matter: By the way I will observe one thing, which will not
trouble my Demonstration, but yet your Worship see, how ready I am to allow you
in your Speculation, all that can reasonably be desired. A celebrated Author
notes, that the Ancients described Antichrist, by the Phrase of (...), The
Firstborn of the Devil. Supposing now that the Devil created something, as you
contend, you see, it could not be the Gout; at least, not if you will be judged
by the Fathers; but rather Antichrist, or the Pope. I desire your Worship to
consider next, that you shall not read in Platina, Onuphrius, or any latter
Antichristian Biographer, that ever faetid Toe of Pope was visited with
beneficial Gout. But had so great a Blessing been created by the Devil, as you
fondly imagine, the Devil had for a certain, bestowed it on his Firstborn the
Pope: Nay, and then too, instead of the filthy Scrutiny through the Porphiry
Chair, for old and wasted Testicles, the Deacon had only pulled off the
Stocking of the Elect, and the ratificatory Report had been, Dominus noster
Papa habet Podagram. In short, Sir, Antichrist, or the Pope, [for they are one
and the same Firstborn of the Devil, according to the Ancients,] being never
favored with the Gout, it is plain that the Devil did not create it, (...),
which was the thing to be demonstrated.

Having thus, Sir, utterly confounded your Error, my next labor shall be, to
instruct you in a sounder persuasion. The Gout was sent in Mercy down from
Heaven to lengthen wasting Life.

The Seat of this Friendly Demon, by whom every afflicted Man receives a
thousand times more benefit, than ever Socrates, by his; his Seat, I say, is in
the Nervous parts; he commonly visits the Internodia of the Bones of the Feet;
sometimes the Hip, the Knee, the Elbow, Shoulder, Wrist, and Ancle: But to
prove its Divine Original, I will proceed methodically, and from his lowest
Commendations ascend by six just Steps or Degrees, till I have raised him above
the Stars, and entered him among the Celestial Spirits; to whom, Sir, you will
then be tempted to offer up your Oraisons in the prescribed Form, at the end of
an Old Manuscript-Missal, communicated to me by a learned Antiquary, a great
Collector of those Rarities. The Form this; Blessed Gout, most desirable Gout,
Sovereign Antidote of Murdering Maladies, powerful Corrector of Intemperance,
deign to visit me with thy purging fires, and throw off the tophous injury
which I may have suffered by Wine and Wit, too hard for the Virtue of a Devote
upon a Holy Festival; but fail not thy Humble Supplicant, who needs thy
Friendly Help to keep his tottering Tenement in order, fail him not, every
Vernal and Autumnal Aequinox.

I know some precise Doctors are against all Invocation of Saints, at present I
shall not dispute with them, but they must grant me, That there is more to be
said in justification of such a Prayer to the Gout, than can be said for the
Offices directed to any other Saints, not excepting the Virgin. For I defier
their Worshippers to prove, that there has been the Tithe of so much good done
by them all, as I shall prove has been done by the beneficial Gout. I begin at
the lowest step, and Note,

First, The Gout gives a Man Pain without Danger.

It is possible, I confess, that a Sick Man, if he were directly asked to
declare his Sense of the matter, might refuse to acknowledge the benefit of
Pain without Danger, for Sickness and Peevishness commonly go together; but
mind his Discourse at another time, when he talks from the heart, and is not
upon his Guard: Then, O then, Pain without Danger is a Blessed thing. For
Instance, -- Suffering under a painful threatening Distemper, What Is his first
question to the Physician, but this? Doctor, pray be plain with me, and let me
truly know what I am to expect, don't flatter a Sick-man, but tell me, am I
like to Recover or no? That Pain, you see, which he suffers, does not at all
trouble him, he is only afraid he shall Die, secure him against that Danger, and
all is well with him: Cut, Slash, Burn, no pain is grievous, if it promise to
set us out of the danger of Death.

When the other Doctor comes, the Physician of the Soul I mean, whose coming
bodes no good to the Body, He tells the Decumbent a long Story of the Pains and
Misery of Life, in order to make his nunc dimittis go down the easier; but that
method seldom takes, for not one of a hundred is so bad, but he is content to
live, and put the rest to the venture. The fear of Death is generally more
grievous than all the cruel Pains of a wretched Life. But since we must have
pain while we live, give me the Pain of the Gout, which has no danger
attending. Here some malevolent Adversary may importunely object, Did never any
Man Die of the Gout? To this I answer, 1st. I have not yet affirmed, That the
Gout can make a Man immortal, though I will boldly say thus much, it very often
keeps a Man alive till all his Friends are weary of him. But 2. Should I
venture to say that the Gout has in it self the power to make a Man immortal;
it ought not to seem so very strange, all things being considered. If that be
true, which some Authors Write of the Noble Paracelsus, He had the Secret to
make a Man immortal, and I would not say he lied, though himself Died about
Forty; for perhaps he did not like his Company; but it must have been by way of
his Discovery to give any Man the Gout when he pleased; in that I am positive.
Here the Objector will scornfully put me in Mind, that Gouty persons, escape
Death no more than other Men, which is very true, but that is because Men are
Fools, and don't know when they are safe; they must be curing the Gout
forsooth, and to that end they deal with the Doctor, i. e. with the Factor of
Death, the Emissary of Hell, the Purveyor of the Grave, Damned Alchymist, good
at calcining nothing but Living Bodies into Dust and Ashes. Let every one bear
his own burden; the Gout has nothing to do with the Carnage of the Doctor. All
that can be rationally said against the Gout, is, that it does not actually
preserve Man, in spite of their own Folly, and the Dr's ignorance: And yet
there is the Right Honorable Sir R. H. the Gout is so Salutary to him that two
Swiss Doctors cannot dispatch him; what would a certain Lord give that those two
coagulating Spirits could remove his Honors Gout; but say I, Gout hold thy
own; for Earth has more need of the Cripple, than Heaven of the Saint. And now,
Sir, let me tell you a Story, the famous Willis shall be my Voucher, who
dissected the the Body of the Reverend, Learned, and Pious Doctor Hammond,
killed purely by his Friend, who unhappily taught him a Medicine to cure the
Gout, upon the Success of that Medicine, the Doctor's old Nephritic Pains
returned, and in a Fortnight dispatched him.

Therefore for your own, for your Lady's, and for your Childrens sake, Sir,
welcome the Gout to your House, and shut all your Doors against the Physician,
I Will warrant you for upwards a Hundred. Lord! how glad shall I be, to see 'em
pick Chalkstones out of your Worship's Feet, some forty or fifty Years hence;
by that time you will have learned so much Patience, as never to rear for the
Matter. But if you do roar [for that may be then as you use your self now,]
they that look on, if they love Life, will envy, not pity You: Indeed you are
already a fit Object for the Envy of Thinking Men, for I have heard you
confess, that yours is an Hereditary Gout, and that is for the better; an
Hereditary Gout is a far greater Happiness than an acquired one; what a deal of
Intemperance, and amorous Excesses, might it have cost Your Worship to have got
the Gout before Forty, whereas now you have the mighty Blessing for nothing,
sort nascendi, it is your Birthright, Sir, never think of parting with it.

Perhaps you may be now tempted to ask me, how I acquired my Gout? I shall not
be shy to satisfy your Curiosity, for I came by it honestly: We Scholars have a
way by our selves to come at the Blessing, without ever being beholden to the
God, that chears the genteel Candidate of the Gout by day, or the Goddess that
entertains him on nights; We lead Sedentary Lives, Feed heartily, Drink quantum
sufficit, but Sleep immoderately; so that, the Superfluities of our Sober and
Grave Fullness, not exhaling, we very honestly prepare Tartarous Matter for the
Gout, for the beneficial Gout, which gives us Pain without Danger. Ascend we
now the next step, which advances the Honor of the Gout.

2. The Gout is no constant Companion, but allows his Patients lucid Joyous
Intervals.

Humane Nature is so framed, that no one thing is agreeable to it always;
therefore it is well for us, that the World is so full of changes; the Earth we
tread on, the Seas we sail on, the Air we breath in, the Starry Firmament
expanded round us, have their continual Vicissitudes, which all make for our
Advantage and Delight. The Body of Man is a true Microcosm in this respect, for
it never continues in one condition; and, upon the same account, his Mind is a
very fit Guest for his Body; for, at different times, he thinks, and speaks,
different things, -- Modo Reges atque Tetrachas.
Omnia magna loquens, modo sit mihi. --
Sometimes he would talk, of Heroes, and of Kings
In mighty swelling Numbers, mighty things;
And then, again, let Gracious Fortune give
A little Meat and Drink enough to live;
Let her a Coat to keep out Cold present,
Although it is thick, and course, he will be content.
Mr. Creech.

How welcome is a Guest that knows when to be gone; but if his stay be longer
than ordinary, we are ready to thrust him out of doors. For these, and the like
considerations, the way of the Gout's dealing with his Patients can never be
enough esteemed. Whatever some impatient weak Minds may think, it is manifest,
that the Gout, by his coming and going, takes the right course to be very
agreeable, and obliging. Weak People may curse the Gout, and wish to be wholly
excused from his intermitting Visits; but I look upon such People as Men that
are weary of the World, and being willing to leave it, I grant, they have
reason to be angry with the Gout; with the Gout that folds their Mortality so
fast about them.

Your Worship has been guilty of this impatience, but I hope to recover you to
a better Mind. I have already shown you, that, to a wise Considerer, the
absence of danger takes off from the pain of the Gout, but some pain there is,
and ought to be, for constant Health has no relish, it is an insipid dull thing:
That Reverend Calvinist, Dr. Twiss, affirms, That it is better to be Damned than
Annihilated. I might, I suppose, with less offense, affirm, that 'twere better
to be Dead, than never to be Sick of the Gout; nay, this I am sure of, that all
the Sober and Experienced People will be so far from taking offense, that I
shall have them on my side, if I venture on that Paradox; for, how often have I
heard a Grave Adviser, one that had tried Health and Sickness, alternately, for
many Years, tell the robust, young, riotous Fellow, that he knew not the value
of Health. No, how should he, having never been Sick? But why should his sober
Adviser press him to be careful of his Health, that is the way never to
understand the deliciousness of it, by that time he gets the Gout, he will
thoroughly understand the matter, I Will warrant him? Set me two Men together, one
that never knew Pain, and another newly recovered of the Gout; observe them
both narrowly, in the former perhaps you may perceive an easy, even Temper;
but the latter is ravished with Joys and Satisfactions, which, if his Tongue
does not declare, his Hands, and Feet, and Gesture shall.

Homer says that the Beauty of Helen was a Prize, worth all the Blood spilt
through the long course of the Ten Years War. Homer would not have redeemed
those Lives by the least injury to that adorable Lady: Such are the lucid
intervals between Heartbreaking Fits of the Gout, worth all the Ravings, and
Roarings, which the violent Paroxysm forces from the tortured Patient; and who
would spoil the resin'd Pleasure of his Recovery, by wishing to have one angry
Throb, one heavy Groan 'bated him. Si parvis componere magna liceret, if we
might compare great things with small, The Gout is to Health, as Ham, and
Tongue, to Wine, or rather, as (...), to the Lovers Congress. Courage, Sir, and
be advised by me, it is good advise I am giving, and you shall have it Gratis.
When your Foot swells, and burns, and throbs, banish all foolish Sorrow, and
Repining, instead whereof, let swelling Joys dilate your Generous Breast; when
sharp fermenting Juyces, not easily miscible, shall meet, and by their furious
contest, cause cruel twichings of your nervous Fibers, comfort your Heart, and
be extremely pleased; when Masculine Acetous Recrements shall, with Female
Tartarous Matter, Mix, Engender, and Beget a Tophous Mass, when that same
Tophous Mass shall lodge in the Intornodia of Your Worship's Bones,
entertaining you with a rending Solution of Continuity, then let your Soul
Triumph; but touch not, taste not, the Crumen-Emulgent Doctor's Emulsions,
Juleps, Apozemes, nor let his Repercussives, or Resolvents, Cataplasme, and
Anodynes, touch you; so let your Friend the Gout take his course, and maul you
soundly. O! so easy, so pleased, so joyous, so happy, so blessed will you be,
when the turn of Health shall come, why, Sir, you will be in Heaven, in Heaven
while you are on Earth; you will be entirely Beatifi'd on this side the Grave,
and that is more than Solomon has arrived at yet [if you can give any credit to
a Catholic Painter] for but one half of him is Glorified, the other fryes in
Flames, vexed by tormenting Devils, like the Noble Shaftsbury in Windsor-hall,
beshrew the Painter for -- his Pains, Fas est and ab host doceri. Learn of our
common Enemy; Sir, I fancy, the Late Tyrant solaces his Exile, with the
expectation of a return to trample on the Liberties, and riot in the Blood of
Heretics; but before ever that dismal day come, may the Gout, my Life's kind
Preserver, and my dear Life it self forsake me; only I will make it in my
bargain, I will not stand to this wish, if my help can contribute any thing to
oppose his Invasion. I am much of the Mind, Sir, that by what I have said
already, you are a coming Proselyte; but before I have done with you, you shall
choose to part with your Eyes, rather than your true Friend the Gout. The mighty
Blessing whereof, that you may the better understand, mount with me one Step
higher, and then take notice of this farther advantage of the Gout.

3. The Gout presents you with a perpetual Almanac; And that it may never be
out of the way, but ready always for Your Worship's use, safely deposites it in
the Internodia of your Bones. Barometers, Thermometers, and other the
Inventions of Men, not yet perfect Masters of their Art, serve more for the
Delight, than the Use of the Curious; but theusesul Pains of the Gout give Your
Honor trusty Prognostics of the Seasons. As often as a moist Constitution of
the Year, South, or North Winds, or Snows are at Hand, you predict those things
from the accesses of your Pains; and by the absence of your Pains, you foreknow
the contrary; so one way or other, your Bone-Almanac serves for all Changes.

Our Lilly's and Gadbury's foreknow when it shall be Rain-like, or Snow-like,
but what Your Honor foreknows, by means of the Gout, does afterward actually
come to pass. Doctor Goad knew more of the Stars, and their Positions than you,
but not half so much of their Influence. Spinoza will have it, that when a
Jewish Prophet foretold any thing, he gave a Sign, a present Sign, which was a
confirmation of his Prophecy; you have the Sign within you, Sir, and are a
true Prophet all over.

Majora animalia diutius visceribus Parentum continentur, says Pliny. Nature
gives to larger sized Animals a longer stay in the Womb of their Mother; their
mighty Limbs, and vast Frame of Body, are not so soon fashioned and perfected,
as is the Compendious texture of lesser Animals: So is it with the most Noble
Arts and Sciences, with the most useful Inventions, when first brought to
light; every Man is taken up with unactive Ecstasy, and lazy Admiration,
greatly pleased to be Taught, and let into Mystery, and as well content to know
no more than is taught him; time passes silently on, and Ages steal away,
before there starts up a studious inquisitive Person, who bends his Wit to
improve the discoveries of his Ancestors, and raise them to their just
Perfection.

Now of this Observation, I am of the Mind, there is not again in Nature, so
clean an Instance as the Gout affords us. The Gout, at first, passed for no
other but an Evil Spirit, which an Exorcising Priest attacked with Charms
before ever the Physician fell foul upon him with Poisonous Recipe's. The
Physician, purely to force a Trade, imposed upon the People, That the Gout was
a Disease; having cheated them with this false Opinion, he plagued them with
real Tortures, all which he was pleased to Christen by the general Name of
Therapeutic Method, in which his barbarous Executions thus follow one another.
First Phlebotomy, then Catharties, Emeties, Hypnotics, the -- and all; and
while the inside of the Poor Patient is thus miserably Racked and Confounded,
he dawbs the outside with Anodyne Applications, Unguents, and Cataplasms; and
when all is done, I Will give them my Body to Practice on, [tho' I had rather the
Executioner had it to dispatch outright] if plain Cathartic-Gruel, and the
Cataplasm of a fresh Cow-turd do not work greater wonders, than any thing they
can pretend to. From Germany, nay, from beyond the Alps, they come, with hard
Names, Exotic Cant, and Baneful Poison, to allay the Paroxysm, and remove the
Procatarxis of the Gout; but, God be thanked, their Practice decays, and must
do more and more every day, now that it is so plainly discovered, that the Gout
needs no Remedy, not being, in truth and proper speaking, a Disease, but a
Sovereign Antidote against the most dangerous Diseases; and therefore People of
the best sense are content to let it take its course, and not only so, but they
are proud to publish the Satisfaction they take, in one or other advantage,
which the Gout affords them. For Instance, as to the Foreknowledge of Weather:
The Gout never twitches their Nerves, but they will be telling others what
changes are toward. Now, that which I propose is this, That People should not
think it enough to know thus much of the Gout, but study to improve, and
increase their knowledge; for, no doubt, more may be made of this Blessing,
than ever yet was done by the happy Man that has enjoyed it longest. I am
persuaded, that if the fortunate Patient would be at the pains to observe all
the motions of the Gout, in his pinching, smarting, gawling Accesses; in his
gnawing, stabbing, burning Paroxysms, in his evacuting, tender, remitting
Recesses, he might quickly come to wind a Storm, so long before, that in a
short time, no Owners would think their Ship safe, but with a Gouty Master, nor
would any experienced Seaman, that wanted a Ship, offer himself to the
Merchants, but upon Crutches. Possibly here some nice Person may object, That
it is a sad thing to be a Cripple; I reply, In Lameness two things are to be
considered, the unsightly Gate, and the afflicting Pain. As to the unsightly
Gate; Set the Italian Proverb against it; He knows not Venus in her perfect
sweetness,
Who has never lain with a Lame Mistress;


And Montaign tells us, that the same is said of Men, as well as Women; for the
Queen of Amazons answered the Personable Soythian, who courted her to Love,
(...), Lame Men make the best Gallants. In that Female Republic, to prevent
the Dominion of the Males, they lamed them Arms and Legs in their Infancy,
believing that they would be rather the better, for the use which they should
make of them thereafter. Montaign gives a Philosophical Reason for the
advantage accruing by Lameness, either to Men or Women, viz. The Legs and
Thighs not receiving their due Aliment, it falls out, that the Genital Parts
above are the fuller, better supplied, and more vigorous. 2. As to the Pain
proceeding from Lameness. I will not, to diminish that, tell the Objector a
long Story from the Reasonings of Aristotle, or the Practice of Cato; but only
pray him to consider the lower fort of People, who know little of Example, and
mind as little of Precept; Nature is their Guide, and this their familiar
Practice; they call the Phthisic, says Montaign, a Cough; the Bloody Flux is no
more with them than a Looseness; a Pleurisy, but a stitch in the Side; and as
they softly Name, so they patiently Endure these Grievances.

If the Mercenary Adversaries of the Gout, the Doctors, have any other
Objections against a Bone-Almanac, besides what I have answered, let them be
published, I will fairly and fully Answer them also, or renounce my Reverence
for the Gout.

O that I had an infallible Medicine, which would both certainly and speedily
cause the Gout; [Wine and Women are tedious and uncertain ways of purchasing
the mighty Blessing,] I would not doubt but to make more of it, than ever Daffy
did of his Elixir, or any stroling Mountebank of his Nostrum. The Fair for
Rider's Almanac, Partridge's Almanac, Al -- ch's Almanac, lasts but one Month
in the Year; but I might vend Gout-Almanacs, and Bone-Almanacs all the Year
round. Here I suspect that the Malevolent Doctors, that get their Living by
their mischevious Craft in practicing on the Gout, will Object, that all which
I have hitherto urged in its Commendations, has a very great allay; for though it
is not Dangerous, yet it is Painful; though the Patient has lucid Intervals, yet
he has violent Paroxysms; though he be a Prophet, yet the Spirit, which inspires,
rends him. But of these Objectors I would fain know, whether Holy prescious
Enthusiasm, be not a furious ungovernable Impulse; whether lucid Intervals, are
not more Eligible than a constant, weak, and sullen Light; whether Pain without
Danger, is not better than Ease without Security? I am of Opinion, that our
Compositions are no more able to endure pure and unmixt Felicities, than
Semele, the Halfgone Mother of Bacchus, to abide the the warm Congress of the
Olympic Jove, circled with all his Glories. Yet, to silence Envy it self, the
next Step we ascend, we shall see the Gout dealing to his Patients a Benefit,
so wondrous, refined, pleasant, and useful, that he must be a very dull
Creature, that can seriously think on this, and not passionately wish,
deliberately consider it, and not heartily labor, by all honest ways, and
means to deserve the Gout.

4. Gouty Persons are most free from the Headache; the reason of which is this.

-- The heavy Recrements of the Blood and Nervous Juice always fall downward to
the Gouty Joints. The Nerves of the Head, the Fibers and the Membranes, whereof
there are many placed above and under the Skull; the two Meninges, the Tunicles
of the Nerves, the Pericranium, and other Periostia, the Muscles, the
Panniculus Carnosus; and lastly, the Skin it self, are all freed from a World
of Torment by means of the Medicinal Gout, which attracts, to exterior remote
Parts, vicious Humors of various Denominations, and there sets them on Fire,
wastes, and Evacuates them. Persons, much favored by the Gout, upon every long
absence of that best Friend of theirs [whether occasioned by unknown Accidents,
or unwise recourse to the mischievous tampering of a wicked Doctor] exchange
their Freedom from the Gout, for Pain more Intense, and Dangerous; but, of all
other Pains, they are extremely subject to the Headache; something of a Cloud,
more or less, always hang over their Brain: But as soon as ever the Gout
pleases (forgiving their Ingratitude) to Re-visit them, presently the Weather
breaks up, the Nerves are relaxed, the Fibers unmolested, the Membranes and
Muscles recover their right Tone; while the inimicous contesting Particles,
thrown off from boiling Blood, and turgid Nervous Juice, fall down to the
remote Parts of the Body; and then the Understanding grows clear, the Thoughts
brisk and active; and the Patient is fitted, whatever his Station and
Employment is in the World, to do the Duty thereof better than ever. I have
been told of several Sea-Captains [and I have reason to believe the Relator]
who, during a Fit of the Gout, happening to meet the Enemy, bestir'd themselves
with a vigor that forgot their Pain, and gave their Order with a steddier
Presence of Mind, than ever they were Masters of before. I have the honor to
be known to a Person of Quality, who has obliged the Age with several
Instructive Pieces, who never Published a sorry Trifle, nor ever any thing so
absolutely Perfect, Useful, and Entertaining, as when he lay under a course of
the Gout. Then would He Dictate like an Angel, or, which is much the same, a
Man Inspired, to his Ravished Amanuensis. That Amanuensis of his, has told me,
though he loved his Master very well, yet he was always sorry for his Recovery;
for then his Strength failed him, and he was no more than another Writer, I
mean a Writer of the First Rate though. I know nothing that a Man, when he enjoys
the Gout, is unfit for, but Jumping, Running of Races, or Football. The
Amazons, if they are not belyed, coveted to admit Strangers Flagrante
Paroxismo. Had Montaign ever met with the MS. whence I have the Notice, he
would have given us a Philosophical Reason for it. The Gout being thus
beneficial, I bless my self to think, that any Patient should be so much his
own Enemy, as to be weary of it; any Doctor so much an Enemy to Mankind, as to
offer at the Cure; but Cure it they cannot, whatever they pretend, unless they
Kill the Patient. For my part, I know no difference in the Earth between a
Doctor of Physic and a Tinker, save that the Doctor has more of the Tinker, the
Tinker more of the Doctor in him: For, the Tinker effectually Stops that
particular Hole which he is hired to Stop, though he makes two other for it; but
the Doctor does but disturb the Gout which he undertakes to Cure; and when the
vicious Humors of the Body are not suffered to have their course to the
exterior remote Parts, there to be sacrificed on the Internodial Altars of the
Gout, they revert with Fury and Indignation, dangerously Assault the Vitals,
diffuse their Venom over all the Viscera, corrupt the Stomach, but more
especially affect the Head, with violent Pains, which are often followed by
dangerous Swoonings, a Vertigo, a failing of Memory; nay, and sometimes a
downright Delirium. Thus Physicians Cure their Patients of the Gout! Then
doubly Blessed are the Poor and Needy, who, when they have the Gout, and do not
understand their own Happiness, cannot be at the Charge to get rid on it, by a
Cure of the Doctors. Nay, beside the mischievous consequences of their
Meddling, their very Meddling it self, is a sorer Pain, than the Gout, a
thousand times; so that, that Man's Intellectuals must not be right, who would
not wish to have his Headache Cured by the Gout, rather than by the Doctors
Methods, i.e. by being Purged and Blooded, Cupp'd and Flux'd, Stifled with
Spirit of Hartshorn and Soot, drenched with Cephalic Juleps, and Waters -- Cold
as those, that extinguished the Vital Heat of that Renowned ThriceIllustrious
Hero, hight Old Simon the King. The Gout's a Specific, a Single, Proper, and
Effectual Remedy for the Headache; by a strong Revulsion it attracts Morbific
Matter from the Nobler Parts, and ever while you live, say I, keep Pain from
your Head, and Sorrow from your Heart. The honest Old Beldame made sport for
her Neighbors, when she applied the Clyster to her Forehead, the part
affected: Again, when her Neighbors turned up her Blind-side, and played the
Pipe at her Virgin Avenue, that was a Jest to her: Marry Gap, quoth she, it is
the upper end that aches, and you give Physic to the lower; but the Clyster was
a good Remedy for the Headache, though planted at distance, and so the Gout. How
necessary a Friend to the Head, the Medicinal Gout is, keeping it easy, clean,
and free from all morbific Matter which disturbs the Brain, we might partly
guess, from the subtle Observation of the Famous Confucius upon Gonty Persons,
which is communicated to us, by one of the Chastest Historians among the
veracious Emissaries, [for the Chinese are blessed with the Gout, as well as
the Europeans;] It is possible, said that wise Mandarin, for a Lame Gouty
Person to be a Knave, even in our own Country have I known some such; but who
ever knew a Gouty Cripple that was a Fool? In a Book of that Great Master of
Morals and Politics, presented by a Mandarin of Confucius his own Race, to a
Learned Jesuit who has enriched the King of France's Library with it, [but I
suppose the Book was there reposited, since a certain Person finished his
Travels,] these farther Remarks are delivered, Natural Fools never acquire the
Gout, the Sons of Gouty Persons are defended from Dullness and Folly by the Sins
of their Parents, or if in their Minority their Understandings happen to lie a
little backward, they shall no sooner enter on their Gouty Inheritance, but a
bright Illumination brings the same forward: Whatever a Man's natural Powers
are, they are so improved by the Gout, so refined, so heighthned in the
Paroxysm, that I am almost tempted to call it a sort of Natural Inspiration.
Facile est inventis addere, what the Noble Confucius has admirably well
observed of the Gout, viz. That it is a perfect Deletory of Folly, prompts me
to think, that it would be worth inquiry, whether the Gout is not as effectual
against Madness, and we may reasonably believe that it is so, if upon
Examination it should be found, that there are no Gouty People in Bedlam; and
then for the Recovery of those poor Creatures to their Wits again, it will not
need much Consideration, whether they ought not to be excused the hard blows
which their barbarous Keepers deal them; and the Therapeutic Method of Purging,
Bleeding, Cupping, Fluxing, Vomiting, Clystering, Juleps, Apozemes, Powders,
Confections, Epithemes, and Cataplasms, with which the more barbarous Doctors
Torment them; and instead of all their Learned Tortures, indulged, for a time
only, a little Intemperance, as to Wine, or Women, or so; or the Scholar's
Delight of Feeding worthily, and Sleeping heartily, whereby they might get the
Gout, and then their Madness were cured.

Many and great are the Advantages which accrue to Mortal Man from the Gout, as
cannot but sufficiently appear to Your Worship, from what I have, in running
haste, observed; but far more numerous, and unconceivably vast are the
Improvements, which a Man, worthy of the Gout, and sensible of his Happiness,
might, with attentive Care, and sedulous Observance, make. Yet I shall not
insist on conjectural Topics to do Justice to so effectual a Promoter of the
Safety of humane Life; but proceed on those Benefits, which are the Objects of
Sense; so that, if there be any Person, that shall Think, or Speak ill of the
Gout, he must be one, that does not desire, or deserve to Live.

It is a Lofty Height, to which I have advanced Your Worship; Four steep
Ascents you have already climbed, but the Honor of the Gout, Caput inter
nubila condit. Can your Head bear to mount a Fifth? But why do I ask that
Question? The Gout it self will enable you.

5. The Gout preserves its Patients from the great Danger of Fevers.

Gouty Persons, by reason of a fixed Dyscrasy of the Blood, are not obnoxious to
Fevers, As they live free from the dreadful Pains of the Headache, so likewise,
from the scorching Heat of Fevers. Every one knows, that a Fever is a high
disorderly Motion, or over-boiling of the Blood, which seldom, or never,
happens to Gouty Persons, because the malignant Recrements of the Blood, and
Nervous Juice, which occasion Fevers, are continually deposited in the Joints
of Gouty Persons, are there imprisoned, watered, and consumed by the Purging,
Healing, Cleansing, Sanative Fire of the burning Gout. There is a Natural
Motion, and Heat in the Blood, depending partly on its proper Crasis and
Constitution [for being composed of Spirit, Salt, and Sulphur, Principles
vigorous and active, it spontaneously grows Turgid and Tumultuous, like
Generous Wine in narrow Vessel pent,] and partly to the Ferment implanted in
the Heart, which Rarifies the Liquor passing thorugh its Chancls, and and
forces it to rise with Effervescence frothy. The Preter-natural Ebullition of
the Blood, is caused either by some Extraneous, Heterogeneous Mixture, or from
the immoderate Exaltation of its own natural Spirit, or Sulphur, which when it
happens, presently a high, and quick Pulse follows; the Blood, like a
Sulphurous Liquor, taking Fire, diffuses its burning Heat all over the Body.

The vast Sicilian Chasms, which vomit Flaming Heaps of Matter, Sulphurous, and
Combustible, what are they, but Nature's Emblemes of a burning fiery Fever? And
when the Poets Fable, That haughty Typhocus, big Eryx, and bold Enceladus, deep
buried in the Earth by angry Jupiter, belch out those Fires, which waste the
Country, and fright the Inhabitants, what mean'd they to denote, but the
Restlesness of strenuous Heroes [for want of the Gout to withdraw the Feverish
Fuel] frying in Flames Merciless, and Destructive?

Methinks I pity the Young, and Healthy, whose Blood flows temperately, and
never knew disorder; I pity them, I say, not for their present Ease, but
because of their imminent Danger. For when a Royal Sun of France blazes, and
perishes in Flames Painted by a brave Russel's Masterly Hand; when a vanquished
Admiral shifts off in Boat Inglorious, a King of equal Valor from a safe
Station all the while beholding the Monsieur's prudent care to preserve a Great
Commander; when a haughty Marshall is beat out of the Strongest Bulwark, that
Fenced his Master's treacherous Rapine, and, to induce that Master of his for
once to keep the Cartel, can, in spite of all his blustering, part with his
Sword: When Rebel Invaders are disappointed, and execrable Assassines punished,
at such tempting occasions as these, who can forbear a rightful, lawful, and
brimful Glass? Yet on so solemn a Festival, if the Healthy gives Nature but a
Fillip, it may perchance throw him into a Fever, and that Fever perchance cost
him his Life; whereas the Man that is obnoxious to the Gout, cheerfully ventures
the Duty of the Day, well-knowing, that when the worst comes to the worst, it is
but roaring in Purgatory some Forty Days, or so; and by that time the Gout has
wasted, and cleans'd off the Tartarous Recrements of undigested Falern, who
knows but good News may come to make another Holy Day.

Purgatory, which cleanses the Souls of the departed from their Filth, which
sets them out of the Danger of the Lake, and renders them (like burnt
Tobacco-pipes) clean and pure, and fit for Paradise, is a true Picture of the
Fire of the Gout, which spends the Morbisic Matter, that might otherwise throw
the Body into a Hellish Fever. Indeed, Infidels and Heretics may object, and
say, that perhaps Purgatory is but a false Story, but no matter for that; for
Grave Authors teach, that a false Story may be a true Picture, and serve to
illustrate as necessary a Doctrine as that of Purgatory, but in this, I am
positive, that neither a false Story, nor a true one, can illustrate a more
infallible Maxim than this, That the Purging Fires of the Gout withdraw the
Fuel, from the destructive Fires of burning Fevers.

Those learned and worthy Authors, that write of Devils and Spirits, and know
the Natures and Orders of them as perfectly, as heart can wish, tell us, that
there be two sorts of them, White and Black, Good and Bad: So is it certainly
with Diseases; the Gout, if it be lawful to call it a Disease, is a good and
useful Disease, a White Devil; the Fever, a bad and hurtful Disease, a Black
Devil, the Devil of a Disease, or a Disease that is the Devil, whom if ever the
Physician casts out, I Will Swear it is by Compact: Whereas the Gout is an honest
Febrifuge, the Operations thereof Natural, and Intelligible, something Painful
indeed, but there is no Magic in them. By the way, If the Physician cures or
casts out Black Diseases or Devils, by Compact with Black Devils, may it not be
said to be a double wickedness? For I took it to be the Roman Priest's ungodly
Office, with rumbling Exorcisms to eject them; but this is the fault also of
other Dealers, there is nothing more common among them than to encroach upon one
another's Trade. Could Tyrants inflict Fevers, they would never make use of
Rack or Gibbet, Axe, or unrighteous Judge, unless the object of their Fate were
an honest Gouty Fellow; for the Gout would soften the feverish Infliction, as
the Popish Printer did his Father Confessor's Penance, when he boiled the
Pease, which he was required to put in his Shoes before he took his walk. There
is not certainly a severe Torment than a Burning Fever, nor a more Sovereign
Antidote than the Medicinal Gout; so that it is a Truth, clear as the Sun, if
more People had the Gout, fewer would die of a Fever. Having placed these
things in so clear a light, I am strongly persuaded, that not Your Worship
only, but the generality of the Age will set their prejudices aside, and yield
to the happy force of the many useful Truths, which, by the bright Illumination
of a violent Gout-Paroxysm, I have here discovered; so that hereafter, instead
of the Old parting Complements, -- Save you, Sir, God keep you in good Health,
I question not but we shall say, -- The Gout defend you, Sir, God give you the
Gout; for we ought not to hope for a Blessing without the means. To wish a Man
the Gout, is to wish him that, which withdraws Fuel from Diseases, and
preserves Life at so cheap a rate, it costs a Man not a Penny more than
Patience.

It has been the Opinion of some Writers, that none can be saved, who die of
the Plague, but in judging of the Future State of others, I think it best to
venture being mistaken on the Charitable side; and therefore I would sooner
believe, that none can be Damned who have the Gout; and I must tell Your
Worship, that I have known a less probable Sign of Salvation given by a
Dissenting Rabbi to his Hearers.

When Mercury, by the mighty Power of a Verse, borrowed from that great
Architect Homer, heaved up the aspiring Mountain Pelion, and pil'd it entire on
Heav'n-shouldring Ossa, and then helped Charon up to the top; the poor old
Ferry-man complained, That the distance from the Earth was so great, that he
could not see what was done there: I am much afraid, Sir, that this uppermost
Step of Ascent, on which I am going to Seat Your Worship, that you may have a
full view of the amazing Excellence of the Medicinal, Useful, Health-restoring,
Soul-enliv'ning Gout, will place you at such a vast distance above Terrene
Things and Notions, that you will not be able to discern the true proportion of
that Benefit which Crowns the Honor of the Gout; at least, not so plainly as I
could wish.

6. To Crown the Honor of the Gout, It is not to be Cured.

The Gout defies all your Gross Galenical Methods, and all your exalted
Chemical Preparations; for, the conjunct Causes thereof (as the Learned Willis
confesses) lie in parts so very remote, that the Virtues of no Medicines can
reach them; and Heaven be praised for it, for why, Sir, would you Cure [as you
call it] the Gout, which gives you Pain without Danger, a better taste of
Health by an acquaintance with Pain, a knowledge of future things, freedom from
the Headache, and from Fevers?

Bless us! That any Man should wish to be rid of the Gout, for want of which he
may become obnoxious to Fevers, and Headache, be blinded in his Understanding,
lose the taste of his Health, and the security of his Life. I hope you and I,
dear Sir, shall be better advised, and to show that we are so, and at the same
time, to set the World a good Example, I hope we shall neither of us ever
tamper with the Doctor for the Cure of the Gout, which really and truly is
incurable, unless the Patient be to be killed; which is what the Doctor's
Medicines aim at, perhaps not what He directly aims at himself: For his Heart
is chiefly upon his Fee; his Prayers, that his Patient may neither Die, nor
Recover; at least not Die, while he is worth a Penny; but when his last Penny is
spent, then the miserable Creature is forsaken, like the Poor Woman in the
Gospel, and may Perish for all him, unless Heaven has a Miracle in store for a
Poor Sinner that has been tormented by a nasty D -- before his time. But lest I
should be thought, in vindication of the Honor of the Gout, too severe against
the Pretenders to Cure it, I shall argue against them, from their own
confessions: We may say of every Medicaster, whether a College, or a
Stage-Doctor, habemus confitentem reum; the whole Clan of them are Homicides by
their own Confession. Other wicked People put on the Guise of honesty, for the
better perpetrating their Crimes; but Physicians own the Roguery of their Art;
indeed, to save themselves from public Infamy, they give this softning turn to
their scandalous Cause. The Principles of their Art, they say, are difficult to
be understood, and uncertain to be relied on; and then also the temperament of
the Body, on which they Practice, can be but guessed at; so that, the success
of the most Learned Practitioner can be but casual. Now, that after this, these
Men should be entertained, and so general admittance given to their Practice,
does evidently prove, that the generality of Men, when they lose their Health,
lose their Wits together with it. I will allow, that it were reasonable for a
Sick Man liberally to part with his Guinea's for his Health, if the Doctors,
that have their Money in Hand, were sure of restoring Health, or upon failure
would refund; but to pay down ready Money for a Lottery-Chance, where it is
great odds but the Adventurer increases his Malady, and hastens his Death! I,
for my part, declare against it, and am persuaded, that no one who considers
rightly, but would keep his Money and bear his Burden. A spare and easy Diet
shall be always my Physic, and I will leave it to Nature to do her own work.
But let us come to some more particular acknowledgments of these deadly Enemies
of Mankind.

Galen, that is still revered as a God by Modern Practitioners, acknowledges it
impossible to find out a Medicine that shall do any great good one way, and not
do as much hurt another. The Learned Dr. Hammond fatally experienced the truth
of this acknowledgment; the Medicine which was prescribed him to Cure the Gout,
moved the Gravel from his Kidneys, which being too big to pass the Ureters,
choked the Channel, and deprived him of his Life that way. Cornelius Agrippa
tells us of one Rafis, a Physician of Note, who considering the foolish
credulity of Patients, and the contentious ignorance of Professors in Physic,
advised that never above one Doctor should be made use of at a time; giving
this reason, Because the mistake of a single Man was less dangerous: And I
would advise never to use any; for, as the mistake of one Man is less dangerous
than of a Consult of them, so the having nothing to do with any one, is less
dangerous than the mistake of one; for Nature can commit no mistake, but if not
loaded with Luxury, nor disturbed with Physic, will vigorously strive to throw
off every noxious Disease. Such the Gout is not, for Nature throwing off
Morbific Matter to the remoter parts of the Body, does designedly beget the
Gout, and make use of that admirable Remedy, to Cure Diseases already gotten,
and to prevent others. But it is not mere reason which I rely upon, when I
advise Men to trust Nature alone for their Recovery, and never go to a
Physician, I have the greatest Authority to support my advice. 2 Chronicles. 16.12.
Asa in the 39th. Year of his Reign was diseased in his Feet [as I am now, which
hinders me from running to my Commentators] but I remember the Phrase of the
Septuagint, is (...), his Feet were soft and tender [swell'd with the Gout,
that must be the meaning] until his Disease [Gout] was exceeding great, yet in
his Disease [(...), in the extreme softness and tenderness of his Gout] he
sought not to the Lord, but to the Physician. I do not see how our Doctors of
Physic can evade the force of this Text, in defense of their Profession; for
it is a very weak and precarious Reply, which they make, when they tell us, That
Asa is blamed, not directly for seeking to the Physicians, but for not trusting
in the Lord, when he sought to them. Now I will grant these Gentlemen, that it
is the duty of Patients, to trust in the Lord, when they seek to the
Physicians; nay, it is their Duty to trust in the Lord, then, above any other
time; for then they run themselves into those hazards, that, if the Lord does
not help them, it is odds but they miscarry. But I would have these Physicians,
who make but sorry Interpreters of Scripture, to consider, that the Text sets
seeking the Lord, and seeking the Physician, in opposition to one another;
plainly enough implying, that the former was his Duty, the latter his Fault.
But our Physicians, it seems, would have the Sick seek to the Lord, and them
both; as if the Lord could not do his own work without them. Odi profanum
Genus. -- Hence, Sir, it is plain to me, that they are an Order of Men that
Care not much what they say or do, to uphold their own Honor, and keep their
ungodly Trade a going: But therefore I would wish all unhealthy People, who
have bought their Misery of the Professors; and all honest Gentlemen, who are
preserved by the Salutary Gout in the Land of the Living, to prefer a Bill in
Parliament against this destructive Order of Men, that by a strong Cathartic
Act, they may be Purged out of His Majesty's Dominions; I will engage that
there is never a Family in the Nation, but shall by this means, besides their
Health, save their Taxes, so that a vigorous War may be continued against
France, till the Monsieur's not worth a Livre, and no body with us ever the
Poorer. For such an useful Decree, we are not without a President in History.
The Wise Romans, under Marcus Porcius Cato, Banished Physicians, not only from
Rome, but also from Italy, which Council, it may be reasonably thought,
contributed not a little to the increase of their People; for, as where the
most Lawyers are, there are the most Quarrels and Contentions; so where the
most Physicians, there the most Funerals; and some say, where the most Divines,
there the most differences about Religion; but that is not the fault of the
Divines; for if the Magistrate would let the strongest Party alone, they would
force all the rest to be of their Opinion. But I am afraid I forget my self in
too long a Digression; what I ought chiefly to insist on, is, the Superlative
Excellence of the Gout, which is never to be removed. The fear of losing a
Blessing takes off from the pleasure of enjoying it. Thieves may plunder your
House, Age will ruin your Beauty, Envy may asperse your Reputation, Bribes
corrupt your Faith, but the Gout is a sure Inheritance; neither Thieves, nor
Knaves; neither Time, nor Envy, nor any thing else, can despoil you of it. A
Man may, himself, if he has a mind to it, squander his Estate, blemish his
comely Form, injure his Fame, and renounce his Honesty; but let him get rid of
the Gout if he can; that blessing he may take Comfort in, being secure, that
it is for his Life. They say, there is more Care and Trouble in keeping an
Estate, than getting it; as for the Gout, there may be some trouble in getting
it, though that is mixed with pleasure too, but no Man is put to the least care or
trouble for the safe keeping of the Gout; he may endure Misery enough indeed,
if he seeks to the Physician for the Cure of it. You cannot be always Young and
Handsome; but Gouty once, and Gouty ever; thence came the Proverb, Drink Claret,
and have the Gout; and Drink no Claret, and still have it: The Gout, it is true,
is the Reward of some Works, but there is no forfeiting it, and therein it is
preferable to a Crown Imperial. Possibly a Wise and Worthy Person may secure
his Virtue again dangerous Temptations, but then he must be always upon his
Guard; but let him take as little Care of himself as he pleases, he shall never
have the less Gout for his loose way of Living. But possibly it may be
objected, That the Gout, Curing other Diseases, and not being to be Cured it
self, becomes an encouragement to Intemperance, and Lust. The Lustful, and In
temperate Drink, and Love on, reckoning that the Gout will carry off the Evil
Consequences of wild Excess, and foolish Passion. Now I will not lie for the
Gout, as much as I Honor it: If it were not for this one -- abatement, 'twere
Physic for an Angel. But, that the Reader may not reproach me for a gross
Philosophical Error, I declare, that I do not mean, for the Spiritual Substance
of an Angel, for that, I well know, needs no Physic, of one sort, or other; but
for the Corporeal Vehicle which an Angel may chance to assume; which Vehicle,
being rectified by the Gout, may, with less trouble, be actuated by the Angel.

Sir, I thought to have taken a longer View of the Excellency of the Noble
Gout, from this sublime Ascent, which represents it with its greatest
advantage, the advantage of being Incurable: But, alas! the violent Paroxysm,
which I have labored under for these three short Days and Nights, abates; the
Intenseness of my Pains considerably remits, and therefore I am forced to break
off abruptly; for I am sensible, that no Man can do Honor to the Gout by a
just and adequate Panegvric, but he that at the time of Writing feels it in
extremity.

To all the numerous Offspring of Apollo, whether Dogmatical Sons of Art, or
Empirical Byblows.
To all Pharmaceutic Residentiaries in Town, or City; also to all Stroling
Practitioners and Impostors.
GENTLEMEN,
IF this Letter shall happen in any measure to spoil your Trade, Heaven make me
thankful; for, well I know, that yours is the very Trade, of two Famous
Princes, that have by one Method or other, ridd out of the way, very great
numbers of Men.

A Malefactor Condemned to Die, ought to be free from all manner of insults as
he goes to Execution. I know it, and therefore do not Dedicate this Letter to
you, by way of Insult, but Friendly to mind you, that since your unrighteous
Trade is Broke, or Breaking, You would timely bethink your selves, what Honest
Employment you may be fit for; If you will take my advice, you shall Travel; for,
to your Sorrow, you have known an overgrown Farrier from abroad, make a great
Doctor in England; Why should not you make as good Farriers abroad, as they do
Doctors here? This is certain, like true Farriers, you have Prescribed to many
a weak Man a Medicine for a Horse; so then, for the Materia Medica it is the
same, nothing will be troublesome, and uneasy to you; in your New Profession,
but that you shall never get as much by Practicing on the Spavin, as the Gout;
but you must be content with less Earnings; What! you cannot in Conscience
expect as much for Killing a Horse, as a Man.

To this Change of your Profession, not only the discovery of the Frands and
Dangers thereof, but also the Name of your Great Patron Hippocrates invites --
What are You more than He? Come, come, (...), Change Name and Profession,
better a Murrain among Horses than a Plague among Men.

Having thus obliged you, Gentlemen, in an Epistle Decicatory, by minding you
of the imminent Decay of your Practice upon Humane Bodies, and teaching you how
to make the best of a bad Market, by trying experiments upon Horseflesh; I
hope you will make me that grateful return, as to prevent the Obligation I
confer on you from turning to my prejudice; therefore if any Gouty Person that
may happen to malign you, shall object against me, and say, I had better have
made a Forlorn Regiment of you, and sent you to have been knocked of the head in
Flanders, than given you a License to Kill Horses, remember to say this for
your Selves and your Benefactor, That when the Devils were ejected out of
Humane Bodies, they were suffered to enter into Swine.

FINIS.

