A DEFENSE OF King Charles I. Occasioned by the LIES and SCANDALS OF Many BAD
MEN of this AGE.

By Richard Hollingworth, D. D. Their Majesty's Chaplain, at St. Botolph
Aldgate, London.

LONDON: Printed for Samuel Eddowes, under the Piazza of the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill, 1692.

TO THE KING and QUEENS Most Excellent Majesty's.
May it please Your Majesty's,
THE Subject of this Discourse being no less a Person than King Charles I. of
Blessed Memory, and Your Royal Grandfather, whose Throne You so happily fill,
and whose Virtues and Graces You daily imitate; I therefore thought the
Dedication of it proper for none but Crowned Heads, upon which score I humbly
presume, such as it is, to lay it at Your Sacred Feet, hoping that it may be
serviceable to support the Honor and Reputation of Monarchy in general,
(which, I am certain, is struck at through the Sides of this Great Prince) to
preserve the Peace and Happiness of Your Majesty's Government, and to secure
Your Majesty's from the Danger, as well of flattering and pretending Friends,
as of public and open Enemies: Which good effect that it may have, shall be
the constant Prayer of

Your Majesty's most humble and dutiful Subject and Servant, Ric. Hollingworth.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
IF those, who have of late made it their Business to Defame King Charles the
First, will, after this, repent and do so no more, then I promise, this
Discourse, as it is my first, so it shall be the last I will put forth of this
nature. But if they are resolved against Conviction, and will act against
Noon-day-light, and will continue to load this Great and Good man's Memory
still with their wonted Calumnies and Reproaches; I do here tell them, that I
have so much more to say in his behalf, which I could not crowd into these
Papers, (because I was willing it should be every man's Money) that, if it be
possible, will put them to a shame. And I do here assure them, if they will not
suffer Modesty and Good-manners to command them for the time to come, they
shall have it; for, I am resolved, as long as I can hold a Pen in my Hand, I
will not drop this Cause, namely, The Defense of Charles the First. I have but
one thing more, and that is, That I cannot believe that man loves me, let his
Professions be never so great and many, nay, but that he has a Spite to and
Design against me, who in all Companies and Places, without Cause or
Provocation, calls my Grandfather Knave and Rascal.

Farwell.
A DEFENSE OF King CHARLES the First, and
KING Charles the First was a person whose Life I have diligently looked into,
and as seriously considered, and in doing both, have found my self equally
affected with Joy and Grief; with Joy, to meet with a person, under so great
and many Temptations as Princes must needs be, so admirably tempered, so
greatly condescending, so ready to comply with whatever was presented to him
for the Good of his Subjects, of so great Patience under the greatest
Sufferings and the most horrid Indignities put upon him, of so great Constancy
to the Religious Persuasions of his own Mind, that neither the enjoyment of his
Crown, nor yet his Life, could bribe him to forsake them.

Further, to meet with a Prince of so affable a Conversation, and that attended
with such pithy and admirable Discourses, as made some of those who were his
Keepers at Holdenly-House, not only love, but admire him ever after; so that
they not only wished, endeavored to put him in a better condition. Lastly, A
Prince of so solid a Judgment, as all his Writings and Disputes do testify,
and also so serious and awful, as well as constant in his Devotions; I say,
when I meet with these true Accounts in History, I cannot forbear praising God
with the greatest joy, that there was such a person of his Degree, and in his
High station, that was born into, and lived in the World to be a Pattern to
future Princes, as well as to all other sort of Persons, of true Virtue and
real Goodness.

But, on the other hand, I have been often overwhelmed, as it were, with Sorrow
and a loading Grief, to find this Prince, so every ways Great and Good, so
rudely handled, so barbarously used, so ignobly and ungenerously refused not
only the Liberty of his Body, but the free exercise of his Religion in that way
which he had so often and also so solemnly declared to be according to the just
and well-made satisfaction of his Mind and Judgment; to find him libelled by
every petty and saucy Scribler, and those Libels countenanced, and also spread
abroad by a Factious number of Men, who designed nothing, but by his Ruin to
raise themselves into Places of Wealth and Power. I say, when I meet with
these, and a thousand more Affronts put upon him, enough to have broke any
Heart but his, I cannot but entertain my self with sorrowful Thoughts, nor yet
forbear such Resentments as almost force me to break out into undecent Passions
and violent Reflections upon those men, who once swore Allegiance to him, and
afterward, forgetting all their Obligations, treated him as one of their
Slaves or Footboys. But however, it would be some allay to a man's Grief, if he
could find the present Generation of this Kingdom, especially many of those
whose Ancestors had too great an hand in these vile and scornful Treatments of
this Great and Excellent Person, to make an atonement for the Faults of their
Progenitors, by bewailing of them, and by a constant forwardness to give this
Good man that just and true Character that his Worth and Merits do call for at
all honest and considering men's hands: But, alas! when I find at this time of
the day, instead of this, these very men, who succeed in Principles those who
imprisoned and at last murdered him; I say, when I find so great numbers of
them vindicating his Death, and in order to that, loading his Memory with all
the filthy Accusations and groundless, as well as false, Aspersions, that Wit
and Malice put together, can amasse and heap up, never speaking of him, but as
a Tyrant, a Rogue, a Rascal, nay, and a Papist too, though he so strenuously
asserted and pleaded the Protestant Cause, as it is professed by the Church of
England, and calling the day on which he was murdered, and which is appointed
by the Supreme Power of the Nation to be religiously observed, The Madding Day,
as it is in a late lewd Pamphlet, that goes under the name of Ludlow: Why, I
must needs say, this swells my Grief above its usual Bank, as well as stirs and
raises my just Indignation against such a vile Brood, who, under pretense of
Duty, and entire Affections to Their present Majesty's, (believe them who will
or can) are daily abusing him from whose Loins they came, and whose Virtues
they daily imitate.

And therefore, from these two Passions of Grief and Anger, thus justly
grounded, I am resolved, in the ensuing Treatise, to vindicate this great
Prince, and if possible, to shame his implacable Enemies, who do show by what
they so frequently vent, that they have neither Knowledge, Wisdom, nor
Good-Manners, nor indeed any thing else that belongs to the Human as well as
Christian Nature; the influency of either of which, if suffered, would make
them tender of the Reputation and Memory of one, whose Virtues and Graces were
as conspicuous as were the Perfidiousness and Treachery, the Hypocrisy and
Perjury of those who imbrewed their Hands in his Sacred Blood.

And here I must tell the Reader, that I intend only to run through the last
Eight years of his Reign; for though there might be some mistakes in his
Government before, (as, What Government is without them?) yet now he offers to
redress all, and did so as far as he could be satisfied things were out of
order; and, I am certain, from the beginning of the Long Parliament, November
the 4th. to the day of his death, January 48. that he did every thing almost
that deserved a better reception than it met withal, and made such various
Offers and Condescentions, as would have pleased any sort of men, but those who
were resolved to be Masters of his whole Crown and Dignity, together with his
Revenues, and the Estates of all those who from Principles of Conscience, stood
by and asserted his just and righteous Cause. And in this Undertaking I promise
the Reader to be true and impartial, and to offer nothing but what I have a
good and truly-acknowledg'd Authority for; for I scorn to set Pen to Paper,
with a disign to cheat and impose upon the World, which when I have done, I
fear not the Reflections of any prejudiced, resolved, and unreasonable men
whatsoever.

When the Parliament sat down in 40. it is plain to any man that reads the
History with a clear and equal mind, That the King purposed and resolved to
consent to every thing they could offer him, which might be really for the Good
of his Kingdom; and that if any Grievance was left unredressed, it should not
be his, but their own fault, only supposing they would not make Grievances
where there were none, and overturn the Government instead of healing the Sores
thereof. And therefore, in his first Speech, he tells them frankly, That he was
resolved to put himself freely and clearly on the Love and Affection of his
English Subjects; and withal, promises them at the same time to concur with
them so heartily, that all the World may see, that his Intentions have ever
been, and shall be, to make this a glorious and flourishing Kingdom. And, I
think, he that reads the first half-years Transactions betwixt him and this
Parliament, will find he made his word good to a tittle; for whatsoever they
offered to him by way of Bill, which the Nation groaned under before, as a
real, nay, but as a fancied Burden, he presently passes it. As for instance;
The Star Chamber had been long complained of as a Grievance, and therefore he
signs the Bill to take it away. Further, the High Commission was a Court that
most men's Mouths were opened against, though it was well designed, when in Queen
Elizabeth's days it was first erected; and he consents to take that away too.
The Ship Money, though great and very learned Lawyers had given their Opinion,
That the exacting of it in some cases was according to Law; yet he resolving to
set all right at once, betwixt himself and many of his discontented People, he
gives that up also, and withal, consents, that the late Proceedings touching
Ship Money should be declared void. And, to please the Western. Gentlemen, and
many others of inferior rank, he passes an Act against the Encroachments and
Oppressions of the Stannery Courts. And, to please others throughout the
Nation, as well as them, he signs another Bill, relating to the Metes and
Bounds of the Forest; and all these things done in a very short time. And
after this, to let his People see, that all Dangers from Bad men's wicked
Counsels, for the time to come, should be prevented, he signs a Bill for a
Triennial Parliament, wherein, upon a Neglect at Court, or from the better sort
of men in the Country, to summon a Choice, he puts it into the power of the
very. Constables to do it; namely, to meet and chufe Representives: Which,
certainly; was as great a Condescension as was ever made by a Prince, and would
have satisfied any but those who were resolved to carry a Game further than was
at that time seen by men of clean and undesigning Minds.

And after this, when they thought things would never be well, until all sorts
of Subjects were conversant in nothing else, but what was proper for their
Calling, and therefore fancied, that if the Bishops were removed out of the
House of Lords, they would have more leisure to attend their Spiritual
Empl^ments; why even this Bill, together with that which offered violence to
the Peace and Quiet of his Mind all the days of his Life, namely, the Bill for
attainding the great Earl of Strafford, he orders by Commissioners to be
pa^sed. And, what can any man think, after this, could give occasion for
Discontent or finding Fault. If any thing could persuade men, that the King was
resolved nor to break with his People, but to lay a firm Foundation of Duty on
their sides for the time to come, certainly a man would think this would do;
though, God knows, by the sequel we find it did not, but the more he gave, the
bolder they grew in their Requests, or rather in their Demands; and therefore,
the next thing they presented him withal, which was a thing, I verily believe,
never a Prince that had sat upon the English Throne before, would have
granted; Granted did I say? nay, would scornfully have rejected: Yet to show he
was resolved to honor them with an entire Confidence, he passes that too, and
with it not only all the future Comforts, of his Life, but his Life too, and
that was the Bill for the Parliament to sit during their pleasure: Such an Act
of Kindness, as one would have thought, should have obliged them for ever, and
shut the door against all Suspicions of him. Great and Good man had thou had
any jealousy of this People's Kindness and Duty to thee, thou would have
suffered thy Hand rather to have withered off, than by it to have signed a Bill
whereby thou losest almost all thy Power at one blow.

And now surely all Clouds are blown away, and the Sky looks clear, and there
is a mutual Harmony, and an undisturbed Intercourse betwixt him and his People,
especially considering that he is so far from repenting of what he has done,
that he is still continuing to invite them, both by Speeches and Messages, to
propose any thing to him that might make them both happy, (provided they did
not invade the Essentials of an English Monarch, and strip him of every thing
but the Name of a King) with all manner of assurance, that he would comply with
them; as any man may satisfy himself, that converses with the History and
Transactions of those times.

But, alas, all these Condescentions would not do; and though he, good man,
flattered himself with an easy Belief, that he had done what was fitting for a
gracious King to do, in order to still the voice of further Complaints, yet for
all that, when for necessary reasons he took a Journey to Scotland, these men,
whose Requests he had thus largely answered, in his absence to show their
gratitude for what was done before, appoint a Committee, who being picked and
chosen men, drew up a Remonstrance, wherein they made the most bitter
Reflections upon his former Government, and exposed him to the censure and ill
thoughts of his less-discerning Subjects, and which was so very unmannerly, as
well as false, that when it came to be delated in the whole House, after
sitting up all night, and thereby wearying many of the ancient Gentlemen, and
being protested-against by many learned and worthy Patriots in the House, and
carried only by eleven Votes, yet it was ordered to be printed, on purpose to
inflame the Nation against him. Notwithstanding which affront to his Person and
Government, (after he had fairly answered it, and vindicated himself from those
horrid Aspersions wherewith they had loaded him, fairly proving, that the
present Miseries and future Dangers of the Nation lay at their door, and not at
his.) I say, notwithstanding this, he continues still to solicit them, by
Message after Message, to offer any thing to him wherein the true Interest of
the Kingdom was concerned, and he would be ready to gratify them, by giving it
the Royal Fiat.

And when through Tumults and too-much-countenanc'd Riots he withdrew from
Whitehall, being under apprehension of Affronts designed to be offered to his
Person, if not something worse, yet he ceases not to call upon them, to
consider the Nations Good, and the settling it upon such Foundations as neither
the Monarch might invade the just Rights of the People, nor the People encroach
upon the Rights of his Crown and Dignity: And so he tells them upon their
presenting their Petition at Theobalds, and afterward at New Market, in the
same month, when after hearing their Declaration read, he expostulated in these
words: What would you have? Have I violated your Laws? Have I denied to pass
any one Bill for the Ease and Security of my Subjects? God so deal with me and
mine, as all my Thoughts and Intentions are upright, for the maintenance of the
true Protestant Profession, and for the Observation and Preservation of the
Laws of this Land. Expressions surely that do not in the least savor of that
Tyranny and Oppression with which, at this time, by many wicked persons, his
Memory is charged. It Is true, these Applications from the two Houses, at this
time, were for nothing less than the Militia; but, Can any man accuse him for a
Tyrant, because he would not part with that which his Ancestors always
enjoyed, and without which a King is indeed but the shadow of a King;
especially not to part with it at that time, when so little a Regard had been
paid to his Person, nay, so many Indignities had not only been promoted but
encouraged too by those very men, whom nothing now could satisfy, but the
whole Power of the Sword?

Well, the King continuing steadfast to his Resolutions, and deaf to all their
Importunities, telling them, he would not part with his Militia for an hour;
which any wise man, that considered the present posture of Affairs, would judge
he had great reason to do, the Parliament falls into great Passions and
Resentments, and resolve to be as stiff on the other side, and not to abate him
an Ace of their Demands; and so intent are they upon this very thing, that
though the King sent to them to digest into one body all the Grievances of the
Kingdom, and to send them to him, promising his favorable Assent to those
Means which should be found most effectual for Redress, wherein, as he says, he
would not only equal, but exceed the most Indulgent Prince; (words which do not
use to drop from the Mouth of a Tyrant, as he is falsely called by some at this
day.) Yet all this was nothing, the Militia they must have, or the Nation is
undone, and rather than fail, they will take it into their Hands by force: And
so they did, after they had sent the King a downright Message, That if his
Majesty did not agree with the two Houses, to settle the Militia, that then,
for his and the Kingdoms safety, they shall be constrained of themselves,
without His Majesty, to settle the necessary business of the Militia. And they
were as good as their words; seize it they did, in spite of all the King could
say or proclaim to the contrary.

But, before the War actually broke out, the King was gone to York, and made it
the place of his Royal Residence, hoping thereby to cool the Heats that were at
London, and in some little time to be invited thither, to live with more Honor
and Safety than he did before. Now, while the King staid at York, what
Protestations he made to the Gentlemen and Citizens of that that County and
City, what Assurances he gave them of his Resolutions to govern by Law, and no
otherwise, and of his protecting and countenancing the Protestant Religion, may
be easily known by any man, who will but look over the faithful Historians of
those Times.

The same Assurances he gave to the Inhabitants of Lincolnshire and
Leichestershire; and when he was forced to raise an Army, which was after the
Parliament had voted the Necessity of a War with him, and after they had seized
his Militia as far as they could; why, to let the World then see what he aimed
at, he does assure the Gentlemen, whose Loyalty engaged them early on his side,
Sept. 19.42. and does promise them in the presence of Almighty God, and as he
hopes for his Blessing and Protection, that he would, to the utmost of his
Power, defend and maintain the true Protestant Religion established in the
Church of England, and, by the Grace of God, in the same he would live and dye.
The Truth is, to repeat all that he said of this nature, in several Counties,
and to several Parties, would be endless, and not at all suit with my disigned
Brevity.

And now we come to another Scene of Action, and, God knows, a very melancholy
one: For, through the High and Imperious Demands of the Parliament, to which
the King could no ways, without stripping himself of every thing but the Name
of a King, the Sword, the Unhappy Sword is drawn, and the poor Kingdom instead
of being an Island of Peace and Plenty, is made a Field of Blood, and the
Father appears against the Son, and the Son against the Father; our
Plough-shares are turned into Spears, and our Pruning Hooks into Instruments of
Hostility: And methinks it should grieve both King and Parliament, the one to
see and hear of the Destruction of his own Children, as I may justly call them,
and the other to hear so frequent Tidings, not only of the loss of their
Fellow Subjects Lives, but also of the ruin of their Lands and Houses. Do not
they both strive which should most court each other to Peace? And do not they
abate of their former Demands, as well as stiff Adherencies? Methinks the Cries
and Losses of the poor innocent Inhabitants of the Kingdom should pierce their
Ears, and melt their Hearts, and make them forget all their former Passions and
Resentments. Why truly, to give the two Houses their due, they did at this time
send Proposals, as if they had been truly assected with the Nations Miseries;
but, in the mean time, (I am sorry I can say no otherwife) they were such
Proposals as they could, upon all reasonable and fair Considerations and
Debates with themselves, expect no good Success of, because they could not but
know beforehand they would be denied, insomuch, as the King had told them
again and again, where he would stop, and how far he would go, especially as to
Church Affairs. Nothing less in these Proposals would satisfy them, than the
abolishing, by Act of Parliament, the whole Hierarchy, to which he was sworn by
his Coronation Oath, settling the Militia as they pleased themselves, the
King's disbanding his Army (made up of the best Nobility and Gentry of the
Kingdom) and withal, which was a greater Assront to Majesty than could be
supposed to them, in coming to demand the five Members: He must be obliged as
it were, and in effect, to beg those Members Pardon for wronging them, with
what he thought and could by good Evidence prove Matter of Truth; Which
certainly was but to seem to desire Peace, and at the same time to resolve to
continue the War.

But now the next thing to be considered is, after these Proposals, how the
King manages himself, and what steps he makes toward a Peace; and truly, I
think, according to my poor Judgment, he now acts according to what he always
pretended and solemnly avowed, to wit, as a true Father of his Country; for he
proposes, That his Revenue, Magazines, Towns, Ships, and Forts, may be restored
to him; that what has been done contrary to Law and his Right, may be
recalled; and that he will consent to the execution of all Laws concerning
Popery or Reformation: Nay, he further tells them, That he had given up all the
Faculties of his Soul to an earnest endeavonr of a Peace and Reconciliation
with his Subjects. So that to me hitherto the Fault lies not at His Majesty's
door, say the Enemies to his Memory what they please; for, let them but abate
of the rigor of their Demands, and not ask him things wholly inconsistent with
his Honor and Conscience, with his Crown and Dignity, and the issue of Blood
is stopped presently, and the Nation restored to its former state of Peace; for
still he stands ready, and prossers again and again, to sign any Bill that, in
his own, and the Judgment of many Wise and Good men about him, who were true
lovers of their Countries Licerties and Properties, was necessary for making the
Nation more happy in its Privileges than it had been in all Ages before. And
truly, it so, I see no Cause for continuing a Destructive War in the Bowels of
the Kingdom, nor for standing upon their Points at that rigid rate they did,
especially when so many of their Brethren and Fellow Members of both Houses,
upon great dissatissaction at their Proceedings had left their station, and
took in, out of Principles of Loyalty and Duty, with their Master's Cause,
venturing both their Lives, Families, and Estates upon it, which no man can
believe wise men would have done, if they had not seen great Reason to question
the Integrity of the prevailing part of the Parliament: So that hitherto there
appears no just Reason for those many scandalous Reflections, that in
Coffee-houses and other places of public Intercourse or private Communication,
are made upon this great and excellent man. And thus ended the year 42, all the
King's Proposals and Condescentions being neglected and slighted.

The year 43. begins with a Treaty for Peace, at Oxford, Commissioners for the
Parliament being, the Lord Northumberland, the Lord Wenmain, Mr. Peirepoint,
Mr. Hollis, etc. who were civilly treated, both by the King himself and many of
his great Officers; which Treaty was managed not by Commissioners on the King's
side, but by himself.

And truly, he that reads it over, must needs confess, that His Majesty
deserved the Commendation Mr. Whitlock, who was one of them, in his Memorials
gives of him, to wit, That in this Treaty the King manifested his great Parts
and Ability, strength of Reason, and quickness of Apprehension, with much
patience in hearing what was objected against him, wherein he allowed all
Freedom, and would himself sum up the Arguments, and give a most clear Judgment
upon them. This is Mr. Whitlock's Character. And, to let all the World see his
readiness to do every thing which might reasonably answer the Kingdoms
Expectation, and make it happy, he tells these Commissioners, That he has nor
denied any one thing, proposed to him by both Houses, which in Justice could be
required of him, or in reason expected: And the Truth of it is, had not their
Demands been so very high in this, as well as in other Treaties, (which, a man
must think, were made on purpose, by the prevalence of a designing
self-interested Party, to continue the War) I am certain Peace had ensued upon
this Treaty; for, the King still, like a tender Father, groaned under the
Oppressions of his Honor and Conscience were not concerned, in order to put an
end to that desolating War: And therefore, that this Treaty had no better
effect, was not the King's fault, but of those that bound up their
Commissioners to such narrow limits, that His Majesty, without doing Injustice
to the Essentials of Regality, could not comply with the Proposals that were
offered: And this he complains of himself, That they bound up their Committee
in that manner, as to Time and Power, as might wholly render it ineffectual.

It Is true, after the Commissioners returned home, the Lords and Commons put
out a Declaration upon the Proceedings of this Treaty, which I shall no ways
reflect upon, but only tell the World, the King presently put out an Answer to
it, which whosoever will be pleased to read, will find His Majesty the same
person still, a man of true Honor and Conscience, and ready to serve all the
Needs and Conveniences of his Country, and no ways deserving those Reflections
which were made by his Subjects at that time, to render him odious to his
People; and I do desire the present Maligners of this Great Person to read over
his Declaration in answer to the Parliaments, and then tell me whether he
designed any Tyrannical and Arbitrary Power, and was guilty of the Stubborness
that he is falsely accused of by Designers against Monarchy at this time: for,
hearing nothing for a Month together, by way of Message, after he had parted
with the Commissioners, he, Good man, in order to a Compliance, sends another
Message to them, and in it requires, as they will answer to God, to him, and
all the World, that they will not longer suffer their Fellow Subjects to welter
in each others Blood; that they will remember by whose Authority, and to what
end they met in that Council, and send such an Answer to His Majesty, as may
open a Door, to let in a firm Peace and Security to the whole Kingdom. And
after this, that, if possible, a stop might be put to this Bloodshed in the
Bowels of his Kingdom, he sends another Message for another Treaty, wherein he
promises them, after he had expressed a becoming Pity for the Miseries of the
Nation, that no Endeavors or Concurrence of his shall be wanting; and that he
might give infallible Proof, that those Desires of his were not feigned and
pretended, but real and hearty, after his defeat of Waller at Croptedy-Bridge,
he even then, by a Message, courts the Lords and Commons to a Peace, and tells
them in these words; That from an earnest and constant endeavoring of Peace,
as no discouragement given him on the contrary Party shall make him cease, so
no Success on his shall ever divert him. Words spoke like a man of true Bowels
and Affection to his People. And after this, from Travestock, when he had
defeated the Earl of Essex in Cornwall, and made so advantageous a Conquest, yet
so far is he from being puffed up with that Success, so far from showing any
inclination to enlarge his Power, above what was for his Subjects good, that he
even then, in the midst of his Laurels and Triumphs, sends to the two Houses,
and tells them. It having pleased God in so eminent a manner to bless his Arms
in those parts with Success, yet he did not so much joy in the Blessing for any
other Consideration, as for the hopes he had, that it might be a means to make
others lay to Heart, as he did, the Miseries brought and continued upon the
Kingdom by this unnatural War, and that it may open their Ears, and dispose
their Minds to embrace Offers of Peace and Reconciliation. Which Message, after
so great a Success, certainly argued not the Spirit of a Tyrant, as our present
Common-wealths-men call him, but the Compassion of a tender Father, whose
Bowels yearned for the Miseries his Kingdom labored under, especially if we
add what he a little after said in a public Proclamation, where, after he had
complained of receiving no Answer to the two former importunate Messages, he
tells the World he desired a Treaty for Peace, in which he does assure all his
People, upon his Royal Word, and the Faith of a Christian, which was the
greatest Security he could give them, that he would insist only upon the
Settling and Continuation of the true Reformed Protestant Religion, his own
undoubted Rights, the Privileges of Parliament, and his Subjects Liberties and
Properties, according to the known Laws of the Land. And what besides this was
truly necessary for the Peoples Happiness truly I cannot divine.

And thus far things went, and these Condescentions the King made, when his
Affairs were very prosperous, and the Scale seemed to be turned on his side,
which, I think, was an Argument of Sincerity on his side; and will take off all
Objections made against his future Offerings for Peace; as if bare Necessity
drove him, when Success fell upon the Parliaments Forces.

The two Houses therefore, at this melancholy juncture, apprehending
themselves in danger, and fearing a severe account hereafter, wanting, as they
thought, Forces in England to stemm the Tide, which was coming in so furiously
upon them; they therefore send Commissioners into Scotland, to invite the
Subjects of that Nation to come in to their assistance, and rather than fail,
notwithstanding all their Protestations and Votes formerly not to alter the
Essentials of the Church Government, whereby they swore to dissolve the Frame
of the Church, as it had been by Law established ever since the first excellent
Reformation, notwithstanding they knew it was not in their Power, according to
the known Laws of the Kingdom, without the King's Consent: And take it they
did, and by that means procured Twenty thousand of their Brethren, as they
called them, to invade England, against the King's Proclamation to the
contrary, by virtue of which Act, I mean taking the Covenant, they shut up all
the Doors against Peace; for, they knew at the same time the King was resolved,
and had often so declared against altering the Government by Bishops, as a
thing which was directly contrary to the satisfaction of his Conscience, and
which he could no more recede from than from his Life it self. And therefore,
from this, I cannot but persuade my self, they were resolved to continue the
War, and engross all into their own hands, let what would become of the King,
or those Noble Persons that took in with and adhered to his Just and Righteous
Cause.

But yet, that they might pacify the Minds of a great number of the Nation,
who groaned under the Miseries of the War, and began to see too much of a
private Spirit under public Pretenses; they afterward, in some precess of
time, consent to a Treaty, and Vxbridge was the place pitched upon for it, to
which place the King agreed, and accordingly sent Commissioners, men of Honor
and Honesty, men of Fortunes and Estates, men of great Parts and Endowments,
who understood the business they went about, and were very fond of healing the
Nations Breaches, and putting things into such a posture as might settle the
King upon his just Rights, and the People upon their ancient Privileges,
together with the addition of more such as were necessary for that Time and
Season. And with what Temper they managed the whole Conference, what Offers in
the King's Name and by his Authority they made, such as our Ancestors never
enjoyed, nor indeed ever thought necessary to ask, let any man judge of, by
reading the Conference it self.

It would swell this Book into too great a bulk, to run through the whole; and
I shall therefore give the Reader a taste, by which he may guess at all the
rest.

1. As to Church Affairs, they offered, That Freedom be left to all persons, of
what Opinion soever, in Matters of Ceremony; and that all the Penalties of the
Law and Custom which enjoin these Ceremonies, be suspended. 2. That the Bishops
shall exercise no Act of Jurisdiction or Ordination, without the Consent and
Counsel of the Presbyters, who shall be chosen by the Clergy of each. Diocese,
out of the gravest and most learned of the Diocese. 3. That the Bishop keep his
constant Residence in his Diocese, except when he shall be required by His
Majesty to attend him on any occasion; and that if he be not hindered by the
Infirmities of Old Age, or Sickness, he preach every Sunday in some Church
within his Diocese. 4. That the Ordination of Ministers shall be always in a
public and solemn manner, and strict Rules observed concerning the Sufficiency
and other Qualifications of those men who shall be received into Holy Orders;
and the Bishop shall not receive any into Holy Orders without the Approbation
and Consent of the Presbyters, or the major part of them. 5. That competent
Maintenance and Provisions be established by Act of Parliament to such
Vicarages as belong to Bishops. Deans, and Chapters, out of the Impropritions
of the several Parishes. 6. That no man, for the time to come, shall be capable
of two Parsonages or Vicarages, with Cure of Souls; and likewise, that one or
more Acts of Parliament be passed for regulating Visitations, and against
immoderate Fees in Ecclesiastical Courts.
And that they might be might be wanting in nothing, if any thing could
satisfy, they declare in the close, That if their Lordships shall insist upon
any other thing which they shall think necessary for Reformation, they were
very willing to apply themselves to the consideration thereof.

And now let me ask any man, whether these men acted like the Tools and
Instruments of a Tyrant, of one who was resolved to set up his own Will in
opposition to the Nations Good or Contentment? But yet all this was nothing,
the state of things is changed from what it was when they made their
Protestation; now no Peace, no Reconciliation without the King's taking the
Covenant. and thereby perjuring himself, and signing an Act for others to be
perjured as well as himself, or else wholly to be laid aside, as useless and
unprofitable Members of the Body-Politick, and to be wholly incapable of any
Place of Trust or Profit either in Church or State. And here I now appeal to
all impartial and unprejudiced Readers, who were in fault, and who stood
betwixt the Kingdom and a Complete Happiness, and what reason there was to
continue such a bloody and unnatural War. when a Peace was offered, and might
have been concluded upon such fair and agreeable Terms as these were: And they
therefore that at this time censure and reproach the Memory of King Charles the
First, must be men either of Resolved Prejudices, or else of Profound and
Stupid Ignorance, who never gave themselves Leave to read his Story, and
thereby to be acquainted with true Matter of Fact. The Truth is, had such
things been granted as to Church Affairs, when King Charles the Second was
restored, I am sure those men who at this Treaty scornfully refused these
Offers, would have thought themselves happy in the enjoyment of them, and have
blessed God for such healing Abatements and Condescensions; but God's Justice
reckoned with many of these men in 62, for their Cruelty to the Episcopal
Clergy in 43.

The other great thing that came under debate at that time, was the Militia,
and what Moderation the King's Commissioners showed, and what fair Offers they
made, let any man read the Conference, and then judge. In short, they
consented, That the Militia, for three years, should be in the Hands of Twenty
Commissioners, the one half by the two Houses, which certainly considering the
King's Right to it, and his Ancestors having always enjoyed the whole Power of
disposing of it, was a very great Condescension on the King's part: But, alas!
it was nothing; the Instructions on the other side were to have all or none,
and here they broke; and certainly, any Prince, or any Noble Person deputed by
him, as these were, would have broke with any Enemy, rather than to have
submitted to such slavish terms as these were: For, as the Commissioners told
those that appeared in the Parliaments behalf, that upon these Terms His
Majesty, for himself and his Posterity too, would have parted with their
peculiar Regal Power of being able to resist their Enemies, or protect their
good Subjects, and with the undoubted and never-denyed Right of the Crown, to
make War and Peace.

He that reads over the whole Conference, will find, it was managed on the
King's Commissioners side, in all other things with the same Spirit, and the
same great Abatements of the Royal Power; so that if there had been any real
Inclination to Peace on the other side, a Blessed and Happy Peace would have
ensued, and the future Miseries and Desolations of the War had been prevented;
but God did not see it good, neither was the Nation worthy of such a Blessing
at that time, her Sins cried aloud for further Vengeance, and she had it in
very great proportions.

Well, after this, by the assistance of the Scots, and the new-modelling of the
Army, the Parliaments Arms prosper at a great rate, and the King's Affairs
consequently went backward: But however, His Majesty, upon all promising
Opportunities, or at least, to gratify the Tenderness of his Bowels toward a
distracted and oppressed People, left not off to show his Zeal for Peace that
his poor Subjects might not live in those continual Fears and Dangers they were
in; and therefore he sends from Oxford, and tells them how deeply-sensible he
was of the Continuation of this bloody and unnatural War, and that he cannot
think himself discharged of the Duty he owes to God, or the Affection and
Regard he has to the Preservation of his People, without the constant
application of his earnest Endeavors, to find some Expedient for the speedy
ending of these unhappy Distractions. Which Message, when neglected and not
answered, His Majesty, Good man; ten days after, send another to them,
extremely wondering that they, after so many Expressions on their part, of a
deep and seeming sense of the Miseries of the Afflicted Kingdom, and the
Dangers incident to his Person during the continuance of this unnatural War,
should delay a safe Conduct to the persons mentioned in the last Message, who
were to treat of Peace. And again, this Message being slighted, within a few
days after, he follows them with another, and tells them, Notwithstanding the
strange and unexpected Delays (which can be Presidented by no former Times) to
his former Message, therefore he will lay aside all Expostulations, as rather
serving to time, than to contribute any Remedy to the Evils, which for the
present do afflict this distracted Kingdom: And therefore he offers to put
things into such a posture, as certainly, if they had designed an End of the
Nations Confusions, would have terminated in an happy and settled Peace: But
this taking no effect, he presently, in a few days, sends another Message, with
such solemn and religious Professions of his Desire for composing the present
Differences betwixt them, that truly, he that reads them, must upon necessity
(unless he be all Will and Prejudice) conclude, that this Great King is very
wrongfully blamed, and barbarously used, when he is called by such Names as
very many of this Nation, out of great Good manners, and also prosound Respect
to his Royal Grandchildren now happily in the Throne, think good to abuse him
withal.

Now, after all this, the very month following, though he tells them, he needs
make no Excuse, if he sends no more Messages to them, because he knew very
well, he ought not to do it, if he stood upon Punctilio's of Honor; yet
nothing being equally dear to him, to the preservation of his People, His
Majesty passes by many Scruples, Delays, and Neglects, and once more desires
them to give him a speedy Answer to his last Message, for His Majesty believes
it does very well become him, after this very long Delay on their side, at last
to utter his Impatience, since that the Good and Blood of his Subjects cry so
much for Peace. Which words, how much they look like the words of a Tyrant or a
Villain, as he is commonly called by our present pretending Patriots, I leave
any man to judge.

And, in the month following, in another Message he says thus. Notwithstanding
the unexpected silence, instead of Answers, to His Majesty's many and gracious
Messages to both House, whereby it may appear, that they desire to attain their
Ends rather by Force than Treaty, which may justly discourage His Majesty from
any more Overtures of that kind, yet His Majesty conceives he shall be much
wanting to his Duty to God, and in what he owes to the Safety of his People, if
he should not intend to prevent the Inconveniences that may any ways hinder a
safe and well-grounded Peace. Which words certainly are not the words of a
Tyrant.

Well, after these Messages from Oxford, His Majesty, for Reasons best known to
himself, leaving Oxford in a disguise, and committing himself to the Scotch
Army then by Newark; pray let us see what he does when in his Enemies Hands:
Why, Good man, still he breathes nothing but Peace, as you may see by the
following account; for, from Southwell he writes to the two Houses, and tells
them, That he withdrew from Oxford only to secure his own Person, and with no
intention to continue the War any longer, nor to make any Division between his
two Kingdoms, but to give such Contentment to them both, as, by the Blessing of
God, he might see an happy and well-grounded Peace, thereby to bring Prosperity
to these Kingdoms answerable to the best time of his Progenitors: And, that he
might satisfy them he was in good-earnest, and designed no Tricks by way of
Postscript he tells them, That being dasirous to shun the further Effusion of
Blood, and to evidence his Real Intentions to Peace, he is willing that his
Forces in and about Oxford be disbanded, and the Fortifications of the City
dismantled, they receiving Honorable Conditions, which being granted to the
Town and Forces, His Majesty will give the like. Order to the rest of the
Garrisons. And, pray let the honest Reader judge where lay the fault now, and
who rid the Nation, and prolonged its Miseries, the King, or those whom our
present Pretenders to the only Loyalty to Their present Majesty's, call The Old
Blades, The Brave Fellows, The noble Defenders of their Laws and Country;
though at the same time they trampled them all under their Feet, and set up
their own Wills in opposition even to Magna Charta if self. And surely, he that
has but half an Eye, may see who were the Continuers of the War, and for what
reason, namely, To ride upon the high places of the Earth, to kill and take
possession.

And after this the Great and Good man sends a Letter to the City of London, in
which he tells them, That nothing is more grievous to him, than the Troubles
and Distractions of his People; and nothing on Earth is more desired by him,
than that it Religion and Peace, with all the comfortable Fruits of both, they
may henceforth live under him in all Godliness and Honesty: And this
Profession, says he to the City, we make for no other end, but that they may
immediately know from himself, his Integrity and full Resolution to comply with
his Parliament in every thing for the settling of Truth and Peace. Words
becoming the Excellent and Religious Temper of this Great man.

After this, he sends another Message from Newcastle, to the two Houses, in
which, among many other things, he desires them, That the Propositions of Peace
so often promised and so much expected, may be speedily sent to him, that upon
consideration of them, he may apply himself to give such satisfaction as may be
the founddation of a firm Peace. And, to convince every man who would be
convinced, that he was in all his Desires for Peace the very same man, that is,
True, and in Earnest, the same day he writes this Letter to the Houses, he
sends another to the Governors of his remaining Garrisons, telling them, That
having resolved to comply with the Desires of his Parliament, in every thing
which might be for the Good of his Subjects, and leave no means unessay'd for
removing all Differences between them; therefore he had thought sit, the more
to evidence the Reality of his Intentions of settling ^ happy and firm Peace,
to require them, upon honorable (...), to quit those Towns, Forts, and Castles
i^ed to them by him, and to disband all the Forces under their several
Commands. And, pray what Tyranny is there in all this? And, upon what account
is this Great man so basely accused as he is at this time by Thousands of this
Nation? Certainly, when they read all this, they must needs fall foul upon
themselves, for being guilty of so much Unworthiness and Dishonesty, to the
Memory of so great and good a man as he was.

But now some may say, You talk all for the King here Pray what said the two
Houses to all these Messages? Were they wholly deaf to his Offers? Did they
^orn any Answer to his Proposals? No, no; that they might seem to be for Peace,
they sent Propositions to the King at Newcastle, but, I must tell the Reader,
they were such as would make any man, that wishes well to his Native Kingdom,
sick to read them; such Demands, as no man that had any sense of Honor could
possibly grant. For first, he must justify by an Act of State all that they
had unjustly done to him; he must be obliged to take the Covenant, and sign an
Act for others to do so too; he must part with the Power of the Sword, and
indeed, be thereby but a mere Cipher in the Kingdom; and that which must needs
grate upon a generous and noble Spirit, such as his was, he must pass an Act to
except from Pardon, and to lay at these men's merciless Feet the best and truest
Friends he had in his Kingdom, such as from Principles of Honor and Duty had
ventured both their Lives and their great Estates in his Service. And, Good
man, because he would not sign all these, together with many other unreasonable
things, he must forsooth be called then, and now also, a Tyrant.

It would be too tedious to entertain the Reader with what His Majesty made by
way of Answer to these Propositions, and besides, swell this Paper beyond its
designed bulk, therefore I do refe^r the Reader to the Royal Papers themselves,
only thus much I must tell the World; That His Majesty thought nothing, at this
time, would so soon conduce to a Peace as a Personal Treaty, which therefore he
pressed hard for, not doubting but by that means they might come on both sides
to a true understanding of one another; and therefore, that he might not fail
of having this Request granted him, he ends his Letter to them with these
words. To conclude, it is your King who desires to be heard (the which if
refused by a King to a Subject, he would be thought a Tyrant for it) and for
that end which all Men profess to desire; wherefore His Majesty conjures you,
as you desire to show your selves really what you profess, even as you are good
Christians and Subjects, that you will accept this his Offer, which he is
confident God will so bless, that it will be the readiest means by which these
Kingdoms again may become a Comfort to their Friends, and a Terror to their
Enemies. Which words are not the words of a Monster or a Man of Blood, as some
vile men are now ready to call him, (the greater is their shame) but the words
of a truly-compassionate Father of his Country, whose Heart bled for the Wounds
of his Children and the Miseries of the Nation.

After all this, the Scots, notwithstanding all their Promises and Obligations,
sell him to the English Parliament, and His Majesty is put into the Hands of
Commissioners appointed to keep and watch his Person, and brought by them to
Holdenby-House in Northamptonshire, where his Conversation was so agreeable and
sweet, his daily Discourses so strong and convincing, that he changed: the
Opinion of many that were about him, so that they became constant Admirers of
his Virtues ever after, and great Bewailers of having had an Hand in bringing
him into those Streights, out of which they could not now extricate him.

Now, while he was here, let us see what further Offers he made for Peace. The
first Message to both Houses from this place, acquaints us with his bad
Condition; that his Servants were denied access to him, unless it were a very
few, whom they appointed themselves; and that it was a declared Crime for any
but the Commissioners, or such as were particularly permitted by them, to
converse with His Majesty; or that any Letters should be given to, or received
from him (a condition no man, much less a Prince, could be proud of.) Yet he
tells them, and therefore would not stand upon that, That he preferred a Right
Understanding betwixt him and his Parliaments of both Kingdoms, which might
make a firm and lasting Peace in all his Dominions, before any Particular of
his own, or any earthly Blessing: And, to show he was in earnest, he then makes
such Concessions to them, as certainly would have been accepted of by any sort
of men, but such as had not yet satisfied their own Avarice, Ambition, and
other Lusts, and therefore were resolved to perpetuate the Distractions of the
Kingdom, in order to continue themselves in Places of Wealth and Power: For, he
offered to settle their Church Government for Three Years, and at the same
time, the Assembly of Divines at Westminster and the Directory, provided His
Majesty and his Household were not hindered from the Form of God's Service which
they formerly had. Further, he offers another Act for the better observation of
the Lord's Day: He consents, that the whole Power of the Militia, both by Sea
and Land, for the space of Ten Years, be in the Hands of such Persons as the
two Houses should nominate, giving them a full Power, during the said space, to
change or else to continue the said Persons in their several Offices: Which
when he had offered, he conjures his two Houses of Parliament, as they are
Englishmen, and Lovers of Peace, by the Duty they owe to His Majesty their
King, and by the Bowels of Compassion they have to their Fellow Subjects, that
they will accept of this His Majesty's Offer, whereby the Joyful News of Peace
may be restored to this languishing Kingdom. Which Offers had so great an
eftect upon the Citizens of London, (though they had none at Westminster) that
they forthwith petitioned the Lord Mayor and Common Council, and tell them
thereby, That taking into serious consideration, how Religion, His Majesty's
Honor and Safety, the Privileges of parliament, and Liberty of the Subject,
were at present greatly endangered, and like to be destroyed; and also sadly
weighing with themselves what means might likely prove most effectual to
procure a firm and lasting Peace, without the further effusion of Christian
English Blood, have therefore entered into a solemn Engagement, and do humbly
and earnestly desire, that the whole City may join together by all lawful and
possible means, as one man, in hearty Endeavors for His Majesty's present
coming up to his two Houses of Parliament, with Honor, Safery, and Freedom,
and that without the nearer approaches of the Army, there to confirm such
things as he has granted in his last Message, in answer to the Propositions of
both Kingdoms.

Which Petition, you must understand, was not presented by them called the
Cavalier Party, but by such as had ventured their Money and Plate for the
Cause, and had taken the Covenant, and many of them exposed their Persons to
fight for that which they through mistake, apprehended Religions and the
Nations Cause, yet these men were so far from thinking His Majesty such a Bad
man, as some designing men now report him to be, that they looked upon his
Concessions, as every ways answering that for which at first they took up Arms.

Well, after this, the King, upon more than ordinary grounds to believe that
his Person was in danger at Hampton Court, (whither the Army, after they took
him by force from Holdenby, after many removes, had carried him) makes an
escape from them by night, but withal, leaves a Paper behind him upon the
Table, wherein he gives an account with what patience he had endured a redious
restraint, which, so long as he had any hopes, that this sort of Suffering
might conduce to the Peace of his Kingdom, or the hindrance of more effusion of
Blood, he did willingly undergo; but finding by too-certain Proofs, that this
his continued Patience would not only turn to his personal Ruin, but likewise
be of much more Prejudice than Furtherance to the Public Good, he thought he
was bound, as well by natural as political Obligations, to seek his Safety, by
retiring himself for some time from the public view both of Friends and
Enemies. And after he had appealed to all indifferent men, to judge, whether he
had not just cause to free himself from the hands of those who changed their
Principles with their Conditions, and who were not ashamed openly to intend the
Destruction of the Nobility, and who had changed and put strict Guards upon
him, with the discharging most of all those Servants of his, whom formerly they
willingly admitted to wait upon him: After he had said all this, with a great
deal more ^s the Reasons of that Retirement, he concludes the P^ with these
words: Let me be but heard with Freedom, Honor, and Safety, and I shall
instantly break through this Cloud of Retirement, and show my self really to be
Pater Patriae. And here I cannot forbear again to ask, What Tyranny is there in
all this? and, With what Face is this Great man reflected upon so barbarously
at this day, as he is by some men in all parts of the Kingdom (an unheard of
thing, considering that those that sprung from his Loins are in the Throne)?
Certainly they either never read his Story, or if they did, they are resolved
against Conviction, and keep alive in their Breasts such Resentments, on
purpose to help them to serve another turn when opportunity (which God forbid)
shall offer of the same nature.

The next News, after this, we hear of His Majesty, is from the Isle of Wright,
under the Command of Hammond the Governor, into whose hands he had committed
himself.

And, pray let us see how he carries himself there, and whether he did not make
all Essays for Peace, and the Settlement of the Nation upon a firm and lasting
bottom, that so King and People might enjoy what belongs to them both, without
future fear or danger. Yes, yes; we find him again at the same Work, laboring
with all his Might for Peace: For, though he left Hampton Court but the 11th of
Nov. 47, yet on the 17th. he sends Propositions for Peace, wherein he grants
again what he had done before so greatly to the Contentment and Satisfaction of
the Citizens of London; but alas, it seems to be too late now, for he had lost
his Power, and the Faction resolved never to part with it again, they had
tasted the sweetness of Usurpation, and the relish would not casily go out of
their Mouths; and therefore, as he sell low in his Offers, so they rose higher,
and made bigger Demands, and to show their great Desires of Peace, or indeed,
which has more Truth in it, of continuing themselves in Places of Trust and
Honor, which they thought they could not do without making the Breach betwixt
the King and themselves wider and wider; therefore the more crafty and subtle
Party of the House of Commons (which were the Independent Party, who had got at
that time too great a sway both in the House and Army) procure four Bills and
Propositions to be sent to the King to sign, ready drawn up, together with the
Heads of 23 more, which whosoever will be pleased to read, may easily judge of
the Spirit that then reigned, and the wicked and destructive Designs then on
foot: Bills, that they were assured beforehand, if the most solemn
Protestations on the King's side could convince them, he would never pass, and
indeed, which upon bare Principles of Conscience he could never pass, without
an utter overthrow of the Peace and Satisfaction of his Mind. And so cunning
were they to make Demands at this time that might have no effect, that the
Bills they sent (which they could not but foresee) the Scots Commissioners
protested against to the King, and therefore they proposed ahem so high, that
the King might deny them, and the War be thereby prolonged.

The Answer His Majesty makes to these four Bills, is great and admirable, to
transcribe the whole would be too tedious; in short, he tells them, That he
believes it clear to all Understandings, that these Bills contain (as they are
now penned) not only the divesting himself of all Sovereignty, and that without
a possibility of recovering it either to himself or Successors, (except by
repeal of those Bills) but also the making his Concessions guilty of the
greatest Pressures that can be laid upon the Subject, as in other particulars,
so, by giving an Arbitrary and Unlimitted Power to the two Houses for ever, and
after much more said upon that Subject, he concludes his Answer thus: That His
Majesty is very much at ease within himself for having fulfilled the Offices
both of a Christian and a King, and will patiently wait the good Pleasure of
Almighty God, to incline the Hearts of his two Houses to consider their King,
and to compassionate their fellow-Subject's Miseries.

Which Answer, and Refusal of his to sign these four Bills, so causelessly
enslam'd the then Lords and Commons, that, as if they were sole Masters in
Israel, they vote, That they will make no further Addresses or Applications to
the King, nor that any Address be made to him by any other persons, without the
Leave of both Houses: And, to show their Absolute and Uncontrollable Power,
they vote, That whoever shall make Breach of this Order, shall incurr the
Penaties of High Treason. Nay, to pin the Basket up, they vote, They will also
receive no more Messages from the King, and enjoin all persons to receive and
bring none from him. Here is your Loyalty indeed! This is to act as becomes
humble and dutiful Subjects with a witness; what pity it is, that these great
Heroes Statues are not set up in every Corner of the Kingdom, with this Label
at their Mouths, No more Addresses to our King. But, What says the Good man to
all this? What Resentments has he upon this great Honor done to him, thus to
be as it were dethroned, by those who were under the Obligation of Oaths of
Fidelity to him and his Posterity? Good man, he presently makes a Declaration
in Answer to these Votes, and begins, Am I thus laid aside, and must I not
speak for my self? No, I will speak, and that to all my People; and so goes on
with Reflections upon his Condition, enough to melt the Hearts of any but those
who made those hard-hearted Votes; or those of the same Principles. Now I am
under a Necessity of of Brevity, or else I would transcribe the whole, whereby,
I am sure, I should force Tears from all tender persons Eyes; I referr
therefore the Reader to the Papers themselves, only tell him he concludes it
thus: It may be easily gathered, how these Men intend to govern who have used
me thus: And if it be my Hard Fate to fall, together with the Liberty of this
Kingdom, I shall not blush for my self, but much lament the future Miseries of
my People, the which I shall still pray God to avert, whatever becomes of me.

After this, how these Votes were recalled, and a fresh Treaty agreed upon in
the Isle of Wight; how the Treaty was managed; what Strength of Reason and
Judgment the King manifested, both in his Debates about Church as well as
State Affairs, any man may satisfy himself that reads the Accounts from August
to December, in the year 48, where he will find at last His Majesty, for Peace,
sake, makes such Concessions, that the major part of the House, after many
hours debate, came to this Vote; That His Majesty's Concessions to the
Propositions of Parliament upon the Treaty, are sufficient Grounds for settling
the Peace of the Kingdom. And happy had it been for the whole Nation, if they
had passed such a Vote some years before, upon what the King offered them, they
had prevented the wasting of abundance of Blood and Treasure; but alas, their
Eyes were in their Heads now too late, the Army was now too much poisoned with
Commonwealth and destructive Principles, and therefore, notwithstanding all
their former Assurances of Submission and Faithfulness to the Parliament, they
make bold to let them know, they have been under the Jurisdiction of better
Masters, and have learned another Lesson, and therefore, when the House met
again, they very fairly lay violent hands upon their Persons, and forcibly
pluck them from their Duty, and confine a great part of them, keeping them
under a strict Guard. What followed after this, is known to all the World: The
Great, the Good, the Wise, the Condescending King, his Person is seized by
order of the Army, he is brought up to London, tried and condemned by a
Mock-Court of Justice, against all Law, Justice, Honor, Oaths, and Promises;
and, at last, barbarously murdered by his own Palace.

And thus died Charles the First, the Glory of the English Monarchs, the Mirror
of Patience, the great Pattern of Religion and Devotion, and whose Name among
good and unprejudiced men has ever since blossomed in the Dust; and may the
Judgments that have followed the Nation since, be the last upon the account of
that horrid and unheard of Murder. Amen, Amen.

POSTSCRIPT.
READER,
I Have reserved an Answer to some particular Objections, which are commonly
made by this Great Man's Enemies against him, by way of Postscript, having not
had a fair occasion to bring it into the Body of this little Book; only before
I make it, I must beg leave to tell thee what I have observed concerning the
men that are now so busy in defaming and scandalizing this Great and Pious
Prince, namely, That they are most of them persons that were not born when the
Horrid Murder of the King was committed, and that have not read his Story at
all, but are only put on by old Foxes, that lost, by the Restoration of
Charles the Second, what they never had a legal Right to, and therefore long to
be dabbling again in Crown and Church Lands; which indeed is the true Notion of
these men's Liberties and Properties of the Subject.

First, They considently say, That he was a Papish, or at least, Popishly
inclined; and therefore, by way of Scorn, nothing is more usual, than to hear
them saying, That the late King James was the best of the Three; meaning King
Charles the First, and his two Sons that reigned after him.

Now, by way of Answer to this base and false Imputation, I will not trouble
thee, Reader, with any tedious and long Defense, for they that hear this
Scandal, after they have looked into the Life and Conversation of this Great
man, must both scorn and pity the Malice as well as Ignorance of such as lay
such an Aspersion at his Door: And for an eternal confutation of it, I beg of
thee to take good notice of this true Story.

His Majesty being to receive the Sacrament, in 1643, at Christ-Church in
Oxford, from the Hands of the Lord Archbishop of Ardmagh, rising up from his
Knees, and beckoning to the Archbishop said,

My Lord, I espy here many resolved Protestants, who may delare to the World
the Resolution I now make.

I have, to the utmost of my power, prepared my Soul to become a worthy
Receiver; and may I so receive Comfort by the Blessed Sacrament, as I do intend
the Establishment of the True-reformed Protestant Religion, as it stood in its
Beauty in the happy Days of Queen Elizabeth, without any Connivance at Popery.

I bless God, that in the midst of these public Distractions, I have still
liberty to communicate. And may this Sacrament be my Damnation, if my Heart do
not join with my Lips in this Protestation. And he that will continue to
scandalize this Great Person, after he has read this Story, upon this account,
is resolved to be an incurable --

Secondly, Another thing they lay to his charge at this time, is, That he set
on foot and encouraged the Irish Rebellion.

Ans. They that talk at this rate, I am sure, have never read his Story; or if
they have, it has been with an invincible and resolved Prejudice. His frequent
and public Detestations of it, his groaning under the Miseries and Murders of
his poor Protestant Subjects there, his offering to go in Person to subdue the
Rebels, are sufficient Vindications of him, against this vile Defamation, and
will ever be received as such amongst good men.

But, to strike this Objection dead, over and above all those Defenses the King
made for himself, and the Scorn and Defiance he gave to the pretended Broad
Seal to countenance the Rebellion, which is Forgery all over, give me leave to
lay before the Reader these two things.

The Lord Macquire, a great and bloody Rebel, being taken Prisoner, and
conveyed to London, and there tried for his Life at the King's-Bench-Bar, for
High Treason, where being found guilty, he had Sentence pronounced against him,
as a Traitor, which Sentence was particularly executed in the presence of the
Sheriff and, it is believed, of Fifteen thousand Spectators.

Now, when he came to Execution, the Sheriff abjured him by the dreadful
Tribunal of God, before which shortly he was to appear, and for the clearing
and easing of his Conscience, that he would then ingenuously confess whom he
knew guilty of the same Crime, namely, the Irish Rebellion; upon which the
Criminal, though the Rope was about his Neck, and he half way up the Ladder,
yet, by Name, he acquitted King Charles from being any ways privy to it: Nay,
says my Author, being cast off the Ladder, and when he had tried what Hanging
in part was, being reprieved, and had no small hopes given him of a Pardon, he
still persisted in the same Protestation. And that which further convinces me,
and so it will any unprejudiced man besides, of the truth of this, is, That
when they came to draw up the Charge against him, in order to his Trial and
Condemnation, though their business was to blacken him with all the foul
Imputations their Malice could rake up, and they did so, yet not one word in
the whole touching his abetting or countenancing the Irish Rebellion; which
certainly they neither could nor would have omitted, if they had had any
Grounds to believe and to charge him with it.

Thirdly, The last Objection against him is, his Divine and Holy Book: It is
not to be imagined with what Industry they have, within this last year,
endeavored to persuade the World it was a Forgery, and not of his compiling;
and there is a certain Essex Doctor of Divinity, who has assisted this
Objection to the utmost of his power, with a false Story, which I will
presently refute, and set the whole in a true and proper Light.

Ans. I could never obtain Leave of my self to believe that any Man could write
at that divinerate, but he that felt the Miseries that suggest such Thoughts
and Heavenly Meditations; the various Conditions of men, good men, wonderfully
help them, in their Retirements and Solitudes, to Divine Intercourses and
Aspirations; and he that could counterfeit such things, and make such Appeals
to God, without being in such Conditions as those Appeals suppose, must be
rather next to an Atheist than a good Christian. And if the Essex Doctor had
any value for the Memory of his deceased Friend, he would certainly have
forborne telling it in all places, with a more than usual Confidence, as he has
done, and that for this one reason.

The Story, in short, that he tells, is this; That Dr. Gauden, then of Bocking
in Essex, made this Book, and sent him; then his Curate, to the Press with it,
which command he obeyed, and accordingly did so carry it, in order to its
printing.

Now the Truth of the Story is thus: There was one Mr. Simmons, a learned and
pious Minister, who lived near Dr. Gauden in Essex, and who, out of a true
Affection to His then Majesty's Person and Cause, writ a learned Defense of the
King, with which the King was so pleased, that he presently resolved, that this
person should have the perusal and correction of his Book, and accordingly
sends it by a trusty Messenger.

The Book, when looked over by him, did so affect him, (and no wonder) that he
could not forbear sending for his Neighbor Gauden, in order to make him happy
with himself, in the sight and reading of such an inestimable Jewel; Dr. Gauden
would not be denied the kindness of taking the Book home with him, for a few
days, which upon importunity Mr. Simmonds (knowing the Dr. a Well-wisher at
that time to the King) granted; Dr. Gauden presently falls to transcribing of
it, and in some days, with great Labor and Application, finishes it, and so
returns the Original to Mr. Simmonds again.

Within a while the great Storm coming upon the King, which at last, God knows,
wholly overset him, Dr. Gauden, out of a true Affection to his Master the King,
hoping thereby to do him Service, sends his Copy by the Hands of this Doctor to
the Press: And so far, and no farther was he concerned in it.

And whereas it is said, that Dr. Gauden told King Charles the Second he made
the Book, the Truth of the Story is this: That he putting in for the Bishopric
of Worcester, and meeting with some opposition from Bishop Sheldon, the King
asked him what Pretenses he had to so great a Favor; he answered, That he put
out his Fathers Book; which Answer, though true in some sense, yet being
ambiguously spoken, as it got him the Bishopric, so it also gave Rise to the
late Earl of Anglesey's Memorandum, which has made so great noise in the World.

But, to put all things out of doubt concerning this Book, give me leave to
tell this Story: I was, not many weaks ago, in Conversation with Sir John
Brattle a worthy person, and who has long enjoyed a considerable Office in the
Royal Mint, with whom discoursing about King Charles the First, and
particularly of the Suspicions raised of the Truth of the Book, he frankly told
me, and assured me the Truth of this Story.

That in the year 47. King Charles having drawn up the most considerable part
of this Book, and having writ it in some loose Papers, at different times,
desired Bishop Juxon to get some Friend of his (whom he could commend to him as
a trusty person) to look it over, and to put it into an exact method; the
Bishop pitched upon Sir John's Father, whom he had been acquainted withal for
many years, who undertaking the Task, was assisted by this his Son, who
declares, he sat up with his Father some nights, to assist him in methodizing
these Papers, all writ with the King's own Hand: Thanks be to God, Sir John is
yet alive, and is ready to give the same Account to any man that asks him.

And whosoever, after this, will suspect this Book, is certainly a man of that
temper, who will keep up his Prejudices against this Great man, in spite of
all Evidences, though as clear as the Sun at Noon: And for my own part, I must
tell him, that I think it not worth the while, to attempt his further
satisfaction; because nullum remedium Deus posuit contumariae, God Almighty
has not provided a Remedy for Resolved Stubbornness in the ordinary course of
dealing with Men; and if nothing but Miracles will convince them, I have no
Commission to pretend to them.

FINIS.

