portrait of Matthew Hale MATHE. HALE blazon or coat of armsMiles Capitalis
Justice. de Banco Regis Ano 1677

For W. Shrowsbery at The Sign of The Bible In Duck Lane,

F. H. van Have: Sculp.


THE Primitive Origination OF MANKIND, CONSIDERED AND EXAMINED According to The
Light of Nature.

WRITTEN By the Honorable Sir MATTHEW HALE KNIGHT: Late CHIEF JUSTICE of His
MAJESTY'S Court of KING'S BENCH.

LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM GODBID, for WILLIAM SHROWSBERY at the Sign of the
Bible in Duke-Lane. MDCLXXVII.

TO THE READER.
THE subject Matter of this Book is a free Disquisition, according to the Light
of Nature and Natural Reason, touching the Primitive Origination of Mankind,
consisting principally of these Parts and Assertions.

I. That according to the Light of Nature and Natural Reason, the Mundus
aspectabilis was not Eternal, but had a Beginning.

II. That if there could be any imaginable doubt thereof, yet by the necessary
Evidence of Natural Light it does appear that Mankind had a beginning, and that
the successive Generations of Men were in their Original Ex non genitis.

III. That this Truth is evident by Reason and Arguments demonstrative, or at
least little less than apodeictical.

IV. That there are Moral Evidences of the truth of this Assertion, which are
herein particularly expended and examined; and how far forth they are
concludent, and how far not: which I have impartially delivered.

V. That those great Philosophers that asserted this Origination of Mankind Ex
non genitis, both ancient and modern, that rendered it by Hypotheses different
from that of Moses, were mistaken: Wherein the several Hypotheses of Aristotle,
Plato, Empedocles, Epicurus, Avicen, Cardanus, Cisalpinus, Beregardus and
others are examined, and the absurdity and impossibility thereof detected.

VI. That the Mosaical System, as well of the Creation of Man as of the World
in general, abstractively considered without relation to the Divine Inspiration
of the Writer, is highly consonant to Reason, and upon a bare rational account
highly preferrible before the Sentiments of those Philosphers that either
thought Mankind Eternal, or substituted Hypotheses of his first Production
different from the Mosaical.

VII. I have concluded the whole with certain Corollaries and Deductions,
necessarily flowing from the things thus asserted, as well touching the
Existence, the Wisdom, Power, Providence of Almighty God, as touching both the
Duty and Happiness of Mankind.

Though this may seem a laborious Work to little purpose, since the generality
of Christians, among whom I write, do generally believe this Truth of the
Origination of the World and Mankind, as it is delivered in the Holy
Scriptures; and thus to write in proof of a Truth generally received, does
rather create Doubts in Men's Minds of what they already believe, than any way
advantage or confirm their belief.

I Answer, 1. That for my part I think Atheism so unreasonable a thing, so
abhorrent to the Light of Nature and Sentiments of Conscience, that I cannot
think there is so much speculative Atheism abroad in the World as many good Men
fear and suspect: But if there be but one quarter of that Atheism in the World,
I do not know any better Cure of it, or Preservative against it, next to the
Grace of God, than the due Consideration of the Origination of Mankind. 2.
Again, though the Creation of Man be generally acknowledged by Jews and
Christians, yet we must likewise consider that many take it up only as a part
of their Education, and not upon any serious, deep Conviction of the truth of
it: and had such Men but an Education in such a Place or Country where it is
not believed, or where it is doubted, they would be at least skeptical and
doubtful in the belief of it. 3. The best of Men, and soundest believers of
Divine Revelations, may be better confirmed by the accession and suffrage even
of Natural Evidences of the Verities they already believe; but howsoever, it
better enables them to convince such Gainsayers as will be governed in their
Judgments by no other Light than the Light of Nature and Reason, and many such
there may be met withal in the World.

And upon that account, my whole Discourse is bottomed upon Natural and Moral
Evidences suited to these Men's Principles or Motives, by which they are guided
and governed; yea when I make use of the Sacred and Infallible Scriptures, I do
use them abstractively from their Divine and Infallible Authority, and only as
Moral Evidences of the Truth I assert: for any Man may easily foresee, that an
Atheistical Spirit that denies or questions the truth of the Fact therein
delivered, will not be convinced by the Infallibility of that Scripture which
delivers that for a Truth, which he denies or questions.

This whole Book as thou now see it, was written by me some Years since, and
has lain ever since in my Chest, and surely therein should have lain still,
but only for Three Reasons: 1. Because that some Writings of mine have without
my privity come abroad in Print, which I never intended; and this might have
had the same fate, if not in my Life time, yet after my Death. 2. Because
possibly there has some more care been used by me in the Digesting and Writing
hereof, than of some others that have gone abroad in public. 3. That although
I could never be brought to value the Writings of mine that are published, as
worthy of the public view, yet I find them well accepted by many, which
encouraged me to let this Book come abroad under my own Name; wherein I used
more care than in those lesser Tractates, although I have not yet confidence
enough to say that this may deserve any great acceptance: though there be many
things in it which may not please, yet I do think there be many things useful,
and such as will not displease Judicious Readers.

If there be any Faults or Mistakes in Quotations, in Syntax, in Translations,
in Transcriptions, or if there by any Errors (as possibly there may be) in my
Deductives, Inferences, or Applications; or if the Language be in some places
either improper or obscure, or if the Expressions or Words which we sometimes
use be not so full, so significant, or proper, or delivered from Amphibologies,
yet I must desire the Reader to take this Apology for it.

1. It was written at leisure and broken times, and with great intervals, and
many times hastily, as my busy and important Employment of another nature
(known to the World) would give me leave; which must needs make such Breaks,
and Chasms, and Incoherences, that possibly a continued, uninterrupted series
of writing would have prevented, and carried on the Discourse with a more equal
Thread.

2. A long indisposition of Health has much hindered and interrupted me in a
strict revising and amending of what possibly might have been requisite to be
done.

3. A Man whose scope, and intent, and drift is at some one thing, and has his
Eye and Design fixed upon it, many times is not so solicitous nor so curious,
nor so exact in the choice of his Words, especially in Expressions of
collateral things, not being the principal Subject of the Discourse, which
though they may lie in his way, yet are not much under his strict advertence;
but he thinks it is enough if he dresseth his Discourse so that it tend to what
it principally aims and drives at. And hence it is, that in Chronological
Computations, which I sometimes make use of, I content my self with a more lax
and common Computation, without any great curiosity or exactness, because it
equally serves my purpose as if my Computations were more critical and exact,
even usque ad minutias Chronologicas; and so in some other mentions of Names
and Times of Authors, and the like: and likewise in the choice of Words or
Expressions, wherein possibly I may sometimes be too lax and free, using such
as come next into my Mind, without a curious or critical choice; which is more
excusable in a Discourse of this nature, than in some Polemical and
Controversial Discourses of other natures, where Men usually catch at Words and
Expressions, and it is the greatest part of their Business.

4. I must also desire my Readers pardon, in that in my Transcripts of some
entire Texts out of Aristotle, Plato, Plutarch and others, I use the Latin
Translation, and not the Original Greek, wherein the Authors wrote: I was a
better Grecian in the 16th, than in the 66th Year of my Life; and my
application to another Study and Profession, rendered my skill in that Language
of little use to me, and so I wore it out by degrees.

And thus thou have this Book presented to thy view, I wish thee as much
Contentment in Reading as I had in Writing it: If there be any thing therein
that may be useful to thee (as I suppose there may be) there is matter for my
Contentment and thy Benefit; if all be not answerable thereunto, and to thy
expectation, the former Considerations give thee reasonable Motives of Charity
to excuse it.

The Contents.
SECT. I.
CAP. I. THE Introduction, declaring the Reason of the Choice of this Subject,
and the Method of the intended Discourse. CAP. II. Touching the Excellency of
the Humane Nature in General. CAP. III. A brief Consideration of the Hypotheses
that concern the Eternity of the World. CAP. IV. Concerning the Origination of
Mankind; and whether the same were Eternal, or had a Beginning. CAP. V.
Concerning the Supposition of the first Eternal Existence of the common Parents
of Mankind, and the production of the succeeding Individuals from them. CAP.
VI. Certain Objections against the Truths formerly delivered, and against the
Reasons given in proof thereof, with their Solutions.
SECT. II.
CAP. I. The Proofs of Fact that seem with the greatest Moral Evidence to
evince the Inception of Mankind; and first, touching the Antiquity or Novity of
History. CAP. II. Concerning the first Evidence, the Antiquity of History and
the Chronological Account of Times. CAP. III. The Second Evidence of Fact,
namely, the apparent Evidences of the first Foundation of the Greatest and
Ancient Kingdoms and Empires. CAP. IV. The Third Instance of Fact, proving the
Origination of Mankind, namely, the Invention of Arts. CAP. V. The Fourth
Instance of Fact, seeming to evince the Novity of Mankind, namely, the
Inceptions of the Religions and Deities of the Heathens; and the deficiency of
this Instance. CAP. VI. A Fifth Consideration concerning the Decays, especially
of the Humane Nature; and whether there be any such Decays, and what may be
collected concerning the Origination of Man upon that Supposition. CAP. VII.
The Sixth Evidence of Fact, proving Novitatem generis humani, namely, the
History of the Patres familiarum, and the original Plantation of the Continents
and Islands of the World. CAP. VIII. The Seventh Evidence of Fact proving the
Origination of Man, namely, the Gradual Increase of Mankind. CAP. IX.
Concerning those Correctives of the Evils of Mankind, which may be thought to
be sufficient to reduce it to a greater Equability. CAP. X. The farther
Examination of the precedent Objection. CAP. XI. The Consequence and Illation
upon the premises against the Eternity of Mankind. CAP. XII. The Eighth
Evidence of Fact proving the Origination of Mankind, namely, the Consent of
Mankind.
SECT. III.
CAP. I. The Opinions of the more Learned part of Mankind, Philosphers and
other Writers, touching Man's Origination. CAP. II. Touching the various
Methods of the Origination of Mankind. CAP. III. Touching the Second Opinion of
those that assert the Natural Production of Mankind ex non genitis, or the
possibility thereof. CAP. IV. Concerning Vegetables, and especially Insecta
Animalia; whether any of them are sponte orta, or arise not rather ex
praeexistente semine. CAP. V. If it be supposed that any of those Insects at
this day have their Original ex non genitis, or spontanee whether yet the same
may be said a Natural or Fortuitous Production. CAP. VI. Supposing the
Production of Insects were totally spontaneous, equivocal, and ex putrido;
whether any Consequence be thence deducible for the like Production of Perfect
Animals, but especially of Men. CAP. VII. Touching the Matter of Fact it self,
whether de facto there has been any such Origination of Mankind, or of any
Perfect Animal, either Natural or Casual.
SECT. IV.
CAP. I. Concerning the last Opinion, attributing the Origination of Mankind to
the immediate Power and Will of Almighty God. CAP. II. The Mosaical History
touching the Production of the World and of Mankind, and the Congruity and
Reasonableness of the Mosaical Hypothesis. CAP. III. Concerning the Production
and Formation of Man. CAP. IV. The Reasonableness of this Hypothesis of the
Origination of the World, and particularly of the Humane Nature, and the great
Advantages it has above all other Hypotheses touching the same. CAP. V.
Concerning the Nature of that Intelligent Agent that first formed the Humane
Nature, and some Objections against the Inferences above made, and their
Answer. CAP. VI. The Reasonableness of the Divine Hypothesis touching the
Origination of the World, and particularly of Man, and the preference thereof
before all the other precedent Suppositions. CAP. VII. A Collection of certain
evident and profitable Consequences from this Consideration, that the first
Individuals of Humane Nature, had their Original from a Great, Powerful, Wise,
Intelligent Being. CAP. VIII. A farther Enquiry touching the End of the
Formation of Man, so far as the same may be collected by Natural Light and
Ratiocination.
DE HOMINE.
CAP. I. The Introduction, declaring the reason of the choice of this Subject,
and the Method of the intended Discourse.
IT is an admirable evidence of the Divine Wisdom and Providence, that there is
that suitable accommodation and adaptation of all things in Nature, both to
their own convenience and exigence, and to the convenience, use, and exigence
of one another; which evidenceth, 1. That all things are made, governed, and
disposed by a most intelligent, and wise, and powerful Being. 2. That that
governing Being is but one, and that all this accommodation, and adaptation,
and mutual subservience of the things in Nature are the product of one most
wise decree, counsel, and purpose of that one most wise, intelligent, and
soverag^n in Being.

It is not here seasonable to make a large prosecution of the particular
instances of that accommodation of things in Nature, nor of the necessity of
the former consequences arising from it. The instances thereof, that are
suitable to the Design meant in this Discourse, shall be only these two, which I
shall but shortly touch: 1. The admirable accommodation of Sensible Faculty to
the Objects of Sense, and of those Objects to it, and of both to the well-being
of the Sensible Nature: 2. The admirable accommodation of the Intellectual
Faculty in Man to Intellectual Objects, and of those Objects to it, and of both
to the well-being of the Humane or Rational Nature.

Touching the former, the Sensible Nature in its complement and integrity has
five exterior powers or faculties, that are accommodated to all those motions
or impressions of natural bodies, and their accidents which are useful to it;
and by these five ports or gates all those impressions which are useful for the
perception of the Sensible Nature are communicated to it, namely, the five
exterior Senses. It is not only possible, but very likely, that there may be
such motions or qualities of Bodies, that make not any impression upon any of
those Senses; but if there be such, they are such as are not of use for the
perception or convenience of the Sensible Nature. But for such as are necessary
for such perception of the Sensible Nature, there is no motion, quality, or
operation of external Bodies, but what has accommodated to it a Faculty in
Sense receptive of it: Is there such a motion or objectiveness of external
Bodies which produces light or color, figure, vicinity, or distance, the
Faculty of Sight is fitted to receive that impression or objectiveness, and
that objectiveness fitted and accommodate to that Faculty. Is there that motion
or objectiveness that causes sounds? the Faculty of Hearing is fitted to be
receptive of it, and that objectiveness or motion (or what ever it is) fitted
to make an impression upon that Faculty. And so for the other Senses. And by
this adaptation and congruity of these Faculties to their several proper
Objects, and by the fitness and proportionateness of these objective
Impressions, Qualities, or Motions, upon their respective Faculties,
accommodated to their reception, the Sensible Nature has so much of perception
and reception of things as is necessary for its sensible Being. I speak not
here of those other interior Senses of Discrimination of the Objects of Sense,
Fantasy, Memory, Appetite, and the rest, for they are not at present to my
purpose.

II. And what is thus excellent and admirable in the accommodation between the
sensitive Faculties and their Objects, is to be observed in the intellectual
Faculty, though the Faculty and Object are far more noble and excellent than
that of Sense. As there is an accommodation between the visive Faculty and its
Object, and as there is an accommodation between the Faculty of the Taste and
the Object, the Object fitted to make an impression upon the Faculty, and
Faculty fitted to take the impression from the Object; so there is an
accommodation, and suitable adaptation, between the intellective Faculty and the
intelligible Object, the Object as it were thrusting it self into the Faculty,
and the Faculty receiving and perceiving the Object.

The means of derivation, and immediate union of these intelligible Objects to
the Understanding, are various: Sometimes divine and supernatural, as by
immediate irradiation or revelation; sometimes artificial and instituted, as by
discourse and instituted signs, and thus Intelligibles are conveyed from one
man to another by words or writing; sometimes natural, and that seems to be by
three kinds of means, 1. by the mediation of Sense, which is ordinarily the
first basis of all humane intellectual knowledge; 2. by ratiocination or
discourse of the Mind, whereby even from sensible Objects the Intellect
receives a farther prospect of other Intelligibles, not immediately presented
by or to the Sense, but by consequences, deductions, and conclusions deduced
from things more obvious to Sense, and perchance at first represented by it; 3.
there seems to be a third means, which is a kind of intuition; there are some
truths so plain and evident, and open, that need not any process of
ratiocination to evidence or evince them; they seem to be objected to the
Intellective Nature when it is grown perfect and fit for intellectual
operation, as the Objects of Light or Color are objected to the Eye when it is
open, they are understood and assented unto quasi per saltum and intuitum; and
though these truths are such as are also deducible by ratiocination and
rational process, yet the connection between the premises, and the conclusion
in them, are so clear, and the transition from the premises to the conclusion
is so swift, short, and clear, that it seems to be in a moment, and the assent
to them and evidence of them is instantaneous; such are many conclusions of
moral and intellectual truths, which seem upon this account to be congenite
with us, connatural to us, and engraven in the very frame and compages of the
Soul, because they are Intelligibles of that nature that present themselves,
and thrust themselves into the Understanding immediately, and many times
without the mediation of Sense or Ratiocination. There is that primitive
congruity between these Intelligibles and the Intellectual Faculty, that they
are immediately united as I said by a kind of intuition, and though they are
deducible by ratiocination, as conclusions from premises, yet in respect of
their swift transitus in the Understanding they seem to be principles.

Now this excellent Faculty of the Understanding, though it seems to be passive
in relation to its reception of its Object, yet it is not barely a passive
Faculty, it has an activity about that Object that it receives, and it
actively trades upon it to its farther improvement.

And therefore according to the nature of this excellent Faculty the
Understanding (which as it has been said is partly active and partly passive)
there are two things that do much improve and enrich this Faculty.

First, It is improved by its Exercise and Employment, the very Faculty it self
will degenerate, and grow sluggish, dull, and rusty by idleness: The exercise
of the Intellective Faculty makes it agil, quick, and lively, yea though the
object about which it is exercised be poor, little, and low, yet a Man has
this advantage by the exercise of this Faculty about it, that it keeps it from
rust and torpidness, it enlarges and habituates it for a due improvement even
about nobler Objects.

Secondly, It is enriched by the nobleness and worth of the Object about which
it is exercised, when the Object is noble, generous, useful, and suitable, at
least in a convenient degree to the worth of the Faculty: Diligence and
Industry, and exercise of the Intellective Faculty therein, does not only
exercise, employ, habituate, and enlarge the Faculty, but enrich and enable it
by the worth of the Object wherewith it is furnished.

There is so great variety of Intelligibles in the World, so much objected to
our Senses, so much deducible from them by Ratiocination and Discourse, and
every several Object so full of subdivided multiplicity and complicateness: And
on the other side, the life of Man so short, and the approaches of the
Understanding to the knowledge of things, is for the most part so slow, and
gradual, and difficult, that it is not to be hoped that a Man should ever
attain the full comprehension even of any small inconsiderable Insect, with all
its connexions, dependences, relations, deductions, and consequents; much less
can it be expected, that any Man should ever attain the full knowledge of that
stupendous multiplicity and variety, that appears in all or any considerable
part of those Objects of our Senses that occur in that mundus aspectabilis
which every day we behold: And yet even the World we see is the smallest part
of that which we neither do nor can see.

Therefore it seems to be worth the care of a Man, that has a desire to
improve those two great Talents that God has lent us, namely, his Time and his
Faculties; that he not only exercise his Faculty to keep him from sloth and
idleness, but out of this great multiplicity of Objects to choose some such for
the exercise of his Faculties, that by their worth and value may improve and
advance them; and such as may be profitable for this use and exercise, and in
some measure attainable with competent certainty and satisfaction.

There be certain qualifications that do much commend an Object to a Man's
Enquiry, which are principally these:

First, the nobleness and worth of an Object: Secondly, the usefulness of this
Object being known, or of the knowledge of it: Thirdly, sufficient certainty
touching the Object, or of the knowledge of it: Fourthly, that the Object be
such as may be large enough to satisfy the Intellective Faculty, and yet not
distract it through its multiplicity, vastness, or extent. Something I shall
say of each of these.

I. The first qualification in the choice of an Object is, that it be noble and
worthy of the Faculty that is employed about it. There is not only a congruity
herein between the nobleness of the Faculty and the Object, but also the
Faculty is enriched and advanced by the worth of the Object. It was the
reproach of Domitian a great Emperor, that he busied himself in hunting of
Flies: Yet I do not blame the pursuit of the Works of Nature, even in the
Contemplation of the smallest Works thereof; for though the things themselves
are comparatively low, and inconsiderable, yet even in the smallest Vegetable
or Animal, even in the very little Insects, there appears the excellent Work of
the Divine Wisdom, and therefore there is a worth and excellency in the
Contemplation of them, especially when that Contemplation is directed to the
search and admiration of the great Wisdom and Skill of the great Creator, who
in many small Insects, that in respect of their minuteness almost escape the
Sight, has placed and digested as great a variety and excellency of Organs,
Faculties, and Instincts, as in the Whale or Elephant: And therefore the
Labors herein of Aristotle, Fortunius Licetus, Muffetus, Aldrovandus, Goddart,
and others, that have written whole Volumes concerning the generation,
production, alteration, and variety, even of small Insects: Flies and Worms are
not without their worth and use, seeing in the least of these the curious
Wisdom, Skill, and Power of the great Maker of all things is conspicuous; and
though they are but little Rills, yet if they be closely followed, they are and
may be Manuductions to lead us to that Ocean of Wisdom, Power, and Goodness of
the God of Nature, from which they had their original.

II. The second qualification that commends an Object, or Subject of Enquiry,
is the usefulness of its knowledge. It is true, that there is scarce any kind
of knowledge of any Object but is grateful and useful in some measure to the
Understanding: But among the Scibilia or Intelligibilia in the World, there are
several degrees, some are not only useless to be known, but seem to be mere
impertinencies; as for instance, many Grammatical Criticisms, and how this Word
was written by one Author, how by another, what fashion Clothes the Roman
Officers, Military, Civil or Sacred used, and very many Curiosities relating to
Languages: It is true, so far forth as Words and Languages are means to derive
unto us the memory, relation, or understanding of the things contained under
them, so far the knowledge of them is useful in order to that end, but
Languages simply in relation to themselves are but a narrow piece of
speculation, and consequently those great expenses of time and study that some
have taken about little useless Criticisms, and trifles of that nature, has
been an improvident expense, and misemployment of their time and faculties.
Again, some things there are which are yet of more value, but yet but of little
use, they are known only that they may be known, or inquired into only for the
exercise of Wit, Invention and Subtilty: What great pains has been taken
concerning the Quadrature of a Circle, and the Duplication of a Cube, and some
other Mathematical Problems? And many Men have spent much time, and written
great Volumes touching those matters, which yet were they attained, the
knowledge rests in it self, and is never applicable to any use answerable to
the pains of their acquest. Again, there be many things touching Matters
Physical, which though they are full of contentation to be known, and have
their use thus far, that they are an inquiry and discovery of things that are
the Works of God, and of his Wisdom, and serve to explain many Phenomenon in
Nature, yet they are otherwise of little use to Mankind; as concerning the
degrees of acceleration of Motion, the gravitation of the Air, the existence or
nonexistence of empty spaces, either coacervate or interspersed, and many the
like, which have taken up the thoughts and times, and exercised the Wits, and
even the Passions of Men in Disputes concerning them; and yet though the
knowledge of them is curious, and contenting in it self, yet it is not much
ordinable or applicable to the use and benefit of the Man that knows them, or
of others: And therefore though the knowledge of these Objects be commendable
unto us upon an account of their contentation and curiosity, yet they do not
commend their knowledge to us upon the account of their usefulness and
beneficialness.

Again, some Objects there are that are not only noble in themselves, but they
have also at least a mediate and preparatory usefulness to Mankind, though
perchance in themselves and immediately they have not that commodation. Thus
the knowledge of diverse parts in Natural Philosophy, and the rules, motions,
and variety of Qualities and Operations of diverse Natural Objects, the
connection of Causes and Effects, the observation of the Order of things in
Nature, are of singular use to carry the Mind up to the acknowledging and
admiration of the Great Efficient and Governor of the World, of His Wisdom,
Power, Goodness, Bounty, and consequently to raise up the Heart to veneration
of Him, dutifulness and gratitude unto Him, dependence upon Him, and a deep
impression of Natural Religion toward Him, and of all those consequents that
arise in the Mind and Life from this habit of Religion: So true is the Saying
of an excellent Naturalist of our own, A little knowledge in Philosophy may
perchance make a proud empty Man an Atheist, but it is impossible that Atheism
can lodge in a Mind well studied and acquainted with Natural Philosophy.

And as thus the knowledge of Nature is useful to Mankind, to bring him to and
confirm him in the knowledge of the Glorious God, so it is preparatively
useful, and indeed necessary to many useful things in this Life, as to make a
Man a good Physician, ubi desinit Philosophus ibi incipit Medicus, where the
Philosopher ends the Physician begins; which next to the knowledge of Almighty
God is of great necessity and use to Mankind.

And touching Geometry, Astronomy, and Arithmetic, though in the knowledge of
them there be many things that are nice and curious, and not so much in order
to use as to speculation and exercise of Wit, yet they are such Objects, the
knowledge whereof is in many things very beneficent to Mankind, as we see in
the construction of all Mechanical Engines in the measuring of Bodies,
Superficies, and Distances, in the Rules and Exercise of Architecture,
Fortifications, and ordering of Battalia's, Computations and Reckonings in
Contracts and Merchants Affairs, in Navigation, in the Measure and Computation
of Time, and the right knowledge of several Seasons, these Mathematical
Subjects and Sciences have great use in relation to humane affairs and concerns.

And as thus those more curious Sciences have their use in the Affairs of
Mankind, and are commended unto us, not only upon the account of the nobleness,
but also of the usefulness thereof; so the knowledge of History, of Humane
Laws, of Moral Philosophy, and of Political and Oeconomical regiments of the
various Modes, Temperaments, and Qualifications of Governments, with their
Appendages, are upon the account of their usefulness to Humane Society, and the
Peace, Tranquillity, and Order of the World, and of the particular Societies,
Relations, and Persons therein commended to our knowledge and contemplation, as
things without which the World of Mankind would soon be in disorder and
confusion. And although these Studies are not so pleasing and grateful to the
Understanding, as those other more curious Contemplations either Physical or
Mathematical, yet they recompense it with the excellency and necessity of their
use, in relation to the noblest visible Creature, Man, and in relation to his
noblest and most useful posture and station in this World, namely, a state of
regulated Society and Government.

Now according to the kind or degree of the usefulness of the Objects to be
known, so the knowledge thereof is more or less commended unto us, upon the
account of the various degrees of usefulness: Some Objects and their knowledge
are of greatest value, because their use is of more universal concern and
important necessity, and such is the true knowledge of Almighty God, His
Greatness, Power, Wisdom, Goodness, and Will, especially as He has revealed
Himself in His Word, and those noble habits that upon that account are
ingenerated in the Soul, as Religion, Gratitude, Obedience, and Tranquillity of
Mind, Regularity of the Soul and Life.

And upon the same account there is a great value in knowledge of Morals, and
of those Duties that we owe to our selves and others, and a conformity of Minds
and Lives to the Dictates of Religion and Morality. And the excellence of their
use, and consequently the commendation of that knowledge upon that account is
evident in these particulars: 1. The right and true knowledge of those things
do not only perfect our Souls and Natures by the excellency of the knowledge it
self, but they perfect our Souls and Natures with Goodness: They do not only
perfect the Intellectual Faculty, but they also perfect the Volitive Faculty;
they make the Man not only more knowing, but more wise, and they also make him
the better, more just, sober, temperate, religious: A Man may know very much in
Mathematics and Natural Philosophy, and yet be a bad Man; but a Man truly
acquainted with the knowledge of God, and with the due sense of his Duty to Him
in matter of Religion, and his Duty to others in points of Morality, which is a
part also of the Divine Will, is not only a knowing Man, but becomes also a
good Man (if indeed his knowledge be sound and true).

Again, 2. All other knowledge merely or principally serves the concerns of
this Life, and is fitted to the meridian thereof: They are such as for ought we
know will be of little use to a separate Soul, at least we do not know whether
the Soul in its state of separation will be much concerned in the knowledge of
Physical or Mathematical Learning, or the Rules or Methods of Political
Regiment: But this we are or may be sure, that the Soul will carry with it into
the other World that knowledge of God which it acquires here, and receive an
unspeakable improvement thereof by a nearer union to Him; and it will carry
with it those improvements and advances of Piety, Goodness, Righteousness,
Holiness, those Habits and Graces that it began here; and as the Soul is
improved and made the better in this Life by this knowledge, and those effects
and meliorations that it here acquired by them, so it will carry along with it
those advantages to the next World; for there is a connaturality and congruity
between that knowledge and those habits, and that future estate of the Soul. So
that this kind of knowledge is not only serviceable and useful for the present
Life in via, but is proportioned to that state that is in patria.

And as touching the knowledge of things that are merely accommodate to the
present Life, they receive their disparity of value in this respect, according
to the disparity or different degrees of usefulness. Some are useful for nobler
ends, some for lower and more inferior ends; some are in a greater degree
useful for the same ends than others; and according to the varieties of ends,
uses, and their degrees, the knowledge of them (as in reference to this part of
the commendation of an Object, namely, usefulness) is more or less eligible.
But this is too large a Subject particularly to prosecute in this place.

III. The third commendation of a Subject of Contemplation, and that renders it
eligible, is Certainty. Where the Subject is uncertain, and the evidences
touching it doubtful, although perchance the speculation that it affords be
very high and sublime, yet such a Subject is not in this respect so eligible as
what is more certain, for it leaves an impartial and serious Mind full of doubt
and dissatisfaction; and where it meets with a Man of a busy fantasy,
self-conceited, and partial to himself and his own thoughts, and that would be
thought to know beyond the common standard of other Men's Reason, it puts him
upon the confident framing of Hypotheses built merely upon Imagination, and
from these weak foundations he deduceth Systems of Consequences and
Conclusions, which being built upon mere fanciful and inevident Suppositions,
fall to nothing but dust and smoke as soon as their evidence is impartially
examined. Some Subjects are so remote from us that we are strangers to them,
and our knowledge concerning them is merely conjectural, and those very
conjectures for the most part wanting competent media to make them tolerably
probable. Concerning the Extent of the Universe, the Plurality of Worlds, the
State of Heavenly Bodies, whether they are inhabited, and with what kind of
Inhabitants, whether they are animate Bodies, whether they are moved by
Intelligences, or by their own Forms, or by the motion of the Body of the
Ether, or those imaginary Vortices wherein they are placed? These and many
such Speculations touching things at this distance may gratify the
Imagination, but never satisfy the Mind. Again, some things though they are or
may be near unto us, yet are of that subtilty that they escape our Senses, and
thereby we cannot make our approaches to their discovery. As concerning the
Nature of Spirits, their ubi, motus, the manner of their Intellection and
mutual communication of Notions; by what means or in what manner actual
Intellection is effected in the Soul; how the Species, Order, and Circumstances
of things are preserved in the Memorative Faculty or Organ, or where else?
these and many other hidden parts of Nature, even of a far lower form, are
unaccessible to us.

The Contemplation of the Universe, and of the Natural Causes and Effects
therein, is indeed an excellent Contemplation: For, first, it exercises the
Intellectual Faculties, keeps them in motion and employment, and thereby
perfecteth them. Secondly, It is full of delight and contentation to the Mind.
Thirdly, Although the Understanding attains not a perfect discovery of what it
searches after, yet many times undesigned and unthought of discoveries of many
excellent things recompenceth the loss of the principal intention; as those
that have bent their endeavor to attain the Philosophers Stone, though they
never attain their end, yet in their process toward it do many times light
upon excellent discoveries which they never thought of or designed, which in a
great measure recompenseth their disappointment in the Particular sought after.
Fourthly, It gives a great discovery of the admirable Wisdom and Power of God
in framing and ordering of the World, and so becomes a manuduction to the
knowledge, acknowledgement, and adoration of Him.

But yet when we consider how short and weak our best discoveries are in the
most accessible, obvious particulars, and narrowest Integrals of the Universe:
When we consider how many things in Nature escape our Senses, and the
discoveries thereof; and yet how much we stand in need of the discoveries of
Sense, and sensible and experimental observation, to bottom any sound
conjecture concerning the Nature, Causes, and Effects of the things in Nature,
and how uncertain, fanciful, and imaginary our Suppositions are without it,
whereby it comes to pass, that we many times frame suppositions and conclusions
concerning things supposed to be in Nature, before we have any certain
evidence, whether in truth the very things about which we frame our
suppositions or conclusions have at all any real existence; or if they have,
yet for want of a clear, and sensible, and experimented observation of them,
our positions and conclusions touching their Causes, Effects, Order and Methods
of their procedure are but fictions and imaginations, accommodated to our
Inventions rather than to the things themselves, and such as we rather project
we would have them be, if we had the making of them, than what in truth they
are. And lastly, if we consider the vast extent and multiplicity of the whole
Compass of the Universe, and the things therein contained, the many parts
thereof, that either in respect of their tenuity or distance escape the reach
of our Senses, the infinite complications and combinations of several
concurrences, causes, and contributions to the constitution and operation of
almost every Integral in Nature; the shortness of our Lives, and the many
necessary diversions that we have, and must necessarily have from those
Contemplations. I say, when we consider these things, it seems a thing utterly
to be despaired of to attain a full, certain, evident knowledge of the whole
Universe, or of any considerable portion thereof.

And hence it is, that if we consider the various Hypotheses of the ancient and
modern Philosophers, touching the general Systeme of the World, and those more
Universal and Cardinal Solutions of the common and great Appearances in Nature,
we shall find them or the greatest part of them, to be little else than
excogitated and invented Models, not so much arising from the true Image of the
things themselves, or resulting from the real Existence of them, as certain
instituted and artificial Contrivances of men's Wits and Fancies. And these
Suppositions being thus invented, they distort, stretch and reduce the Orders
of things in a conformation to those pre-conceived Suppositions; and then by
the Inventers of them, and those that are their followers, and would seem to be
men of quicker sight than others, and not to come too short of the perceptions
of their Leaders, they are in a little time magnified into the true Solutions
of the Arcana Naturae, and then all or most of their Argumentations, Positions,
Superstructions and Conclusions, are founded upon, and conformed unto, and
deduced from these excogitated Hypotheses, as if they were the true, and only
and real frame and constitution of things, when they have as little reality,
and less evidence than the imaginary solid Spheres in the Heavens, or their
Music, the Horses of the Sun, or any other Poetical Fictions.

And if at any time some one Phenomenon of Nature appears, that crosses any
of these Suppositions or Hypotheses, or suits not with them, or is not salved
by them, presently great pains is taken to supply that Defect with some
subsidiary Supposition, that may stop that Leak, and piece up the Hypothesis,
which must be presently granted to be true, not because there is any evidence
of it from the things themselves, but because it suits with that artificial and
precarious Hypothesis which was before taken up and made much of.

This we may easily observe to be true; if we should examine all the various
Suppositions of leading men in their several Sects.

The Chemical Philosophers make their Tria prima, Salt, Sulphur and Mercury,
the great constituent Principles of all Bodies; others add two more: And their
evidence that they are so, are, because they find by their solutions by Fire,
some things which they call by these Names, to be that whereinto Bodies are
dissolved; when, for ought can be evidently made out, many of these are not so
much really in the constitution of the Bodies themselves, as the very
alterations or changes of them by the force and energy of that active Element,
or at least, though after their solution, they assume the shapes of Salt,
Sulphur and Mercury, yet there are even in those Consistences very various
Contextures, differing extremely in each Body from other, though they seem to
assume some analogy of shape: And possibly there may be a thousand Constituents
of different Natures from any of these supposed Principles in Bodies, both
before and after their solution by Fire or Heat.

The Aristotelians have excogitated another sort of Suppositions of Principles,
Matter, Form and Privation. And yet it is very difficult to conceive that any
such thing should be as Matter, undetermined by something called Form; and as
difficult to conceive what many sorts of these Forms are (which they call
substantial) whence they arise, what becomes of them, whether some of those
they call Substantial, are any other than the various Modifications of Matter;
whether others of them are not some middle Nature, neither Bodies nor
Accidents, but Powers of a different nature from Bodies, Accidents, or
Qualities, or Substances, though not so obvious to our perception: This
Hypothesis therefore seems for the most part, to be a kind of artificial
contrivance, not wholly taken from the natures of things, but fitted to give
some kind of explication of them; and for the most part an Engine to guide our
Conceptions, as the Figures in Logic, or the artificial Schemes for the
finding out a Medium used by them; Barbara, Celarent, Darii, etc. Napcas,
Cipinis vel Nipis.

Again, if we look upon the Supposition of Epicurus, and his Explicator,
Lucretius, and his Advancer, Gassendus, how many things must be taken for
granted, that are not only perfectly inevident to our sense, but altogether
improbable? The multitude of physically indivisible Atoms, their strange
Figures acommodated to their Motion, Adhesion, and Coagulation, their declined
Motions, and the means of their Coalition: And when all this will not serve to
contain things within any possible certainty or specifical determination, to
patch up that defect, certain Moleculae Seminales must be supposed to make up
that Defect, and to keep the World and its Integrals from an Infinitude and
Exten^lesness of excursions every moment into new Figures and Animals, and yet
made up merely by chance, and by the contexture of those Atoms which have
neither quality nor energy, nor any thing else besides their small and
imperceptible Moles, to make them operative, and that Local Motion which they
there have; but they teach us not from whence they have it.

Again, If we look upon Des Carts his Supposition, who was not altogether
content with the former, but gave it some Correctives, though the main
Substratum be of Epicurus; what color of evidence have we of the various
Configurations of his Atoms, the grinding of them round by their mutual
attritions, the coalition of the Globular Atoms into the Heavenly Bodies, the
filling of Chinks and Interstices by the Ramenta of the greater, whereby a
Materia Subtilis is diffused through the Universe, which is invisible, performs
most of those motions that we see in things, that the Animals are only Engines,
and actuated by the mobility of this subtle matter? These, and infinite more
artificial Inventions of his there are, that neither Sense nor Reason could
ever acquaint him or us with; but they are an ingenious Creature of his own
fruitful Invention, wittily framed to explicate not so much the Nature of
things, but those Conceptions he entertained thereof, and to reduce and range
them into an Order contrived by him, not by Nature.

This Excursion I have used to show how great a difficulty there is for a man
to have a suitable conception of the great Fabric of the World with any
tolerable certainty, whereby it has come to pass that the readiest and most
exercised Wits have fallen into so great varieties of explication thereof, and
yet all of them so full of unevidence and incertainty, so full of precarious
and imaginary Postulata, so full of unreasonableness, and improbability, and
impossibilities in themselves, and one with another, that a man that is not
imposed upon by the Veneration of the Authors, or his own Fantasy, cannot
tell how to fix in any of them but must cry out upon them with the Comedian,
Probe fecistis, incertior sum nunc quam dudum: Ye have mended the matter well;
I am now more in doubt than before: Neither are we ever likely to attain any
certain or satisfactory knowledge in the Physical Causes, Effects and
Appearances in their largest extent and latitude.

4. The fourth commendation of an Object of Knowledge is, that if it be merely
Physical or Mathematical, it bears some proportion to the Intellective power,
neither too narrow, and circumscribed into a small compass, nor yet too full of
multiplicity: The former satisfies not the Understanding; for it soon exhausts
all that is in it, and leaves the Understanding no work to exercise it self
withal. The latter surchargeth and oppresses the Understanding with its
multiplicity. And upon this latter account it is, that, although the whole
Universe and every part thereof are Objects full of excellency and worth, yet
the multiplicity thereof is so great and various, that the Understanding falls
under a kind of despondency of getting through so great a Task: and those that
have undertaken the full speculation of all the parts of the visible World,
have done it but superficially, lightly, and in Generals; the time of Life and
the Intellective faculty, that moves but gradually and successively, have not
been sufficient for an exact account of all things visible: And therefore they
that have designed exactness and deep scrutiny into things, have taken some one
part of Nature for that purpose; and even in those single Objects there is most
commonly a connection of such various Appendances or Incidents that they that
have set themselves upon such seemingly narrow Enquiries, have found it a
business enough to take up a greater portion of Time and Enquiry than our short
Lives will afford us; as may easily appear by the great and large Tractates of
them that have written concerning the little Organ of the Eye, or the Visive
Faculty, the Magnetic Motions and Variations, or some other single Organ or
Faculty of the Reasonable or Sensitive Nature.

Among the many Objects of Knowledge, there seem to be two especially, which
upon the most part of the beforementioned accounts, most commend themselves to
our contemplation and enquiry; namely, the knowledge of the ever-glorious God,
and the knowledge of our selves and the Humane Nature. Almighty God is the
highest and most excellent and sovereign Object of the Intellectual Faculty: It
is true, he falls not under the last qualification. Though he is but one, and
one most simple uncompounded Being, yet his Nature and Perfections, his Power,
Wisdom, Goodness, and all other Excellencies are infinite and incomprehensible
by any intellectual Nature but himself; and therefore he is an Object
infinitely too large for the comprehension of any created Understanding: He is
a Light too bright for our Intellective eye to see, but by reflection, or
through the Vail of his Word or Works. The more we know of him, and the more we
draw near unto him by serious and humble contemplation, the more we discover an
endless and unsearchable Ocean and Perfection in him, so that we must not,
cannot expect to find out the Almighty to perfection; his ways are unsearchable
and past finding out, and much more his Essence and Perfections; so that though
he be the most natural, and the most desirable Object of created
Understandings, he is an Object infinitely too large for it.

But although in respect of the measure of his Perfection, he be an Object
unproportionate to a created Understanding, a Light too bright, and an Ocean
too large and too deep for it, yet there is so much of his knowledge attainable
by us, as is sufficient for use, nature and everlasting happiness: and the
knowlede of Almighty God, so far as it is attainable by our narrow created
Understanding, highly advances the humane Understanding upon all accounts, and
infinitely excels the knowledge of any other Object in the world, upon these
ensuing accounts among many others.

First, It is a knowledge of such an Object that has the greatest and most
convincing certainty in the world, a certainty that he is, and in a good
measure a certainty what he is; for though it be impossible for any or all the
created Beings in the world, to attain a distinct, perfect and full Idaea of
the Divine excellencies, in their full, adequate, distinct perfections; yet
that Image that he has given of himself, in the admirable Frame of so much of
the world which we know, does with all imaginable certainty evince, That he is,
that he is but one, one most intelligent, wise, powerful, free, good, simple,
eternal, infinite and most perfect Being, the Fountain of Being, and the first
Cause of all things, though we cannot attain the full comprehension of that
perfection: And truly it is no small evidence of the Divine Wisdom and
Goodness, That that great and important Truth of the being and perfection of
Almighty God (the Principle and Object of the greatest importance in the world
to the good of Mankind, and for the advance and perfecting of humane Nature)
should be written in such plain, clear and evident Characters in the Works of
Nature, and evinced by Evidences rising from thence, as are obvious to any
person that has but the common use of Reason, and the honesty to use and
exercise it sincerely.

Secondly, It is the most noble and excellent Object in the world, and that may
and does most enoble and advance the intellective Faculty; he is the Fountain
of all Being, and of all Perfection: Those Excellencies that are in the noblest
created Natures in the world, are but shadows of that perfection that is in
him: Though a created Understanding can never take in the fullness of the Divine
Excellencies, yet so much as it can or does receive thereof, is of greater
extent, use and value, and does more advance and enrich the Faculty, than any
other Object in the world, though that other Object were fully and adequately
known.

Thirdly, Although the Understanding can never search out the Almighty to
perfection, by reason of the infinite excess of this Object, beyond the
capacity of a created Faculty, yet there is that congruity between this Faculty
and this Object, that connatural ordination, as it were, of Intellective
Faculty to this Object, as if it were (if not only, yet principally) lodged in
the humane Nature for the sake of this Object; so that though there is no
commensurableness between this Object and a created Understanding, yet there is
a congruity and connaturality between them: And hence it is, that so much as we
do or can know of God, is delightful and grateful to the Understanding. And
though this abyss of excellency be infinite, yet it does not confound, nor
disorder, nor overwhelm the Understanding in its modest and due searches into
it: And besides, although the perfection of his Essence, and many of his
Attributes, as Infinitude, Immensity, Indivisibility, etc. do dazzle our
Understandings, yet some of his Attributes, and the Manifestations thereof, are
not only highly delectable to the Intellective Faculty, but are suitable and
easily conceptible by us, because apparent in his Works, as his Goodness,
Beneficence, Wisdom, Power, etc. if we attend to it.

And certainly it was the great Goodness and Condescension of the Glorious God
unto his Creature Man, that when he knew all his own Excellencies were too
great and too bright for us to see, he has Been pleased to discover so much of
himself as was fit and necessary for us to know, by means that our Faculties
might use without dissipation, distraction, or too great astonishment; namely,
first, By his Works, reflecting his Greatness and Goodness. Secondly, By his
Word, by Divine Revelation discovering his Goodness, Mercy, Power and Truth.
Thirdly, By his Son, through the Vail of our Flesh; by all which that
Brightness and Splendour of the Divine Excellence, that by an immediate
intuition or exhibition would-have overwhelmed our Intellective Faculty (as it
stands united to our Bodies) is presented to us more proportionately to our
Capacities and Faculties, by a kind of refraction, and a more easy and
familiar manifestation.

Fourthly, It is the most useful Object of our Knowledge that can be; and in
comparison of this, all other Knowledge is vain, light and impertinent; and
indeed all other knowledge is valuable upon this single account, by how much it
gives us a manifestation of the Divine Excellencies, and leads and conducts to
the knowledge of Almighty God and his Attributes. If I consider my self in this
Life, there is not a moment which I live, or wherein I have any contentation,
or comfort, or convenience, but all this I have from his Influence and Bounty;
and certainly it concerns me highly to know my Benefactor, from whom I receive
my Good, that I may depend upon him, be thankful unto him, probitiate him, and
make my applications to him for what I want. Again, the wisest men that have
searched after happiness in this Life, though they have missed of the place
where it is to be found, have with great reason placed the best happiness that
can be found on this side Death, either in Virtue and the exercise thereof, or
in Tranquillity of mind, or in both, for they are rarely asunder. Now I may be
an excellent Mathematician, a man well seen in Natural Causes and Effects, an
excellent Statesman and Politician, and yet be without that Goodness that may
denominate me justly a good man, and without that tranquillity of mind that may
make me a happy man: but the true knowledge of God, seriously and really
dwelling and digested in the Soul, makes a man a good man, and a happy man; it
makes a man to love, fear, honor and obey him that he thus knows. A man cannot
truly know him, but he must know that in him, which by a moral necessity
raises in a man those Habits and Dispositions, namely, of Religious Piety
toward God, Justice and Righteousness to men, Sobriety in relation to himself,
for in knowing this God, he knows that these things are well-pleasing to him,
and the contrary displeases him, and he knows him to be a God that knows all
things in the world, and that is a bountiful Lord to them that love and obey
him, and a just Judge of them that despise or forsake him. And as thus it makes
him good, so it makes him happy, by giving him the highest and most firm
Tranquillity of Mind that can be; for he knows that this most gracious and
powerful God orders and governs all the things in the world with irresistible
power, exquisite and infinite wisdom, and abundant goodness, and that he is
well pleased with them that love, fear and obey him; and upon all these
accounts a man rejoices in his Favor, depends upon his Power, Goodness,
Wisdom and All Sufficiency, resignes himself to his Will; is contented and
patient under all conditions, and so does enjoy perfect tranquillity of Mind.

But this is the lowest portion of the usefulness of Divine Knowledge. There is
another Life after this, a Life of eternity, and the influx of the knowledge of
God in relation to this everlasting Life, is infinitely of more moment; it
fills the Soul with a capacity of it, with a sutableness and state of congruity
to it, with those preparations, dispositions and habits that are necessarily
pre-requisite for it, and gives him the fruition and perfect enjoyment of it:
That measure of the knowledge of God that we attain, is the best happiness we
enjoy in this Life, and the perfection of our happiness in the Life to come,
where we shall have a more perfect intellectual Vision of the Glorious God, and
as full a fruition of the Goodness of God, as that elevated Nature which we
shall then have, can be capable of: Then that measure of the knowledge of God
which we here acquire, shall be refined and advanced to a degree of perfection
suitable to the advance that this Intellective Faculty shall then receive; and
that measure of goodness that by the means of that knowledge is wrought in the
Soul in this Life, shall then be improved to a higher degree of excellence, and
rewarded with a weight of Glory.

This Knowledge therefore of all other Knowledge is to be preferred: And in all
our busy inquisitions touching other things, we must remember our selves, as
our Lord remembered Martha in the Gospel. We are busy about many things, and
trouble our selves with many Enquiries; but there is one thing, one Object, and
the knowledge thereof necessary, namely, the knowledge of the glorious God:
This is life eternal, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom
thou have sent, John 17.3. Whatever therefore we endeavor to know, it must be
with subordination to the endeavor after this knowledge: And as far as is
possible, all other knowledge, and desire thereof, should be directed to the
improvement of this Knowledge, or in order to it, and to the end acquirable by
it.

The second profitable and useful Object of our Knowledge, is, the (...)
Knowledge of our selves: And next to the Knowledge of Almighty God, and his
Will, and his Son, this Knowledge of our selves, seems most worthy of our
endeavor: And therefore I have chosen this Subject for my search and
examination at this time: For in this Subject we shall find all those
Qualifications or Requisites beforementioned, that commend any Subject to our
Enquiry or Knowledge.

Of any one visible Subject in the compass of created Nature, there is none
that we know and are acquainted with, that has more worth and excellency next
to the great Creator of all things, and the holy Angels; and that which seems
to be most noble, the Image of the glorious God; namely, the Universe, as it
comprehends the Systeme, Order and Excellencies of all created Beings, digested
into their several Ranks and Orders, and collected and put together into that
glorious Frame of the Universe: But as it is impossible for us, at least in
this Life, by any means to be acquainted with all the Integrals of that
glorious Structure, some are in their nature imperceptible by our Sense;
namely, the Spiritual Beings; yea, and the more refined parts of material
Existences, which by reason of their subtilty, escape our perception: Other
parts thereof are so remote, that although they might in their own nature be
perceived by Sense, yet they are at that remote distance from us, that they
escape our Sight, though the most active Sense we have. And again, the vast
extent of the Universe is such, that though we might successively see the parts
of it, yet it is not physically possible to see it at one view; and
consequently impossible to see at once that beautiful and glorious Image of the
more beautiful and glorious God in its full complement represented in the
entire Frame of the Universe.

Again, we cannot but suppose that there are diverse Ranks of created Beings
intermediate between the glorious God and Man, which far surpass man in
perfection of Nature and Operations; as the glorious Angels, and created
Intelligences; nay possibly there may be material Beings of a more refined
substance, and endued with more advanced Forms than ours. Who knows whether the
Stars are not furnished with intellectual Creatures more excellent for their
Substance and Forms, than we Mortals? Yea, and for ought we know, the Stars
themselves may have Forms appropriate to them, of a more excellent frame than
ours; though, as I have before said, this exceeds our determination.

But although these things may be, yet we know not that they are; and if they
were, yet we are unacquainted with their natures and kinds; only the reality of
existence of Angelical Creatures, and created separate Intelligences, and the
possibility of Nobler Creatures or Natures than ours, residing in some parts of
the Universe, may teach us not to be so over-prizing and over-valuing our
selves, as to think that there are no other Creatures intermediate between God
and Man, of a greater perfection than Man. We see a multitude of Creatures
between us and the lowest rank of Animals specifically and gradually one below
another; and doubtless there are, or may be, many ranks of Beings intermediate
between the glorious God and Mankind, that have specifical gradations one above
another.

But whatever may be said touching these, yet certainly of all the visible
Creatures that we are acquainted with, Man seems to have a very great
Prerogative of excellence. And though he may not bear so fair and so noble an
Image of the Divine Glory as the Universe in its full Systeme and Order, or as
those nobler Beings that are of a Rank and Nature above him, yet certainly he
bears a greater measure of the Divine Image, than any one visible Creature we
know; and so far forth as we know: God himself affirms thus much of Man, that
he created him after his own Image; which he says not of any of the Celestial
Bodies themselves; Genesis 1. Man therefore is a Creature, that of all visible
Creatures that we know, is the noblest.

We may observe in the Creatures of a subordinate rank to us, how the more
inferior and ignoble bear somewhat of the Image of the superior, a kind of
shadow or adumbration of those perfections that in the superior are more
perfect, not only by a gradually, but specifically differing perfection. We see
in some Metals an Analogical resemblance of those vital effects of Vegetables,
growth, digestion and augmentation that is more perfectly in Plants and perfect
Vegetables: We see in Vegetables a resemblance of Appetition, Election,
Generation, and in some of them an imperfect Image of that universal sense of
Feeling which we find more perfectly in Animals: We find in Animals, especially
some of them, as Foxes, Dogs, Apes, Horses and Elephants, not only Perception,
Fantasy and Memory (common to most, if not all Animals) but something of
Sagacity, Providence, Disciplinableness, and a something like unto a Discursive
Ratiocination, bearing an analogy, image or imperfect resemblance of what we
find, though in a degree, specifically more excellent in the humane Nature,
insomuch that Porphiry, Plutarch, Sextus Empericus, Patricius, and some others
have been bold to make reasonableness not the specifical difference of the
Humane Nature; and some latter persons would not have the Definition of a man
to be Animal Rationale, without the addition of Religiosum; wherein he seems
particularly to exceed the Brutal Nature: Although in truth that which seems to
be Reason in the Brutes, is nothing else but the Image and Analogical
representation of that true Reason that is in Man, as the Water-gall is the
Image, Shadow, or weak Representation of the Rainbow.

And we have reason to think that that intellective and volitive power which is
in Man, bears an Image and Representation of the like power that is in Angels
and separate Intelligences, though neither of equality to that perfection that
is in them, either in degree or kind.

And although it were too great presumption to think that there is any thing in
any created Nature, that can bear any perfect resemblance of the
incomprehensible perfection of the Divine Nature (very Being it self not
predicating univocally touching him and any created Being and Intellect, and
Will, as we attribute them to God, are, as we may reasonably think, not only of
a Perfection infinitely transcending any created Intellect and Will, but of
another kind and nature from it) yet though we are not able to comprehend the
excellence of the Divine Nature, we cannot frame unto our selves a conception
of him without the notion of Intellect and Will, though infinitely perfect: It
seems that those two great Faculties in us, bear a weak Analogy with, and
Representation of the Divine Nature. And therefore in that respect, Man is the
Image and Representation of the Glorious God, though the disproportion between
him and this his Image, be infinitely more than the disproportion between
Caesar and his Image upon his Coin, or the Sun in the Heaven, and the Shadow of
him in a Basin of Water.

And in this respect, the Humane Nature is a worthy and noble Object of our
Enquiry and Knowledge, because here is the best visible Image of Almighty God
that we can fully acquaint our selves with, next to him that was the Brightness
of the Fathers Glory, and express Image of his person, Christ Jesus our Lord.

And besides this relative consideration of the Humane Nature, with relation to
those Beings that are above him, Man is an excellent Object of contemplation;
so if we look upon him either absolutely in himself, or with relation to
Creatures of an inferior nature, he is a worthy and noble object of our
contemplation.

If we consider him absolutely in himself, he is an Object worthy of our
contemplation; he is admirable in excellent composure and figuration of his
Body, and in every part apart, and in the whole structure put together,
admirable in the Nature, Faculties, and Excellence of his Soul, admirable in
the conjunction of both together, admirable in all the operations of Life,
Sense, Intellect and Will, which he exercises in this state of conjunction and
union, admirable in his production and generation, and admirable as to the
condition of his Soul in its state of disunion and separation. The speculations
concerning him, are all full of great variety, curiosity and worth, because the
Subject it self is such.

If we consider him with relation to other created Beings of an inferior
nature; First, he comprehends all the excellencies that are in the inferior
ranks of Being, and that for the most part in a more excellent and perfect
manner: The Life that is in Vegetables, and the operations of that Life; the
Life and Sense that is in Sensibles, and the excellent operations of them, all
Sensation, Perception, Memory, Fantasy, Nutrition; with its several process,
the faculties of Appetition, Passion, Generation; The disposition of Parts and
Organs that are best in any Animal are to be found in the disposition, order
and texture of the Body of man; and wherein it differs, it differs with much
advantage and prelation over the structure of the Bodies of Animals; so that
the knowledge of Man gives us a full account of the excellence of others,
either Animals or Vegetables: He that well knows Man, knows whatsoever is
excellent in the Animal or Vegetable Nature. Secondly, Besides these
Excellencies common either to the Vegetable or Animal Nature, and Man, there
are certain excellencies superadded to the Humane Nature, certain specifical
prelations in his Body, the Structure, Posture, Beauty and Majesty thereof,
certain specifical excellencies and usefulness in some of his Organs, the
disposition of his Hand, Brain, Nerves and other Integrals: Again, the
specifical Excellencies of his Soul in those great and admirable Faculties of
Intellect and Will; Of all which in their due time: So that he that is well
acquainted with, and knows Man, knows whatsoever is excellent in the Vegetable
and Animal Nature, and much more.

So that upon the whole account, we have a Noble and Worthy Object of our
Contemplations, in the contemplation of Man.

2. In the contemplation of Man we have an Object that does not overmuch
confound us with its excessive multiplicity; and yet it does not satiate, nor
proves ungrateful for want of sufficient variety: Touching the former of these,
it has been before observed, that he that goes about to make the whole
Universe and all the several parts thereof the business of his Enquiry, as he
shall find that there are many things therein that he cannot come at, or make
any discovery of, so among those parts of the Universe that are objected to a
greater discovery of our Senses, the multiplicity is so great, that a man of
the most equal and firm constitution, must despair of Life enough to make a
satisfactory, particular and deep enquiry into them: But the Object in hand is
but one; it is Man, and the Nature of Man.

I confess it is true, that he that shall make it his business to take in as it
were, by way of a common place, all those things that may be taken up under
this consideration, and follow all those Lines that concenter in this, or
almost any other the most single piece of Contemplation, will make this Subject
large enough; and upon that account may be drawn in almost all things
imaginable: We find in the consideration of the Humane Nature, a Substance, a
Body, a Spirit: We find the several Objects of his Senses, Light, Color,
Sound, and infinite more: He that upon this account will take in the distinct
and large considerations of these and the like Appendices to Humane Nature, in
their full amplitude, will have a large Plain, that will more than exhaust his
Life, before he come to the Subject it self which he designs. Again, there is
an infinite multitude of collateral considerations that yet are relative to
man; hither comes all the considerations of Theology, Physic, Natural
Philosophy, Politics, the considerations of Speech, Government, Laws, of
History, Topography, of Arts, of those Sciences that relate to the Senses, of
Optics, Music, and infinite more; for all these have a relation to Man, and
are like so many Lines drawn from several Objects that some way relate to him,
and concenter in him; and he that shall make it his business to follow all
those Lines to their utmost, shall make the contemplation of Man almost as
large as the contemplation of the whole Universe.

When I say therefore the contemplation of Man is the contemplation of a single
Object, I mean, when it is kept into those single bounds of Man in his own
specifical Nature, and under the physical contemplation of his Nature, Parts
and Faculties, as they are appropriate unto him. And then it is a Subject that
we may possibly make some progress in its contemplation and conception within
the period of the time, that by the ordinary time of Life, and the permission
of necessary avocations, a man may employ in such a contemplation.

And yet secondly, though in this restrained notion, the Subject seems to be
restrained and single, we shall find it no very narrow Subject; but there will
be business enough in it to employ our Faculty, and to take up that time, which
either more necessary, or more imporunate thoughts or employments will allow
us; and variety enough to entertain our thoughts with delight, contentation and
usefulness.

3. The Third Commendation of this Object to our contemplation, is this, that
therein we have more opportunity of certainty and true knowledge of the Object
enquired into, than we can have in any other Object, at least of equal use,
worth and value: Many excellent things there are in Nature, which were very
well worth our Knowledge, but yet, as has been said, either by reason of their
remoteness from us, unaccessibleness to them, subtilty and imperceptibleness to
us, either are not at all suspected to be, or are not so much as within any of
our Faculties to apprehend or discover what they are; or in case we have any
conception that there may be something of that kind, yet our Notions touching
them, are but products of Imagination and Fantasy, or at best, very faint,
weak, ungrounded and uncertain conjectures, and such as we can never prove to
the satisfaction of others or our selves.

Our Sense is the best evidence that we have in Nature, touching the existence
of corporeal things without us, and where that is not possibly to be exercised,
we are naturally at a great uncertainty whether things are, or what they are.
Now the Understanding perceives or understands things by the assistance of
Sense in a double manner. 1. It either perceives them immediately, as being
immediately objected to, and perceptible to the Sense; as I perceive the Sun
and the Stars by my sight; I find that there is a Body hard or gentle, or hot
or cold, by my Touch; and accordingly my Understanding judges of them: Or
secondly, though the Sense perceive not the Object immediately, yet it does
represent certain sensible effects or operations; and though by those effects
or operations the Understanding does not immediately conclude anything else to
be, but what the Sense thus feels or sees; yet the Understanding sometimes by
ratiocination, and sometimes by the Memory does infer and conclude something
else to be besides what the Sense immediately represents either as the cause or
the concomitant of it, and does as forcibly and truly conclude the thing to be,
and also sometimes what the nature of that cause or concomitant is, as if it
were seen by the Eye, or felt by the Hand.

I do not see, nor by any Sense perceive the quiet, undisturbed Air; yet
because I do see that a Bladder, that was before flaccid, does swell by the
reception of that which I see not, I do as truly and certainly conclude that
there is such a subtle Body which we call Air, as if I could see it as plain as
I see the Water: I do not see the Animal or Vital Spirits, neither can they, by
reason of their subtilty and volatileness, be discovered immediately to the
Sense; yet when I see that forcible motion of the Nerves and Muscles, I do as
certainly conclude, there are such Instruments which the Soul uses for the
performance of those motions, as if I saw them: I come into a Room where there
is no visible or tangible Fire, yet I find by my Sense the Smoke ascending, I
do as forcibly conclude that Fire is or has been near, as if I saw it; because
my sensible experience and memory tells me they are concomitant. Upon the same
account it is, that when my Sense and sensible experience shows me that these
and these effects there are, and that they are successively generated and
corrupted, though my eye sees not that God that first made those things, yet my
Sense having showed me these sensible Objects, and the state and vicisstude of
them, my Understanding does truly conclude that all this vicissitude of things
must terminate in a first cause of things, with as great evidence and
conviction, as if my Sense could immediately see or perceive him: So that in
the ordinary way of Nature, and without the help of divine Revelation, all our
certainty of things natural, begins at our Senses; namely, the immediate sense
of the things themselves, or the sense of those effects and operations which
after by the help of the Understanding are carried up to the discovery of
things not perceptible by Sense immediately.

Now there may be many things in Nature unto which we can have neither of these
accessions of Sense: How many Stars are now discovered by the Telescope, which
were never before known, because not perceived by Sense? And how many more
there may be, which are not visible to us by that help, we cannot yet know till
that discovery; We cannot know what the extent of the Universe is, whether
there be any Worlds without the compass of this; whether the Heavenly Bodies
are inhabited, and with what Creatures: We cannot know the Nature,
Constitution, Faculties of created and separate Intelligences, nor the manner
of their Ubi, Motion, Intellection, mutual Intercourse, or detection of their
Minds: These things are out of the reach of our Sense either mediately, or
immediately; and consequently without the help of Divine Revelation, we can
never upon a natural account, come to any certainty in them; or the most we can
otherwise know, is by considering the reflexed acts of our Understanding,
whereby we know many acts of our own minds and Soul, which are not perceptible
to our external Senses; and upon that account, we may think that (...) their
perception may be something analogical; But Man is an Object of greatest
vicinity to himself, and has thereby, and by other contributions, the best
opportunity to know and understand himself with the greatest certainty and
evidence.

And yet it cannot be denied, that notwithstanding this great proximity of Man
to himself, yea, and notwithstanding the many and great Essays, Attempts,
Enquiries and Observations that have been made in all successions of Ages, by
men of excellent Parts, Learning and Industry, we still remain, and are like
still to remain ignorant of many things of importance concerning our selves:
The great and wise God whose Glory it is to conceal a matter, having lodged
many things in the Humane Nature, and Fabric, and Constitution thereof so
secretly and so closely, that notwithstanding the Experience and Observation of
near 6000 years, and the search and industry of the best Judgments in all Ages,
and the close proximity of Man to himself, there are very many things in our
Nature, whereof we neither can, and probably never shall be able to give any
account to our selves or others, with any evident, nay with any tolerable
certainty; as if the Divine Wisdom meant hereby to give to the Children of Men
an instance to keep them humble, that cannot find out the certainty of what
they hourly most intimately converse withal; and an indication of his own
profound and infinite Wisdom, that can thus keep secret those things, which in
regard of their proximity to us, we have great opportunity to know.

And of this nature are many things which we know to be, but we cannot give our
selves any sufficient explication of the manner or reason of them. We are
certain we have a vital, active Principle in us, by which we see, understand,
remember; which we call the Soul. But whence that Soul comes, or how, and when,
and in what manner it is united to the Body, whether it be extended with the
Body, or indivisible, and in every point of the Body, how and in what manner it
exercises its nobler acts of Intellection and Volition, or how far forth it
stands in need of the Organs actually to exert any of those operations; or how
far forth it does or may exert them without it: how or by what means the
Species not only of sensible Objects, but even of Notions of the Mind are
preserved in the Memory without confusion and dissipation, notwithstanding
lapse of time, and intervention of infinite variety of Objects: whether it be
the same individual principle that exercises the acts of Intellection, and
likewise of Sense and Vegetation; and if it be, what become of these Faculties
subservient to a temporal Life, in the state of separation of the Soul: where
it is that the exercise of Sense is performed; whether in the Brain, or by the
Soul, by the mediation of the Spirits in the extremity of the Nerves; and if
the former, how the Species of Visibles are carried through those dark Caverns
between the Organ and Cerebellum, supposed to be the Seat of the common Sense.
These and many more difficulties, scarce explicable with any sufficient
certainty, do occur in the little Shop of the Fabric of Humane Nature. We must
not therefore think, that because of this nearness to our selves, all the
Phenomenon of our Nature can be rendered as evidently explicable as we do or may
understand the Fabric of our Hand by Anatomical Dissection.

But though this vicinity of our selves to our selves, cannot give us the full
prospect of all the Intrigues of our Nature, yet we have thereby, and by other
opportunities, much more advantage to know our selves, than to know other
things without us, and by that opportunity of knowing of our selves, to know
the truth or falsehood, or analogy of very many things without us, which
otherwise could not be so well known or explicated.

1. We have hereby an opportunity to know the Constitutions, Frame and Order of
our Bodies; It is true, the great advance of the practice and skill of Anatomy
has laid open to ocular inspection the Fabric of the Bodies, as well of
Brutes and Birds, as Men; and therein they seem to be equally obvious to our
knowledge: But a Brute or a Man are another thing, when they are alive, from
what they are when dead: Anatomy can give us the Position, Frame, Situation,
Figure and connection of all the several Integrals of the Body of Man or Beast;
but it is the living Man's observation of himself, that must give account of
those Vital motions that are in the Body when living; as the Pulsations of the
Heart, the Circulation of the Blood, the Communication of the Parts, the
Congruity or Disagreement between my Nature and other things variously
qualified: The Humor that separates, divides, attenuates and digests the
Nourishment; the several exertions of the several Organs relating to their
several Functions, the things that impede or advance the vital or sensible
operations in a man, what impressions are made upon the Blood and Spirits by
the several passions of the Mind, what things increase or advance the Spirits,
what disorder or discompose them; the immediate and agil subservience of the
Spirits to the Empire of the Mind or Soul. These and infinite more touching the
Body, are discoverable by Observation, and by no other Observation, so well as
by a man's Observation of himself.

2. We have hereby an opportunity to know much more of the Nature, Operations
and other things relating to our Souls, than we can touching other things or
Natures. There has been much Dispute among Learned men, concerning the manner
of the Intellection of Spirits and Intelligences; and by others, touching the
knowledge of Brutes, touching their remembering Faculty, whether they have a
kind of Discursive Faculty, which some call Reason; whether they do prescind or
abstract touching their Voices; how far they are significant, and whether they
intentionally signify by them, how far their Animal motions are spontaneous,
or merely mechanical, and which are of one kind, which of another; or whether,
as Des Carts would have it, all are purely Mechanical.

Many vain things have been asserted by men that would be counted eminent Wits;
but without debating in this place the truth of any of these things, it is no
marvel if we are to seek what are the manner of these operations of abstract
Spirits or Brutes; we cannot know them, unless we were in them, so as to be
acquainted with their inward motions, or at least, unless they had some such
way of communicating their Perceptions and Phantasms unto us, as we have to our
selves, or one to another: But whatever can be known of them, we may easily by
inspecting and observing our selves, know much concerning our own Souls and the
operations of them: We may know that we have a principle within, which we do,
as it were, feel distinct from our Bodies, whereby we think, and we know we
think; whereby we do discursively, and by way of ratiocination deduce one thing
from another; whereby we abstract, divide and define, whereby we have notions
of things which were never derived to us by Sense, as the Substance or the
Substratum of those Accidents of things which are derived to us by our Sense;
whereby we do correct the errors of our Sense, and judge otherwise touching
things represented, than the Sense represents them. The Sense represents the
Sun no bigger than a Bushel; there is somewhat within us tells, and that truly,
that it is bigger than the Earth, because we find Distance diminishes the
appearance of Bodies: Our Sense tells us that the representation in the
Looking-Glass, has all the motions, the bulk, figure, color of that corporeal
Moles it represents, and represents the same under all the renditions of a
Body, as it does the thing it self reflected; but there is that within tells
us, and that truly, that it is but a mere shadow, and no real Substratum under
that appearance of any such corporeal Moles: We do most certainly know that
there is that within us, that does exercise a rational Empire over our passions
and sensual appetite; that believes, hopes and acts in order to ends that
respect another Life than that of Sense, We do find, as it were, the principal
seats of these operations, we feel our selves to understand in our Head, and
that we will, and resolve, and love, and hate, and pity in our Heart, almost as
plainly as we find our selves see with our Eyes, or hear with our Ears: I feel
the propensions and inclinations of my Mind as really as I feel my Body to be
cold or warm. I find in my self that this inward principle does exert many of
its actions intentionally and purposely; I resolve and cast about to remember
things that I would remember; I cast about for all circumstances that may
revive my Memory or Reminiscence: When I command any Muscle of my most remote
Limb to move, it does it in an instant; in the moment I will it; and hereby I
understand the motions of my Mind are no way Mechanical, though the motion of
the Muscle be such; I move, ride, run, or speak, because I will do it, without
any other physical impulse upon me, and when I see many analogal motions in
Animals, which though I cannot call them voluntary, yet I see them spontaneous;
I have reason to conclude that these in their principle are not simply
mechanical, although a Mouse-trap, or Architas his Dove moved mechanically,
from an artificial principle. And because I find that the remotest Muscle in my
Body moves at the command of my Will, and since I see the energy of my Soul in
every particle of my Body, though not using intellectual actions in every part,
yet using some that are imperate, as Local Motion; some that are natural and
involuntary, as the Pulse of my Heart, the Circulation of my Blood, my
Digestion, Sanguification, Distribution Augmentation: And because at the same
time I understand, consider, determine, speak, walk, digest, and exercise, as
well intelectual, imperate and involuntary actions, and all from the same vital
Principle, though operating differently in several Faculties and Operations: I
therefore experimentally feel that my Soul, though it has the residence of the
exercise of his nobler Faculties in my Head and Heart, yet it pervades my whole
Body, and exercises Vital Offices, proportionate to the Exigences or Use of
every part, the Flesh, the Bones, the Blood, the Spirits, Nerves, Veins,
Arteries, Seminal Parts; and this I feel to be through my whole Body, and if I
find any part of my Body be so mortified as it becomes like a rotten Branch of
a Tree, whether it be Nerve or Joint, whereby that principle cannot communicate
it self to it, it putrifies and corrupts, and is not participant of the motion
or influence derived from my Soul, because it is now no longer in it to quicken
it. And as I find my whole Body the Province or Territory of my Soul; in which
it universally acts according to the different organization and use of every
part, so I find that my Soul, as to its substantial existence, is confined
within the precints of it, and does not physically act without it; and by all
this I learn, that my Soul, if it be a Spirit, may be circumscribed within the
compass of a determinate space, that though it be a Spirit, yet its operations
while it is in the Body, may be, if not altogether, yet in a great measure,
organical. I understand, remember and reason better in my health, than in my
sickness; and better in my riper years, than when I was a Child, and had my
organical Parts less digested and inconcocted: And though it be a Spirit, yet I
find it is no inconvenience to have some analogy, at least of co-extension,
with my Body. And although it may be a simple Spirit, and univocally and
essentially the same, as well in my Toe, as my Head, yet according to the
variety of the disposition and organization of the several parts of my
organical Body, it exercises variety of operations; the same Soul that
understands in the Brain, and sees in the Eye, and hears in the Ear, neither
understands, nor sees, nor hears in the Fingers, but moves and feels.

These and many such Perceptions I have touching that principle of Life, Sense
and Intellection within me; and of these I have as great a certainty as
possibly I can have of any thing in the world. First, Although I cannot
immediately have any immediate sight of my Soul, or of its immediate
operations, or internal actings, yet I sensibly see and feel the effects
thereof with as great an evidence and demonstration that it is such, as if I
saw the Principle it self, and its immediate operations. I sensibly see and
feel that my Hand or Foot moves upon the command of that principle within me:
And when that principle is removed by a total deprivation, as Death; or by a
partial deprivation, as in a mortified Limb or Member; or by a temporary
suspension, as in an Apoplexy or Deliquium Animi; I am sure there is no such
motion, because that principle is absent in Death, or its operation suspended
in case of such Diseases: It was therefore a principle that was within,
distinct from my Body, that while it was there, exerted this Empire, and was
obeyed in it. Secondly, In those actings of my Soul, which are not in
themselves perceptible by any sensible effect, yet I have as firm and certain
an evidence that they are such, as if I had a sensible perception of them: When
I think, or understand, or remember, or abstract, or divide, or define, or
purpose, or will, it is most certain these effects or intrinsic operations of
my mind are not possibly perceptible by my sight, or hearing, or taste, or
smell, or feeling; they are objects of such a nature, that fall not under any
perception of any of those Senses; yet I am as certain, if not much more
certain, that I do think, or remember, or abstract, or reason, or resolve, or
will, as that I hear, or see, or feel; and I do as certainly know before I
write, what I am now writing, that I think or reason touching the things I am
writing, or that I resolve or purpose to write them, as I am certain that I
have written them when I have written them; for the motions of my mind are as
certainly obvious to a perception in me answerable to them (which I call the
reflex act of the Soul, or the turning of the intellectual eye inward upon its
own actions) as the motions or rather passions of my Sense are certainly
obvious to my Sense; I see the Object, and I perceive that I see it: And
therefore though he was a little too positive that said, Ego cogito, was, as it
were, primum cognitum, yet certainly herein he was irrefragably true, that
there cannot be any thing more certain and evident to a man that thinks, than
that he does think; and yet that Thinking is not perceptible by any of our five
Senses. Thirdly, But there is yet a farther opportunity of very much certainty
in that knowledge that a man may have of himself, and of those things
concerning himself; by that conversation, by the help of speech or signs that
he has, or may have with other men. Man only, of all visible Creatures, having
this privilege of communicating his thoughts and conceptions by instituted
signs of speech or writing; and by this a man acquires a threefold superadded
certainty of what he may or does know concerning himself: Namely,

1. He thereby knows that there is a specifical Identity between him and other
men, and that they agree in one common rational Nature; for by mutual speech we
find that we have both alike an intellective, discursive Faculty, as I do
reason, so does he; as I divide, define, abstract, purpose, determine, will, so
does he use the like operations of his Mind; and although oftentimes interest
and misapprehension make us differ in our conclusion, yet he endeavors to
maintain his Conclusion by the like method of Reason and discursive
Ratiocination as I do; and most times when prejudice and misapprehensions are
removed, that which seems reasonable to him, seems so to me; whereby it appears
that we concenter in one common Nature, and that the Principle of Reason and
Reasonable Soul is common to us both, and that we meet in one common rational
Nature.

2. He likewise knows that as they concenter in one common rational Nature, so
every one of that Species, has yet an individual Principle of his own, that
individuates, and personally discriminates one from another: For till we
mutually communicate our thoughts by instituted signs, he knows not what I
think or purpose, nor I what he thinks or purposes.

3. This adds a certainty to me that I am not deceived in those reflections
that I make upon my self, and the collections I make from them; for as I do
find I think, I reason, abstract, divide, define, purpose, so I find by the
help of Speech and Signs that he has the very like internal operations; and as
I do find that those do arise from a principle different and distinct from that
moles Corporea which I have, so I find that he has the same perception of the
original of these internal operations, and attributes them to a Principle in
him distinct from the Body: So that if I might have any imaginable doubt of
those reflexed perceptions which I have touching those appropriate operations
of my own Mind, I am confirmed in them, because I find the like perceptions in
all the men I converse with. And thus far touching the third Commendable in the
search of our selves, namely, Certainty and Evidence.

4. The fourth advantage of this subject and the knowledge thereof is, the
profit and usefulness thereof: Next to the knowledge of Almighty God, and our
Blessed Savior, and the Sacred Scriptures, there is not any subject in the
World that is more necessary and useful to be known than the Humane nature,
with those incidents that do necessarily fall into that consideration; and of
all the knowledge that relates to man, there is nothing of greater moment or
use to be known than Man under the Physical notion of his Body and Soul, and
both united together. And the usefulness of this Consideration distributes it
self into these two kinds; Usefulness in reference to Speculation or Knowledge,
and Usefulness in relation to Practice or Exercise.

1. Touching the Speculative Usefulness there is this to be said, that there is
in the contemplation of Man a means of discovery and explication of very great
and momentous truths. And although possibly the very same truths may be
elicited, and in some measure explicated by parallel Phenomenon in the
contemplation of Animals, yet they are more clearly and eminently evidenced in
the contemplation of Man, who, by how much the more excellent and noble a
Creature he is above Brutes, and by how much he is the more observable to
himself than they can be, by to much the more useful and excellent is the
knowledge of himself.

Now these Speculative truths which I shall choose to instance in shall be these.

1. The due contemplation of the Humane nature does by a necessary connection
and chain of Causes, carry us up to the unavoidable acknowledgement of the
Deity; because it carries every thinking man to an original of every successive
individual thereof by a course of generation, till it come to a common Parent
of the whole Species, the immediate workmanship of the Glorious God.

2. Consequently, it gives every considering man a sound and full conviction
that the efficient of this first Parent of Mankind, is a most wise, most
powerful and beneficent Being. For the true prospect of the Humane Fabric in
its essential and integral parts, in the fabric of his Body, and the faculties
and operation of his Soul must needs convince any man of ordinary reason, that
can observe but clear and evident consequences, that the Efficient that first
made this first root of Mankind was not only an intelligent Being, but a Being
of most admirable Power, Wisdom, and Goodness; for such this effect does
necessarily declare its Efficient to be.

3. As the contemplation of the Origination of the Species of Mankind gives us
an assurance of the Existence of the first Cause, and of his Attribute of
Wisdom, Power, and Goodness; so the contemplation of the secondary origination
of Mankind, or the production of the Individuals by generation gives us an
evidence of the like power, wisdom, and goodness of God, and a little Emblem of
the Divine Power in the Creation of the World. Any man that attentively
considers the progress of the generative production of mankind, will find, that
this goodly and noble Creature called Man has its gradual formation and
complement from a small, almost imperceptible vital principle, which by the
Divine institution is endued with such a regular, orderly, and unerring power,
that from most inconsiderable and unlikely materials builds up gradually the
goodly frame of the Body, clothes it self with it, and exercises an admirable
Economy over it: And this it does not by such a kind of choice, deliberation
and forecast as the Watch-maker makes his Watch; for as yet this vital rational
principle does not exercise an actual ratiocination or discursive deliberation,
neither has those organs of Heart, and Brain, and Spirits, and Vessels (by the
help of which we exercise our Acts of Reason) till it has made and framed
them. And yet this admirable Frame is immediately wrought by this little
particle which we call the Soul, and molded, formed and perfected with an
incomparable and unerring dexterity, skill, elegance, and curiosity more and
greater than the most exquisite Artist can show in the most polished piece of
Artificial work.

Now if this little spark of Life that in this work of generation and formation
is Vicarius Dei, the Instrument of his power and wisdom; if this little
imperceptible Archeus is endowed by the Divine power, wisdom, and institution
with this admirable, regular, and effective power out of so small,
inconsiderable and unlikely materials to mould up and fashion the goodly
Fabric of Humane Nature, and to perfect it for a complete habitation for it
self, wherein to exercise its most excellent economy and operations; if this
Pusillus divinae lucis radius, ex tantilla and tam improbabili materiae
particula mirandam naturae humanae fabricam tam affabre, eleganter, and
inerrabunde formaverit. If we find in so small a particle of a created Being
this admirable energy, why should we make a question whether that God that at
first gave this admirable energy to the Soul to frame so goodly a piece out of
matter so near to nothing, should not have power to create a World of matter
out of nothing.

2. Again, since I do see as plainly as I see my Paper that I now write upon,
that this fabrication of the Humane Body is the immediate work of a Vital
principle that prepares, disposes, digesteth, distributeth and forms the
first rudiments of the Humane nature when it is no bigger than a little Bean;
that afterward gradually augmenteth and perfecteth it to the goodly complement
of a Man: And the same thing I see in the first rudiments of all generations as
well vegetable as animal. It does give to me (notwithstanding all the bold
confidence and conjectures of Epicurus, and those that follow him as far as for
shame they durst) I say it does give me not only an undeniable evidence, but an
exemplar in analogy and explication, that the coalition of the goodly frame of
the Universe was not the product of chance, or fortuitous concourse of
particles of matter, nor the single effect of matter and motion; but of the
most wise and powerful ordination of the most wise and glorious God, who thus
ordered the World, and instituted that Rule, Order, or Law which we call Nature
to be the Law of its future being and operation; if I see that the
Coagmentation of a Man, nay of a Chicken or a grain of Wheat is not by
casualty, but the wise and powerful God has committed the Coagmentation,
Disposition, and Formation thereof to their Seminal Principles, tanquam
Vicariis and substitutis Divini Numinis Instrumentis, as it were to Vicegerents
and subservient Instruments of the Deity: I have no reason to think that the
goodly Frame of the Universe was the production of Chance, or Accident, or bare
Matter, or its casual motion or modification thereof; but that the same was the
Contrivance and Work of the Great, Wise, and Glorious God, as a Work in a great
measure answerable to the Excellency of such an Efficient.

3. Again, I find a sort of Men that pretend to much severity of Wit, and would
be thought too wise to be imposed upon by Credulity, where they think they have
not evidence enough of Sense or Reason to convince them; that would be thought
to be Men above the common rate; these have gone about, as far as they durst,
to exclude God out of the World, and pity those Men as troubled with Credulity,
and of weak Parts, that believe the Regiment of Divine Providence; a business
that they think, or pretend to think may be made use of to impose upon the
weaker part of Mankind, think it a Fiction, and such as is utterly inexplicable
to the satisfaction of a reasonable and impartial judgment. Now the due
contemplation of the Humane Nature, and that Economy that the Active Principle
in it ordinarily called the Soul does exercise therein to my Understanding,
gives me both a reasonable evidence of the Divine Providence governing the
World, and a fair explication of it to me.

I mean not in this place to examine the truth or falsity of the Plurality of
Subordinate Forms, or whether there be two or three distinct Substantial Forms
or Souls in Man, whereby he is Vivens, Sentiens, and Intelligens; for they are
proper for a farther Examination in their proper place: But at present I do
suppose, that that one Soul, whereby Man is constituted in Esse Hominis, is the
single Principle of all his operations of Life, Sense, and Intellection;
because, as to this purpose which I am now upon, it comes all to one whether
there be a Unity or Plurality of Subordinate Forms, or of Souls in the Humane
Nature.

I say therefore, in the Humane Fabric we may observe two kinds of Forms, if I
may so call them; the one, the Forma Corporis, as such whereby it has those
Properties or Operations which are common to Bodies of the like make or
composition; whereby it is weighty and descends as other Bodies, it is figured,
it has dimensions and qualities common to other Bodies; it has in it some
parts more active and fiery, others more passive and waterish, or earthy; it
has its tendencies to corruption and dissipation: And though after the
separation of the Soul from the Body, it perchance loses some of those
particular Qualities, Figurations and Properties that it had before, yet it
retains many of them; for many of these Proprieties of a Body as such, do not
depend upon the Specifical Form of the Humane Nature as such: Again, there is
in this Body a certain Active Specifical Form, whereby it is constituted in
Esse Hominis, which has in it, and does communicate to the Body certain
operations specifical to it; by this he exercises those operations which
either flow from or are communicated by that Form, as Life, Sense,
Intellection, Volition, and the like: And though Life and Sense be common to
Man and Brutes, and their operations in many things alike, yet by this Form he
lives the Life of a Man and not of a Brute, and has the Sense of a Man and not
of a Brute: For there is no such thing as Animal, or Vivens, not determined
unto some particular Species, as there is no such thing as a Man not determined
in some individual: For Universals are but Notions and Entia Rationis, having
their existence only in the understanding power, and not in reality.

And these Operations and Faculties of Humane Life, Humane Sense, and Humane
Understanding and Volition flow not from the corporeal Moles, but from some
other active regent Principle that resides in the Body, and governs it whiles
it lives, which we call the Soul. And therefore although the corporeal Moles
after some kinds of Deaths retain the same bulky Integrals, the same Figure,
Color, and many other accidents; yet the Soul being removed, the Faculties and
Operations of Life, Sense, and Intellection cease from that Moles corporea, and
are no longer in it.

This Principle of Life, Sense, and Intellection in Man called the Soul, has
the Body as its Province and Districtus, wherein it exercises these Faculties
and Operations: and we shall find the Actions which are performed by it in the
Body are of three kinds or natures; 1. Some are immanent, and not terminated
immediately in any external or corporeal action. 2. Some are transient and
spontaneous, terminating in the Body, or some parts or motions thereof. 3. Some
transient, but involuntary, and exercised and terminated in or upon the Body.

These seem to be the several kinds of Actions of the Soul, at least relating
to the Regiment and Oeconomical Government of the Soul upon the Body.

1. The internal and immanent Faculties and Acts of the reasonable Soul
(besides those of Common Sense, Fantasy, Memory, Passion and Appetite, common
to Men and inferior Animals) are Intellect and Will; and the proper Acts of
the Intellect are Intellection, Deliberation, and Determination or Decision:
The proper Acts of the Will are Volition, Nolition, Choice, Purpose or
Resolution, and Command in relation to Subordinate Faculties: And although
there be many actings both of the Intellect and Will that are relative to other
things or objects than what immediately concern the Microcosm it self; yet the
principal part of that analogical Providence that the Soul exercises in
relation to the Microcosm or Humane Compositum are Intellection, Deliberation,
and Determination in the Understanding; and Choice, Volition, Nolition, and
Purpose in the Will; and these do or should regularly precede all those
imperate Acts of the Soul that relate to the Compositum: Before I write, or
speak, or go a journey, or eat, or any the like action, there is the
deliberation of the Understanding, whether I shall do this action; the decision
of the Understanding, that it is fit to be done; the choice of the Will to do
it, the purpose of the Will that it shall be done: And although many times the
distinction of these several procedures of the Soul do not always appear
distinct, especially in sudden or ordinary actions, which seem to have but one
act antecedent to the thing done, namely, the willing of it to be done; yet in
actions of weight and importance all these have their distinct order and
procedure. For although in the most incomprehensible and perfect Will of
Almighty God there is no such succession of procedure; yet in the operations of
the rational Soul that is linked to the Body, there is ordinarily that
successive procedure of those immanent acts of the Soul that relate to any
thing to be done. This therefore is the first part of that analogical
Providence that the Soul exercises in relation to the Body, namely,
deliberation or counsel, and decision in the Intellect; and choice and purpose
in the Will.

2. The next Act, which immediately succceds Purpose, is the Command that is
given by the volitive Faculty of the Soul, and the Execution thereof: and
herein are considerable, First, The Power commanding, which is the Will, now
determined by purpose or resolution. Secondly, The things to which these
commands relate, or the Object of them; which in relation to the Body is in
effect nothing but motion of the Spirits, Nerves, Muscles, parts of the Body,
or the entire Compositum; by virtue of this command the Muscles, the Hand, the
Eye, the Tongue perform those imperate commands of the Will; I do not digest,
sanguifie, nor my Heart move, nor my Blood circulate, nor my Meat digest by any
immediate command of my Will; but I eat, I drink, I move my Eye, my Hand, my
Muscles, my whole Body in pursuance of this command of my Will. Thirdly, The
executive Instrument of this command mediately are my Nerves and Muscles, but
immediately those subtle, invisible and forcible Engines which we call the
Animal Spirits; these being the most subtle parts in Nature, and parts of
matter subtilized, next in degree of purity to that Soul that commands them,
are in their nature proper, fit, and suitable to be the first recipients of the
Empire of the Soul; they are the nimblest, agil, strongest Instruments, fittest
to be executive of the commands of the Soul; they are a middle nature between
the Soul and the Body, the nexus animae to the Body; and these subtle
Messengers speedily dispatch themselves through the Nerves to the Muscles,
which are by these Spirits and the native Indoles that is in them and the exact
texture of them fitted to move those Integrals of the Body to which they serve;
and as the Spirits shot through the Nerves are the first and immediate
Instruments of the Soul in its imperate acts, so the Muscles are as it were the
Instruments of the Spirits, or the remote Instruments of these imperate
motions: And by this means the Soul has the actual imperium and command of all
those motions of the Body which are spontaneous or capable of being commanded
by the volitive Power of the Soul; it is by this the Eyelid opens or shuts, the
Eye is converted to this or that object, the Lungs are intended or remitted,
the Tongue speaks, the Hand strikes or moves, the Foot walks, the Mouth opens
or shuts, and all those spontaneous motions subject to the Empire of the Will
are performed: And though I choose my Instance in the subject in hand, yet the
like imperate motions are in Brutes and Animals, though not by the Empire of
Will, which they have not, yet by a Faculty that moves in many things
spontaneously in some analogy and adumbration of the Empire of the Will in Man,
but incomparably below it both in perfection and freedom.

3. Again, there be very many Operations, that although they flow from this
active Principle, yet they are not acts that are imperate by the Will, but they
are in a manner natural and unvoluntary; and therefore I call them sometimes
Involuntary, sometimes Natural, and they are very many and various; such are
many of the acts of Sense, especially the external. Though I do by the Empire
of my Will direct the Motion or Acies of my Organ to this or that Object, yet
my Eye, my Ear, my Touch, my Smell, my Taste exercise their office of perception
upon the Object duly applied to them, without any act of my Will commanding
them so to do when they are joined to their Object: So my Heart moves, my Blood
circulates, my Meat digests, my Body is augmented, without any intention of
mind to assist their actings. So if there be an ill humor in my Body, or a
wound in my Hand or Leg, the Vital energy of my Soul thrusts out the Balsamical
humor of my Blood to heal the latter, and uses all that Economy that is
proper for the expulsion or subduing of the former; sometimes by pustulae or
eruptions in the flesh, sometimes by sweat, sometimes by urine, sometimes by
seige; and all this it does in the most congruous way imaginable; so that the
best Physicians have not better direction ordinarily in their applications,
than to follow Nature in those motions. And all this is done most exquisitely,
and yet without any deliberation or rational decision of the Understanding or
Empire of the Will in relation to those Natural motions. I shall only therefore
observe concerning these Involuntary motions, 1. That though they are without
any dictamen Rationis, yet they are done in a way of as great congruity to its
end, as if they were directed by the wisest counsel of the wisest Soul; and it
is reason good it should, for it is a standing and most wise Law of exercise
planted by the most wise God in this Vital Principle for the regiment of the
Body: And therefore though it be not directed by deliberation of the Humane
Intellect, or choice of Humane Will, it is settled, contrived, implanted and
directed there by a higher Wisdom, even the Wisdom of the most wise God: And
this indeed is the reason of that Excellency that is seen in Instincts, even of
Brutes, and the Formative process in generation; that they so aptly and
excellently attain their Ends: namely, because these Instincts and Powers are
the immediate Impressions, Signatures and Energies placed in them by the Great
and Glorious God, whose very foolishness, as the Apostle tells us (namely the
seemingly vilest and lowest Impressions of his Wisdom) is wiser than men. 2.
The second thing to be observed herein, is, That those Natural and Involuntary
actings are not done as the former, by deliberation and formal command, yet
they are done by the virtue, energy, and influx of the Soul, and the
instrumentality of the Spirits as well as those Imperate acts before spoken of;
wherein we see the immediate empire of the Soul: That Soul that moves my hand,
my tongue, my foot by way of express command and empire; digests, sanguifies,
carnifies, excerts and does all those Involuntary operations by it influence
and presence: remove but the Soul, there is no more digestion, sanguification,
or any other acts of that kind, than there is speech in the tongue. And
although in some Insects there appears a palpitation of the Heart for some
little space after it is severed from the Body; and in Chicken and other Fowl,
after the separation of the Head from the Body there is a motion of the parts
divided, yet it lasts not long, and they are but the irregular and convulsive
motions or struglings of those Spirits which could not so hastily dismiss
themselves from the vessels wherein they were enclosed.

I would now observe some generals in relation to this Adumbration of
Providence and analogical Economy of the Soul in the Body, which are these: 1.
That this analogical Providence of the Soul in relation to its Province the
Compositum or Microcosm is universal to every part of it; there is not the most
inconsiderable particle of Flesh, Bone or Artery, not the smallest Capillary
Vein but it is present with, and auxiliary to it, according to its use and
exigence, and the congruity of its constitution; it accommodates it self to the
Eye for seeing, to the Ear for hearing; and though it accommodate not it self
to the Finger in those exertings of those Senses of Seeing or Hearing, yet it
equally accommodates it self to those remote and small Organs as perfectly in
relation to Feeling, and to those motions that are suitable to them. 2. That
even those Exertions of the active Energy of the Soul that seem most remote
from the deliberation of the Understanding and immediate active Empire of the
Will, are guided and directed with all imaginable congruity to their several
Ends and Uses. 3. That this very same individual Soul may, and oftentimes does
exert all those operations at the same time without any difficulty or
confusion: At the same time I think, I deliberate, I purpose, I command: in
inferior Faculties; I walk, I see, I hear, I digest, I sanguifie, I carnifie,
my Lungs move swifter or slower by the empire and command of my Will, my Heart
moves naturally by the motion of Palpitation, my Blood by the motion of
Circulation, Excretion, Perspiration; my Guts by the motion of Vermiculation,
my Stomach and Intestines digest, the good ejects and expulses the bad, my
Disease is resisted and expelled, my Wound cured, and a thousand more
concurrent, coincident Motions; and all these performed at the same time by the
Power, Energy and Economy of one individual Soul; and yet all this done
easily, and sweetly, and perfectly; without either lassitude, confusion, or
perturbation.

And all this done by a little spark of Life, which in its first appearance
might be enclosed in the hollow of a Cherry-stone; yet this little active
Principle as the Body increases and dilateth, evolveth, diffuseth and
expandeth if not his Substantial Existence, yet his Energy and Virtue, to the
utmost confines of his little Province and every particle and atom thereof; yea
and it is of that absolute necessity that it should do so, that without it the
Compositum would be dissolved, and the Body dissipated into corruption and its
first principles, as we see it falls out suddenly after the separation of the
Soul from the Body: As the Body could not be reduced into that orderly frame in
which it is constituted, without the Plastic and Formative power of the Soul,
so it could never be upheld in that state of Order and Convenience without the
continued Influence of the Soul: The latter is as absolutely necessary for its
continuance and conservation, as the former for its constitution.

I easily foresee two Objections against the Method proposed; 1. That the
Hypothesis it self is not sufficiently evidenced: How do we know that this
Economy is the effect of a Power, or Nature, or Being distinct from the Body?
and why may it not be the result of this Disposition, Harmony, or
Contemperation of qualities or parts of that Matter that constitutes the Body?
2. And if it be, what need we magnify the Humane Nature as the great
Instructor in this business; since we may with a little observation find very
much the like in Brutes as well as Men? For there we find a sensible Perception
and Fantasy answering the Intellect in Man; an Estimative or Judicial
faculty, an Appetition or Aversation and Locomotive faculty answering the Will;
and the very Economy of the animal Soul or Spirits managing as well their
spontaneous actions as these natural or involuntary exertions of Digestion,
Egestion, Circulation, and the rest of those Motions called Involuntary or
Natural.

To the First of these I say, That this is not the place for a large reduction
of these Operations to the regiment of the Soul as a distinct active Faculty,
distinct from the Corporeal Moles and its contemperation, that shall, God
willing, in its due place be at large discussed, which I am not here willing to
anticipate. In the mean time, let the Objector but honestly and impartially
examine and observe Himself, and he will need no other evidence of this truth
but his own experience to satisfy him, that all those effects proceed from an
active, regnant Principle within him, distinct from the Moles corporea, or the
contemperation thereof. The distemper of the humors of the Body cause
sometimes such sickness as disorders the Fantasy and Reason; but sometimes
though it distempers the Body, the Intellective faculty and operations are
nevertheless free and sound, as Experience shows. If this Objector was ever
under a Sickness or Distemper of the latter kind, let him give an account what
it is that gives him under such a Disease the use of his Reason.

To the Second I need not say more than what I have before observed; namely, 1.
That although the Inferior Natures have a kind of Image of the Humane Nature,
yet it is less perfect, and therefore no equal Instance in order to the
explication of what I herein design. 2. As it is less perfect, so it is more
distant and less evident to us, than our selves are or may be to our selves;
the Regiment and Economy of our own Souls in our Bodies and of them are more
evident to us and perceptible by us, than that Regiment and Economy that the
Souls of Brutes exercise in them, and therefore fitter to be made our Instance
of that which I go about thereby to illustrate; namely, the possibility,
necessity and explication of the Divine Providence in the governing and
influencing of the Universe and all the parts thereof; which I shall in the
next place prosecute in the Analogy that this small Regnant Principle bears
within its little Province to the Divine Regiment of the Universe.

Sic parvis componere magna. I come therefore to the illustration of the Divine
Providence, and Regiment of the World by the foregoing Emblem thereof.

1. By this smaller Instance of this Regiment of this lesser World by the
immediate presidency of the Soul, it seems evident that it is no way impossible
but that the greater World may be governed by the Divine Wisdom, Power, and
Providence. It is true, there are these two disparities between these, namely,
the greater World and the lesser: The greater World is of a more vast extent;
and again, the Integrals and Parts thereof are of greater multiplicity and
variety; but neither of these are any impediment, because the Regent thereof is
of an infinite immensity more than commensurate to the extent of the World, and
such as is most intimately present with all the Beings of the World, and of an
infinite Understanding, Wisdom, and Power that is able to apply it self to
every created Being, and therefore without any difficulty equally able to
govern the whole and every part thereof: This we see in Natural agents; that
little spark of Life, the Soul, that exercises its regiment upon an Infant of
a span long, when the Body is grown to its due stature, and together with the
extension of the Body this little Vital particle evolves and diffuseth it self
to the extent of the enlarged Body, governs it with the same facility as it did
before that extension. And the sensible Soul of a vast Whale exercises its
regiment to every part of that huge structure with the same efficacy and
facility as the Soul of a Fly or a Mite does in that small and almost
imperceptible dimension to which it is consigned. For the Soul is expanded and
evolved, and present to every part and the uttermost extremity of the greater
as well as the lesser Animal. And therefore if my Soul can have its effectual
energy and regiment upon my Body with ease and facility, with how much more
ease and facility can a Being of immense Existence and Omnipresence, of
infinite Wisdom and Power govern and order a great but yet a finite Universe,
and all the numerous yet not infinite parts thereof?

2. As there is a possibility of such a regiment of the Divine Wisdom, Power
and Influence in the Government of the World, so there is a necessity of it. It
is not enough for the Soul of the Humane Nature to form and mould its Corporeal
Vehicle, if it gave over its work when that were done, it would soon dissolve,
dissipate and corrupt. There is the same necessity for the Divine Influence and
regiment to order and govern, conserve and keep together the Universe in that
consistence it has received, as it was at first to give it before it could
receive it: The intermission of that Regiment and Divine Providence and Influx
but a moment after the constitution of this World would have dissolved its
order and consistence, if not annihilated its Being.

And indeed, he that observes the great variety of things in the World, the
many junctures and contributions of things that serve to keep up its
consistence, the want of any of which (as the disorder of a little Nerve, Vein,
or Artery in the Body) would bring it into a great disorder; the continual
strife between contrary qualities, the strange activity of the active Fiery
Nature that involves it, or at least is disseminated up and down in it; the
vast and irregular concretions of Meteors, and those strange and various
Phenomenon that are in the World, which as they proceed from or are found in
the Integrals of the Universe, are devoid not only of Reason but of Sense. And
he that after all this shall see the World upheld without any considerable
decay or defect, in the same state and order as it has been for many Thousands
of years, will upon a due and impartial search find that it were far more
impossible that this could be without the Wisdom, Power, and Influx of a most
Infinite, Omnipresent, Omniscient and Omnipotent Fixed Being, than for the
Humane Body to be kept without dissolution and putrefaction, being destitute of
the influx and regiment of its Vital Principle the Soul.

And therefore some of the Ancients that were willing to solve the Phenomenon
of the World, have (though erroneously) thought that the World was Animate, and
that all these Operations in the World proceeded from that Anima Mundi, as the
Operations in the Bodies of Men proceeded from that Anima Humana that lodged in
it; and at length finding so great effects that are and may be done by this
supposed Anima Mundi, according to their Hypothesis, have at last proceeded in
plain terms to determine that this Anima Mundi was, in truth, no other than the
Glorious God; whereas they might with much more ease and truth have attributed
all the great Economy of the Universe to the most Glorious God, without
dishonouring him into the existence of a Forma informans, or a constituent part
of that World which he made.

Others to amend that absurdity, and yet out of a piece of mannerliness and
respect, as they think, to God, though they deny this Universal Soul or Form
informing of the whole Universe, yet without any sufficient ground have devised
several Systems of the Universe, and assigned several Souls to each System or
Vortex at least, which should be the immediate Regent in every such System, as
the Soul is in the Body: This, as it supposes something without evident
ground, so it does without any necessity: For the Divine Wisdom and Power is
sufficient for the management and government of the whole Universe; and if such
Animae Systematum should be granted, yet still there must be some one common
Regent of all these Systems and their respective Souls, or otherwise disorder
would follow between the Systems themselves.

But thus far even those suppositions bear witness to the necessity of a
Providential Regiment of the parts of the Universe; that bare Matter, Motion,
and Chance cannot perform this business, but that there is a perfect necessity
of a Regent Principle besides it, which may govern and dispose it as the Soul
of Man does his Body: And even that supposed regiment of these particular Souls
of every System, as they must needs have it, if they had it at all, from the
institution and efficiency of the Wise God, so they are all continually
influenced from him, and the whole College of them governed, guided and ordered
by him as their sovereign Regent.

3. The Third thing that I design is this, That although it is impossible for
any Created Being, or the Operations thereof, to hold a perfect Analogy or
adequate Representation of the Divine Wisdom, Power, and Providence in the
governing of the World; because the Wisdom and the Ways of Almighty God are
unsearchable and past finding out; they are of such a perfection that no
Created Being or Operation thereof can be a just Parallel or adequate
Resemblance of them; yet there seems to be such an instance in the regiment
which the Humane Soul exercises in relation to the Body, that with certain
correctives and exceptions may give some kind of Explication or Adumbration
thereof, whereby though we can never get a complete Idea of the Divine
Regiment, yet we may attain such a notion thereof as may render it evidently
credible, and in some kind explicable.

1. The first act of the Divine Nature relating to the World and his
administration thereof is an immanent act: The most wise counsel and purpose of
Almighty God terminated in those two great transeunt or emanant acts or works,
the works of Creation and Providence.

The Divine Counsel relating to the work of Creation, is that whereby he
purposed to make the World, and all the several Integrals thereof, according to
that most excellent Idea or Exemplar which he had designed or chosen, according
to his infinite Wisdom, in those several ranks and methods, and in that order
and state wherein they were after created and made.

The Divine Counsel relating to his Providence, or Regiment of the World, seems
to consist in these two things: 1. A purpose of communication of an uncessant
influence of his power and goodness for the support and upholding of things
created, according to the several essential states and conditions wherein they
were made; some being created more durable, some less; some in one rank of
being or existence, some in another. 2. A purpose of instituting certain laws,
methods, rules, and effluxes, whereby he intended to order and rule all the
things he had made with the greatest wisdom and congruity, and according to the
natures and orders wherein he had created them.

And this is that which I call the law, rule, and regiment of Divine
Providence, and seems to be of two kinds, namely, general Providence and
special Providence.

The general Providence I call that whereby every created Being is governed and
ordered, according to that essential, connatural, implanted method, rule, and
law wherein it was created. And thus the state and several motions and
influences of the Heavenly Bodies is that general providential law wherein they
were created, and according to which they are governed; and the susceptibility
of those influences, and the effects thereof, and of that motion, is the
general providential law, whereby other physical Beings are governed in
relation thereunto; the activity of the active Elements, and the passiveness of
the passive, the methods and vicissitudes of generation and corruption, the
efficacy of natural causes, and the proper effects consequential to them, the
natural properties or affections of Bodies according to their several
constitutions, as motion, alteration; ascent of light, descent of heavy Bodies.
These and the like are the general providential Laws relating to them. Again,
that things endued with sense should have a sensible perception, and certain
instincts connatural to them, that rational and free Agents should move
rationally and freely. These and infinite more are the standing and ordinary
Rules and Laws of general Providence, and the wise God, who sees all things
from the beginning to the end, and therefore can neither be disappointed nor
overseen in any of his Counsels, has with that great and admirable Wisdom so
ordered these Laws of his general Providence, that he thereby governs most
excellently the World; and they are never totally changed, and but rarely
altered in particular, and that only to most wise ends, and upon most eminent
occasions.

And the reason is, because the Infinite Wisdom of God has so instituted and
modelled those natural Laws, that they are ad omnem eventum fitted to the
ordinary administration of the World. When the wisest Counsel of Men in the
World have with the greatest care, prudence and foresight, made Laws, yet
frequent emergencies happen which they did not, nor could foresee, and
therefore they are necessarily put upon repeals, correctives, and supplements
of such their Laws: But Almighty God by one most simple foresight foresaw all
Events in Nature, and could therefore fit Laws of Nature that might be
proportionate to the things he made, and not stand in need of any change in the
ordinary administration of his Providence.

The special Providence of God is so denominated either in relation to the
objects which are special, or in relation to the acts themselves.

Special Providence in relation to the objects, is that Providence which
Almighty God exercises either to Man or Angels in relation to their
everlasting ends, such as are Divine Laws and Institutions, the Redemption of
Men by Christ Jesus, the Message of the Gospel, and the like.

Special Providence in relation to the acts themselves, are those special
actings of the Divine Power and Will, whereby He acts either in things natural
or moral, not according to the Rules of general Providence, but above, or
besides, or against them: And these I call the Imperate Acts of Divine
Providence; whereof in the next place.

2. Analogal to the imperate acts of the Soul upon the Body are the imperate
acts of Divine Providence, whereby with greatest wisdom and irresistible power
He does mediately or immediately order some things out of the tract of ordinary
Providence. For although the Divine Wisdom has with great stability settled
the Laws of his general Providence, so that ordinarily or lightly they are not
altered, yet it could never stand with the Divine Administration of the World,
that He should be eternally mancipated to those Laws he has appointed for the
ordinary administration of the World. Neither is this, if it be rightly
considered, an infringing of the Law of Nature, since every created Being is
most naturally subject to the Sovereign Will of his Creator; therefore though
He is sometimes pleased by extraordinary interposition, and pro imperio
voluntatis, to alter the ordinary method of natural or voluntary Causes and
Effects, to interpose by his own immediate Power, He violates no Law of Nature,
since it is the most natural thing in the World that every thing should obey
the Will of him that gave it being, whatever that Will be, or however
manifested.

Now the Instances that I shall give touching these actus imperati of Divine
special Providence shall be, 1. In things simply natural: 2. In things
voluntary or free Agents.

In things natural we have these Instances of the actus imperati of the Divine
Providence, namely, first those that are real and also appearing Miracles, as
Moses his Rod turned into a Serpent, our Saviors miraculous curing of all
sorts of Diseases, and raising the Dead, and the like: Again, there are other
things, that though they are natural effects, and not in themselves apparently
miraculous, yet are in truth the actus imperati of the Divine Providence, Winds
and Storms, Hail and Thunder, and many the like, are things that are in
themselves natural, yet when they are in such a season and such a juncture,
they may be and are, and possibly more often than we are aware, actus imperati
specialis providentiae: The East Wind that brought the Locusts, and the West
Wind that carried them off from Egypt, Exodus 10.13, 19. The East Wind that
divided the Red Sea, Exodus 14.21. The Hail that slew the Canaanitish Kings,
Josh. 10.12. The Rain and Drought, 1 Kings 18. Amos 4.7. Thunder and Lightning,
1 Samuel 13.18. Yea the very Blasting, and Mildew, and Caterpiller, and
Palmer-worm, Amos 4.9. are sent by God. The ravenousness of a Lion or Bear are
natural to them, yet the mission of them upon an extraordinary occasion may be
an actus imperatus of Divine Providence, 1 Kings 14.24. 2 Kings 2.24. And
although we often attribute as well mischiefs as deliverances to accidental
natural Causes, yet many times they are actus imperati of the Divine special
Providence, as much and as really and truly as the motion of my Pen is the
actus imperatus of my Will at this time.

And if we enquire how these things are effected, though it may be they be
sometimes effected by the immediate Fiat of the Divine Will, yet I have just
reason to think they are most ordinarily done by the Ministration of Angels, as
the destruction of the Host of the Assyrians, and diverse other great Exertions
of these imperate acts of Divine Providence. Psalm. 103. His Angels that excel
in strength, that do his commandments, harkening to the voice of his word.
That as the more refined and efficacious Matter, which we by way of analogy
call Spirits, are the executive Instruments of the actus imperati of our Will,
so these true and essential Spirits are ordinarily the immediate Instruments of
the imperate acts of Divine Providence.

And therefore although many times Effects purely natural, that have their
Originals merely by the ordinary course of Providence, are ordered by special
Providence unto great and wonderful Events, yet it seems to me very plain, that
there be many natural productions that it may be in the immediate Cause, or
second, or third, may be purely natural, yet at the farthest end of the Chain
there is an Agent that is not simply natural (as we use to call natural Causes)
but voluntary, sometimes in the first production, sometimes in the restriction,
sometimes in the direction of them, for otherwise we must of necessity make all
successes in the World purely natural and necessary, and Almighty God would be
mancipated to the Fatality of Causes, and to that Natural Law which he gave at
first, and Prayers and Invocation upon Him in case of any calamity would be
unuseful and ineffectual.

And therefore though Almighty God do not create a Wind for every emergent
occasion, but the Wind is a Vapor breaking out of the Earth, yet the
Ministration of an Angel may restrain, open, excite, direct or guide that
Vapor to the fulfilling of those imperate acts of Divine special Regiment. And
it is observable, that although the regular part of Nature is seldom varied,
but ordinarily keeps its constant tract, as the Motions of the Heavenly Bodies,
yet the Meteors, as the Winds, Rain, Snow, Thunder, Exhalations, and the like,
which are in themselves more unstable, and less mancipated to stated and
regular motions, are oftentimes employed in the World to very various ends, and
in very various methods of the special Divine Providence.

And hence the Winds and Storms are styled in a peculiar manner, Winds and
storms fulfilling his will, Psalm. 148. And, He brings his winds out of his
treasury, Psalm. 134. And again, Has the rain a Father, and who begot the drops
of dew? Job 38.28. And again, Can any of the vanities of the Gentiles give
rain? Jer. 14.22. Thus the wise God, who does nothing vainly or unnecessarily,
nor infringeth the more constant Laws of Nature, when those parts thereof that
are more anomalous, and more easily applicable to his imperate acts and ends of
Providence may serve, more ordinarily chooses those parts of Nature to execute
his special Providence, that may do it without any great fracture of the more
stable and fixed parts of Nature, or the infringment of the Laws thereof.

Again, as the Empire of the Divine Will does exercise its imperate acts in the
Methods of special Providence upon things simply in themselves natural, so it
does upon Agents or Natures intellectual and free: Sometimes immediately by
Himself, sometimes by the Instrumentality of Angels or proposed Objects.

This Exercise of the imperate Acts of the Divine Providence may be upon the
Understanding or Will.

Upon the Understanding principally these ways, 1. By immediate afflatus, or
impression, as anciently was usual in prophetic Inspirations. 2. By conviction
of some Truths, and this may be either by a strong and over-bearing presenting
of them to the Understanding with that light and evidence, that it is under a
kind of necessity of believing them, which was often seen in the primitive
times of Christianity, wherein God was pleased many times irresistibly, and by
immediate overpowering the Understanding by the powerful impression of the
Object or Truth propounded, to conquer as it were the Understanding into an
assent. Or, 2. By advancing and enlightening the understanding Faculty with a
superadded light and perception, whereby it was enabled to discern the truth of
things delivered: For as the Understanding receives some Truths proposed by
reason of the congruity between the Faculty and the Object, as the Eye sees
some visible Objects by reason of the congruity between it and them; so the
reason why it perceives not all Objects of Truth is because of some defect of
the Faculty, whereby it holds not a full and perfect congruity with them,
either by reason of the remoteness or sublimity of the Object, or some
deficiency of light in the Faculty, which is aided by the Collyrium of the
Divine Assistance, Rev. 2. Or else, 3. By some extraordinary concomitant moral
evidence; such was that of the Miracles of our Savior and his Apostles, the
Seals and Credentials of the Truths they delivered: And as thus the imperate
acts of the Divine special Providence are exercised upon the Understanding, so
they are exercised upon the Will, and that either immediately or mediately.

Immediately, 1. By an immediate determining of the Will: For although the Will
be naturally free, yet it is naturally and essentially subject to the imperium
divinae voluntatis, when He is pleased to exercise that empire upon it: This
although he rarely does, yet he may do it, and sometimes does it irresistibly,
determining the Will to choose this or that good, and yet this without any such
force or violence as is simply contrary to the nature of it; because as there
is no Power in the World but owes most naturally an obediential subjection to
the Lord of Nature, so even the Will it self is naturally and essentially
subject to the determination of the Lord and Author of it. 2. By immediate
inclining and inflecting it to determine of it self: This is that secret
striving of the Spirit of God with the Will, inflecting and persuading it to
this or that good: It differs from the former way because that it is
irresistible, this though potent yet in its own nature resistible by the Will
of Man, though it many times prevails by its efficacy. V. Genesis 6.3. Ephesians. 4.30.

Again, 2. Sometimes it is done Mediately more humano, and yet not without the
mediate special Empire and Regiment of the Divine Will: and thus it is done two
ways, viz. 1. By an irresistible, or at least powerful conviction of the
Understanding that the thing in proposal is fit and necessary to be done or
omitted; for although some think that the Will has a power of choosing or
refusing or suspending, notwithstanding the final decision of the practical
Understanding, yet certain we are that ordinarily and when the Will acts as a
Rational faculty, it is or ought to be determined by the last decision of the
practical Understanding; and 2. By proposing Moral objects that do more humano
guide the Will to determine it self accordingly; and these are various,
sometimes Intervention, Persuasion, or Examples of others, and sometimes even
the junctures of Natural occurrences. For, as I shall have occasion to show,
and is partly touched before, even the Natural occurrences of things are under
the guidance and conduct of the Divine Providence, even when to us they seem to
be either Accidental, or to be the mere product of Natural Causes.

And surely if we should deny the intervention of Imperate Acts of Divine
Providence in relation to actions Natural or Moral that appear in the World, we
should exclude his Regiment of the World in a great measure, and chain up all
things to a fatal necessity of Second Causes, and allow at most to the glorious
God a bare prospect or prescience of things that are or shall be done, without
any other Regency of things but merely according to the instituted nature and
operations of things. And thus far of the Imperate Acts of the Divine
Providence. Only this farther I must subjoyn as a certain truth, That neither
the Empire of the Divine Providence, or his mediate or immediate
determinations, persuasions or inflexions of the Understanding or Will of
Rational Creatures does either naturally, morally, or intentionally deceive the
Understanding, or pervert the Will, or necessitate or incline either to any
falsehood or moral evil.

3. The third Analogy that is between the regiment of the Soul over the Body
and the Divine regiment of the Universe, is in relation to the acts of general
Providence, or that ordinary Law wherein Almighty God governs ordinarily the
Universe and the things in it, without the particular mixture of those that I
have called the Imperate Acts of special Providence, which seems to consist of
two parts: 1. The institution of certain common Laws or Rules for all created
Beings, which (without a special intervention of his Will to alter or change)
they should regularly observe; as that the Heavenly Bodies should have such
Motions and Influences, that the Inferior or Elementary World should have its
several Mixtures and Transmutations by the application of the active principles
and particles in it to Passives, and by the virtue of the Heavenly Motions and
Influences: That there should be vicissitudes of generations and corruptions;
that Vegetables should have the operation of vital vegetation, increase,
duration and productions according to their several kinds; that Sensible
Natures should enjoy a life of Sense, and those several powers or faculties of
Sensation, Fantasy, Memory, Appetition, Digestion, Local Motion, Generation,
and those several instincts whereby they should be managed and governed
according to the conveniences of a sensitive nature: That the Rational Nature
should have those Faculties of a Sensitive Nature, and superadded to it the
Faculties of Intellect, Reason and Will, whereby it might govern it self as a
reasonable free Agent, and determine it self to this or that action. And these
are the instituted Laws of the Divine common Providence.

2. A continued influx of the Divine Goodness, whereby things are upheld and
continued in their state of being according to this Law of their Creation: And
by virtue of both these acts of common divine Providence all things are enabled
to act and operate according to the Laws of their being, without the necessity
of any new individual concurrent act of special Providence producing,
directing, or determining their several operations. And hence it is that the
Will of man by the instituted Law of his Creation, and the common Influence of
the Divine goodness and power is enabled to act as a reasonable Creature, to
determine it self, and to govern its proper actions according to the Law of his
Creation, without any particular, specificating, concurrent, new imperate act
of the Divine special Providence to every particular determination of his Will:
Even as the continued influx of the reasonable Soul enables those Faculties
which we call Natural or Involuntary, without new deliberation, purpose or
counsel to every new act thereof: And by this means the World is in an ordinary
course of Providence governed according to those standing fixed Laws given to
the Universe and the several parts thereof by the Divine Will, wherein it is
supported by the common influx and presence of the Divine power and goodness.

And this is that which being duly considered extricateth that Question which
has so much troubled the World, concerning the sinful acts of men, and how far
forth the glorious God is at all concerned in them. Certainly the imperate acts
of his Blessed Will have nothing to do to enforce or necessitate the Will of
man to any sin, it is far from the purity of his Glorious Nature: But the
general Law of his Providence is only thus far concerned in it, That he has
made Man an intelligent and free Agent, put him into the power of his own Will,
but yet sub graviore imperio, to restrain its actings, if he please, by his
special Providence; and Man in this state of his liberty, when he does sin,
sins from the Empire of his own Will, and not from a determination of the
Divine Regiment.

But though the contemplation of the regiment of the Soul over the Body has
given some analogical explication of the Divine Providence in the Government of
the World, yet as this Analogy is but imperfect, the Divine Regiment of the
World is infinitely more wise, more powerful, more perfect than the regiment of
the Soul over the Body, so in many things this Analogy by no means holds: For
instance, The Soul does what it does in the Body, though by a kind of
efficiency, yet it is but a subordinate efficient, and vicarious and
instrumental in the hands of the Almighty; who as it has endued the Soul with
this energy, so the Soul is but his substitute in this regiment of the Body;
but Almighty God is the supreme Rector of the World, and of all those
subordinate provinces and parts thereof: Secondly, in the imperate acts of the
Souls regency of the Body and the Compositum: She cannot in the Body work
immediately without the instrumentality of the intermediate animal and vital
Spirits: But in the imperate acts of the special Divine Providence though we
may justly think he does most ordinarily use the ministry of those noble
natures called Angels, yet he may and oftentimes does by the immediate Fiat of
his own Will exercise these imperate acts of special Providence; for his Power
is infinite, and all Beings are in an immediate obedience and subjection to it.

3. The Soul cannot by its own Will exercise any immediate imperate act upon
those natural and involuntary operations which yet are exercised by an influx
from it; indeed it may starve and destroy the Body by its Empire, and thereby
consequently impede and determine those natural and involuntary operations, yet
it cannot by its Intention or Empire prohibit or suspend their exercise, the
natural means being allowed and present; it cannot effectually prohibit the
Heart not to move, or the Blood not to circulate, or the Ventricle not to
digest: But it is otherwise with the Regent and regiment of the World; even
those things wherein he has set a fixed Law, which by virtue of the common
influence of the Divine Power and Goodness they observe and follow, are subject
to the Empire of his special Providence and the imperate acts thereof. And this
is evident in that Administration of special Providence which is miraculous; he
commanded the Fire not to burn, stopped the mouths and appetites of Lions, and
prohibited the natural operation and agency of Natural Causes. 2. In all the
special Providence that are exercised in the World, though they do not visibly
appear to us to be miraculous, yet they most certainly are governed by the
imperium of special Divine Providence, whereby it sometimes excites second
Causes to production of Effects which being thus excited they naturally
produce; sometimes impeding them, sometimes diverting them, sometimes directing
them, sometimes by contemperation, or uniting other more active or contrary
Causes allaying or enforcing them: and although it may be the interposition of
the Divine imperium or special Providence be not immediately the immediate
antecedent Cause, but it may be the third, the fourth, the tenth, the twentieth
Cause distant from the Effect. Nay though possibly the conjunction of the
immediate imperium Providentiae be with the First Mover in Nature, the
Heavenly, Ethereal, or Fiery Influx, yet the regiment of the Divine Providence
is as full and infallible in relation to the imperate regiment of the Effect,
as if it were immediately joined to the designed Effect: So that the Moral of
that Poetical fiction, that the uppermost Link of all the series of subordinate
Causes is fastened to Jupiter's Chair, signifies a useful truth; Almighty God
does as powerfully govern and direct when he pleases, and how he pleases, all
subordinate Causes and Effects, as the Soul governs the motion of the Muscle or
Limb by those strings of the Nerve which are rooted in the Brain.

4. Again, the regiment of the Soul over the Body is the regiment of the more
active part over the more passive, though both making one Compositum; but the
regiment of Almighty God over the World is not as a part of it, or as a Form or
Soul informing it, but as a Rector or Governor, distinct, separate, and
essentially differing from it, his regiment of the World in this respect not so
much resembling the regiment of the Soul over the Body, which together with it
make one compounded Nature; as the regiment of the Master or Rector over the
Ship, or the regiment of a King over his Subjects.

And thus I have gone through the Speculative consideration of the Divine
Providence resulting from the contemplation of a Souls regiment of the Body,
wherein I have been the longer, because the contemplation of the Divine
Providence is a Subject that delights me, and I am contented to dwell upon it
as much as I may, and to take up this or any the like occasion to lead me to
the contemplation of it.

And thus far touching the Usefulness of the Contemplation of the Humane
Nature, in relation to truths Speculative.

II. The Usefulness of it in relation to matters Practical, wherein I shall be
shorter. This Contemplation has these useful Advantages, namely, 1. Physical;
2. Moral; 3. Theological or Divine.

1. For Physical, by which I mean that practical part of Physical knowledge
that is called Medicinal. The due consideration and knowledge of the structure,
fabric and parts of the Humane Body is necessarily conducible to that
excellent Faculty for the preservation of life and health, no one thing being
more conducible to the advance and perfection of that Science or Faculty than
the knowledge of the Humane Body, wherein the Experience of Anatomy and
dissection, and the Observations of the ancient and modern Physicians has
given a large evidence and testimony.

2. The Moral Practical consequences deducible from the knowledge of the Humane
nature are many and useful. For instance, when I consider the admirable Frame
of the Humane Nature, made by the Wisdom, and according to the Image of the
Glorious God, 1. How careful should it make me that I do not injure that goodly
Structure in others, by offering violence to the life of another, or to corrupt
him either by evil example or evil counsels? 2. How careful should it make me
in relation to my self, not to embase that excellent Frame either of my Body or
Soul, or both, into the image of a Brute by sensuality, luxury, or
intemperance; or into the image of a Devil, by malice, envy, or irreligion? How
careful should it make me to improve and ennoble those excellent and
comprehensive faculties of my Understanding and Will with such Objects as are
worthy to be known and desired? The intellectual Faculty is a goodly field,
capable of great improvement, and it is the worst husbandry in the world to sow
it with trifles or impertinencies, or to let it lie fallow without any seed at
all.

3. The Theological uses that arise from the knowledge of our selves are great
and many. When I consider the admirable Frame of my Body, made up in that
elegant, stately, and useful composure; and when I consider the usefulness,
amplitude, and nobleness of my Faculties, an Understanding capable of the
knowledge of all things necessary for me to know, accommodate and fitted to the
perception and intellection (though not to the full comprehension) of a World
full of variety and excellency; of a God full of all conceivable perfection and
goodness; a Memory able to retain the notions of what I understand; a Will
endued with freedom, whereby I am a subordinate Lord of all my actions, and
endued with a connatural propension and appetite unto rational good; Reason and
Conscience to guide and direct me in all the enquiries and actions of my life;
and besides all this, a Soul, the stock and root of all those Faculties, endued
with immortality, and capable of everlasting blessedness: When I consider that
this Soul of mine is not only endued with faculties admirably fitted to the
life of Sense which I enjoy in this World, but find in it certain secret
connatural rudiments of goodness and virtue, and a connatural desire and
endeavor after a state of immortal happiness. And when I consider that this
Frame both of Body and Soul had its primitive origination immediately from the
great Creator of all things; and although my own immediate origination was from
my Parents, yet that very productive virtue was implanted in the primitive
Nature by Almighty God, and the derivation of the same specifical Nature to me
was by virtue of his original Institution and Benediction, and by virtue
thereof that excellency and perfection of Humane Nature in its essential which
was first formed by the glorious God, is handed over to me, abating only those
decays which Sin brought into my nature: I say, when I deeply and intimately
consider these things, I cannot but be sensible that that Being from whom I
thus derive this being, and such a being, is a most wise, powerful and
bountiful Being, that could thus frame the Humane Nature, and thus freely
bestow and confer this constitution upon me. 2. And upon this sense of his
Wisdom, Power and Goodness, I must needs entertain it with all imaginable
admiration of it, and with all possible gratitude, for so great and so free a
gift. 3. And consequently I cannot choose but exercise the choicest affections
I have toward him, of reverence and fear of his Greatness and Majesty, of
dependence and rest upon his Power and Goodness, of love to the excellency of
his Essential Perfection and Communicative Goodness and Beneficence. 4. And
consequently of entire subjection unto him that upon all the rights imaginable
has the most just sovereignty over me. 5. And consequently of all due
inquisitiveness what is the Will and good pleasure of that God that I owe so
much gratitude, love and subjection to, that I may serve and please him. 6. A
resolved, entire, hearty obedience of that Will of his in all things; thereby
to testify to him my love, gratitude, and subjection. 7. An external
manifestation to Men and Angels of that internal love and gratitude I owe him
by continual praise and thanksgiving to him, invocation of him, reverence of
him, and all those acts of Religion, Duty and Obedience which are the natural
Proceed of that internal frame of my Soul toward him. 8. A constant desire of
my Soul to enjoy as much of this bountiful glorious blessed Being, as it is
possible for my nature to be capable of. 9. And because my estate and condition
in this life is but a state of mortality, and a temporal life; an earnest
endeavor to have my everlasting Soul fitted and qualified to be an everlasting
partaker of his presence and goodness in a state of nearer union to him and
fruition of him, in that future life of glory and immortality. 10. And
consequently abundance of circumspection, care and vigilance that I so behave
my self in this state of probation here, that I neither lose his favor from
whom I expect this happiness, nor render my self unworthy, unfit, or incapable
to enjoy it.

And thus this deep, serious, and comprehensive Consideration of our selves and
the Humane Nature in its just latitude, does not run out barely into Notions
and Speculations, but is operative and practical; teaches a man Virtue and
Goodness and Religion and Piety, as well as Knowledge, and is operative to make
a man such as it teaches him to be; perfects his nature, enricheth it with
practical as well as speculative habits, and fits and moulds and accommodates a
man to a conformity to the End of his being.

And these be the Reasons that have especially put me upon the search and
enquiry into this Subject, MAN.

I am not without excellent helps and patterns in this Inquiry, nor without the
due fruits and effects that it has had upon the Minds of them that have been
exercised in it.

Galen, though he spoke darkly and doubtfully of the Soul, being destitute of
much of that light which we now have, yet upon the bare contemplation of the
structure of the Body and the parts thereof, in that excellent Book of his De
Usu Partium, resolves the whole Economy thereof into the Power, Wisdom,
Goodness, and Efficiency of the Glorious God; and is transported both with the
admiration of the Divine Wisdom appearing therein, and with indignation against
the perverseness and stupidity of Epicurus and his disciples, which would
attribute this one Phenomenon to Chance.

And had he, or should any else apply himself to the search of that
Intellectual Principle in Man, his Soul, he will find a greater evidence of the
Divine Wisdom, Goodness and Power; as will easily appear in a little
consideration thereof.

CAP. II. Touching the Excellency of the Humane Nature in general.
ALthough I intend a more distinct Consideration of the Humane Nature, and the
Faculties of the Humane Soul, and the Parts of the Humane Body, yet it may be
necessary before we come to the discussion of the origination of Mankind, to
premise something concerning the Nature of Mankind, and its pre-eminence and
excellence above all other sublunary Creatures, that we may have a little taste
touching that Being whose origination we inquire. This Consideration will be of
use to us in the enquiry touching the origination of Man; to evidence, that
neither Chance nor surd or inanimate Nature could be the Efficient of such a
Being, but a most Wise, Powerful, and Excellent Author thereof.

I shall not at large discuss those Faculties and Organs which he has in
common with Vegetables and Brutes, but those only that belong to him
specifically as Man, and those also but briefly.

The Corporeal Beings of this lower World are divided into these two ranks or
kinds; such as are Inanimate or not living, and such as are Animate or living.

Life, according to Aristotle in 1. De Anima, cap. 1. is described by its
effects, viz. Nutritio, and auctio, and diminutio quae per seipsum fit; and the
lowest rank of such things as have life are Vegetables: for though Minerals
have a kind of analogical nutrition and augmentation, yet it is such as
ordinarily non fit per seipsa, but rather by accession and digestion from
external Principles and coagmentation.

The Principle from whence this Life flows in all Corporeal Natures that have
it, is that which they call Anima, or at least vis Animastica. The Faculties or
Operations of this Anima vegetabilis are these; 1. Attractio alimenti: 2.
Fermentatio and assimilatio nutrimenti sic attracti in succum sibi congenerem:
3. Digestio, vel dispersio alimenti sic assimilati in diversas parts individui
vegetabilis: 4. Augmentatio individui vegetabilis, ex unione and consolidatione
succi vegetabilis diversis partibus individui. 5. Conformatio hujusmodi
particularum unitarum specificae naturae ejusdem individui cujus est
augmentatio; ut in trunco, ramis, cortice, fibris, foliis, fructu, etc. 6.
Seminificatio and propagatio ex semine vel partibus seminalibus. 1. Attraction
of aliment: 2. Fermentation and assimilation of the nourishment so attracted,
into a juice of the same kind with it self: 3. Digestion, or dispersion of the
aliment so assimilated into the diverse parts of the vegetable individual: 4.
Augmentation of the vegetable individual, from the union and consolidation of
the vegetable juice to the diverse parts of the individual: 5. The conformation
of these united particles, to the specifical nature of the same Individual,
which is augmentation; as in the trunk of a Tree, the bark, fibers, leaves, and
fruit: 6. Seminification and propagation from the seed or seminal parts. These
seem to be the process of the Vegetable Nature, Soul, and Life.

2. The next rank of living Creatures is that which has not only a vegetable
life, and a vegetable principle of life, but has also superadded a life of
sense, and a sensitive Soul or Principle of that life of Sense, which
nevertheless as one specifical Principle exerts the acts as well of the
vegetable as sensitive life.

And this nature 1. Includes all those powers and faculties of the Vegetable
Nature, as Attraction, Assimilation, Digestion, Augmentation, Conformation, and
Propagation or Seminification.

2. It includes them in a far more curious, elegant, and perfect manner, at
least in the more perfect Animals. As for instance, the first assimilation of
the attracted nourishment in Vegetables converts it into a watery humor or
juice; but the assimilation thereof in Animals rectifies this alimental juice
into Chyle, and then into Blood: The propagation of Vegetables is without
distinction of Sexes, but that of Animals usually with distinction of Sexes;
and many more such advances has the animal nature above the vegetable in those
faculties or operations which for the main are common to both.

3. It superadds a greater and higher perfection to the animal nature, by
communicating to it certain essential Faculties and Powers that the vegetable
nature has not: And those are these;

1. Sense. It is true, that Campanella in his Book De Senfu rerum, and some
others that have written de Perceptione substantiae, attribute a kind of Sense
to all created Beings, and therefore much more to those that have a vegetable
life: And in some Vegetables we see something that carries a kind of analogy to
Sense; they contract their leaves against the cold, they open them to the
favorable heat; they provide teguments for themselves and their seeds against
the injury of the weather, as their cortices, shells; and membranes; they seem
to be carried with a complacency in the propagation of their kinds as well as
Brutes, and therefore many of them being impeded therein, they germinate again,
though later in the year: And some Plants seem to have the sense of Touch, as
in the Sensitive Plant and some others; which seems to be an advance of the
Vegetable Nature to the very confines, or a kind of contiguity to the lowest
degree of those Animals that are reckoned in the rank of Sensibles.

But this notwithstanding we deny a real and true sense to Vegetables; indeed,
they have a kind of umbra Sensus, a shadow of Sense, as we shall hereafter
observe, that Sensibles have a kind of umbra Rationis, a shadow of Reason, but
it is only a shadow thereof. 2. There are also in their natures by the wise God
of Nature implanted even in their vegetable natures certain passive Strictures
or Signatures of that Wisdom which has made and ordered all things with the
highest reason, even the least inconsiderable Herb; and these Signatures are
bound to their natures by certain connatural instincts planted in them; but
still they want the active principle of Sense in them.

Now this Sense or Sensitive Faculty in Animals is of two kinds; the external
Senses, and the internal. The external Senses are five, all which belong to the
more perfect Animals; and that of the Soul to all Animals, viz. Seeing,
Heiring, Tasting, Smelling, and Touching.

And it is admirable to consider that the great Lord of Nature has so disposed
of sensible Beings, that although (for ought we know) there may be many more
impressions or motions of external Bodies that we know not by their
communication unto Sense, because we have not Faculties receptive of them. Yet
the Faculties of the five Senses are adequate and proportioned to all those
impressions of Objects from without that are conducible to the use and
well-being of Animals in a sensible station or nature.

The internal Senses are of two kinds, viz. 1. Such as concern perception of
Objects: 2. Such as concern the motion to them as useful, or from them as
noxious.

Those of the first sort have some adumbration of the Rational Nature, as
Vegetables have of the Sensible, and they seem to be these; the Common Sense,
the Fantasy, the Estimative Faculty, and the Memory.

The Common Sense, or Commune Sensorium, which receives the several reports of
the several Senses by their several Nerves into that common receptacle or seat
of this useful office, the Brain; where it distinguishes the Objects of the
several Sensories.

The Fantasy, that in a way unsearchable unto us, 1. Creates the (...)Images
of the things delivered from the several Senses to the Commune Sensorium: 2.
Compounds those Images into some things not unlike Propositions, though
confusedly and indistinctly: 3. Makes particular applications of them one to
another, though still darkly and confusedly, whereby it excites the Appetite
either to prosecute their attainment, or fly from them.

The Estimative Faculty, which is indeed no other than the last operation or
composition of the Fantasy beforementioned, whereby it concludes that this
is a sensible good or a sensible evil, that it is attainable or feasible, or
not attainable; that though it be good, yet sometimes it is not safe to be
attempted by reason of the impendence of a greater sensible evil. This seems to
be the dark and confused shadow of the decision of the practical Intellect in
Man.

The Memory, which is an impression of the Image of some sensible Object made
by the Fantasy, which remains some time after, the impression, and by the
return of a like Objedt again is sometimes revived and reinforced: But how this
Image is made, where it is imprinted, how conserved, are things we cannot at
all attain the knowledge of; they are wonderful, though common effects of a
most wise and stupendous Wisdom and Power that has thus constituted even the
Faculties of the Animal Nature: Only it seems to me that these Images are not
made in the Brain it self, as the Pencil of a Painter or Engraver makes the
Image in the Table or Metal, but are imprinted in a wonderful method in the
very Soul it self: For it is plain that Sounds and Voices are remembered, and
yet no real configurations are possible to be made thereof in the Brain; for
what Image can there be of a Sound?

Now as to that Faculty or those Faculties that concern the pursuit or flight
of what is thus propounded by the Fantasy or Estimative Faculty, they are
generally two: The Appetitus naturalis, which bears some analogy to the Will in
the Reasonable Nature; and the acts thereof are either prosecution of the
Sensible Object propounded, if presented by the Fantasy and Estimative
Faculty as good; or else aversation from it, if presented as evil.

This is the Faculty of Empire or Command, for in conformity to the
determination of the Appetite the motion of the Body follows.

The other Faculties that concern pursuit or aversation, are the Passions, the
Satellites appetitus, serving either in the prosecution of the good propounded,
as Love, Desire, etc. or in opposition of the evil presented, as Anger,
Revenge, etc.

And thus far touching the Senses in Animals, both External and Internal.

2. The second superadded prelation of the sensible nature above the vegetable
is the faculty and exercise of animal and local motion, whereas Vegetables have
naturally no other motion but that which is determined and natural, and what is
within it self; as the motion of Attraction, Digestion, Nourishment,
Augmentation and Increase. Animals have the faculty and power of animal motion;
which has these accessions, 1. It is or may be spontaneous; for though the
object moves objectively, yet the faculty or power moves ab intrinseco, and
spontaneously. 2. It moves the parts spontaneously, the Leg, the Eye, the Ear
or any other part, which cannot be done by Vegetables. 3. Again, it can move
the whole Compositum from one ubi to another (at least in all Animals except
those that are almost in the nature of Plants, called Zoophyta or Plantanimali
a) which cannot be done by Plants, who are mancipated and fixed to the place of
their station or growth, unless removed by an extrinsecal agent.

3. The third superadded advantage of Animals is their Instincts. It is true,
Vegetables have their instincts radicated in their nature, as we have before
observed; yea even things Inanimate have certain simple instincts, as in the
motions of ascent of light bodies, and descent of heavy bodies: But the
instincts of Animals are sensible instincts of a more noble kind and nature
than those of Vegetables, and such as seem to savor more of an active
principle; as sagacity of Brutes in taking their prey, defending themselves,
providing against the inclemency of the weather, care for their young, building
their nests, and infinite more, which are too long to name.

These are the superadded Faculties of the Animal Nature; and proportionate and
accommodate to their faculties are their organizations of their Bodies. And in
as much as there is great varieties in the temperaments, dispositions,
faculties and uses of several Animals of several kinds, their organizations are
not only fitted to the common natures, uses and powers of sensible Creatures,
but every several Species has its several accommodation as well of his Organs
as of his Faculties to the exigence, use and convenience of his proper
specifical nature.

Thus the ranks of the vegetable perfections are not only included within the
rank of sensible Beings, but these have greater perfections in what is common
to both, and superadditions of other more noble Faculties and Organs not
communicable to the former. The Vegetable Nature is indeed like a curious
Engine, but it has but some simple and single motions, like a Watch that gives
the hour of the day, or a Trochea with one Wheel: But the Animal Nature is like
an Engine that has a greater composition of Wheels, and more variety of motions
and appearances; as one of the compound Engines of Archimedes, or as a Watch,
that besides the hour of the day gives the day of the month, the age of the
Moon, the place of the Sun in the Zodiac, and other curious Motions wrought by
multiplication of Wheels.

Now touching the Sensitive Natures, there have been two extreme opinions, both
of them extremely contrary one to another, and yet both of them, as they are
delivered by their Authors, untrue.

1. That Opinion that depresseth the natures of sensible Creatures below their
just value and estimate, rendering them no more but barely Mechanisms or
Artificial Engines; such as were Archytas his Dove, Regiomontanus his wooden
Eagle, or Walchius his iron Spider: that they have no vital Principle of all
their various Motions but the mere modifications of Matter, or at least the
elementary Fire mingled with their other Matter; that they have no other form
or internal principle of Life, Motion, or Sense but that which is relative and
results from the disposition, texture, organization and composition of their
several Limbs, Members or Organs: This fancy began by Des Carts in his
Fundamenta Physica, and has been followed and improved by some of his
admirers, and particularly much favored by Honoratus Faber in his Book De
Generatione Animalium; and herein they think they have given a fair solution to
all the Phenomenon of the Sensitive Nature, and given a fair prelation to the
Soul of Man, which they agree to be a substantial Principle of humane actions:
But in both these they have been disappointed; for this supposition as it gives
not at all a tolerable explication of the Phenomenon of sense and animal
motions, so if it did, it would easily administer to a little more confidence
and boldness, a temptation to resolve all the Motions of the reasonable Soul
into the like supposition, only by advancing the Engine or Automaton humanum
into a more curious and complicated constitution: For he that can once suppose
that the various modifications of Matter and Motion, and the due organization
of the Bodies of Brutes can produce the admirable operations of Sense,
Fantasy, Memory, Appetite, and all those instincts which we find in Brutes;
is in a fair way of resolving the operation of the Reasonable Nature into the
like supposition, only by supposing the organization of the latter somewhat
more curiously and exactly disposed and ordered as much above that of Brutes,
as theirs is above that of Vegetables. It is true, the organization of the
humane and animal Body, with accommodation to their several functions and
offices, is certainly fitted with the most curious and exact Mechanism
imaginable; as appears by the structure of the Heart, the Lungs, the Brain, the
Tongue, the Hand, the Nerves, the Muscles and all other parts, and the several
orders and methods of their motions and adaptations to their several offices,
and the exercise by them of those Faculties to whose service they are
consigned; This must needs be acknowledged by every man that observes them, or
that takes the pains to read the Tracts of those that have written of them; and
especially Galen his divine Book De Usu Partium, Des Carts and Fabritius
concerning the structure of the Eye, the same Fabritius and Steno De motu
Musculorum, and diverse others.

But that the Principle that sets on work these Organs, and works by them, is
nothing else but the modification of Matter, or the natural motion thereof thus
or thus posited or disposed, or the bare conformation of the Organs, or the
inclusion and expansion of any natural inanimate particles of elementary Fire,
is most apparently false, even to the view of any that observes or considers
impartially.

It is impossible to resolve Perception, Fantasy, Memory, the sagacities and
instincts of Brutes, the spontaneousness of many of their animal motions into
those Principles, nor are they explicable without supposing some active
determinate power, force, or virtue connexed to, and inherent in their Spirits
or more subtle parts, of a higher extraction than the bare natural modification
or texture of Matter, or disposition of Organs, or, as they are often pleased
to style them, their plexus partium.

Again, it is visible to the Eye, that that power, or virtue, or principle,
whatever it is, that in the generative process first immediately forms and
organizeth the parts of the Body, is that which guides, orders and governs all
the animal motions of it after: That power which first forms the Brain, the
Heart, the Liver, the Eye, is that which afterward increases, augmenteth,
exercises and employeth them after: And no man living can force himself to
imagine that that Principle which forms, organizeth, disposes, and modifieth
the parts, is any thing that results from the organization or modification of
those parts which are not yet molded or framed, but must have its modification
from that Principle which is antecedent to any manner of organization or
texture of parts into an animal composition: No man therefore that has not
abjured his Reason, and sworn allegiance to a preconceived fantastical
Hypothesis, can undertake the defense of such a supposition, if he have but the
patience impartially to consider and look about him.

2. The other extreme Opinion seems to advance the Animal Nature too high, at
least without a due allay of their general expression; namely, those who
attribute Reason and a reasoning faculty or power to Animals as well as to Men,
though not altogether in the same degree of perfection: so that they will not
have Reason to be the specifical or constitutive difference of the Humane
Nature, but common to them and Brutes: This Opinion seems generally to be
favored by the Pythagoreans, that held Transmigration of Souls; by Plutarch,
in Grillo, and his second Oration De Esu Carnium; by Sextus Empiricus, Contra
Mathematicos; by Porphyry, Lib. 3. de Abstinentia ab Esu Animalium; which he
endeavors to prove and illustrate by diverse reasons and instances; and among
the latter by Patricius in his fifth Book de Animis irrationalibus; but above
all by the ingenious and learned De Chamber in his Book of the Knowledge of
Beasts, wherein he asserts not only the simple apprehension of Beasts by
phantasms or images wrought by the Fantasy, but the conjunction of images
with affirmations and negations, which make up Propositions, and the
conjunction of Propositions one to another, and illation of Conclusions upon
them, which is Ratiocination or Discourse: And that in farther evidence thereof
there is a certain kind of Language whereby Beasts or Birds, especially of the
same Species, communicate their conceptions one to another; only this
discursive Ratiocination of Brutes he calls Ratio imaginativa, and differenceth
it from Ratio intellectualis which belongs properly to Men, principally in
this, That the imaginative or brutal Ratiocination keeps still in particulars,
and within the verge of particular propositions and conclusions; but
intellectual Reason has to do with universals, and for the most part grounds
and directs its Ratiocination by them.

Touching the thing called Reason, we must consider that it has a double
acceptance: 1. It is taken for every conduct of any thing by fitting means to
fitting ends, or the due and convenient ordering and adapting of one thing to
another; and this again seems to be of three kinds, viz. Active, Passive, or
Mixed: i. That I call Active Reason which from an inward intellective principle
orders and disposes, as the Watch-maker contrives, orders, and disposes the
several parts of the Watch, so that it excites a regular and useful motion: 2.
The Passive Reason (which is more properly Reasonableness) is that order and
congruity which is impressed upon the thing thus wrought; as in the Watch I see
every thing moves duly and orderly, and the reason of the motion of the
Balance is by the motion of the next Wheel, and that by the motion of the
next, and that by the motion of the Fusee, and that by the motion of the
Spring; the whole frame, order and contexture of the Watch carries a
reasonableness in it, the passive impression of the Reason or intellectual Idea
that was in the Artist: 3. The Mixed sort of Reason seems to be when a thing
concurrs actively and from an internal principle, and (in things that have
life) vitally, to the production of a reasonable effect; but yet per modum
instrumenti, and in the virtue of a superior direction of a reasonable agent:
Thus when I plow my ground, my Horse is harnessed and chained to my Plough, and
put in his track or surrow, and guided by my Whip and my Tongue, and so draws
on my Plough, and this reasonable work is performed actively and vitally by my
Brute in the virtue of my direction. And certainly this kind of latter Reason
is evident not only in the brute Beasts in their instincts and operations, but
also in Vegetables, and almost in all things in Nature; for they are all endued
with a certain inherent activity, which is nevertheless implanted, directed,
ordered and determined by the great Creator in the Laws of their several
constitutions: The process of nutrition and generation not only in Animals but
even in Vegetables is done with the highest Reason, exceeding the imitation of
the Humane Reason; the Birds making their Nests, ordering their Eggs and moving
them in incubation, feeding and disciplining their young, is done with the most
exquisite reason and congruity thereunto, beyond the artifice of the most
ingenious man. And it must needs be so; for though they concur actively from an
internal Principle to the production of the effect, yet they are determined
therein and thereunto, and their track ordered for them and to them by the Laws
of their nature instituted and imprinted on them by the unimitable Wisdom of
the highest intellectual Being. This mixed or instrumental Reason, as I may
call it, therefore all must agree to belong not only to Brutes, but almost to
all things in Nature, and herein differs from Reason or Reasonableness which I
before call simply passive, in that it immediately proceeds from the internal
active Principles implanted by God in their natures.

2. But there is another kind of Reason which we call Ratiocination, or
Discursus rationalis, which consists principally in these three things, though
the two former without the latter make not up a complete Ratiocination: 1. The
simple apprehension of things themselves, which is done by images or
representations thereof, made either by the Intellect, or by the
representations made thereunto by the Fantasy: 2. The compounding of the
images or representation of things with an affirmation or negation; this makes
a Proposition: 3. The composition of several Propositions among themselves, and
drawing from them Conclusions; and this is called Syllogismus, Ratiocination or
Discourse.

But though this be the analysis of Ratiocination into which by a careful
attention it may be resolved, we are not to think all sort of reasoning or
ratiocination, even in Men themselves, is presently by way of explicit or
formed Syllogisms, or artificial Moods and Figure. Some consecutions are so
intimately and evidently connexed to or found in the premises, that the
conclusion is attained quasi per saltum, and without any thing of ratiocinative
process, and as the Eye sees his object immediately and without any previous
discourse; so in objects intellectual many evident truths or principles are
primo intuitu assented unto: as in objects of Sense the action is elicited per
saltum; as many times when a Horse is hungry and comes to a good pasture, he
falls to his food immediately without forming Mr. Chambre's Syllogism, This
green is grass, This grass is good to eat, Therefore this green is good to eat.
But the transitus from the Sense to the Fantasy, and from that to the
Appetite, and from that to the motion of Eating is immediate, momentaneous, and
per saltum.

In brief, as the vegetable nature, as has been observed, has a kind of
shadow of the sensible nature, so the sensitive nature has a kind of shadow of
the truly rational nature; their Reason is but a low, obscure and imperfect
shadow thereof, as the Water-gall is of the Rainbow; and proportionable to
their imaginative Reason is their animal Language, which though it be a kind of
natural sign of their Imagination and Passions, yet it is infinitely below the
perfection of humane Language: For we see that those Birds who by reason of the
analogy of their organs by use are taught some words or sentences, yet they
never proportion those words to an explication of any distinct conception
signified by them, nor can use or apply those words they learn to the things
they signify, nor can they connex their words or sentences in coherence with
the matter which they signify; and commonly have recourse to their wild
natural notes when they would express their imaginations or passions, which
notes are at the best but like natural interjections, framed by Nature, not by
Art, to discover their passions or impressions; and their artificial language
or notes are no other than impressions upon their sensitive Memory by iterated
use, and drawn out from them upon the strength of such impression, or by
repetition of Objects that excite that Memory.

Thus much I thought good to premise concerning the vegetable and sensitive
natures; which may be of some use in the consideration of the rational or
humane nature; partly to instance what this latter includes, namely the whole
perfection of the vegetable and animal faculties, and partly to discover the
preference that the Humane Nature has above the Animal Life in these most
perfect faculties of Intellect, intellectual Reason, and Will.

I shall not here distinctly and fully examine the nature of Man in the whole
compass and extent thereof, but shall reserve it to a fuller inquiry; I shall
only instance in so much thereof in this place as may be apposite to my
purpose, namely, to show that he is a Creature of most admirable constitution,
and such as deserves our inquiry, and such whose first composure and
origination requires a higher and nobler Constituent than either Chance or the
ordinary method of mere Natural causes and concurrences; and that it is such a
piece as in its first constitution and ordination requires an Efficient of
infinite Power, Wisdom and Goodness: This is the end and scope of my present
Inquiry.

Now to give a brief Inventory of the Excellence of the Humane Nature, I shall
observe as near as I can this order.

First, I will briefly consider those Excellencies that he has in common with
the vegetable and sensible nature: Secondly, I shall consider those specifical
or appropriate Excellencies that he has above the former, both vegetable and
animal nature.

Under the Second general I shall consider Man singly with relation to himself,
and then with relation to other things without him.

In relation to himself I shall briefly consider these particulars: 1. The
excellency of his Soul or intellectual nature in its nature, faculties, acts
and habits; 2. The peculiar excellency of his Body; 3. The peculiar excellency
of the Compositum, consisting of both his former essential parts.

In relation to things without him, I shall consider him with relation 1. To
God, 2. To Mankind, 3. To the other integrals of the World; and therein 1. Of
their serviceableness and accommodation to him; 2. Of his dominion and
sovereignty over them, and the means and instruments thereof.

This is the brief Scheme that I intend of those specifical and appropriate
preheminences that the Nature of Man has above other visible Creatures.

First therefore, touching those Excellencies that the humane Nature has above
the vegetable and animal Nature, I shall subjoin these ensuing Positions.

1. There is no excellent vegetable or animal Faculty in the vegetable or
animal Nature, as such, but it is found in the humane Nature; such as are
attraction, nutrition, digestion, conformation of parts digested,
proportionable augmentation, generation, sensible perception, common sense,
estimative faculty, sensible appetite, locomotive faculty, and animal motion: I
meddle not herein with all those smaller sort of Faculties, which are
peculiarly appropriate to Vegetables or Animals, as swiftness, sagacity,
strength, and special artifices, which belong not to them in the common nature
of Vegetables or Animals, but by certain specifical Instincts or Faculties,
because though it may be some of them are not found in the same kind and degree
in the humane Nature, yet they are such as are abundantly recompensed by that
art and ingeny which appropriately belongs to the humane Nature.

2. There are no Organs in the sensible Nature (which yet are more perfect than
those of the vegetable Nature) subservient to the Faculties of Life and Sense,
which are wanting in the constitution of the humane Body, at least in substance
and equivalence.

3. Those very Faculties and Organs subservient unto them in the vegetable or
sensible Nature, which are found in them, are lodged in the humane Nature in
far more excellency and perfection than they are in the vegetable or animal
Nature: So that if the Faculties or Organs subservient to the vegetable or
animal Life in Man, do differ in their state or composure from those of Brutes,
it differs for the better, as obtaining a more exquisite perfection,
usefulness, beauty, and contexture, than those of Brutes, as may appear in the
Hand of Man compared with the Foot of Beasts or Birds; the Foot, the Leg, the
Thigh of Man, with those of Beasts, and the like. It is true, the constitution
of some Faculties and Organs of Sensibles, is more accommodate to their fabric
and use than the like Organs of Man would be to the use of Brutes; but simply
comparing one with another, the Organs of the humane Body are more curious and
excellent than the Organs of the bare animal Nature. And from hence it comes to
pass, that the full knowledge of the humane Faculties and Organs, subservient
to the animal Life in Man, comprehends in effect all the like Faculties and
Organs in the animal Nature, though differing in some particular textures and
positions, with a proportionable advance by the access of excellence of the
humane Nature.

2. As to the specifical or appropriate Excellencies of the humane Nature above
the most perfect Animals, they come next to be considered.

It is true, that Animals in proportion to the length of their Life attain
their complement of their specifical perfection sooner in proportion than the
humane Nature: The animal Soul sooner expands and evolves it self to its full
orb and extent than the humane Soul: Therefore the Horse that lives naturally
about thirty years, comes to his full growth and perfect exercise of its animal
Faculties in four years; but Man, that lives not ordinarily above seventy yeas,
comes not to the ripeness of his Intellectual Life 'till two and twenty or
three and twenty years at least, nor even to his full growth 'till nineteen or
twenty: So that what we say concerning Man, in relation to the actings of his
Mind, must be applied to that state and age wherein his Soul has fully as it
were evolved it self, and its Organs fully mature and disposed for the actings
of his Soul: He is long ripening, but then his maturity, and the complement
thereof, recompenseth the flowness of his maturation.

Now the Excellencies appropriate to the humane Nature are, as before, observed
of two kinds; 1. such as immediately concern the humane Nature it self; or 2.
such as are extrinsecal, but yet relating to it.

Those things that are immediately residing in, or part of the humane Nature,
come first to be considered: And they are three: 1. His Soul, or intellectual
and volitive Principle. 2. His Body, or corporeal part. 3. The Compositum or
Coalitum of both those Principles, which complete the humane Nature.

The Soul comes first to be considered, and therein these four things: 1. Its
Constitution or Nature. 2. Its Original. 3. Its Faculties. 4. Its congenite
Habits or rational Instincts.

1. Touching the Constitution of the Intellectual Soul of Man, I shall not in
this place enter into a large discourse concerning it, but reserve that
consideration to its proper place, only in general it is 1. An active
principle; 2. It is a substantial principle; 3. It is not corporeal or
material; 4. It is not corruptible or mortal.

2. Touching its Original, whether it be by traduction, or creation, or
participation, I shall not here dispute, but reserve it to its proper place for
a fuller disquisition. But whether the one way or the other it had its
original, there is no inconsistency but that it has those essential
qualifications abovementioned.

3. Touching its Faculties, they are two, the Understanding and the Will: And
here I shall not concern my self in the Inquiry, whether the Faculties are the
same with the Soul it self, or the same one with the other, and only distinct
in notion? whether the Will be any more than the complete or ultimate act of
the Understanding determined? It is sufficient, that the acting of the Soul as
it relates to perception and decision, and as it relates to choice and pursuit,
or aversation, are distinguishable to us, and those notions serve to explicate
what we mean in the things we discourse of, as the supposed Circles in the
Heavens serve to explicate the appearances thereof. The Understanding or the
Intellective Faculty (the shadow whereof only is the Fantasy in Brutes, but
it is but a shadow of this of Intellect) is a Faculty that not only gradually
but essentially differs from and exceeds the perceptive Faculty in Brutes.

Three things there are that give us the best notion we can have of the humane
Intellect, and the discrimination thereof from the animal perception and
imagination: 1. The Objects thereof: 2. The Acts thereof: And 3. The Habits
thereof.

1. The Object of the humane Intellect is omne intelligibile, which is of a far
larger extent than the Object of sensible perception or imagination, which as
it exceeds not the province of sensible Objects, so it is in order to the
convenience of a sensible Life. For instance: When a Brute sees a Man, it sees
his color, figure, motion, bulk, and by the advantage of Memory or Instinct it
comes to him, or flies from him, as it has received, or thinks it like to
receive good or evil by him, but it perceives not substance. These Objects,
among many other that might be instanced, fall under the perception of the
Intellective, which seem not to be within the verge of Imagination or sensible
perception: 1. The Notion of a Spirit, or substance void of corporeity. 2.
Universals, or conception of things as conjoined in one common nature or
notion, abstracted from the Individuals thereof. 3. Abstracted conceptions, as
entity, corporeity, etc. 4. Though Brutes may be able to apprehend multitude,
as things more than singular, yet they cannot have a distinct notion of Number.
5. Though they may have a confused imagination of something as past, or future,
yet it is without distinction of Time, or the notion of it. 6. The truth of
consequence in or from the antecedent. 7. The actings of the Mind or
Imagination it self, by way of reflection or introspection of themselves, are
discernible by Man distinctly, but at least not distinctly by Brutes. 8. The
truth and evidence of Geometrical Demonstration. 9. The reason or just estimate
of connection of things to their Causes. 10. The moral goodness and congruity,
or evilness, unfitness, and unseasonableness of moral or natural actions; which
falls not within the verge of a brutal faculty. 11. The Notions of a Deity, and
the result thereupon, namely, Religion, is not to be found in Brutes, but seems
connatural to the humane Nature, as shall be shown.

2. The Intellectual Acts, and they are many:

1. Intellectual Perception, which greatly differs from imaginative or
sensitive perception, as far above it: For in those things where the root of
intellective perception is in the sense and fantasy, the perception
intellective oftentimes departs from and corrects the report of the fantasy,
as in the apparent bigness of the Sun, the apparent crookedness of the Staff in
a double medium of Air and Water; though this kind of Intellective Perception
be not without the help of Ratiocination.

2. Intellective Ratiocination, which infinitely exceeds that imaginative
Ratiocination which some have attributed to Brutes. 1. It is distinct, and with
a distinct knowledge of the terms, which in Brutes is confused, 2. It is
founded for the most part in Universals, which is not compatible to imaginative
Ratiocination. 3. The thread and train of Consequences in intellective
Ratiocination is often long, and chained together by diverse Links, which cannot
be done in imaginative discourse or ratiocination by some attributed to Brutes,
which if the transitus from the premises to the conclusion be not very speedy
and short, that imperfect Ratiocination is lost in Brutes.

And here I shall again a little resume the former Consideration touching the
imaginary Reasoning of Brutes, which I have before called the Image of Reason,
and not truly Reason; for it is not a distinct reasoning, but performed in a
physical moment: And though we suppose Subject, and Predicate, and Copula, and
Propositions, and Syllogistical Connexions in their Reasoning, there is no such
matter, but the entire business is at the same moment present with them without
deducing one thing from another, though we form them into notions of distinct
acts; and this acting of the sentient Fantasy is performed, 1. By a presence
of sense, as the Horse is under the sense of hunger, and that without any
formal Syllogism presses him to eat: the fire burns the Cats foot, and
therefore it pulls it away because the immediate sense of pain enforces it.
2. By the presence of Memory; the Dog has been beaten for taking the meat out
of the dish, and the next time he sees it there, though he be hungry yet he
dares not venture, for his imaginative Memory makes the past strokes as present
to him as if he felt them. 3. By the presence of Instinct, which puts him upon
those motions that are most evidently as reasonable as any thing can be, and
yet without the intervention of Ratiocination. For instance, Every Creature
almost has certain Instruments for its defense, and the offense of its
enemies, exactly fitted for their use, and they have that singular dexterity in
using them that the most disciplined Fencer cannot equal: The Cock, for
instance, has his Spurs, and he strikes his Feet inward with singular strength
and order, and it is not possible he should use his Spurs with greater reason
for his advantage; yet he does not this by any syllogistical method, or by
Ratiocination, but is merely tutored to it by Instinct, which is present with
him, and at hand without any discursive Reasoning. And this appears, because
while it is yet a Chick, and has no Spurs, nor cannot hurt by it, nor yet has
seen the like motion before to imitate or learn it; yet he readily practices
it. And to these three present impulses of Sense, Memory, and Instinct, most if
not all the sagacities of Brutes may be reduced without the help of true
Ratiocination or discursive Reason; though witty men by Analytical resolution
have Chymically extracted an artificial Logic out of all their actions.

3. Intellective Memory, which I call an act of the intellective faculty
because it is wrought by it, though I do not inquire how or where, because it
is not solvible: The specifical preferences that it has above the sensible
Memory are these; 1. That it remembers and retains such things as were never at
all in the Sense, as the conceptions, enuntiations and actions of the Intellect
and Will; the conviction of truth or falsehood of propositions or reasonings;
the conceptions of universals: whereas the sensitive Memory retains nothing but
sensible Objects, or their Images wrought by the Fantasy. 2. In that it is
more complicated and complex than the sensitive Memory, retaining the series of
propositions, argumentations, and a long tract of historical narratives. 3. In
that it is more distinct and unconfused than the sensitive Memory. 4. In that
it is firmer, and more fixed and permanent than the sensitive Memory. 5. In
that it can resuscitate and stir up it self to remember and call together other
Images or media to retrive what it once remembered; which is Reminiscence, an
act of intention, which therefore Aristotle in his Book De Memoria and
Reminiscentia makes an act peculiar to Man; whereas the Memory of Brutes is
either conserved by the Images impressed by the Imagination, and there
continued, or revived and reinforced by the occurrence of external Objects
bearing an identity or resemblance to the Images at first impressed by the
Fantasy.

4. Deliberation; a staid and attentive consideration of things to be known and
their media, and of their several weights, conclusiveness, or evidence; and of
things to be done and their media, their congruity, suitableness, possibility
and convenience, and of the several circumstances aptly conducible thereunto;
which is an act far above the animal actings, which are sudden and transient,
and admit not of that attention, mora, and propendency of actions.

5. Judgment; either concerning things to be known, of the weight and
concludency of them and ends in decision; or of things done or to be done, of
their congruity, fitness, rightness, appositness: and this if it refers to
things to be done, ends in determination or purpose; if in relation to things
already done, then in sentence of approbation or disapprobation: And hither
that which we call Conscience is to be referred, namely, if by a due comparison
of things done with the rule, there be a consonancy follows the sentence of
Approbation; if discordant from it, the sentence of Condemnation.

And this act of the Judgment in relation to things to be done, and the
determination thereupon, is that which is usually styled the last decision of
the practical Understanding immediately antecedent to the decree of the Will,
which it must follow by a kind of moral necessity, when it acts as a reasonable
Faculty, and in the due state and order of its nature; though by its liberty
and empire it sometimes suspends its concurrence. And thus far concerning the
Acts of the Understanding.

3. Concerning intellectual Habits or the genuine effects of these acts in the
understanding Faculty, and they are diverse and diversely expressed by those that
have treated thereof.

1. Opinion, when the assent of the Understanding is so far gained by evidence
of probability, that it rather inclines to one persuasion than to another, yet
not altogether without a mixture of incertainty or doubting.

2. Science or Knowledge effected by such evidence, cui non potest subesse
falsum; as in case of demonstrative evidence.

3. Fides, or Faith, or Belief, which rests upon the relation of another that
we have no reasonable cause to suspect; and upon this account we believe Divine
Revelation when we are sufficiently convinced that it is Divine Revelation; we
also believe our Senses, because we have the greatest Moral evidence that we
can reasonably have of the truth of their reports, when they are not controlled
by apparent Reason, impossibility, or improbability: We believe good and
credible persons, and this principally referrs to matter of fact, which we
cannot or do not control by our Senses or other weighty evidence; as that
there was such a man as Julius Caesar, that there is such a place as Rome,
though we never saw the one or the other; because delivered over to us by
credible persons, and such who could probably have no end to deceive us.

4. Wisdom; which is a complicated habit referring to all things to be known
and done, the due comparison of things and actions, and the preference of them
according to their various natures and degrees.

5. Prudence; which is principally in reference to actions to be done, the due
means, order, season, method of doing or not doing.

6. Moral Virtues; as Justice, Temperance, Sobriety, Fortitude, Patience, etc.
for these begin in the Intellect, though their exercise belong principally to
the faculty of the Will.

7. Arts Liberal or Mechanical; for though the exercise of those (in which the
formal nature of an Art consists) be external, yet the Ideal notion and habit
of them begins in the Understanding; and a man is first a Geometrician in his
Brain, before he be such in his Hand.

And all these habits of the intellectual Faculty are far advanced above what
is found in Sensible Natures; take the last for instance. It is true, we find a
rare dexterity in the Spider and Silkworm in framing of their threads, but this
proceeds not from any Intellectual principle in them, but from an Instinct
connatural to them, and whereunto they are determined by the Law of their
nature; again, we find in the Fox, the Hawk, and other Animals admirable
sagacities, wiles and subtilties in getting their prey and in defending
themselves: But when we consider the sagacity of the Humane Understanding,
although the particular Instincts of some Animals are scarce imitable by it,
yet it exceeds them in other things almost of the same nature, and so by way of
equivalence, or rather prelation in those very Instincts; witness the Arts of
Painting, Tapestry, Fortification, Architecture, the Engines whereby noxious and
subtle Animals are subdued, and infinite more arising from the fruitfulness of
the Understanding and the dexterity of the Hand. And thus much touching the
Intellective Faculty, the seat of intellective Perception and Counsel: I come
to consider of that other Faculty, the Will, the seat of Empire and Authority.

The Will therefore is that other great Faculty of the Reasonable Soul, and it
is not a bare appetitive power as that of the sensual appetite, but is a
rational appetite, and is considerable, 1. In its Nature, 2. In its Object, 3.
In its Acts.

1. The Nature of this Faculty is that it is free, domina suarum actionum, free
from compulsion, and so spontaneous, and free from determination by the
particular Object, wherein it differs from the sensitive appetite, which though
spontaneous, because moving from an inward principle, yet is, if not
altogether, yet for the most part determined in its choice by the external
Object. But how far forth the Will is determined by the last act of the
practick Understanding, or how far such a determination is, or is not
consistent with the essential or natural liberty of the Will, is not seasonable
here to dispute. This liberty of Will, together with that other Faculty of
Understanding, is that which renders the humane Nature properly capable of a
Law, and of the consequence of Law, Rewards and Punishments; which does not
properly belong to the animal Nature, because destitute of these two Faculties.

2. The Object of the Will is not confined to a sensible Good, but is much
larger, namely, such a Good as is compatible to an Intellectual Nature in its
full latitude, such as are moral and supernatural Good.

3. The Acts of this Faculty are generally divided into Volition, Nolition, and
Suspension: That division that herein better suits with my purpose are these,
Election and Empire.

1. Election or choice, and this in reference both to means and end; for though
the Schools tell us, that Electio is only mediorum and non finis, this is to be
intended of the general end or good at large, and in its universal conception,
for when several particular ends are in proposal, there is belonging to the
Will a power of Election of these, as well as of the means to attain them.

2. The Imperium voluntatis over the Body and the Faculties: We may observe in
the humane as well as the animal Body two kinds of motions or exertions of
Faculties; some are styled natural or involuntary, such is the motion of the
Heart, the Circulation of the Blood, the perception of the Senses; when the
Organs are open, and the Object applied, these natural, though vital Faculties
and Motions, are not under the command of the Will immediately, for whether I
will or will not, while I live, my Heart beats, my Blood circulates, my
Ventricle digests what is in it, my Eye sees when open. But there be other
Motions in the humane, and also in the animal Nature, that are subject to the
command of the Will in Man, and to the appetite in Brutes, as local motion,
which in Animals is under the regiment of the Appetite, in Man under the
regiment of the Will.

Now this Imperium voluntatis may be considered in relation,

1. To it self: It can suspend its own acting, either of electing or rejecting.

2. To the Understanding: Though it cannot suspend its perception, omnibus ad
percipiendum requisitis adhibitis, yet it may suspend its decision or
determination, or at least its obsequium to such decision.

3. The Passions, which are as it were the Satellites voluntatis, and follow
the command of the Will, where the Will acts according to its power and
authority.

4. To the animal Spirits, and the Vessels in which they are received when
designed to Motion, namely the Nerves and Muscles, those are all subject to the
Empire of the Will, as to Local Motion of the whole Body or any part thereof,
when the Spirits, Nerves and Muscles are in their due and natural state.

5. To the sensual Appetite: And indeed herein is evident both the Empire and
Sovereignty of the Will, and also the visible discrimination between the Humane
Nature and the Animal or Brutal Nature, and its preference before it. In the
animal Nature it is evident that the sensual Appetite is that which has and
exercises the sovereignty and dominion over the spontaneous actions of the
animal Nature, that commands the Foot to go, the Mouth to eat, and all other
the spontaneous motions in order to a sensible good: But in Man the sensual
Appetite is Regimen sub graviere regimine, the government of the Appetite is
under the government of the Will and controlled by it, at least where the
reasonable Faculty is not embased and captived by ill custom or disorder. And
this appears two ways:

1. Sometimes the very motion of the Appetite it self is restrained by the
Empire of the Will, so that a man does not appetere that sensible good which
otherwise he might or would, because he will not; and this is the most natural
and noble regiment of the Will over the sensual Appetite.

2. Though it may fall out that the sensual Appetite may appetere bonum
sensibile, yet the Will may and does control the empire of the Appetite in the
execution of that appetition: As for instance, A man sees delicious fruit, and
he desires it; in so much, that were there not a control over the empire of
his Appetite, it would command the Hand to reach it, and the Mouth to eat it:
But the contrary command of the Will supersedes the command of the Appetite;
the Appetite desires it, but the Hand is forbidden by the Will to reach it.

Now if any man shall say this contradiction appears, not only in the
reasonable Nature, but even in the sensible: The sensible Appetite is checked
in its execution oftentimes by sensual Fear, as in Dogs and Horses, and other
Brutes, yea sometimes by the remembrance of a former suffering for the like
attempt to gratify his sensual Appetite; and yet they are destitute of any
superior faculty of Will to interpose a prohibition upon the Appetite. I
answer, this is true, for in such cases the impendent Fear is either present or
in memory, and so expected; and it being of a sensible evil, has the same
influence upon the sensual Appetite as the present good; and therefore if the
evil feared or impendent be a greater sensible evil than the good, it
overrules the Appetite to aversation; as the Fish that loves the bait, yet
fears the hook, which it discerns as a greater sensible evil, the very
Appetite is thereby determined to aversation.

But the control of the Will upon the Appetite in the reasonable Nature, is
many times, and indeed most often done, not upon the account of a sensible evil
felt or feared, which of it self were sufficient to determine the Appetite; but
sometimes upon the account of such hopes or fears as fall not under a sensitive
notice, as of the command or prohibition by God; yea many times upon a bare
Moral account of the indecorum, unreasonableness, unseasonableness or utter
unfitness of the thing it self, without any other motive of fear either of a
present or future sensible inconvenience thereby; which Moral consideration can
no way move the sensible Appetite, were it not for the Will, which being a
rational Faculty is moved by it.

And this is all that I shall say touching the two great Faculties of the Soul,
the Understanding and Will: I shall not add any thing here touching Passions or
Affections of the Mind, 1. Because they are but a kind of appendices to the
Will, the Satellites voluntatis; those of the concupiscible kind being as it
were the flowers of the motion of Volition, those of the irascible kind the
flowers of the motion of Aversation. 2. Because the Passions for the most part
are found in the sensible Nature, namely those of love, hatred, delight, grief,
expectation and fear; and therefore I shall not here treat of them.

3. I come now to consider of those rational Instincts as I call them, the
connate Principles engraven in the humane Soul; which though they are Truths
acquirable and deducible by rational consequence and argumentation, yet they
seem to be inscribed in the very crasis and texture of the Soul antecedent to
any acquisition by industry or the exercise of the discursive Faculty in Man,
and therefore they may be well called anticipations, prenotions, or sentiments
characterized and engraven in the Soul, born with it, and growing up with it
till they receive a check by ill customs or educations, or an improvement and
advancement by the due exercise of the Faculties. I shall show first what they
are: Secondly, what moves me to think that such are connatural.

1. Touching the former, I think those implanted and connatural anticipations
are these; namely, That there is a God; that he is of greatest Power, Wisdom,
Goodness, and Perfection; that he is pleased with good, and displeased with
evil; that he is placable; that he is to be feared, honored, loved,
worshipped, and obeyed; that he will reward the good, and punish the evil; a
secret sentiment of the immortality of the Soul, or that it survives the Body
to be capable of rewards and punishments, according to its deportment in this
life; certain common notions of Moral good and evil, of decorum and turpe; that
faith and promises are to be kept; that a man must do as he would be done by;
that the obscene parts and actions, though otherwise natural, are not to be
exposed to public view, obvelatio pudendorum; that a man must be grateful for
benefit received; These, and some such common notions or intimate propensions
seem to be con naturally engraven in the Soul antecedently to any discursive
Ratiocination; and though they are not so distinct and explicit, yet they are
secret Byasses inclining the humane Nature primarily to what is useful and
convenient for it in proportion to the state of an intellectual Nature: That as
we see in Brutes, besides the exercise of their Faculties of sensitive
Perception and Imagination, there are lodged in them certain sensible Instincts
antecedent to their imaginative Faculty, whereby they are pre-determined to the
good and convenience of the sensible Life: So there are lodged in the very
crasis and constitution of the Soul certain rational Instincts whereby it is
pre-disposed, inclined, and biased to the good and convenience proportionable
to a rational and intellectual Life; a certain congenite stock of rational
Sentiments and Inclinations which may go along with him, and fairly incline him
to such a trade and way as is suitable to the good of his Nature; so that he is
not left barely to the undetermination, incertainty, and unsteadiness of the
operation of his Faculties, without a certain secret and gentle pre-disposition
of them to what is right, decent, and convenient for their manage and guidance
by these common anticipations, inclinations, and connatural Characters engraven
in the Soul. 2. And that which inclines me to believe this, is not only the
congruity of the supposition to the convenience of the humane Nature, and the
instance of the sensible Instincts in the animal Nature proportionate to their
convenience, and the great importance of them to the convenience thereof: But
also that which is observable in the attentive consideration of the manners of
Mankind in general, which seems to have those common sentiments in them, and to
accord in them in a very great measure; and though evil Customs and Education
much prevails among men, yet it does not wholly ob^literate these sentiments,
at least from the generality of Mankind.

It must be agreed that these rational Instincts, as I call them, are not
always so vigorous and uniform in their actings as the animal Instincts of
Brutes are in their kind, which partly proceeds from that liberty of Will that
is in the humane Nature which many times suspends or interrupts their energy
and operation, partly from that mixture of the sentient Appetite with the
actings of the reasonable Soul, which oftentimes transport it: Even the more
simple and uncompounded any Nature is, the more uniform are its motions and
actings; the natural Instincts and Pro-portions even of things inanimate (as of
heavy Bodies to descend) are more uniform than the very Instincts of Brutes,
who have a more complicated form or nature; But as this accidental interruption
of rational Instincts does not disprove their existences, so Man has a greater
advantage by the exercise of his Reason and intellective Faculties, to remove
those interruptions, and improve those connatural Sentiments or rational
Instincts to his singular use and benefit, which abundantly recompenceth those
Interruptions.

And if any shall say that there are or may be other means of propagation of
those motions and inclinations in Men, namely, 1. A Traditional traduction of
them into the World; and 2. The Exercise of the humane Intellectual Faculties
upon the occurrence and observation of external Objects and Events: I answer,

1. As touching Traditional communication and traduction of those Truths that I
call connatural and engraven, I do not doubt but many of those Truths have had
the help of that derivation: But, first, such a Tradition possibly has not
been without interruptions by evil Education, and yet these Sentiments have
obtained almost in all Ages and Places, though not without interspersion of
certain corrupt additaments, obtained likewise by evil Custom or Education. But
secondly, it cannot reasonably be supposed that a Tradition could so constantly
and universally prevail and obtain among Mankind, unless there were some common
consonancy and congruity of somewhat inherent in Nature which suits,
corresponds and suffragates to that Tradition, and closes with it, and accepts
it.

2. As to the other, concerning the Exercise and Actings of our Intellectual
Faculties, it must needs be agreed that those that I call Connatural Principles
are in themselves highly reasonable, and deducible by a strong process of
Ratiocination to be most true and most convenient; and consequently the high
exercise of Ratiocination or intellective Discourse might evince their truth
and excellency, though there were no such originally inscribed in the Mind: But
this no more concludes against the supposition, than it would conclude against
the supposition of implanted Instincts in Brutes; which as they are in
themselves highly reasonable and useful to their ends, and evincible by true
Reason to be such, as it may be any thing we know: So also many, though not all
the actings of those Instincts might possibly in the Brutes themselves be
elicited by a strong intention and exercise of their Fantasy and sensible
Perception, Ratiocination, and Connatural Implantation, are but several means
or discoveries of the same thing which in it self is most highly reasonable;
only the latter is for the most part less difficult, and readier at hand. But
to the Objection.

1. Let any man but duly consider how few men there are in the World that are
capable in respect of the meanness of their Parts and Education, to act and
improve their Intellects or Faculties to so high a strain as the eliciting of
those that I call Connatural Principles by the strength of their Intellectual
Operation; this requires very choice Parts, great attention of Mind,
sequestration from the importunity of Secular employments, and a long advertent
and deliberate connexing of Consequents; which falls not in the common road of
ordinary men, but of Philosophers, Metaphysical heads, and such as have had a
more refined education, which is not the thousandth part of Mankind; Other men
require a more easy and familiar access to these Truths and Inclinations; and
yet we see that these Sentiments are not confined to the Literati of mankind.

2. Again, I appeal to the most knowing men in the World that have but had the
leisure to think seriously and converse with themselves, and that have kept
their Minds free from the fumes of intemperance and excess, passion and
perturbation; whether next under Divine Revelation their best and clearest
sentiments of Morality at least have not been gathered from the due
animadversion and inspection of their own Minds, and the improving of that
stock of Morals that they there find, and the transcribing of that Original
which they found first written there: It is true, that it is with the
connatural Principles inscribed in our Minds as it is with our Faculties, they
lie more torpid, and inactive, and inevident, unless they are awakened and
exercised, like a spark involved in ashes; and being either suppressed or
neglected they seem little better than dead, but being diligently attended,
inspected and exercised, they expand and evolve themselves into more
distinction and evidence of themselves. And therefore it was not without some
kind of probability that some of the Ancients thought that Science was little
else than Memory or Reminiscence, a discovery of what was in the Soul before.
But whatever may be said of other matters, certainly the first draughts and
strictures of Natural Religion and Morality are naturally in the Mind.

And hence some thinking men have thought that the specifical difference of the
humane Nature is Propension to Religion, and therefore define Man to be Animal
religiosum, which could not be from any habit barely acquisite by the exercise
of Faculties, unless the same were radically engraven in the very texture of
his Soul.

I shall add but this one thing more: It is plain that the existence of a Deity
as a Being of infinite Perfection, and consequently of infinite Goodness and
Justice to reward and punish, and of infinite Power and Wisdom, is a truth that
is highly rational and demonstrable by the exercise of intellectual Faculties
upon the consideration of the Universe and its several parts; and possibly the
Immortality of the Soul is evincible by very great reason: But these great
truths are not communicated barely by one kind of means, and it is needful, in
respect of their use, they should all have all contributions, and not only
Brains to pursue a long train of consequences. And yet we shall find in the
generality of mankind (especially when death begins to draw toward them) a
very quick and active demonstration of these convictions, and possibly many
times more vigorous and active than that rational conviction that is wrought by
Speculation and Syllogisms; which evidenceth that these Principles of the
existence of a most righteous and powerful God, and a state of rewards and
punishments after death, are more universally engraven in the Crasis of the
Soul by Almighty God in its natural constitution than barely by the exercise of
Faculties in Speculation and Ratiocination.

And herein it must be remembered that I am in this Discourse still in the
outward Court of the Gentiles, discoursing only as a reasonable Man, and not
taking in the assistance of the Christian Doctrine and those subsidia divinae
gratiae that relate thereunto.

Therefore to conclude this point, There seems to be two means of communicating
and preserving in the Soul and Conscience these great speculative and moral
Principles whereof I have even now treated, viz. 1. That which I here call
Connatural, or a certain rational Instinct engraven in the very Make and
constitution of it: And as those that write of Conscience tell; us it has
three offices or acts, Synteresis, Syneidesis, and Epicrisis; so those
Principles are lodged in that Chest of the Conscience called Synteresis.

2. A second means of attaining and keeping and improving these connatural
Sentiments or rational Instincts both speculative and moral, is that admirable
adaptation of the Faculties of the humane Soul to those Principles and
Sentiments, that as the Eye discerns light and color by a congruity between
the visive Faculty and the visible Object, and as the Palate tastes and
relisheth its meat by the congruity between the Faculty and the Object, whereby
it judges of what is good and embraces it, and what is evil to it, and
rejects it: So in the humane Faculties, those of his Intellect and Will there
is a proportionating of the Faculties to the Object, whereby the former
discerns truth from falsehood, and moral good from moral evil, honestum and
decorum from indecens and turpe; and accordingly the Will, when it acts
regularly and as it should, accepts or rejects it: But as the estimative
Faculty in Brutes is nevertheless consistent with their connatural Instincts,
which latter have still excellent use in the sentient Province; so this
adaptation of the Faculties in Man to their Objects does not exclude those
connatural, implanted, rational Instincts in the humane Nature, but both
consist together, and are of admirable use to the humane Soul.

And thus far concerning the Soul of Man, its Faculties and Instincts.

I come now to consider of the structure and fabric of the humane Body, and
that not at large, for that will be for another place, but briefly and
summarily to give an account of some of those appropriate and discriminating
notices wherein it differs from and has preference above the most perfect
brutal Nature: And they are such as either concern the entire Fabric of the
Body, or such as concern some special Parts or Integrals thereof: but I shall
mingle them together as follows.

1. There is in the humane Fabric a greater Majesty and Beauty than in any
Animal in the World besides; and that appears, 1. In the erectness of his
posture; all other Animals have transverse Bodies, as Birds and Beasts, and
though some do raise themselves upon their hinder legs to an upright posture,
yet they cannot endure it long, it is unnatural and uneasy to them, neither
are the figures or junctures or order of their Bones, Nerves, and Muscles
fitted to such a posture. And it is observable, that the structure of Man's
Body is with that equilibration (notwithstanding diverse prominences therein)
the composure of his Nerves and Muscles for the due motion of his Spirits, the
structure of his Feet are so singularly accommodated; that he maintains this
erect posture standing or walking, though his Feet, the Basis of the Pillar of
his Body, be much narrower than the latitude of his Body. 2. In the Majesty of
his Face and Eyes. 3. In the Beauty of his Face: Beauty consists principally in
these things, Figure, Symmetry, and Color. No Bird, or terrestrial Animal
exhibits its Face in the native color of its Skin but Man; all others are
covered with Feathers, or Hair, or a Cortex that is obduced over the Cutis, as
in Elephants and some sort of Indian Dogs; and though in the torrid Climates
the common color is black or swarthy, yet the natural color of the temperate
Climates is more transparent and beautiful.

2. There is no Animal has any Organ of equal use to the Arm and Hand of a
Man, that Organum organorum, an Organ accommodate to all the useful motions,
operations, arts and uses of his life: Man is born without any offensive or
defensive weapons like to those of other Animals, but by the usefulness and
accommodation of this Organ and his Intellective faculty he makes weapons and
uses them, he forgeth and mouldeth Metals, builds Houses and Ships, makes his
Clothes and Ornaments, and exercises all Arts for use and ornament.

3. There is no Creature that I know of, has the like structure of his Leg and
Foot; the former being only two to support his Body, have greater and larger
Muscles than any Animal of no greater proportionable bigness; and the latter
being the Basis of those Pillars, are admirably fitted by their length and
figure for his gressus progressivus.

4. Since the Brain is the great Organ of Intellection in Man, and of
Imagination in Brutes, which are the two noblest Faculties of either Nature, it
will not be amiss to examine the differences between the Brain of either, and
the Nerves proceeding from either, wherein none that I know has given more
light than Doctor Willis in his Anatomy of the Head; all therefore that I shall
do herein shall be to gather up the most of those observable differences that
lie dispersed in that Book.

1. The humane Brain is in proportion to the Body much greater and larger than
the Brains of Brutes, having regard to the size and proportion of their Bodies,
and fuller of anfractus or sinuations, and so more capable of greater diversity
of employments and uses in the Perceptive Faculties.

2. There are in the Brain certain portions called protuberantia annularis,
nates, and testes; and that in those Brutes wherein this protuberantia
annularis is largest in proportion, those Brutes are of greatest sagacity and
subtilty, as Foxes, Apes, etc. that though in Man those prominences called
nates and testes are the least, yet the protuberantia annularis is greater in
proportion in Man than in any Animal, the structure of this Organ being fitted
to a greater degree of natural sagacity.

3. That whereas in Brutes the only communication of the Brain with the Heart
is by the nervus paris vagi derived from the Cerebellum, and spreading its
branches into the Muscle of the Heart; in Man there is not only the same
communication of that Nerve, but a ramification of the nervus intercostalis is
also inserted into the Muscle of the Heart, whereby a greater communication
between the Brain and Heart is maintained in Man than in Brutes.

4. That other ramifications of this nervus intercostalis are derived into the
Chest and Diaphragma, whereby principally that peculiar affection of Laughter
is excited, more appropriate to Man, together also those others of Sternutation
and other natural actions common to Men and Beasts are excited, but not from
the like communication of that Nerve in Brutes.

And thus much shall serve to be spoken of the peculiarities of the Humane
Body, though what I before said touching the Faculties of the Animal Nature in
Man must also be remembered touching the organical parts of his Body: There is
no Organ in the Brutal Body subservient to the Animal Faculties, which is not
found in the Humane Body, with such variations and additions as render them
more curious, perfect, useful, and admirably accommodate to his Animal Life and
Faculties; But of this more fully hereafter.

3. I shall now subjoin a Consideration of Man in his whole Compositum,
consisting of both his essential parts of Body and Soul, and of the aggregation
of the Faculties and Organs belonging to either, so far forth as they evidence
his appropriate and specifical Excellency above the Animal Nature.

The appropriate or specifical acts of the humane compositum, are the capacity
and faculty of instituted Signs, expressive of the inward conceptions of the
Mind, which are of two kinds: 1. Audible, 2. Visible Signs.

The Audible Signs are instituted Speech or Language, the formal nature whereof
consists in two things: 1. Articulate Voice; 2. The accommodation of the
Articulate Voice to the rendering or expressing of the inward thoughts or
intentions of the Mind: And herein is the great preference of the language of
Man above that of Brutes or Birds, who though they have audible signs that
express something of their Imaginations or Appetites, yet they extremely differ
from humane speech: 1. They are but short and transient, like Interjections in
speech, whereby though they express the sudden motions of their Fantasy,
Appetite, or Passions, yet they carry not with them any distinct series or long
train of their Imaginations; they are short and sudden, somewhat like Sighs or
Ejulations in Man. 2. They are not articulate, nor orderly, but short, natural
and broken. 3. When Birds, especially by the fabric of their Tongue and
Palate, are taught to use articulate words, yet they understand not their
import, nor do render any conceptions of their Fantasy by them, nor can
answer a question by them, but use them insignificantly, as the Organ or Pipe
renders the Tune which it understands not.

And by the help of significant and articulate speech, one Man expresses the
notions or conceptions of his Mind to another, instructs another, mutual
commerce and society is maintained, which could never be without instituted
signs.

And this Act of instituted signs, especially those of Speech or Language,
proceeds from the entire compositum, the Mind instituting the signs, and
communicating its notions and desires by it, and the Palate, Larinx, Tongue,
and Lips, forming the Voice according to such institution, whereunto they are
most admirably accommodated by their Apertures, Nerves, and Muscles.

2. The instituted visible Signs, are Writings, Gestures, Tears, Motions of the
Eye, Mouth, and Face, which were long to enumerate: By means of writing, former
Ages transmit the Memorials of ancient times and things to posterity; Men
understand the sentiments, purposes, and desires of one another, though absent,
and the living converse with those ancient Philosophers, and others, that are
long since dead.

And now in this composition of the humane Nature, we have these things
observable:

1. That in this contexture of the Humane Body and Intellectual Soul we have a
Creature made up, that is, nexus utriusque mundi, intellectualis scilicet and
corporei. The next Range of Beings above him are the pure and immaterial
Intelligences, the next below him is the sensible Nature. Man is as it were the
Comes limitaneus of each Nature, participating of both. And we may observe,
that in the process of Natural Beings, there seem some to be Creatures placed
as it were in the Confines of several Provinces, and participating something of
either; as in things that have life and that have not; there is placed the
Minerals between the inanimate and vegetable Province, participating something
analogical to either: Between the vegetable and sensitive Province there are
Plant-animals, and some kind of Insects arising from Vegetables, that seem to
participate of both: Between the animal and rational Province, there seem to be
some Animals that have a dark Image or resemblance of the Influxes of Reason.
So between the corporeal and intellectual World, there is constituted Man,
participating much of both Natures: It a quod non transitur ad extreme nisi per
media.

2. That Man in his constitution seems admirably fitted to the convenience of
his Nature, a little World accommodated with Faculties and Organs admirably
convenient to it self, a kind of entire State, Kingdom, or Republic within
himself, fitted with all accommodations and requisites for the due Regiment of
himself, as a Sensible and Intellectual Being: He has the Council or Senate of
his Intellect, and her subservient Acts and Faculties to advise him; the Empire
and Regiment of his Will to command the Satellites and Ministers of his
Passions and Animal Spirits to execute his Conscience for his Tribunal: There
wants nothing within this little Circle of himself, which may be requisite to
order that little compacted Province for its Political Regiment.

And thus far concerning Man, as relating to himself, his Parts, Faculties, and
entire Composition: It remains, that we take a little survey of him, as he
stands in relation to things without him; which is the last Consideration that
I promised in this brief Inventory of the Humane Nature and Excellencies.

The Humane Nature, thus fitted with these Faculties, is admirably accommodated
to a threefold relation to somewhat without him, namely, To Almighty God: To
the rest of Mankind: And to this mundus aspectabilis wherein he lives.

1. To Almighty God; for being a Creature endued with an Immortal Soul, endued
with those great Faculties of Understanding and Will, and those Facultates
Ancillares of his Affections, he is rendered into a capacity, 1. Of knowing Him:
2. Of knowing his Will, and what is acceptable to Him; for it is in a great
measure inscribed in his Soul: 3. Of being a fit Subject to Him, and to obey
Him: 4. Of loving and trusting in Him: 5. Of glorifying of Him, especially in
the Contemplation of His Works, which are proposed to his Sense and
Understanding: 6. Of Invoking and Worshipping: And 7. Finally, to enjoy the
Blessed Vision of Him, by reason of the congruity of his Immortal and
Intellectual Nature to such a fruition. And thus we have him in his Duty,
Religion; and in his Happiness, Immortal Life.

2. To the rest of mankind he is accommodated with Moral principles inherent in
his Nature, and improvable by the exercise of his Faculties, as is before
shown; he is accommodated with Speech and Intellectual signs to maintain
intercourse and mutual communion and commerce; and his very disposition and the
mutual necessitudes of humane Nature necessarily maintain mutual offices and
correspondence between them; and the accommodations of Government and Laws are
the fruit and productions of his Intellectual nature, and the support of
society.

3. To the rest of the visible World; there is an admirable accommodation of
the humane Nature and Faculties to the Mundus aspectabilis, and of the several
parts of it, and of them to it.

1. Of the Faculties of the humane Nature to the visible Universe, especially
the vegetable and animal Natures, which by means of the admirable advantage of
his Intellect, and that singular Engine of the Hand, he has skill and power to
subdue and bring under, whereby he exercises dominion over them and protection
of them, as the Vicegerent and Deputy of Almighty God.

2. Of the Universe and parts thereof to the humane Nature and Faculties, which
were infinite to enumerate; I shall only insert some of them.

1. A kind of awful subjection and fear of the greatest part of the animal
Nature, of him and to him; and though some be so hardy and unruly as to resist
him, yet he wants not power by the advantage of his Understanding and Hand to
subdue and master them.

2. An accommodation of most of the things within the compass of the visible
Universe to his use and convenience, which though I cannot say it is the only
or the prime end of their being, yet they are singularly accommodated to the
use, delight and benefit of mankind, as might easily appear by an enumeration
of particulars: The light, motion, and influence of the Sun and Stars; the
nature, position and frame of Elements; the variety and concurrence of the
Meteors; the fertility of the Land; the position of the Ocean; the
interspersion of the Rivers; the various Minerals, Vegetables and Animals, some
serving for his food, some for his clothing; some for his labor and travel;
some for his delight; the whole compass of Nature affording infinite variety of
Instances of this kind.

3. An admirable accommodation of all the things in the World to his Faculties,
and for their delight, advancement and improvement. He has the perception of
Sense, to which all the visible Objects of the World are presented, and he has
the light and searching Faculty of his Understanding, which as it is qualified
for such an employment of Contemplation, so it has a fruitful exhibition of
Objects of great variety and excellency, the knowledge whereof does not only
delight and enrich his Faculties, but are so many manuductions to the knowledge
and admiration of the infinite Wisdom, Power and Goodness of the Creator and
Upholder of them.

And thus I have given a short and brief estimate of the peculiar Excellencies
of the Humane Nature: I did not design a large or exact enumeration or
description of them; There is not any one particular abovementioned but would
take up the business of a just Volume, and I am easily conscious that I have
omitted many things that possibly might be of as great importance as any that I
have mentioned: But this brief Inventory I have here given as preparatory to
what follows, and to pre-possess the Reader, 1. That a natural Indagation
according to the light of natural Reason touching the Origination of such a
Creature as this, is no contemptible or unworthy enquiry: 2. That surely such a
Creature as this thus accommodated could not have his Origination from any less
than an Intellectual, most Wise, Powerful and Beneficent Being, the great God,
Creator and Governor of Heaven and Earth: And this is the scope and end of my
business in this Tract, the short Synopsis whereof is as follows.

There are two grand Opinions among the Ancients touching the Origination of
Man: The first is, That Humane Species had no beginning, but was Eternal; the
second, That it had a beginning.

In the first place, I examine the supposition of the Eternity of Mankind in
their successive Generations: And in order thereunto I take up the
consideration of the Eternity of the World as it is now constituted, and,
whether it be in Nature possible that it should be so: I then descend to the
particular consideration of the Eternity of Mankind, whether although there
should be a possibility of an eternity of some permanent created Beings,
whether yet there be a possibility in Nature, or any probability of evidence
that Mankind can be eternal a part ante, or without beginning.

This I oppose by Arguments of two kinds; 1. From the very repugnancy in Nature
of successive Beings to be without an inception, or eternal, and upon these
kind of evidences I do indeed lay the principal weight and stress of my
Conclusion, because though these kind of Arguments may seem more obscure, yet
upon a due consideration of them they are highly consequential and concludent
to my purpose.

2. The second sort of evidences are Moral evidences, wherein I take into
consideration most of those Moral evidences that have been collected by others
or thought of by my self against the Eternity of Mankind: Whereupon I do
conclude, 1. That singly and apart many of them are subject to exception, yet
collectively they make up a good moral evidence touching a temporary inception
of the humane Nature: 2. I do consider the particular deficiencies of those
moral evidences taken singly and apart: 3. I substitute other moral evidences
that even singly and apart have each of them a great moral and topical evidence
of this truth and are not capable of any considerable Objection against them,
though taken sigillatim and apart.

But when all is done, I lay the great stress of my Conclusion upon the first
sort of Evidences natural, or metaphysical, which seem to me no less than
demonstrative; and therefore if no other moral evidences were added thereunto,
or if those moral evidences should be capable of exception (as some of them
are) yet the truth of the Conclusion against the eternity of Mankind is
sufficiently supported by those that I offer in the first place, which I call
Physical and Metaphysical.

2. Again, I then come to consider that Opinion which supposes an Inception of
the Humane Nature.

I consider the various Hypotheses that the Ancients entertained touching the
manner of that Origination, and show the absurdity of them in their several
orders.

I then consider the Mosaical Hypothesis, and the great reasonableness thereof
upon a bare Natural or Moral account, without taking in the Infallibility of
Divine Revelation.

In order to that, I consider the whole Mosaical Systeme or History of the
Creation of the World, the admirable congruity it has, both with it self, and
with a due and unprejudiced and considerate Reason.

And lastly, I deduce certain Corollaries or Consequences from the whole
Discourse, both Theoretical and Moral, and this is in effect the whole Method
of what these Papers contain: Wherein I proceed merely upon an account of
Natural Reason and Light, because in this Discourse I deal with such as are
either only or most commonly guided and governed by such Sentiments, and
therefore I do not call in to my assistance the Authority of Divine Revelation,
though that of it self does and ought to carry the full and unquestionable
Assent of all good Men that are acquainted therewith.

CAP. III. A brief Consideration of the Hypotheses that concern the Eternity of
the World.
ALthough I intend not a large Discourse touching their Suppositions that hold
the Eternity of the World, yet it will be convenient a little to consider it,
for the better application of what follows in the ensuing Discourse, touching
the Eternity of the Successions of Mankind, and the possibility or
impossibility thereof.

The Supposition of the Eternity of the World is considerable under a double
relation: 1. With relation to the Notion of Eternity: 2. With relation to the
Subject it self, which they would have eternal, namely, the World, either
wholly or in some parts thereof.

In relation to Eternity it self, two things are to be premised: 1. What it is;
2. What its Kinds are. 1. As to the former, in all this Discourse I call that
Eternal which is without beginning, or eternal a part ante. 2. Things thus
supposed Eternal may be of two kinds, either such as have an Eternity simply
independent upon any thing without it, or from which it should derive that
Eternal Being, as we and all good Men say that Almighty God is Eternal: Or
else, such an Eternity as yet supposes its dependence upon Almighty God as its
Cause. And they that attribute the first kind of Eternity to the World, must do
it upon one of these two grounds, viz. That there is no other first Being, no
first Cause, no God, upon whom the World should depend, or from whom it should
derive this its Eternal Existence: And this is the grossest and most irrational
Supposition, as well as the foulest Atheism, that can be imagined. Or else,
That although there be in truth such a Being as God, yet the World had not this
its Eternal Existence by any derivation or influx from Him, but has it
absolutely and independently. This is the Epicurean Atheism, which though it
oppose the Eternity of the World in that consistency that now it has, yet it
asserts the Eternity of those small and infinite particles of Matter, and the
coalition of them into that state wherein they now are in process and
succession of time and motion, yet without any dependence of the one or the
other upon Almighty God, whom he totally secludes from the concerns of the
World.

Others there are again, that attribute an Eternity to the World, but yet
withal acknowledge Almighty God, and also Him to be the Efficient thereof: And
therefore though they attribute an Eternity to it, yet it is but a dependent
Eternity, and so though it be Eternal, yet it is but an Eternal Effect of an
Eternal Cause. These are much more tolerable than either of the former, for
they assert a God, and likewise the dependence of the World in its Eternal
Existence and Duration upon Almighty God, as the Cause and Root of that Being
of the World.

But among those that thus assert this dependent Eternity of the World upon
Almighty God as its Cause or Efficient, there seems to be two Parties, namely,
1. Such as suppose Almighty God the Necessary Cause of the World as his
Necessary Effect. 2. Such as suppose Him merely the Voluntary Cause of the
World and of its Eternity. Of the former sort, that suppose Almighty God the
Necessary Cause of the World and of its Eternal Existence, there seem to be
these two Parties or different Opinions.

1. Such as suppose the World a mere natural and necessary Emanation from God
as its necessary Cause, without any manner of intrinsecal freedom in Himself to
do or be otherwise, and consequently it being a necessary and connatural Effect
of the first Cause, it must be necessarily as ancient as Himself, and if
Almighty God be (as He is) most necessarily, so upon the same necessity He is
the Cause of the World, and the World a necessary, and consequently Eternal,
Production necessarily flowing from the same; as if the Sun be Eternal, his
Light, which necessarily flows from the Existence of the Sun, is likewise
necessarily Eternal. This seems to be the Opinion of Aristotle, and some others
that follow him.

2. Again some there have been, who will not have Almighty God to be a mere
natural and necessary Cause of the World, but such a Cause as is a free Agent,
agens per intellectum and voluntatem, and that the World was an Effect of Him,
not as a natural or necessary, but as a voluntary and free Agent: And yet the
World was necessarily Eternal, though freely willed to be Eternal. For they do
suppose, that in as much as God Almighty is necessarily Good and Wise, and it
is part of his Perfection to will what is best, and always to will it,
therefore the Divine Will was always determined, even eternally, to will the
Existence of the World, as a thing eternally consonant to the Perfection of his
Nature, to will and always to will what is best: And there was never, in all
the vast and boundless Period of Eternity, any one moment wherein he willed not
to communicate his own Benignity and Bounty to something without Him; and
therefore though he freely willed the World to be, as a free Agent, yet that
freedom of his Will was from all Eternity determined, by the Perfect Goodness
and Beneficence of his Nature, ever to will what He once willed, and
consequently to will the World to be Eternally: Herein confounding the Divine
Goodness with the Divine Beneficence and Benignity, the former being indeed
necessary, but the latter under the Conduct and Guidance of his Free Will,
indetermined by any thing but it self.

Others there are that attribute the Being of the World to the mere
beneplacitum voluntatis divinae, neither determined as a mere Natural cause,
nor determined by any intrinsecal obligation of his own Goodness; but only that
he willed it because he willed it, though most wisely and bountifully: Many of
these do not indeed conclude the World to have been eternal, but in conformity
to the truth of the Sacred Scriptures conclude it to be created in the
beginning of time, but yet do again conclude that there is nothing in the
nature of the thing either on the part of Almighty God, or on the part of the
World it self, or on the part of the manner of its Creation which is
instantanous and per modum emanationis; but that such parts of the World at
least as have a permanent existence, and are not in a flux of succession, might
have been not only in some period antecedent to that point of time wherein de
facto it was created, but also that it might have been thus eternally created
if the Divine beneplacitum had so pleased: And therefore many of those do not
conclude that it was so, but that it might have been so eternally created, yet
freely and voluntarily without any of the two foregoing necessities. Thus
^quinas, Suarez and some others.

And thus having considered these various suppositions touching the diverse
qualities or qualifications of this eternal Existence of the World, I shall now
consider the subject Matter which men would thus have to be eternal, or at
least possible to be such, namely the World. And herein even many of the
assertors of the Eternity of the World, or the possibility thereof, have (and
not without cause) fallen into diverse conclusions.

By the World therefore we must understand either the Matter of the World
simply in it self, without being determined to this determinate Fabric wherein
it is; and thus it should seem that all those ancient Philosophers that have
asserted the Eternity of the World, as Aristotle, and before him Otellus
Lucanus: or, that have asserted novitatem mundi in hac constitutione, have
agreed; thus Epicurus, that asserts the coalition of Atoms into this Fabric
that we see, was of later edition than Eternity, yet asserts that these Atoms
were eternal: and those Ancients mentioned by Aristotle in the 8th of his
Physics, that held that the World was made, and unmade and made again by
eternal vicissitudes of Amor and Inimicitia, yet held the constituent Matter
thereof eternal. And this seems to be the most comprehensive acceptance of the
World.

2. Again, by the World we may understand the World as it is now framed, the
visible World in that form and constitution as it now is: And thus it seems,
Aristotle and those others that hold it proceeds necessarily from God as a
necessary cause, or as a cause determined by his intrinsic Goodness, have held
the World to be eternal; but yet we must not rest here. The World is like a
goodly Palace, a fair large Building; but as in such a Palace there is first
the case or fabric or moles of the Structure it self, and besides that there
are certain additaments that contribute to its ornament and use; as various
Furniture, rare Fountains and Aqueducts, curious Motions of diverse things
appendicated to it, as Clocks, Engines, etc. so in the goodly Universe there are
the great Structure it self, and its great integrals the Heavenly and
Elementary Bodies, framed in such a position and situation, the great Sceleton,
as I may call it, of the World: But besides this there are very various and
curious furnitures and accommodations of the Universe, as for instance, in our
inferior World various Animals, Vegetables, Meteors, Minerals, Mixtures, and
Men; and in the Heavenly Bodies various Motions and Aspects.

Now it will be necessary for him that asserts the Eternity of the World as now
it stands, or the possibility of such an eternity, to consider whether he
applies his assertion to the whole World, as consisting not only of the greater
integrals whereof it consists, as the Heavenly and possibly the Elementary
Bodies; but also of that furniture thereof consisting of Men, Animals,
Vegetables, Meteors, Minerals, and those accommodations that are to it, as the
Motions of the Heavenly Bodies; or whether he intends only some parts of it
which seem more capable of an eternal existence, as being more fixed, and in
themselves permanent, and so more able to sustain an eternal and consequently
an immutable existence.

And upon examination we shall (...) find either of these choices full of
incurable difficulties, if not utter impossibilities, in relation to an eternal
existence of the World or any parts thereof.

And this I shall in the order of this Discourse evince against all those
former suppositions of Eternity; namely, 1. Against those that assert an
independent eternal existence of the World: 2. Against those that assert an
eternal but dependent existence thereof upon Almighty God, as a mere natural
and necessary Cause thereof: 3. Against those that assert an eternal existence
of the World dependent upon God as a free intellectual and voluntary Agent, but
yet determined in his external emanations by the necessity of the Goodness and
Beneficence of his nature: 4. Against those that assert at least a possibility
of an eternal existence of the World, but dependent upon the freedom of the
Divine Will undetermined by the necessity of his Beneficence.

First therefore concerning the supposition of the Eternity of the World in
general; I shall not in this place dispute whether there be an utter
impossibility of any material Being to be either independently or dependently
eternal; enough may be said against it from the incapacity of any material
Being to sustain such a kind of duration a part ante, and yet without any
derogation to the Divine Omnipotence or Goodness, which though infinite, yet
cannot communicate such a duration to that which in its own intrinsic nature
is not capable of it: Nor secondly, shall I dispute whether there be any such
material or corporeal Being or Beings within the compass of the Universe, that
has or may have such a kind of permanence or fixedness in being that may be
capable of an eternal existence a part ante, either dependently or
independently upon Almighty God; admitting by way of argument, but not granting
it possible, that in the nature of the thing some material or corporeal Being
may be of such a fixed, permanent consistence as may sustain such an eternal
existence; and I here omit this dispute not because I make the least doubt of
the beginning thereof by Creation, but because these are matters that require a
longer and stricter process of enquiry and debate than I intend in this place:
and therefore I shall descend to things that are more plain and evident, and
yet such as will abundantly serve my design in the inquiry in hand.

And therefore for the present I shall gratia argumenti admit or suppose, 1.
That there are or may be some corporeal things in the compass of the Universe
that may possibly be of such a fixedness, stability and permanent nature that
may sustain an eternal existence, at least dependently upon the supreme Cause.
2. And that possibly Matter it self undetermined to any particular form, or
under any particular constitution; the Heavenly Bodies, the Elementary Bodies,
and such as seem to have a simple nature; and possibly their figure, position,
and situation may be such as might have this eternal existence, as the Sun, the
Stars, the Ether, the four Elements; we will, for avoiding dispute touching it
for the present, admit them to have been, or that possibly they might have been
of that nature, quality, distance each from other eternally as now they are,
like the great integrals and contignations, figure and concamerations of a
goodly Palace: These things I say, though in themselves most certainly untrue,
I shall for avoidance of difficult disputes admit at present. Yet I farther
say, that though all these things were admitted, yet there are some great and
considerable parts and integrals, and appendications unto the Mundus
aspectabilis that we see, that are purely impossible to be eternal, and do de
facto appear so to be; and consequently it is apparent that the World in its
full latitude and comprehension cannot be eternal.

And herein I shall not fix upon little or inconsiderable things, but upon such
as highly contribute to the excellency, beauty and usefulness thereof; neither
shall I fix upon individuals which are apparently transient, and necessarily
have their beginning, duration and end in certain known determinate portions of
time, as is evident in the individuals of all kinds or species of mixed,
sublunary Natures: But I shall apply my self to the species themselves, which
most that assert the eternity of the World assert to be eternal, or to such
individuals as are the single Conservators of their own species.

And in this debate I shall take my measure from things in Nature as I find
them; and it is reasonable I should do so, especially considering that this
Discourse concerns principally the Judgments or Opinions of those men that are
the great assertors of Nature, and the eternity of those Laws, Rules, Orders,
or Methods of Nature which they now find and observe in it: And it were a great
vanity and rashness especially for such men to reject those reasons which are
drawn from the nature of things as now they appear, or for them to go about to
answer those reasons by suppositions of a variety in things from what they now
appear. If therefore the state and method of things to be instanced in, as they
now appear, do involve a repugnancy to an eternal existence, the Arguments
drawn from that Supposition must be conclusive, at least to those great Priests
and Venerators of Nature and its appearances.

Those things therefore that I would instance in, as in their own nature
incapable of eternal existence a part ante, are these:

1. All things that are of all hands agreed to be concreted of other things,
and necessarily in their own nature require a pre-existence of those more
simple Bodies out of which they are concreted, and a pre-existence of some
preparatory antecedent motion for their coalition, mixtion and concretion; as
Animals, Vegetables, Minerals, Meteors, and regularly all mixed Bodies.

2. All things that are in their own nature successive, as all Motion,
Alteration, Generations, Corruptions, and all things that in their own
constitution have as it were intrinsecally annexed to them, or at least
necessarily belonging to them in respect of their situation and position, and
juxta-position to other things, a necessary subjection to alteration or
corruption.

3. All things that do not, nor (their nature considered) cannot persist in one
immutable state, but have variety in the nature and manner of their existence
necessarily by the laws of their nature annexed to them.

These things constituted and being in that state we find them, cannot without
a total alteration of their nature and being from what in truth they are, nor
in the state of nature wherein they are placed, can they be eternal or without
beginning: And these are very considerable and momentous parts or appendices of
the World, and if it had been eternally without these, it had been a very lame
and defective World, and such as the wisest man under Heaven could hardly
understand for what use it would be, or why it should have continued in such a
defective condition from the endless period of Eternity: Or at least if it had
its use and beauty, certainly it had not had the same use that now it has, nor
the same beauty that now it has.

And the consequence thereof is of great moment and importance, viz. If these
great accessions to the World, whereof I am speaking, could not be eternal, and
yet without them the World would have been greatly deficient from what it is,
the greatest Arguments for the Eternity of the rest of the World will
necessarily fall off: for the same reason that concludes for the necessity of
an eternal existence of the World, would as effectually conclude for the
eternal existence of that which highly conduces to the beauty, use, and ends
of the Universe, which yet we shall find cannot be eternally existing; as it
concludes for the eternity of such integrals of the World which possibly might
be eternal. Again, if it be inconsistent with the nature of many of those
things eternally to be, which yet contribute much to the glory, beauty,
usefulness and excellency of the World, as mixed Bodies, motion, and alteration;
how can we think that there is a necessity in the Divine Nature to have made
that Case or Sceleton of the World from eternity which should have been in so
great a measure useless, and wanting that beauty, order, use and perfection
which it obtains from the contribution of mixed Bodies, motions, and
alterations? And what could be thought a sufficient motive to have had an
eternal Carcass of an Universe wherein the materials and positions of it were
eternally laid together, and to consist infinite millions of Ages; and yet that
which gives it its beauty and ornament and use, at least in a great measure,
must be brought to a beginning five, or six, or ten thousand years since, and
not before? The nearness or novity therefore that is necessarily required in
these great contributions to the beauty and use of the Universe is a great
evidence of the novity of all the rest: And therefore although the House must
be built some time before it be furnished, and the Watch must be made, the
materials formed, adapted and fitted, and the whole put together before it be
put in motion; yet it were unnecessary and vain to suppose the Case or Fabric
of the House, or the Fabric and Composition of the Watch, were an infinite
time before its furnishing and setting into motion.

But to the business it self, and the Instances above given:

1. It seems inconsistent with the Nature of mixed Bodies that they should be
eternal, for then they must be as ancient as those simple Bodies out of which
they are taken.

That there are in our inferior World diverse Bodies, that are concreted out of
others, is beyond all dispute. We see it in the Meteors; the Clouds are
attracted out of moist and watery, and also earthy Vapors; Stones and Minerals
do grow and arise in the Earth, out of the succus terrestris digested by the
heat of the Sun: Diverse Vegetables, and some Animals, sponte nata, arise from
the temperament of the terrestrial and watery Matter, the insinuations of the
Ether and Air into it, and the influence of the Sun: Other Animals, and some
Vegetables, have a more regular production from Seed, as some of the perfecter
sort of Vegetables, and the nobler Animals, and Men; which seminal Principle is
a mixture of the diverse particles of Matter and Spirits, derived and elicited
from the Plant or Animal.

And as it is apparent, that there are such mixed Concretions, so it is
apparent, that before the actual concretion of these mixed Bodies there must be
pre-existent to it: 1. The Matter, or more simple Bodies out of which they are
concreted: Again, 2. There must be antecedent to it that Ethereal or Solar
heat, that must digest, influence, irradiate, and put these more simple parts
of Matter into motion and coalition: And 3. Before the full and perfect
formation of this concrete, there must be a preparation, and digestion, and
formation of this Matter, before it come into a perfect Concrete, be it of what
kind soever; and this preparation, digestion, and formation, requires a
competent mora, or time, antecedent to its complete and full constitution. All
these are evident, in a more special and eminent manner in the production of
Animals and Vegetables, but I shall at present take the Instance, that is
obvious every day in our Gardens, in the production of a common Flint or
Pebble: First, there is the more simple Matter, out of which it borrows its
substance, namely, the Earth, and the Water or Moisture; then there is the heat
of the Sun, that digests and concocts both; then there is the conjunction and
cohesion of the Matter into a more loose, or indigested and softer consistency
like Mortar or Clay, and thereby it is prepared to the concrement of a Pebble
or Flint, which possibly in a week or a month it perfectly obtains. Every Man
must needs see, that in the natural course of things this Pebble does suppose,
as pre-existent to it, the more simple Matter out of which it is desumed, the
heat and influence of the Sun, and the due preparation of the Matter; which
takes up a competent time, and that necessarily, before this Pebble had its
complete Being: And consequently, in the course of Nature, it is impossible
that any Pebble was eternal, for it necessarily required these things to have
been before it could be, and yet if it were eternal, it must have been as
ancient as that Earth, and that Water, which was its material constituent, and
as that Sun, whose heat digested it, or coagulated it, or as that preparation
which preceded its consistence.

And though this Instance be of one Individual, and that of the basest nature,
yet the very same reason holds in all mixed Bodies, as in Meteors, Comets,
Minerals, Vegetables, Animals, their Seeds and Productions. The consequence of
this is, that it is impossible that mixed or compounded Bodies can be eternal,
because there is necessarily, according to the Rules of Nature, a pre-existence
of the simple Bodies out of which they are desumed, and an antecedence of their
constitution preceding the existence of mixed Bodies.

If any Man shall object against this Reason, and say, That it destroys my
own Foundation, which supposes a creation or concrement of those very Bodies
which I suppose to be mixed, as Animals, Vegetables, etc. without all this
preliminary process, or orderly antecedency of such circumstances, as are now
in the course of Nature, as it stands settled, necessary to their production:
And that, as I do suppose, all created Beings had at first their primitive
production by the Fiat of the Divine Will and Power, so in the defense of that
Supposition or Conclusion, I must suppose another method of production of mixed
Bodies, than what we now find in Nature as it stands settled.

I answer, That it is true, I must and do suppose another kind of method in the
first and primitive Constitution of things by Creation: But it stands and
consists with, and is consonant to my whole Supposition, and indeed my general
Supposition* cannot possibly be or consist without a Supposition also, That the
first constitution and coalition of mixed Bodies was quite of another frame or
method, than what now obtains in settled Nature.

But the Objector must consider against whom and what kind of Opinators the
Reason above given is levelled, who take all their Measures from things as they
now see them in settled Nature, and do thereupon assert, That the order and
method of the existence and production of all things was eternally the same as
now it is. And therefore certainly this Reason is fully concludent against
those persons that would suppose an Eternity in all things in the World,
independent upon the first Cause and Efficient: For certainly those of their
Principles do and must needs suppose, that things had no other method of their
production than what we now see they have, and therefore they must (if they
hold to their Principles) agree that they had their production always as now
they have: The necessary consequence whereof is, that if such a kind of
production of mixed Bodies cannot in the nature of the thing be eternal, they
cannot have an eternal production.

But it is true, that this does not answer the Supposition of those, that
though they suppose an Eternity in mixed Bodies, do attribute even that Eternity
to an eternal Creation, and therefore to another kind of production than what
we now suppose to be natural, and consequently as they suppose, at first in an
eternal moment Almighty God created simple Bodies, as the Heavenly or
Elementary Bodies, so in the same instant He might and did create other Bodies,
which though in their constitution they were or might be composed of such
particles, as had they been asunder and divided, might have been of the simple
nature of those simpler Bodies, yet they were in the same eternal moment or
instant created and put together without any priority of existence in those
simple Bodies whereof they might otherwise consist; nor were such mixed eternal
Bodies successively desumed or compounded out of the pre-existing simple
Bodies, but con-created and put together in the same eternal and indivisible
moment or instant: so that a Mineral for the purpose might be created in the
same moment wherein the elementary Earth was created. And although after the
completing of the whole Frame of Nature in that eternal, indivisible,
intelligible moment, the production of mixed Bodies either by spontaneous or
contingent coalition of various particles of Matter, or by an univocal
generation, the course that is now held in Nature might be observed, and that
Priority of particles of simple Matter, Influx of the Heavens, and Preparation
of Matter might be antecedent and precedaneous not only in order but in time to
their ordinary productions; yet at first it might be, and was otherwise in the
primitive constitution of such mixed Bodies as had their original by Creation.

I do confess this Supposition may evade the illation made upon the Natural
production of mixed Bodies, but then we must remember that this quite departs
from the method of things as they now stand in the course of Nature; neither
can any man conclude that it was or could be so from the observation of the
Order or Cause of Nature, or any rational deduction from the same, but must
have recourse either to bare Notion or Conjecture, or else to Divine
Revelation; the former seems somewhat too light, soundly to ground any
Hypothesis; and the latter, namely, Divine Revelation, though it does discover
unto us that things had their production in a different way in their first
Constitution or Origination, namely, by the almighty Power of God creating
them, yet withal it informs us that that origination was not from Eternity,
but in the beginning of Time, which wholly overthrows the Hypothesis of an
Eternal Creation of the World: If therefore they will appeal to Revelation for
their Creation, they must be concluded by it, not to say it was eternal.

2. My second Reason is this, Because all things that are in their nature
successive must have a first beginning of their being, and cannot be eternal.
But there are in the World many things of great note and moment (and without
which the Order and Usefulness of the Universe would be deficient) which have a
successive nature; and therefore such things cannot be eternal or without
beginning: And this reason concludes forcibly as well against that independent
Eternity supposed by some of the Ancients, as that Eternity dependent upon
Almighty God, whether as a necessary Cause, or as a free voluntary intellectual
Cause determined by the necessary Goodness and Beneficence of his nature; or as
a perfectly free Agent, determining his Will by his own beneplacitum thus
eternally to produce the World.

The Assumption or minor Proposition, That there are many things in the World
of great moment and importance to it that are in their own nature successive,
is apparent; such are all the Individuals of Species of corruptible things,
that yet notwithstanding have a continued succession in their individuals, as
Vegetables, Animals, and Men, that successively propagate their kind. 2. All
kinds of Motions to which all natural Bodies are in some kind or other subject,
as the motions of Generation and Corruption, Augmentation, Diminution, and
Alteration that are uncessantly incident to all sublunary Bodies, and they must
change their nature and cease to be what they are, before they can cease to be
actually subject to alterations; such is also Local motion, communicable not
only to the inferior and sublunary Bodies, but also to celestial Bodies, and
this motion even of the Heavenly Bodies themselves seems to be partly continued
and unintermitted, as that motion of the First Moveable; partly interpolated
and interrupted, as some affirm of that Motus trepidationis; sometimes of
access and recess, as the Annual motion of the Sun, wherein some have thought
there is a small, though impeceptible, rest in the very point of returning,
which we call Solstices.

The major Proposition, namely, that such successive things cannot be eternal,
includes two Affirmations, viz. 1. That the motions or successions themselves
cannot be eternal or without beginning: 2. That the things that have
necessarily and inseparably these motions or alterations annexed to their
nature cannot be eternal, so long as we suppose them necessarily accompanied
with these alterations: The former of these is considerable in this place, the
other is considerable under the next Reason.

Now touching the impossibility of the eternal succession of the Species,
whether of Men, Animals, or Vegetables by natural propagation or prosemination,
the same and the Reasons thereof shall be fully delivered when we come to the
particular consideration of the Origination of Mankind, and the necessity of
fixing in some common Parents of the individuals of Mankind, and thither I
shall refer my self.

As touching the eternity of any kind of Motion, especially even of that of the
Heavenly Bodies, I shall say somewhat briefly in this place which will be
easily reducible to any other of the motions in the World, as namely the
motions of Generation, Corruption or Alteration, all which are in some respect
but the effects of Local motion of one kind or another.

And there seem to be two special Reasons even from the intrinsecal nature of
the things that encounter the possibility of an eternal successive duration in
them: The first concludes against all imaginable eternity of Motion of the
Heavenly Bodies, whether independent or dependent upon Almighty God; the latter
indeed principally concludes against the possibility of the created or
dependent eternity thereof. And they are these:

1. If the circular motion of the Sun or Heavens were eternal, then there must
be two circulations of the Heavens immediately succeeding on the other Eternal;
the consequence whereof yet would be, That the one of those circulations would
be necessarily before the other by the space of twenty four Hours, which would
be impossible, for then the next succeeding circulation would not be so ancient
as the first, and yet both should be eternal, which is impossible and repugnant.

This Reason a late Philosopher has made use of in substance, but in a
different method, namely, That if the circular Motion of the Heaven were
eternal, then of necessity there must be granted some one circulation of the
Heaven to be distant from us by an interposition of infinite Circulations: This
consequence must needs be true, and yet it would perfectly destroy infinite
Circulation of the Heaven; for it would necessarily from hence follow that all
the intermediate Circulations were finite, and determinate on both ends; at
this end with that Circulation that is presently in motion, and a part ante
with that Circulation that is supposed to be infinitely distant from us, which
excludes any possibility of infinitude in Motions intermediate. And if it be
said that the first of these intermediate Circulations is likewise infinitely
distant from this, then it should be infinitely distant and yet the next
precedent Circulation should be before it, which destroys the very nature and
reason of infinitude. And if it shall be said that that next succeeding
Circulation after that which is so supposed infinitely distant from what is now
current, is distant from us by a finite interval, and not infinitely, then that
one Circulation which preceded it, and must necessarily be like ours, and
consequently absolved in the space of twenty four Hours, shall by its accession
to a finite number of Circulations, or consequently to a finite interval of
duration, make up an infinite succession and an infinite duration; the addition
of that one antecedent Circulation shall make the intermediate finite
Circulations infinite, and the addition of a period of twenty four Hours (the
uttermost extent of one Circulation) shall make a finite time or interval
infinite, which are intolerable absurdities, and yet necessary consequences
upon the supposition of the eternal Motion of the Heaven or Sun; or if you
will, of the Earth, as the Copernicans will have it.

2. A second Reason is this, which though it be but a different and farther
explication of the former, yet it renders it clearer and in more perspicuous
terms, which is this: Whatsoever once was and now is not, as it is now past, so
it was once present, and before it was so present was future: Take it in the
former Instance; It is not possible that there could have been any Revolution
of the Heaven that is now past, but that the same was once present; as
whatsoever now is, is necessarily whiles it is so; whatsoever has been, was
necessarily whiles it was; in praeteritis non est contingentia.

The consequent whereof is, that whiles it is impossible but that the remotest
Revolution of the Heaven once was present, That Revolution when present, was
necessarily the Epoch, the terminus from whence all other succeeding
Revolutions took the course or journey; and yet this remotest Revolution could
not be of a greater period than 24 Hours, which was not sufficient to make it
eternal, yet all the succeeding Revolutions took their rise and journey from
it; and must needs be closed within two bounds, namely, the most remote and the
present Revolution.

Again, if it be impossible that there can be any Revolution now past which was
not once present, then the most remote was once present, and at that time when
it was so present had none before it or more ancient than it; and that
Revolution being such as now we have, must necessarily have its beginning
within the space of twenty four Hours, before which it was not, and
consequently when it was so present could not be eternal; and consequently all
the Revolutions that succeeded came after it, was terminated by it, and by such
a Revolution that when it was present had a beginning and could not be eternal,
nor consequently all the Revolutions that happened since that first, which are
utrinque clausa, namely, with that which is remotest, and with this that now is
in motion.

3. Whatsoever bodily Being is created eternally, must necessarily be created
in some certain situs or disposition, and must of necessity remain an eternal
duration in that situs or disposition wherein it was so created. For instance,
if we should suppose the Sun created eternally, we must necessarily suppose 1.
That he was created in some determinate ubi or situs, for that is undispensably
necessary to every created individual Body; and therefore if he were eternally
created we must suppose him created in tali vel tali plaga mundi, suppose we to
be above our Horizon, or below it. 2. It must necessarily be, that in that ubi
where he was so created, that he must by an eternal space or duration abide in
that situs or ubi where he was so created; and he must (it is true) have a
disposition to motion, but he must be in dispositione tantum ad motum by an
infinite tract of duration: For if we shall suppose that he staid in his situs
of his Creation but an hour, or a day, or a moment, and then set out to move,
that moment of his existence before he moved would terminate and bound the
duration of his motion, which could not be eternal because it had an antecedent
moment before it, which secludes it from eternity: Neither can we suppose him
to be eternally created in motion, for he must be before he can move, and must
also have a terminus motus a quo. But suppose we might imagine him to be in the
very first eternal imaginable instant of his eternal being put into motion, yet
the terminus of that motion must necessarily be that ubi and situs wherein he
was created, which would necessarily be the antecedent circumscription of the
line of his motion; and if the line of his motion has necessarily a terminus
of its inception, it must of necessity have a terminus of its duration, and
cannot be infinite in duration a part ante: And as to this purpose there will
be no manner of difference between a circular motion and a straight motion, if
we could suppose in the vast abyss of imaginary infinite space there were some
one determinate point from whence a direct local motion should be supposed to
begin its motion, the line that such a straight motion should make would be
finite, and consequently an infinite time could not possibly be consumed in
such a motion. And upon the same account if the Sun were created in any point
of the Hemisphere, and then presently took his start or motion to the West, and
so onward in his circular journey, it were impossible that the line of that
motion should be of an infinite extension, but being drawn out at length like a
clew of thread wound off from a bottom, it would be of a finite extension, and
consequently the period of that motion could never be infinite. For Aristotle
tells us truly, that an infinite time can never be drawn out in a finite
motion, nor an infinite motion be absolved in a finite time: This Reason the
acute and judicious Suarez, 2. Metaph. disp. 29. sect. 1. borrows from Antonius
Ruvio, and though according to the opinion of Aquinas he be a stiff assertor of
the possibility of the Eternal Creation of the World, ibid. disp. 20. yet he
frankly confesses and maintains that Motion is of such a nature as is not
capable of an eternal duration a part ante; and thereupon concludes, Propter
hanc ergo causam existimo Aeternitatem repugnare Motui, and Motum includere
repugnantiam cum quadam immutabilitate, quam includit Aeternitas: Ideoque de
facto motum non solum non esse aeternum, verum neque esse posse. Igitur ex motu
aeterno colligi non potest Motor eternus vel immaterialis.

And now let any Man consider what is gained by the Supposition of an Eternity
of the Bulk or Carcass of the World, when yet it cannot hold with it in consort
an Eternity of Motion: 1. That we must separate from Bodies that which is most
connatural to them, especially the Heavenly Bodies, and this for an eternal
period, 'till put in motion within the limits of time. 2. We shall hereby
separate from the Body of the Universe for an eternal period that which renders
it most useful, and most beautiful: To suppose an Eternal World, and yet
eternally destitute of Motion, were to suppose the whole Universe destitute of
Life, and all Vegetables, Animals, Meteors, the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea,
the whole Furniture at least of this inferior World, to be none but dead,
liveless, stupid Beings, for such it certainly would be, if the Heavenly Bodies
should be destitute of their Motion.

And therefore it seems wholly disagreeing to Reason, that the World should be
eternal, when it is evident, that Motion (which as Aristotle truly tells us is,
Vita quaedam omnium mobilium) cannot be eternal, and so there should be an
eternal useless Carcass of a World from all Eternity, without that life of it,
its Motion.

And on the other side, it seems more consonant to Reason, that the Fabric of
the World did not long antecede its Motion, and that since Motion is not,
cannot be eternal, so neither is the Fabric of the World, but they both began
at least very near together, and the World was not made from Eternity to lie
fallow and uninhabited during that infinite abyss of its pre-existence to its
first putting forth into any Motion, for such it must be, if destitute of
Motion. And consequently the evincing of an impossibility of an eternal
successive Motion, does not only evince, that the whole World, with all its
considerable Appendices, was not eternal, but does with great evidence enforce,
that the great Integrals of the World it self were not eternal, which had been
imperfect without Motion.

And this does salve two Objections at once, viz. 1. That drawn from Gods
Omnipotence, that could have made the World eternal, if He pleased. The Answer
is: That whatever could have been done in reference to the Rest of the World,
yet as in reference to successive Motion the same could not have been made
eternal, and yet without derogation to the Divine Power or Omnipotence, but
because the nature of the thing could not sustain or bear such a duration.

And likewise this answers the Argument for the Eternity of the World, drawn
from the Divine Benignity and Goodness, whereby He is supposed to be under a
kind of intrinsic necessity of doing all the good He could, and consequently
to make the World eternally. I answer, 1. That as before the World, in its
complement and perfection with the advantage of Motion, though there was no
determinate time, point, or period, but God might have made it sooner if He had
pleased, yet (with all due reverence to His Majesty) it could not have been in
its complement and perfection eternal, because its successive Motion could not
be eternal, nor consequently all that glory, beauty and usefulness which
accrues to the Universe by that successive Motion. 2. That although the Divine
Will be determined by the Divine Perfection necessarily to will his own immense
Goodness, yet he is not determined by his own Benignity necessarily to will any
thing without himself; his own essential Goodness he wills, and that
necessarily, and ad ultimum posse; but his Benignity is measured out ad
beneplacitum voluntatis, and not by an absolute necessity ad ultimum posse: And
therefore although it were admitted that he could have eternally made the
World, or made more Worlds or better Worlds, yet he was not bound to it,
because the emanations of his Benignity are not necessary, but governed in
their extent and measure juxta voluntatis beneplacitum. 3. And upon the same
account also, though he could have made the World sooner than he made it, yet
he was not bound to it, but to make it when and how he pleased, though all his
Works carry the impression of transcendent Wisdom and Goodness.

And therefore as these Reasons seem strongly to conclude 1. Against the very
possibility of an eternal duration of those things that gave the principal
ornament, beauty and usefulness to the Universe, namely, Variety and Succession
of Individuals and Species, and Motion, so they do, at least de facto, evidence
that if the rest of the Universe were able to sustain an eternal duration, yet
they did not, because these would be very defective without those that cannot
hold that state of Eternity with them.

2. Against the truth of that Reason and Assertion, That Divine Goodness did
intrinsecally necessitate his Will to create things in their best state from
Eternity, since it seems evident that the condition and state of many things in
the Universe that give it much of its usefulness, perfection and beauty, namely
Motion, and Succession of Generations and Corruptions, of Animals, Vegetables
and Men, are impossible to be as ancient as that intrinsic Goodness of the
Divine Nature, which is as eternal as his own most perfect being.

3. I come now to the third Reason against the Eternity of considerable parts
of the World, which is this; Sublunary Bodies, whether simple or mixed, are by
the necessity of their nature subject to alteration and corruption: But
whatsoever is subject thus to alteration or corruption, is incapable of
sustaining an eternal duration a part ante, and consequently sublunary Bodies
are not capable of such an Eternity.

The first of these Propositions, namely, That all sublunary Bodies are subject
necessarily to alteration and corruption: This naturally happens to sublunary
Bodies upon both or one of these accounts, 1. From an intrinsecal Cause, which
is principally seen in mixed Bodies, in which the band and ligament between
Matter and Form, nor of the parts of Matter themselves is not so strict and
tenacious, but that they must necessarily in process of time fall asunder.
Besides, by the continual contest between those contrary qualities bound up
together in them, there do arise uncessant alterations, and at last final
dissolution of them, even from within themselves 2. From extrinsecal Causes:
For the very necessary composure and position of things in the World is such,
that there is a vicinity between Agents and Patients, and contrary dissenting
active Qualities, that the one incessantly invades the other, and alters,
changes, intends, remits and corrupts the other; which perpetual lucta is seen
daily not only in the mixed and compounded Bodies, but even in the more simple
elementary Bodies, which daily invade, change, alter, and corrupt one the other
according to their various degrees of activity, contrariety and vicinity each
to other.

And if the World had been eternal, we must suppose it eternally constituted of
such natures so placed and disposed in such situation and constitution as now
they stand, or otherwise, we do not reason ad idem, the World otherwise should
have been of another make, constitution and position than now it is; things
corruptible must have been incorruptible, and the vicinity, activity,
contrariety and position of things and their natures and qualities must
otherwise have been quite different, and so our debate would be transferred
quite to another World of another nature and constitution from that touching
whose Eternity we now dispute.

The second Proposition is this, That whatsoever is subject to such alteration
or corruption cannot possibly be eternal, at least unless we shall wholly
remove from it by an infinite duration that corruption or alteration to which
it is thus necessarily subject, and so make it another thing than what indeed
it is.

And because the due and clear explication of this Truth renders the Assertion
plain in it self, I shall distinctly examine it; and because we have supposed
that the corruption of things corruptible, and the alteration of things
alterable depends, as before, upon a double Principle, viz. That intrinsecal
defectibility of the connection or union of the parts of things corporeal, which
is rooted in the very Nature of the things themselves; and 2. From the vicinity
of other contrary active Principles endued with contrary active Qualities which
mutually invade one another; which position (considering the Frame and
Constitution at least of this inferior World, is absolutely necessary, unless
we shall make the World another thing, and of another Fabric than what it is)
as the moisture of the Water is contiguous to the dryness of the Earth, and the
heat of the Sun is contiguous to the coldness and moisture of the Water, and
cannot be otherwise in the Constitution of the World as now it stands, and
consequently one must necessarily work an alteration in the other: I shall
therefore pursue the same method, and first consider such Bodies as seem to
have an intrinsic principle of alteration or corruption from the dissolubility
of their parts, and the coadunition of several particles endued with contrary
and destructive qualities each to other; or such as at least tend to a gradual
alteration. And secondly, I shall consider such parts of the Universe as do
mutually act one upon another, and thereby induce corruption or alteration of
one by another, according to the prevalency and activity of the one or the
other.

But before I come to either of the particulars I shall premise some things
which will be of use in all that follows, viz. 1. That precedaneous to all
Generation of any material Being, according to the course of Nature which we
see, there must be a gradual preparation and alteration of the matter before
there is a complete generation of any thing: This we see in the casual
production of Insects and Vegetables, and in the natural production of Minerals
or Meteors, and in the regular production of Animals and Men. 2. That in things
which yet hold their essential consistency, yet there are very many
alterations, not only accidental, as where things are rarefied or condensed, or
made hot from being cold, or cold from being hot, but also such as seems
connatural to the Species: Thus we see in a Man, first he is a weak little
Infant, then a Y^u^h, then a Man, then he becomes an Old Man, and yet continues
still a Man till his dissolution; and to these various states of his Age there
seem to be various alterations accommodate, as difference in stature, bigness,
strength, activity, understanding; and the same is observable in proportion to
their capacities in Animals, Vegetables, Minerals, and the like. 3. That these
alterations are necessarily successive and gradual, whether they be such as are
preparative to Generation or Corruption of Beings, or such as consist with the
Existence of the being they have (as those alterations incident to the state of
things in their consistency) yet they are not instantaneous, but successive and
gradual; nay those very alterations that are wrought in things by an external
contrary Agent, yet they are not in a moment, but gradual and successive, which
is partly by reason of the resistance in the Patient, and partly because the
Agent works upon the Patient by a certain local motion of it self or parts, or
of its virtue and activity, which cannot be instantaneous and tota simul, but
gradual and successive: Thus the Sun reduces the Clay to its final degree of
hardness, and the Wax to its final degree of softness successively and
gradually; the Fire assimulates the Stubble, and converts it into Fire, not in
an instant but by degrees, though sooner or slower according to the vicinity of
each, and the precedaneous preparations of congruity of the Stubble to be
wrought upon by the Fire. 4. That these alterations that are thus successive
and gradual, as they cannot be perfectly instantaneous, so it is impossible
they can last or continue for an infinite or eternal duration. The reason is,
because as they must have an inception of their motion, so they must of
necessity arrive to their complement within the compass of time, and can never
hold out in their progress to an infinite duration: Let us suppose the Fire and
the Stubble to have been created eternally contiguous one to another, the Fire
could never have held an infinite duration in consuming that Stubble, for then
it could never have been consumed; for that which had been burning an infinite
time could never be burnt, no not so much as any part of it; for if it had
burned part after part, the whole must needs be absumed in a portion of time:
neither need we labor this, for we see that the Fire consumes Stubble or other
combustible matter in a short portion of time; and since if we talk of an
Eternity of the World, or of any thing in it, we must in common reason suppose
it to be such as now it is, we must necessarily allow the like properties,
activities, natures and operations to things as we find them now have. And
since we see that all bodily alterations are effected in certain portions of
measured duration or time, we cannot upon any reasonable account allow to those
alterations an infinite antecedent duration; but if any Body or Thing in that
imaginary period of Eternity allotted to it had any such alterations as we see
now are incident to them, they could not possibly be of an eternal duration no
more than they are now, for that were wholly to alter the state of the World
and of those things that are in it. 5. And consequently whatsoever thing it is
that has or can have an eternal being a part ante, must persist in that
eternal being without any change, alteration or corruption; or if it have any
alteration or corruption, the first alteration, change or corruption that it
can have, must be in time, and after an eternal, unchanged, unaltered estate
precedaneous to such alteration; for if we should suppose it to be eternal,
then of necessity that alteration or corruption which it has, must be
subsequent to that eternal state which it had before it was altered or
corrupted, and consequently must have had a persistence in that unaltered,
uncorrupted estate infinite Ages before such alteration or corruption: If it
were eternally altered, or eternally corrupted, then it was eternally, and
eternally was not; it was eternally without alteration, and eternally altered:
The thing must be before it can be altered or corrupted, and consequently its
alteration and corruption must be subsequent and after that existence which it
had unaltered or uncorrupted; and consequently the alteration and corruption
must needs be younger than that estate which it had unaltered or uncorrupted,
and consequently cannot be eternal.

Again, we cannot by any means suppose that any commencement of alteration in
the first moment or degree of it could be coeternal to it; for (as is before
evident) then that alteration would of necessity be perfected within the like
portion of time as the like alteration is perfected: Now suppose it were a
corruptive alteration, it may be that is perfected in the space of three or six
months from its first inception, the consequence whereof would be, that the
like alteration of that eternal alterable or corruptible Body, if it began with
the thing it self, would be perfected in the like space, viz. six months: And
should that perfected alteration fall within the compass of Eternity, or out of
it? If it should, then the thing was eternally unaltered and uncorrupted, and
was yet eternally altered or corrupted; was eternally, and yet that Eternity
was but a space of six months, for so long only it had its being uncorrupted:
If the alteration or corruption was not eternally perfected, but perfected in
time, then an addition of six months the more of that alteration added unto a
finite duration or time succeeding after such alteration, should make it
infinite and eternal. 6. And yet the supposition of an eternal state of any
corruptible or alterable Being, in a state of incorruption or unalteration,
were utterly to change the very nature of things; and to give them an eternal
state, we must be forced to gratify them with a nature not only preter-natural
to what they had, but quite of a distinct nature: For the purpose; That man
that is even upon the intrinsic constitution of his nature dissolvible, must
by being in an eternal duration continue immortal, unalterable, and not for a
year, or a million or two of years, but for an eternal duration antecedent to
his dissolution: Nay, it is inconceptible how any such man that has stood the
shock of an eternal duration without corruption or alteration, should after be
corrupted or altered: from any internal principle of corruption or alteration
it could not be, for then he could never have ridden out an eternal period; but
it must be, if at all, by the power of a more powerful Being than himself, that
must violently de novo introduce his change and dissolution. The Supposition
therefore of an eternal existence of any thing corruptible, is to alter their
very nature, and make that to be incorruptible which is corruptible. And to
suppose that imaginary eternal state of things corruptible, to be utterly of
another nature, kind, and condition than what we now see them to be, which is
an unreasonable Supposition, unworthy of an admirer of Nature, which should be
constant in his Supposition, and yet is the necessary consequence of the
granting of an Eternity of corruptible Beings. But particular Instances of the
several kinds of alterations and corruptions of things either ab intrinseco or
ab extrinseco, will make the thing more plain.

1. Touching things alterable or corruptible from an intrinsecal Cause, as
Vegetables, Animals, Men. If any Vegetables were eternal, as an Oak, or an Elm,
then some Oak was eternal; if it were, then if it were of the same nature as
Oaks are now, it was first a slender Plant, and then gradually grew to his just
dimensions, perhaps in two hundred years, and in about two hundred years more
decayed, and was corrupted to dust; so that his duration exceeded not four
hundred years, and in that period of time he grew perchance from an inch in
diameter to six foot in diameter, and from a foot high to a hundred foot high:
These alterations and augmentations were gradual and successive; he was not in
the same moment one inch and six foot in the diameter, nor in the same moment
was a Plant and dissolved and turned to dust; and yet if this Oak were eternal
in all this portion of his duration, he must be eternally one inch in diameter,
and yet eternally six foot in diameter; eternally one foot high, and yet
eternally a hundred foot high, he must have eternally been a Plant, eternally a
Tree, and yet eternally corrupted; his duration must have lasted but four
hundred years, and yet he must be eternal, though his first being were but four
hundred years before utter dissolution: And yet it is most certain that this
Tree could not have been eternal; for being but of four hundred years standing,
somewhat must have anteceded that period, and so somewhat more ancient than
what had been eternal.

But let us suppose this eternal Oak had not been bound to the laws of duration
of other Oaks, but to have lasted eternally, and probably would have lasted to
this day, had not external force either violently or accidentally corrupted or
destroyed him; yet did this Oak ever grow bigger or taller than what he once
was, or did he put off his leaves in the Winter, and gather others in the
Spring? Did he put forth new branches, which before he had not? If he did none
of these things, surely he was not a vegetable Being, he was not like those
Oaks that are now growing, but quite of another nature, and we have nothing to
do with him, he is a perfect stranger to this World: If it did grow from lesser
to greater, and did put forth new branches, certainly the increment could not
be eternal, but must be done gradually and successively, and from one degree of
bigness to another; and since that augmentation could never be of an infinite
procedure, but being successive, we must come to the beginning of that increase
within the measure of such a portion of time as we now find sufficient for such
a production or increase, it may be two or three hundred years, which being but
a finite duration can never be eternal: And this necessary Supposition of a
successive alteration or increase, utterly destroys the possibility of an
eternal duration in any thing capable of such alterations; 1. Because it
necessarily supposes somewhat precedent to that state wherein it is, namely, a
precedent alteration of it, whereby it is now become what it now is, and what
before it was not; so that it had somewhat before its present state which
stateth it to be what it now is, namely, that alteration or augmentation which
so preceded its present state, and consequently that present state wherein it
is, could not be eternal, for it had somewhat before it. 2. Because that very
alteration that anteceded that state which it has cannot possibly be eternal,
but must be perfected within a certain portion of time destined to it, and
consequently must have beginning within the compass of a determinate time, and
cannot be eternally moving to its accomplishment.

And as this Instance gives the impossibility of an eternal Existence in any
thing essentially alterable or corruptible, so it would be possibly more
conspicuous in the Contemplation of the Humane Nature: If we should suppose a
Man to have been eternal, Was that Man ever an Embryo, a Child, a Youth, a ripe
Aged Man? Did he grow from a smaller stature to a greater, had he vicissitudes
of temperaments and distempers, did he eat, digest, etc. If he did not, then
those eternal Men were not of the same Make with the Men that are now, but
quite another thing, which we know not what it was, or where to find it: But if
he had all those changes he could not be eternal, he should be eternally a
Child and eternally a Man, eternally young and eternally old, yea eternally
living and yet eternally dead; for all these must fall within the compass of
Eternity.

2. But let us now consider how the Case falls out in relation to alterations
and corruptions occasioned ab extrinseco, and we shall find, 1. That as the
World is framed, and as those that suppose it eternal, must suppose it to have
been always so framed, there must necessarily be incessant mutations,
alterations, generations, and corruptions by the invasion and juxta-position of
contrary Natures, Agents, Patients, Qualities, Motions; the Earth naturally dry
is moistened by the vicinity of the Water, and again dried by the heat of the
Sun; the Earth obstructs the fluidity of the Water by mingling its grosser
parts with it; all things as it were in continual motion and agitation, and
mutual preying as it were one upon another; which as necessarily occasioneth
mutations, alterations, generations and corruptions, as the very intrinsecal
dissolubility of the natures of mixed Bodies. 2. And as we find this now, so we
must suppose that this has been always so since the World had a being; unless
we shall suppose, as I have often said, another kind of World than what we see:
And although we are not acquainted with the state of things out of, or beyond
this sublunary World, in which we see this vicissitude of alterations, yet
whether there may not be some such mutations in the Ethereal World, we know
not; but there may be such, though we cannot certainly know them. 3. And yet it
is most certain, that it is impossible that any thing that is capable of these
mutations and changes can be eternally under them, but must of necessity, if it
were eternal, consist in such a state of fixedness and permanency that were not
obnoxious to these changes. 4. And since it is not possible, for the inferior
World at least, to be de facto one moment of time without these changes and
variations, alterations, generations and corruptions; which, as before, are not
at all consistent with an eternal duration a part ante, of that that is so
subject to changes, we have just reason to deny and disesteem this imaginary
Eternity can belong at least to the sublunary World. The late Author of a Book
De Aetate Mundi has given us an Instance herein, that if it would hold, we
need not go farther; namely, That the great Rocks in the Sea are yet many of
them eminently visible to this day, and yet daily experience shows us that
those Rocks are gradually diminished by the beating of the Sea against them;
which had they been so dealt with from Eternity, though they lost but one grain
in a million of millions of years, they would not have been, but would have
been consumed an indefinite time long since elapsed: But the Supposition fails,
because it may be that these Rocks have at least vicissitudes of increase and
diminution by the very alluvion of the Sea, or, which seems far more easily
supposed, that the Earth and Seas might notwithstanding have been eternal, but
yet the Sea might not have kept the same Channel where these Rocks now are,
from eternity, but gained it in time; the Ancients telling us that the great
Atlantic Sea was for the most part of it anciently a Continent, or at least a
great Island as big as Europe and Asia, and after swallowed up and corroded
into that vast Sea called the Atlantic Ocean, leaving behind it only those
relics now called the Canary Islands: I will therefore take my Instance in
some other things.

1. It is evident that diverse Minerals are bred in the Earth from an earthy
consistence, by the heat of the Sun and other concurrent causes successively,
as may appear to any man's observation touching Coals, Rocks, especially of
Stone, which from a sandy kind of Earth gradually concoct into Freestone, when
they were before Earth, as may be seen in many Quarries by those pieces of
unconcocted Earth not yet perfectly digested into Stone: If the Body of the
Earth were eternal, either these concretions were also as eternal as the Earth
gradually and successively digested into these concretions, or else the Earth
must have had an eternal permanency in that state of simple natural Earth,
without any such concretions or alterations in it: If we shall say the latter,
we make the Earth another thing than what in truth it now is, which by the aid
of the Sun has these concretions and alterations even by a kind of necessity
of Nature wrought in it: And besides, if in that portion of eternal duration
wherein the Earth and Sun were in that very same natural state wherein they now
are; the one active, piercing, and digestive by its heat; the other passive,
receptive, and stored with materials for such a production. What should hinder
but that there should be such production gradually and successively prepared,
and at length generated by the conjunction of these active and passive
Principles.

And yet if it be duly considered, supposing the Sun and the Earth to be both
eternal, the Earth and its parts must of necessity persist in an eternal
unchangeable state in that period of Eternity antecedent to the first
alteration thereof to any such production: For if the production of these
Minerals should be eternal, and consequently infinitely distant from us, the
productions must be eternal, and yet there must necessarily antecede those
productions a successive and gradual alteration of those parts of the Earth
which were to be molded in succession of time to Coals, or Stone, or Minerals:
And though perchance that alteration might take up a long preparation and
disposition, yet it could not be eternal, but must be absolved, though in a
long, yet in finite time; and consequently the Earth, if eternal, must be
before that preparation or alteration, and must have continued in an eternal
state, destitute of such alteration or preparation, and in an eternal
disposition thereunto; which yet had been to suppose the Earth in that eternal
period quite destitute of that mutation that upon the Supposition of the agency
of the Sun had been connatural to it. So that upon the whole matter it seems
plain, That neither successive natural Beings, nor corporeal Beings, that are
corruptible or necessarily subject to alteration, either from an intrinsic
Principle or from an extrinsick natural Cause necessarily contiguous or
approximate to it in situation or virtue, cannot be eternal; which will deprive
the greatest part of the sublunary World at least of that possibility, and must
leave only such parts of the visible Universe as are incorruptible,
unalterable, and unsuccessive (if any such be) capable of this privilege of
the very possibility of an eternal existence a part ante: And consequently the
whole Universe cannot be eternal.

It remains then, they who assert the Eternity of the World must content
themselves with such parts thereof as are capable of that duration. And
accordingly there seem to have been three Opinions, which although they assume
not the Assertion of the Eternity of the whole World, yet they endeavor to
come as near to it as they can; which I shall distinctly set down and examine.

1. The first Opinion is of such, that although they suppose the sublunary
World not to be eternal in its Frame and Constitution, yet they assert the
Matter thereof eternal, though undigested, and not perfected till afterward:
But yet the Celestial or Ethereal World, the Stars and Planets they will have
eternal, and that these were used as the great Engines in the subsequent
formation of the inferior ^r sublunary World.

Touching the Eternity of Matter, whether Celestial or Sublunary, I mean not in
this place to meddle; but as to the Supposition of the eternal existence of the
Celestial or Ethereal World, this shall be all I shall say: 1. We are not
acquainted with the Constitution of them, and whether they are in their nature
corruptible or subject to alterations; if they are such, they are as equally
incapable of an eternal existence as the sublunary World. 2. But suppose them
to have a radical incorruptibility and immutability in their natures, yet their
Motion cannot be eternal upon the Reasons before given. 3. And therefore though
they are a goodly Fabric, yet they are not in a state of Permanency of so
great use, beauty and perfection, as in a state of Motion, which is a great
part of their excellency, and that which accommodates the several parts thereof
one to another, and all to the advantage and good of the inferior World; and
therefore it seems not probable that they should have an eternal existence in
Rest and Permanence, and afterward in a process or period of time be endued
with that which is their great perfection, namely their Motion, which neither
was nor could be eternal: It rather seems more agreeable to the nature of the
thing, and to the Divine Wisdom, whose Works are full of wisdom, excellence,
and perfection, to respite the Fabric till it were capable of its most useful
and beautiful perfection, namely Motion; which must either be natural to them,
and then it were mavelous they should yet enjoy an infinite duration
destitute of what was natural to them, and yet not capable to be enjoyed by
them in an eternal duration a part ante: Or if it were adventitious from the
immediate power of God, or by the instrumentality of Intelligences, yet surely
it was foreseen by him that knew all his Works from the beginning: and
therefore was not likely to ordain an eternal consistence of those Bodies to
which he intended to give Motion, their great perfection, not sooner than time:
And therefore though the Heavenly Bodies were admitted capable of an eternal
Permanency, yet it is not probable they had their Being before, or at least not
so long before their Motion.

2. The second Opinion is of those that although they allow not the Mundus
aspectabilis to be eternal, yet do suppose that besides that Eternal Generation
of the Second, and the Eternal Procession of the Third Person of the Sacred
Trinity, Almighty God eternally created a World of Intelligences, whereunto he
might and did communicate the emanations of his Bounty and Benignity, and that
in the beginning of Time he Created this Mundus aspectabilis which we see, for
the farther communication of his Bounty and Goodness; and this they suppose
more congenious and suitable to the Order of things, and of his own Goodness
and the communication thereof, than to suppose the Creation of a material World
either eternally or quasi per saltum, or at the same time with the Creation of
those purer Beings, who had a greater similitude and proximity to his own most
Divine and Spiritual Nature. This though it might possibly be so, yet we are
without any sufficient Evidence that it was so, and such Conjectures of things
without our knowledge, or those media that we are capable to exercise for the
acquest thereof, are uncertain and endless: Upon such conjectural Congruities
the Platonists had their Dii ex Deo, the Manichees their Aeones, and Origin his
Mundus Animarum: and therefore I leave it as a Conjecture.

3. The third Opinion is of those who though they suppose the World not to be
eternal, and perchance think with reason enough that the duration of Eternity a
part ante is such as is only competible to the Eternal God, and not
communicable to any Created Being, at least such as is in its own nature either
corruptible, alterable, or compounded: yet to the end that they may carry the
Communication of the Divine Goodness and Benignity as far as is possible, are
not contented to suppose the World to be sempiternal or eternal a part post,
or to be as ancient as the Sacred Scriptures inform us, but will carry up the
Creation of the World to an immense antiquity, long before Six Thousand years,
and thereby they think they do at once salve the large Accounts which the
Babylonians and Egyptians and Chinese give of the duration of their own
Kingdoms and Histories, and also do, as they think, satisfy at least in a
great measure that immense Benignity of the glorious God, whom they declare not
only infinitely Good in himself, but necessitated by the perfection of his
nature to comunicate his Goodness ad ultimum posse to things ad extra.

This Supposition of theirs seems to be grounded upon two matters which are as
I think mistakes, or at least do no way appear to be evidently true; namely, 1.
That Almighty God, though he be by them admitted a free and intellectual Agent,
is necessitated ab extrinseco from the Perfection of his nature to do good ad
extra, ad ultimum posse, which seems untrue. 2. And it seems likewise untrue,
that if he were under that intrinsecal necessity, yet he were thereby bound to
make the World sooner than we suppose he made it: For as to the fabulous
protractions of the age of the World by the Egyptians or others, they are
uncertain idle Traditions, whereof they have no evidence but from the
Impostures of their fabulous Priests.

Touching the first of these, namely, the Intrinsic Necessity of Almighty God
to do good ad extra, ad ultimum posse, this is that Opinion upon which some
have built their Hypothesis of the Eternity of the World, and others, driven
from that Hypothesis by the absurdities that accompany it, build their
imagination though not of the Eternity, yet of a prodigious Antiquity of the
World. But it seems to me, That although Almighty God being infinitely and
essentially Good, is necessarily carried to will and delight in that his own
infinite Goodness; yet in his acts of Benignity ad extra he is not necessitated
by his own Perfection to act ad ultimum posse, but although his own Nature be
Benign and Bountiful, the seasons, degrees and measures, and other
circumstances of its Emanations are guided and directed by the freedom of his
own Will.

And the reason thereof is evident, namely, Because all the Good that is
without, or that is possibly communicable by him to any thing without him, is
finite, and cannot be infinite; and therefore he cannot be carried to it by an
infinite desire and intention, and yet such it must be, if it be ad ultimum
posse.

And if it should be so, there would be infinite absurdities follow which
cannot be solved; as for instance, That either this present World must be
actually of an infinite extension, or that there must be either infinite
Worlds, or at least as many Worlds as is possible to be by the power of
Omnipotence. That he has made some Beings of that perfection, that Omnipotence
it self cannot make them one grain perfecter, that they are but in the very
next degree of perfection to himself, and cannot have the addition of one grain
more to the excellence of their nature; that the Universe is so perfect,
omnibus numeris, that it is not possible for Omnipotence it self to add to it,
no nor to alter it in one jot or tittle, either to make it better or worse, or
otherwise than it is; nay he cannot, pro arbitrio or dominion make one spire of
Grass, or one Fly, or one Worm more or less than he has made, because he has
made it as good as is possible to make it, and he is under the necessary
obligation of his own indispensable Perfection to make and keep it just as he
has made it: That the whole Ocean of Omnipotence and infinite Goodness is
already exhausted in the Work of the Universe, and has nothing of good left
that he can do more. These are the consequences of this Position, That the
Divine Will is necessitated by the Perfection of his Nature to do good ad
ultimum posse.

And as these absurdities evince the untruth of the Assertion, so it is
apparent in the very Frame of the Universe it self and the integrals thereof,
that it is untrue: For upon this Supposition admitted, there could not be a
disparity in the Natures of things, but every thing should be constituted in
that state of being that might be capable of as much of the Divine Beneficence
as it were possible for God to communicate. And if it be said that this
disparity of things in their degrees of specifical or individual perfection
contributes to the beauty and convenience of the Universe, which is the primary
Object of the Divine Beneficence, this salves not the Objection; because it is
possible that many things might have a greater measure of specifical Perfection
with great advantage to themselves and to the Universe also. But suppose this
inequality of degrees of specifical or individual Perfection might nevertheless
contribute to the advantage of the Universe considered collectively, yet do we
not see that daily there are many deficiencies even in individuals, which might
have been supplied with exceeding benefit to themselves, and with advantage to
the Universe? Are there not among men some that want the integrity of their
Limbs, some that want their Senses, Memories, Understandings; some that are
extremely vicious, and unjust, and degenerate even from the common Principles
of Humanity, many that are diseased and infirm, many good men of short and
difficult lives; and might not all these have the integrity of their Bodies and
Minds proportionate to the perfection of their specifical Nature; be virtuous,
sound, long-lived, with advantage to themselves and mankind, and yet without
detriment to the Universe? And therefore surely such they would have been, if
the glorious God were necessitated to be Beneficent ad ultimum posse, unless we
should presumptuously assert an impotence in him to rectify these things.

2. But if we should suppose this to be true concerning the Divine Obligation
or Necessity, let us now examine what the making of the World a million of years
elder than it, is would do in the business.

1. It is true, though we say the World is not, cannot be eternal a part ante,
yet it is certain that either upon the nature of the thing or the part of the
Almighty and the absolute power of God, without relation to the determination
of his Will, there can be no determinate moment, or tempus signatum
imaginarium, within the bounds or limits (if I may so speak) of antecedent
infinite duration, but God might have made it sooner than he made it; and if a
year sooner than he made it, he might have made it a thousand years sooner than
that.

2. Consequently, if the World be not eternal, it is impossible to assign any
time for its making it which answered the ultimum posse of Almighty God for the
making it; and therefore if we should suppose the World to have been made as
many millions of years before it was made, as there have been minutes since it
was made, it could not answer the ultimum posse of Almighty God, nor answer
that imaginary Obligation or Necessity of his nature to do good ad ultimum
posse, for still it might have been made before any hora signata.

3. Consequently the time of the Creation of the World, if it were on this side
an eternal period, could neither be determined by his want of Power, nor by his
necessitated Benignity agere ad ultimum posse, for in that indefinite time
within the limits of Eternity no time can be assigned before which he could not
have made the World, though it be admitted it could not be eternal.

4. Consequently there could be nothing that could determine the time or period
wherein the World was to have been made, but the absolute Divinum beneplacitum;
there could be nothing without him to determine it, for nothing was till he made
it, nor any thing but his own Will within him that could determine it: for his
power and goodness were undetermined to do it sooner or later, since no time
could be assigned for the doing of it but it might be done sooner.

And when all is done, his Beneficence, nor the good which the created Beings
might receive from that Beneficence, had had no imaginable advance or
enlargement, if the World had been created millions of millions of years before
it was; and that upon these plain evident Reasons.

1. Because though the World had indeed been at this hour ancienter, and lasted
longer, if it had been created a million of years sooner, yet the future
Eternity or Sempiternity of the World being of all hands admitted, though the
Eternity a part ante be denied, there will be a future infinity for the
emanation of the Divine Goodness and Beneficence to his Creatures.

2. Considering the nature of the Beings themselves that partake of the Divine
Beneficence, there is no advance at all to them by receiving it sooner or
later: If Plato had been a million of years before he in truth was, and had
lived his proportion of eighty years, he had tasted no more of the Divine
Beneficence than if he had lived as he did about two thousand years since.

3. Neither is there any difference in respect of the ever-glorious God, for he
received no access of happiness by the Creation of the World, nor stood at all
in need of it: And if he might be imagined to have received any contentment in
it, yet he had an eternal prospect of all things as if they had been really
made eternally: And besides, if the World had been myriads of millions of years
sooner than it was, yet it was still infinitely short of an eternal duration;
Almighty God had been an infinite duration before without that World, which had
it been made millions of years before it was, yet had not held any proportion
to that infinite duration that preceded.

And whatsoever has been formerly said against the Eternity of this World does
equally conclude against an eternal being of any World antecedent to this, much
more against an eternal succession of infinite Worlds, either of which can have
no certainty, nor have any evidence or probability; so that as there cannot be
attributed an eternal duration a part ante to any one such supposed
pre-existing World, so much less to a succession of Worlds.

The very same Arguments that conclude against the possibility of eternal
Motion, or the eternal successions of Generation and Corruption, or of
successive Individuals of Mankind do as effectually conclude against an eternal
succession of infinite Worlds, and therefore I shall spare the repetition of
them.

The Arguments which I have before used are such, as though at the first view
they seem intricate, yet they have strength of evidence in them, and such as
are accommodate to the nature of the thing which requires Arguments of such a
nature; and those Arguments that are more experimental and obvious to sense,
though they are more easy to be apprehended, yet are more easy to be evaded
by the Assertors of the Eternity of the World.

In the beforementioned Book De Aetate Mundi two experimental Arguments are
brought against the Eternity of the World, upon which the Author lays some
weight.

1. That if the World were eternal, by the continual fall and wearing of Waters
all the protuberances of the Earth would infinite Ages since have been
levelled, and the Superficies of the Earth rendered plain, no Mountains, no
Valleys, no inequalities would be therein, but the Superficies thereof would
have been as level as the Superficies of the Water.

2. That if this World had been eternal there would have been no Rocks
appearing in the Seas above the Water, whereof there are very many visible; for
the motion and agitation of the Water does wear and eat off gradually the roots
and other parts thereof, as is visible to our observation; some whereof have
their roots so corroded by the Water, that they are ready to fall, and others
have apparently by that means been either wasted or decayed, that now they are
not extant which in some men's memory have been standing; and if the breadth of a
Barleycorn had been consumed in a million of years, there had been nothing of
them left.

That these things are true in fact, and that the reason why many of these
effects are apparent to us to be as they are, is because that these Rocks and
these Protuberances have not been eternal, may bp well attributed to that
novitas essendi, that finite period wherein they have continued, is very
probable and evident to him that is satisfied otherwise, that the World had a
beginning, I easily grant: But he that asserts the Eternity of the World will
find out easy evasions of these sensible Arguments: They will tell us, and
with truth enough, that in a great tract even of a finite duration the Earth
must have and has had great mutations: That by the eruption of Bituminous and
Sulphurous Vapors, and the firing thereof, these protuberances of Mountains
and Hills may be made, and have been made in many parts: That as Warts or Wenns
growing in our Hands are thrust up by the humors ministered by the extremity of
the orifice of some Capillary Vein, and increase; so in the great Body of the
Earth such protuberances may be thrust out and gradually increased, though not
so easily perceptible in one Age, and by this means there may be a continued
supply of what is successively abraded from them by decursion of Waters: That
Matter is never lost or annihilated: That what is decayed by that decursion of
Waters is in some measure supplied by the terrene faeces which that Water
brings with it: That by continued vicissitudes the Earth is repaired by the
insensible descent of Atoms of Matter raised in others places, the Atmosphere
being evermore filled with little particles and concretes of Matter which are
uncessantly discharged upon the Earth, and as uncessantly again supplied in the
Air by the more gross and terrestrial parts of those Vapors that are raised
principally from the Sea and watrish places, by means whereof the Water justly
pays in process of time what is borrowed from the Earth by a perpetual
circulation. And that hence it comes to pass that in process of time, even to
our view, Channels that were deep and broad, yet by a little time of dryness
grow narrow and shallow; that those Mountains, whose chief substance is Rock,
become clothed with a superficial Mantle of Earth and Mould; that those
places, which were formerly filled with Wood, have buried the fallen Trees
three, four, or five foot deep in the ground, by an accretion or cover of
Earth, derived to them sometimes by Alluvions or Floods, sometimes and most
ordinarily by the descent of those Terrestrial Particles, that are drawn up
together with watery Vapors, and either together with those Waters, or after
arefaction thereof in the Air, discharged upon the Earth, which does reparare
deperditum.

And as to those Rocks in the Sea, they will also tell us, that the
vicissitudes of the Sea and Land in a long process of time, much more in an
eternal duration, are very many and various: Sometimes that becomes Land which
was once Sea, as appears in that part of Egypt thorough which Nilus runs, long
since observed by Aristotle, and before him by Herodotus; and even in our
memory great quantities of Land are now firm and habitable, where Ships
anciently rode; and on the other side many parts are become Sea, which were
once firm Land: They instance in that traditional vast Island in the Atlantic
Ocean, which is drowned, and has left no Remains of it self, but those Islands
called the Canary Islands; but whether that tradition be true or not, it is
very probable, that by particular Inundations the Face and State of the
Terrestrial Globe, by great vicissitudes, is much changed. And therefore though
they suppose the Terrestrial Globe Eternal, yet the Earth and Water has not
eternally kept the same position or site that now it has: And therefore the
Sea, so often (at least in an Eternal Period) shifting its Channel, has not
eternally washed the same Rocks that now it does, but after an indeterminate
and vast uncertain Period, it may be of ten or twenty thousand years, leaves
that Channel which before it had, and gives those Rocks that it wasted
opportunity to recruit again, and then perchance after a like vast Period of
Time visits the same Channel again; and therefore though the World might be
Eternal, the alluvion of the Sea upon those Rocks might not be eternally
continued, but interpolated. And though the Earth be not animated with a
Sensible Soul, yet it is possible that it may be a great Immortal Vegetable,
which may reproduce or increase Rocks or Mountains in various vicissitudes of
vast Periods of Duration. And this they think very probably to be collected by
the observation of things, and yet if it be not to be proved to be thus, yet
thus possibly it may be, which is sufficient to elude the force of those
sensible Arguments.

And the truth is, these Solutions do evade the edge and concludency of those
Physical Arguments, and therefore much weight is not be laid upon them, but
upon those of another nature, whereof in the foregoing part of this Chapter.

And there is no way to encounter the Solutions that these Men do, or may give
of these two last Arguments, but to have recourse to what has been before
said, namely, that since the Solutions are grounded upon a Supposition of
Eternal successive Motions, whereby by vicissitudes of long uncertain Periods
of the Decays and Reparations of the inferior World, and by eternal
vicissitudes of the translation of the Earth and Seas to several sites either
by interpolated, or successive Motions. And since by what has been before
proved, there is an utter impossibility in Reason and Nature of any Eternity a
part ante of continued or interpolated Motion, there is likewise an
impossibility in Nature that there should be this eternal vicissitude of decays
and repairs of the Earth, or shifting of stations between the Earth and the
Sea. And thus we are at last driven to resort to those though more obscure yet
more concludent Arguments against the Eternity of the World which are mentioned
in the beginning of this Chapter, or such as are of the like nature, some
whereof will be hereafter farther considered.

Averroes, who was a strong Assertor of the Eternity of the World, insisteth
upon a Reason which is witty, but upon a mistake of the nature of eternal
duration, viz. That if the World were not eternal, but created in some certain
Epoch or Period, it could never have been at all, because an eternal duration
must necessarily have anteceded the first production of the World; and that
Supposition excludes the possibility of such its production, and is
contradictory to that supposed novitas essendi of the World; for, infinitum non
potest pertransiri, an infinite duration pre-existing to the Worlds production
could never be passed through, so no possible accession to the first existence
of the World through the vast compass of a pre-existing infinite duration.

But this reasoning of his is insufficient, because it takes in but a portion
of Eternity which is a part ante, whereas that Maxim is to be applied to the
full and entire compass of Eternity or Infinitude. For if that Argument should
hold, neither Averroes nor Plato, nor any man else could have been born in the
World, but must have had an eternal existence upon the very same reason that
Infinitum non potest pertransiri; for it is certain that as well an infinite
duration anteceded the Birth of Plato or Averroes, as it must do the production
of the World if admitted to have novitas essendi.

And thus much touching this preparatory Disquisition concerning the Eternity
of the World in general.

CAP. IV. Concerning the Origination of Mankind; and whether the same were
Eternal, or had a Beginning.
IF the World it self were not eternal, this Disquisition touching the Eternity
of Mankind were needless, because decided in that decision.

Therefore our Inquiry touching the Origination of Mankind, and whether it had
or had not a Beginning, is in this place by way of Supposition or Admission,
namely, Whether admitting the great Integrals at least of the Universe, the
Heavens and Heavenly Bodies, the Elementary World were or at least might be
eternal; whether yet Mankind were, or might be eternal? And the Question
possibly will be much of the same kind, with relation to other at least perfect
Animals and Vegetables, yea and all mixed or compound Bodies; for we shall
easily find, that admitting those greater Integrals of the World were eternal,
yet whatsoever is said against the Eternity of Mankind will bear as hard
against the Eternity of perfect Animals, and almost of all compound Bodies.

And although for the more orderly discussion of this Enquiry concerning the
Original of Mankind, I must gratia argumenti, and according to the Method
proposed, admit the Eternity of the great Integrals of the World; yet it will
appear upon a due examination to be such an Admission as must in a great
measure be contradicted in the debate of what is propounded to be proved, and
the particular Reasons against the Eternity of the Humane, Animal, or
compounded Bodies will necessarily infer an impossibility, or intolerable
absurdity in the thing admitted. For instance:

To suppose an eternal existence of the Heavenly Bodies and of the Elementary
Bodies in the site and position in which they are, and to suppose them in an
eternal rest and unactivity, and without motion, action, passion, or perfection
of the less noble by the more noble, were to suppose them eternally kept in a
useless, needless, imperfect state, for an immense, eternal duration, till the
first moment of their being put into Motion.

Again, to suppose the Heavenly Bodies and their Motions and Influence, the
Fiery Nature dispersed through all the Sublunary World, with its activity and
motion; and the Passive Nature of the more passive Elements to have been
eternally in the World, and in all that eternal duration not to have produced
mixed and compound Bodies in that eternal duration until such a determinate
point of it, were a thing strangely repugnant in Nature, unless Almighty God
were pleased to uphold their being, and yet suspend their activity for an
immense eternal period.

And yet to suppose that the composition of Bodies out of the Elements (by
virtue of the activity and influx of Motion, out of Matter that must by that
influx be prepared for composition) should be as ancient as those Heavens, or
that Motion, that Fiery active Principle that must compound them out of those
simpler Bodies out of which they must be compounded (as all this must be, if
they are eternal) is as impossible as any thing that can be thought of.

Again, if we should resolve the Eternity of the World into the Divine Will,
which being necessitated by his goodness to do all the good he can, even ad
ultimum posse, and upon that account made the World eternal, it were a strange
Supposition to imagine that this God should give the great Integrals of the
World an eternal being in eternal rest, without Motion, which is their
perfection; or if together with Beings he gave or indeed could give an eternal
Motion, it were a strange Supposition that he should suspend the efficacy of
that Motion or Activity of the active Principles upon the passive (which both
existed) for an infinite space, and then after took off that suspension: And
yet farther, Suppose Almighty God did or could give an eternal being to those
Active or Passive Natures, and an eternal production of all mixed Bodies for an
eternal duration but only Mankind (that is the noblest of all sublunary
Natures, and apparently the glory of the sublunary World, and the very end of
much of what is produced) I say, it is strange that the inferior World should
be moved, agitated, and mingled into various mixed Bodies, and thus continue
during the immensity of an eternal duration without Mankind in the World, if
Almighty God were necessitated by the Benignity of his nature to do the
uttermost good he could; and if he could produce Man eternally, there was an
equal necessity for him to do it as to produce a Tree or a Stone eternally.

All this tends but to this, That if in the debate of this matter we can find
that Man either could not be, or was not eternally produced, we have the same
reason to believe that no compound Nature was produced eternally, that no local
Motion or corporeal Action was or could be from Eternity; and consequently,
that the Heavenly or Elementary Bodies were not from Eternity: The very single
clearing of this one thing, that Man was not eternal, breaks the whole
Hypothesis of the Eternity of the World, cuts asunder all the connection of
evidence that is for it, renders the most considerable perfection of the World,
its Motion, Action, and Operation impossible to be eternal, and the existence
of the Bulk, Position, and Fabric thereof (unuseful, imperfect, and deficient
without its Motion, Activity, and Operations) improbable to be eternal. So that
the Position which I endeavor to prove, namely, the Non-eternity of Mankind,
does in truth destroy the Supposition of the Eternity at least of the inferior
World. But this I only subjoyn by the way.

Concerning the Origination of Mankind, Censorinus in his golden Book de Die
Natali, cap. 4. gives us the short state of the Question, and the several
Authors that hold either way; viz. Alii, semper homines fuisse, nec unquam nisi
ex hominibus natos, atque eorum generi caput exordiumque nullum extitisse;
alii, fuisse tempus cum homines non essent, and his ortum aliquando
principiumque natura tributum. Of the former Opinion he reckons Pythagoras
Samius, Ocellus Lucanus, Archytas Tarentinus, Aristotle, Theophrastus, Plato,
Xenocrates, Dicaearchus, and others.

But for the more clear stating of the Inquiry, I shall resume somewhat which
has been before said touching the Question before-going of the Eternity of the
World, and some other things I shall add thereunto.

First, it is to be observed, that the Question is not here, Whether the
successive Individuals of Mankind may or shall be eternal a part post,
perpetuated to everlasting by successive generation. For although whether that
shall be or no, depends upon the Divine Beneplacitum, yet there is no
intrinsecal repugnance ex part rei, but that as the World, and the Generations
of Men in it have been thus long continued by the communication of the Divine
Influence and Providence, so both the one and the other by the same Influence
and Providence may be continued without end: And the reason is, because such a
duration, and such a successive multiplication of Individuals imports only a
potential infinitude, and such as never shall nor can be completed into an
actual infinitude of duration or number: So that as Number is potentially
infinite by addition of new parts to it, which yet never shall nor can arise to
a number actually infinite, because after every period thereof there still may
be a farther accession of a farther period, yet it never will nor can be
actually infinite, because still there will or may be farther additional
periods of duration to that which went before.

The Question therefore rests only as to that part of the imaginary Line of the
duration of successive Individuals that anteceded any given moment; or, Whether
Mankind had any beginning of being, or were eternal or without beginning.

And touching this, there have been some that have affirmed Mankind to be
without beginning or eternal; others that have affirmed that Mankind had a
beginning.

Touching the latter of these, and the various Conjectures touching the manner
of it, I shall write hereafter; at present I shall consider and examine the
former.

Again, of those that have affirmed Mankind to be without beginning, and that
maintain not only the Eternity of the rest of the World, but also of Mankind;
they are of two sorts, viz. 1. Such as have affirmed that the successive
Generations of Men have been eternal, not only without any beginning, but
without any first Parents of Mankind, and that they have been always geniti ex
genitis. 2. Those that have supposed that there were some first Parents of
Mankind, which by a natural and univocal generation multiplied their Species,
but yet that those first Parents of Mankind were eternal Individuals, having an
eternal existence in their individual nature, and in relation to them the rest
of Mankind were geniti ex non genitis.

As to the former of these Opinions, they seem to be divided into these ensuing
Parties or Opinions.

1. Such as think the successive Generations of Men were eternally so, and
independent upon any Efficient, and necessarily by the eternal established
course of Nature independent upon Almighty God, or any first Efficient of the
Species.

2. Such as think the successive Generations of Men were eternally so, but
dependently upon Almighty God, yet as a necessary Effect produced by Almighty
God as a necessary or natural Cause, as the Light is a coexistent Effect of the
Sun.

3. Such as think the successive Generations of Men were eternally so, but
dependently upon God as an efficient voluntary Cause of them by eternal
Creation, yet suppose that Will intrinsecally determined to such an eternal
Creation of Mankind by the indispensable benignity and goodness of his nature.

4. Such as though they take Almighty God to be under neither of the former
necessities, but an Agent purely voluntary, and determining his own Will by it
self only, and that deny the eternal successions of humane Generations as to
the fact; but yet affirm it possible that Almighty God might, if he pleased,
have created the World and Mankind eternally.

Having thus stated the Opinions of the Assertors of the Eternity or Beginning
of Humane Generations, I shall pursue this Method; 1. In this Chapter I shall
consider the possibility or impossibility of eternal Generations of Mankind,
with relation to the four preceding Suppositions that assert it. 2. In the next
Chapter I shall consider the possibility or impossibility of any one Man or
Woman eternally existing, from whom Mankind had their production by univocal
generation. 3. I shall afterward consider of those evidences of fact and
probability, that de facto may seem to prove that Mankind had their beginning
in time, and the Objections against it. 4. I shall then descend to the
Consideration of the various Suppositions of those that have supposed a
temporary Origination of Mankind.

At the present therefore I shall propound those Reasons that to me seem
concludent, that although it might for Arguments sake be supposed that some
parts of universal Nature, namely, such as are permanent and fixed, and not in
fluxu, might be eternal; yet it is simply impossible that the Generations of
Mankind can be eternal in any of the four foregoing ways.

And before I come to give my Reasons, I shall premise two things.

1. In relation to the four foregoing Opinions, there seems to be this employed
in them: 1. The two former do most clearly take up the entire collection of
Mankind and the Generations of them to be a mere natural Effect or Work, with
this odds, that the former acknowledges no Efficient at all; the latter
acknowledges God the Efficient or first Cause of the eternal World and the
Generations of Mankind as a natural Cause: And consequently they must needs
hold, that as Man is now generated, so he was eternally so; and as he is now,
so he always has been; and the measure that we take of him now will fit to all
those innumerable Men that have been within the vast compass of Eternity: As
Man is now a compound Body of the four Elements, so he always was; as he is now
nine Months in utero matris, such was the method and the mora of every Man's
production; for the Effect is a natural uniform Effect, whether independent
upon God as the Efficient thereof, or dependent upon Him as a Natural Effect.
And therefore whatsoever is impossible to be attributed to Peter, or John, or
any other individual Man, is incompetible to every Man in all this infinite
Collection within the unlimited extent of Eternity.

But the two latter, though both suppose an eternity of Generations, and though
in Eternity there cannot be supposed well a first, yet do what they can, if
they suppose a production of Man by eternal Creation, they cannot deliver
themselves from these consequences; 1. That there must be some Man or Men that
had his or their beginning in some other way then other persons had it, namely
by Creation; for although Creation be an instantaneous act of the Divine Will
and Power, it must of necessity be terminated in some individual determinate
Person, and it cannot be quid vagum; the consequence whereof must necessarily
be, That if there were an eternal Creation of any Man or Men, they that were
thus created had their production (if we may suppose such a production) by a
different way from the production of those that had their being by generation;
and herein this Supposition of the Origination of Humane Nature differs from
the two former Suppositions. 2. And consequently, that if the Creation of Man
and of the rest of the World must be in the same point, as I may call it, of
Eternity, the rest of the World or any part thereof could not be precedent to
the Creation of Man; for then they have lost what they contend for, namely, an
eternal Creation of Man: If it were but one imaginable moment after, then the
World might indeed have had an eternal existence, but it would be impossible
for Man to have had that eternal existence by Creation, unless in the same
first imaginary conceptible moment of Eternity (an expression improper enough I
confess) Man and the rest of the World were concreated: The consequence
whereof, as I before said, is, that those Men must not as the former suppose
all Individuals of Mankind had the same natural manner of production, for among
the whole Collection some one or more had a supernatural manner of production,
namely, by Creation.

2. This being premised concerning the different states of the two former and
two latter Opinions, somewhat I shall say in general touching the Reasons I use
against all these Suppositions: 1. In general, That that kind of reasoning
which reduces the opposite Conclusion to something that is apparently
impossible or absurd, is as much a Demonstration in disaffirmance of any thing
that is affirmed as can possibly be in any case, if the Conclusion of the
affirming party does necessarily infer an impossibility or absurdity in the
nature of the thing affirmed, it is a Demonstration, Argumentum cum
contradictione conclusionis; and such will those be which I shall bring. 2.
Because the former Suppositions touching the Eternity of Mankind, though they
conclude in the same Assertion, yet because they do it by several Suppositions,
the Arguments that I shall use shall be of three natures; 1. Such as oppose in
special the two first Assertions: 2. Such as especially oppose the two last: 3.
Such as in common oppose both.

1. The Argument that I use against the two first Suppositions is this, That it
is evident to Experience and the Concessions of those very men, that the Body
of a Man and all other compounded Bodies consist not only of Matter antecedent
to their Composition, but also of such a Matter as is digested from those more
simple Bodies which we call the four Elements, Fire, Air, Water, and Earth: And
therefore of necessity, and according to the Principles of these very men,
before the existence of any compounded Body there must be of necessity, 1. A
pre-existence of those simple Bodies out of which this compounded or mixed Body
is compounded: 2. A pre-existence of those more active Principles in Nature
that are necessarily pre-requisite to the mixing of these particles of
Elementary Bodies, and to the disposition of them to the Union and Constitution
of that mixed Body whereinto it is to be formed, namely, the Motions and Influx
of the Heavens, the Activity of the fiery Nature, subduing the more passive
parts of Matter to the susception of that Form wherein it is to be brought. 3.
A mora, or due space of time intervening between the first coagulation of
Matter and the first instant of the disposing thereof, and the complement
thereof in its determinate Species, which according to the degree of its
specifical perfection is sometimes longer, and sometimes shorter; as the
Statuary strikes more strokes upon that piece of Marble that is completed into
the Statue of Caesar than into the Cube or Pedestal whereon he stands: all
these must precede, not only in nature, but in time, before the complement of
any compounded Body in its specifical constitution. And therefore since all
mixed Bodies require necessarily the antecedence of these simple Bodies, this
action of the more active Principles, this mora in the full disposition and
digestion of them into their complement of a mixed Being, it is simply
necessary that there must be a posteriority in time of every compounded Body,
especially the Body of Man, to these more simple Bodies out of which it is
constituted, and those successive and gradual actions, and of the more active
Nature by which it is disposed and completed in its being: And if once we admit
a priority and posteriority, it is impossible the latter can be eternal,
because it has necessarily something that actually preceded it.

2. The Argument against the Eternity of Mankind upon the two latter
Suppositions is thus; If Man were eternally created, or con-created with the
rest of the World, it is of absolute necessity that that Creation must be
terminated in that individual Person that was thus created. For whether
Creation be eternal or not eternal, it must necessarily be terminated in some
individual Being that is so created. And it is necessary also that that created
Person were created in some determinate state, and in a state answerable to the
nature of these Men that we now see; and though his Life were longer than ours,
yet it would be certain that he lived as we do, one day, one month, one year
after another, and that those first created Persons did generate their kind by
the conjunction of Sexes, as is done in the World. And therefore if both Sexes
were created, yet sooner or later they propagated their kind, as is now done;
for though they themselves had a differing manner of production from those that
succeeded them, we must conceive that their Constitution was the same,
otherwise we shall not so much suppose an eternal Creation of Man, as of
something else of a nature essentially differing from Man; which is contrary to
the Hypothesis it self: And if this be supposed, we shall never deliver our
selves from intolerable difficulties and absurdities. For, 1. There would of a
necessity be a first Man, which cannot be consistent with the attribution of
Eternity to Mankind. Again, 2. That first Man, if created eternally, must needs
be distant from us by a less portion of duration after he had lived a year or
two; and consequently the duration from his age of two years could not be
eternal, for it is short of the period of his Creation by two years, and
therefore not eternal; neither could his Creation be eternal, for then the
adding of two years to a duration less than infinite should make it infinite,
which is absurd and impossible. Again, 3. Was the generation of the first born
Man at an infinite distance from us, and eternal, or no? If it were, then it
must be of the same antiquity with the Creation of the first Man; and so the
first born Man was eternal, and was consequently before he was born; and his
Eternity should be ten, twenty, thirty, or forty years short of the Eternity of
his Father, yet both eternal: If the Birth of that Man were not eternal, then
consequently the Generations of Mankind are neither infinite nor eternal; nay
consequently the Creation of the first Man could not be eternal nor an infinite
distance from us, for there must necessarily be a determinate Period between
the Creation of the first Man and the Birth of the second, and that time must
necessarily be finite; and the addition of a finite duration to a finite
duration can never make an infinite duration.

Eternity therefore, and a duration actually infinite, cannot be applied to
successive Beings: The absurdities and incongruities that arise upon such an
application are infinite and uncurable, and not to be attempted: Nothing but an
infinite and indivisible Being is able to sustain an infinite and eternal
duration, it will never fit other things, it is too great for them.

3. I now come to consider those Reasons that are applicable indifferently to
all the former four Suppositions, and render them all alike vain, absurd, and
impossible. I shall resume some of those that I used before against the
Supposition of the World's Eternity, and I shall subjoyn some others more
particularly applicable to the condition of Man.

1. If the successive Generations of Mankind were eternal, then of necessity
some one Man among them that preceded us was infinitely distant from us that
are now living in point of duration, and infinite numbers of Men have
intervened between us and him; this is plain and undeniable.

If so then, if this Man lived to the ordinary age of man, for the purpose,
till thirty years old, and then had a Son, and after this he lived to seventy
years old, and died: Was this Son of his distant from us an infinite duration,
an infinite period of years; or were there infinite Persons that intervened
between this Son and us his remote descendants or no? If there were, then the
duration from his Father, which was thirty years before his Son, must be thirty
years greater than the duration of the Son, and yet the Son as eternally
existing as his Father: if not, then thirty years added to the finite duration
from the Son to us must make it infinite. There were infinite Persons in the
interval between us and his Father, and but finite between us and his Son, and
yet the odds between both must be but one. The Father's Death must be eternally
distant from us as well as his Birth, and yet his birth seventy years before
his death.

2. I shall here also resume the Argument above-given against the Eternity of
Motion (which yet is no other but a different kind of application of the
Argument last mentioned.) Whatsoever is now past and gone, was most certainly
once present; therefore the most remotely distant Man in that vast Period of
Eternity was certainly once actually existing, and though he be now past, yet
those Attributes and Conceptions that were applicable and affirmable of him
when present, are now affirmable and applicable to him though past, (abating
only the relations of past and present,) if when he was present and actually
existing he could not be eternal, so neither can the addition of all the
succeeding myriads of Men by successive procreation make any one day of that
Man's age to be infinitely distant from us, for it could not be so when he was
present and existing. That Man whereof we speak was such a Man as we are, lived
successively as we do, and though possibly he might be longer-lived than us,
yet his age was measured by days and years as ours is, and could never be
without beginning; and consequently this Man, when existing, was the Radix of
all that succeeded him, the terminus claudens of all his succeeding
Generations, which bounds and terminates a part ante all the succeeding
Generations; as that Man when present was not eternal, so neither can the
addition of successive Generations produce a Line of duration of infinite
extent, for that duration is utrinque clausa, namely, with that Man which was
once present, and that Moment wherein I now write.

3. My third Argument (which though it be common, is very evident) is this:

It is impossible, ex natura rei, that any multitude can be actually infinite,
or, (which is all one) so great that there cannot be a greater, or, multitudo
omnium maxima: But if we should suppose an eternal succession of Generations of
Men, or an infinite Series of successive individual Men, there would
necessarily follow an infinite multitude, or a multitude than which there could
not be a greater. And therefore ex impossibili, there could not be such an
eternal succession of Generations.

The first Proposition, namely, That it is impossible there should be an
infinite multitude, or (which is all one) a number actually infinite, is
evident by those many contradictions, absurdities, and intolerable
incongruities that would follow upon such a Supposition.

It must needs be granted that an infinite multitude is the greatest multitude
that can be, there can be no greater; if there can be a greater, then the
former was not infinite. For when we have to do with any thing whose very
essence, as I may call it, consists in being greatest, there majus and minus do
alter the very essence of the thing, and is identical with magis and minus: A
greater or larger Line, or Superficies, or Body is not magis linea,
superficies, aut corpus, than a shorter, narrower, or lesser Line, Superficies,
or Body, because they agree in the same common nature, the one as well as the
other is a Line, Superficies, or Body. And so of other things.

But when the very Essence of the thing consists in a certain essential
difference of major or minor, there major or minor vary the kind.

And therefore a Line of two foot long (with relation to that extent)
essentially differs from a Line of a foot long, which under that notion is
essentially greater or more extended than a Line of a foot long, and it is
impossible that a Line of a foot long should be as long as a Line of two foot
long, as it is impossible that a part should be equal to the whole. And yet
upon the supposition of an infinite multitude, it must necessarily follow that
one infinite multitude must be greater than another, and yet both infinite;
upon the supposition of infinite Generations of Men, there must have been an
infinite multitude of antecedent Individuals and Generations of Men a million
of years since, and yet necessarily by the addition of those Individuals that
have accrued since in that great Period of a Million of years, there must needs
be an accession of a vast number to that multitude that was before, whereby it
must necessarily be greater, and yet both supposed infinite, that is, such than
which there can be nothing greater. Again, the multitude of the individual Men
must be infinite, and yet the multitude of these Men's Eyes must be double to
the number of Men, and yet both be infinite. And it is but a vain thing to say,
that though the collection of Men be antecedently infinite, yet it is clausa
and finita in the present extreme: as if a Line should be extended infinitely
from the point A, the Line would be finite at the point A, -- A
though infinite toward the other part; and the apposition of the accessional
number of Men is to that part that is finite: For though the Generations of Men
are limited toward the extreme that is next us, or at the Period of a Thousand
years before us: and though the apposition of the accessional number be toward
this hithermost extreme which is clausa or finita, yet the apposition is to the
whole number or multitude, and the collection thereof, and therefore the
absurdity of the Supposition of an infinite pre-existing multitude, which is
more enlarged by the increase, is equally evident, as if we could suppose an
apposition of the number to any other part; for the scope of the Argument is to
prove the incompossibility of Infinite and Multitude, because no Multitude can
be greater than Infinite, yet such would it necessarily be, if we should
suppose the multitude now greater than it was a thousand years before: And to
render it yet more plain, suppose on the other side we should take the other
Operation of Arithmetic, namely, Subduction: If out of that supposed infinite
multitude of antecedent Generation, we should by the Operation of the
Understanding subduce Ten, whether we subduct that Number of Ten out of the
last Generations of Men, or out of Generations a thousand years since, or
indeterminately out of the whole Collection, certainly the residue must needs
be less by Ten than it was before that Subduction made, and yet still the
Quotient must be as great as before, which is still infinite.

Again, the incongruity of the Supposition of an infinite multitude appears in
this, that the part must be as infinite as the whole: It is the Instance of
Algarel, in his Dialogue with Averroes; the Number of 4 multiplied into it self
produces the Square Number of 16, and that again multiplied by 4 produces the
Cubick Number of 64. If we should suppose a multitude actually infinite, there
must be infinite Roots, and Square and Cubick Numbers, yet of necessity the
Root is but the fourth part of the Square, and the sixteenth part of the Cubick
Number. The Instance of Algarel, in his first Disputation with Averroes, which
Averroes endeavors to answer (but tyres himself in vain to do it) may explain
this Consequence: The Sun passes through the Zodiac in one year, Saturn
passes through it in thirty years; so that the Revolution of Saturn to the
Revolution of the Sun is as one to thirty, and consequently as one Revolution
of Saturn contains thirty Revolutions of the Sun, so two Revolutions thereof
must contain sixty Revolutions of the Sun, and so if we should suppose their
Revolutions infinite, yet the proportion of the Revolutions must necessarily
hold the same, namely, in all the whole Collection, the Number of the Suns
Revolutions must be thirty times as many as the Number of Saturns Revolutions,
and consequently the Revolutions of Saturn can be no more than one thirtieth
part of the Revolutions of the Sun, and yet both being supposed infinite, the
part, namely, the thirtieth part, must be as great as that whereof it is the
thirtieth part, which is impossible.

And this impossibility holds in all other things that have succession or
extension, as in quantity, motion, successive duration of things, in their
nature successive. But it is more plain and conspicuous in discrete quantity,
or different Individuals, which are already measured by Number, without any
breaking the continuity that is in things that have continuity, as continued
quantity and motion. And therefore they that go about to demonstrate the
impossibility of Eternal Motion, a part ante, or infinite extension in a Body,
Line, or Superficies, do first break it into parts to measure them, and reduce
them to discrete quantity, because the demonstration is more clear and sensible
thereby, and therefore they break the Measures of Motion into Hours, Days,
Years, or such like Measures, or into Periodical Revolutions, and so they break
continued Quantity into Palms, Feet, Perches, or the like; because though the
repugnancy of Infinitude be equally incompetible to continued or successive
Motion, Duration, or continued Quantity, and depends upon the incompossibility
of the very nature of things successive or extensive with Infinitude, yet that
incompossibility is more conspicuous in discrete Quantity or Multitude, that
arises from parts or Individuals already actually distinguished: But the
reason of both is the same, especially if broken and divided into real or
imaginary parts.

But in the Matter in question, namely, Multitude of successive Men, or
successive Generations of Men, there is already a separate, divided, discrete
multitude, without any antecedent work of my Understanding, or otherwise, to
reduce it into parts or discrete multitude; and so the Instances of the
Absurdities that arise by an infinite multitude of Individuals and distinct
Generations, is made more plain and open to view: And he that is desirous to
prosecute these Asystata of Infinitude and Multitude, let him resort to the
Prelections of Faber, collected by Monsuerius, in his Metaphysica demonstrativa
de infinito.

And to say the truth, there are none of the Ancients that have any weight in
them, that do not agree, that it is impossible that any Quantity, either
discrete or continued, should be actually infinite, but only potentially,
either by addition of supposed parts to either, or by division of Quantity
continued into parts infinitely divisible: But the greater difficulty rests in
the Assumption, which is next to be considered.

The second Proposition is this, That if Eternal Generations of Men were
admitted, there would be this absurd Consequence, that a multitude given might
be actually infinite, which remains to be proved.

The Objection that stands in the way seems to be this, That there is no
repugnancy that Multitude might be possibly infinite, for as we may without any
inconvenience suppose, that the Generations of Mankind might be sempiternal or
eternal, a part post, so there is no inconvenience to suppose them eternal, a
part ante, for they never co-exist, but are successive, and so do not
constitute any multitude co-existing actually infinite, which is indeed
impossible; but there is no implication or repugnancy that there might be an
infinite succession of Generations, for they are not together, but one
Generation passes and another succeeds.

And hence it is they say, that in moventibus vel causis per se subordinatis,
there cannot be processus in infinitum, but we must necessarily fix in a First
Mover, between whom and the last Motion or Effect there cannot be a series of
Infinite Causes for two Reasons: First, Because if there were Infinite Movers
or Causes, moving per se to the same effect or motion, the motion would be
infinite, and so would the time wherein that motion would be absolved, for
infinitus motus non fit in finito tempore. Secondly, And again, there would be
an actual Infinitude of co-existing Causes, which is impossible; and therefore
for the purpose, to the production of this generation of an Insect by
putrefaction, there is not an infinite series of Causes per se cooperating to
its production, but the series of Causes is finite; for the active qualities of
the Elements move the Matter, and the Heat and Influence of the Heavens agitate
and move, it may be, the Elementary Body, and the Intelligences move the
Heavenly Bodies, and Almighty God the Primum Movens moves the Intelligences,
and these are finite in number: But in causis aut moventibus accidentaliter
subordinatis there may be an Infinitude or Eternity, thus the Father may beget
the Son, and the Grandfather begat the Father, and so backward to Eternity, and
so in the successive productions of all Animals ex semine. For though the
Individuals successively existing from all Eternity, must needs be infinite,
yet they do not coexist, but as one Generation comes another decays, and so
make no infinite multitude; and consequently, that all the absurdities that are
heaped upon the Supposition of infinite multitude or numbers, conclude nothing
to the matter in question, because there is no infinite multitude, because no
infinite Individuals or Generations of Mankind coexisting: And though this
cannot at all, according to their supposition, any way admit the possibility of
an infinitely extended Body, Line, Superficies, or Place, because that would be
an actual infinitude in extent; yet as to successive continued things, as
successive Motion, as that of the Heavens, and successive Duration, as that of
Motion which we call Time, there is nothing of inconvenience according to their
Supposition, if they be infinite, eternal, and without beginning; because
though they consist of infinite Parts, yet they are not altogether, or
coexisting, without which there is no real Multitude.

So that the Question will be hereby reduced to this Point, Whether in this
succession of Generations and Individuals of Mankind there be such a Multitude
produced that is consistent with Infinitude therein.

I shall not here lay hold of that Supposition of the Immortality of the Souls
of the several Individuals of Mankind (which if supposed, would make an
infinite multitude actually coexisting of separate Souls) because some of those
that maintain the Eternity of Mankind, deny the Immortality of the Soul; others
deny the Immortality of the Soul in its individuation, supposing it to resolve
into a certain common Element of Souls; and others, as the Pythagoreans, though
allowing the Immortality of Souls in their individuation, yet suppose a finite
number of Souls might supply the infinite Successions of Men by Transmigration
of these in their due time: This I lay aside, because it would necessarily
occasion other Disputes with Men of those Persuasions.

I do therefore say, That upon the Supposition of the Eternal Succession of the
Generations of Men, and the infinite successive Individuals thereby arisen,
there does arise such a Multitude as is equally inconsistent with Infinitude,
as if the Individuals had been all coexisting, and that all those foregoing
Asystata that render any number or multitude of coexisting Individuals
impossible to be infinite, render the multitude of successive Individuals
impossible to be infinite; abating only the excrescence of infinite coexisting
Men to an infinite moles, which inconvenience indeed falls not upon the
successions of Individuals, some by death and corruption making room for new
Successors.

And to make good what I say, I shall deliver these ensuing Conclusions.

1. That as in things that are present, while they actually are, they also
necessarily are; so in things that have been, they have been while they were,
actually and necessarily: It is as certain that my Father and Grandfather once
actually were in rerum natura, as it is certain that I now actually am; for
though in things that are yet to come, they are only in possibility, and not in
act; yet in things that have already been, they have been as actually as what
now is; in praeteritis non datur possibilitas; and it is as certain that what
is past, once was actually present and existing, as what now is, is actually
present and existing. This I say to prevent that Objection, That things past
and things to come are of the same nature in relation to their existence, and
that only our manner of apprehension is that which makes things future only
inter possibilia.

2. That things that once existed and are now past, do as really constitute a
multitude (if many) as things that are coexisting; It is as evident that the
Grandfather and Father and Son did as really make up a multitude, that is, one
man, and one man, and one man, (which multitude we call artificially three,
though the Father and Son were both Posthumi) as if they all had or did all now
exist together; and it is as true a Predication to say that these were many, as
it were in case they had all coexisted, or were now coexisting: And those three
Revolutions of the First Moveable that were past three days since, are as
really a multitude of Revolutions, as the three Stars that this hour coexist in
Heavenly Constellation are a multitude of Stars; and when I speak of a
multitude, I mean more than one.

3. That although number, or the digesting things under this or that number,
whether Collective, as three, six, nine; or Ordinal, as the second, third, or
fourth, be but an operation of the Understanding only, yet antecedent to any
act of the Understanding, and without the help of it, unum and multa, and of
those multa, plura, or pauciora have a reality: Plato is one, and Plato and
Aristotle are multi, or more than one; and Plato and Aristotle and Tully, are a
greater multitude than Plato and Aristotle, antecedently to any operation of
the Understanding.

4. That antecedently to any act of the Understanding, even in those things
that have a successive existence, and are not all together, there is as real an
unity or multiplicity as in things coexisting. For instance, The Revolution of
Heaven that was dispatched the first Natural day of the last week, was as
really, as that Revolution which now is in concluding really is; and as it
really was, so it really was but one: And the Revolutions that followed in the
two next Natural days were really more than one, and therefore multa; and the
Revolutions of the three next days after, was a multitude greater than the
Revolutions of the two former days; and all those six Revolutions were really a
greater multitude of Revolutions than any one of the former multitudes, and
this without and before any operation of the Understanding, though indeed the
Understanding gives them their numeral distinction of one, and two, and three,
and six.

5. That the incompossibility of Infinitude with Multitude, or the
impossibility that any Multitude should be infinite, does not arise either upon
the existence or nonexistence of the Subjects of that Multitude together at
this or any other determinate time, but from the very nature of Multitude it
self: So that whether the multa were present, or past, or fixed, or successive,
yet the very supposition of Multitude does exclude the possibility of its
infinitude: For 1. It supposes a discrete Quantity, and any Quantity must
needs be limited. 2. It supposes a consistence of many Unities into which it
must necessarily be resolved, as the constituent Subject or Matter of them. 3.
It supposes a Term which cannot be the greatest: It is impossible that any
Multitude can be so great but that a greater may be given: So that as although
there were no Man in the World to take notice of it, every Triangle would
contain three angles equal to two right-angles, though no Man were in the World
to discover or assent to it; so though there were no things in the World
existing to be denominated multa, and no Understanding in the World to form the
conception of it, it would be an eternal Truth, That what consists of many
Unities, as all Multitude necessarily does, cannot be Infinite, nor
consequently any Multitude arising by succession cannot in the nature of the
thing be Eternal.

Upon the whole matter therefore, I conclude that it is impossible that the
Generations of Men or their successive Individuals can be Eternal; that a
Multitude does as well arise by successive as by coexisting Individuals; that
if the Generations of Men and their successive Individuals were Eternal, there
would necessarily follow, that the multitude of such Individuals were infinite
as well as if they were all coexisting, and that it is equally repugnant to the
nature of multitude, whether of successive or of coexisting Individuals to be
infinite: Therefore there could not be such an eternal succession of
Individuals or Generations.

And that this Supposition, That multitude of coexisting Individuals, or of
Causes or moventes per se, cannot be infinite; but that successive Individuals
or Causes and Effects per accidens might be infinite and eternal, is in truth a
Supposition not fitted to the truth of things, or grounded upon any rational
difference between the things, but a Supposition fitted merely to serve that
other precarious Supposition which Aristotle and his followers had taken up
touching the Eternity of the World.

And these shall be all the Reasons that I shall trouble my self withal
against the Eternity of Mankind, or the successive Generations and Individuals
thereof; having willingly declined those many other Ingenious Reasons given by
others (as of the Impertransibility of Eternity, and the impossibility therein
to attain to the present term or limit of antecedent Generations or Ages; the
necessity of every posterius to have a prius, that there be an equal number of
priora and posteriora) which either are so many various Explications of the
Reasons going before, or at least are not so evidently concludent, or are
subject to Exceptions in some particulars.

The Objections both against the Reasons before given, and against the
Supposition it self, I shall take up after the next Chapter, wherein I shall
examine the other Supposition before mentioned, namely, The eternal existence of
some first Man and Woman, and the successive Generations from them, wherein,
because it is touched before, I shall be brief.

CAP. V. Concerning the Supposition of the first Eternal Existence of the
common Parents of Mankind, and the production of the succeeding Individuals
from them.
I Come to that other Supposition, namely, of the Existence of some one Man and
Woman the common Parents of Mankind eternally, and the successive
multiplication of the Race of Mankind from them by the ordinary course of
generation. And although this Supposition carries with it the clear evidence of
its absurdity, and therefore may seem to be scarce worth the pains of a
Confutation; yet because it lies in my way, and the Observations upon it may be
useful for other purposes, I shall say somewhat concerning it.

This first eternal Pair we cannot conceive to have an existence by a bare
course of Nature, without an eternal Creation of them by Almighty God, and an
unintermitted Influence from him to support them in a state of Incorruptibility
through the vast abyss of Eternity: For he that will suppose things purely
under that course of existence that is proper to them by the course of Nature,
must needs suppose the Individuals of the humane Nature to have been always
such, and of such a Frame as now they are, that is, mortal and corruptible
Beings; and though their Ages might anciently be of a longer continuance than
now they are, yet (upon a bare natural account) they could not be conceived
immortal, incorruptible, immutable, no more than they are now.

Therefore since the great admirers of Nature do therefore frame their
Hypotheses of an eternal Succession of Men, because they think themselves bound
to think that all things have ever been as now they are, and because they will
not substitute other Hypotheses of the Origination or Existence of things in
any other manner than they now see them. Certainly as to these, and ad hominem,
it is an Evidence beyond contradiction, that there never was any such pair of
Man and Woman that eternally existed, but that all Men and other perfect
Animals, if they were eternal in their Species, were eternally produced ex
prius genitis as now they are, and that there was no one first individual of
Man or Beast that had an eternal Existence, because such a Supposition equally
crosses that course of the nature of things which now they see, which
therefore they make the standard, and their measure of things that are past.

They therefore that must support an existence of the first individual Parents
of humane Nature, and that those Individuals had an eternal existence, must
necessarily suppose that they had that existence by an eternal Creation of
Almighty God, and an eternal Influx and Support from him in that incorruptible
estate through all the vast extent of an eternal duration.

And by this means they do think, and that truly, that they assert a dependence
of the Species of things upon Almighty God, which cannot possibly be supposed
to be dependent upon him, unless they had in their individual nature their
existence from him; since it is impossible there can be any Supposition of the
existence of any Species (as for instance, the Species of Man) unless it be
supposed to exist in Individuals; nor consequently a dependence of the Species
of Mankind upon God as its Cause, unless there were a dependence of the first
Individuals thereof upon him in fieri as their Cause: And they likewise hope
(but vainly) hereby to avoid the inconveniences of successive eternal
Generations without any first Caput or Radix of those Generations, though they
fall hereby into the same difficulties, and others that are equally intricate
and inexplicable.

And although in this Supposition we must admit the first pair that were the
Roots of Mankind did herein differ from the state of Mankind now, that whereas
now Men live ordinarily seventy or eighty years, and are subject to Death, yet
those first radices humani generis were by the Influence of the Divine Power
immortal, and not confined to the age incident now to Mankind, but were able to
endure the immense duration of an eternal being; yet we must also suppose that
in other respects they were of the same Make with these individuals of Mankind
that are now: For otherwise instead of a supposition of an eternal being of the
first individual Man and Woman that had their being by eternal Creation, we
shall fall into a supposition of something that was not in truth Man. And
therefore, as according to the Doctrine of Moses and the Truth, Adam the first
created Man, though consisting of a composition intrinsecally dissolvable, had
he continued in Innocence, should or might have held by the continued Influx of
the Divine Will and Power a state of immortality and indissolubleness of his
Composition; yet as to the Essentials of his nature, and the Integrals thereof,
he should have been and continued like other Men.

And therefore those first imaginary eternal Individuals, the Root of Mankind,
should have consisted of Flesh and Blood and Mind and Soul and Body as other
Men do, they must have the support of their Lives by receiving of nourishment,
by digesting thereof according to the various process of Digestion as we do,
they must draw in their Breath or Air and emit it again as we do, they must
have had the like successive motion of the Heart and the like circulation of
their Blood as we have, the like local motion of their Bodies, the like
variation and succession of Thoughts as we have; and though the supposed
Eternity of them should have excluded from them corruption or dissolution in
that vast Period of Eternity, yet even that duration of his must be in this
respect like ours, that it was a successive duration, a duration that was
measured out by the supposed coexistence of the eternal succession of days, and
months, and years; And such a duration, as though there had been no such
collateral or coextended extrinsick measure, yet it was intrinsecally
successive, and not indivisible, because he was in his nature a corporeal
successive Being as well as we; and as we in the very Constitution of our
Automaton have certain successive gradual marks and signs and operations,
whereby though there were no external successive measure, by comparison whereto
the succession of our duration might appear, as the Motion of the Heavens and
Heavenly Bodies, and the like; yet by those connatural successive marks and
signs our beings and durations would be measured, and the successions thereof
would appear; as the vicissitudes of Respiration, the Pulses, Palpitations of
our Hearts, the variety and succession of acts of Sensation, the succession of
our Thoughts and Cogitations; whereby it is apparent we have not only
intrinsecal marks and distinctions of our successive duration, but also that
our operations are various: I do, I think and speak that to day which I did not
yesterday, the number of my Respirations or Pulses were thus many yesterday,
and as many to day, and it may be more, upon the variety happening in my Body
by local motion, repletion, or any casual perturbation. And as all this I find
in my self and other men, so I must needs conclude the very like was in these
first Individuals that are supposed to be eternal: For though they had (ex
suppositione) an immortality and preservation from putrefaction or corruption
by the eternal and continued influx of the Divine Goodness and Power, yet they
were not in a state of perfect immutability in their actions, operations, or
existence: For then we must suppose them not to have been Humane Creatures, but
Gods, or at least Angels; which nevertheless are not wholly exempt from their
degrees of mutability and variation, at least in their intrinsic operations:
it being the sovereign Prerogative of Almighty God only, to be without
variableness or shadow of change.

And now I shall not inquire what are become of those eternal pair of first
Parents, where they are, or if they are dead, how it came to pass they could
weather and stand the shock of an eternal duration, and yet be at any time
subject to a dissolution. It may be said they were translated into Heaven, or
possibly they may be since dead, the Divine Beneficence subducting in this or
that point of time that Influence which it communicated from the time of their
first Creation, whereby they were kept in a state of immortality till that
moment of the subduction thereof wherein they began to undergo the common Laws
of Dissolution.

But I do say that there is the same impossibility that any corporeal
Individual of such a Make and Constitution as Man is, should be eternal in hoc
individuo, as there is in the eternal succession of several Individuals: Such a
kind of duration cannot be sustained by succession of Humane Individuals, much
less can it be sustained by any single Individual of Humane Nature.

1. The same absurdities and impossibilities would follow upon the admission of
the Eternity of one single Humane Individual as of successive; because that
Individual has necessarily a concomitant succession of interpolated Motions,
namely, the Pulses of the Heart, and the successive Motions of Respiration, and
diverse others. All which will produce multitudes incapable of Infinitude, as
much as the several individuals of Mankind.

And among all these Pulses and Respirations some one will be necessarily,
infinitely, actually distant from some other Pulse within the limits of time,
whereupon all those former heaps of incongruities and impossibilities before
observed will be consequential.

2. It is impossible that any Being can be eternal with successive eternal
Physical changes, or variety of states or manner of existency naturally and
necessarily concomitant unto it. But if we should suppose any one one Man
eternal, yet he must in the very constitution of his being necessarily have
Physical changes and variety of states and manners of existence accompanying
him, or else we must unman him, and make him another thing: Therefore no
individual Man can be eternal. The Major Proposition is evident to any that
consider it. For let us suppose the first Man created eternally in a state of
Childhood, Youth, or Rest, it is necessary that he continue eternally in that
state, and the first moment he moves or alters that state, must be on this side
the uttermost limits or compass of Eternity, namely, within such a compass as
is finitely distant from this hour, for two Causes: Because Rest must needs be
antecedent to his Motion, his Childhood antecedent to his Youth, and that to
his Manhood; and therefore if his Rest, Childhood, or Youth were eternal, his
motion or alteration of his state cannot be eternal, for then this
contradictory Proposition should be true, That Man did eternally rest and
eternally move, or which is all one, eternally move and eternally not move, for
Rest in Bodies is but an absence or privation of Motion: That he was eternally
a Child, eternally a Youth, and eternally a grown Man.

But let us suppose that it were possible that he might be created eternally in
a state of Rest, or yet in some determinate point within the extent of Eternity
he should begin to move, that interval that anteceded his Motion must be either
in a finite or infinite distance from us: If we should suppose it infinite, we
contradict our selves; for we shall make the first Motion eternal, and
consequently infinitely distant from us; and yet to have a beginning, and such
a beginning that was infinitely later than the Eternity of Rest. And if we
shall suppose the interval between the first imaginary beginning of that Rest
and the beginning of that Motion, finite, (suppose for the purpose, the time of
a Month) then we shall upon the very same account make the beginning of that
Motion to be less than eternal, because begun a Month after what was eternal;
and consequently also we shall make the beginning of that Rest to be not
eternal, because that first Motion having a beginning after Eternity, could not
be eternal; nor consequently the beginning of that Rest could not be eternal,
for, ex suppositione, it is but a Month ancienter than that Motion, which was
not eternal: and a finite duration added to a finite duration cannot make an
infinite duration: Therefore if Man, ex suppositione, were created in any state
whether of Motion or Rest, Childhood, Youth, full grown Age, or whatever other
state it be, he must necessarily so persist an infinite duration, and if he
undergo any alteration from that state, that alteration must be in time, or of
a puisne date to Eternity.

The second Proposition is this; That Man in his very Constitution is such,
that there is uncessantly and naturally concomitant with him Physical changes,
and a variety of states and real changes, without which he would be in vain,
and indeed he could not be what he must be supposd to be, namely, essentially a
Man.

It has been heretofore shown what great variety of Motions and Alterations do
necessarily accompany his very Constitution, and let any Man but think with
himself what a kind of thing Man would be during all that immense abyss of his
first being, if he be supposed eternally and unchangeably resting, unchangeably
moving, eternally and unchangeably a Child, a Youth, a full grown Man, or any
other determinate unchangeable state. As we have before observed, though we
should admit a possibility of an eternal Creation of Man or of any created
Being whatsoever, we must suppose him created under some of the conditions
which are incident to an individual nature; he must be created in some
determinate ubi, and in some determinate situs and state; he must be created in
Rest or in Motion, a Child, or a Youth, or a full grown Man: This Man, unless
he put off his nature, must in some finite or limited time at least after the
eternal imaginary moment of his Being move locally, or with the Motions of
alteration, augmentation, growth or decay. These and the like Motions are, upon
the account of his Constitution, necessarily incident to him within certain
ordinary Periods, and are connatural to his very Constitution.

And therefore it is irrational, and indeed impossible that this created Man
should eternally be in a state of Rest without Motion, without Alteration,
Augmentation, Diminution; and yet thus he must be conceived to be, if he were
eternally made: If once we admit a variation from the state of his Creation,
that variation must be necessarily after an eternal and infinite duration, and
therefore within the compass of Time: If this Man should be conceived to move
or alter his condition within a year, nay a million of years after his
Creation, his Creation could not be eternal, because his Creation would be
antecedent to that first alteration but a finite time; and that first
alteration could not be eternal, but within the compass of a finite time; and
consequently his Creation anteceding that first alteration by a finite time
could not be eternal, or of an infinite distance from the time wherein I write:
And consequently this Creation of Man is not, cannot be eternal, because Man in
his very Constitution has the necessary concomitants of those alterations that
are inconsistent with an eternal duration, and such as he cannot be without,
according to the very intrinsic fabric of his native Constitution one Week,
much less an eternal duration.

Again, the truth is, the very Supposition of eternal Creation of any Being
essentially distinguished from Almighty God is a perfect contradiction in it
self: That which is eternal, is that which is without beginning; that which is
created, has necessarily a beginning, although by Creation.

But I shall not prosecute this any farther, the Supposition of any individual
of Mankind eternally created is so absurd that it deserves not half the words
that have been used about it: But I have not been so prolix in it for the sake
of the Supposition it self, but rather because it gives a fair opportunity of
clearing of some things which could not be so aptly done otherwise.

And upon all this that has been said, although it should be admitted that
there were an eternal being of a first Man and a first Woman, yet it were
impossible in Nature that the Generations of Men should be infinite; and this
appears upon the Reasons here given, and likewise upon the former Consideration
of the impossibility of the Eternity of Mixed Bodies. For it is absolutely
necessary that there be an interval between the first existence of the first
created Parents of Mankind and the production of any descendent from them by
ordinary course of procreation or generation: For such a production cannot by
any possibility be as ancient as the producents; though Creation may be
instantaneous, yet Generation in its first inception, complement and
perfection, cannot be instantaneous. Ideoque necesse est ut primus homo per
procreationem sive naturalem generationem productus, per novem menses integros
post primam conceptionem in utero lateat, and demum post ejusdem in lucem
editionem, per omnes gradus infantiae, pueritiae, juventutis, ad complementum
maturioris aetatis deveniat: unde etiam necesse est ut primus homo per
generationem, posterior sit primis hominibus per creationem, per spatium ad
minus novem mensium. Unde si daretur primos humani generis parents extitisse
per aeternam creationem, impossible est primos homines ex iisdem prognatos
extitisse per aeternam generationem; parentum enim existentia praecedere debet
existentiam filii, aliter filius per generationem and pater in suis positivis
existentiis erunt aeque antiqui, utrique aeterni: Et si detur existentia patris
(licet non sub ea relatione) ante existentiam filii, filii existentia
principium habeat necesse est posterius existentia patris, and sic non aeque
antiquum, and consequenter nec aeternum.

Upon the whole matter, I do conclude, That although the Creation of the common
Parents of Mankind might be de facto a very long time since, nay although there
can be no imaginable time nor imaginable point wherein the Creation of the
Individuals might not have been by the Divine Power; nor no imaginable point
but that the Creation of the World or Mankind might have been sooner, if the
Divine Will had been so pleased, (for that denotes only a possibility of
pre-existence sooner than it was, if the infinite Agent had so pleased, and not
an actual Eternity) yet it is not possible in the nature of the thing that
Mankind or any other created Being, that has succession either continued or
discrete necessarily accompanying it, should sustain an actual, eternal, and
consequently infinite duration.

CAP. VI. Certain Objections against the Truths formerly delivered, and against
the Reasons given in proof thereof, with their Solutions.
THere are certain considerable Objections against those things that are
delivered in the precedent Chapters, and against the concludency or evidence of
those Reasons, these I have delivered over to this Chapter.

The First Objection is thus: That Eternity, and Infinite, and the notions
thereof are too large for our Understanding, and we are lost when we go about
to frame Conceptions of them; and all our Argumentations touching them are
inevident and unconcludent, because our Understanding being but a finite power
is capable only of finite Objects, and that the media whereby we go about to
evince any thing must needs be finite, or otherwise they are not comprehensible
by us, and therefore wholly disproportionate to frame Conclusions touching an
Object that of all hands is agreed to be infinite; our Faculties are
proportionate to those Objects that are derived to us by the help and
instrumentality of Sense, either immediately, or at least mediately, and
therefore are not proportioned to the nature of Eternity and Infinitude. And
therefore our Reasoning touching these matters is as if he that were born blind
should Philosophize touching Light or Colors, whereunto he has not, nor never
had a Faculty accommodate.

I answer, It is true that there is something which I may call Positive in the
conception of Eternal or Infinite, which the Understanding cannot master. But
since it is very plain that all things in the World come under the distribution
of finite or infinite, or that which has a beginning, or that which has not a
beginning and is consequently eternal; If I can (as most certainly I may) have
a conception of what is finite, and what are the Laws and necessary Connexions
of it, I can by that Notion conclude that whatsoever is finite, or that must be
under the Laws and Rules of finite Beings, cannot be infinite: I have a Globe
in my Hand, though I know not the Eternity, yet I know that whatsoever has or
must necessarily have limits or fines, is not, cannot be infinite, and
therefore this Globe cannot be infinite: And if I can find in any other thing a
parity of Reason, I do and may remove infiniteness from it as reasonably and
evidently as I do from this Globe I hold, or this Hour I write, or this Life I
live: I do therefore certainly know that whatsoever is limited or bounded by
somewhat that necessarily anteceded it, cannot be eternal.

I do not determine what Eternal or Infinite is in the Positive nature of it,
only I remove Infinitude from what I find to be necessarily finite; and
determine, that whatsoever has bounds or limits to it, is quid finitum, and not
quid non finitum; and whatsoever has necessarily a beginning is quid
temporale, and not quid aeternum: And all my endeavor has been to show that
the things before disputed are and needs must be of such a nature as comes
under the notion of what I know, namely, finitum or temporale; and not under
the negation thereof, namely, infinitum, or non finitum, or fine principio.

2. Object. That by denying the possibility at least of Eternity to created
successive Beings, I put a restraint to the infinite Goodness of God, who
thereby is straightened in the communication of his Goodness, coeternal to his
being, which is part of his Divine Perfection; and also to the extent of his
Power and Omnipotence: which is too bold and adventurous.

I answer, Touching the Goodness of God, and the necessity of his communication
thereof, I have before said enough in the Second Chapter, I shall not repeat
it: But as touching the other restraint upon his Omnipotence, I say, the
denying of Power in God to make a Creature, especially a successive created
Nature as ancient as himself, is no more a derogation from his Power, than to
deny him Power to make a Creature as great, and as good, and as powerful as
himself: The Infiniteness of his Duration is a part of the Divine Perfection
(in my judgment) incommunicable to any created Being, and it is part of the
eminence, and excellence, and transcendence of that Divine Perfection, as well
as others that are not communicable to any created Being. But secondly, Suppose
that Eternity might be communicated to any created Being, as for the purpose,
to the more pure Mental Natures, yet I do not disparage the Omnipotence of God
when I say it is not communicable to a successive Being that is in fluxu; not
for want of Power in God, but for want of Capacity in the nature of the thing
to sustain such a duration upon the intrinsecal discongruity of the one to the
other: It would not be a derogation to the Divine Omnipotence, to deny that the
Diagonal of a Square should be commensurate in length to the Sides; for the
nature of the thing will not bear it.

3. Object. But a late Author has with ostentation enough produced an Argument
whereby all those Reasons and Instances concerning the impossibility and
absurdity of infinite Generations, infinite Individuals, and infinite Motion
supposed to have actually existed, are easily discharged; and therefore he
concludes, that notwithstanding all that has been said, the Generations of Men
might have been actually eternal, and that there may be infinite numbers of
successive Men, Generations and Revolutions, and that consequently it is not
repugnant that infinite may be greater than infinite; that there be infinite
Days, and Years, and Men, and yet in that infinite 365 times more Days than
Years, yet both infinite; the number of Men infinite, and yet the number of
their Hands or Eyes double to the number of the Men: That the Supposition that
these are contradictions, are but mistakes and delusions of our Understanding
not able well to digest the business of Eternal, Immense, or Infinite. And this
he thinks he proves by two principal Instances which he thinks are
unquestionable.

1. That there is and would be such a thing as Duration, and that duration
would be successive though there were no being in rerum natura, which he calls
tempus aeternum.

2. That there is unquestionably an infinite Space actually: And yet all these
imaginary consequences and absurdities follow upon that Supposition, which are
urged as the Reasons against the successive eternal duration of Individuals
above mentioned: For in that infinite space there are infinite Miles and
infinite Leagues, and yet thrice so many Miles as Leagues: The extent at both
the extremes of East and West infinite; yet each extreme divided, infinite: and
many such the like Instances, which yet notwithstanding avoid not the truth of
an infinite extension.

To this I answer briefly in this place, (for I have elsewhere examined at
large the truth of both these Hypotheses) I do in the first place premise, That
as the excess (as I may call it) of Being, namely Infinitude, is difficult to
apprehend; so the defect of Being, namely Nothing, is very difficult to
apprehend: When we go about to apprehend simple Nothing, yet our Imagination
clothes it with something like Existence, and gives imaginary being to Nothing,
before we can come to shape a thought concerning it.

And certainly Duration and Space are in themselves relative to something that
does durare, and something that is spatiatum, namely, something extended: And
if any (thing I cannot say) but if any Conceptible is more nothing than
another, Duration without a thing that dureth, and Space without a thing that
is extended in it, is the veriest, the absolutest Nothing that can be: While
they are in conjunction with the thing that sustains them, they are the meanest
Being that is, for they are but modes of being; and therefore when the things
that must sustain them are not, they are the purest nothing that can undergo
the notion of Nothing.

To say there is a duration, whether successive, or permanent, or indivisible,
when there is nothing that does sustain that duration, is a Phantasm of Nothing
under the notion of Something: For it is most apparent to any man that will but
lay aside the Phantasm, That the duration of every thing is diversified in
relation to it self, according to the nature of the thing that endures; and
though it coexists with a thing that appropriates another kind of duration, as
suitable to its being, yet it retains still its own duration, as appropriate to
it self. Thus the duration of the glorious God is another kind of duration than
that of Motion or Bodies, and yet it coexists with that duration. Nay possibly
the duration of a permanent Being (we will take it, a piece of Gold) has
another kind of duration than that of Motion, that is successive: So that all
the notion that we have of Duration without relation to something that endures,
is a fiction that the Understanding takes up, and the Image whereby it
conceives it, is partly by the successiveness of its own operations, and partly
by those external measures that it finds in Motion, rendered a successive
Nature, and pars post partem: And thus the imaginative Understanding dresseth
up a Nothing, namely, Duration without a thing that endures, and then
attributes to it what she finds in her self, and the things she converseth
with, namely Succession; when really there is no such thing as duration or
successive duration, unless there is something that does so endure.

And that this is nothing else but a creature of the Imagination appears by
this: No man alive can suppose that there is any existence of duration that is
to be a thousand years hence, it rests merely in possibility; yet the
Imagination will dress up that future duration under certain proportions that
it borrows from the things it sees and converseth with.

And what is said of Duration without a Body that dures, is in truth to be said
of Space without a Body to which it relates, and therefore well called spatium
imaginarium.

The just apprehension of Space seems to be this; That wheresoever there is a
Body actually existing to which Space relates, there is an actual space: And
therefore if we should suppose nothing to be beyond the unequal Superficies of
the last Heaven, yet the immediate contiguity of that unequal to nothing were a
real space, because it denotes a true relation to that which is, namely, the
unequal Superficies of the highest Arch of being: Nay, if we should suppose that
the Universe were perfectly spherical, and another Universe of the same
dimension and figure were created contiguous to it, as A and B, though they
were contiguous only in the point of contingency, yet their two imaginary Poles
C and D would have really a space between, which would be commensurate to the
Semidiameter of both Spheres; for still there is a real distance between the
parts of two Bodies, and from that relation arises a real space: So if the Air
within a concave Sphere or Cube were annihilated or not there, yet there would
be a real space between the sides of the Cube or Sphere though no Body
intervened, because still there remained the ambient sides, to which that space
may as well relate and be commensurate, as if the vacant space were full of Air.

But without relation to some Body, there can be no actual Space; for Space is
a term merely of relation to something that is spatiatum.

But then comes in the Author, and brings Lucretius with him, and tells us,
that before the World was there was Space, or otherwise how could there be room
for the Universe unless there were space to receive it: and supposes that if
an Archer were upon the unequal Superficies of the Heaven there would be space
for him, and if he shot his Arrow upward, there would be space for that Arrow
to fly, or else the Arrow would not move from the string.

And all this is very true, and yet it proves nothing of real Space beyond the
confines and relation of Bodies.

But as in relation to the infinite active Power of God, nothing had (as it
were) a passive potentiality to be something, to be a Body, to be a World; so
consequently nothing had a potentiality, as I may call it, to become Space when
the World was made, and together with the production of Body there was a
production of Space: As if at this day in the sunshine there should be produced
an opacous Body, together with it the shadow would be produced: and as the
shadow, though really nothing when there was no opacous Body, had a kind of
potentiality to be, upon the existence of that Body; so this abyss of Nothing
had a kind of potentiality to be Space, when something was produced to which it
might have relation, as quid spatiatum.

And the same Answer is most clearly evident, as to Lucretius his Archer.

There was nothing, and therefore no space, till the Archer came to the unequal
of the uppermost Heaven, but only a potentiality, if I may so call it, to
receive him when he was there; and when he shot up his Arrow, that space that
really was not before, but only potentially to serve a Body when it comes
there, now becomes space for the flight and return of his Arrow; but when it
was returned, now the space no more existed for the Arrow, nor for the Archer
after his coming from the unequal of the highest Heaven: so that though nothing
may be space when it has a Body to which it may relate, yet till that relation
it is not space, but nothing.

And certainly that which imposes upon persons to assert an infinite Space, is
this: Their Imagination and Fantasy does first create a Phantasm, that does
subire vices corporis, and they fill an imaginary space or an imaginary
extension with that Phantasm, and then indeed they have got an imaginary space;
I say, their Fantasy and Imagination follows the conception of the imaginary
space with an imaginary extension, either supposing the World infinitely
extended, or else fancying the Archer and the Arrow, and when that is handsomely
fancied, the Phantasm it self does effectually in the Imagination serve the
turn to make up a relation between a Body and it, though really there be
neither infinite Body, nor infinite Space, till the Body comes to give it its
relation.

And if men will needs be concluding, that because I cannot deliver my self
from the apprehension of space ultra pomoeria coeli, therefore it must be
supposed really to be; we shall find another imagination hardly able to deliver
it self from the apprehension of something beyond the last Heavens, and again
something beyond that, because it cannot frame to it self an apprehension of
nothing, or of any space to be without a Body in it; and so upon the same
reason prove the World infinitely extended.

And yet I appeal to the Fantasy of these very men which either suppose an
infinite empty Space, or an infinite World, whether they can bring their
Imagination to such a discipline as to suppose this Infinitude all together,
but are fain to go on from one step to another, and to think first of a space
larger than the Heavens, and then of a space larger than that, and so
gradually; so that if Imagination should be a sufficient medium to prove a real
existence, it would only prove an indefinite space or extension, not a space or
extension actually infinite; for Imagination will never be able per saltum to
conceive actually Infinite, nor without an Image of Existence to conceive that
which actually is not.

Therefore it seems to me to be too precarious an Argumentation against the
strong evidence of Reason, to prove the existence of an infinite Space or
infinite Body, barely by bold affirming it; or because a man's Fantasy, or
Imagination, or Intellect being accustomed to the knowledge only of things
extended and real space, cannot deliver it self from the thought of an
imaginary space or extent, though there were nothing in the World to sustain it.

And upon this account a late Excellent Author has used a very incongruous
medium to prove a most certain and important Truth, namely, the existence of
God, because there was really a Space before the World was created: Whereas
first of all, there could be no Space without a Body; and secondly, if there
could be such a Space, it were of a divisible existence, which could hold no
proportion with the indivisible nature of the glorious God; Space being quid
extensum, and divisible; but the Essence of God purely spiritual and
indivisible, and equally immense, whether there were a World or no World, Space
or no Space.

4. The Fourth Objection is this: That it seems that it is not inconsistent
that one Infinite should be larger than another, and yet both infinite:
Instances may be given of two kinds; 1. One Infinite in Intension may be larger
than another; there are degrees of perfection in Created Natures, a Brute is
more perfect than a Vegetable, and a Man more perfect than a Brute; and an
Angel more perfect than a Man, and one Angel more perfect than another, at
least gradually; and consequently the Perfection of Almighty God must more
infinitely exceed the perfection of a Man than it does of an Angel, and more
infinitely exceed the perfection of an Angel of an inferior Order than an
Angel of the supremest Order, and yet He infinitely exceeds the perfection of
the most perfect Angel. 2. In Extension, or somewhat analogal to it: Certainly
(...) the Eternal God had an eternal duration the first moment that he had
Created the World as he has now, and yet with Humility and Reverence in so
great a Mystery, we may say, and that truly, that he has endured at this day
above five thousand years longer than he had endured at the Creation of the
World: so that it is not repugnant to the nature of Eternity to be longer or
shorter.

I answer, That for the obviating of this difficulty I have willingly declined
that Instance against the eternal succession of Mankind that purely consists
upon the account of additional accessions to the latter end, as I may call it,
of Eternal Duration.

But first, I say that this answers not at all the Reason given, the stress
whereof rests not upon the incompetibility of an excess of one Infinitude above
another either in Intension or Extension, but the incompetibility of any
multitude to be infinite; because it is impossible that any number or multitude
can be infinite if there can be another multitude or number given that exceeds
it, which will fall out in the successive Individuals and Generations of Men:
But the glorious God, as he is most simply and indivisibly One, and all his
Perfections essentially and indivisibly the same with his most One and
indivisible Being; so the infinite excesses both of his Essential Perfections
and of his Eternal Duration beyond all other Beings, are not measurable by
multitude or number of degrees or successive moments, which would in it self
imply either parts or divisibility, but exceeds them all by an infinite
interval that neither has nor can have any bounds or limits: As his Perfection
is infinitely greater than the perfection of a Man, so it is infinitely greater
than the perfection of an Angel; and were it not infinitely greater than the
perfection of an Angel, it could not be infinitely greater than the perfection
of a Man, because the intensive distance between the perfection of an Angel and
of a Man is but finite: And therefore though that interval between an Angelical
and a Humane perfection be subducted out of the extent of the Divine
Perfection, still the extent of the Divine Perfection is infinite; for what is
so subtracted or subducted out of the extent of the Divine Perfection, leaves
still a Quotient, if I may so call it, Infinite.

Secondly, That which gives a clear Answer to the Instance is this: The
Perfection of Almighty God is a Primitive Essential Perfection, antecedent to
all created perfection; and all created perfection is a perfection indeed given
by the glorious God, according to such measures-and degrees as he is pleased to
bestow: But as it is a derivative perfection, so it is a distinct kind of
perfection from that which is in God, and of another nature, and makes no
alteration in the Divine Perfection, nor borrows any of it: The glorious God
was equally perfect before a Brute, or a Man, or an Angel, or a World was
created, as he was after; and the production of Creatures of various degrees of
essential perfection contributes nothing to it, nor takes any thing from it,
nor makes any alteration in it: only it gives a new or farther relation from
the Creature new created unto the Creator, and that in those various ranks or
decrees of perfection is indeed diversified by disparity in the Creatures
themselves, and in that comparative preference that one has above another; but
still it is without and below the essential infinite Perfection of God, and
does no way affect or alter it. Take this Example in some measure to explain my
meaning; I have a Rod of six foot long in my Hand, I take another Rod of four
foot, another of two foot long, and apply them to my Rod of six foot long; I
thereby find that my Rod of four foot takes up a greater space upon my Rod of
six foot than that of two foot, yet it makes no alteration in my Rod of six
foot, but that continues of the same length as before, only by the application
of the shorter Rods to it there arises a new relation, or rather variety of
comparison between the Rod of six foot and the other Rods. Thus the Divine
Perfection is primitive, absolute, unchangeable; and when a Man is created,
there is a Creature made that has a perfection greater than a Brute, and when
an Angel is created, he has a perfection greater than a Man, and thereby comes
in a nearer degree or likeness of perfection to the Divine Excellence than a
Man does; but yet it does not at all alter that Perfection that is primitively
and essentially and infinitely in Almighty God, but is a perfection of quite
another kind as well as degree.

And upon the same account it is, that although the extent of the Divine
Duration is now greater than it was five or ten thousand years since, yet the
duration of the Divine Existence was no less infinite ten thousand years since
than it is now; because the duration of ten thousand years is but finite, and
therefore though taken out of an infinite duration, leaves still the duration
infinite; for finite taken out of infinite, leaves still that which remains
infinite.

Besides, the duration of the glorious God is the duration of such a Being as
is indivisible, and as he has no divisibility in himself, so neither is his
Eternal Duration divisible into parts.

It is true, that when his own Power has produced a World, and with it Motion,
he coexists with that Motion and successive Duration of created Being, which is
little else besides a relation to the things existing: And therefore he cannot
be said now to coexist with that which yet is not, but shall be, because the
coexistence with any thing imports an existence of both the terms of that
relation: And although by reason of that relation to Beings that are successive
and have succession of parts, as Local Motion, or successive Generations; it
seems to us that he has a kind of succession in his duration, yet most
certainly the existence of a divisible succession in created Beings does no
more make his duration successive than if nothing had been besides himself: As
the unsuccessive duration of Almighty God with relation to himself, which is
the modus existentiae divinae, does not communicate unto Motion or other
created Being the same manner of duration which is appropriate to the Divine
Existence; so neither does the existence of Motion or created Beings transfer
to the Divine Being such a kind of duration as is proper to them, namely, a
divisible successive duration consisting of successive and innumerable parts:
For, as I before have observed, the duration of every thing, which is only the
mode of its existence or permanentiae in suo esse, is diversified according to
the nature of the existence thereof. And though by reason of the coexistence of
one thing with another there arises a various relation or connotation between
them, yet it alters not that intrinsecal manner of duration that is appropriate
to the Essences of the things themselves.

If we should suppose the Circle A B C to move about a fixed unmovable Center
at D, whereby the part that is now in A, an hour hence will be at B, and an
hour after that at C, and thereby is gained successively different relations of
site or position between the fixed or stable central Body at D, yet it is
without any variation either of situs or motion in the central Body at D, which
all this while rests unmovable, and keeps the same unaltered site or position
in it self: So it is in the coexistence of successive Beings with the
indivisible, fixed, permanent state of the glorious God.

But in all this there is nothing that answers or weakens the Reason before
given against the Eternity of successive Generations or Individuals, which is
not upon this account, that that which is eternal cannot be extended to a
greater extent at the hithermost and concluding extreme, as I may call it, for
at the hither end it is quasi quid finitum; but that those Beings that must by
their successive existence excrescere in multitudinem sive numerum, cannot be
eternal upon a certain intrinsic incongruity between Multitude and Number of
the one part, and Infinite of the other part: But in the eternal duration of
the glorious God there is neither Multitude, nor so much as Succession. And
this is my second Answer.

3. My third Answer is this: That although it may be, and certainly is
consistent with an eternal duration, that it may be shorter, or it may be
longer upon the hither end thereof, namely, that extreme wherein it is finite,
as is before shown; yet it is impossible to be consistent with the very notion
of an eternal duration to be longer or shorter, a part ante, in the extreme or
remote part thereof, as I may call it; for upon that Supposition it should be
utrinque clausa, terminated in the moment wherein I write, and terminated or
limited by an antecedent being or duration of something else: (With Reverence
be it spoken) If any thing in the compass of Nature might bear an eternal
Creation, yet if that Creation were but a moment after the Divine Existence,
that created Being could not be eternal because it had a pre-existence of the
Divine Being before it: Nay, though I use the expression of an antecedent
moment to render my conception, yet that very imaginable moment must be an
infinite duration antecedent to that created Being; and it could not possibly
be otherwise; for if it were possible to be otherwise, it would consequently
deny the Eternity of God himself: for that created Being being impossible to be
eternal, since it must, ex suppositione, have a pre-existing moment of the
Divine Existence, if that mora prae-existentiae divinae were not eternal, but a
moment, or any limited duration less than eternal and infinite, it would be but
an addition of a limited time to a limited or non-eternal time; and therefore
cannot be eternal (and here by the way, the Eternal, Incomprehensible
Generation of the Son, and Procession of the Holy Spirit are no way concerned
in this Dispute, which are not created Beings, nor distinct from the Divine
Essence, or essentially distinct from one another, but One Incomprehensible God
Blessed for ever) though under a personal distinction.

This therefore being the true state of the matter, the Reason herein given
does not at all infirm the important Reason against the Eternity of Mankind,
because necessarily there would upon such a Supposition follow an Eternity that
had a beginning, an Eternity that was puisne to some other thing or some other
Eternal: And that although that duration which is infinite in one extreme,
namely, a part ante, and finite at another extreme, namely by the present
time, may have an increase, accession, or addition in that part in which, it is
finite; yet it is impossible that it should have any thing before it in that
extreme wherein its Infinity and Eternity consisted. This is the chief stress
of the former Debate, which is no way impugned by the Instance here given; for
the glorious God and his Eternal Existence is such, that it has not, cannot
have any thing antecedent to it; neither is it measured by successive parts,
but is simply eternal, infinite, before all things, without beginning of Being
or Duration as well as without end; and such a Duration, as it is impossible to
suppose any thing before it, or any thing equally ancient to it; but ever was,
and ever had Being or Existence, that is, eternally and immutably the same;
what once he was he ever was, still is, and ever shall be.

5. A Fifth Objection is this: That because we have formerly supposed that
nothing can possibly be eternal, and together with it have variety of
Operations. The glorious Eternal God has variety of Operations in all the
Works of Creation and Providence, his emanant Actions; and also in the Counsels
and Determination of his Will, his immanent Actions: And therefore the Position
seems to be derogatory to the Eternity of Almighty God.

I had not inserted this Objection but for the fuller vindication of the Truth,
and to show, that it no way in the least imaginable degree derogates from the
Truths concerning God.

I therefore answer, that when we are speaking of alterations or changes, it
may reasonably be supposed to be one of these kinds.

1. An alteration that with it carries a change of the Nature or Essence of a
thing; and thus in a large sense generation or corruption, or the essential
change of any thing or Being into another thing; thus corporeal Matter under
any determinate form is changeable, and such a mutability is impossible to be
consistent with Eternity: and it is thus impossible for the glorious God to be
subject to any change, for he necessarily and therefore eternally exists, and
must ever exist.

2. An alteration of states or conditions of any Being, which yet as to its
essential condition persists as before: thus Bodies are every moment changed,
sometimes in quality, as from hot to cold, sometimes in figure, sometimes in
dimensions, as the motions of augmentation and diminution: a Child grows unto
the stature of a Youth, and then of a Man; and such Beings as these cannot
sustain an eternal duration, a part ante: and in this respect the
ever-glorious God is perfectly unchangeable, without so much as a shadow of
change, but eternally and immutably the same.

3. A change of the internal and immanent acts of the Understanding and Will in
a Being endued therewith; as to know that which before it knew not, to will,
purpose, or determine what before it willed not or purposed not. The Schoolmen
are indeed many of them a Generation of Men that think they can give an
estimate of the manner of the Divine Operations, even those that are immanent,
when yet God knows it is more possible for the Infant of a span long to discern
and understand and define and determine the most sublime and abstruse Notions of
the most Seraphical Doctor, than for such a Doctor to give an estimate of the
hidden Operations of the Divine Intellect and Will: And therefore they are too
bold to adventure upon such determinations touching these Operations of the
glorious God; and in the upshot arrive at nothing touching them but
presumptuous, uncertain and dangerous Speculations: and it must needs be so,
for as the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so and much more are the thoughts
of the unsearchable God higher than our thoughts. The more sober and weighty
part of the Schoolmen do conclude this Question in the negative, and assert,
That Almighty God by one eternal act knew all things from all Eternity, and by
the like eternal act willed from all Eternity what he any way willed; and
though the termination of that Will respected Objects that neither were nor
could be eternal, yet his Knowledge and Will was eternally the same as ever;
and he begins not to know any thing which he did not eternally know, nor to
will any thing which he did not eternally will, though the execution of that
Will respects things to be done in time and futurity. And certainly as this is
the most probable Opinion, so it takes away the pretense of the Objection; the
immanent Acts and Operations of the glorious God being eternal and without
change.

It is true, some late Schoolmen, and after them Clara in his 4th Problem seems
to assert, that, Divina voluntas potest velle aliquid novum sine mutatione sui.

But suppose that this Supposition were admissible, yet this would not any way
be inconsistent with the Eternity of the Divine Nature and Essence: 1. This is
no Physical change in Almighty God, but a voluntary and free operation of his
Will, which possibly was so at first willed by him to be changed according as
he saw cause in his infinite Wisdom. 2. That this which is here called a change
of his Will, is not in truth a change of his Will, but a change in the Object,
which only seems to make a diversification of the Will, but indeed is the same
Will diversified only in the habitude to the Object. The Will of God is like a
straight unalterable Rule or Line, but the various comportments of the Creature
either thwarting this Rule or holding conformity to it, occasions several
habitudes of this Rule unto it. We need no better explication hereof than that
of the Prophet Ezechiel, Chap. 33. from the twelfth to the twentieth Verse.

4. A change of Actions and Operations in relation to some external Object, or
terminated therein; and such a change as this is consistent with an Eternal
Being, though the change happen in any given portion of Time: Thus the Almighty
and Eternal God created the World by his Power and Will in the beginning of
Time, and orders, governs and disposes of the things by his Providence in all
the Periods of Time, and yet without any Physical or real change in himself.
And thus he began to be a Creator, when before he was not a Creator; and began
to be a Governor of the World after it was made, and exercises diverse
external acts of his Providence daily which before he did not. For those
various acts of his are terminated in such Objects as neither were nor could be
eternal, namely, the World and the Government thereof: And although he thereby
gain a change of relation or relative denomination, yet it is no real or
Physical change in himself. For all relations arise from the supposition of
existence of both the terms of relation, as between the Creator and the thing
created, and the Governor and thing governed; and therefore although one of
the terms of that relation, namely the Eternal God, had an eternal existence in
his own absolute nature; yet the World, that was the other term of relation,
had no eternal existence, but was created in the beginning of Time, and the
relation of a Creator or Governor must necessarily therefore arise in Time,
and not from Eternity, because one of the terms of the relation, namely the
World, had not any existence before Time began.

But in the eternal Generation of the Son and Procession of the Holy Spirit,
the termini relationis were all eternal, and consequently the relation of
Paternity and Filiation between the First and Second Person, and the relation
between the Sacred Persons of the Trinity and the denomination thereof must
needs be eternal, because the terms of relation between whom that relation
arises were eternal: But it is not so between the Eternal God and a temporary
World, for the relation could not arise till the World had an existence; and a
change or acquest of a new relation is not at all any real change in God, but
is an accident resulting from the existence of both the termini, and can be no
ancienter than the coexistence even of the latest and newest of those terms,
which if began in time must necessarily produce a new relation, yet without any
real change in the pre-existing and eternal God.

And thus I have done with those Physical and Metaphysical Evidences of the
Inception of the World and of Mankind, and against the Eternity of both. And
although I shall descend in the ensuing Section to Moral Evidences of
probability strongly persuading the same Truth, yet I lay the principal weight
and stress of this Argument upon what is said in the preceding Chapters of this
First Section, which though perchance they may have something of obscurity, as
being bottomed upon and fetched from the true nature of the things themselves,
and therefore not so obvious and plain to all Capacities, yet they have a
concludency in them not inferior, or at least little inferior to Demonstrations.

SECT. II.
CAP. I. The Proofs of Fact, that seem with the greatest Moral evidence to
evince the Inception of Mankind: And first, touching the Antiquity or Novity of
History.
I Have now done with those Evidences that in my Understanding seem, quasi ab
intrinseco, to evince the Inception of Mankind from that intrinsecal
incompossibility and inconsistency that the Supposition of the eternal
existence thereof bears with his Nature: I now descend to the examination of
those Evidences of Fact, which do or may seem to contribute to the proof of
what is designed, namely, Novitatem generis humani.

And although that Evidences of Fact of things remote from our Sense cannot be
said infallible and demonstrative, because the nature of such matters of fact
(simply as they are matters of fact) is not capable (as such) of Demonstration;
yet they may be Evidences of high credibility, and such as no reasonable Man
can with any just reason deny his assent unto them.

That which has been, has as certainly and infallibly, yea and as necessarily
been, as that which is: Omne quod, est, dum est necessario est, and omne quod
fuit, cum jam preteriit necessario fuit quando fuit, and in praeteritis non est
contingentia. Only that which is, and is obvious to Sense, has this advantage
of evidence which that which has been wants, namely, the immediate evidence of
Sense, wherein though it is not universally impossible but that Sense may be
deceived, yet because it is the best evidence that we have of matters of fact,
we give credit to it as a sensible evidence, and we have reason so to do.

But of things transacted before our time, and out of the immediate reach of
our Sense, we may have such an evidence as in reason we ought as reasonable Men
to acquiesce in, though the evidence be still in its own nature but moral, and
not simply demonstrative or infallible: And the variety of circumstances
renders the credibility of such things more or less, according to the various
ingredients and contributions of credibility that are concentred in such an
evidence.

It is impossible to demonstrate by evidence infallible (or which is all one,
by evidence that is impossible to be false) that there was such a Man as Julius
Caesar or Augustus, that there was such a Man as William the Conqueror, or King
Henry the Eighth, or that such a Man was his Father, or such a Woman his
Mother; or that there is such a City as Venice, or Rome, (to me that never saw
it,) for all these I have but by relation from others, and it is not impossible
but those Histories or informations or relations by which I am informed of
these things may be false: And they are such matters as have in them a less
evidence than my own Sense of Sight; for the evidence of my Sense is simple and
immediate, and therefore I have but a shorter cut thereby to the assent to the
truth of the things so evidenced: But in things that I have by relation from
others, my evidence is of greater distance; for first, I see them not by my own
Eyes, but it is others that must first see the thing they relate; and secondly,
though I should think that whatsoever might be believed, if obvious to the
Sense of others, might have as great a credibility as if obvious to my own, yet
I must have a second postulation that must have an ingredient to elicit my
assent, namely, the veracity of him that reports and relates it. And hence it
is, that that which is reported by many Eyewitnesses has greater motives of
credibility than that which is reported by few; that which is reported by
credible and authentic witnesses, than that which is reported by light and
inconsiderable witnesses; that which is reported by persons disinteressed, than
that which is reported by persons whose interest it is to have the thing true,
or believed to be true; that which has the concurring testimony of real
existing monuments, than that which is without them; and finally, that which is
reported by credible persons of their own view, than that which they receive by
hearsay from those that report upon their own view: So that it is not with
Evidences of Fact as it is with Logical or Mathematical Demonstrations, which
seem to consist in indivisibles, for that which thus is demonstratively true is
impossible to be false; but Moral Evidence is gradual, according to the variety
of circumstances. Yet such a man would be exploded as an irrational man, that
will not believe there was such a man as Julius Caesar, because the Historians
that write of him might possibly conspire to deceive the World with a Romance,
or that the Books may be supposititious or corrupted; or will not believe that
such a Man was his Father, or such a Woman his Mother, because he might be
supposititious; or will not believe there is such a City as Rome, which he
never saw, because Travelers are wont to love to tell strange things, and so
may many as well as one.

So that as eternal Truths may have one kind of certainty by Logical
Demonstration, and as Mathematical Conclusions have an infallible certainty by
Mathematical Demonstration, and as matters objected immediately to our Sense
have another kind of certainty by sensible evidence, so matters simply of fact
not objected immediately to our Sense have another kind of certainty, though
not altogether equal to the former, nor simply infallible, yet so highly
credible that may justly elicit the assent of reasonable men, and such as is
proportionate to the nature of the thing, and therefore more cannot be
reasonably expected for the proof of the fact.

In the pursuance of this Argument, namely, Evidences of Fact touching the
Origination of Mankind, I must therefore say that the Evidences thereof are not
of an infallible certainty, and so much the rather because it relates to a
matter that at the nearest that can be supposed is near six thousand years
distant from us, and some suppose more; therefore the Evidences of Fact are as
it were percolated through a vast Period of Ages, and many very obscure to us.
And therefore all Proofs of this kind except that of Divine Revelation (which
though true, and infallibly true, we must not by the Laws of Argumentation
bring in here, because at one word it determins the Question) will arise to no
higher than Moral, and therefore fallible in their own nature. We rest upon
what has been before said for Evidences and Reasons, that to me seem
demonstrative.

But yet the Evidences of Fact which we shall produce must be considered also
with these Advantages for their credibility.

1. They are such as bear a great congruity and consonancy with, and
subservience to those former Arguments that ex natura rei and intrinsece prove
an impossibility of an eternal duration of Mankind, a part ante, which though
it does not, cannot evince that Mankind must have their Origination or
Beginning in hac vel ista hora, yet they do evince that Beginning it must have,
and the evidences of fact are as so many testes, contestes, or suffragiales,
that bear witness to that Truth that the former sort of Arguments do plainly
evince.

2. Though these Evidences of Fact taken singly and apart, are not without
their Objections that may seem to weaken them, yet juncta juvant: That evidence
at Law which taken singly or apart makes but an imperfect proof, semiplena
probatio, yet in conjunction with others grow to a full proof, like Silurus his
twigs, that were easily broken apart, but in conjunction or union were not to
be broken.

Truths (especially of Fact) are not made Truths by Arguments or Evidence; If
there were once such a man as Caesar, it is most certainly true that he was,
though no Historian ever mentioned him; and therefore if there were ten
thousand Authors that mention him kept sacredly and inviolably in certain
Archives unto this day, all this evidence does not make him to be, but only
gives us a light and evidence of great probability that he was: The Stars in
the Milky-way, and those Asseclae Jovis are not therefore in the Heavens or
Ether, because the Telescope has discovered them, for they were there before;
but the position of those Glasses present them to our perception, and evidence
their being, which cannot be discovered without them.

And so it is with Evidences of Fact, they do not make the thing to be, but
evidence them to be; and because if to any one quaesitum of fact there be many
but probable evidences, which taken singly have not perchance any full
evidence, yet when many of those evidences concur and concenter in the evidence
of the same thing, their very multiplicity and consent makes the evidence the
stronger; as the concurrent testimonies of many Witnesses or many Circumstances
even by their multiplicity and concurrence make an evidence more concludent.

Now these Evidences of Fact I shall cast into these ranks.

1. We have no authentical History of former Ages extant, but what has been
written within the compass of four thousand years.

2. The subject matter of those Histories give us no account of the Original of
great Monarchies, Kingdoms, or Commonwealths, but what appear thereby to have
begun within the compass of about five thousand years.

3. The original Invention and Inventors of most considerable Arts had their
Origination, as far as we can find, by Monuments of ancient times, within the
compass of about six thousand years.

4. The Original of the Apotheoses of most of the Heathen fictitious Deities
appears by the ancient Monuments of former times to have had their beginning
within the compass of five thousand years.

5. The most authentic Histories and Monuments of Antiquity give us an account
of the first Fathers, or Capita familiarum, and of the Plantation of the known
Parts, Continents and Islands of the World within the compass of five thousand
years.

6. The Inhabitants of the World do daily increase, and their increment
surmounts daily their decrease; which could not be, unless the World of Mankind
had their original within some proportionate time, and could not consist with
such a vast excess of duration which some would assign, much less with an
eternal duration, or such as never had a beginning.

7. There has in all Ages, and among all People been a constant tradition
retained and believed, touching the Origination of Mankind ex non genitis vel
per generationem propagatis.

These are the Heads of those Evidences of Fact which I shall use in this
Argument touching the Origination of Mankind, whereunto possibly other
occasional Topics of the like nature may be added.

And touching these Evidences of Fact, this I shall subjoyn.

1. That I do not lay the weight of this Argument upon those Evidences of Fact,
because they have or may have their several allays and fallibilities, which I
shall impartially subjoyn to every particular Topic.

But I lay the weight of the Argument upon what has been before said, which to
me seems to be little less than demonstrative, drawn from the intrinsic nature
of the thing, and from that absurdity which would arise upon the Supposition of
the Eternity of Mankind, and the incompossibility of an eternal duration, a
part ante, to successive Natures.

2. That although singly and apart these Evidences of Fact are not so
conclusive but have their allays and exceptions, yet they have these advantages
that advance their evidence, as very credible; 1. In that the Supposition which
they are produced to prove, is not impossible to be true: 2. That there is
nothing of probability of Reason or Instance that can be produced against the
truth of that Supposition which is contended to be proved by them: 3. They have
so much the more weight and evidence, in that they do suffragate and bear
witness to the truth of that Supposition (namely, the Inception of Mankind)
which holds so great a congruity with the intrinsic reason and nature of the
thing, the contrary whereof, namely, the Eternity of Mankind, is apparently
contradictory to a strict and true reason.

3. That although these Evidences of Fact, taken singly and apart, possibly may
not be so weighty, yet the very concurrence and coincidence of so many
Evidences that contribute to the Proof of the thing designed, carries with it a
great weight, even as to the point of Fact: it is not probable that that
Supposition should be false which has so many concurrent Testimonies bearing
witness to it: And therefore although I shall impartially subjoyn those Allays
and Abatements which may be brought against the several Instances, whereby if
single, they might seem of less weight and moment; yet I do not thereby take
off that Evidence which in consort and conjunction they give to the truth of
the Supposition intended to be proved by them.

4. That it cannot be expected in an Argument of this nature, which is touching
a matter of Fact, that Evidences of Fact can be no more than topical and
probable; and therefore though there may be Allays and Abatements that may take
away a necessary or infallible concludency in these Evidences of Fact, yet it
is sufficient that they be probable and inductive of Credibility, though not of
Science or Infallibility. Aristotle, as I remember, in the beginning of his
Politics tells us that all Truths have not the same kind of Evidence, neither
indeed can have, and therefore it is unreasonable to expect such an Evidence as
the thing cannot possibly bear, though it be a real Truth.

5. That among these Evidences of Fact, though all contribute to the Proof of
the Supposition, yet the three last seem to be of that nature that they are of
greatest weight, and less subject to exception.

6. That in as much as in this Argument I design only the use of Reason and
Reasonable Evidence, and endeavor to make my Supposition evident to Reasonable
Men as such; I do not therefore make use of the divine and irrefragable
Authority of the Holy Scriptures: For they that subscribe to the Infallibility
and Divine Authority of them, need none of this Method of Ratiocination that I
use to prove this Supposition of the Origination of Mankind, which is so
plainly and distinctly delivered in the Holy Scriptures; and therefore where I
have recourse to the Holy Scriptures, I use it but as a Moral Evidence, a
History highly credible; and I demand of my Reader^ this equal Justice, That he
would at least give it that credit that the Antiquity, Congruity, and Moral
Evidence of it deserves, which certainly would be much more than what the most
do ordinarily allow to the History of Thucydides, Herodotus, Livy, Tacitus,
Manethon, Xenophon, Ctesias, or Berosus.

7. Though in this large Discourse I may seem to lose time by proving of that
which is not questioned by sober Men, that in a laborious Discourse of this
nature I do rather raise a Question that would be at quiet if let alone, at
least I lose time, and, magno conatu nihil efficiam; yet I hope in the
Conclusion it will be of use to confirm our Faith, to magnify the value of the
Holy Scriptures, and to give some stop to those Atheistical and Epicurean
Opinions that begin more than formerly to obtain in the World.

CAP. II. Concerning the first Evidence, the Antiquity of History, and the
Chronological account of Times.
BUT before I begin, I shall prefix a short Chronological Scheme of Times, to
which I shall have occasion oftentimes to refer; wherein I shall not be
over-sollicitous for great curiosity or exactness. For although there is scarce
any one Chronological Writer that differs not from another in the precise
connection of Times and Things, yet there will be certainty enough for my
purpose, if I take so much out of them wherein they do in substance agree,
though they differ in their particular Account.

And although the Account of the Years of the World according to the seventy,
do seem more useful to the solution of some difficulties in Chronology, who
assign 2262 years from the Creation to the Flood; and from thence to the Birth
of Abraham 1132 years; whereas the Jewish Account assigns for the former Period
1656 years, and for the latter 292 years. So that according to the Seventy,
from the Creation to the Birth of Abraham were 3394, but according to the Jews
only 1948 years; yet I shall rather choose to follow the Jewish Account, and
take Helvicus Abstract for my little, small Chronological Table.

Anni JUDAICI. ASSYRII. ARGIVI. AEGYPTII. ATHENI HISTO 1656 Diluvium. 8171
Belus. 1771 Ninus. 1823 Semiramis. 1870 Ninus. 1948 Abraham 2093 Inachus. 2123
Abrahami 2149 Phoronous. 2200 Apis. 2210 Aegyptie 2220 Joseph in 2235 Argus.
2300 Promethei 2373 Moses 2430 Athenien Deucalionis 2450 Exitus ab 2475 Danaus.
2490 Joshua dux. 2573 Ganymedis 2660 Cadmus e Hercules 2710 Argonau 2750 Bellum
Tro 2850 Reditus He 2905 David Rex Ionica mi 3000 Homeri aetas. 3060 Athalia
and Lycurgus 3175 Vzziah. Olympiades 3195 Roma con 3325 solon and se 3391
Pythagoras,

Having premised thus much touching the Chronological Account of some Times and
Things past, without confining my self to the exactness of Years, and with
omission of many things happening in these Periods; I shall now proceed with
the first of my Instances, namely, touching the Histories of former Ages, and
their Antiquity; reserving the matter of their Histories, and what may be
collected from them, to the ensuing Chapters.

Those Nations whose Historians put fair for the greatest Antiquity, are the
Romans, Grecians, Persians, Assyrians or Babylonians, Egyptians, and the Jews:
of all these there is something extant.

As touching the Chinese and their long derived Annals, there is much spoken
by report or relation, but nothing authentic thereof is extant to the common
view but some ingenious yet uncertain Collections out of Martinius by Mr. Webb
in his Essay touching the Primitive Language; Vossius, and some others: and
therefore I shall spare any thing touching them.

First touching the Romans, though there were many Monuments of Antiquity
preserved in writing among them, as appears by their Laws of Twelve Tables,
their Fasti Consulares, the Transcripts whereof are extant to this day; yet we
cannot expect so much Antiquity of Historians and Writers among these, as we
may among other People of greater Antiquity; since the first Foundation of
their City was some time after the Olympiads began, viz. in the 7th Olympiad,
and about the year of the World 3190.

The Grecians, whose Monarchy preceded that of the Romans, have more ancient
Historians than the Romans: And not to reckon up their Philosophers and Poets,
that applied not themselves to History, I shall only mention these that follow:
Xenophon, that lived about the 97th or 98th Olympiad; Thucydides and Herodotus,
who lived about the 85th or 88th Olympiad; but he among them of greatest note
and antiquity was Homer, who wrote the History of the Trojan War; touching the
time of his life and writing the Chronologists agree not, some making him 200
years after the Destruction of Troy, some more, some less; but all placing him
before the first Olympiad, and after the Destruction of Troy, those two famous
Epochae among the Greeks.

This is the ancientest Poetical Historian that is extant among the Greeks,
although it is not unlike that many were more ancient among them, as is
mentioned by Tatianus in Eusebius. praeparationis lib. 10. as Linus the Tutor of
Hercules, Amphion, Orpheus, Musaeus, and some others; yet we have little extant
of them but Poetical Raptures and Fictions, and those also but in fragments and
pieces traditionally preserved in subsequent Authors.

Among the Persians, though their Monarchy were more ancient than that of
Greece, yet we have less extant of Historical Writings concerning them; the
ancientest that I have heard of is that of Xenophon, though a Grecian, and
Ctesias, who is supposed to have lived contemporary with Xenophon; Megasthenes,
a Persian Historian about the 120th Olympiad, out of whom Abydenus that wrote
touching the Assyrians and Babylonians extracted many things relating to the
Persians, as appears by his Fragments cited by Eusebius. lib. 9. Praepar. sect. 41.

Touching the Chaldean or Babylonian Historians, though that Monarchy be
extended to a vast Period by some of their ancient Historians, yet the
ancientest credible Historians that we have concerning them are, Berosus who
lived about the 130th Olympiad, and Abydenus before mentioned; only it is
reported by Simplicius out of Porphyry, that Calisthenes one of Alexander's
Captains brought to Aristotle from Babylon a relation of their ancientest
Astronomical Calculations, 1903 years before the Taking of Babylon by
Alexander, which is supposed to be in the year of the World 3620 according to
the Septuagint; which gives a probable conjecture of the Inception of the
Babylonian Monarchy to be about 200 years before the Birth of Abraham.

Touching the Phoenicians, from whom it is supposed that not only Learning but
Letters themselves were brought into Greece by Cadmus; the first and ancientest
Historian is supposed to be Sancuniathon, who is related by Philo Biblius
according to Eusebius. praepar. lib. 1. sect. 9. to have been before the
Destruction of Troy, and very near the time of Moses, and to have written a
History a prima Universi molitione, and that he searched many Monuments of
Antiquity: The Writings of Mercurius Trismegistus whom the Egyptians call
Thoth, and the arcana Ammoneorum volumina, purged the History of former times
from Fables, and gave a full account of former Ages, whose Writings Philo
Biblius translated into Greek, and digested into nine Volumes, he gathered much
from Hierombal the Priest of Jao, whom Bochart upon very probable reasons
supposes to be Gedeon called Jerubbaal; and having set up an Ephod in his
City, might be supposed a Priest, and from the intercourse between them the
Idol Baal-berith was brought from Berith the City of Sancuniathon, into Judea.

Touching the Egyptians, they pretended to the greatest antiquity both of
Government and Learning; the latter they principally derived from Hermes,
styled by some Mercurius Trismegistus, and by the Egyptians Thoth; the
Phenicians made claim to this man as theirs, attributed to him the Invention of
Letters, of Navigation, of the Virtues of Herbs, Eusebius. lib. 1. Praeparat.
sect. 10. de Phoenicum Theologia; he is supposed more ancient than Moses, but
we have nothing authentic existing which he wrote: The ancientest Historian of
the Affairs of Egypt was Manethes the Egyptian Priest, who lived about, or as
some think, before the time of Alexander, he carries up the Res Aegyptiacas to
an excessive Antiquity, and yet with great particularity and pretended
certainty: some account him fabulous, because he carries up the Egyptian
Dynasties before the Flood, yea and long before the Creation; others assert the
probability of the Egyptian Dynasties to overreach the universal Flood, but
salve that prodigious excess of their numerous Years by reducing them to
Months, or Anni Lunares, which were anciently so accounted among the Egyptians.

The Egyptians have had other Writers of their Histories, but of a later date,
as Ptolemeus Mendesius, mentioned sometimes by Eusebius; and those Arabic
Historians mentioned by Kircher in that Book that delivers the History of the
succession of their Dynasties.

Lastly, I come to the Jewish History begun by Moses, and continued down in a
clear succession and series of times till their return from the Babylonish
Captivity and this History has a just prelation above all the Writings of
other Historians in these ensuing respects.

1. It has the greatest and most particular certainty, and far beyond any of
the Historians before mentioned; it contains the certain Periods of Times,
Names, Men, Places, Actions, and all Circumstances requirable in a History to
inform; it is not involved in Mystical expressions or Mythologies, but is
plain, familiar, and intelligible.

2. It has the greatest evidence of Truth that can be expected by a reasonable
man, namely, Evidence from it self, the particularity and circumstances of the
things it relates; Evidence from the ancientest Heathen Authors, especially
Sancuniathon, Berosus, and Abydenus before mentioned; Evidence from the several
parts thereof, the Book of one Age bearing witness to another; as the Books of
Joshua to those of Moses, the Books of Kings to those of Moses and Joshua,
though written in several Ages; Evidentia rei, or facti, there cannot be
greater Evidence than the Regiment of a People for so many Ages according to
the Laws given and recorded by their first Historian Moses, and the enjoyment
of their Possessions according to the distribution of their next Historian
Joshua.

3. It is no broken Piece, or Historical Fragment, but it is carried down from
the beginning of Time to all the ensuing Ages of the Jewish State, without any
chasma or interval.

4. It has the evidence of the highest credibility that any thing of that
nature is capable of, That the Books of Moses especially, which are the Caput
Historiae Judaicae, were written by that Man Moses, and that he lived in that
Age wherein he is supposed to write: 1. The constant uninterrupted Tradition of
that Kingdom and Nation from it first coalition, even to this day. 2. The
attestation of all the succeding Writers of that Historical Series of the
Jewish Affairs. 3. The inviolable Observation of those Laws given by Moses and
recorded in that History, as of the Laws given by him. 4. The Suffrage of all
Heathen Authors both modern and ancient, that have occasion to mention the
concerns of that People.

5. It is a History that contains matters of far greater moment and antiquity
than any other Writers but such as in probability made their Collections out of
it, namely, of the Transactions from the first Creation of the World until the
Universal Flood, and from thence to the time of him that first wrote it, namely
Moses.

6. It is a History that was really written by Moses, who was far more ancient
than all the Heathen Writers above mentioned (excepting only Trismegistus, of
whose Writings we have nothing extant) and more ancient than most of those
Things or Notes recorded by those most ancient Heathen Writers which for the
most part filled their Books; He wrote 540 years before Homer; 200 years before
Sancuniathon, according to Bochart's account; 300 years before the Expedition
of the Argonauts; 350 years before the Trojan War; and a considerable time
before the Apotheoses or Inaugurations of many of the Heathenish Deities. So
that as the Matter of his History, so the Time of his writing is far more
ancient than the writing of the most ancient Heathen Historians that are at all
extent. Much of this I shall have occasion to resume and enlarge in the ensuing
Chapters, yet this was necessary in this place.

The Inference that is made from hence is, That probably if the World of
Mankind had been Eternal, or if it had any such vast distance from its
Beginning as some suppose, we should have had Historical Monuments and Writings
long before the Age of Moses.

But for all this, I must needs say, this Consideration singly (I say singly)
taken and weighed, makes not much against an eternal or at least a vaster
Epoch of the first Origination of Man than is ordinarily supposed; I shall
therefore set down those allays that make against the strength of the
consequence drawn from this Topic.

1. It is evident that the use of Letters and Writing were far more ancient
than the time of Moses; the Egyptians and Phenicians carry up the original of
the invention thereof to Mercurius Trismegistus, which is supposed long before
Moses: And although Cadmus is supposed to have brought the use of Letters out
of Phoenicia into Greece some time after the Age of Moses, according to
Polydore Virgil, lib. 1. cap. 6. out of Pliny, Herodotus and others; yet it
appears by what is before mentioned, that there were in Phoenicia very ancient
written Volumes called Volumina Ammonaeorum long before the time of
Sancuniathon. And if we believe the Tradition of Josephus, the Pillars of Seth
were extant in his time; and according to Tertullian some Fragments of the
Writings of Enoch were traditionally extant in his time: But howsoever Moses
(if he be the Author of the History of Job, whom some think to be contemporary
at least with Jacob) mentions Books and Writings to have been common things in
the time of Job, Job 19.23. Josephus lib. 1. cap. 3. Tertull. de Habitu
Mulierum.

2. Surely if Writing were so ancient, it is probable that many Histories might
be before the time of Moses which were lost in succession of time, as it must
be agreed that most of those ancient Monuments that in the granted Period of
the World were extant before Moses time are since lost, and many millions of
Books that have been written since Moses time have by the injury of Time and
Men been lost; much more those Books which were written antecedent to Moses
time: And the truth is, the preservation of the Books of Moses entire unto this
day, when so many of a far later date are lost, is to be attributed to the
special Providence of Almighty God.

2. Again, they that assign the shortest time between the Origination of
Mankind and the Writings of Moses, allow it to be somewhat above 2460 years: So
that although Moses were admitted the first Historian that ever wrote, it would
very near as strongly conclude against the antiquity of 2460 years before his
writing as against an eternal existence of Mankind: if it should be an Argument
against the latter, it would be such also against the former.

3. Considering the many mutations and casualties of Wars, Transmigrations,
especially that of the General Flood, there might probably be an obliteration
of all those Monuments of Antiquity that immense Ages precedent at some time
have yielded. Cecrops was contemporary with Moses, and Belus and Ninus were
before him; yet we have no Monuments extant of the Assyrians so ancient as
Belus, or of the Athenians so ancient as Cecrops, but such as are Traditions,
and written long after their times. So that although I have mentioned this
concerning the known Periods of Historical Writers, yet I think we are to be
careful not to lay too great a stress singly on it, and it is the least of all
that follow in weight or evidence: And yet this was fit to be mentioned,
because it is necessary for the more clear discovery and application of that
which follows.

CAP. III. The second Evidences of Fact, namely, the apparent Evidences of the
first Foundation of the greatest and ancient Kingdoms and Empires.
I Come to my Second Evidence of Fact, which is the subject Matter of
Histories, and principally concerning the Evidence arising from them of the
first Original of the most considerable Monarchies in the World.

Touching the great Monarchies of the World, their Original is so well known,
and delivered down to us from Authors of unquestionable truth, that there need
little be said touching them; for they have their confessed Epochae within
certain and known Periods. As the beginning of the Roman Monarchy under
Romulus, which gives the Epoch Urbis conditae in the 7th Olympiad; the
beginning of the Grecian Monarchy, which has its Epoch in Alexander about the
111th Olympiad; the beginning of the Persian Monarchy, which had its Epoch in
Cyrus about the 55th Olympiad, though the same were not established in the
beginning of Cyrus, but completed in Cambyses his Son about the 62d Olympiad.
And the like might be observed concerning several smaller Kingdoms, whose
originals are delivered over to us in Histories.

And although it is true that these Beginnings of these several Monarchies and
Kingdoms do not so begin as if those Men that founded these Monarchies were the
natural Fathers of all those Persons that did coalescere in Regnum vel
Monarchiam; or as if those Monarchies were derived from the Heads or Roots that
gave them this denomination, as all Men are derived from the common Parent of
Mankind, or as possibly some other of the ancient Monarchies, which we shall
have occasion hereafter to mention, were derived: For many times the beginning
of Monarchies and Kingdoms was by the coalition of many Persons, it may be of
several Nations, into an Army, as they did under Cyrus, or into a City, as they
did under Romulus, or by transmigration of Persons from one Country to
another, as the Israelites did.

And therefore we are not to take it that these Originations of Monarchies were
the Origination of all the People that were joined in it; for they had their
existence oftentimes before, and took their denomination from the Dux Exercitus
or the Rector Civitatis, under which they were as it were listed in their Civil
or Military coalition.

And therefore the Argument is not thus necessarily that the Roman Monarchy or
the Grecian Monarchy had not its beginning before such a time, therefore those
Men that were the constituent parts thereof had no existence before that time;
but that the Civil Society under the Prince, Rector or form of Government then
began to be formally such in such a special Constitution.

But those Monarchies that pretend to the greatest Antiquity are principally,

1. The Assyrian or Babylonian Monarchy. 2. The Egyptians, and their Dynasties.
3. The Grecians. 4. The Chinese.
These I shall examine in order.

1. Touching the Assyrian or Babylonian Monarchy, we do with the best authority
both of Sacred and Profane Writers suppose,

1. That it had its beginning since the Universal Deluge from Ham the youngest
Son of Noah.

2. That the Reasons and Authorities against that Supposition are not of weight
enough to evince the contrary.

Before I come to my Reasons for this Assertion, something I shall premise
touching the Assyrian Empire, and how it stood in relation to that of the
Babylonian.

It seems that Babylon was at first the Seat of the Assyrian Empire, the
building whereof some attribute to Belus, some to Ninus his Son, some to
Semiramis his Wife, and some to others: but afterward the Caput Imperti of the
Assyrians was Ninive, built upon the River Tigris.

It also seems, that in process of time the Assyrians either new built or
repaired Babylon that had lain long neglected, and the same was peopled with
those People on the South of Assyria called Caldeans: That which gives me light
of it, and indeed of the whole History of the Babylonian Monarchy is Isaiah
23.13. Behold the land of the Caldeans, this people was not till the Assyrian
founded it for them that dwell in the wilderness: They set up the towers
thereof, they raised up the palaces thereof. It seems therefore that Babylon
formerly neglected, by this favor of the King of Assyria prospered into a
petty Kingdom, and growing powerful did set up for themselves in the time of
Ahaz the King of Judah who was contemporary with Tiglah Pileser, 2 Kings 16.10.
And possibly the first divided King of Babylon was that Nabonassar that gave
the original of the Era Nabonassaris that began about the beginning of King
Ahaz, in the beginning of the 8th Olympiad, about four years after the Building
of Rome.

It seems that either the same Tiglah Pileser, or his next Successor
Salmanassar King of Assyria that carried away the People of Israel in the ninth
year of Hoseah, about four years after the death of Ahaz, 2 Kings 17.6. did
afterward re-take Babylon; for certainly he was possessed of it at or shortly
after the deportation of Israel; for he brought Men from Babylon, from Cutha,
from Ava, Hamath and Sepharvaim, to put into Samaria. 2 Kings 17.24.

It seems that most of these places from whence People were transplanted to
Samaria, were places conquered by the Assyrian Monarch, who did as Victors use
prudently to do, transplant the conquered into other places; and the same seems
evident for some of these places at least, and as probably for Babylon also, 2
Kings 18.24. Isaiah 10.10. particularly for Hamath, Sepharvaim and Avah: And
accordingly he transplanted the conquered People into Gozan and other places, 2
Kings 18.11. which were won by Salmanassar from the Medes by Conquest. 2 Kings
19.12.

Senacherib succeeded Salmanassar, and came up against Hezekiah in the
fourteenth year of his Reign, where he received that great blow of 185000 Men,
which sent him back to Nineveh where he was slain; and Ezarhaddon his Son
reigned in his stead. 2 Kings 20.35, 36, 37.

This gave opportunity to the new usurped Kingdom of Babylon again to break the
Yoke of Assyrian Monarchy; for it evidently appears that Berodach-Baladan the
Son of Baladan was King of Babylon, and sent to complement Hezekiah when there
was another King of Assyria, 2 Kings 20.12. Hezekiah having reigned 29 years
dyed, and Manasseh his Son succeeded him.

Manasseh reigned 55 years, and toward the latter end of his Reign he was
carried Captive to Babylon by the King of Assyria, 2 Chronicles. 33.11. whether the
King of Assyria had regained Babylon, or whether the King of Babylon had
overcome the Assyrian, and so held the style of that Monarch, appears not,
though the latter seems probable by comparing the reprehension of Isaiah, 2
Kings 20.17.

Ammon succeeded, and reigned 2 years.

Josiah succeeded, and reigned 31 years.

Jehoahaz 3 months.

Jehoiachim 11 years.

Jehoiachin 3 months.

Zedekiah 11 years; the last year of whose Reign was contemporary with the 19th
year of Nebuchadnezzar.

Now putting all the years together from the first of Ahaz to the last of
Zedekiah are about 155 years and 6 months; out of which subducting 19 years for
the Reign of Nebuchadnezzar, there remains from the first of Ahaz to the first
of Nebuchadnezzar 136 years, which comes very near to the Era Nabonassaris;
for according to the common Calculation the first of Nebuchadnezzar happened in
the 138th year of Nabonassar, which began about two years before the first year
of Ahaz; or in the second year of the 8th Olympiad.

And that in all probability, Baladan who was the Father of Merodach-Baladan
that sent to visit Hezekiah, might be that Nabonassar whose Era is so much
celebrated.

After the beginning of the Reign of Nebuchadnezzar the entire Assyrian
Monarchy was translated to Babylon, and Nebuchadnezzar the King thereof.
Herodotus in his First Book tells us that Cyaxares the Grandchild of Dioces
first attempted the taking of Niniveh, but was repulsed by the aid of the
Scythians; and that afterward he took it, and became Master of all Assyria,
Excepta Babylonica quadam portione.

But according to the Histories of Tobit and Judith, Niniveh was taken by
Assuerus and Nebuchadnezzar, and afterward entirely possessed by
Nebuchadnezzar, Tobit 10.17. Judith 11. But this is obscure, because it has
been conceived that Nebuchadnezzar was a common Name used amongst the
Babylonian Kings, as Pharaoh among the Egyptians; only it may not be impossible
that Nebuchadnezzar who was certainly contemporary with Cyaxares the Mede,
might be an assistant in the Destruction of Niniveh with Cyaxares, called it
may be by Tobit, Assuerus; but how he came to be sole Possessor after in the
time of Judith, is hard to unriddle.

This Nebuchadnezzar made Babylon the Seat of his Empire, and so far enlarged
it that it seemed as new built, as his own arrogant and vainglorious
expression witnesses; Is not this great Babel that I have built? Dan. 4.30.

Upon all this that has been said, it seems plain:

1. That Babylon or Babel was the first or ancient Seat of the Assyrian Empire.

2. That the same was first built by Belus, or Ninus, or Semiramis, as the
Heathen Writers tell us; or by Nimrod, as the Holy History tells us, who
possibly might be the same with Belus.

3. That afterward the Seat of the Assyrian Empire was translated to Nineveh
the great City of that Empire.

4. That afterward Babylon was again either repaired or enlarged by the
Assyrian Empire, and was the Metropolis of that part of Assyria called Caldaea,
the Inhabitants whereof were greatly addicted to the Celestial Observation, and
became so famous for it, that a Caldean and an Astrologer were terms equivalent
in common appellation.

5. That afterward the Babylonians or Caldeans obtained or usurped a divided
Kingdom from the Assyrian Empire.

6. That the first King of that divided Kingdom was called Nabonassar, which
give the original to the Era Nabonassaris, beginning about the 8th Olympiad.

7. That about 140 years after the beginning of that Kingdom it grew so potent,
that it acquired the whole Assyrian Monarchy, and became the Seat thereof under
Nebuchadnezzar.

8. That Nebuchadnezzar again enlarged the City of Babylon with Buildings and
Walls of incredible strength and glory.

This being premised, I now come to those Reasons that satisfy me that the
Assyrian or Babylonian Monarchy was not of that great Antiquity that the
Babylonians and the favorers of their Tradition pretended, but had its known
Original or Epoch from whence it began.

1. The Authority of the Heathen Authors allow not above 1400 years at most for
the continuance of the Assyrian Monarchy, and lodge the Original of it in Belus
the Father of Ninus, the beginning of whose Reign is by computation to be cast
in the 153d year after the Flood, according to the Jewish Account. Vide
probationes inde Petavii doctrina temp. l. 9. per totum. The Account, according
to Diodorus Siculus, runs thus; The Assyrian Monarchy beginning with Ninus
lasted 1360 years unto the fall of Sardanapalus by Arbaces the Mede, after
which that Monarchy fell in with the Mede: it continued there until Pull became
the Head of the Assyrian Monarchy, and after him Tiglah Pileser, and then
Salmanassar, and afterward Senacherib: The Proof they add to this Supputation
is this; That from the Fall of Sardanapalus to the Taking of Babylon by
Alexander are accounted 543 years, which added to the former number gives 1903
years, the Epoch of the Caldean Astrological Calculation brought by
Calisthenes to Aristotle at the Taking of Babylon by Alexander; which casts the
Beginning of the Assyrian Monarchy under Belus, or at least under Ninus his
Son, to be about the year of the World 1717, about 60 years after the Flood,
according to the Jewish Account; though others, following also the Jewish
Account, cast the same to be about 104 years after the Flood.

But Africanus, and others that follow the Account of the 70 Interpreters, tell
us of seven Kings of the Caldeans, and six Kings of the Arabians that were
antecedent to Belus in that Empire, that successively reigned in Babylon 440
years; that Belus obtained by Conquest the Kingdom, and reigned 55 years; and
by this Account the Beginning of the Assyrian Kingdom under Ninus was 631 years
after the Flood, and one Age after the Confusion of Languages in the time of
Phaleg: But which way soever we take, yet we find a Beginning of the Assyrian
Empire, though they that suppose it 440 years before Belus, thrust the Deluge
and the Creation farther back than the Jewish Account.

2. The Authority of the Holy Scripture by the Pen of Moses gives us the
Original of the Babylonian or Assyrian Monarchy in Nimrod, which possibly may
be the Name in Hebrew of Belus the first Founder of it. And here I do not take
advantage of the Divine Authority of the Sacred Scripture, but make use of it
only as a History, and singly upon that account has greater evidence of its
truth than any Heathen Historian whatsoever. 1. The Writer thereof was most
certainly nearer the times of the first Foundation, of that Monarchy by above
800 years than any other Historian that gives us the account of the Assyrian
and Babylonian Monarchy; which is a great advantage in point of evidence
touching the truth of any Historical Relation. Again, 2. He was not very far
distant from the Place or Seat of that Monarchy, the Wilderness and Palestine
being not far distant from Assyria 3. He was descended from him that was the
native of that Country, namely Abraham, who was born and lived many years in
the Caldean Country, and doubtless did bring along with him and transmit to his
Posterity a fair Tradition of that Empire, being contemporary with Peleg, in
whose time the famous dissipation of Mankind and distinction of Languages
happened. 4. He was educated in Egypt, the people whereof were greatly learned,
especially in Chronological Computations. 5. The coherence and synchronism of
all the parts of the Mosaical Chronology, especially after the Flood, bears a
most singular testimony to the truth of his History and Computation: for
although he draws not down the lineal Descendents of Ham and Japhet down to his
time, but only mentions their Children and Grandchildren for two or three
Generations at most; yet he draws down the lineal Pedigree from Sem in the
Sacred Line down to his very Age, together with their Births and Ages, which
are a great evidence of the probability of the rest of his Account. So that if
we take the History of Moses upon a bare Moral account, abstracted from the
Authority of Divine Revelation, he has greater evidence of the truth of what
he relates than any Historian whatsoever that takes upon him the narrative of
the Antiquity of Kingdoms or Empires, the ancientest of which Historians were
above 1000 years later than Moses. But this I shall have occasion farther to
improve hereafter.

The Objections against this late Original of the Assyrian or Babylonian
Monarchy (for it had its successive translation into these denominations) are
principally these:

1. That it appears by the Account of ancient Historians, that the Caldeans (in
whom the Assyrian Monarchy began and ended) at the Taking of Babylon by
Alexander had preserved Astronomical Calculations for about 400000 years; thus
Diodorus Siculus, lib. 3. cap. 8. Quadringenta tria annorum millia usque ad
ascensum Alexandri numerant; and Tully in his second Book de Divinatione
mentions the number to be greater, Quadringenta and septuaginta millia annorum,
in periclitandis experiendisque Pueris quicunque essent nati, Babylonios
posuisse.

2. That it seems impossible, that if their Monarchy began but in Nimrod, or so
short a time after the Universal Deluge, that in the time of Ninus, by some
supposed the first, by some the second King of the Assyrians or Babylonians,
the Empire could have grown so populous as to build that vast City of Babylon,
and that of Nineveh, whose state and magnificence and amplitude were of
incredible greatness; or that his Widow Semiramis could at once bring into the
field against Zoroastres an Army of 1700000 Footmen, 500000 Horsemen, 100000
Chariots, 2000 Ships, as Diodorus Siculus out of Ctesias, l. 3. cap. 5. And
therefore as well Mankind as the Empire of Assyria must have had a longer
continuance to have set out such an Army, than the succession of an Empire for
two or three Governors at most, or the successions or propagations of Mankind
within so short a time as this is supposed to succeed the Universal Deluge,
could afford. To the first I answer:

1. That some will have these Years to be but Months, which they suppose to be
accounted Years by the ancient Babylonians and Egyptians: But as we have no
certain evidence that they used to account a Month a Year, but if we had, yet
that reduction will not serve; for that number of Lunar Months reduced to Solar
Years will arise to above 40000 Years, which will overreach the Creation of
Mankind.

2. Therefore we may with the same Tully and Diodorus Siculus pronounce it to
be an incredible and fabulous Account warranted by no credible evidence, but
merely their own fancy or imposture; that because they held the World eternal,
would gratify their people with a succession of an incredible Antiquity. And
it appears to be fabulous, 1. For that in all this time they would probably
have gotten the perfect Theory of the Planetary Motions and Positions, which it
is plain they did not, if we believe the same Author; for they were at a loss
touching the true discoveries and periods of the Eclipses, especially of the
Sun. 2. For that Calisthenes, who was very curious in searching the famous
Periods of the Babylonian or Caldean Celestial Observations, at the very time
when they pretended so great an Antiquity, namely, at the Taking of Babylon by
Alexander, upon a strict enquiry found their Astronomical Observations not to
be above 1903 years old, which he accordingly reported to Aristotle, that
employed him specially in that Enquiry, as Simplicius reports in his
Commentaries upon the Book of Aristotle de Caelo. The prodigious Accounts
therefore of the Caldeans of the Times past deserve as little credit as their
Predictions of things to come, who, as the same Tully there observes, flattered
both Caesar and Pompey with long Lives and happy and peaceable Death; both
which fell out in the success, to both extremely contrary.

2. I come to the second Objection, namely, That it seems altogether impossible
that the General Flood should put a period to all former Governments, and
indeed to the whole Race of Mankind except eight persons, and yet that from
these in so short a time such vast and powerful Monarchies, especially as that
of the Babylonian or Syrian should arise. To which I answer:

1. That if we should admit the Computation of the Seventy, now much magnified
by Vossius and others, it would easily deliver us from that difficulty; for
whereas the Hebrew Computation gives the Universal Flood to be but 1656 years
after the Creation of Mankind, the Septuagint gives it to be 2262 years: and
whereas the Hebrew Account gives us about 300 years from the Flood to the Birth
of Abraham, and consequently about 104, and according to some only 58 years
from the Flood to the beginning of Ninus the Son of Belus, the Septuagint gives
us from the Flood to the Birth of Abraham 1132 years; and consequently the
beginning of Ninus though admitted to have been about 250 years before the
Birth of Abraham, would yet have happened near 800 years after the Flood, which
would not only give a competent time for Mankind to grow to that great
multitude that is supposed, but would satisfy those preceding thirteen Kings
in Babylon that are supposed to have worn out 440 years before (...) the
beginning of Belus the Father of Ninus.

2. But the Objection needs not that help, neither does enforce us to desert
the Hebrew Account to satisfy that or the like Objections. For considering the
long Life of the Ancients that lived within 300 years after the Flood, and
consequently their coexistence with those that descended from them; we may
without the help of a miraculous fertility find that in 104 years Mankind
descended from Noah and his three Sons and their Wives, might arise to a
stupendous multitude by that Arithmetical Progression that would be found in
their Generations. I shall not need to set down the process of the Computation
or the product, it is excellently done to my hand by Temporarius in his second
Book Chronologicarum demonstrationum, and out of him by Petavius his Doctrina
temporum, lib. 10. and out of both by Kircherus in the first Book of his first
Tome of his Oedipus Aegyptiacus, where he undertakes, that in the progress of
200 years after the Flood the multitude of the coexisting People might be so
great, that if they were cast into a square Battalia, allowing to every person
but one square foot of ground, the side of that Square would be 372
Astronomical miles, or 25 Heavenly degrees. And thus far touching the Original
of the Assyrian, Caldean, or Babylonian Monarchy.

2. Touching the Egyptians, they maintained the Origination of Mankind, and
that the same was not Eternal, as it seems by Diodorus Siculus in his second
Book; for they supposed, in respect of the fruitfulness of their soil and the
convenience of their situation, that the first Original of Mankind was among
them, and that the Egyptians were the ancientest People in the World.

But though they admitted the Origination of Man, yet they pretended to a very
great antiquity of their Nation and Government; and because they would exceed
all others, they suppose their first Governors were Gods: Diodorus tells us,
that in the 180th Olympiad they pretended a succession of Government of 33000
years, whereof the first 18000 years they were governed by Gods and Heroes, and
the last 15000 years by Men.

Manetho, that wrote the History of the Egyptians about the beginning of the
Grecian Monarchy under Alexander, with very great pretense has carried up
their Government to an incredible distance before the Creation of Mankind; for
he digested the successive Governments of the Egyptians into 32 Dynasties, and
to each Dynasty a great number of Governors and Years, whereof 15 exceeded the
time of the Flood, and therefore are omitted by Africanus and others that yet
are fond of the credit of Manetho: the other 17 Dynasties are supposed to be
extended unto the beginning of the Grecian Empire for about 1694 years after
the Flood.

But 1. This Account, even of Diodorus Siculus, is very uncertain; for it
appears by Censorinus, de die Natali, cap. 19. that the ancient Egyptian year
was bimestris, and after that trimestris, and after that, in latter time, of 13
months and 5 days: And some tell us, that yet their most ancient year was but
one month, namely, one revolution of the Moon through the Zodiac; which if it
should be admitted, may shorten their Account of 33000 years to 3600 years or
thereabout. But yet this Answer serves not, for in all probability their years
continued to be 365 days ever since the time of the Jewish Exody at least,
which will carry up the Account far beyond the Creation of Man, though their
former years should be supposed menstrui or bimestres.

Therefore it seems either a plain Imposture of Manetho, out of an emulation of
the pretended Antiquity of the Babylonian Monarchy, or at least a very plain
mistake, by reckoning all these 32 Dynasties or Principatus successive, when it
seems they were all contemporary, and that after Mean, which is supposed the
first Head of these Dynasties, the Regiment of Egypt was divided into several
Principalities, and each had his Dynasty, but the particular Regiment of each
several Principality, Mean being the Head to them all; which is so well evinced
by Vossius in his little Tract de Aetate Mundi, out of Eratosthenes
contemporary with Manetho, Herodotus and others, that nothing can be added to
it, or reasonably objected against it; though Kircherus in the first Book of
his Egyptian Antiquities endeavors to carry on the 17 last Dynasties in
continued succession from Cham to the dissolution of the Egyptian Monarchy by
Alexander; and supposes the first 15 Dynasties to have incurred before the
Flood, and the traditional memory thereof derived down by Cham to his
Posterity. But of this also more hereafter.

Touching the Grecians, it is true, the Grecian Monarchy had its known Epoch
in Alexander about the 114th Olympiad: but they were a People long before,
though divided into smaller Kingdoms or States; but the Memorials of the
Babylonians and Egyptians were far more ancient than those of Greece, which
derived much of its Learning from the Egyptians. Censorinus in his golden Book
de die Natali gives us out of Varro a threefold Period of the Grecian Histories
or Monuments or Times, Cap. 21. namely, 1. (...) or incognitum, from the first
Origination of Mankind (if it had an Original) ad cataclysmum priorem, or the
Ogygian Flood: 2. (...) or fabulosum, from the Ogygian Flood to the first
Olympiad: 3. Historicum, from the first Olympiad until his time. For the first
of these times, Sive semper fuit, sive habuit initium, certe quot annorum sit
non potest comprehendi: for the second; Non plane quidem scitur, sed creditur
esse annos circiter mill and sexcentos, though he reduces it by his account
to a shorter time; namely, 400 years from the Ogygian Flood to Inachus, and
from him to the first Olympiad according to some 400, according to others 395,
407, or 417: I shall not trouble my self with the curious enquiry into the
number, or the different Account of Chronologers touching it: But within the
compass of this tempus (...), or Periodus fabulosa, happened many of those
Relations of the Greeks; namely, the Age of Prometheus, the Flood of Deucalion,
shortly after the beginning of the Dynasty of the Athenians, in the time of
Cretopus King of the Argives; Incendium Idae, Cadmus and Europa, Ganymedis
raptus, Phaetontis incendium, Hercules Amphitryonis filius, Expeditio
Argonautarum, Bellum Trojanum and Reditus Heraclidarum, Ionica migratio, and
many other fine Stories that have furnished some of the Poetical Historians of
after Ages.

But however Censorinus makes his Computation, Inachus, who was the first King
of the Argives, though he were about 375 years after the beginning of the
Assyrian Monarchy, and contemporary with Isaac, yet he began his Reign about
100 years before the Ogygian Flood, which happened in the latter end of Phoroneus
the Son of Inachus and second King of the Argives. So that Inachus was about
100 years before the Ogygian Flood, and about 1070 or 1080 years before the
first Olympiad upon this account.

This then being, as it seems, the state of these Periods, there seem two
Nations of the Grecians that pretend to greatest Antiquity, namely, the Argivi
and the Attici.

The former had their beginning with Inachus, whether before or after the
Ogygian Flood it will not be much of moment, but at least within 1070 years
before the first Olympiad, which is the highest time that the Grecians pretend
unto.

Touching the Attici, the Grecian Memorials give us no higher Account than of
Ogyges, in whose time it is supposed the Ogygian Flood happened in that part of
Greece called Attica, and takes its name from him, namely, Diluvium Ogygium.

Out of this Kingdom arose the Dynasty of the Athenians, about 200 years after
the Ogygian Flood, wherein Cecrops was the first Governor contemporary with
Moses; he first set up the Worship of Jupiter, as some report. And so we have
the Original of the Government of the Argives in Inachus, of the Athenians in
Cecrops.

It is true, the Egyptian Priest under the name of Timaeus in Plato tells us a
large Story of the Island of Atlantis far bigger than Asia, and that although
now that goodly Island be lost and swallowed up in the Sea, yet the Athenians
were a kind of Colony transplanted from that Island into Greece about 7000
years before Solon's time. But this is one of those Poetical Fictions wherewith
Plato plays, mingling more serious things with it in the following part of his
Discourse; and the Story has no footsteps of any evidence for it, unless we
shall suppose that Atlantis to be an Island that was before the Universal
Deluge, and destroyed by it.

4. Concerning the Seres or Chinese, a People whose Customs and Histories were
strangers to Europe till of late times, wherein some Travelers have lately
given us some account of those great Periods both of their Histories and
Government. Vossius in that little Book de Aetate Mundi, tells us by relation
from others, That by their Histories and Monuments their Empire has lasted
4505 years in the year of Christ 1658, which reaches some Ages beyond the
Flood according to the Hebrew Account, but according to the Septuagint the
beginning thereof falls in the time of Phaleg, 531 years after the Flood; which
he brings as an Argument for the Authority of the Septuagint: But the truth is,
we are still strangers to the true state of Chronology of the Seres or
Chinese, what we have touching it, is by broken relation of some few
Travelers, and what they had, possibly may be gathered up from the vulgar
Traditions of that People, upon which little of sound conclusion can be made
touching their Antiquity. But be it true or not, which we have from these
Relations, yet their longest Period gives them a Beginning, and reaches not so
high as the pretended Epoch of the Babylonians or Egyptians, much less is there
any thing in them that gives any color of Evidence of an Eternal Duration.

And thus I have gone through the Examination of those Kingdoms and Monarchies
which pretend to greatest Antiquity, the Babylonian or Assyrian, the Egyptian,
the Grecian, and the Seres or Chinese; upon all which we may observe,

1. That though many of them pretend to a very great Antiquity, yet there are
none that give us any sufficient Evidence of an Eternal Duration; for what are
those Periods of the Egyptians or Babylonians to Eternity? Nay many of these
Nations that pretend to the longest continuance, as the Egyptians and Grecians,
yet disclaim an Eternal Succession; pretend themselves to be Aborigines, and to
be the first People, but yet not to be Eternal. Indeed their vast continuance,
if admitted, would seem to contradict the Authenticalness and Authority of the
Mosaical History, which contains a Relation of the Beginnings of Mankind within
the compass of about 5660 Years, according to the Hebrew Account, and about
7240 Years, according to the Septuagint; but does not so much as suppose an
Eternity thereof.

2. That notwithstanding these great pretensions of Antiquity, yet upon a true
examination their great pretended Antiquity is fabulous; and the Origination of
their Monarchies began some Ages after the general Deluge; and so the truth of
the Holy History concerning the Inception of Mankind, and the Inception of all
the Monarchies in the World after the Deluge that happened under Noah, 1656
Years after the Creation of Mankind, is not at all weakened by those Fabulous
Antiquities of the Babylonians, Egyptians, or Grecians.

3. That this Inception of the Notable Empires and Kingdoms of the World, even
of those that pretend greatest Antiquity, and the termination of the uttermost
Extent of the Histories of the Babylonians, Egyptians, and Grecians, within the
compass of the Extent of their pretended Monarchies, is an Evidence against the
Eternity of Mankind; for had Mankind been Eternal, they had infinite Ages since
arrived to all the perfection of Political Government, and to all those Means
and Arts for the preserving the Memorials of things past, as they have now
attained unto; there would have been no tempus (...), or obscurum, among the
Grecians, but there would have been as fair Monuments and Historical Narratives
of things past, before the Olympiads or the Ogygian Flood (which was not
universal) as after. I shall conclude therefore with Lucretius, lib. 5.

Preterea, si nulla fuit genitalis origo
Terrai and Coeli, semperque aeterna fuerunt;
Cur supra bellum Thebanum and funera Trojae
Non alias alii quoque res cecinere Poetae,
Qui tot facta virum toties cecidere, neque usquam
Aeternis famae monumentis insita florent?
Verum ut opinor habet novitatem summa, recensque
Natura est mundi, neque pridem exordia cepit:
Quare etiam quaedam nunc arts expoliuntur,
Nunc etiam augescunt, etc. --
But yet this Consideration touching the Antiquity of Monarchies, their
Inception, and the Narratives and Historical Monuments of things, happening
within the Periods of their Commencement and Continuances, are not of that
weight that we can lay the stress of this Hypothesis of the Inception of
Mankind upon: And therefore this Consideration must be taken with its allay, I
shall therefore fully set down those Instances that do give this Consideration
its due abatement.

1. It is no Consequence, That because a Monarchy or Kingdom had its Beginning,
that therefore the People that constituted the Moles of that Kingdom had its
Beginning: Kingdoms, Monarchies, and States, often change their Governors, and
the Forms of Government, and their Styles and Denominations, as the Silkworm
does his shape, and yet the People in a continued succession the same. Rome
took its Name from Romulus, but the People were a Farrago, collected and
gathered out of the neighboring Nations. Greece fell into one Monarchy under
Alexander, yet the People (that were the Stuffing, as it were, and Materials of
that Monarchy) were existing before in other Forms of Government, and under
other Governors. And though it is by some supposed, That the Assyrian Monarchy
began in Ninus, yet Diodorus out of Ctesias tells us, That he made up that
great Structure of the Assyrian Monarchy by the Conquest of diverse People, who
thereby were added to it, as the Egyptians, Phenicians, Syria, Coelicia,
Pamphilia, Lydia, Caria, Phrygia, Mysia, and many more, mentioned by him, l. 3.
cap. 1.

England began not to be a People, when Alfred reduced it into a Monarchy, for
the Materials thereof were extant before, namely, under the Heptarchy. So that
the finding out of the Head of a Monarchy is not like the finding out the Head
of a River in the Fountain, or the Head of a Family in one common Parent: The
ancientest Monarchy might have a Beginning, and yet the People, that are the
material constituent of it, might exist long before, under other Forms or
Vicissitudes of Governments.

2. All Nations do not always begin their Histories, or the Matter, of the same
Antiquity with the People touching which they write; but some earlier, some
later, according to the variety of their Opportunities, Educations, and
Disciplines.

The Israelites were certainly the most knowing People of the World, began
early to record the Memorials of their own Times, and of those that anteceded
them, delivered down by Tradition from the Patriarchs: Thus did Moses; and the
Annals of that People are carried down to the very dissolution of their
Government. The Phenicians began their Historical Monuments after them, the
Grecians after them. The Pelasgi and Attici were a People long before Homer
wrote. England was doubtless Inhabited before Caesar came over, yet we have few
Monuments of Britain more ancient than Caesar gives us; and from him, except
Beda, we have few Authentical Histories by any known Historian before the
Conquest by King William; but they have been all written since, or very near
his time; and many of the things which they have put together touching the
Britains, Picts, Danes, yea and the beginning of the Saxons, have been
collected out of broken Monuments in Monasteries, and Tradition, and digested
into series and order of times by those that have written long since the things
done; by men that lived since the Normans came in, as Henry of Huntington,
William of Malmsbury, Roger Hoveden, Matthew Paris, and others.

3. A third difficulty is this: That in those elder times there were not those
means of preserving the Monuments of things past, as after times afforded; for
whatever antiquity the World may be supposed to be, it is plain that Arts have
increased and grown: Printing is a new Invention, and although Letters and
Writing were ancient among the Phenicians, and from them derived to the Greeks,
yet we must suppose they were not so perfect or so common in the elder Ages as
in those that succeed them. And therefore those that contend for an Eternal
succession of Men in the World, do suppose that by a kind of circulation or
rotation Arts have their successive invention and perfection and traduction
from one People to another; and consequently though some might be early able to
deliver over Historical passages, as being better instructed in Letters and
Writing, and more civilized than others, yet others attained it later: As the
Europeans had their Learning from the Asiaticks, so the Americans have it from
the Europeans, and yet the People of Europe, Asia, and America may be of equal
Antiquity.

Besides all this, there have been many vicissitudes and changes whereby
ancient Monuments and Histories have been lost: As 1. The Variation of
Languages, or at least of the Characters wherein they were written, many things
written in former Ages being scarce legible in after Ages, and so neglected. 2.
Wars and Desolations happening thereby, which obliterate many ancient Monuments.
If by a kind of common stipulation or pact as it were, Monasteries had not had
a kind of common Protection in the vicissitudes of the Conquests of England by
the Picts, Danes, Saxons and Normans, we had had very little extant of ancient
things. 3. Transmigrations of People from one Country to another, whereby they
left their ancient Monuments behind them, which were neglected by them that
succeeded them. 4. Floods and Inundations, especially in the parts of Asia,
which swept away many ancient Monuments.

These are the Allays that are to be given to this particular touching the
Epochae and Original of Monarchies, Kingdoms, and States, and the Monuments and
Historical Relations of them or happening in them, and to the weight of those
consequences deduced or deducible from them, in order to the Argument in
question touching the Origination of Mankind.

CAP. IV. The Third Instance of Fact proving the Origination of Mankind,
namely, the Invention of Arts.
I Come to the Third Instance of Fact, namely, the Discovery and Perfecting of
Arts, and the new Discoveries that later Ages have made of things that were not
formerly known.

And this Topic consists principally of these parts; 1. That there have been
such Discoveries of Things and Arts not formerly known: 2. That consequently
the World, especially of Mankind, is of a far later Edition than Eternity.

Touching the former of these, it is very evident both by the Tradition of the
Ancients, and also by our own unquestionable Experience, that very great
Discoveries have been in several Ages made of Things and Arts that were hidden
and unknown unto precedent Ages. I shall not trouble my self with those large
Catalogues of profitable Inventions which have been successively discovered,
when before they were not known, at least for ought appears to us; as the use
of Husbandry, the making of Wine and Oil, the discovery of the Letters of the
Alphabet in successive Ages, Music, Military and Civil Discipline, Engines of
War, and Navigation: These and infinite more have been by the Industry of
former Writers reduced to their several Epochae and Authors of their
Discoveries, and some of the Authors have had therefore divine Honor given to
them by the admiring Heathen. These several Inventors and Inventions are
registered by Diodorus Siculus in his first six Books, by Clemens Alexandrinus
in the first Book of his Stromata, by Pliny l. 7. cap. 56. and ex professo by
Polydore Virgil in his eight Books de Rerum Inventoribus: In which and other
Collections of that kind, although possibly there be many things that are
fabulous, or grounded upon a very light and uncertain tradition; yet there are
many things that are true or very credible, especially since the Monuments of
ancient times give us an account of the most remote Ages of Men; Rudes primum
and incuria silvestri non multum a ferarum asperitate dissimiles, Macrob. in
somnio Scipionis, l. 2. cap. 10. see the elegant description of the elder
Inhabitants of the World, Lucret. l. 5. Nec commune bonum peterant spectare,
neque ullis
Moribus inter se scibant neque legibus uti.
With which description of the elder World agrees Plato in his Politics, Nudi
enim and sine stragulis magnam partem foris and sub dio vitam colebant; and the
same Plato in his third Book de Legibus supposes, that those relics of Men
that escaped the ancient Deluges by flight into the Mountains became perfectly
ignorant in process of time of those Arts and conveniences of humane Life,
which possibly their Progenitors might have been better acquainted with.

But we need not go so far for a full conviction of that admirable Discovery
and Improvement of Arts and other things, especially such as are necessary for
humane Life.

In matters Astronomical we have a far greater light than what was two thousand
years since; for we find the old Hypothesis of the Heavenly System called since
in question by Copernicus, Galilaeus, and Kepler; the solidity of the Orbs
detected to be untrue, by the plain discovery of Tycho Brahe and others; the
new discoveries of Stars and Asterisms, and their figures, by the help of the
Telescope, demonstratively and to the sense.

In matters Philosophical many new Discoveries have been made by Experiences,
whereunto the Ancients never attained: And although the Bodies of Men, Animals
and Insects have been these many thousands of years exposed to the view and
search of diligent Physicians and Anatomists, yet it is a wonder to see what
new Discoveries have been made in Anatomical Dissections and Observations,
which seem wholly hidden to the Ancients; as those of the Circulation of the
Blood by Doctor Harvey; the Venae lacteae by Asellius; the Repositorium Chyli
of Pecquet, with the method of its deduction into the Vena cava; the process of
Generation and of the Formative actions; the curious Discoveries of the Parts
and Faculties of small Insects, by the help of the Microscope, rendered by
Malpighius and others.

Again, the great Discoveries that have been made by the means of Pyrotechny
and Chemistry, which in late Ages have attained to a greater height than
formerly.

Again, in matters Mechanical, although it be true that this latter Age has
not arrived to that incredible skill of Archimedes, yet Mechanical powers have
been strangely improved, as we see in the late improvement of the late
discovery of the Motion of the Pendulum, whereby the portions of Time are not
only measured with an incredible exactness, but the use thereof translated unto
Watches, Clocks, and other Engines; so we have high advancement of Dialling,
Clocks, Pumps, Fountains and other Motions beyond the acquests of former Ages.

And although the Art of Navigation has been very ancient, and the use of the
Mariner's Needle, which some carry up to Amalpes an Arabian in the year of
Christ 1360; others to the Chinese, and by them discovered to Paulus Venetus;
others carry it up to King David: yet the Art of Navigation has been since
greatly improved, and many excellent Discoveries in relation to the Inclination
and Variation of the Magnetic Needle. To these we may add the use of Guns,
Gunpowder, and Printing, which though by some asserted to be of long use in
China, yet in this Western part of the World the original of the Invention has
its known Epoch.

By these and many more Instances of the like kind it may appear, That many
Inventions and Discoveries of things not only of curiosity but of use and
convenience to Mankind have had their known and certain Epochae, or a
sufficient evidence of times when they were not used or known in the World.

2. The consequence of this Supposition seems to be this; That in as much as
these had their discoveries within known Periods, it is not supposable that the
successions of Mankind could have been without a Beginning, but rather that
they had a Beginning within a reasonable time: for it is not conceptible that
in an infinite, or indeed in a very long period of Revolutions of Mankind,
those or any things of this kind discoverable would have been of so late and
puisne a discovery: This is the Argument of Lucretius, who though an Asserter
of the Eternity of Matter and Motion, yet together with his Master Epicurus
asserts a Beginning of this World which we now behold, Lib. 5.

Quare etiam quaedam nunc arts expoliuntur,
Nunc etiam augescunt; nunc addita navigiis sunt
Multa, modo organici melicos peperere sonores;
Denique natura haec rerum ratioque reperta
Nuper --
And upon the same account Macrobius l. 2. cap. 10. in Somnium Scipionis; Si
enim ab initio, imo ante initium fuit mundus, ut Philosophi volunt, Cur per
innumerabilem seriem seculorum non fuerat Cultus quo nunc utimur inventus? Non
Literarum usus quo solo memoriae fulcitur Eternitas? Cur denique multarum rerum
experientia ad aliquas gentes recenti aetate pervenit? ut ecce Galli vitem vel
cultum oleae, Roma jam adolescente, didicerunt; aliae vero gentes adhuc multa
nesciunt quae nobis inventa placuerunt. Haec omnia videntur aeternitati rerum
repugnare, dum opinari nos faciunt certo mundi principio paulatim singula
quaeque coepisse.

But although this Argument at the first view may seem to have much of evidence
in it of the Origination of Mankind, yet it seems too weak to lay any great
weight, at least singly, upon it, as will appear by what follows; though in
consort with other Instances it has its use and weight.

The Discovery or Invention of things may seem to be upon these, or some of
these Methods.

2. It seems to me that some things have been discovered unto Mankind by a more
immediate interposition of the Divine Providence, or the ministration of
Angels; as for instance, the Medicinal Virtue of some Herbs, Vegetables, or
Minerals, that lie not in the ordinary road of Experience, or analogical
collection from Circumstances, Signatures, or Observation.

2. Some things were discovered experimentally, though perchance not
intentionally, or by design in the first discovery: And thus probably the
Virtues of ordinary Simples came to be discovered; for the Food of Mankind
being anciently Herbs and Fruits, or at least of such of Mankind who either
through choice, custom or necessity were driven to that abstemious Diet, there
did doubtless occurr the experience of various temperaments and operations of
those Herbs; some purgative, some emetick, some sudorifick, some astringent,
which gave Men opportunity of digesting them into several ranks and uses.

3. Some things were discovered ex praenotis, and per viam rationalis
discursus: Thus probably Men by the Signatures, Tastes and Colors of Herbs,
bearing analogy to other things they knew, concluded fairly touching their
Nature and Use, which by Trial and Experience they improved into more fixed and
stable Theorems and Conclusions: And upon this account also many Practical
Arts, especially relating to Numbers, Weight, Measure and Mechanism had their
production; for the Rudiments of Proportion being lodged in the Mind, they seem
to have grown intentionally and ex industria into those various practices of
Arithmetic, Geometry, and Mechanics resulting from those principles per media
processus rationalis; and thus those practices of the Rules of Proportion,
Mechanical Motions, Staticks, Architecture, Navigation, Measuring of Distances
and Quantities, and infinite more did arise.

4. Some things in their first discovery seem purely accidental, and although
possibly the operation of Reason and Trial and Experiment might or may carry on
the Invention into farther Improvements and Advances, yet in the very first
primo primum of the Discovery it may be accidental: The old, whether true or
fabulous Discovery of Fire may serve to explain my conception; wherein it is
supposed, that one sitting upon a Hill and tumbling down Flint stones, upon the
collision thereof he observed sparks of Fire, which nevertheless he after
improved by adding combustible materials to it; and doubtless upon such and the
like occurrences many Chemical and other accidental Discoveries have been made,
besides and beyond and without the intention of the Operator: And I well knew a
Person that had not capacity enough to deduce any thing of curiosity per
processum rationalem, yet by accidental dealing with Water and some Canes did
arrive to a most admirable excellence in some Mechanical Works of that nature,
though he never had the Wit to give a reason of his performance of them.

5. Some things have been found out by a kind of necessity and exigence of
Humane Nature; such as Clothes, Societies, Places of Defense and Habitation,
and possibly much of the plainer sort of Tillage and Husbandry; Venture magister
artis, ingeniique largitor: and commonly these were the earliest Inventions,
because Nature stood early in need of them. And hence it came to pass, that
they who had Coelum clementius, that afforded them necessaries without the
assistance of considerable Industry, continued longest rude and uncultivated.
And therefore if the Husbandry of Ceres or Triptolemus came late into the
World, it was because those Eastern Countries then inhabited abounded with
plenty of Fruits, which supplied the defect of Husbandry till the World grew
more dispersed and fuller of Inhabitants, and transmigrated into parts of less
natural fertility.

6. Some things have been discovered not only by the Ingeny and Industry of
Mankind, but even the inferior Animals have subministred unto Man the invention
or discovery of many things both Natural and Artificial and Medicinal, unto
which they are guided, and in which they are directed by secret and untaught
instincts, which would be infinite to prosecute. The Fable or History of
Glaucus observing Fishes to leap into the Sea, upon tasting an Herb by the
shore; the Weasel using Plantane as an Antidote; the wounded Stag using Dittany
to draw out the Arrow, (if true) and diverse others, give us some Analogical
Instances.

And these are ordinarily the Methods of Discoveries. The Things or Objects
discovered are principally of two kinds; viz. 1. Such things as are already
lodged in Nature, as Natural Causes and Effects, and those various Phenomenon
in Nature, whereof some lie more open to our Senses and daily observation;
others are more occult and hidden, and though accessible in some measure to our
Senses, yet not without great search and scrutiny, or some happy accident;
others again are such as we cannot attain to any clear sensible discovery of
them, either by reason of their remoteness, distance, and unaccessibleness, as
the Heavenly Bodies and things closed up in the bowels of the Earth; or by
reason of their subtle and curious texture, escaping the clear and immediate
access of Sense, as Spiritual Natures, the Soul and its various Faculties and
Operations, and the Reasons or Methods of them, wherein for the most part our
acquests touching them are but Opinion and Conjecture, wherein Men vary
according to the variety of their Apprehensions and Fantasies, and wherein
(because they want that manuduction of Sense which is our best and surest Guide
in the first Instance in matters Natural) Men range into uncertain, inevident,
and unstable Notions.

2. Such things as are Artificial, wherein some Discoveries are simply new,
others are but accessions and additaments to things that were before mentioned:
Some things are of convenience, utility or necessity to Humane Nature or the
condition of Mankind; some things are of curiosity: some things are found out
casually or accidentally; some things intentionally, and out of those
Principles or Notions that seem to be lodged originally in the Mind.

Now upon these Considerations premised, it seems that the late Discovery of
many things in Nature, and many Inventions in Art are not a sufficient Evidence
of the Origination or late Origination of Mankind, at least taken singly and
apart.

1. In things Natural the variety is so great, and the various combinations
therein so many, that it seems possible that there should not have been a full
discovery of the whole state of things Natural unto the Minds of Men, although
there were supposed an eternal duration of Mankind. We may give our selves a
Specimen hereof, if we look but back upon that one Piece of Nature with which
we have reason to be best acquainted, namely, our selves; which by reason of
our vicinity to our selves, our daily conversation with our selves and others
of the same Species, our daily necessities and opportunities of inquiring into
our selves, and the narrowness of our own nature in comparison of the vast and
various bulk of other things, seems to render us a Subject capable of being
very fully discovered. And besides all this, the more inquisitive and judicious
part of Mankind have industriously set themselves for many Ages to make the
best discovery they could of the nature of Man. Hippocrates the Father of
Physicians, who lived in the 82d Olympiad, and above 2000 years since busied
himself much and profoundly in this Enquiry; and a succession of industrious,
observing and learned Physicians and Naturalists have pursued the Chase with
all care and vigilance, and by the help of Anatomical Dissections have searched
into those various Maeanders of the Veins, Arteries, Nerves and Integrals of
the Humane Body: Yet for all this, in this sensible and narrow part of Humane
Nature, the husk and shell thereof, how much remains after all this whereof we
are utterly ignorant? So that notwithstanding all the Discoveries that have
been made by the Ancients, and those more curious and plentiful Discoveries by
the latter Ages, there still remains so much undiscovered that leaves still
room for Admiration and Industry, and gives us a powerful conviction of our
Ignorance, that the things we know in this little narrow obvious part of Nature
the Body of Man is the least part of that we know not touching the same.

But when we yet consider how small a part of the Humane Nature is that which
is the Corporeal part; and how little we know with any tolerable certainty
touching the more noble Parts, Acts and Operations of the Humane Nature, the
Principle of Life, Sense, and Intellection, we have still reason to conclude
that this little, narrow, near Subject of our Knowledge is yet very difficult
for us actually and fully to comprehend, and furnishes our search with more
Materials than we are possibly able to exhaust with all our Industry, Care,
Study, and Observation. When I consider those difficulties that occurr touching
the Production of that we call the Soul, whence it is, what it is, what power
it is that performs the processus formativus that digests, disposes, models the
prima stamina naturae humanae that acts with most admirable skill, dexterity,
infallible order, and in the most incomparable way of Intelligence, and yet
wholly destitute of those Organs whereby we exercise the operations of Life,
Sense, and Intellection. That incomparable accommodation of all parts and
things fittest for use, for time, for convenience: Again, when I consider those
various powers of the Sensible Nature, that Regiment that it performs and
exercises by the Spirits, Nerves, and Muscles; the admirable powers of
Sensation, of Fantasy, of Memory, in what Salvatories or Repositories the
Species of things past are conserved: Again, when I consider the strange powers
of Intellection, Ratiocination, Reminiscence, and what that Thing or Nature is
that performs all those various operations: And when I consider how little, how
uncertain, how contradictory those Sentiments of Mankind have been touching
these things, wherein nevertheless they have searched and toyled Age after Age;
I must needs conclude, That if we had no other subject of our search and
enquiry besides our selves, we should have for ought I know for infinite Ages a
continued stock for our discovery; and when we had learned much, yet still even
in this narrow Subject there would be still somewhat to be learned; and we
should never be able actually to overtake the plenary discovery of what would
remain; Sic rota posterior currit, sed in axe secundo. And if this one small
near piece of Nature still affords new matter for our discovery, where or when
should we be ever able to search out all the vast Treasuries of Objective
Knowledge that lies within the compass of the Universe? So that the new
Discoveries that have been made in Natural things is not a sufficient evidence
of the newness of the existence of Mankind, because of that inexhaustible
Magazin of Natural Causes and Effects which possibly will store Mankind with
new Discoveries unto an everlasting continuance.

2. And the same that is said for the redundance of matters intelligible and
cognoscible in things Natural, may be also applied to things Artificial. There
are these things that render Artificial Inventions prodigiously fertile and
various: 1. The variety of the materials of things that may be applied to
Artificial ends and uses; as we have Iron, Brass, Wood, Stones, Sounds, Light,
Figuration, Tactile qualities; some things of a more active, some things of a
more passive nature; some things diversified in degrees of heat, cold, dryness,
moisture; various Elements, Meteors: and infinite variety of these Materials we
have, which may be the material constituents or ingredients into Artificial
Structures, Engines, Motions, or Effects. 2. The variety of the Apprehensions
and Fancies of several Men in the destination and application of things to
several ends and uses; and this arising in them partly by the various texture
and frame of their very temper of their Brains, Blood, and Spirits; partly by
variety of Education, partly by Necessity, partly by Accidental Emergency: by
this means possibly the same Material is variously managed into various
Artifices, according to this variety of Phantasy or Imagination. As take the
same Wool, for instance, one Men felts it into a Hat, another weaves it into
Cloth, another weaves it into Kersey or Serge, another weaves it into Arras;
and possibly these variously subdiversified according to the phantasy of the
Artificer: For it is most certain that there is not greater variety in the
figures and complexions of Men's Faces and Features, and in the contemperations
of their natural Humors, than there is in their Fantasies, Apprehensions and
Inclinations. And hence it is that, for instance, the texture of Zeuxes or
Apelles inclines him to the invention or improving of Painting, Archimedes to
Mechanical Motions, Euclid to Geometrical Conclusions: and hence it must
necessarily come to pass, that according to the variety of Men that either
casually or industriously apply themselves to Artificial Discoveries or
Inventions, there will ensue variety of Inventions. That Invention that did
arise from the Genius or temperament of the Fantasy or Imagination of
Apelles, would probably never in the same individual Invention have been found
out before him, though the World of Men had lasted millions of Years before
him; because perchance in that long Period no Man had ever the same Syntax of
Fantasy or Imagination that he had, and consequently though some Artificial
Inventions are as it were of that common congruity to the general Fantasies of
Men; or seem to arise upon a common sutableness to the use or exigence of
Mankind, as digging, planting, ploughing, sowing, making of Apparel and Houses;
yet some have that particular respect or cognation to the Fantasy of this or
that particular Man, that they would never have been found out till such a Man
had had his being in the World; and consequently the Invention was not found
sooner, because the Man to whose Fantasy this Invention was accommodate was
not born nor lived sooner.

3. The variety of Application and Combination of several Materials of
Artificial things in their several Artificial Complements: For it is very
plain, that even where things are finite and determinate in their number, yet
they arise to a strange and prodigious multitude, if not indefinitude, by their
various Positions, Combinations, and Conjunctions: The Letters of the Alphabet,
which arise from the several apertures and conjunctions of the Tongue, the
Teeth, the Palate, the Lips, the Throat, are but 24 in number, yet various
combinations of these Letters are the formal constituents of all the Words and
Languages in the World: And yet all the Words and Languages in the World do not
amount to the hundredth part of those other articulate Languages that might be
made out of the remaining combinations of the Letters of the Alphabet, which
are not in use in any or all the Languages of the World. The general division
of Lines in Geometry is into straight and crooked, but the various combinations
and positions of these two sorts of Lines would make more Figures of
Superficies than all the Ages of the World could possibly collect or describe.

And from this variety of Materials, variety of Fantasies and Imaginations,
and variety of Combinations or Junctures of things, we may reasonably conclude
that the multitude of Artificials is inexhaustible; and that although there be
many new Inventions discovered daily which were not discovered before, yet that
alone is no sufficient Argument of the Novity of Mankind; for this Magazin of
Artificials is so fruitful, vast, and indeterminate, that if the World should
last millions of Ages there would be a store and supply for immense Ages, Et
semper aliquid ultra.

It may be possibly objected, That although the variety of Materials are great,
and possibly indefinite and indeterminate, and so also of the Fancies of Men,
and consequently those various combinations of things that are constituents of
new Inventions, yet they are not Infinite: For although the combinations of the
24 Letters of the Alphabet are a prodigious number, yet if instead of 24
Letters there were 24 millions, as those 24 millions are a finite number, so
would all the changes and combinations thereof be finite, though perchance not
easily computable by Arithmetic, in respect of the huge excess of the number;
and consequently, in an infinite Period of Time, though one of these
combinations should be exhibited in a million of Years, the whole number of
combinations had been infinite Ages since exhausted, and no combination left to
make up the material or formal constituent of a new Invention.

I answer; It is true, the combinations of things finite existing must needs be
finite as well as the things themselves. But, as I have before supposed, the
Invention of Arts does not only depend upon the existence of the Materials of
things Artificial, no nor singly upon the various combinations of those
Materials; but upon the Fantasy, Design and Destination of Man, which is
various, according to those various Temperaments that have ingredience and
influence into him: yea and possibly also upon certain junctures and concourses
of things that might never before befall any other. And therefore, as if upon a
supposed Eternal Succession of Mankind we should find but one individual
Socrates or Plato, so it is not impossible to suppose that Socrates or Plato
should consist of such a Temperament and Constitution, such a Fantasy and
Imagination as never any man before had exactly the like; and consequently he
might be the discoverer of some such Invention as never before was discovered.
Or if we should be so hardy as to suppose a Man pre-existing in all things
exactly like to Socrates, both in his Temperament, Body and Mind, yet possibly
those accidental Occurrences which excited the Imagination of Socrates to the
discovery and composing of such an Invention might not fall in with that Man
that is supposed of a perfect parity with Socrates.

For although perchance existing Individuals may not be actually Infinite, yet
certain it is that the potential gradation of things may be potentially
Infinite, and so may the junctures of Occurrences be potentially Infinite;
whereby it may come to pass, that though an Eternal Succession of Men were
admitted, yet in ista hora a Man might be produced that had never parem omnibus
gradibus and numeris: And such junctures of Occurrences might happen in ista
hora that had never an exact parity of all Circumstances, and the same exact
weight and number of Occurrences in any antecedent portion of Eternity.

And hence it may very easily come to pass, that as any one Invention had not
its existence in a portion of a thousand, two, ten, twenty thousand years
before; so, if the Ages of Mankind were infinite, it might never have
pre-existence before, though the whole Race of Mankind had been industriously
addicted ad ultimum posse to have discovered or improved Artificial Inventions.

3. The third Allay to the concludence of this Argument is this: That Mankind
have been, and in many places are very remiss and unactive in improving their
knowledge and discovery of things Natural and Artificial; and that which
befalls one Man, or Age, or Place in this kind, may befall another: This may
happen by laziness and sloth, by an evil custom, or by overflowing
barbarousness and want of improvement by Education: And upon this account we
find a great want of Arts and Inventions in the Western World, in Africa, and
even nearer hand among the Irish: And if now by the accession of Planters of
better Education, or by the advanced Industry of some Inhabitant of those
barbarous Countries there should be derived among them the Inventions of
profitable or curious Arts, we could not with any sufficient reason conclude
that the World lately began in those Countries, because the Original of those
Arts and Inventions was but lately begun among them. If therefore those People
by reason of their Barbarous course of life might be strangers unto Arts and
Inventions for the space of five hundred or a thousand Years, why not for a
much longer time? why not eternally? Since the very same supineness and
negligence might as well possess those Parts and Inhabitants for many Ages, as
well as few; and for interminate Ages, as well as certain: and if at this day
they should discover and practice new Arts and Inventions, it were no greater
Argument against the Eternity of their Succession, than against their
Continuance for those many thousand Years, which probably they have had in that
unknown Western World.

4. The fourth Allay of this Observation seems to be this: That as in Kingdoms
and Empires, so in Discoveries of Arts there seem to be very great vicissitudes
and circulations, which strangely vary the Faces of Things and Countries; and
this principally done, 1. By Wars and Victories: 2. By Floods, Inundations, or
Epidemical Diseases and Plagues.

The Instances of the former are various. The Romans were a People civilized
and improved into great Knowledge in Arts and Sciences, and in Civil and
Military Government; and where they prevailed in Conquests and Victories, they
did together with their Victories transmit Arts, Sciences, and excellent
Methods of Government among even Barbarous Nations, which quite altered
oftentimes the former Face of those conquered Countries, and by that means
those Arts which were not known before in those Places, became in use and
request in those Countries wherein before they were strangers: not as if they
then began for they had their Practice and Use long before among the Romans,
though their transmission and derivation into those Countries that were
conquered seemed new.

Again, some Countries were been morati, well disciplined in Learning, Arts,
and Knowledge, but possibly by the Irruption of numerous Armies of Barbarous
People, those Countries were quickly overgrown with Barbarism and desuetude
from their former Civility and Knowledge, and degenerated into the Ignorance
and Barbarism of their Conquerors; so that in a reasonable Period of time much
of their ancient Knowledge and Arts was forgotten, as if they never had it.
This was the condition of Greece the Learned Part of the World after their
subjugation by the Turks, and this possibly may be the condition of China in a
few years after the great Irruption and Devastation by the Tartars; wherein
possibly if an Age or two hence the state of things should be judged according
to the present appearance, it would be looked upon as if it had never been the
habitation of those Curious Arts which some time dwelt there: and possibly the
setting on foot some of those very Arts that were once well known in those
parts, would be looked upon as the Natales of those Arts, or the first
Inchoation of them, Wars and Desolations having obliterated the Monuments of
their former practices; which yet nevertheless would be in truth but the
reviving of those Arts which were long before practiced, though intermitted and
interrupted by the vicissitudes of Wars.

And upon the same account are those alterations that have happened in the
condition and state of People by other accidents, as Inundations, Epidemical
Diseases, Corruption of the Air in some Parts and Continents, either by some
eruption of pernicious Vapors, or other Inclemency of the Heavens. Plato in
his third Book de Legibus, in the beginning, though he suppose an interminate
Beginning of Mankind, and that there were successively Cities, Laws, and Arts;
yet he supposes that upon these and the like Occurrences, those that escaped
these common Calamities betook themselves to the Mountains, kept Sheep, and
preserved the Species of Mankind; but most of those Arts and Sciences which
formerly were common, became disused and forgotten among them: But after
Mankind multiplying, they descended into the Valleys, and by degrees, mutual
conversation, the necessity of their condition, and the due consideration of
things did gradually revive those Arts which Men had formerly lost by long
intermission. For such is the indoles of the Humane Nature, where it is not
strangely overgrown with Barbarousness, that it will by a kind of Natural
Sagacity discover things, especially necessary for the use of Humane Life and
Society; as Husbandry, Laws, Government, Architecture, Clothing, and the like;
as Bees or Ants provide for their common habitation and supply.

Upon all which it may seem that we are overhasty when we conclude, That
because Arts or Sciences do perchance discover themselves first to our view in
such Places or Ages, that therefore this was their first and primitive
production, or that they were never before. For it may very reasonably be, that
those or the like Arts might have been either in other places, and by a kind of
migration or circulation be transmitted to those new places either by Armies or
Colonies deduced hither; or that even among the same People or Nation these
Arts were sometimes flourishing, though possibly having received some
intermission by great Accidents and Occurrences, they again do repullulare and
revive upon the opportunity of Peace, Trade, Commerce and Popular Increase. Nay
many times it comes to pass, as is before observed, That when People are
multiplied, so that their places grow strait and narrow, and their supplies not
proportionable to their number, necessity and exigence, it gives an edge to
their Industry and Invention, and produces new Discoveries of things that were
either not known before, or forgotten: And even this one thing has advanced
the Dutch to that eminence of Manufacture, Industry and Arts, that they exceed
the rest of the World therein.

We may have an Instance of this Circulation of Arts even in this Kingdom of
England in that which is our great Manufacture, namely, Woollen Cloth: It
appears very plainly by those ancient Gilds that were settled in England for
this Manufacture, as at Lincoln, York, Oxford and diverse other Cities, that in
the time of H. 2. and R. 1. this Kingdom greatly flourished in that Art: but by
the troublesome Wars in the time of King John, H. 3. and also in the times of E.
1. and E. 2. this Manufacture was wholly lost, and all our Trade ran out in
Wools, Wool-fells, and Leather carried out in specie; and the Manufacture,
during those Warly times, held its course in France, the Netherlands, and the
Hans Towns; but by the Wisdom and peaceable times of E. 3. and his fair
treating of foreign Artists, which he invited and entertained in this Kingdom,
he regained that Art hither again, which for near one hundred Years had been
for the most part intermitted, which has hitherto continued to the great
Wealth and Benefit of this Kingdom.

So that we are not to conclude every new appearance of any Art or Science is
the first production of it, but as they say of the River Tigris and some
others, they sink into the ground, and keep a subterranean course, it may be 40
or 50 miles, and then break out above ground again, which is not so much a new
River, as the continuation and new appearance of the old: So many times it
falls out with Arts and Sciences, though they have their non-appearances for
some Ages, and then seem first to discover themselves where before they were
not known, it is not so much the first production of the Art as a transition,
or at least a restitution of what possibly was either before in another, or in
the same Country or People: And thus some tell us that Guns and Printing,
though but lately discovered in Europe, yet were of far ancienter use in China.

So that notwithstanding this Consideration of the late Invention of Arts, or
Discoveries of things Natural or Artificial, Mankind might have had an infinite
succession, or at least such a continuance as surmounts all those Accounts
which the most prodigal Computations have given: and that Saying of the Wise
Man may be verified, Ecclesiast. 1.9. The thing that has been is that which
shall be, and that which has been done is that which shall be done, and there
is no new thing under the Sun: Is there any thing whereof it may be said, See,
this is new? It has been already of old time before.

I shall here add a farther Consideration, because it has a cognation with the
Subject of this Chapter.

There seems to be very probable Conjectures made touching the Origination of
Mankind, because there seems to be one Radical Language from which all others
have their derivation, though some carry in them more, some less Memorials of
their Original, as they were more or less remote in their Inception.

The Languages of the World may be aptly enough divided into the Primo primae,
the Primo secundae, and the Secundo secundae.

The Language which I call Primo primae must needs be but one, if the Original
of Mankind were but two common Parents of either Sex, as the Holy Scriptures
teach us; and this one Language they must needs learn either from a
conformation of Voices by the Angels, such might that vocal Language be between
Almighty God by the ministration of Angels, and Adam, whereof we read in the
first and second Chapters of Genesis; or it must be an instituted Language,
chosen by Adam in Paradise, by which he gave the several Beasts their names,
and maintained discourse with GOD, and the Woman with the Serpent: For although
it is as natural to Mankind to express their Desires, Passions, and Conceptions
vocally, as it is for Brutes to use their natural vocal Signs, though of a more
simple and imperfect kind; yet the forming of Languages into this or that
particular fashion or mode, whereby Conceptions may be rendered intelligible to
others, is a business of Institution, Discipline, Intention and Consent. But
what this first Language of our first Parents was, is difficult for us to
determine: some think it was the Hebrew, and from thence they derive other
Languages; others think that the Chinese Language was the Original, because it
is the most simple, consisting most of monosyllables, the most natural, fitting
the apertures and flexures of the Lips and Tongue with the greatest ease, and
yet having the greatest multiplicity and variety of Words; others again contend
for the Scythian Language as the Primitive: all founded upon conjectural
Reasons.

But when we consider how soon Languages are changed, and what a tract of time
there was between the Creation and the Flood, and from thence to Moses, it may
be difficult to suppose that that Language continued so long in its purity and
integrity; possibly if in any Line it continued in its integrity, it might be
in the Line and Family of Noah, and so down to the Confusion of Languages at
the Tower of Babel.

But it is hard to determine what that Primitive Language was: the Hebrew or
Samaritan bids fairest for it, 1. In respect of its Antiquity; 2. In respect of
many Languages, especially of the East, that seem to be derived from it, as the
Caldee, Egyptian, Phenician, Syriack, Arabic, which have a great cognation
with it, and derivation, as it seems, from it.

And though possibly in those Elder times, as in the time of Abraham, these
several Languages might be but as so many several Dialects of the same
Language, whereby it came to pass that Abraham, though brought up in Caldea or
Assyria, held conference with the King of Gerar and the Children of Heth, that
were Canaanites, and as some think, used the Hebrew Language; his Servant also
readily conferred with Laban the Syrian: Isaac also had conference with the
Philistims and Egyptians, yet it is apparent that in process of time they grew
into distinct Languages, unintelligible each to other: The Sons of Jacob
understood not the Egyptian Language when they came down for Corn, Genesis 42.23.
neither did they afterward understand ordinarily the Syrian Language, 2 Kings
19.26. nor the Caldean Language, Jer. 5.15.

But although it be commonly thought the Hebrew Language was the common
Language of the Canaanites, yet it seems hard that the Holy and supposed
Primitive Language should be preserved only in the Posterity of accursed
Canaan, and from them derived to the Posterity of Abraham the Holy Seed.

As touching the Language of the Seres or Chinese, those that suppose it to be
the Primitive Language, do suppose that Noah's Ark first rested upon the
bordering Mountains of China, and that Country first peopled by the descendents
of Noah; that they were not at the building of Babel. But this seems to be but
a novel Conceit.

2. The Languages that were Secundo primae, were those that happened upon the
Confusion of Tongues, which the Jews suppose to be 70 or 72, from that place
Psalm. 78. verse. 55. He has divided the Nations according to the number of the
Princes of Israel, or the Sanhedrim; but whether they were so many, or more, or
less, is not possible to determine.

Some suppose those Languages which are ordinarily called Linguae matrices,
were some of those Languages that arose at the Confusion of Tongues, and are
called Matrices, because diverse other, especially of the European, seem to be
much derived from them, namely, the Greek, Latin, Teutonick, Sclavonick,
Scythian, Hungarian, Finnick, Cantabrian, Irish, British, Arabic, Frisick,
Illyrian, and Jarygium.

But though these are taken to be Linguae matrices, yet much of their Languages
seem to be borrowed from the Hebrew and Phenician Language; and though they
suppose those Linguae matrices might arise at the Confusion of Tongues, yet
they were not totally estranged from that common Language which universally
obtained before that Confusion, which some think as before, was the Hebrew;
some relics of which Primitive Language were notwithstanding that Confusion
retained as Indications and Monuments thereof, as Bochart in his Phaleg, and
out of him Mr. Gale in his Book called The Court of the Gentiles, endeavors
largely to prove.

3. The third sort of Languages, which I call Secundo secundae, are those that
have either been derived from those that were Primo secundae, or that have been
compounded out of other Languages, or taken up de novo of later times, or by
all of those ways have obtained in several parts of the World, as the French,
Italian, Spanish, Danish, English, and diverse others.

Now if it can be well deduced that there was some ancient Primitive Language
that by reasonable Evidence can appear to be the common Root of all other
Languages, it is reasonable to conclude, That surely there was some one common
Head that was the Beginning of Mankind; for without this Supposition it is
hardly possible that there should be a common Language at any time in the
World, from which as from a common Root all the Languages of the World should
in process of time be derived.

But this Evidence also taken singly, lies open to some Objections that weaken
it upon these Considerations.

1. We have not clear Evidence enough of any single Primitive Language, nor
what that Primitive Language was if such there has been: there might be in
process of time a thousand successive Languages, and many that went before have
been lost, and succeeded by others.

2. Those similitudes of Words of one Language which are found in another, give
us no sufficient Demonstrations which of them was Primitive; the resemblances
of words signifying the same thing in the Hebrew and Greek Language prove no
more that the Hebrew was before the Greek, and lent Words to them, than that
the Greek was before the Hebrew, and lent the similitude of Words to them.

3. If we consider almost any Language not beforehand or by some after means
mancipated to Rules, we shall scarce find any that contain themselves in the
same Articulation, Accent or Pronunciation for the space of three or four
hundred Years, but are infinitely varied in process of time from what they
formerly were. The English Language that was common and usual three or four
hundred Years since, is scarce now intelligible by us; yea and the Greek
Tongue, though a regular Language, and reduced to a Grammatical Canon, yet a
good Grammatical Grecian can hardly understand a Native Grecian, nor a Native
Grecian the other at this day: yea we are told by Quintilian, as I remember,
that in Rome it self in process of time the Latin Language was so altered, that
the Priests could not readily understand the Hymns composed for their
Idol-Service by the ancient Priests of Rome.

4. As succession of Ages, so variety of places in the same Country and Nation
gives such variety of Dialects in the same Language, that one side of a Kingdom
scarce understands the other: witness the four Dialects of the Greek Language,
and the several Pronunciations of the French in several parts of France, and
the various Dialects of the English in the North and West that render their
Expressions many times unintelligible to the other, and both scarce
intelligible to the Midland: various Provinces of the same Kingdom, and that at
first used the same Language, in process of time use various manners of
Pronunciation, which in time also alter the structure of the Words as they are
spoken or written, which in farther process of time alters the Language into
several Dialects, as it did in Greece and other places.

5. Every Nation has a certain humor or disposition appropriate to it, which
by a kind of Natural necessity frames the very Air of Words, Speech and Accents
accommodate and similar to that Natural humor or inclination; -- Graiis dedit
ore rotundo
Musa loqui --
In the very frame of the Speech of the Spaniard, Italian, French, Dutch,
Welsh, English we may find a kind of Image of their Complexions and Tempers,
suiting and framing their Speech, Accents, Tone, Pronunciation: Vowels conform
thereunto, no less than in their Gate and Gesture; and this very Account would
in a little time diversifie one and the same Language in the Mouths of several
Nations, so that in a little space they would not be the same.

6. Commerce and Trade with foreign Nations gives great alterations in
Languages, each Country borrowing some Words, Accents, or Expressions from the
other, whereby in a little time it is quite altered, and becomes a mixed
confused Language, made up of the Ingredients of several Languages.

7. As in Clothes, so in Words, Phrases, and Expressions there commonly grow
new Fashions, whereby it comes to pass that the same Words and Phrases that
were not used, or scarce understood in former Ages, become in Fashion,
Reputation and Vogue in another Age; and this obtains sometims from the Courts
of Princes, wherein a Word a little in request soon grows in fashion with the
Gentry, and from them at the third hand passes over to the Tradesman or
Countryman.

8. Many times the Literati and Scholares coin new Words, and sometimes in
common Speech or Writing in their Native Language, give Terminations and
Idiotisms suitable to their Native Language, unto Words newly invented or
translated out of other Languages; which is sometimes done out of Affectation,
sometimes out of Necessity, by reason of the want of sufficient significancy in
their own Language; and when such Phrases or Words come abroad in printed
Books, in Sermons or Orations, they become more general, and incorporate into
the Native Language.

9. Many Languages of Countries are greatly altered and mingled, and sometimes
totally eradicated and lost by Invasions and Victories, or by transmission of
Colonies by Foreign Princes of a different Language. Thus by the chacing the
Britons out of England into Wales, their Language was wholly exterminated from
hence with them, and by the successive Incursions and Invasions of the Saxons,
Danes and Normans, the English Language grew a kind of mixture of them all,
which yet in process of time has been so much varied, that the English that
was written in the time of H. 1. is not now intelligible.

It is true that those Languages that are not now Native, though sometimes they
were, but are preserved in Writing or Rules or Canons, have long kept their
simplicity, as the Hebrew, Greek and Latin, which have been indeed preserved
from being lost by vulgar use, but when a Language once becomes of vulgar use,
it soon loses its integrity; thus the Latin degenerated into the Italian, and
the very Hebrew and Greek more barbarous by much where they are popularly used,
than in the ancient Writings, wherein they have been preserved and kept to
their ancient integrity.

Considering therefore the great instability of Languages, the great variations
and changes to which they are subject, the great alterations that they have
had, the great difficulty of finding any Language which (upon grounds barely of
Reason, without Divine Revelation) we can safely call Original, and the great
difficulty of deducing other Languages entirely from it: It is hard for us
singly to lay any weight upon this Instance, to prove the Origination of Man
upon a mere Moral Account or Topical Ratiocination thereof.

CAP. V. The Fourth Instance of Fact seeming to evince the Novity of Mankind,
namely, the Inceptions of the Religions and Deities of the Heathens, and the
deficiency of this Instance.
REligion seems to be as connatural to Humane Nature as Reason, and possibly a
more distinguishing property of Humane Nature than it: For almost in all
sensible Creatures, especially those of the more perfect kind, a certain Image
or weak Adumbration of something like Reason appears, yet we find in no
Creatures below Mankind any thing like Religion, or Veneration of a Deity: And
those faint Conjectures touching something analogical to Religion observed in
Elephants, are too weak to give any reasonable admission thereof in them.

Religion therefore seems as ancient as Humanity it self, at least of some kind
of dress or fashion or other: therefore if we can arrive at the Inception of
Religion, Veneration of a Deity, and those Rites, Adorations, and Services that
result from thence; we have reason to conjecture that the Inception of Mankind
was not long before.

And because the Inception of Mankind is not doubted by Jews or Christians, who
acknowledge the Truth and Divine Authority of the Scriptures, that reveal and
discover the Origination both of Mankind and the World, but the doubt only
rests among those of the Gentile World; it has been thought a reasonable
Argument to convince the Heathen World of the Origination of Mankind, by
discovering the Origination not only of the Religious Worship of the Heathens,
but even of those very Deities which they celebrated and venerated, and paid
that Religious Worship unto.

And this Discovery of the Origination of their Heathenish Deities has been
endeavored by two Methods: First, by following the ancient Histories of the
Phenicians, Egyptians, Grecians, and Romans; by which means they have traced up
most if not all their Heathenish Deities to their Original, and their first
Inauguration into Deities; whereas they were in their original for the most
part but Men of great Note and Merit or Power in the Ancient World, or such,
who outgoing the ordinary rate of Mankind by some signal Excellence, Learning
or Industry, were by the admiring inferior sort of Men translated into the
Opinion and Veneration of Gods: and then there wanted not Poets and Priests to
derive from them a Race and Progeny of Gods, which swelled into great Numbers,
Pedigrees, and Genealogies of Gods and Heroes, Theogonia, which filled the
superior World as Men filled the inferior World by successive Generations:
And those Authors that have given us an account of the Apotheoses, the
Inauguration of the Heathenish Deities and their successions, are many;
especially, Diodorus Siculus in his first six Books; Eusebius in his first and
second Book De Praeparatione Evangelii, out of the Ancient Monuments of the
Phenicians, Egyptians and Grecians; and Clemens Alexandrinus in lib. 1.
Stromat. who gives us an account of the Apotheoses of Bacchus, Hercules,
Aesculapius, Isis, Ceres, Serapis, Apis and others, many of them, if not all,
having their being and translation into Deities after the time of Moses; and
from the various Denominations of those Heathenish Deities, some had one Name
among the Egyptians, another among the Phenicians, another among the Syrians,
another among the Grecians; though possibly the Persons themselves were for the
most part the same.

Secondly, By carrying up the Original of most of the Ancient Deities of the
Heathens, and resolving them into Noah, and his Sons and Descendents, deducing
by very probable Arguments that Noah was Saturn, Chronos, etc. that Japhet was
Neptune, Ham Jupiter, Shem Pluto, Canaan Mercury, Nimrod Bacchus, Magog
Prometheus: vid. Bochart. in Phaleg, l. 1. Vossius de Idololatriae origin and
progressu, l. 1. and others that have followed those Learned and Ingenious
Authors.

But this Inference of the Recentness of Mankind from the Recentness of these
Apotheoses and Origination of Gentile Deities, seems also too weak to bear up
this Supposition of the Novitas humani generis.

1. Because although possibly some of their Heathenish Deities might have been
of a late Edition, yet there might be many more that might be ancienter, who
either were antiquated and forgotten, or they were translated to other Names
and Successors; it faring with Idol Gods as it does with Words or Languages, --
Cecidere cadentque,
Quae jam sunt in honor vocabula. --


The lust of Men's Fancies in Propagation of Deities was endless and unsatiable.
We are told out of Varro that there were no less than thirty thousand
Heathenish Gods and Deities of all sorts, which were known in his time; and how
many more there might be whose Names and Worship were long before that time
antiquated, we cannot easily conjecture: only in all probability they were far
more than those that survived. And therefore possibly there might be a Race and
Succession of Apotheoses long antecedent to those whose Originals we have given
us in Ancient Histories. We see how easily the Roman Calendar swells with new
Consecrations of Saints, and to what a multitude they have grown within less
than the compass of one thousand Years; and possibly had the World continued
many thousand years before it is supposed to have began, there might have been
an interminate succession of imaginary Deities, though many or most of their
Names are now unknown, or the times of their Consecrations forgotten.

2. But yet farther, if we should suppose that this course of Idolatry began
even shortly after the time of Noah and his three Sons, yet it is granted of
all hands that the World had stood above 1600 Years before the invention of
this kind of Idolatry: So that ex confesso this was not the first Religion in
the World, neither did this Religion tread upon the Heels of the Origination of
Mankind if Mankind was, and was 1600 Years before those Deities were found out;
and so this Religion cannot pretend to be coeval with Mankind, nor give us any
sufficient Indication of the Recentness of Mankind.

3. But yet farther, it is very apparent that this Veneration of Men
Consecrated into Deities was not the ancientest Idolatry, much less the
ancientest Religion of the World: The Worshipping of the Host of Heaven, the
Sun, Moon, and Stars was an Idolatry that way far more ancient than this of the
Heathen Gods made of Men: and this is an Evidence of the antecedency of that
Idolatry of the Stars and Heavenly Bodies, in as much as when these new
consecrated Deities were made, they did as it were incorporate and affix them
to that more ancient Idolatry, transferring the Names of most of their Gods to
the Heavenly Bodies or Asterisms; as Saturn to the Star of Saturn, Mars, Venus,
Mercury, Jupiter to the several Planetary Bodies; and to the Sun and Moon a
prodigious number of Deities, as to the Sun, Phoebus, Apollo, Osyris, Horus,
and many more; to the Moon, Diana, Hecate, Venus, Astarte, and many others: So
that although we should allow the first Origination of those Heathenish Deities
to have been when Historians give us an account, and not before; yet the
Idolatry performed to the Heavenly or Elementary Bodies, the Sun, Moon, Stars,
Fire, Ether, etc. might have had a long practice among Men before the
Invention of these later Deities.

4. But yet farther; in as much as Truth is certainly more ancient than Error,
we have reason to think that even before the ancientest Form of Idolatrous
Worship in the World, even that of the Heavenly and Elementary Bodies, there
was a True Worship of the True GOD, which might continue many Ages before any
sort of Idolatry prevailed in the World. So that it would be too rash to
conclude, That because many of the Heathenish Deities had their known Original,
that therefore no other Religion anteceded it, or that that Religion soon
followed the Origination of Mankind.

5. Besides all this there seems in the World, or at least it is very possible
to suppose certain vicissitudes or relations not only in Arts and Sciences, as
is before observed, but even in the Religions professed, which may obtain
successively both in Places and Ages according to several vicissitudes: We see
that in the Country of Palestine shortly after the Flood Idolatry obtained
among the Canaanites and the descendents of Ham; after that, the Knowledge and
Worship of the True GOD among the Israelites for many Ages; and after that, a
degeneration of the greatest part thereof to Idolatry again in the Country of
the Ten Tribes, and in a great part among the other Two Tribes: after that a
Reformation and Restitution of the true Worship of God, in the return from the
Captivity until Christ came; then the most sound and perfect Religion, namely
Christianity, obtained for some time; then the return of Paganism, under
persecuting Roman Emperors; then the prevalence again of the Christian
Religion, under Constantine and some that succeeded him; then Popish
Superstition; after that Turcism and Mahumetanism, especially in the parts of
Greece, Palestine, Egypt and other parts of Asia and Africa. Thus various
Professions of Religion have had various Vicissitudes, Revolutions and
successive Alterations in Places and Ages.

Albertus Magnus, as I remember, with somewhat too much curiosity, and somewhat
transported with too much fancifulness toward the Influences of the Heavenly
Motions and Astrological Calculations, supposes that Religion has had its
successive Alterations and Seasons according to certain Periodical Revolutions
of the Planets: to the first Ages of the World he assigns the Presidency of
Saturn in matters of Religion, and so downward, according to several successive
assigned Periods. These are vain Conjectures, but they serve to explain what I
mean, namely, That there may be successive Alterations and Changes in the
professed Religion of the World in successive Ages, and successively in the
same and other places of the World; whereby it will be hard to determine the
Epoch of the Commencement of Mankind by any one Form or Shape of Religion
professed in the World; for there may be some Religion antecedent to that which
to us in this Age appears to have been the ancientest; but still with this
probable Conclusion, That since Truth is more ancient than Error, it seems,
that if there were any Religion that was Primitive in the World, it was the
true Religion and true Worship of the true God, and not Idolatry, or
worshipping of Men or Idols, or the Works of Nature: and consequently, that
although we had no Monuments extant of any Religion ancienter than Idolatry,
yet we had no reason to conclude that that Idolatrous Religion was the most
ancient, or coeval to the Origination of Mankind: but rather, that Mankind had
an Existence in the World much antecedent to such Idolatrous Worship, wherein
the true God was for many Ages and Generations truly worshipped; and that
partly by the subtilty of the Enemy of Mankind, partly by the apostasy and
corruption of Humane Nature, and partly by the gradual decay of that true and
ancient Tradition of the true Worship of the true God, Idolatry and
Superstition prevailed and obtained in the World.

So that although it be a most certain Truth that Mankind had an Origination,
and was not without Beginning, yet the Evidence of the Origination of their
Idolatry and Idolatrous Deities, is no sufficient Proof or Evidence of the
Origination of Mankind.

CAP. VI. A Fifth Consideration concerning the Decays especially of the Humane
Nature, and whether there be any such Decays; and what may be collected
concerning the Origination of Man upon that Supposition.
THis Argument has been excellently handled by Dr. Hakewell, I shall therefore
be the shorter in it, yet somewhat I shall say concerning it.

Some of those that have been inquisitive into the Nature of Man have observed
two things, which if they were true, would certainly give us an irrefragable
Argument against the Eternal Succession of Mankind, viz. 1. That the Ages of
Men grow gradually shorter and shorter: 2. That the Quantity of Humane Bodies
was ordinarily heretofore much larger than they are now, and by a kind of
gradual decay of that Natural Vigor and Strength they decline to a smaller
Stature. Thus Plutarch inter placita Philosophorum tells us out of Empedocles,
Nostrae aetatis homines priscis comparatos infantium instar esse; and yet
Empedocles lived upon the point of 2000 Years since, and Plutarch near 1500
Years since: and Pliny in the 7th Book of his Natural History, cap. 16. tells
us the same, In plenum autem, cuncto mortalium generi minorem indies fieri
propemodum observatur, rarosque patribus proceriores, consumente ubertate
seminum exustione, in cujus vices nunc vergat aevum; and some Instances are
given there and by the Additional Notes thereupon, of the great Sceletons of
Men's Bodies found in several Ages, and that, Jam ante annos mill vates ille
Homerus non cessavit minora corpora mortalium quam prisca conqueri.

And indeed if this natural Decrease of the Ages of Men's Lives and their Bodily
Statures had held such a proportion, it would not only avoid the possibility of
an Eternal Succession of Mankind, but would also give us a very late Epoch of
their first Origination: For a very ancient Original, accompanied with such a
natural Decrease of Age and Stature by reason of that insensible but
unintermitted decay of the strength and stature of Nature, would have long
since reduced Mankind to be but Ephemeraes in duration, and little other than
Insects in extent, or rather wholly determined, and put a Period to the whole
Species infinite Ages past.

But it seems that these are mistaken complaints both of Empedocles and Homer;
for surely in so great a Period as 2000 or 1500 Years elapsed since the death
of those Men the experiment of that Decrease would have been much more obvious
and observable than we find it at this day. And although the nature of Mankind
and of other Creatures subject to corruption, if left to it self without the
continued Subsidium and Influence of the Divine Providence, would soon have
fallen into dissolution per saltum, and without the incessant and corroding
invasions of so long a time; yet that same Power that first gave Being to
things, has supported their successive Generations in the same state and
natural vigor that it ever had, abating those accidental occurrences that Sin,
Excess, and other occurrences have brought into things.

First therefore as touching the Decays of the Age of Man's Life; we do indeed
learn from the Sacred Scripture (for no Humane History reaches so high) That
the Lives of the Ancients were very long, especially before and for some time
after the Flood; and this the Divine Wisdom, Providence and Goodness ordered
for most excellent Ends, namely, the Peopling of the New World, and that
without any other means than his own Will, or at least by means unknown to us:
in Arphaxad the Son of Shem the great Age of the Ancients was cut to halves,
namely to 440 Years; and in his Grandchild Peleg it was again cut to halves,
for he lived but 242 Years; and it is also true that afterward gradually to
the days of Moses the Lives of Men became shorter and shorter, till they fixed
in that common Period of the Life of Man of 70 or 80 Years: and although it be
true that the Histories of former times give us some account of longer Lives of
Men, as the Lives of Moses, Aaron, Phinehas and some others, and those
mentioned by Pliny, lib. 7. cap. 48. and some in our own Experience; yet Moses
himself states the ordinary Standard of the Life of Man to be 70, or at most 80
Years. Psalm. 90.10. 2 Samuel 19.32, 35. And this we shall find true upon the
consideration of the Chronological Account of the Years of the ancient
Patriarchs and Kings that succeeded Moses; as likewise of the time that the
Israelites lived in the Wilderness, all which that were twenty Years old and
upwards at the coming into the Wilderness when the Spies were sent into Canaan,
which was shortly after their coming thither; all these I say, except Joshua
and Caleb, dyed within the 40 Years Peregrination in the Wilderness: and at
this stay the ordinary Age of Men has been for these 4000 Years, abating those
casualties either of Diseases or other Accidents that have shortened the
ordinary complete Ages of Men's Li(...)

2. As touching the Stature of Men, it must be agreed that in former Ages there
have been Giants and Men of extraordinary Stature: some Instances we have in
the same Pliny and other Heathen Authors, and many more in the History of the
Old Testament: But these were out of the ordinary and regular course of Nature.

But it seems that ordinarily in all Ages the Statures of Men have little
differed from what they now are, though according to the difference of Climates
and situations there has been ordinarily and regularly a difference in the
Stature of Men; many times Marsh-Countries, and those that are of a temperate
heat, producing Men of a larger size than Mountainous or those Parts that are
nearer the Sun, as some parts of Spain and Galicia.

And that the ordinary Stature of Men's Bodies is much the same now as anciently
in the same Places or Regions appears by undeniable Experience: 1. The Bodies
of the Egyptians that have been exsiccated into Mummy, and lain some thousands
of Years, are found to have the same Stature or very little differing from what
they now have; neither could they shrink into a shorter dimension by the length
of time, considering that the Bones of all parts are joined in their
extremities, and could not become shorter without putrefaction, which occurrs
not in those exsiccated Bodies.

2. As the first practical Rudiments of Arithmetic were taken from the Parts
of the Humane Body in the Numeri primarii or Digitales, so in Geometry it is
evident that the first notation of Measures was taken from the Parts of the
Body of Man, and very ancient both among the Hebrews, Greeks and Romans, and
these hold still the same proportion as they did anciently.

These Measures according to the Jewish, Arabian and Egyptian Account are as
follows.

6 Barley-corns make 1 Digit.

An Inch consisted of 8 Barley-corns, or which is all one, one Digit and of a
Digit.

The Palm consisted of 3 Inches, or 4 Digits, or 24 Barley-corns, mentioned
Exodus 25.25.

Spithama, a Span consisted of 9 Inches, or 12 Digits; the half of a Cubit,
namely, the utmost extent between the extremity of the Thumb and the little
Finger extended to their greatest dimension. This was the Measure of Aarons
Breast Plate. Exodus 28.16.

A Foot consisted of 4 Palms, or 12 Inches, or 16 Digits, or 96 Barley-corns.

A Cubit, the interval between the Elbow and the extremity of the longest
Finger; this was the Ordinary Cubit, it consisted of 6 Palms, which allowing 3
Inches to a Palm is 18 Inches, or a Foot and a half: vid. Kircher in Oedipo,
Tom. 2. Class. 8. where writing of the Egyptian Cubit, Habet autem omnis
Cubitus sex Palmos, and Palmus quatuor digitos, and Digitus sex grana hordei.
This was the usual Mosaical Legal Cubit which they used in Measures of
Building; the length of Ehud's Dagger, Judges 3.16. and that measure whereby
the dimensions of the Ark are measured: though besides that common Cubit they
had among the Jews and Egyptians two larger sorts of Cubits, one called Cubitus
Regius, which was 3 Inches longer than the ordinary Cubit; and the other called
Cubitus Geometricus, which was double to the common Cubit, viz. 3 Foot, or
according to others, 6 common Cubits, viz. 9 Foot.

These Measures according to the Roman or Latin Account are as follows.

4 Barley-corns breadth make 1 Digit.

An Inch [Uncia] consisted of 5 Barley-corns and of a Barley-corn, or which is
all one, the breadth of the Thumb, or, 1 Digit and of a Digit.

The Palm consisted of 3 Inches, or which is all one, of 4 Digits, or 16
Barley-corns.

Spithama, the Span consisted of 3 Palms, or 9 Inches, or 12 Digits, or 48
Barley-corns.

Pes, a Foot consisted of 4 Palms, or 12 Inches, or 16 Digits, or 64
Barley-corns.

Cubitus, a Cubit consisted of 6 Palms, or 18 Inches, or 24 Digits, or 96
Barley-corns.

Gressus, a Step, two Foot and a half; in Greek (...).

Passus, a Pace, consisting of 2 Steps, or of 5 Foot according to the Roman
Account, but according to the Greek Account 6 Roman Feet and; so that the
Grecian Pace was longer than the Roman by a Foot and quarter.

Orgya, or a Fathom, the distance between the extremities of the Fingers of
each Hand, the Arms being extended, which very near answers the length of any
person from Head to Foot; and to reduce it to a certainty, the usual estimate
thereof is 6 Foot. Vide de hac re Danielem Angelocratorem de Ponderibus and
Mensuris.

The usual Computation according to a medium or proportion of the height of a
Man is 6 Foot, or a regular Fathom, or 4 Cubits: So Vitruvius, Pes est sexta
pars altitudinis corporis, Cubitus quarta: with this agrees Kircher, ubi supra;
Altitudo humana e quatuor communibus Cubitis Egyptiacis, unus quoque Cubitus
sex Palmis, Palmus quatuor digitis. So that the ordinary height of a Man is 96
Digits which the ancient Egyptians estimated to be equal to that Mystical Cubit
among them styled Passus Ibidis, or the Trigon that the Ibis makes at every
step, consisting of 3 latera, each 32 Digits, amounting in all to 96 Digits,
the common Measure of the procerity of a Man, or 4 common Cubits.

These were the very ancient estimates of distances taken from the Parts of a
Man, and their extent; namely, the Finger, the Thumb, the Span, the Cubit, the
Fathom, the Foot, the Step; and these were the estimates and reduction of them
to known and certain Measures, and these Proportions are still, even in our
Age, in Men that are of an ordinary stature: The Fingers breadth now as
anciently 6 Barly-corns breadth; the 4 Fingers or Palm about 3 Inches; the
Span, the Cubit, the Foot, the Step, the Fathom of the same extent and
dimension now as anciently, and the ordinary estimate of a tall Man 6 Foot now
as then; Witness our Qld Statute called Compositio Ulnarum and Perticarum; Tria
grana hordei sicca and rotunda ( viz. in length) faciunt pollicem, duodecim
pollices faciunt pedem, tres pedes faciunt ulnam, quinque ulnae and dimidium
faciunt perticam, quadraginta perticae in longitudine and quatuor in latitudine
faciunt acram. Whereby we have very plain reason to conclude that Empedocles
and Pliny were mistaken touching the gradual diminution of Humane Stature,
since those Measures that took their denomination and extent from the Parts of
Men held anciently that extent and length that the very same Parts in Men hold
in these times.

And truly if we look upon the progressive Growth and Periods in Humane Nature,
as also in all other perfect Animals, they hold regularly the same state and
order as they held in the most remote Ages whereof we have any Memorial in
Ancient Writings or Histories, The same time for the Formative process of the
Humane Embryo now as is recorded to have been usual in the times of Aristotle
and Hippocrates, viz. ordinarily in the beginning of the tenth Month. Aristot.
Hist. Animal. cap. 3, and 4, Hippocrat, de Carnibus, in fine.

The proportion of Stature the same now as anciently; they bred Teeth at 7
Months, Aristot. Hist. Animalium, l. 2. cap. 10. shedding and new breeding of
Teeth at 7 Years, Censorinus de Die Natali, cap. 14. and again breeding of the
novissimi maxillares or genuini dentes at 20. Arist. Hist. Animal. l. 2. cap.
4. At 5 Years of age in an ordinary growth the procerity is half of that which
will be attained at full age, Aristot. de Generat. Animalium, l. 1. cap. 18.
though Pliny l. 7. cap. 16. assigns that proportion to trimatos or 3 Years of
age, but mistakenly, as it seems.

The ordinary Period of the Humane Procreative Faculty in Males 65, or at most
70; in Females 45, or at most 50. Arist. Hist. Animal. l. 5. cap. 14.

The several Periods of the Ages of the Life of Man according to Hippocrates
divided into 7, viz. at 7, at 14, at 22, at 35, at 42, at 61, and from thence
to the end of Life, which at most is 81 or 84, upon the greatest ordinary
Account. Vide Rhodogin. l. 19. cap. 21.

So that although the Humane Nature, as to that part of it that is Corporeal,
is subject to changes and corruptions, and not of so firm and stable a
consistence as the Heavenly Bodies, and consequently not so capable of a
permanent and fixed constancy and continuation as they; yet by the constant and
unintermitted Influx of the Divine Providence this corruptible and mutable
Nature of Mankind, yea and of the other perfect Animals, is admirably preserved
in the same measure of extent, regular procedure, and length of duration, as it
has been many Thousands of Years since. Indeed it may be possibly true, that
Accidents, accidental Occurrences, Intemperance, ill and noxious Effluvia from
the Earth, Waters, and intemperature of the Air, and other Accidents may in
these latter Ages of the World produce some such Diseases and accidental
Disorders as may possibly more infest Mankind, and occasion more Mortality than
in former Ages. But as to the regular and ordinary course of Natural procedure
and state of things with Mankind, yea and other Animals, there seems to be
little or no decay or variation from what has been formerly (abating that
Concussion which the Perfection of the Humane Nature suffered by the first
Fall, and the shortning of Men's Lives, which is of another Consideration.)

And therefore I am not so apt to attribute that firm Consistency of the
Heavenly Bodies, their constant uninterrupted and invaried Motion, and those
other Indications of Permanency and Perpetuity, barely or singly to the
singular and indissoluble Texture of their Nature or Composition, as to that
incessant Influx and unintermitted Causality of the Divine Power and
Providence, which I so plainly see conserves almost an equal regularity in the
Motions, Processes, Succession, and Condition of poor, frail, Sublunary Bodies,
which in their little Period belonging to their specifical and individual
Nature, have the same regularities and orders now as formerly, and in the whole
Systeme of their specifical Nature preserved in the successive Individuals for
many thousands of years, obtain the same regularity, order, and method of
Existence, without decay, as it has always held.

This Supposition therefore of the gradual decay of the state of Humane Nature,
though in hypothesi it would strongly infer a late Origination of Man, yet it
is false in thesi, and so concludes nothing touching the Argument in hand,
namely, the Origination of Mankind in some determinate Point of Finite Duration.

An Ingenious Person, in a new Essay of Natural Philosophy, Entitled, New
Principles of Philosophy, Part. 2. Cap. 22. tells us: That the Sun or Fiery
Region gains gradually upon the Inferior Elements, so that the greatest
Declination of the Sun in the time of Hipparchus and Ptolemy was observed to be
23 degrees. 52 min. but is since found to be reduced to 23 degrees. 30 min. or 28 min.
which is a necessary Consequent of the Suns gradual approximation toward the
Earth: And if that should be so, it were a necessary Argument of the
Origination of the World, and with it of Mankind, within a certain Period of
Time. But we must not be over hasty in allowing of that Position; for every Day
gives us Instances how difficult it is exactly to find out the Distances of the
Heavenly Bodies, Lines, and Motions, especially when we come to measure them by
Minutes, or Parts of Minutes, which cannot be effected but by Mathematical
Instruments, which can never reach to a perfect exactness in this nature.

CAP. VII. The Sixth Evidence of Fact proving Novitatem generis humani, namely,
The History of the Patres familiarum, and the Original Plantation of the
Continents and Islands of the World.
IN Profane Authors and Historians we may find the Roots and Founders of many
Kingdoms, Monarchies, and States, either by Victories, or by Emigrations, or by
Intestine Commotions, or by common Consent of the People or Inhabitants: Thus
we find the Foundation of the later States or Monarchies in that Constitution
at least wherein they now stand, or in some former Ages stood; As the
Foundation of the English Monarchy in the Norman Conquest; and before that, the
Foundations of the Saxon and Danish Monarchies in this Kingdom, in the old
Histories of Hoveden, William of Malmsbury, and others. The like might be found
for the Foundation of the French, Spanish, and Danish Kingdoms, the Empire of
Germany, of the Grand Seignior, and others. And ancienter Histories give us an
account of the Foundation of the Roman Empire in Romulus, of the Grecian in
Alexander, of the Persian in Cyrus, of the Babylonian in Nabonassar, of the
Assyrian in Belus, Ninus, Semiramis. But yet, as is formerly observed, the
Discovery of these Originations of Civil Coalitions into Kingdoms and Empires,
do not lead us up to the Origination of Mankind, in the material Constituents
of these Kingdoms and Empires; for the Men that made up these Civil Bodies, or
at least their Ancestors, had a Being before, though perchance under a
different form of Civil Government, or under some other Names or Governor: As
the several States of Greece, before their coalition into one Kingdom under
Alexander, or Philip his Father, subsisted in several smaller Principalities or
Commonwealths. For these kind of Histories, though they afford us the Inception
of new Governors or Governments, the Capita Regiminum, yet they give us not the
Capita Familiarum: For though Romulus, for Instance, laid the Foundation of the
City and Monarchy of Rome, and became as it were the Parent of that City and
State, yet he was not the Parent of the Men that were the material Constituents
of it, for they were a Farrago, or Collection of many people that had their
Existence long before in themselves or their natural Progenitors. And upon the
same account it is, that although many Histories, as Diodorus Siculus,
Thucidides, Herodotus, and others, do give us some true and some fabulous
Derivations of the Names of Places or Countries, from the Men that seemed to be
the Heads or Roots of those Denominations, yet though they should be all
admitted to have truly given those Denominations to those Countries, it does by
no means follow, that they were the Parents of the Inhabitants thereof; but
they were such, as either by War, or Power, or Election of the People, presided
in those places, and gave them thereupon their denomination. Thus they tell us,
That Helen gave the denomination to that part of Greece which was called
Helenica, and those Grecians were called Helenistae. Pelasgus was he that gave
the denomination to the Pelasgi, another part of Greece. Latinus, to Latium and
the Latins. Danaus, to another Cept of the Grecians. Tenes, the Son of Cygnus,
to Tenedos. Cretas, to Creta and the Cretians. Italus, as some say, to Italia
and the Italians. Romulus, to Rome and the Romans. And infinite more such
Allusions of Denominations of Countries and People, from the Name of him that
presided either in the Army, or Colony, or Country unto which such
Denominations were after given: And yet Latinus, nor Pelasgus, nor Cretas, nor
Helen, were any more the Natural Parents of all those persons that were called
Pelasgi, or Cretenses, or Helenistae, or Latini; than Romulus was the Natural
Parent of all those people that were the first Inhabitants of Rome, or of those
that were after Incorporated and Infranchised into that Name, City, or
Government. Indeed these were such persons, as perchance were the Captains of
those Armies or Colonies that were commanded by them, or were such as were the
Heads or Founders of the Monarchies or Kingdoms that they thus founded; or such
as did sustinere nomen and personam totius communitatis, and thereby had the
Power and Privilege to give a Denomination to those Countries or People they
governed, calling them after their own Names: But they were not the Natural
Roots, or common Natural Parents of all them that bore their Denomination,
though it may be very likely they had some Children of their own which might
participate in that common Denomination.

This therefore singly considered, namely, the Denomination of People from some
one Person, is not sufficient to assure us that all those Persons that bore
that Denomination were derived by Natural Propagation from him whose Name they
so bear; but though it may be true that such a Denomination may be communicated
to such only, as descended by Natural Propagation from him, as I shall
hereafter instance, yet it may be otherwise: Therefore I have no reason to
conclude, That wheresoever I find a Society of Men bearing the Denomination of
one Man, that that Man was the Natural Parent of those that bear that
Denomination, unless I have some better Evidence than Allusion of Names, since
it is apparent in these Histories that it is otherwise.

Upon this Reason it seems plain, that it will not be possible from any
Profane History to find the Original Parents of any one Kingdom, much less of
Mankind. It is very evident indeed, that by help of a continuation of Profane
Histories or other common Monuments well kept together, the Genealogies and
Ramifications of some single Families even to a vast and numerous extension may
be preserved. But that will not do the business that I intend. For it is rare,
and beyond Example in any Author that I know, that the entire and complete
Pedigree of the whole Descendents of any particular Family is deduced down
through the space of a thousand Years last past; whereas such Instances as must
serve my turn must be such as are at least five thousand Years old, or
otherwise I shall fail in the application of this Topic now in hand to the
Matter in question.

It remains therefore that for Instances of such Antiquity useful to my purpose
I must resort to the ancientest History, namely, the History of Moses, which as
it is a History of the ancientest Times and Occurrences in the World, so it is
a History that was written at the greatest distance from this Time, and nearest
to the Times and Things whereof he writes; no History in the World being so
ancient as this by near eight hundred Years, for so long lived Moses the Author
of this Book before Homer the first Profane Historian that is extant.

And if any Man shall object against the competency of this Instance, 1.
Because the same Moses whom I use in this Topic is the person that asserts the
thing de quo ambigitur, namely the first Production of Mankind, and therefore
that he is incompetent in this Case: 2. Because all that urge the Testimony of
Moses urge him as infallible, divinely inspired, and so whatsoever he says
must not be contradicted; and upon such a Supposition there were a compendious
way of evincing the Question in hand of the Inception of Mankind, by telling us
that Moses who wrote by an infallible Spirit and Inspiration, tells us that
Mankind was Created by GOD about 6669 Years since according to the Seventy; and
so there needs no farther Reason, nor can be any farther Controversy touching
it.

To this I shall say these things: That although it is certain that Moses was
Inspired by an Infallible Spirit in what he wrote, and that he does in plain
terms tell us that Man was at first Created by Almighty God, and therefore to
me or any else that is satisfied of the Infallible Authority of the Holy
Scripture, this is sufficient to satisfy that the truth is as Moses has
informed us, and there needs no other Argument to support my Faith of the truth
hereof: yet because I am writing of those Natural and Moral Evidences of this
Truth that may be of strength enough to evince the truth of this Assertion,
upon the apparent Moral Evidences of the credibility of the Writings of Moses,
I shall here urge the Authority of Moses for the Proof of the Matters of Fact
in question as I would urge Herodotus or Livy to prove a Matter of Fact alleged
by them; and at this time and in this Dispute shall only use his Testimony as a
Moral Evidence of the Truth he asserts, as an Evidence of Credibility. And as I
shall not exact a Subscription to the Truths he delivers upon the account of
his Infallibility, so it is not reason to deny that Credibility of what he
relates, which would be allowed to a Profane Author; especially when it
carries with it singly, without the contribution of the Supposition of a Divine
Authority, as great an evidence of truth as any History in World besides.

And as to that which is said, That the Supposition of the truth of what Moses
asserts, is to suppose the thing controverted, because Moses asserts the
Creation of Mankind: I say, 1. That I shall not at all instance in that
Assertion as to determine the Question, but only so far forth as it is a Moral
Evidence of the truth of it; namely, That this was a thing believed near 4000
Years since by Wise Men, such as Moses was, and by them that were much nearer
to the time wherein the Origination of Mankind and those other Matters of Fact
that are contributory to the Proof thereof was transacted; and therefore in
common Reason must needs have a clearer Tradition and Evidence of the truth in
this matter than the Ages so many thousand Years after; but this I shall
reserve to its proper place. 2. In this place I shall not at all insist upon
the Tradition of Moses touching the Creation of Man, but only upon those
Historical Narratives delivered by Moses relating to such Matters of Fact that
were nearer his time, and such as he might very reasonably know and deliver as
an Historiographer; namely, the Propagation of Mankind after the Flood, and the
Reduction of most of the considerable Nations of the World to their several
Roots or Parents by Natural Propagation, and the credibility of his Relation
touching it: Though even the credibility of this Relation of his gives a great
Evidence and Attestation, even upon a Moral account to what he writes touching
the Creation of Man, and those parts of the History antecedent to the Flood.

The Sum therefore of the Mosaical History that I shall in this place make use
of, is this:

1. That a Universal Flood was brought upon the Earth in the Year 1656 after
the supposed Creation of Man according to the Jewish Account, although the
Septuagint allows a longer Period between the Creation and the Flood.

2. That by that Universal Flood all Mankind were destroyed except eight
persons, namely, Noah, his Wife, his three Sons, Shem, Japhet, and Ham, and
their Wives.

3. That all the Race of Mankind after this Flood, were derived by natural
generation from these three Sons of Noah and their Wives.

4. That the particular Descendents from these three Sons of Noah, are truly
described and set forth in the 9th, 10th, and 11th Chapters of Genesis by their
several Names, and drawn down from that Root to the filling and peopling of the
whole Earth: Genesis 32. These are the Families of the Sons of Noah, after their
Generations, in their Nations; and by these were the Nations divided in the
Earth after the Flood.

5. That after the Flood, in the time of Phaleg, the Languages of the World,
especially of the families of Cham and Japhet, were confounded, and the Nations
proceeding from these Families dispersed.

6. That the Family of the Israelites was deduced through these ensuing
Patriarchs, viz.

Sem. Arphaxad, born two years after the Flood, Anno mundi, 1658. Salah. Heber.
Peleg. Reu. Serug. Nahor. Terah. Abram. Isaac. Jacob marries Rachel and Leah,
Anno mundi, 2192. Levi, and the Twelve Patriarchs. Kohath. Amram. Moses, born
in the Year of the World, 2373.
So that from the Flood to the Birth of Moses the Descendents from Jacob grew
into a great Nation, for in the 80th Year of Moses Life the Males of the
Children of Israel, that were above 20 Years old, were above 600000, besides
the Levites, and besides Women, and Children that were under 20 Years old,
Numb. 2.32. and this great Increase of this People happened within the compass
of about 260 Years. And thus, according to the Jewish Account in the Holy Text,
the Period between the Flood and the Exitus of the People out of Egypt was
about 800 Years: But indeed the Account of the Septuagint, partly by the
Intersection of Cainan in the Genealogy, and partly by adding 100 Years to that
Technogonia of the Patriarchs before Abraham, have made the Period larger by
884 Years. So that according to that Account, the Exitus ex Egypto was at least
1684 Years after the Flood.

Now this History of Moses of the peopling of the World by the Posterity of
Noah, does these two things:

1. It gives us an Account of the Original of all the Nations in the World, not
from bare allusion of Names, nor from bare Coalitions into Civil Societies in
which they were formed, as Romulus was the Founder of the Populus Romanus, and
Pelasgus of the Pelasgi; but it gives us the Account of their Origination by
Propagation from the Natural Roots and Parents of them. 2. Although
notwithstanding this Instance, it may be possible, that though the Natural
Derivation of all Mankind was from Noah and his three Sons, yet the Progenitors
or Ancestors of Noah might have no Original, but might be Eternal, according to
the Hypothesis of Aristotle: yet when I find the same Author that gives me an
Account of the Derivation of all the World from Noah and his three Sons, and
that with most clear evidence and credibility, it gives me a very great Moral
Evidence of the truth of his Relation touching the first Origination of Man by
Creation: For doubtless both were derived to him by a constant Tradition from
those from whom he was descended, and it is not reasonable to suspect the truth
of the one, since we have a strong Moral Evidence for the truth of the other;
namely, the General Flood, and the preservation of Noah and his Family, and the
derivation of all Mankind from him and his Sons: He that has sufficient reason
to believe the History touching the latter, will have little reason to doubt
the truth of the Relation touching the Origination of Mankind; which as in it
self it seems reasonable, and no other possible Supposition to compass it but
by a Supernatural Production, so it has a most excellent congruity with the
subsequents of the Holy History touching the Descendents from the first Man,
the Flood, and the Re-peopling of the World from Noah.

Now the Moral Evidences of the credibility and truth of this History are these:

1. Moses that wrote it, had the best opportunity that could be to give a true
Narrative of this Fact touching the Flood, and the Productions of Mankind by
Generation from the Children of Noah: For, 1. It is evident by the Writings of
this Man that lie was a very Learned knowing Man, inquisitive after all sort of
Learning; a Man in great Power and Esteem in the Court of Egypt, and after that
a great Governor of a very great People, which he governed with admirable
Wisdom; and by this means had opportunity to furnish himself with all Monuments
and Evidences of Antiquity that might be conducible to the Discovery of former
things, and his Learning, Judgment and Ability to make an excellent use of
these helps was also remarkable. Again, 2. He lived not far remote from the
transaction of these things that he wrote, in comparison of the Writers or
Historians of after Ages: He dyed above 500 Years before Homer lived, which yet
is the ancientest Historian that Greece affords, and he lived within the Period
of 800 Years after the Flood and the division of the World among the Posterity
of Noah. Livy and other Historians give us an account of the Affairs of Rome
for above 600 Years before they were born, and many other Historians for a much
longer time, and we give them credit; and certainly such an Occurrence of such
remark as the Universal Flood and the Re-peopling of the World must needs be
fresh in memory for such a Period of about 800 Years; especially considering
that the Peopling of the World was a gradual and successive business, that must
needs preserve its Memory even upon its own account, for it was still current,
and many were concerned in it in the preservation of the laying the first
Foundations of their States and Republics. 3. As the Period or distance of
time was not great, so if we consider the longevity of Men's Lives in those
times, the Period was not much longer than three Generations, and so the
Tradition of things might be preserved fresh and certain unto the time of Moses
without any great difficulty: For Shem that was an Eyewitness of the Flood was
contemporary with Abraham, Abraham was contemporary with Jacob, Cohath the Son
of Levi was contemporary with Jacob, and with Amram the Father of Moses and Son
of Cohath: So that the Tradition of the Flood, and all that succeeded, might be
handed from Shem to Abraham, from Abraham to Jacob, from Jacob to Cohath, from
him to Amram, and from him to Moses. 4. Besides all this, without any more
Hands in the delivery of it over, it appears that Abraham, Isaac, Jacob were
great Men, had great Families and Wealth, were Men of great Note and
Observation for their Learning and Knowledge, Men that had great Expectations,
having a Promise of that Land to be given to their Posterity; and although they
kept Sheep and Cattle according to the custom of those Eastern Countries, yet
they were great Princes, and Men of excellent Education: doubtless Abraham
instructed his Son in all the Knowledge that he had received by Tradition from
his Ancestors, the like did Isaac, and after him Jacob. And therefore it might
very reasonably be thought that the Traditions of former things were kept fresh
and pure in this Line of Men.

And though we have no Writings extant ancienter than Moses, yet probably in
his time there might be Books, or at least Monuments and Inscriptions of things
done before his time, which might preserve the Memory of things past as well as
our Books do now: For it is not to be doubted but Writing was much ancienter
than Moses his time, Job speaks of Writing as a thing in use in his time, Job
19.23, 24. and Josephus tells us of certain Pillars erected by Seth, wherein
the Monuments of Learning and History were preserved, Joseph. l. 1. Antiquitat.
cap. 2. and Moses mentions Books written by others, either before or in his
time.

I very well know that Moses had a greater means to know all those things that
to a Jew or a Christian are of greater weight than all these; namely, the
Infallible Conduct, Revelation and Inspiration of the Divine Spirit: But the
truth is, we are fallen into an Age of many Christians in Name and Profession,
that yet think it below them to believe upon that account without some farther
Evidence that may satisfy their Reason; I have therefore subjoyned these and
the following Considerations to make it appear, That upon the bare account of
Moral Evidence more is to be said for the truth of the History of Moses than
may be said for the truth of any other History of things transacted before the
life of the Historiographer.

2. Again, we usually allow such an Historian to be worthy of belief, even in
those things whereof we have no other Evidence than the Credit of the
Historian, if we find many things delivered by him to have so great an Evidence
of Truth that they cannot well be doubted by any reasonable Man. I will admit
that Moses delivers many things that were antecedent to him, and can have now
no other Evidence than the Credit, Prudence, and Fidelity of the Historian
himself; as touching the Derivation of the Nations of the Earth from the
several Sons of Noah, and though possibly when he wrote there was a vigorous
and authentical Tradition or other authentic Evidence of the Truth of them,
which it may be is now so lost that we have no other Evidence thereof but the
bare Relation of Moses (this I do for the present admit, though in the sequel
it will appear that there are other concurrent or collateral Evidences that
assert and attest it) yet it is plain that the same Moses writes many things
that have so undoubted and so solid a Tradition asserting it, that no Man can
doubt it that will not first deny his own Reason. As for instance, Can there be
any doubt but that the Family of the Israelites were derived from Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, and the 12 Patriarchs; that they were brought out of Egypt
under the Conduct of Moses; that they lived in the Wilderness forty Years, and
were there miraculously fed by Quails and Manna, since this was written in that
very Time and Age that could and would have contradicted it, if false? Can
there be any doubt but the History of his making the Ark and the Tabernacle
were true, since both continued for many hundred Years after? Can there be any
doubt of the History of the Fiery Serpents, and the Cure of their Biting by the
Brazen Serpent, which continued in the Wilderness until the time of Hezekiah,
which was many hundred Years after, with an unquestionable Tradition of the
reason of its Making? Can there be any doubt whether he divided the Land of
Canaan, in such manner as is set down, in his life time, namely, to the two
Tribes and a half on the farther side of Jordan; and his Prescripts for the
future dividing of the rest, since it was enjoyed according to those Prescripts
for many hundreds of Years after, and part of it until the coming of Christ?
Can there be any doubt that he gave those Laws Moral, Judicial and Ceremonial
recorded by him, since those very Laws have been for the space of near two
thousand Years the very Rule and Model by which the Sacred and Civil Concerns
of that People were always ruled and governed, and that in contemplation of the
same Law that was given by the Hand of Moses, and so recorded in his Books of
Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers and Deuteronomy? I say we have not greater Evidence
that there was such a Man as Alfred, Edward the Confessor, or William the
Conqueror; or that there were such Laws of the Confessor, such a Survey of
England called Doomsday made by William the Conqueror, such an Abbey founded by
him in Memory of his Victory in Sussex called Abbatia de Bello; such Laws made
by H. 1. as are transcribed in the Red Book of the Exchequer under that name;
such a Charter of King John made at Reningmead, or such a Charter as Magna
Charta made by King H. 3. than we have that there were such Laws, such
Distributions of the Land of Canaan, and such things done in Egypt and the
Wilderness as are recorded by Moses. The Moral Evidence that arises from this
Consideration is this; That since in these things that are capable of an
incomparable Evidence of Credibility in respect of the time wherein they were
done (though very ancient, and exceeding the Age of any other Author) we find
such indisputable Evidence of Truth, we have reason to give credit to the same
Author relating the Derivation and Beginning of Nations from the Sons of Noah,
though in respect of the greater Antiquity thereof we have not any other
concurrent Testimony but that of Moses: And the rather, though we have not
those other Evidences thereof, yet Moses might have as unquestionable Evidences
of the things transacted between his time and the Flood, which at the greatest
Account was not above 1600 Years, but by the Jewish Account about 800 Years
before his time, as we now have of those things which were transacted in the
time of Moses, which is above twice 1600 Years distant from our time.

3. Besides the Relation of the Traduction of the several Nations of the World
from the Sons of Noah, delivered by Moses in that short Pedigree or Extract,
Genesis 10. we have very many probable Evidences of the consent of all succeeding
Ages to that Genealogy of the World; as, 1. The common Tradition of those Ages
that succeeded shortly after Moses, which commonly esteemed them so descended:
2. The Analogy of their several Names of the Countries wherein Moses supposed
the first Fathers fixed, as Canaan, Misraim or Egypt, Chittim, Assure or
Assyria, and infinite more of this kind which are not needful here to be
remembered, since Bochart and those that have transcribed out of him give us
abundant Instances. Neither is it reasonable to object against this that which
is before observed in relation to other Allusions of this kind, namely, That
those Denominations of Places might not be so much from the Roots of those
Nations or Families, or from the Captains or Governors that gave Names to those
Countries they conquered; because the Historian Moses gives us in express terms
the reason of the Denomination to be from the very Parental Roots of those
People or Families: and 2. Because those Heads of Countries or Nations who were
nearer to Moses time gave the Denomination to the Countries which in effect
they peopled; as Edomites to the Posterity of Edom, Moabites and Ammonites to
the Posterity of the two Sons of Lot, Madian to the Posterity of Abraham by
Keturah, and many more: And we have as great reason to suppose that these grew
and increased into great Nations in the time of Moses, since the People of
Israel who descended from a later Stock than any of these within the space of
little more than 200 Years, increased into so great a People, that in their
going out of Egypt their Males of above 20 Years old amounted to 600000,
whereof use will be made hereafter.

The late Discovery of the vast Continent of America and Islands adjacent,
which appears to be as populous with Men, and as well stored with Cattle almost
as any part of Europe, Asia, or Africa, has occasioned some difficulty and
dispute touching the Traduction of all Mankind from the two common Parents
supposed of all Mankind, namely Adam and Eve; but principally concerning the
storing of the World with Men and Cattle from those that the Sacred History
tells us were preserved in the Ark. And the Objection runs thus:

It seems apparent by all Geographical Descriptions of this lower World, that
the whole Continent of America and the adjacent Isles thereof are no way
contiguous to any parts of Asia, Europe, or Africa, but disjoined from the same
by huge and vast Oceans; divided from the Western Coasts of Europe and Africa
by the vast Atlantic Ocean; from the North parts of Europe by the great Frozen
Seas lying between it and Greenland, which seems to be the Northern Coast of
America; from the North-east part of Asia, Tartary and Cathay by the Fretum
Anian; from the East parts of China and the Philippine Islands by the Oceanus
Pacificus of above 2000 Leagues breadth, and is divided from the great lately
discovered Island del Fogo by the Straits of Magellan, and that Island again
divided from the uttermost Southern Continent (if any be) by a great Sea, which
though not formerly known to the Europeans and Asiaticks, being divided from
Asia and Africa by the great Indian Ocean, yet has been lately discovered by
Le Maire.

It is also evident that this vast Continent and the greatest part of the
Islands near adjacent to it are well stored with Men, and Beasts of all sorts:
Laetius, in his Disquisition touching the Original of the Americans, in his 8th
Observation gives us an account of above thirty Millions of Americans destroyed
by the Spaniards in those Parts of America that they have usurped to their own
Dominion, which is not the hundredth part of that great Continent.

The Inhabitants of this Continent as they greatly differ among themselves, so
they extremely differ from the Asiaticks, Europeans and Africans in their
Language and Customs, they recognize no Original from these Parts: it is true,
they have some resemblance of the Scythians or Tartars in some of their
barbarous Customs, and some Words they have which seem to carry a congruity
with Words of other Nations; But these are but slender Evidences to prove their
Traduction from Asia, Africa, or Europe, especially since no Monument is extant
that gives an account of their Traduction or Migration thither; and the rather,
because it was a World wholly unknown to the Europeans, Africans and Asiaticks,
till the Discovery thereof made by Americus Vesputius and Christopher Columbus
which is but of late time.

Again, Acosta tells us in his 4th Book, Cap. 36. there are diverse perfect
Animals of diverse kinds in America which have none of the same kind in Europe,
Asia or Africa, as their Pacos, Guanacos, and Indian Sheep; and on the other
side, many species of Birds and Beasts in these Countries which are not found
in America.

And upon these Premises they thus argue:

That since by all Circumstances it is apparent that America has been very
long inhabited, and possibly as long as any other Continent in the World, and
since it is of all hands agreed that the supposed common Parents of the rest of
Mankind, Adam, Noah and his three Sons, had their Habitations in some Parts of
Asia, and since we have no probable Evidence that any of their Descendents
traduced the first Colonies of the American Plantations into America, being so
divided from the rest of the World, the access thither so difficult, and
Navigation the only means of such a Migration being of a far later perfection
than what could answer such a Population of so great a Continent; That
consequently the Americans derive not their Original either from Adam, or at
least not from Noah; but either had an Eternal Succession, or if they had a
Beginning, they were Aborigines, and multiplied from other common Stocks than
what the Mosaical History imports.

And although their Traditions in America be mingled with some things fabulous,
yet they seem to favor this Conclusion. Some of them acknowledge the Creation
of all things by God, and that He fixed certain Arrows in the ground, and from
thence the Original of Mankind came. de Laet. de origin gent. Americanorum,
Observat. 6. Many of them have a Tradition of a Flood, at least in the
Continent of America, which dispeopled all the Country, and that out of the
Lake Tilocaca the great God created at several places the common Parents of
Mankind: ut videre est apud eundem, page 115, and 105. or that certain Men
leapt out of a Cave called Picare Campo, or Tampo, and were the first Parents
of Mankind; and therefore they hold the Tambi the most ancient of Mankind.

Besides, if we could suppose that either ex industria, or by accident some
might pass the Seas from Africa, Asia or Europe into America, yet it is not
easily conceptible how Beasts, especially of prey, should be transported into
America, through those large Seas after the Deluge; neither is it possible to
suppose that all the Beasts of America, which are many of them wholly different
in kind from those of Europe, Asia or Africa, should be conducted over the Seas
to be preserved in the Ark, and after be transported again thither: and the
improbability thereof is so much the greater, because many of the perfect
Animals found in America have none of the same kind in Europe, Asia or Africa,
and e converso, but are as it were appropriate to their proper Regions, though
some there are that are common to America and the other Countries on this side.
And therefore either the Flood was not universal, or new Creations of Animals
proper to America happened there after the Flood.

I answer to these difficulties: The Author of the Book called Praeadamitae
has set down certain Suppositions, which though they salve the difficulties,
yet they cross the tenor of the Mosaical History, viz.

1. That Moses in the History of the Creation of Man does not set down the
Original of Mankind, but only the Original or common Parent of the Jewish
Nation: that Adam was not the first Man that was created, but there were very
many Ages of Men before him that peopled tho greater part of the World long
before the Creation of Adam: And consequently, though Adam was the common
Parent of the Inhabitants of Palestine and many of the Countries adjacent, yet
those that peopled the far greater part of the World, especially the Parts of
America, were not descended from him.

2. That the Flood in Noah's time, though it drowned the Descendents from Adam
and the Countries inhabited by them, namely, Palestine and some of the adjacent
Countries, yet it was no Universal Deluge, but the far greater part of the
World and the Inhabitants thereof were free from that Deluge; and consequently
that Noah and his three Sons were not the Capita familiarum of the whole Earth,
but only of those Families and Nations that were Inhabitants in Palestine and
some of the adjacent Countries; and consequently that many of the Countries of
Europe, Asia and Africa, and the entire Continent and Islands of America were
not overwhelmed with this Deluge, though possibly they might have their
particular Deluges, as happened in Greece and Thessaly under Deucalion and
Ogyges: and in favor of his Opinion alleges the long Computations of the
Egyptians, Babylonians and Chinese; the vast Armies of Ninus, Semiramis,
Zoroaster and others, and the great extent of their Monarchies suddenly after
the Flood; which could not, as he supposes, be so suddenly propagated from
Noah and his three Sons: But especially insists upon the greatness of the
Continent of America and the Islands thereof, the populousness and great store
of Men and Animals, which could not be in any tolerable probability transported
from Countries divided by such great Seas from it.

And likewise he insists upon the Antiquity of the Egyptian Computations, and
upon that fond Reason of the Egyptian Priest in Plato's Timaeus, That Egppt is
the most ancient of the habitable World, because neither subject to Total
Inundations by reason it has no Shoars, nor to Conflagration because of the
Inundation of Nilus: That consequently Palestine and the Countries adjacent
were only drowned, but the upper Asia from whence the Dove fetched his
Olive Branch was never thereby totally overwhelmed. This is the principal
Subject of his 4th Book of what he calls his Systema Theologicum.

If there were no other fault in this Author, there is this one that renders
him inexcusable; In that he in all places of his Book pretends to own and
maintain the Truth and Sacred Authority of the Mosaical History, and seems to
maintain some of his Tenets by Scriptural Suffrage, and yet substitutes such
Assertions as any Man, and much more the Ingenious Author himself could not,
cannot choose but see, that if they were true would necessarily not only weaken
but overthrow the Authority and Infallibility of the Sacred Scriptures; at
least where it seems to cross the Fabulous Traditions of the Egyptian and
Babylonian Antiquity, to which Fables he gives more credit than to the Holy
Scriptures, and submits the Authority of these to the Authority of those: and
while Judas like he seems to kiss these Sacred Oracles, he perfidiously betrays
their Authority, and draws their Truth as much as he can into suspicion. Such a
Discourse had better become a plain professed Infidel, and is so much the
worse, in that it is done slily, and by invidious Insinuations, sub Amici
nomine: If he durst have spoken out, he would have told us roundly and plainly
that the Eleven first Chapters of Genesis were but Fables; That Genesis 3.20.
where Eve is said to be the Mother of all living; That Genesis 7.19, 20. where it
is said, that all the high Hills that were under the whole Heavens were
covered; That Genesis 7.23. where it is said, that every living substance was
destroyed which was upon the face of the Ground, both Man and Cattle and
Creeping things and the Fowls of the Heaven, and Noah only remained alive and
those that were with him in the Ark; That Genesis 10.32. where it is said, that
these were the Families of the Sons of Noah after their Generations in their
Nations, and by these were the Nations divided on the Earth after the Flood;
are not to be believed, and are but mere Fictions: This had become a Man of his
Principles; but he durst not speak out.

I shall not in this place undertake a particular Answer of all that this Man
has said; it is besides my intention in this place to make so large an
excursion, and many others have done it to my hand: only I may say thus much,
That a Man that gives so much cred it to the Egyptian, Caldean, and Grecian
prodigious Traditions, in derogation of that very Scripture which this Man in
Complement at least seems to venerate, might have remembered, That the Tradition
of the Universal Flood has obtained in all places, even among the Americans
themselves, and that the Race of Mankind was thereby destroyed, except some few
that were preserved: That the most severe and observing Sect of the
Philosophers, namely the Stoics, have constantly held vicissitudes of
Destructions of Mankind by successive Deluges and Conflagrations, and a new
Peopling of the World successively by the Power of God; That Aristotle himself
insinuates those great Vicissitudes, especially of Deluges in those Periodical
great Winters which he supposes to have happened, and for the future to happen
in this lower World. But of this hereafter.

And although this Author in his 8th Chapter of his 4th Book gives us a
computation of a declivity of 600 Perches from the Fountain of Danubius until
its fall into the Pontus Euxinus, and supposes the highest Mountains of
Armenia, whereof Ararat where the Ark rested was the highest, does not exceed
the perpendicular height of one Mile above the plain of the Earth; and
therefore that an excess of 15 Cubits above Ararat would not reach the Head of
Danubius, or at least the upper Plains of the Upper Asia; yet he might have
remembered, That though it were admitted, that usually the heights of most
Mountains do not exceed a Mile in perpendicular height above their Basis, yet
many Mountains are situate in the more elevated parts of the Earth, and have
the advantage thereby of the height of their Basis: and possibly it will be
found that the Basis of the Mountains of Armenia is situate in higher ground
than the Fountain of Danubius or Euphrates. So that an excess of 15 Cubits
above their height must in all probability cover the Plain of the Upper Asia.

Again, he might have remembered that Egypt, that from the Authority of the
Fable of the Egyptian Priest is favored by him with an immunity from
Inundation, lies much lower than the Plains of Palestine, yea than the
Superficies of the Red Sea it self: And therefore the Water (that naturally
keeps its level, neither without a Miracle can lose it) which overflowed the
whole Continent of Palestine, even to 15 Cubits above its highest Mountains,
must of necessity overflow Egypt, which Aristotle by impregnable Evidences
concludes to be one of the lowest Countries in the World, and the very
Production and Accretion of the Slime of Nilus; so that if the Flood covered
Palestine, nothing but a Miracle could protect Egypt from it.

The Author of the Dissertation De Aetate Mundi, cap. 12. though he reprehend
the Praeadamitae, and confutes the extravagancy of their Opinion, yet he seems
to mince the Universality of the Flood: Nullum itaque relinquitur dubium, quin
unum tantum fuerit diluvium, idque universale, cujus apud omnes pene gentes
extat memoria: Verum hic minime probo eorum sententiam qui totum terrae globum
it a aquis tectum fuisse existimant, ut nulla prorsus extaret ejus portio; ad
hoc efficiendum multa debuissent concurrere miracula. Cum enim universae orbis
aquae non sufficiant ad obruendam tam alte terram, etiamsi omnia maria
siccentur; debuissent vel plures aquae creari, vel dicendum cum aliquibus,
istam aquarum molem ex aliis coeli orbibus decidisse, and demum finito diluvio
ad seeds suas revolasse: Verum hoc est pie nugari, Deus non facit miracula sine
causa: Quid opus erat mergere terras ubi nec olim fuere homines, ac ne nunc
quidem sunt? Stultum est putare ante diluvium adeo multiplicatum fuisse genius
hominum, ut omnes terrae angulos pervaserit, etc. Ut vero diluvii inundationem
ultra orbis habitati termines producamus, nulla jubet ratio, imo prorsus
absurdum est dicere, ubi nulla hominum seeds, illic etiam viguisse effectus
poenae solis hominibus inflictae.

This indeed salves the necessity of drowning America and the greatest part of
the New habitable World, when it extends the Flood no farther than there were
Mankind inhabiting, and confines those Habitations possibly within the Circle
of Syria and Mesopotamia. And so all the Brutes that possibly in their first
Creation were produced sparsim through all the parts of the habitable World, as
well in America as Asia or Europe, were safe and untouched; and all those Birds
and Fowl that were within 40 or 50 Miles of the Circulus diluvii might easily
preserve themselves by flight out of the extent of it; yea and the Brutes and
Birds which were out of that supposed narrow extent of Syria and Mesopotamia
where the Flood prevailed, might easily refurnish the same Continent after the
subsiding of the Flood, without the wonderful and difficult including of their
kinds within the Ark for their preservation, which if this Supposition hold,
seems a needless Institution and Miracle by the wise God. Genesis 7.1. Therefore,
I confess, I am no way satisfied with this Gratification of that Author to the
Prae-Adamitae.

For first, although I take this Flood to be somewhat more than Natural, and a
thing instituted by the Will of God, yet do I not esteem it a thing purely
Supernatural or Miraculous, neither do I suppose those Waters created de novo,
nor sent out of the Orbs of Heaven to drown the Earth: I do not think the Face
of the Earth and Waters were altogether the same before the Universal Deluge,
and after; but possibly the Face of the Earth was more even than now it is, the
Seas possibly more dilate and extended, and not so deep as now; the Waters
possibly more than now, and in those respects more capable of diffusion over
the, dry Land. For though there be many great variations in process of time in
the Sea and Land, yet it seems that ad plurimum the Seas grow deeper, and eat
lower into the Earth, and consequently more dry Land is daily acquired, and the
Seas grow narrower and deeper.

Now to deliver this Supposition of an Universal Deluge from those
difficulties, and that necessity of multiplication of Miracles, which that
Author has substituted, we are to consider:

1. That we are not to make our estimate of the quantity of Waters merely by
the Superficies of the Sea, but by its vast depth, which in some places is
unfathomable, and by those vast subterraneous Receptacles of Water which pour
themselves out in several great Ebullitions and Marine Springs: Neither is it
altogether improbable that the Waters of the Sea, naturally tending downward,
and being of a fluid searching consistency, might in process of time have
worked themselves even almost to the Center of the Earth, and there residing in
great and vast quantities, and possibly have in a manner undermined much of the
appearing Continent of the Earth: so that that which the Prophet speaks may
be true literally, Psalm. 24.2. He has founded it upon the Seas, and
established it upon the Floods: So that there are greater Storehouses of Water
than appear visible to the World. If we could suppose that the incumbent
Superficies of the Earth should subside and press upon those Storehouses of
Water within its bowels, it might afford a competent store to drown the Earth
without a new Creation.

2. Again, we may easily compute that the quantity or extension of the Body of
the Air, even that which is commonly called the Atmosphere, which at the lowest
account extends seven Miles in height, might by condensation into Water afford
a competent store for the drowning of the World, and yet be again rarefied into
the same dimension and consistence which before it obtained: for there is that
vicinity of Nature between those two Elements, that we daily see considerable
proportions of the one by condensation changed into the other.

3. When we consider those immense Inundations that are Annually, and with some
constant equality occasioned by great Rains, as for Instance, in the River
Nilus, which by the Annual Rains in Ethiopia is raised almost every Year twenty
Cubits, and overflows a considerable part of Egypt yearly between the Months of
June and October; and the like Inundations yearly happening by Periodical Showers
in the great River of America called Orenoque, between May and September,
whereby it rises upright above 30 Foot; so that many of the Islands and Plains
at other times inhabited, are 20 Foot yearly at that time under Water. And when
we see that even the Ocean it self in its daily Tides, especially those that
happen about the Equinoxes, caused, as the Copernicans say, by the
Intersections of the Annual and Diurnal Motions of the Earth; we need not have
recourse to a new Creation of Waters to perform this Office of the Divine
Providence and Justice; He might by a stronger elevation of Vapors, or by an
extraordinary motion of the Seas perform his purpose; which though probably it
might not at the same time drown Asia and America, yet by the successive
peragration of these Waters they might drown the whole Earth, as the Inundation
of Nilus by the Showers of Ethiopia make the Flood there a Month sooner than it
happens in Egypt.

2. As to the Second Objection; I do confess it to be most true, that the
Universal Deluge was a Judgment upon the Old World for their intolerable
degeneration from their Duty to God: But I do not think that was the only
Reason thereof; for the Infinite Power of God might have destroyed those Evil
Men by a Pestilence as well as by a Flood, without detriment to the harmless
Brutes or Birds: But as God Almighty is of Infinite Wisdom, so it is the high
Prerogative of that Wisdom to have variety of Excellent Ends in the same
Action. I do really think that this Universal Deluge was not only an act of his
Vengeance upon Evil Men, but possibly an act of Goodness and Bounty to the very
Constitution of this Inferior World, though the particulars thereof be hid from
us. And if as some would have it, it should be coextended only to the places
that were then inhabited, and so the Flood particular, yet most certain it
would be, even in such a particular Flood, many great Spots of Ground would be
necessarily drowned where never any Men were, or inhabited.

3. And it seems it is too hastily concluded, That in the Period of 1656, or as
the Septuagint, whom he follows, 2256 Years between the Creation and the Flood,
that only Palestine, Syria or Mesopotamia were inhabited: For considering the
longevity of Men's Lives in that Period, a small skill in Arithmetical
Calculation will render the Number of coexisting Inhabitants of the Earth more
than six times as many as would have happened in 5000 Years, when Men's Ages were
abridged to that ordinary dimension which now they have: and the strait bounds
of Syria and Mesopotamia would not have held one fortieth part of the
Inhabitants; all Europe, Asia and Africa were not more than sufficient for
them: So that as the World grew full of Sin, so it grew full of Men and Beasts,
and stood in need of a Deluge to make room for its future Inhabitants.

And this is as much as I shall say in this place, for the Vindication of the
Possibility and Reasonableness of the Universality of that Deluge recorded by
Moses.

And if any shall doubt of the Capacity of the Ark of Noah for the Reception of
Brutes, Birds, and the Family of Noah, with the necessary Provisions of
Livelihood for them; let him but consult Mr. Poole's Synopsis, and he will find
that which may reasonably satisfy him touching it.

And now I shall briefly consider the Method and Means and Manner of the
Peopling of America, and storing that vast Country with Men and Beasts and
Birds, so far forth as we may reasonably conjecture.

And herein I must confess that I only make an Abstract or brief Collection of
what has been done to my hands by those that had better Opportunities and
Abilities to do it; as namely, Grotius, Laetius, Breerwood, Hornius, Josephus
Acosta, Mr. John Webb, Martinius and others, who have professedly written, De
origin gentium Americanarum.

First therefore, I shall consider the Manner of Traduction of Men into America.

Secondly, The Manner of Traduction of Brutes into America.

Touching the Traduction of Mankind into America, I do suppose these things
following:

1. That the Origination of the common Parents of the Humane Nature happened in
some part of Asia.

2. That though the Origination of the common Parents of Mankind were in Asia,
yet some of their Descendents did come into America.

3. That such Migration into America by the Descendents from Adam, was not only
possibly, but fairly probable, notwithstanding all the objected Difficulties.

4. That the Migrations of the Descendents of Adam and Noah into America, was
successive, and interpolated.

5. That although we cannot certainly define the Time or Manner of all these
Migrations, yet many of them were long since, or, as we may reasonably
conjecture, some Thousands of Years since; but yet after the Universal Deluge.

The Means of Transmigration of the Children or Descendents of Adam and Noah
from Asia into America must be either by Land or by Sea, or by both; and if by
Sea, then it must be designed, and ex proposito, or casually.

I think it probable it may be all of these ways, but especially by Sea.

Touching the Transmigration by Land, it seems very difficult, because though
it may be possible that there may be some junctures between the North Continent
of America and some part of Tartary, Russia, or Muscovy, yet none are known,
unless the Frozen Seas in those Parts might be a means to transport Men
thither; which is difficult to suppose, those Parts being unpassable by reason
of the great Snows that happen so far Northward: though some have thought that
Groenland is one Continent with America, and that in its farthest North-east
extent it is joined to the Continent of Asia about Japan or Cathay; so that a
Land-passage might be out of Asia into Groenland, and thence into America. But
this is only conjectured, and not fully discovered to be so.

But however the Case now stands with the three known Parts of the World, in
relation to its contiguity with the Continent of America; it is not impossible,
but in that long tract of 4000 Years at least, which has happened since the
Universal Deluge, there has been great alterations in the situations of the
Sea and Earth: possibly there might be anciently Necks of Land that maintained
passage and communication by Land between the two Continents. Many Instances of
this kind are remembered by Pliny, not only of the great Atlantic Island
mentioned by the Egyptian Priest in Plato's Timaeus, of a great bigness, almost
contiguous to the Western parts of Spain and Africa, yet wholly swallowed up by
that Ocean to which it has given its Name of the Atlantic Ocean; which if
true, might for ought we know afford a Passage from Africa to America by Land
before that Submersion; but also many more Instances of the like Variations:
thus he reports that Sicily was anciently divided from Italy, Cyprus from
Syria, Euboea from Boetia. Vide Plin. l. 2. cap. 88, 89, 90, 91.

Strabo also in his first Book seems to referr the Straits or Apertures of the
Euxin and Mediterranean Seas to the like separations made by the force of the
Sea, and attributes those great Floods and Inundations to the elevation and
subsiding of the Moles terrestris, in these words; Restat ut causam adscribamus
solo, sive quod mari subest, sive quod inundatur; potius tamen ei quod mari
subest: hoc enim multo est mobilius, and quod ob humiditatem celerius mutari
possit. Spiritus enim, hujusmodi omnium rerum causa, ibi est copiosior. Sed,
sicuti dixi, causa horum efficiens accidentium est, quod eadem sola alias
attolluntur, alias subsidunt: and he resembles the ordinary Elevations and
Depressions whereby the ordinary Fluxes and Refluxes are made, to the
Exspiration and Respiration of Animals; but those greater and extraordinary
Elevations and Depressions of the Earth to the greater Accidents; Nam diluvia,
terraemotus, eruptiones flatuum, and tumores subiti terrae in mari latentis,
mare quoque extollunt; subsidentesque in se eaedem terrae, faciunt ut mare
dimittatur. And it is no new or feigned Observation, That as the Volcans in the
Land, as Aetna and Vesuvius, raise up those great Protuberances which seem
Natural Mountains; so the like Volcans or Fiery Eruptions happen sometimes in
the Land subjected to the Sea, whereby great quantities of Earth together with
Fire are thrown up, and grow into Islands. De quibus videsis Strabonem and
Plinium in locis citatis. And if we may give credit to the Conjectures of
Verstegan, the Countries of England and France were formerly conjoined, and
after separated by the Irruption of the Sea between Dover and Calais. And
therefore, although it may be that at this day there is no Land-passage from
this Elder World unto that of America, yet within the tract of 4000 Years such
there might have been, whereby both Men and Beasts, especially from about
Tartary or China might pass; or between Norway or Finland and the Northern part
of the American Continent.

But we need not go so far from home, nor resort to the Ages of ancient times
for the evincing the great Changes that have been between the Sea and Lands,
sometimes by tempestuous Winds, sometimes by Earthquakes, sometimes, and that
most commonly, by the working of the Sea, by casting up Silt and Sand, and by
exaggerations thereby wrought; elegantly described by Ovid, 15. Metamorph.

Vidi ego quod fuerat quondam solidissima tellus
Esse fretum, vidi factas ex aequore terras;
Et procul a pelago conchae jacuere marinae,
Et vetus inventa est in montibus anchora summis.
Quodque fuit campus, vallem decursus aquarum
Fecit, and eluvie mons est deductus in aequor,
Eque paludosa siccis humus aret arenis.
The Instances of latter Discoveries which make evident this various state of
the Globe of Earth and Water, thus described by the Poet, are among others
those that follow.

1. Some Towns that were anciently Havens and Ports where Ships did ride, are
now by exaggeration of Sand between those Towns and the Sea, converted into
firm Land 2, 3, 4 Miles distant from the Sea; such was St Omer in Flanders, Old
Rumney in Kent, Rye in Suffolk: vide Mr. Dugdale his History of Draining, page
173. and the Authors there cited by him.

2. some whole Countries, as well as the Egyptian Delta, recovered to be dry
Land, partly by the exaggeration of Sand by the Sea or the outfalls of great
Rivers; thus the whole Country of Holland seems to be an Accretion partly by
the Sea, partly by the River Rhine. Dugdale ibid. p. 12.

3. Some great Continents and Tracts of Ground were anciently firm Land, and
full of great Woods that could not have less time than 500 Years continuance,
and yet were afterward reduced again into the Dominion of the Ocean, and after
all that re-reduced into firm Land; leaving the infallible Signatures of these
several Changes, though the precise times thereof exceed the Memory of any Men
alive; Instances whereof are as follow.

In the great Level near Thorny, several Trees of Oak and Firr, some severed
from their Roots, others joined to their Roots which stand in firm Earth below
the Moor, and in all probability have lain there hundreds of Years, till
covered by the inundation of the fresh and salt Waters, and the Silt and
Moorish Earth exaggerated upon them: and the like monuments of great Trees
buried in great quantities in the Isle of Axholm about 3 Foot, and some 5 Foot
under ground, whereof there are multitudes; some Oaks of 5 Yards in compass,
Firr-Trees of 30 Foot long. Vide Dugd. ubi supra, page 141, 171.

Mr. Ray in his Ingenious Observations upon his Travels in the Netherlands,
etc. page 6. gives us the like account of great quantities of subterraneous
Woods, lying 10 and 20 Else below the Superficies of the Ground, prostrate
toward the East, which are supposed to be anciently thrown down by the
irruption of the Sea and strong Western Winds, which yet now, and for all the
time of the Memory of Man or History extant, are firm Land, namely, Bruges in
Flanders.

But that one Instance is instar omnium, remembered by Mr. Dugdale, ubi supra,
page 172, but of known and notorious truth; the Sceleton of a great Seafish
above 20 Foot long found in the Downs or Uplands of Cammington in
Huntingdonshire, very far distant from the Sea; which is an unquestionable
Evidence that the Sea was sometime Master of that Tract of Ground.

4. Touching the Conchae marinae of several sorts, it is most unquestionable; I
referr my self herein to the Relation of Mr. Ray, ubi supra, page 114. and
seqq. wherein he gives us an account of these Petrified Shells found in great
quantities within Continents at a vast distance from the Sea; and some Shells
that are found in the Continent, which are strangers in the Ports of the Sea
conterminous to those Continents.

There are two Opinions concerning the Origination of these Petrified Shells;
1. Of those that have thought (and with great probability) that these were left
in those places by the Sea, either by the Universal Deluge, or that really the
Sea did possess those places where it left these Relics and Memorials of it
self upon its recess to a more settled Channel. And certainly if this be so, we
must needs suppose anciently another Face of the Sea and Earth than what now
is; possibly many of these Valleys and lower grounds might be entirely Sea, and
the Hills and Mountains, and other Prominences of the Earth where these
Petrified Shells are often found, being the Shoars of that great Ocean in those
elder times, those Shells were there cast up, as they are at this day upon the
Shoars.

The second Opinion is of those that think that these Conchae or Petrified
Shells were no other than the Lusus naturae, the Effects of the Plastic power
of the Earth; 1. Because they are found at such great distances from the Sea:
2. Because they are many times of such a kind of Fabric as are not to be found
in those parts of the Sea that is conterminous to those Continents where they
are found; some are found in the middle of Germany, 200 Miles distant from the
Sea at the nearest; Scallop-shells are found in the Ditches of Antwerp, and yet
they are rarely to be gotten on the Sea or Sea-shoar nearer than Gallicia in
Spain: 3. Because these Shells are ordinarily filled with Stone suitable to the
Stone of those places where they are found. These and the like Reasons, though
not evidently concludent against the former Supposition, yet have induced many
Learned Men to attribute these Phenomenon to the Plastic power of the Earth.

For my own part, I have seen such apparent Evidences in and near the place
where I live of things of this nature, that I am satisfied that many of them
are but the Relics of Fish-shells left by the Sea, and there in length of time
actually Petrified; and the Instance of the great Fish-sceleton found at
Cammington seems an undeniable Evidence thereof. And I remember in my youth, in
the Lisne of a Rock at Kingscote in Glocestershire, I found at least a Bushel
of Petrified Cockles actually distinct one from another, each near as big as my
Fist: and at Adderly, mentioned by Mr. Cambden, about 40 or 50 Years since
those Configurations of great Shells in Stones were frequently found, and for
their curiosity, as many as could be found were taken up by several persons and
carried away; since which time, for above 20 Years last past, there are none,
or very few found; which nevertheless if they had been the Product of the
Plastic power of the Earth, would have been Annually re-produced.

And yet I do think that all these Petrifications are not always necessarily
the Monuments of the Sea possessing those places as its constant or usual Seat,
but that many of those Shells arise de novo, not barely from the Plastic power
of the Earth (as some Insects and Vegetables arise spontaneously) but from
certain Seminal Ferments brought thither, which are as it were the Seminium, of
their production. And these Seminal Ferments were first in the Sea and
Sea-Waters, and might by many means by brought into those new parts of firm
Land, 1. By the Universal Deluge; 2. By the various mutable stations of the
Land, and fluxes of the Sea; 3. By elevation of those Seminal Ferments from the
Sea or some desiccated places thereof, by the heat of the Sun, and discharging
them by Rain upon several parts of the dry Land, and where possibly those
Seminal Ferments might be digested and ripened gradually into these
Configurations. But touching these kinds of Seminal Ferments, and their Energy,
more will be said hereafter.

By this digression I mean but thus much, namely, That we can by no means
reasonably suppose the Face, Figure, Position and Disposition of the Sea and
dry Land to be the same anciently as now, but there might then be Sea where
there is now dry Land, and dry Land where there is now Sea; and that there
might have been in former times Necks of Land, whereby communication between
the parts of the Earth, and mutual passage and re-passage for Men and Animals
might have been, which in long process of time within a Period of 4000 Years
may have been since altered: That those parts of Asia and America which are now
dis-joyned by the interluency of the Sea, might have been formerly in some Age
of the World contiguous to each other; and those Spots of Ground, namely, the
Philippine Islands, and others that are now crumbled into small Islands, might
anciently have been one entire Continent. And if in places that have been long
inhabited, and observed by Men, these mutations have happened as are apparent
to our very Senses, yet the precise Times, Manner and Circumstances thereof are
wholly lost to us, as in diverse parts of Europe is apparent: much more the like
Changes may happen in those remote and vast Marine Tracts which have been long
unknown and unobserved, and scarce possible to be observed by Mankind, as in
the Scythian, Atlantic, Pacifick, and other Northern and Southern parts of the
Seas.

Touching the Second Means, namely, the Passage by Sea; It seems very probable
that the greatest and readiest means of the migration of Colonies or
Plantations into the Western World from the Eastern, was by Sea, and the help
of Navigation; whereof much might be casual, by Tempests or contrary Winds, but
some and the more principal might be, ex instituto and industria.

Navigation, and the use of Ships is of that great Antiquity, that it is
difficult to assign when it began to be in use.

It seems probable that it was not unknown to the Old World before the Flood,
and yet not in that perfection that it was after, their Vessels being not
reduced to that perfection as to endure a wide Sea, such as the Universal
Deluge was, neither were they probably fitted with such Stores as might be
requisite for so long and unexpected a Navigation as the Flood lasted.

But the Ark of Noah was certainly a most exact piece of Architecture, and
might give a Pattern or Instruction for Vessels of great burden, and very
probably since that time the skill of Making and Navigating of Ships was much
ripened and improved.

If we consult the Heathenish Histories, we shall find Navigation very ancient
among the Grecians, but especially among the Phenicians, Tyrians, and
Carthaginians.

Polydore Virgil, de Inventione Rerum, l. 3. cap. 15. and before him, Pliny in
his Natural History, lib. 5. cap. 57. gives us an Account of the several
Inventors of the various forms and appendants of Shipping and Navigation, but
yet the thing it self they carry up to higher Memorials; the Navigation of the
Argonauts to Colchis for the Golden Fleece, being one of the famous Epochae of
the Grecian Computation, happened in about the 1100 Year after the Flood
according to the Jewish Account; and above 200 Years before them Danaus sailed
out of Egypt into Greece, Shipping being there in use long before.

That although we find not express mention of the Pyxis Nautica or Magnet for
many Years after mention of the Use of Navigation, yet the same Author tells us
that the Phenicians steered their Course by the Observation of the Stars.

But we have a better and ancienter Account of the use and frequency and
antiquity of Navigation in the Sacred Scriptures: Jacob died about 600 Years
after the Flood, mentions Ships and Havens for Shipping as things well known,
and particularly Zidon, as a great Port of Shipping, where Zebulon's Lot was to
be cast, Genesis 49.13. Balaam also in the time of Moses mentions the Ships of
Chettim or Greece as a known thing, Numb. 24.24. again, in the Reign of
Solomon, the Tyrians are taken notice of to be expert Seamen; that Solomon had
a Navy upon the Coast of the Red Sea, that from thence he with the Tyrians made
long and great Voyages to Ophir and Tarshish (places, as it seems most
probably, in the East India, not in Africa or America, as some have thought)
and thence brought Gold and other Commodities once in three Years. 2 Chronicles.
8.18.9.21.

And how sedulous and industrious all Maritim Coasts were in advancing of
Navigation, in multiplying of Shipping, in Merchandising and Trading, in
searching out and subduing Foreign Countries, when either they were afflicted at
home by War, or grew over-populous, the Histories of all succeeding Ages of the
Grecians and Persians, of the Tyrians, Phenicians and Carthaginians, of the
Romans and Egyptians, of the Seres or Chinese; and in later times, of the
Venetians, Sicilians, Rhodians, Spanish, Dutch, French and English give us a
large Account.

And therefore as later Years, have given us of this Age witness, of the
Transplantations to America from Spain, France, Portugal, England, Scotland,
Holland, and some Ages before that have given Instances of Transplantations
from Norway into Groenland and Iceland; so it seems not only possible, but very
probable, that either by Casualty and Tempest, or by Intention and Design,
either out of lucre of Gold, or for disburthening of the Countries surcharged
with multitude of Inhabitants, or by greatness of Mind, affecting Noble
Undertakings, or by reason of Hardship, Oppression and Wars at home, or by some
or all of these ways, several parts of this great Continent at several times
have been planted with Inhabitants, which in process of time have multiplied
into those many Nations, and have forgotten their Original, and the Manners,
Religion or Customs of those People from whom they were derived in Europe,
Asia, or Africa. And surely we have reason to believe that we of this Island
are not Aborigines, but came hither by Migrations, Colonies, or Plantations
from other parts of the World; yet were it not for the help of Historical
Monuments, we should have forgotten who inhabited this Island six or seven
hundred Years ago: yea, and notwithstanding all these Historical helps, we have
no Authentic Tradition that can give us any tolerable Account before the time
of Julius Caesar, much less of the first Plantation of this Island: for as to
the Story of Brute and his Company, we have but little evidence of the truth of
it, and if it were never so true, yet it does not prove it uninhabited before.

Now those Countries in Asia or Europe that with greatest probability first
peopled America, seem to be 1. The British; 2. The Norwegians; 3. The Tartars
or Scythians; 4. The Phenicians and Carthaginians; 5. The Chinese or Seri. I
do not at all mention the late Migrations of the Spanish, French, Portugals,
Dutch, English, or Scottish, but those of a more ancient Edition.

1. Touching the British Migration, recorded by Dr Powel, sub anno 1170, who
tells us, That Madoc one of the Sons of Owen Gwenith went over twice into the
Northern Coasts of America, and made there a British Plantation, who though in
process of time much degenerated from their Nature, Language, Customs and
Religion, yet retained some Monuments of all. This is at large prosecuted by
Laetius in his second Observation, who gives us many Resemblances in some
principal Words between the Language of them and the Cambro-Britains.

2. Touching the Migration of the Norwegians, Hugo Grotius has made some
considerable Observations, which though not altogether approved by Laetius, yet
he willingly grants that Iceland, and some part of Groenland were visited and
planted by Ericus Ruffus, sub anno Christi 982, and the Christian Religion
there planted, and probably from thence Colonies were traduced into the
Northern parts of America.

3. Touching the Migration of a considerable number of Tartars and Scythians
into the North-east part of the Continent of America, over the Fretum Anian,
Laetius seems to lay much stress upon it, partly in respect of the easiness and
shortness of that Passage from Nova Zembla and the farthest North-east part of
Tartary over that narrow Sea; and partly by reason of the congruity of the
Barbarous Customs of the Americans and Scythians, and some other Indications of
that kind.

4. Touching the Migration of the Phenicians and Carthaginians, especially into
the South-east part of the Continent of America, as Mexico and Brasil, Hornius
thinks it probable upon many accounts: 1. Upon the great skill and long
practice of Navigation, and the multitude of Shipping of the Phenicians and
Carthaginians. 2. Upon the Accommodation of the part of Carthage and other
African Ports bordering upon the Mediterranean Sea, to make their Voyages
Westward, and the great advantage of the constant Easterly Wind, that makes the
Voyage to Mexico and Brasil more easy. 3. Upon some ancient Histories
intimating the progress of the Phenician and Carthaginian Fleets into some
Islands and Continents in or near the Atlantic Ocean. 4. From the Analogy of
many Words, and Names of Places with the Carthaginian Language; all which, and
much more to this purpose may be seen in the Book of George Horn, de
Originibus Americanis. 5. And lastly, much of the Origination of the Americans
seems to be attributable to the Migrations of the Seri or Sinenses from the
Eastern parts of China and the Philippine Islands, from the Islands of Borneo,
and the Molucca's, and Japan, through the Marc Pacificum into the Western part
of the Continent of America; which though it be a large Ocean of above 2000
Leagues, between the Philippine Islands and the West of the American Continent,
and the passage thither difficult in respect of constant Easterly Winds between
the Tropicks; yet many Reasons seem to induce a likelihood of Plantations from
thence, 1. In respect of the Antiquity of the Peopling of China, which if we
believe Mr Webb was the first peopled after the Universal Deluge; that the Ark
there first rested upon that tract of Mountains that environ a great part of
China; that Sem the Son of Noah first settled there; that it is the most Ancient
and Primitive Language; that by means of the Antiquity and Setledness of this
Monarchy, having continued in its entireness ever since the Universal Deluge,
it is most probable that the Western Continent was peopled from thence. 2.
Because they were the greatest Masters of Shipping, and best skilled in
Navigation of any part of the World; that the Pixis Nautica was there known and
used long before the knowledge thereof in Europe. 3. The many Islands on the
South-east and South part of China, as Borneo, Java, Gilolo, Celebes and others
near the Equator are dis-joyned but by very narrow Seas, not much broader than
those between England and France, from the Neck of Land called Terra des Papos
or Nova Guinea; and Nova Hollandia, which is now discovered to be at least in
some parts disjoined from the more Southern Continent by a great Sea, but
thought to have been anciently part of the Southern Continent, and possibly so
it may continue in some parts thereof.

Upon these and the like probabilities it may seem reasonable to conclude, 1.
That the Americans had their Original from the Inhabitants of Europe, Asia and
Africa, that transmigrated into that Continent either intentionally, or
casually, or both. 2. That those Migrations were not of any one single Nation
or People, but from many or diverse Nations. 3. That these Migrations were not
altogether, or at one time, but successively in several Ages; some earlier,
some later. 4. That therefore it is impossible to determine the Time or first
Epoch of such Migrations, but only that they were all since the Universal
Deluge, which is now above 4000 Years since: Some Migrations might be within
two, three, or four hundred Years after the Flood, some later, according to
various Accidents; but it is no way probable that the earliest Migration
thither was less distant than 1000 Years from this time. 5. That if we should
admit that the first Migration thither were above 2000 Years since, of an
hundred Pairs they might easily propagate a number competent enough to people
all that vast Continent. 6. That it seems that since the last of these ancient
Migrations, suppose that of Madoc and his Britons, until our late Migrations by
the Spaniards, French, English, Dutch and Scotc^, there probably interceded an
interval of at least four or five hundred Years, in all which interval the
Commerce and Communication between Europe or Asia, and America, has as it were
slept, and been forgotten both by them and us. 7. That in that interval of 500
Years or thereabouts in all Parts, but in some Parts far greater, there must in
all probability happen a great forgetfulness of their Original, a great
degeneration from the Primitive Civility, Religion and Customs of those places
from whence they were first derived; a ferine and necessitous kind of Life, a
conversation with those that having been long there were fallen into a more
barbarous habit of Life and Manners, would easily assimilate at least the next
Generation to Barbarism and Ferineness. It is true, where a Colony comes and
keeps it self in a Body, as the Roman Colonies anciently, and our Plantations
in Virginia and New England do, and the new Accessions incorporate and join
themselves unto that Body, Customs both Religious and Civil, and the Original
Language are long kept entire: But where the Accessions are but thin and
sparing, and scattered among the Natives of the Country where they come, and
are driven to conform themselves unto their Customs for their very subsistence,
safety and entertainment, it falls out that the very first Planters do soon
degenerate in their Habits, Customs and Religion; as a little Wine poured into
a great vessel of Water loses it self: But if they escape a total Assimulation
to the Country where they thus are mingled, yet the next Generation in such a
mixture is quickly assimulated to the corrupt Manners and Customs of the People
among whom they are thus planted: So that it is no wonder, if in such kind of
small Accessions successively from one and the same or several Countries, the
third Generation forget their Ancestors, and the Customs, Religion and
Languages of those People from whom they were first derived, and assume various
temperaments in their Language and Customs, according as the places of their
Habitation and the Company among whom they live, obtain. And if any man
consider but the strange contemperation and production of our English Language
out of the combinations and mixtures of the Danish, Saxon, British, French,
Dutch, and other Countries, he may easily persuade himself, that out of the
Mixtures of People there may arise as great diversities of Language, Rites and
Customs, as there may Temperaments of Qualities by the various combinations and
mixtures of the prime Qualities, or varieties of Words by the various
appositions of the 24 Letters in the Alphabet: and even these Customs and
Languages subject to infinite successive alterations and variations, according
to the variety of Foreign Mixtures, Commerce, Victories, Wars, Credit and
Opinion of Factions or Parties.

And thus far touching the Peopling of America with Mankind; I shall subjoyn
something touching the storing of it with Brutes and Birds.

It seems in the original Creation of things that Vegetables and Insects,
especially those that by their nature may sponte oriri, or by equivocal
Generation, had as large and universal production as the habitable parts of the
Earth or dry Land; as Fishes, for the most part, had their first created
production as universal and sparsim, in the whole extent of the Seas or Waters.

But whether the primitive production of the more perfect Animals both Brutes
and Birds, that have ever since had their production by univocal Generation,
were diffusively created over the habitable or dry Ground as Vegetables were;
or whether there were only certain Capita specierum perfectarum utriusque
sexus, created in a certain determinate districtus near to the place of the
first Origination of Mankind, viz. in or near the Garden of Eden; and that the
whole Progeny of such Brutes and Birds were propagated after successively
through the whole World from these Capita specierum, seems an Inquiry of more
difficulty to determine.

Some Observations seem to favor the former Conjecture, especially considering
that many Species of Brutes and Birds are as it were appropriate to their
several Countries, as Elephants, Camels, Lions, and diverse other Brutes;
Parrots, Ostriches, and other Fowls which are not found in other Countries.

But especially the same Opinion is inferred from the Beasts and Birds which
are found in America, which have not the like in the other parts of the World:
Acosta in his 36th Chap. of his 4th Book says, that besides the Beasts called
Guanaco's and Paco's, there be a thousand different kinds of Birds and Beasts
of Forest in America which have never been known neither in shape nor name in
other parts of the World; whereof no mention is made, nor names given in Greek
or Latin, or other Eastern Language of the World.

And in his 34th Chapter of that Book he tells us, That though the Spaniards in
their first Plantation found certain Beasts, Birds, and other things in America
common to those of Europe, Asia and Africa; yet some Beasts and other things
they brought thither which were unknown there, and for which they had no Names
but what the Spaniards brought along with them. So that one of the best
Indications which they had to know those Beasts which were originally brought
with the Spaniards out of Europe in their first Plantation, was, in that the
Indians had no other Names for such but Spanish Names.

And again, since America, as is generally supposed, is divided on every side
from Asia, Africa and Europe by considerable Seas, and no known passage by
Land, so that all the possibility there could be for traduction of the Brutes
into America from the known World, could only be by Shipping: Though this might
be, and certainly was a method used for the traduction of useful Cattle from
hence thither, yet it is not credible that Bears, Lions, Tigers, Wolves, and
Foxes should have so much care used for their transportation.

And upon the same account they seem to infer, That the Beasts and Birds
preserved by Noah in the Ark could only be such as were appropriated to Asia,
but not those that were of the American kinds, for how should they come from
thence to the Ark? Or if it be supposable that they could be brought thither,
why did none of the kinds which are found commonly in America leave some of
their Kind or Race here?

On the other side, it has been the more received Opinion, That the Capita
specierum perfectarum of perfect Terrestrial Animals and Birds were created
near unto the place of Adam's Creation, and that from these, and these only the
Race of perfect Animals, Birds, and Brutes were propagated and traduced over
the face of the whole Earth; and that the American Brood was traduced from
these, and from those Couples of these that were preserved by Noah in the Ark:
And that upon these Instances, whereof some are of Divine authority, others are
Physical.

1. All the Beasts and Fowls were brought to Adam to give them their Names,
Genesis 2.19, 20. which could not have been, if the several kinds of them in their
first Creation had not been within some reasonable and approachable distance.

2. All the Beasts and Birds had their kinds preserved in the Ark, and the rest
were drowned by the Universal Deluge. Genesis 7.23.

3. Although the Continent of America was in the first Spanish Plantations
thereof stored with wild Beasts, as Lions, Tigers, Bears, etc. yet those
Islands that were remote from the Land, though large and fruitful, had not any
of these Beasts then in them, as Cuba, Hispaniola, Jamaica, Margarita: this is
verified by Acosta, upon a strict examination, Lib. 1. Cap. 21. and alibi, and
the same has been found true in other new discovered Islands by other
Navigations: Whereby it appears that the Brutes were not Aborigines, for then
they should have been found in those Islands as well as in the Continent, as
well as Insects and Vegetables; and that therefore in the Continent it self,
the first storing thereof was not from it self, but by some means of accession
from other Parts, for otherwise they might have been found as well there as in
the Continent.

The two great Obstacles are, 1. The difference of the Brutes and Birds of that
Continent from those of Asia, Europe and Africa: 2. The difficulty of finding a
commodious passage from Asia, Africa, or Europe for such Beasts and Birds from
hence thither, admit they were all of the same kind. And touching both these I
shall say something.

1. Touching the diversity of Brutes and Birds of this and the Western World;
the difficulty from thence is but small, for there are diverse Accidents even in
the Eastern World, Europe, Asia, and Africa, that afford us Instances of that
kind, though, excepting some Islands, it be one common Continent: I shall
instance only in some Accidents of this kind: 1. This Variation may happen by
Mixtures of several Species in Generation, which gives an anomalous Production,
as we see ordinarily by the mixture of Pheasants and Hens, Chickens are
produced partaking of both in color and figure, which yet renders them
different from both: And it is observed by many that the Cause of that great
variety of Brutes in Africa is by reason of the meeting together of Brutes of
several Species at Waters (which in those dry Countries are scarce) and the
promiscuous couplings of Males and Females of several Species, whereby there
arise a sort of Brutes that were not in the first Creation. This was long since
observed by Aristotle, so that it grew a Proverb also, Semper aliquid novi
Africa affert. De generat. Animal. lib. 2. cap. 5. and so continues to this
day. 2. The Percolation, as I may call it, of Vegetables by Prosemination will
alter their Nature, Color and Shape, as Tulips, or Carnations rising from Seed
will differ in Color from what those were that yielded those Seeds. 3. Culture
will improve Wild Flowers in bigness and beauty; and want of Culture will
sometimes make Vegetables degenerate. See for these Transmutations Sir Francis
Bacon, in the 6th Century of his Natural History. I have often observed, that
River-Fish, as Trouts and Flounders, and others, will alter their figure, some
for the better and some for the worse, being put into Ponds. Again in Animals;
the Learned Doctor Harvey in the end of his last Book de Generatione Animalium,
delivers an Opinion which at the first view seems wonderful strange, viz. That
the Conformation of the Proles, both in Men and Brutes, to their several
specifical Shapes and Configurations, is by a certain specifical operative Idea
in the Fantasy or Imagination of Animals, fixed and radicated in them, and
conformable to their several Species; and that monstrous or anomalous
Productions are by some disturbance or discomposure of that specifical Idea, by
some other inordinate Idea. And conformable hereunto seems the Opinion of
Marcus Marci, in his learned Book de Ideis formatricibus. Whatever the truth of
this Opinion be, it is not here properly examinable; yet it seems beyond
question, that as to some external Signatures, as Color, Shape, Figure, etc.
the Fantasy or Imagination of the Females as well Animals as of Mankind,
especially in momento conceptus and for some time after, has a great
Influence: Some there are that think that Jacob's change of the color of Sheep
and Goats by peeled Rods, Genesis 30.37. was partly at least upon a Physical
account; and he that reads Fienus de Viribus Imaginationis, and Sir Francis
Bacon in the latter end of his Natural History, will find such Changes by the
strength of Imagination as are very remarkable. It is probable, that in the
great plenty of Birds and Fowls in uninhabited Woods of the Western World, even
the several aspects of their Figure and Color in their seasons of Copulation
may make various Configurations and Colors in their Broods. 5. But that which
is more to my purpose, and of greater evidence, is this; Variety of Soils and
Climates makes admirable and almost specifical Variations even of the same
Species of Vegetables, Animals and Men: In Vegetables, a fruitful Soil or
Climate improves in Beauty, Bigness and Virtue; a barren Soil or Climate
impairs them: among Animals, the Indian Elephants are larger than the African;
the English Mastiff degenerates in his courage and fierceness, at least in the
first succession by generation, when brought into France; the Barbary Horse is
of a finer Spirit and Make than the Flanders Horse, yet degenerates in a great
measure in the first or second generation, when removed from Barbary. Nay let
us look upon Men in several Climates, though in the same Continent, we shall
see a strange variety among them in Color, Figure, Stature, Complexion, Humor;
and all arising from the difference of the Climate, though the Continent be but
one, as to point of Access and mutual Intercourse and possibility of
Intermigrations: The Ethiopian black, flat-nosed and crisp-haired; the Moors
tawny; the Spaniards swarthy, little, haughty, deliberate; the French spritely,
sudden; the Northern people large, fair-complexioned, strong, sinewy,
courageous: nay we may see in more conterminous Climates, even in those of
ours, great variety in the People thereof; the Up-lands in England yield
strong, sinewy, hardy Men; the Marsh-lands, especially about Somersetshire, Men
of large and high stature; the Welsh that inhabit the Mountains, commonly
sharp-visaged. And there is no less difference in the Humors and Dispositions
of People inhabiting several Climates, than there is in their Statures and
Complexions. And it is an evidence that this arises from the Climate, because
long continuance in these various Climates assimilate those that are of a
Foreign extraction to the Complexions and Constitutions of the Natives after the
succession of a few Generations.

And upon this account there may be great variety in the Color, Figure and
Make of diverse Birds and Animals in America from those in the Eastern World,
and yet both have the same original extraction; for there is no less variety in
the Brutes and Birds of Africa from those of Europe or Asia, and yet nothing
impedes their mutual commigrations, being the same Continent, though differing
Climates.

And therefore although Acosta and others tell us of Brutes and Birds in
America that are not found in Europe or Asia, it does not at all enervate the
Sacred History; it is possible there may be the like in Africa, or some Parts
of Asia which yet Acosta never traveled. 2. But if not, they might arise by an
anomalous Mixture of Species. 3. Possibly they may be of the same Species with
the Primitives, but received some accidental Variations in process of time; as
the various kinds of Dogs here in England, Mastiffs, Spaniels, Hounds,
Greyhounds, etc. might in their Primitives be of one Species; the like may be
said of various kinds of Apes, Baboons, Monkies; of Elks, Buffalo's, and Cows;
the like of several sorts of Parrots, which primitively might be but one
Species, and receive accidental Variations in process of generations, by some
of the means above mentioned: and thus Crows, Daws, Rooks might be but a
bastard kind of Raven; the Royston Crow and the Cornish Daw, though they have
accidental differences from those among us, seem yet to be of the same kind
with ours; and so possibly might the Sheep of Peru, called by Acosta Pacos and
Guanacos, be primitively Sheep, but differenced by their long abode in
successive generations in Peru; the Auza's and Poulasses mentioned by Acosta,
lib. 4. cap. 37. may be but a Species of Ravens, though by the Climate
accidentally altered in bigness and shape.

These things I mention, that it may appear, That even in the same Continent,
wherein a mutual transition may be without difficulty, yet the very Climate may
as it were appropriate some Brutes to certain Countries, which yet might
without any great difficulty be at first Creation of them contained within
nearer bounds, and might upon the occasion of the Common Deluge be drawn
together into the Ark, and afterward by their wandering farther, and inuring
themselves to a certain Continent or part thereof, be accidentally changed, and
as it were appropriate to it: And also to show, That Animals even of the same
Original, Extraction and Species, be diversified by accustomable residence in
one Climate, from what they are in another. Therefore possibly as little
Consequence may be drawn against the common Original of the Capita specierum
Animalium in Asia and America, as may be drawn from the diversity of some kind
of Animals inhabiting in diverse parts of Europe, Asia or Africa, which
notwithstanding is one common Continent. I do therefore conclude, That the
variety of the Brutes and Birds in America from those in Asia, where the Ark
was made, is no Argument against their Original from those that were preserved
in the Ark: Because that it does not yet appear, that those that are now known
in this World do differ any more than accidentally from those in the Western
World, viz. either by the Couplings and Mixtures of Animals of several Species,
or by reason of the Variety of the Climate, or Temperament thereof; which
Variations might be acquired by a dispersion of them as well into America, as
other parts of Europe, Africa or Asia, after the Universal Deluge.

As to the Second, namely, The difficulty of the first Migration of Brutes and
Birds from Asia where the Capita specierum were first created, and after in the
Ark preserved; I shall first deliver my self from the lesser difficulties of
the Objection, and afterward consider the greater.

1. It seems but little difficulty touching the translation of Birds from hence
thither: for although without the supposition of Plato's Atlantis, or some
number of smaller Islands in a convenient distance in the Atlantic Ocean, it
is hardly possible to suppose that any Fowls could maintain a flight from Spain
or Africa, cross the Atlantic Ocean into America; yet there are other Seas
between some parts of Europe and Asia, and the Northern parts of America, where
Fowls by flight might pass from hence thither, as the Fretum Anian, and the Sea
bordering upon Norway and Finland.

2. As to the Water-Fowls, the difficulty is less, for they can and do supply
the weariness of a long flight by taking Water, and infinite numbers of them
are found in Islands far remote from any Continent, and even in the main Ocean.

3. As to Domestick-Fowl, as Hens, Geese, Turkies, etc. and tame Animals for
use, delight, or food, as Horses, Dogs, Hogs, Sheep, Goats, Deer, Apes,
Monkies, Peacocks, Parrots, etc. of which America is furnished; there is as
little difficulty but they might be transported by shipping either for use or
commerce, especially by the Africans, who had store of them; and even Peacocks
and Apes were an ancient part of commerce, 2 Chronicles. 9.21. and Acosta, lib. 4.
cap. 33. tells us that the Dogs and Cattle transported not much above 20 Years
before his coming thither from Spain, were in that space so exceedingly
multiplied in St Domingo and other Islands possessed by the Spaniards where
there were none formerly, that they became wild, and filled all the Country,
that they were forced to use what means they could for the destruction of the
Dogs, and killed infinite numbers of Cows, merely for their Skins.

4. The only difficulty that seems to remain, is touching those ferine,
noxious, and untamable Beasts, as Lions, Tigers, Wolves, Bears, and Foxes with
which that Continent abounds: for it is not probable that these should be
transported by shipping; no Men would probably be at that charge and hazard
with such Beasts that would do more harm than good: And although possibly the
frozen Northern Seas might be a Bridge for their passage, yet that seems
unlikely in respect of the great Snows that accompany such Frosts, and the
impossibility of a supply of food in so great and troublesome a Journey: And as
to Swimming, though it has been observed that Bears have swimmed into Islands
many Leagues from the Continent to prey upon Fowls, and to return again; and
though the Seas between Tartary and Cathay and some parts of America be not so
wide as the Atlantic or Pacifick Ocean, yet they are too large to afford a
passage by Sea, especially for Tigers and Lions, which are not so apt to take
the Water. And it is not yet certainly discovered, though conjectured, that
there is any Neck of Ground, or passage by Land from any part of Europe or Asia
into any part of the Continent of America.

There remains therefore nothing that I can reasonably conjecture to
accommodate the difficulty, but to suppose what I have formerly intimated; That
although it should be granted that there is now no such Land-passage extant,
yet within the compass of 4000 Years elapsed since the Flood there have been
some such Junctures or Land-passages between the Northern parts of Asia or
Europe, and some Northern parts of the Continent of America, or between the
South-east parts of China or the Philippine Islands, and the Southern Continent
(though lately there be discovered an interposition of Sea between the Island
del Fuogo and that Southern Continent) whereby either from Asia to Groenland in
the North, or from China to Terra australis incognita on the South a
Land-passage might be from Asia to America for Men and Brutes, though for some
Ages past either by the violence of the Water, or by Floods or Earthquakes,
which has made great alterations in the Globe of the Earth and Seas, that
Bridge or Line of Communication be now broken and obliterated. And truly he
that observes the infinite company of Islands lying between the Continent of
China and Nova Guinea, almost contiguous to each other, has probable reason to
believe that these were all formerly one Continent joining China and Nova
Guinea together, though now by the irruption of the Sea crumbled into many
small Islands.

CAP. VIII. The Seventh Evidence of Fact proving the Origination of Man,
namely, The Gradual Increase of Mankind.
I Come to the Seventh Evidence of Fact, which seems with much strength and
clearness to evince the Origination of Mankind, and that within such a Period
of Time as the Sacred Scriptures propound, namely, The Gradual Increase of
Mankind upon the Earth.

And because I mean thoroughly to examine this Consideration, I shall propound to
my Enquiry these ensuing Particulars.

1. Whether according to the ordinary course and procedure of Nature in the
Generations of Mankind, there be not a gradual and considerable Increase of
Mankind upon the face of the Earth, unless some collateral Emergency or
Occurrence interrupt or correct that Increase.

2. What Correctives there may be supposed that may check and restrain that
Increase of Mankind, that otherwise according to the ordinary course of Nature
would have obtained in the World.

3. Whether those Correctives or collateral Occurrences which have been, or may
be supposed to have been in the World, have so far prevailed, as totally to
stop that Increase of Mankind, which upon a Natural account, without the
intervention of such Correctives would have obtained.

4. Whether notwithstanding all these Correctives of the Increase or Excesses
of Generations, yet if still the numbers of Mankind have increased, it be not a
sufficient Argument to satisfy a reasonable Man that Mankind had an Inception,
and that within such a period or compass of Duration as is not of a vast or
prodigious Excess.

I shall begin with the first of these, and I shall suppose, and I think
clearly evidence, That without the intervention of some accidental or
collateral Corrective, Mankind must needs increase upon the Earth, and that the
Generations and Productions of Men and Woman in an ordinary, regular and
constant course of Nature, do very much exceed the Decays of Mankind by Natural
course of Mortality, allowing into the Account those common Decays of Mankind
by ordinary, usual and common Diseases incident to Individuals.

The Laws, especially of the Romans and others, have determined the Legal Ages
of Matrimonial Conjunction of a Man to be 14, of a Woman to be 12; Prudential
Considerations have protracted it longer. Plato in his Third De Legibus allows
and determins the Age of the Woman should be between 16 and 20, of the Man to
be between 30 and 35: we will suppose the medium to be for the Man 26, for the
Woman 20. Aristotle determins the extreme time for Generation in the Man to be
70, for the Woman 50; the medium to be 65 for the former, 45 for the latter: we
will take a shorter medium for both, and suppose the extreme term for
Procreation for Man to be 55, for the Woman to be 40 Years; upon this account
the terminus or periodus procreativa to be 20 Years: And although within that
Period there is a possibility of procreation of 20 Children, yet considering
that all Pairs are not of that fertility, we will take the medium to be less
than a third part, viz. 6.

And because upon a due Observation of the Sexes of Mankind, especially by such
as have curiously observed the Registers and Calculations of Births and
Burials, there is some, though not very considerable excess of Males above
Females, viz. as 14 to 13, or in some places, as 16 to 15 (an evidence of the
wise Providence of God, to bring the number of each Sex to so near a parity)
yet allowing a redundance to the Males, to supply those many Casualties
whereunto Males are subject by Wars, Navigations, and other Occurrences that
more exhaust the numbers of Men than Woman. Therefore we will allow to
Productions of five Couples, about 16 Males and 14 Females; which though not
exactly answering either of those proportions, yet comes near to them, namely,
16 Males to 14 Females.

And because partly through the weakness of Infancy, and those Diseases that
happen to Youth either by reason of intemperance, indiscretion, want of of
care, and the ebullition and fermentation of Blood, more dye before 20 Years
than between that age and 50, we will suppose, of those six Procreations only
two attain to the state of future Nuptials and procreation of succeeding
Generations; therefore we will allott only two of these six to attain to the
state of Men and Women, and consequently in an ordinary course of Nature live
to the common age of Mankind.

And although the common age of Mankind, when they are passed the danger of
Childhood and Youth, is 70 Years, yet because I would have my Supposition as
easy and general as may be, I shall allow 60 to be that ordinary Age, abating
great Casualties and Epidemical Diseases.

And upon this account we may justly suppose these things; 1. That these two
Children may be coexisting with their Parents for near 30 Years; for if the
eldest be born at 27 Years of the age of the Father, and the other at 30 Years
of his age, and live till the Father be 60 Years old, the youngest is 30 Years
old at the extremity of his Father's age, which we suppose 60 Years: and 2.
These two Children by Intermarriage may have likewise two, three, or more
Children by that time the Father attains 60 Years: So that in the compass of
about 34 Years the number of two, namely the Father and Mother, is increased to
the number of eight, namely, the Father and Mother, their two Children, and
four Grandchildren; so that in 34 Years they become increased in a quadruple
proportion, and all coexisting: and although by that time we suppose the Father
and Mother dye, yet in the like Period of thirty four by a Geometrical
Proportion their Increase is multiplied proportionnable to the Excess of their
number above Two.

But if we shall suppose that the Technogonia began sooner, as at 17 or 18
Years, and continued longer, viz. until 65, and that the Ages of Men's Lives
were protracted generally to 70 Years, the Increase would be very much greater.

And upon this account it is, that considering the long Lives of the Ancients
shortly after the Flood, and the long continuance of their strength of
Procreation, Petavius in his 9th Book De doctrina Temporum; cap. 14. and before
him, Temporarius in his Chronology gives us a plain Demonstration, That within
the compass of 215 Years after the Flood the Sons of Noah and their Descendents
might without a Miracle increase to prodigious and incredible multitudes. The
number of coexisting Individuals is by one of these Authors with very clear
evidence computed to 1219133512, descended from one of the Sons of Noah. And
therefore, that allowing the beginning of the Syrian Monarchy to have been
about 153 Years after the Flood, it might shortly after the beginning of Ninus
his Empire, which is supposed to have been about 215 Years after the Flood,
have grown to that greatness, that might easily render credible the mighty
Cities that were built by him, and the great Armies that he raised, and the
Battles that he fought, and vast Slaughters that he made and suffered; But if
we should follow the Account of the Septuagint, which gives us a far greater
Period of Time from the Flood to Abraham, the advantage of the Increase would
be signally greater; although the common Account of the Jews render the
Increase easily credible, without the help of a Miracle.

And because that there can be no greater evidence of this Truth of the
Increase of Mankind than Experience and Observation, neither can there be any
Observation or Experience of greater certainty, than the strict and vigilant
Observance of the Calculations and Registers of the Bills of Births and Deaths;
and because I do not know any one thing rendered clearer to the view, than this
Gradual Increase of Mankind, by the curious and strict Observations of a little
Pamphlet, entitled Observations upon the Bills of Mortality, lately printed, I
shall not decline that light or evidence that this little Book affords in this
matter; wherein he plainly evinceth,

1. That the number of Males to Females is regularly as 14 to 13, or as 16 to
15. Cap. 8.

2. That supposing the number of breeding Couples to be 48000, in about the
space of 7 Years, in a healthy time, or in 8 Years, if there be Plagues, the
great City of London, which is not so healthy as the Country, will double,
without the help of the access of Foreiners: and therefore Adam and Eve
doubling themselves every 64 Years, would in the Period of 5610 Years, the
supposed distance from the Creation of Man, produce a far greater number of
Mankind than are now in the World. Cap. 11.

3. That in the Country, which is generally more healthy than London, upon a
medium of Observation of 90 Years, there are five Births for four Burials,
sometimes three to two, and seldom in any Year these Burials equalled or
exceeded the Births; or if they did, yet the succeeding Years balanced it to
that proportion of 5 to 4; for in the space of 90 Years 1059 were Born in one
Parish more than were Buried. Cap. 12.

4. That this Redundance did not much increase the place or Parish it self,
because by transmigrations to London, to Foreign Plantations, and other places
of Trade, they disburthened the proportion of their increase, and added to the
greatness and amplitude of other places, especially London.

5. That considering the small excess of the number of Males above the number
of Females, and considering the redundancy of the number of Males is only
sufficient to make good that decay of Males above Females, by Wars and
Navigation, and other Accidents more incident to Males than Females; there is
very near a parity of Males and Females in the World, to keep it in a
consonancy and congruity to the first institution of Matrimonial society
between one Man and one Woman.

6. That consequently Polygamy does not in the general conduce to the Increase
of Mankind, because the natural or ordinary proportion between the number of
each is equal. But in as much as by reason of the great Consumption of Males
among the Turks, by diverse Accidents, especially that of their great Wars
between them and the Persians, Tartars, Christians and Moors; whereby there is,
or at least in some Ages was, a great redundance of the number of Woman above
the number of Men: The use of Polygamy allowed among them, gives a greater
increase of People than otherwise would be; because of the excess of the number
of Women above the number of Men, by such Accidents.

These are some of those plain and evident Observations of the seemingly
inconsiderable Pamphlets; which give a greater Demonstration of the Gradual
Increase of Mankind upon the face of the Earth, than a hundred notional
Arguments can either evince or confute, and therefore I think them worthy of
being mentioned to this purpose.

Upon all which, and much more that might be said, it is evident, That
according to the ordinary course of Nature, though those common and usual
Accidents of common Sicknesses, ordinary Casualties, and common Events are
incident to Humane Nature; the number of Mankind does and must necessarily
increase in the World, and the Natural Supplies of Mankind are greater, and
more numerous than the Decays thereof. I now therefore come to the Second
Consideration, namely, The Examination of the extraordinary or more universal
Correctives of the Multiplication of Mankind, which because it will be large, I
shall allow unto it a distinct Chapter.

CAP. IX. Concerning those Correctives of the Excess of Mankind which may be
thought to be sufficient to reduce it to a greater Equability.
I Come now to the Second premised Consideration and Inquiry, viz. Whether
there may not be found some extraordinary Occurrences and Correctives, that may
reduce that otherwise Natural and ordinary Increase of Mankind to an
Equability: And I call them Extraordinary, not simply in respect of themselves,
but in opposition to those daily and ordinary Casualties which happen to Humane
Nature; and in respect of those great Distances and Periods, whether certain or
casual, wherein they may be supposed to happen: And I shall improve this
Objection against the Increase de facto of Mankind, with the greatest
impartiality and advantage that may be.

It is certain that the Increase of Brutes, and other Animals which are perfect
and univocally generated, is very great in the World: Aristotle, that
inquisitive Searcher into Nature, in his 4th Book of the History of Animals
has given us an Account touching most Animals, of the length of their Lives,
times of their Breeding, intervals of their Birth; wherein though possibly
there may be variation in several Climates, yet his Account may give a near
estimate, proportionable also to other places.

For Instance, the Cow breeds in the second Year, brings forth the tenth Month;
lives 15 or 20 Years: the Mare breeds the third Year, brings forth in the
twelfth Month; lives 25, 30, and sometimes 40 Years; the Sheep and Goat bear in
the second Year, bring forth in the beginning of the sixth Month, sometimes
two, ordinarily but one; lives 10, 12, or 13 Years: Sows breed in the second
Year, bring forth after four Months; their Young numerous: Bitches breed in the
latter end of the first or beginning of the second Year, bring forth after
threescore Days, or in the ninth Week; their Young many, 5, 6, or sometimes 12;
they live 10 or 12, sometimes 15 or 20 Years: Wolves breed and bring forth as
Dogs, only their number fewer, sometimes 2, sometimes 3, sometimes 4: the Do
brings forth after eight Months complete, but one, and sometimes two; and live
long: the Fox breeds 4, the Cat 5 or 6; and lives 6 Years, many times more: the
speedy and numerous increase of Mice is prodigious; Aristotle mentions 120
produced of one Female in a very little time; Pliny in his 11th Book, Cap. 63.
has in effect transcribed Aristotle herein.

By this it appears, That the Natural Increase of these Animals is much greater
than of Men, yet their numbers have not arrived to that great excess, because
those that are for food have their reduction by their application for that
purpose; those that are domestical, and not for food, as Cats and Dogs, are
kept within compass by drowning or destroying their Young; and those that are
noxious, as Wolves and Foxes, are reduced by that common destruction that Men
pursue them with.

Touching Birds, their Increase seems to be much greater than of Men or Brutes,
but they have those reductions that bring them to a fair equability, unless it
be in those Islands and Rocks in the Sea unaccessible by Men, where Sea-Fowls
breed. First, their number is reduced by Man for food: 2. For destruction, as
in Birds that are noxious: 3. By the natural shortness of the Lives of many
that are yet numerous breeders: 4. By the mutual destruction of the weaker by
Birds of prey; whereof more particularly hereafter: 5. By the Winter cold,
which starves very many, either for want of heat or food; and of this more
hereafter.

Fishes are infinitely more numerous or increasing than Beasts or Birds, as
appears by the numerous Spawn of any one Fish, though ordinarily they breed but
once a Year; and if all these should come to maturity, even the Ocean it self
would have been long since over-stored with Fish. Now the Correctives and
Reductions of these are very many. 1. Aristotle observes in his 6th de Historia
Animalium, cap. 13. Those Eggs that are not sprinkled, aspergine seminis
genitalis maris, prove unfruitful; a great part are devoured by the Male, and
much more by other Fish: some of their Eggs are buried in the slime, and
corrupted. 2. Many are taken by Men, and employed for food. 3. As among Birds
and Beasts they are Beasts and Birds of prey, which are less numerous than
others, so especially among Fish: And though the Wisdom of Providence has
given certain Expedients to Animals, especially Fishes of the weaker nature, to
escape the voracious; as swiftness to some, smalness to others, whereby they
escape to Shallows and Shoars unaccessible to the greater: and to those that
are not able to move, or at least not to move swiftly, the protection of
Shells; as Oysters, Escalops, Crabs, Lobsters and other Shellfish; yet a very
great number are devoured by the voracious kind. I do remember, that a Friend
of mine having stored a very great Pond of 3 or 4 Acres of ground with Carps,
Tench, and diverse other Pond-fish, of a very great number, and only put in two
very little small Pikes; at 7 Years end, upon the draught of his Pond, not one
Fish was left, but the two Pikes grown to an excessive bigness, and all the
rest, together with their millions of Fry devoured by those pair of Tyrants. 4.
Birds also of prey, as Storks, Herons, Cormorants, and other Fowl of that kind
destroy many both in the Sea, Rivers, Ponds and Lakes. 5. Extreme Frost,
especially in Ponds and Lakes, make a great destruction of Fish, partly by
freezing them, partly by the exclusion of the ambient Air, which insinuates it
self into the Water, and is necessary for the preservation of the Lives of
those watery Inhabitants. 6. By great Heats and Droughts, not only drying up
Lakes, Ponds, and Rivers, but also tainting the Water with excessive heat; and
though these two do not so much concern Seafish, who have more scope and room,
yet they have a great influx upon Rivers, Ponds, and Lakes.

Again, to say something of Insects, whether aerie, terrestrial, or watery; they
seem to be more numerous than the common sorts of univocal Animals, who have an
univocal production. For first, their first production is strangely numerous,
out of Putrefaction and much Moisture, influenced by Heat. Hence Diodorus
Siculus in his first Book tells us of the numerous productions of Mice after
every Inundation of Nilus, sensibly and visibly growing out of the slime;
Juxta, Thebaidem, cum Nili cessavit inundatio, calefaciente Sole limum ab aqua
relictum, multis in locis ex terrae hiatu multitudo Murium oritur: which
Aristotle also observes, as frequent in other places, lib. 5. de Histor.
Animal. cap. 37. Locis enim compluribus tam inaudito modo oriri solent, ut
parum ex universo frumento relinquatur. And in my remembrance, after the
drayning of the great Level in Northamptonshire, and other Shires, such an
innumerable company of Mice did upon a sudden in the Summer time arise, as it
were immediately out of the slimy Earth warmed by the Sun, that they were
constrained to cut their Banks to drown the Lands, and so cure one Inundation
with another.

The like numerous production of Frogs happens in some Years, which Aristotle
in the first Section of his Problems, and Sir Francis Bacon out of him makes a
Prognostic of a sickly Year; because such Productions are the effect of a
great degree of Putrefaction in the Elementary Bodies. And we read, that in
Norway there was not long since such innumerable company of Field-Rats of a new
Make produced, somewhat larger than Rats, that they threatened a general
Consumption of all their Fruits, but by some extreme hard weather they were
destroyed; yet so as the multitude of their Carcases produced a noysom
Contagion in the Country. And the like numerous production every Year gives
us, though some Years more than others, of diverse other kind of Insects, as
Flies, Locusts, Worms, Caterpillars, and diverse others, which in some Countries
so abound, that they cover the face of the ground, especially in the parts of
Africa: quod vide, in the 9th Book of Leo his History of Africa, and those
additions out of Paulus Orosius and Alvarez in confirmation thereof. 2. As this
original spontaneous production is very numerous, so the multiplication of
these Insects by their Eggs or Seeds is infinitely more; their Lives are short,
some dye within the compass of one Summer, as the Silkworm: yet a curious
Observer of that Insect, namely Malpighius, has given us an account of the
number of Eggs of one Silkworm in one Year to be above 500; though all possibly
prove not fruitful, yet preserved carefully from the injury of the Winter, many
of them come to perfection the next Spring: And it is apparent that the Erucae,
Caterpillars and Worms we see upon Hedges and Leaves, multiply their Seeds to a
very great excess; and this is much more visible in the Spawn and production of
Frogs, and also in the multiplication of Mice, the blowings of Flies, and
almost all kind of Insects; though their Lives are shorter, yet their
productions are more numerous and frequent in the short Period of their Lives,
than the perfect Animals. So that if there should not be some Corrective of the
excesses of their Productions, the whole Atmosphere, Earth and Waters would be
crowded with their numbers: The contrary whereof is nevertheless apparent, for
the multitudes of one Summer are for the most part exhausted, and invisible by
the next Spring.

The Correctives therefore of the numerous Excess of Insects seem to be
principally these: 1. The Industry of Mankind, in destruction of noxious
Insects. 2. The Wise Providence has placed a certain Antipathy between some
Animals, and many Insects, whereby they delight in their destruction, though
they use them not as food: As, the Peacock destroys Snakes and Adders; the
Weasel, Mice and Rats; Spiders, Flies; and some sorts of Flies destroy Spiders.
3. The common sort of Insects are the ordinary food of diverse Animals, as well
Insects as others: The Spider and all sorts of small Birds, especially the
Swallow, feed upon Flies; the Mole feeds upon Worms; Ducks and diverse
Waterfowl upon Frogs; the Cat and Owl upon Mice: and thus Insects become the
prey of other Animals, which correct their excess. 4. As the hot and moist
temperament of the Air and Earth produce and increase Insects, so that
temperament of the Air, Earth, and Waters that seems most opposite to
Putrefaction, either destroys many of the Individuals, or at least renders
their numerous Eggs and Seeds unfruitful, and resists as well the original
Production of them from Putrefaction, or abates the Prolifick power of their
Eggs or Seeds. 5. Great Rains, and Showers, and Inundation of Waters drowns
oftentimes many sorts of Insects, and renders their Seeds and Eggs unprolifick,
or destroys them. 6. But especially the Winter Cold, Frost and Snow do kill
many Insects, and their Eggs and Seeds, and renders them unfruitful. The Cold
and Winter season is a great Enemy not only to Insects, but to many sorts of
Birds, Beasts and Fishes: and therefore Aristotle most truly observes in his
8th Hist. Animalium, cap. 13, 14, 15, 16, etc. that to avoid the severity of
the approaching Cold, many of them retire into the closest and warmest Caverns
they can get; wherein some lie for many Months without the benefit of Food, and
if they escape the severity of the Cold, they as it were revive the next
Spring. For instance, Serpents hide themselves 4 Months, Swallows betake
themselves all the Winter to low Valleys and Caverns, Tortoises close up
themselves in Holes and Earth all the Winter, as is obvious to daily
Experiences; Et Insecta pene omnia conduntur, praeter ea quae vitam in
domiciliis cum hominibus agunt, quaeque prius intereunt quam omnino tempus
excedunt. And therefore Bees keep themselves close in their Hives, ab ortu
Vergiliarum, till the next Spring. And yet, though Nature has given Insects
this Sagacity to avoid the Winter Cold, yet they are not always successful in
it, but the severity of the Winter finds them out, and destroys them: But as
for their Seeds or Eggs, which in the precedent Summer are laid up and down
upon Leaves, and in other places, they are for the most part destroyed by the
Winter; except such as casually by the Wind or otherwise are dispersed, and
lodged in safer Receptacles, and thereby survive the inclemency of the Winter,
and yield a new Production or Increase the next Spring.

And thus we have seen the Methods and Correctives, that by the Divine
disposition of these small and inconsiderable pieces of Nature are used;
whereby at once there is a preservation of the Kind of those little Animals,
and yet a prevention of that Excess and Redundance which would happen by their
numerous Increase, to the detriment and surcharge of the inferior World.

In all this Consideration of the Reduction of Excesses and Increase of Animals
and Insects, two things are observable in a special manner, namely;

1. That in the state of Animals and Insects, we may see something that is
analogal to the state of the Elementary and mixed Inanimate Bodies; that there
are some more active and vigorous Qualities, that seem continually to exercise
a Sovereignty and Tyranny over the more passive and weak Natures, and prey upon
them: Thus Heat, and also in some degree Cold, are always persecuting and
foyning at the weaker and more unactive parts of Nature: So among Brutes,
Birds, Fishes, Insects there is a continual invading and prevalence of the more
powerful, active and lively, over the more weak, phlegmatic, and unactive
Creatures; the Bear, Lion, Wolf, Dog, Fox, etc. pursue the Sheep, Oxen, Hare,
Coney, etc. and prey upon them: the like is evident among Birds and Fishes, and
generally Insects, being the weaker and more inconsiderable parts of Nature.

2. That the vicissitudes of Generation and Corruption are by a kind of
standing Law in Nature fixed in things, and the Notions and Qualities of
Natural things are so ordered, to keep always that great Wheel in circulation;
and therein the Accesses and Recesses of the Sun, the Influxes of the Heat
thereof and of the other Heavenly Bodies, and the mutual and restless Agitation
of those two great Engines in Nature, Heat and Cold, are the great Instruments
of keeping on foot the Rotation and Circle of Generations and Corruptions,
especially of Animals and Vegetables of all sorts.

3. That yet these Motions of Generations and Corruptions, and of the
conducibles thereunto, are so wisely and admirably ordered and contemperated,
and so continually managed and ordered by the wise Providence of the Rector of
all things, that things are kept in a certain due stay and equability: and
though the Motions of Generations and Corruptions, and the Instruments and
Engines thereof are in a continual course, neither the excess of Generations
does oppress and over-charge the World, nor the defect thereof, or prevalence
of Corruptions does put a Period to the Species of things, nor work a total
Dissolution in Nature.

And upon this seemingly impertinent Diversion touching the Reductions and
Correctives of these inferior Animals, there may seem to be collected
reasonably an analogical Inference of the like means of the Correctives of the
Generations of Mankind; and that although in an ordinary course of Humane
Productions the Increase surmounts the Decay, yet there may be reasonably
supposed such Periodical Corrections as might fairly keep the state of Mankind
in a mediocrity and equability, although it should be supposed the Generations
of Mankind had been Eternal.

And although these Correctives may not happen every Day, or every Year in the
ordinary course of things, and therefore may be called extraordinary, because
they are less ordinary than the common Casualties of Mankind, as Sickness or
Accident that happens to this or that individual Person promiscuously; yet they
are in truth no more extraordinary, than a cold Winter is extraordinary; which
although it is not every Day, nor does it happen every Year possibly in an
equal Degree, yet it is no extraordinary thing in Nature, if it happens once in
5, or 10, or 20 Years.

Having therefore considered these Correctives in the inferior Animal Nature, I
shall now search out what may be those Correctives, that may be applicable to
the Reductions of the Generations of Mankind to an Equability, or at least to
keep it within such bounds as may keep it from surcharging the World; whereby
if in the Period of 2, or 3, or 4000 Years it may grow too luxuriant, yet it
may in probability be so far abated, as may allow it an Increase of the like
number of Years to attain its former proportion. So that by these Prunings
there may be a consistency of the Numbers of Mankind, with an eternal
succession of Individuals.

Those Reductions that may be supposed effectual for these Ends, and such as
the course of Mankind seem to have had great Experiences of, are, 1. Plagues
and Epidemical Diseases: 2. Famines: 3. Wars and Internecions: 4. Floods and
Inundations: 5. Conflagrations.

1. Concerning Plagues and Epidemical Diseases, the Histories of all times give
us Accounts of the great Devastations that they have made in many places: and
sometimes it has been, it is true, only in some particular Regions or Cities,
but at other times it has been more universal; and although at the same time,
in some Seasons, it has not universally prevailed, yet it has gradually and
successively moved from place to place.

The ancient Plagues of former Ages in Foreign Parts have been very terrible,
and cut off multitudes of People: See a Collection of some of them by Dr
Hakewill, lib. 2. sect. 3. as, namely, That Plague in Ethiopia, and also in
most parts of the Roman Empire, in the Year of Christ 250; which continued 15
Years, and left not so many People in Alexandria as there were formerly aged
Men: that under Justinian, in Constantinople, and the parts adjacent; wherein
there dyed 10000 in a Day: that in Africa, whereby according to Procopius, in
the Country of Numidia there dyed 800000 Persons: that in Greece, under Michael
Duca; which so prevailed, that the living were not sufficient to bury the dead:
and that in Italy, in the Year 1359, whereby there were not left ten of a
thousand; this possibly may be the same mentioned by Walsingham, but referred
to the Year of Christ 1349; that prevailed over the World, beginning in the
Northern and Southern parts, that the living were not able to bury the dead:
Existimabatur a pluribus, quod vix decima pars hominum fuisset relicta ad
vitam: and presently after followed a great Murrain of Cattle; so that he
concludes, Tanta ex his malis miseria secuta est, quod mundus ad pristinum
statum redeundi nunquam postea habuit facultatem. Vide Lipsium de Constantia,
lib. 2. cap. 23.

And if we look upon our own Country, besides those great Plagues that have
been in a manner universal, there have been very many such in England;
sometimes more general, sometimes more circumscribed to particular Cities or
places: As that Plague in the North parts of England, mentioned by Walsingham
in the beginning of R. 2. that in a manner depopulated those Parts: that
mentioned by the same Author, Anno 7 H. 4. whereby there dyed in one Year 30000
in London (which was considerable then, considering the narrowness of the City
in those days, comparatively to what it now is) besides the great desolation it
made in the Country.

If we come to latter Years, both in England and in Foreign Parts, the
Observator of the Bills of Mortality before mentioned has given us the best
Account of the Number that late Plagues have swept away; for Instance, In
London, Anno Dom. 1592, of the Plague 11503 Anno Dom. 1593 10662 Anno Dom. 1603
30562 Anno Dom. 1625 35400 Anno Dom. 1636 10400 Anno Dom. 1665 68596

We have also Accounts of the great Devastations made by the Plague in late
Years in Foreign Parts: In Amsterdam, between 1622 and 1664 84564 And in the
Year 1664 24148 Anno 1637 at Prague 30000 Anno 1652 at Cracovia 37000 Anno 1656
at Naples 30000 Anno 1657 at Genoa 70000 Anno 1619 at Grand Cairo in 10 Weeks
73500 And Leo in his History of Africa, tells us, that the Pestilence is so hot
sometimes in that City, that there dye 12000 almost every Day; and Pliny in 7.
Not. Hist. cap. 50. says that the Southern Plagues happen most in the Winter,
and move Westward, according to the course of the Sun; which some have observed
also in the Northern, that it sometimes held a gradual Motion, and for the most
part Westward; as in 1652 at Cracovia; 1653 at Dantzick; 1654 at Copenhagen;
1655 at Amsterdam, and other Towns in the Netherlands; 1656 at Naples and Rome;
1657 at Genoa. And I have somewhere read, that in Alexandria in Egypt the
Plague is Anniversary, beginning with the Rising of Nilus, which is about the
17th of June, and continues rising 40 Days, sometimes 12, sometimes 15 Cubits,
and in its greatest excess to 18 Cubits, and as many Days decreaseth; so that
the Plague lasts 80 Days, and then perfectly cease with the full Ebb of
Nilus.

So that upon the account of Plagues, and extraordinary Epidemical Diseases,
there seems to be a great Corrective of the Redundance and Increase of Mankind.

2. Let us a little take notice of Famines, which though they have not been of
late times much observed, partly because of the great Industry of Mankind,
improving and increasing the Fruits of the Earth; partly by those Supplies that
have come by Sea to those Countries that are in want; but principally by the
goodness of God, in lending the Children of Men seasonable Weather, and
fruitful Seasons, and prosperous Influences: yet in former times they have been
very grievous, and destroyed multitudes of People.

Walsingham in the Life of E. 2. tells us of so severe a Famine in England,
that they were enforced to eat Dogs and Horses, yea and stole Children and eat
them; viz. 9 E. 2. And diverse other Instances our own Histories give us of
other great Famines in this and other Countries.

Ordinarily a Famine and a Plague anciently went together, or the former
followed upon the heels of the Plague, by reason of some of these means: 1.
Commonly the same distemperature of the Air that occasioned the Plague,
occasioned also the infertility or noxiousness of the Soil, whereby the Fruits
of the Earth became either very small, or very unwholsom: As it happened in
that Famine under E. 2. above mentioned, in so much that the Historian tells
us, that Medicinales herbae, quae levamen languidis confer solebant, per
Veris intemperiem and Elementorum inaequalitatem, contra naturam effectae
degeneres, virus pro virtute reddebant. 2. Commonly the Plague among Men was
accompanied or followed with a Rot or Murrain among Cattle, whereby the flesh
of Beasts was wanting, or noxious to those that used it. 3. Commonly by a great
and general Mortality or Plague the Husbandmen and Laborers were so
diminished, that there wanted People to gather in the Harvest, or Till the
Ground, whereby there necessarily ensued a Famine: And oftentimes by a kind of
necessity Famines were durable, the Stock being exhausted one Year, left little
for the supply of Tillage, Husbandry, or Increase for the next.

And as Famine was anciently the Concomitant or Consequent of Plague, so both
Plague and Famine, especially the latter, were the usual Consequents of War,
which bring with it Devastation and Destruction, and a general intermission of
that Husbandry and Care that should supply it.

The terrible Effects of Famine, and the great Consumption of Mankind that is
occasioned, was principally 1. Of the Poor, who upon the bare increase of the
Price of Victuals, and wanting wherewith to buy, must needs occasion their
starving, or a tumultuous gaining it by force, where they could not get it;
which was but a short and temporary Relief, and made more want after, by the
spoil and disorder occasioned thereby. 2. Of numerous Armies, who being brought
into places of want or scarcity without due Conduct or Provision, are
oftentimes destroyed in a Week, especially in close and long Sieges, as it
happened in Samaria when besieged by the Assyrians, and Jerusalem when besieged
by the Romans, wherein more dyed by the Famine than by the Sword.

So that Famines as well as Plagues seem to give a great Reduction to the
Numbers of Mankind.

3. A few words may serve concerning Wars, which are so frequent, and bring so
great a Desolation upon Mankind, that it seems to equal that allay of the
Excesses of Brutes, Fishes, Birds, and Insects, by the other Beasts, Birds, or
Fishes of prey; and the rather, because many if not all the considerable Parts
of the World are some Years at it, though it may be some Ages free from
Pestilences and Famines (other than such as are consequences of War) but in no
Age nor Year of the World has it been quiet from Wars, and those calamitous
consequences thereof, at least in some considerable parts of the World.

It would be endless, and indeed Morally impossible, to give an Account of the
Numbers of People and Armies that have been cut off by Wars, especially on the
side of the Conquered. Some few Instances may give some kind of Estimate herein.

Diodorus Siculus in his third Book tells us, that Ninus in his Preparation
against the Bactrians gathered an Army of 1700000 Footmen, 200000 Horsemen,
10600 Chariots: that Zoroastres his Army consisted of 400000, who in the first
Conflict prevailed, and killed 40000, but were afterward wholly destroyed; so
that probably in that War there fell no less than 400000 Men: Darius Hystaspis
in the Battle of Marathron, whither he came with an Army of 600000, lost in one
Battle 200000: his Successor Xerxes went into Greece with an Army, according to
some, consisting in the whole number of it and its Appendices, of five
Millions, those that spoke most sparingly, of above one Million; all which
within the space of five Years were in effect wholly lost. Vide Lips. de
Constant. lib. 2. cap. 21, 22, 24. Alexander destroyed the Army of Darius,
consisting of a Million of Men, the greatest part whereof fell by the Sword:
and Pliny in his 7th Book of his Natural History, Cap. 15. tells us, that
Julius Caesar, and his Armies in the time of His Command, killed 1192000
persons, besides those that he slew in the Civil Wars: And if by the Estimate
of that one Man, we might make a Calculation of those that were slain by the
Assyrian, Babylonian, Persian, and Grecian Monarchies, by Cyrus, Darius,
Astyages, Alexander and his succeeding Captains; by Marius, Sylla, Pompey,
Vespasian, and the succeeding Roman Emperors; by Tamberlane and the Scythians;
by the Goths, Vandals, Turks, Tartars, Muscovites, Persians, Moors, and
Christians; by the Wars in this little Spot of England; by the late Wars in
France, Spain, Germany; by the Spaniards in the West Indies, the numbers of
Internecions and Slaughters would exceed all Arithmetical Calculation.

So that it should seem, there needed no other Reductive of the Numbers of Men
to an Equability, than the Wars that have happened in the World.

And although Wars are in a great measure accidental, or at least proceed in a
great measure from the Wills of Men, their Pride, Ambition, impatience of
Injuries, affectation of Dominion, mutual Jealousies and Fears of the Potency
of each other, and oftentimes accidental Emergencies and Occurrences; yet it
seems, that abstracting from all these Occasions, Wars seem to be in a manner a
Natural Consequence of the over-plenitude and redundancy of the Number of Men
in the World: And so by a kind of congruity and consequence, morally necessary
when the World grows too full of Inhabitants, that there is not room one by
another; or that the common Supplies which the World should afford to Mankind
begin to be too few, too strait, or too narrow for the Numbers of Men; that
natural propension of Self-love, and natural principle of Self-preservation
will necessarily break out into Wars and Internecions, to make room for those
that find themselves straightened or inconvenienced.

So that as when the Channel of a River is overcharged with Water more than it
can deliver, it necessarily breaks over the Banks to make it self room; or when
the very Brutes or Animals find themselves oppressed and straightened in their
provisions and supplies, by the redundance of their numbers, one necessarily
preys upon another, or destroys another to preserve it self: So Wars among
Mankind are a kind of necessary Consequence of Redundance of Mankind, and will
by a kind of Natural necessity make it self room, and give it self ease by the
destruction of others, if it can get power and opportunity to do it: And
consequently there seems to be no fear of the surcharge of the World with
Mankind, because there is this natural and necessary Remedy at hand; the very
Redundance it self of Mankind seeming by a natural consecution to yield and
subminister this Remedy, for its Reduction and Equation. As in a redundance of
Humors in the Body, the most lively and active do naturally thrust out those
that are weaker or noxious, to make room for themselves: or as Bees swarm to
get new habitations, when they are so increased that their Hives will not hold
them.

4. Concerning the Fourth, and also, inclusively the Fifth Corrective of the
Excess of Mankind, namely, Inundations and Conflagrations.

Those that have been Observers of things in Nature and Histories of former
times, have given us Instances of two kinds of Mutations in this Terrestrial
Globe of Earth and Waters: some that are more ordinary, and of less moment, and
of such various have been in the World; such are those mentioned especially by
Pliny in his Natural History, lib. 2. cap. 85. and seqq. some places severed
from the Continent by the interruption of the Sea; thus he tells us that Sicily
was divided from Italy, Cyprus from Syria, Euboea from Boeotia, Atlantis and
Macris from Euboea, Bosticum from Bythinia; and some have thought, though
perhaps upon very small evidence, that England and France were sometimes one
Continent, and divided by the interruption of the Sea; and Spain from Africa.
Again, some Cities and Countries swallowed up by the Sea; as Pirrha and
Antissa, Elis and Buta, half the City of Tyndaris in Sicily, and 30 Miles of
the Island Cea, with a great destruction of Men and Cattle: some Countries
wholly swallowed up and drowned in the Sea; as Acarnania, Achaia, part of
Europe and Asia in Propontis: but above all, that great Island of Atlantis,
supposed by Plato in his Timaeus to be greater than Lybia and Asia, swallowed
up in the Atlantic Ocean, to which it gives its denomination: but Plato is
oftentimes so Poetical, that we can hardly tell where he means in earnest.

But on the other side, many times the Sea by a certain recompense makes new
room for the Inhabitants of the World, sometimes by producing notable Islands;
thus the same Pliny tells us that Delos, Rhodes, Anaphe, Nea, Thera, and
Teresia, Hiera, Automate, Thia were produced.

Again, the Sea has deserted vast Tracts of Ground in diverse places, and left
them dry Land, as is related by Aristotle in the second of his Meteors, Cap.
14. and by Pliny in a great measure, out of him and Herodotus. Thus
considerable quantities of Land were left by the Sea at Ephesus, at Ambracia
and other Parts; and that a very great part of Egypt, namely, that called Delta
is but the accretion of Nilus, and was sometime covered with Water: and
according to the conjecture of Herodotus, the Sea possessed Memphis and a great
part of Egypt, to the Mountains of Ethiopia. But these are but Conjectures of
the Historian, of what might be in some thousand Years before he was born.
Aristotle indeed supposes, that the City Thebes and the adjacent Parts, were
all that were habitable in Egypt in the time of Homer, because he makes no
mention of Memphis.

But these smaller Vicissitudes, and mutual borrowings and payments between the
Earth and Sea, are not those Mutations which so much contribute to the
Reduction of Mankind; partly, because they are gradual and give Men opportunity
to escape; and partly because they are not such Devastations as may be pares
huic negotio (unless we believe that wonderful swallowing up of the vast
Island, or rather Continent of Atlantis,) and partly because the Sea, which
commonly gives in one place what it takes in another, and so makes room for the
Inhabitants of the World in compensation of what it takes.

2. Therefore I come to those greater supposed Correctives, namely, 1. Floods
and Inundations: 2. Incendia, Burnings; and again, both, or either of those are
also varied, according to the Opinions of some of the Ancients.

1. They are either such as were all at one time, and did wholly overwhelm and
confound this lower World: or 2. They are such as did not wholly dissolve the
lower Word, or put a period to all things living therein.

Again, the former Opinion that held these Cataclysms and Empyroses universal,
was such, as either held that it put a total Consummation unto things in this
lower World, especially that of Conflagration: Or else such, as though it quite
for the present confounded the Face of things, especially in this inferior
World; yet it was but preparative to a new Formation of things, wherein all
things would be put into better Order, till in process of time they again
degenerate, and so were to receive another Purgation by Fire or Water,
according to the fatal Vicissitudes to which the World is subject: And they
suppose, that these successive unmaking and making again of the World (not
unlike the Suppositions of Anaxagoras or Empedocles) were Eternal, and should
eternally continue in this Vicissitude; that the last Destruction of the World
was by Water, and that which is to succeed is by Fire: And this was for the
most part the Opinion of the Stoics, whereof Lipsius in his second Book de
Physiologia Stoicorum, cap. 21, 22, etc. has given us a large Account, out of
Seneca especially, and others which are not necessary to be repeated; and the
rather, because they do suppose that Mankind is neither Eternal nor Perpetual,
according to the course of Natural Generation: For these mighty Concussions of
Nature, especially that of the Universal Conflagration, puts an end to all the
Race of Mankind and all living Bodies; though in the Redintegration of the
World after these Destructions there is also a Re-production of Mankind, but
not by the ordinary method of Propagation as now.

Again, as to those others that held also certain Periodical Cataclysms and
Conflagrations, yet they held them not to be Universal, nor any Universal
Dissolution or Destruction of the inferior World thereby; but they were such as
were great and notable Devastations, sometimes in one part of the Earth,
sometimes in another; either by certain Rotations, or at least in some places
more than in other, acocrding to the accommodation or disaccommodation of them
to such Calamities: As the Valleys and lower grounds were more subject to
devastation by Floods, so the more Mountainous parts were more subject to the
desolations by Fire and Conflagrations.

Plato, who seems very uncertain and unsettled in his Philosophy, seems yet to
agree with this partial kind of exhausting the numbers of Men and Brutes, by
such partial Floods and Conflagrations.

In his third Book of Dialogues, de Legibus, he gives us an Account of various
Methods of the Declinations of Civil Societies, and of those Laws and Customs,
Arts and Sciences in several parts of the World: and again, how and by what
degrees they have been repaired and recovered; the means whereof he assigns not
only to be Wars and Epidemical Diseases, but great Floods and Conflagrations,
which, together with those of Aristotle relating thereunto, I shall transcribe
out of the Latin Translation, because perchance more significant than the
English, though not so significant as the Language wherein they wrote. And this
I do intend to transcribe more largely, because they seem to contain the full
declaration of the Instances of this nature.

He tells us therefore in the beginning of his third Book de Legibus; Multos
hominun interitus ex diluviis, morbis, aliisque permultis, olim accidisse, ex
quibus pauci homines superstites fuerunt. Again: Eos qui cladem tum evaserunt
(scilicet ex diluviis) montanos quosdam pastores fuisse, in montium cacuminibus
pauca semina ad propagandum genus humanum conservata: atqui necesse est eos
aliarum artium fuisse expertes, campestres autem and maritimae urbes funditus
illo tempore perierunt. Instrumenta igitur omnia, and quaecunque artium sive ad
disciplinam civilem sive ad facultatem aliam pertinentium, extabant inventa,
concidisse illis temporibus. And afterward: Ex ea itaque devastatione magnam
terribilemque humanis in rebus desolationem tunc accidisse arbitramur;
fertilium agrorum magnitudinem desertam, caeterisque animalibus corruptis, vix
boum caprarumque genus, and illud quidem rarum relictum fuisse, quibus
pascendis tunc homines vitam agebant; civitatis vero and disciplinae civilis
and legum memoriam quidem nullam fuisse putamus. Tempore igitur progrediente,
etc. genere hominum multiplicato, ad eum quem nunc videmus habitum provecta
omnia sunt.

Again, the same Plato though in his Timaeus he gives us an Account of the
Origination of Mankind, yet he supposes that a vast Period interceded between
that Origination and the Age wherein he lived; and within the compass of that
Period, that there happened very great and very many vicissitudes of Floods and
Conflagrations in this inferior World, whereby the state of things here was
variously altered, and the Numbers of Mankind and Animals corrected and reduced
at several times to small proportions, only sufficient to replenish the World,
until such time as its Excess and Increase received again a like Correction or
Reduction, by the like Revolutions of Floods and Conflagrations, though still
without a total destruction of the Species.

In this Book he gives us a personated Discourse between Solon and an Egyptian
Priest, who after some discourse of the Antiquity of Athens, the Priest tells
him; Vos Graeci semper pueri estis, nec quisquam e Graecia senex, quia juvenis
semper vobis est animus, in quo nulla est ex vetustatis commemoratione prisca
opinio, nulla cana scientia: Nam quod apud vos fertur Phaetontem quondam Solis
filium currus ascendisse paternos, nec patris aurigatione servata, exussisse
terrena, ipsumque flammis coelestibus conflagrasse; quamvis fabulosum videatur,
verum quodammodo esse putandum est: Fit enim longo temporis intervallo
coelestis circuitus permutatio quaedam, quam inflammationis vastitas necessario
sequitur: tunc hi qui edita incolunt loca magis pereunt quam mari fluviisque
vicini. Nobis proro Nilus cum in plerisque rebus nobis salutaris est, tum
hujusmodi a nobis arcet exitium. Quando vero Dii aquarum colluvione sordes
terrarum diluunt, pastores ovium atque bubulci qui juga montium habitant,
periculum illud evadunt; vestrae autem civitates in planitie sitae, impetu
fluminum ad mare rapiuntur: Sed in nostra regione neque tunc, neque alias
unquam aqua in agros superne descendit; contra vero sursum e visceribus terrae
scaturit: quamobrem antiquissimarum rerum apud nos monumenta servantur.
Proinde, ubicunque nec imbrium tempestas nimia, nec incendium ingens contingit,
licet alias plures, alias pauciores, semper tamen homines sunt. Quaecunque vero
sive a nostris, sive a vestris, sive aliis nationibus gesta sunt memoratu
digna, modo ad aures nostrorum pervenerunt, nostris in templis descripta
servantur. Apud vos quidem and alias gentes res gestae nuper literis
monumentisque traduntur, sed certis temporum curriculis illuvies immensa
coelitus omnia populatur; ideo qui succedunt, and literis and Musis orbati
sunt: quo fit, ut quasi juvenes iterum sitis, and rudes, praeteritarum rerum
omnium prorsus ignari. Nam and ea ipsa quae modo ex vestris historiis
recensentur, a fabulis puerilibus parum distant; primo, quod unius tantum
inundationis memineritis, cum multae praecesserint; deinde, quod genus majorum
vestrorum in regione vestra clarissimum ignoretis: ex quo, tu, and Athenienses
cateri nati estis, exiguo semine quondam publicae cladi superstite: quod
propterea vos latuit, quia superstites illi eorumque posteri, literarum usu
multis seculis caruerunt. Then he tells him of the Building of Athens by the
Goddess Athena, 9000 Years since, ex terra and Vulcano accipiens semina: the
great Wars between them and the Inhabitants of the vast Island Atlantis,
greater than Lybia and Asia: the swallowing up of that Island by an Earthquake,
Jugique unius diei and noctis illuvione. Afterward Timaeus begins, and
proceeds with his Narrative touching the Production of the Universe, and
therein particularly of Mankind, which I shall have occasion hereafter to
mention.

Thus this great Master seems to countenance the Supposition of the
vicissitudes of Conflagrations and Floods, especially of the latter, certis
temporum curriculis; and thereby the excessive multiplication of Mankind
corrected, and the vicissitudes of Arts and Laws interrupted, lost, restored,
and repaired: Only he supposes Egypt free from those Floods and
Conflagrations; though it seems necessary; that if Inundations prevailed in
Greece and those upper Countries, Egypt, that seems to lie much lower, could
not easily escape them, though they have no Rain that might occasion them. But
the Priest mingles some strange and improbable Stories with his Supposition of
those Vicissitudes.

Aristotle the Scholar of Plato differed much from his Master: 1. In his manner
of writing, which was much more steady and severe than the Writings of Plato,
who mingled Poetical Fancies with the things he delivered, and seems very
uncertain and unresolved in most things of great importance. 2. In his
Position; for Plato seems not to hold at least the Elementary World Eternal,
though very Ancient: But Aristotle, following rather the Opinion of Ocellus
Lucanus, and not being able to digest those many difficulties he found in the
Hypotheses of the Inception of the World, supposes it Eternal, and an eternal
consistency in the state it now stands; but not without some partial,
successive and periodical Changes in the Elementary World.

And therefore in this Supposition of the successive partial Floods or
Inundations, and Conflagrations, whereby great Changes happen, and a fair
Corrective and Reduction of the Excess of Mankind, he much agrees with Plato.
And he gives us a large and learned Account of his Judgment herein, Lib. 1.
Meteor. cap. 14. in these Words; Eadem terrae loca neque semper fluida, neque
semper arida sunt, sed pro fluminum ortu aut defectu, faciem mutant suam:
Quamobrem diversitas inter Mare and Continentem existit, nec perpetuo alia pro
Continenti, alia pro Mari habentur; sed ubi terra aliquando patuit, mare
superfunditur; and ubi nunc mare, terra exaggerabatur. Suspicarique debemus,
haec omnia ita fieri ordine quodam and ambitu; horum autem principium causaque
existit, quod interiores quoque telluris parts, perinde atque animantium
plantarumque corpora, juventutem atque senectutem habeant. Verum istis haec per
partem subire nequaquam contingit, sed simul totum javenescat aut senescat
necesse est: Terrae particulatim hoc idem ob frigus and calorem accidit; haec
igitur accrescere simul ac decrescere propter Solis calorem conversionemque
assolent. Then he proceeds to show, how that successively some parts of the
Earth grow moorish or watrish, others dry, where it becomes barren; Fountains
and Rivers decay, and sometimes break out in other places; that this makes
Changes in the Sea and Land. At quia omnis quae circa terram fit generatio non
nisi successione and tempore, respectu vitae nostrae quam longo, fieri solet,
ista nobis haudquaquam advertentibus fiunt. Atque prius universae gentes
intereunt pereuntque, quam horum mutatio ab initio ad finem usque memoria
teneri queat: Maximas itaque celerrimasque clades praelia advehunt, alias
morbi, nonnullas sterilitates; and hae quasdam statim magnas, quasdam lentas
adeo, ut talium quoque gentium transmigrationes nos lateant, propterea quod
alii regionem deserant, alii eo usque sustinent, quoad nullam amplius
multitudinem alere regio queat. Inter primam igitur novissimamque loci
derelictionem, tempora interveniant adeo longa par est, ut nemo meminisse
possit; imo incolumibus etiamnum hisoe qui remanserint, longi temporis injuria
oblivio irrepserit. Eodem autem modo latere existimandum est quando primum
singuli populi, quae permutata essent and arida a palustribus aquosisve facta,
inhabitare coeperint. Then he gives Instance in Egypt; Etenim locus ille
totaque regio, quae fluminis tantum invectu nata est, semper aridior fieri
videtur: That all the Ostia Nili, except one, were made by Art, and not by the
River: That anciently Egypt was no more but the City of Thebes; which he proves
out of Homer; shows, that in the time of Troy that part of Greece inhabited by
the Argivi was Marish, and had but few Inhabitants, but now become fruitful and
populous: That part of Greece inhabited by the Miceni was fruitful and
populous, now become barren. Quod igitur in isto loco, qui parvus, accidit, hoc
idem etiam circa loca magna accidere censeamus oportet. That there is no cause
to conceive the Sea less than formerly; for though some places sometimes
covered with Water, are added to the Continent, yet in other places the Sea
has gained upon the Land. Attamen hujusce rei causa ad mundi generationem
haudquaquam referenda; ridiculum enim foret ob parvas brevesque mutationes
Universum moveri asserere. Porro, Terrae moles atque magnitudo ad totum Coelum
nihil profecto est. Verum horum omnium causam existimemus oportet, quod ut
elapsis certis temporum spatiis, inter anni tempora hyems; ita magno quodam
circuitu hyems magna, and imbrium excessu sieri solet: at hic non semper eisdem
in locis efficitur, sed perinde ut vocatum dilivium quod tempore Dencalionis
accidit; etenim hoc circa Graeciam maxim, and eam potissimam partem quam
antiquam Hellada vocitant, factum est, etc. Cum autem necesse sit quandam
mutationem esse Universi, non tamen ortum and interitum; siquidem ipsum maneat
necesse est non semper eadem loca mari, aut amnibus humectari atque siccescere,
quod reipsa quae fieri solet liquido constat. And concludes, That Egypt, Cujus
homines antiquissimos esse diximus, is nothing but a Production of the River
Nilus, that is lower than the Red Sea; and therefore that Sesostris and Darius
gave over that Attempt of cutting the Neck of Land between the Red Sea and
Egypt, for fear of drowning that Country: That the Lake Moeotis is shallower,
and not able to bear Ships of that burden as it did 60 Years before, by reason
of the Slime carried thither, which will in time dry it up: That Lakes grow by
the exaggeration of Sand by the Sea, which Lakes in time grow dry: That Tanais
or Nilus and all other Rivers were sometime dry Land, and did not run where now
they do. At vero si amnes habent ortum and occasum, nec semper eadem terrae
loca scatent aquis, ipsum quoque mare simili modo mutari oportet, quod cum
assidue alia deserat, alia invadat, patet universae terrae tractus eosdem hos
Mare, illos Continentem non esse, sed tempore cuncta permutari.

I have mentioned these places of these Masters of Learning and Reason the more
at large, not only because they herein give the sharpest Objections against the
necessity of a Temporary Beginning of Mankind, by applying these Suppositions
as Correctives or Reductions of the excess of the Generation of Men and
Animals; but also they do discover herein some things that are useful in this
Inquiry: For Instance, 1. It appears hereby that the Inventions of Arts,
Sciences, and Laws might be far more ancient than those times that Historians
gave for their Invention: for they might be in other Places or Ages, and either
by a successive rotation brought from one place to another; or if they were
lost, yet succession of Ages might retrive new Discoveries of them again. 2. We
have a plain detection of the means whereby possibly the American People might
have their deduction from the Europeans or Asiaticks; because it is not
impossible but the Continents might be in some Ages or other contiguous, though
now disjoined by the mutations of the situations of Seas; though the certain
times of those Changes are not transmitted by History to our Age. 3. That the
ancient Histories of things, by Depopulations, Wars, Famines, Inundations,
Transmigrations of People, and other Accidents may be lost in after Ages, which
possibly in former Ages might be known, and some Monuments thereof than extant,
which are now obliterated and forgotten.

Thus far concerning these Reductives by Inundations and Conflagrations, out of
the Princes of the Academical and Peripatetical Philosophers: We shall find the
like Suppositions frequently among the Stoics, Seneca may be an Instance for
all that Sect, only these vary from the former: for although they do with the
former admit and instance in temporary and partial Inundations by Earthquakes
and other Accidents, de quibus vide Senecam. l. 3. Not. Quaest. de Terrae motu:
yet these go farther, and suppose Universal Deluges and Conflagarations, which
will quite alter the whole Frame of this lower World, and the whole Face
thereof. See the Rhetorical Description thereof, Senec. in sine lib. 3. Not.
Quaest. Qua ratione inquis? Eadem qua conflagratio futura est; utrumque fit cum
Deo visum ordiri meliora, vetera finire. Aqua and ignis terrenis dominatur; ex
his ortus, ex his interitus. And out of Berosus assigns the Times and Periods
of these Universal Deluges and Conflagrations: Arsura enim terrena, quando
omnia sidera quae nunc diversos agunt cursus in Cancrum convenerint, sic sub
eodem posita vestigio ut recta linea exire per omnes omnium possit:
Inundationem futuram cum eadem siderum turba in Capricornum convenerit; illic
solstitium, hic bruma confinitur. But yet he supposes a Restitution of the
World after these Destructions: Nec ea semper licentia undis erit, sed peracto
exitio humani generis, extinctisque pariter feris in quarum homines ingenia
transierant, iterum aquas terra sorbebit; natura pelagus stare, aut intra
terminos furere coget, rejectus e nostris sedibus in sua secreta pelletur
Oceanus, antiquus ordo revocabitur: omne ex integro animal generabitur,
dabiturque terris homo inscius scelerum, and melioribus auspiciis natus: sed
illis quoque innocentia non durabit nisi dum novi sunt, cito nequitia subrepit;
virtus difficilis inventu est, rectorem ducemque desiderat; etiam sine magistro
vitia discuntur.

I shall spare mentioning any more to this purpose, though many more Instances
may be given out of the Philosophers of all Sects, and Poets, as Ovid and
others.

Only I shall subjoyn these two Inquiries, and so conclude this Objection.

1. Whence it is that these Ancients had these Conjectures touching these
Floods and Conflagarations, so as to frame them into an Hypothesis either for
the Castigation of the Excesses of Generation, as Aristotle and Plato; or to
the total Dissolution thereof, as the Stoics; and the means that wrought this
Persuasion seem to be these:

1. The things that seem to prevail with the Academicks and Peripateticks for
these Partial Floods and Conflagrations, seem to be those dark and obscure
Histories of the things of that nature which had twice before happened in
Greece: Namely, for Floods, the Tradition of the Diluvium Ogygium, or Diluvium
antiquius, which is supposed by Chronology to be under Ogyges King of Attica,
about 1000 Years before the first Olympiad; about 248 Years before the Flood of
Deucalion in Thessaly; about 532 after the General Flood in the time of Noah;
and about the 2951 Year of the Julian Period, and of the World 2187, though
there is some variation among the Computations of Chronologers. This was a
Partial Flood, as it seems, in Attica, part of Greece. 2. Diluvium Deucalionis,
which was also Partial, and about 248 Years after the former, in the time of
Cecrops first King of Athens, or as others, in the time of Cranaus his Son:
This is that mentioned by Plato and Aristotle, that drowned a great part of
Greece, only some saved by Deucalion by bringing them to the top of Parnassus:
And out of the History of Moses touching the Universal Flood, and the History
of Deucalion, Ovid made up his first Book, attracting in a great measure to the
latter what was written of the former by Moses.

And for Conflagrations; they had two traditional Conflagrations in and near
Greece, which might give some countenance to this Persuasion: namely, 1. That
of Phaeton, Incendium Phaetontis, which seems not to be long after the Flood of
Deucalion, though much of the Relation thereof, as the Grecians, and Ovid after
them made, was a Poetical Fiction; yet it seems it had something of reality in
it, as is observed by Plato, ubi supra. 2. Idae Incendium, which was no great
business, but an Eruption of Fire out of the Hill Ida, as now in Etna: this was
about 73 Years after the Flood of Deucalion.

2. As to the Stoics, who held Universal Inundations and Conflagrations,
possibly they might have the former of these from the Traditional Relation of
the Universal Flood of Noah, which Relation they believed, and upon that
founded their Supposition of the like Inundations; being acquainted with the
History of the Flood, but not with the Covenant that God made never to bring a
Flood again. 2. As to that of the Universal Conflagration of the World, it
seems it was a known, ancient and received Tradition among the Jews before our
Savior's time, reinforced by him and his Disciples: This seems to be implied
in that Prophecy of Enoch, Jude 14. and by ancient Tradition, either from Noah
or the ancient Jews this Persuasion might be Traditionally derived to the
Gentiles, and believed by the Stoics.

2. It appears by what has been before transcribed, That these Philosophers
supposed those Inundations and Conflagrations to be at great distances of
times, and yet to be in some sort Periodical, and with a kind of stated
Revolutions. Plato supposes his Floods to be certis temporum curriculis:
Aristotle supposes his Floods to be also Periodical, Haec omnia fieri ordine
quodam and ambitu; and again, Magno quodam circuitu hyems magna and imbrium
excessus fiunt, bearing some proportion to our Season of the Solar Year.
Therefore it may be fit to consider what kind of Year this must be wherein this
Hyems magna is supposed to happen.

Seneca as before has given us out of Berosus some description of the Periods,
namely, when all the Planets shall meet in one straight Line drawn from the
Center of the Earth to the Tropic of Cancer, then the great Conflagration
shall happen; and again, when they meet in the like position under the Tropic
of Capricorn, then the Universal Deluge shall happen. So that these two
Conjunctions divide that Annus magnus into two parts, and the Summer-Solstice
thereof shall be for Conflagration, the Winter-Solstice for the Inundation, or
that Magna hyems which Aristotle has assigned for his Periodical Inundations.
But what is that Magnus annus wherein these Revolutions must happen, or what
number of Solar Years it contains is uncertain, some assigning a Period that
seems too short, some a Period of a wonderful length.

Censorinus, de Die Natali, cap. 10. speaking of this Magnus annus whereof
Aristotle's Winter seems to make the Conclusion, gives us several Estimates of
the same, some making them 2484 Years, others 5552 Years, others 10224 Years,
others 100020, others 360000 Years, and others supposing it Infinite, and that
such a Conjunction will never happen.

Macrobius in Somn. Scipionis, lib. 2. cap. 11. both describes and determins
this Magnus annus to be when all the Heavenly Bodies shall return to the same
position as they were in any time given, which he resolves to be 15000 Years,
in which all the Heavenly Bodies shall be in the same position as they were
15000 Years before. So that if we should assign the Caput anni to be (...) this
Day and Year wherein I write, at the end of 15000 Years all the Heavenly Bodies
will be in the same position that how they are; this he calls Annus mundanus.

Josephus, lib. 1. Antiquitat. cap. 4. in fine, determins that the Magnus annus
is 600 Years; and yet the Flood happened not till 1656 Years from the Creation;
which according to the Supposition therefore of Aristotle should be the Magnus
annus, and that Year the Winter-Solstice thereof.

Plato supposes that the Magnus annus animarum is 12000 Years, for in that
Period the Soul has run through all the Spheres and Dances of the Gods and
Demons, and returns to its first Station; and the Annus magnus mundanus
consists of three of those Periods, namely, 36000 Years, wherein the Soul of
the World has performed its great Circuit, or one Revolution of the eighth
Sphere: vide Marsil. Ficin. prolog. in lib. 10. Platonis de Republica: and then
not only all the Heavenly Bodies will be just in the same position in which
they were 36000 Years before, but all Humane things will be in the same state
as they were.

Alter erit tum Typhis, and altera quae vehet Argo
Dilectos heroes; and erunt itidem altera bella,
Ad Trojamque iterum magnus mittetur Achilles.
The Egyptians had their great Apocatastases; viz. 1. Apocatastasis dierum,
which was 1461 Days: 2. Apocatastasis annorum aequabilium, which was 1461
Years: 3. Their Apocatastasis magna, consisting of 25 Apocatastases annorum,
which amounted to 36525 equable Years; which was their Magnus annus
canicularis, whereunto Manetho accommodates his fabulous Egyptian Dynasties.

There seems to be another Annus magnus, viz. the Motion of the ninth Sphere or
Chrystallin Heaven, from West to East; which though some to make it agree with
the Magnus annus Platonicus suppose to be 1 Degree every 100 Years, in all
performing its Revolution in 36000 Years, according to the great Platonic
Year; yet Alphonsus allows a greater number of Years to that Revolution, viz.
49000 Years: and others I think more. But I think that we shall not be able to
fit the Seasons of this Year to the Magna hyems Aristotelica, or his
Winter-quarter; because 1. We know not whether any of these, or any other that
can be found, will suit with these Instances upon which it may be thought he
grounds his Supposition; for the Incendium Phaetontis and the Flood of
Deucalion happened very near one the other, as also the Incendium Idae: and
besides, if that Flood of Deucalion had fallen within the Winter-quarter of any
of these Anni magni, it would have had a longer Influence upon the World, and
extended at least successively to all the several Parts thereof. For the
Winter-quarter of the Magnus annus Platonicus, if it had any thing of
proportion to our Seasons, must have been a fourth part of that Magnus annus;
and then it had lasted above 8000 Years: But howsoever it must upon the lowest
Account have lasted a thirty sixth part, viz. 1000 Years; and then the Effects
thereof would certainly have been more permanent and extensive than to one or
two Floods in Greece. 2. Again, could we know the extent of this Magnus annus,
yet we can never find the Caput anni, when it begins, and consequently cannot
possibly assign any probable Period for the Seasons of it; unless we shall
fondly with Virgil suppose it began with the Birth of his Patron Pollio's Son,
Jam redit and virgo, redeunt Saturnia rgna.

Again, these must needs be merely Conjectures, and can have no possible
Evidence because merely depending upon Fact and Experience: it is not possible
that any Man, or any Age of Men can give us any Account of any one Revolution
of this Magnus annus, which amounts to 36000 Years.

Therefore it seems difficult, and utterly uncertain to suppose those
Inundations and Conflagrations to be Periodical in any proportion to any
supposed time or duration.

And thus far touching the urging of this Expedient for the Reduction or
Correction of the Excesses of the Generations of Men or Animals, by Periodical
Floods or Conflagrations; which though the Generations of Men were supposed
Eternal, might Regulate and Reduce their Numbers when beginning to be
immoderate, as our annual Winters correct the excrescence of Insects, whose
multiplication is far more excessive than that of Men, and would apppear so, if
we had a perpetual Summer; yet are reduced to a mediocrity and due equability
by the vicissitudes of Winter Cold and Rain.

CAP. X. The farther Examination of the precedent Objection.
I Have been the longer in the Explication and Inforcement of the former
Objection, because as the necessary and sensible Multiplication of Mankind upon
the face of the Earth by the ordinary course of Natural Generation, seems to be
the most sensible Evidence of Fact against the Eternal Succession of Mankind;
so the Reductives mentioned in the foregoing Chapter seemed with most Evidence
of Sense to weaken the Inference upon that Observation, and by the Supposition
of those continual or interpolated Correctives to render the possibility of an
eternal consistence of Propagations of Men, yet without an over-charging of the
World with a multitude inconsistent with its reception.

I shall now descend to the Examination of these supposed Correctives of the
excess of the number of Mankind, and how far the same may be true; or if true,
how far the same may be, or has been effectual to that end.

Wherein, first I shall set down what is to be agreed touching the same, and
wherein we differ from that Supposition of the efficacy, or availableness, or
accommodation, or suitableness of these Reductives to the end proposed, namely,
to the containing of the Generations of Mankind in such an equability and
proportion as may be consistent with an Eternal Succession of them.

Touching the first of these things it must be agreed, 1. That there have been
great Devastations and Decrements of Mankind by all or many of the Means
mentioned in the former Chapter, namely, Plagues and Epidemical Diseases,
Famines, and Sterilities of great parts of the World; Wars and Internecions,
not only in Battles and Fights, but even in Persecutions and Massacres, witness
the great cruelty of the persecuting Emperors against the Christians, the
cruelty of the Spaniards among the Indians, the violent bloodsheds of the
Papists upon the Protestants, as the late and former Instances abundantly
testify: And also by Floods and Inundations, especially that Universal Deluge
in the time of Noah, which probably did sweep away as great multitudes of
Mankind as are now existing upon the Earth, considering what a Product might
arise in the compass of 1656 Years, the interval between the Creation and the
Flood upon the shortest Account, though the Septuagint render it much longer:
and it is not easy to judge to what a Sum Mankind might arise to in such a
Period, considering the great longevity of Man's Life in those times; only it
is plain that it must needs arise to a greater proportion than thrice so long a
Period would yield, when Men's Ages were reduced to less than a tenth part of
the same longevity.

2. It is certain, that were it not for such Reductives as these above
mentioned, though we should suppose that the Capita humani generis were only
Noah and his three Sons, and that the Generations of Mankind began since the
Universal Flood, yet the multitudes of Mankind would in this Period since the
Flood have risen to such an excrescence, that according to the ordinary method
of Propagation (though the Lives of Men were no longer than now they are) that
the Earth would not have been able to have received its Inhabitants.

3. It is also therefore evident, that the most wise and glorious God has used
these Means above mentioned for most wise and excellent Ends. For it is the
high Prerogative and Advantage of his infinite Wisdom, to bring about
complicated and various excellent Ends in one and the same act of the
dispensation of his Providence, by Plagues, Wars, Earthquakes and Floods (all
which are at least permitted if not inflicted, but howsoever most wisely and
infallibly governed by him) he punishes the Sins and Enormities of Mankind,
and reduces the World to such a due proportion as may be consistent with their
convenience and reception in this Earth: And for this cause, while the World
was but thin and empty of Inhabitants, the Ages of Mankind were longer, and
more accommodated to the peopling of the World; and as the World grew by that
means fuller, so their Lives were successively reduced to a shorter scantlet,
till they came to that ordinary Age and time of Life which now they have, and
for near 4000 Years have held.

4. Therefore also it must be granted, that the apparent Multiplication of
Mankind upon the face of the Earth singly considered, is not any Demonstration
or Apodictical Argument against the Eternity of Mankind: Since, as it is most
evident, that there is a most wise and powerful God, who has a care of the
Inferior World as well as the Superior, and whose Providence (notwithstanding
the contrary Sentiments of Aristotle) reaches below the Moon, and governs the
World with much more Accuracy and Wisdom than a Gardener orders his Garden: I
say, since the Regiment of the World, and especially of Mankind, is so actually
under the Care, Wisdom, and Power of Almighty God, he that for near 6000 Years
by those Methods of his Providence above mentioned has kept the World of
Mankind in a due proportion and equability, which otherwise would have grown
too great for its reception; could have interposed with the like Correctives
for twenty thousand Years as well as six, and for a million or other
interminate duration for the time past or to come; and so have prevented that
enormous excrescence of Mankind, that in an infinite time or duration would
have long since surcharged the World; and upon a Supposition of a future
Sempiternity would produce the same difficulty, without such interposition of
the Divine Wisdom and Providence.

But all this while it must still be remembered, that this Supposition still
takes in the Wisdom, Providence and Regiment of the glorious God; for without
an intelligent Rector of the World, that ex intention thus orders the Affairs
of Mankind, these Reductives either barely, as accidental, or contingent, or
periodical and necessary, were not equal nor competent Reductives of the
Generations of Men, but would be too much or too little, or unseasonable in
time, place, measure, or other Circumstances for such a Business, as shall be
shown.

We therefore are not enquiring what the wise and glorious God might or could
do in order to the equable Reduction of the World, upon a Supposition of an
Eternal Duration; but we are upon a Question of Fact indeed, namely, What he
has done, and whether upon the Supposition of all those Reductives instanced
in the former Chapter, at least without the wise and intelligent Regiment of
God, they have been, or well could be: considering the nature and course of
things of that efficacy to correct the increase and excess of Mankind, that may
render it competible with an Eternal Duration.

I therefore shall now come to the things I oppose, and they are these two;
viz. 1. That these Means considered simply in themselves (without the Conduct
and Guidance and Interposition of the mighty God) are in themselves incompetent
and unsuitable to the Ends proposed: and 2. That de facto they have appeared to
be so; and notwithstanding their admission, yet de facto the World has in all
Ages increased.

Touching the former of these, the Incompetency of these Expedients to the End
proposed (considered singly in themselves) this will best appear by induction
of particulars.

For Famines, they are de facto incompetent to these Ends: for 1. There was
never yet known a Universal Famine, but the defects of one Country supplied by
another, as Canaan was by Egypt. 2. It is ordinarily not sudden but gradual,
and foreseen before felt in the extremity, which gives People opportunity of
transmigrations. 3. Though the ordinary supplies fail, yet necessity makes Men
ingenious and hardy, and if they have but Landroom or Sea-room, they find some
supplies for their hunger which they did not before think of or use; though it
be otherwise in a close Siege, but that is but a narrow compass, and not of
moment to be compared to the multitudes abroad.

2. Plagues are indeed a sharp and speedy Visitation, yet it has these Allays:
1. Many there are that are able to escape it by Flights, some by Physic, and
some by their Age and Complexion. 2. It is not ordinarily of long continuance,
the strength of the Disease seldom continuing longer than a Year. 3. Though the
Desolation be terrible while it lasts, yet it rarely consumes one half of the
Inhabitants. The late Computation of the Number of the Inhabitants, Men, Women
and Children in the City of London and the 16 and 10 Out-Parishes are estimated
at 384000, and about six Millions in the whole Kingdom of England. 2. The
greatest Plagues in our remembrance have not swept away above 100000 at most in
London and the Suburbs: Indeed that before mentioned by Walsingham, which was
in a manner Universal, and successively in several places of the World lasted
about 15 Years, is said to be so great, that scarce a tenth part of People
survived it; yet if it left a tenth part, suppose in England, it left near a
Million of People, which in a little time would and did recover and increase
considerably, as shall be shown. 4. Again, suppose the Devastation by Plagues
greater than History gives us an Account, yet it is for the most part a Disease
that reigns in some times and some places, it may fall in those places where
the numbers are already too small, and need an Increase. And so taken singly by
it self, is incompetent and unsuitable to the Excess, unless managed by the
wise Conduct of Almighty God.

3. Touching Wars and Internecions. It is true, it has been a great
Consumption of Mankind, but yet it is not an equal Corrective of the Excess of
Generations: 1. Though such have happened, and frequently, yet they seem
against the nature and disposition of Mankind, ordinarily and in a course of
Humane Constitution: Naturally Mankind is a sociable Creature, and more than
Bees, as the Philosopher observes; and though sometimes Passions, Jealousies
and Politic ends produce Wars, yet naturally Man is not a Creature of prey
upon others, as Lions and Tigers are. 2. Ordinarily, though Wars are by one
Kingdom or State upon another, yet they preserve their own Societies with
increase under Foreign Wars; and therefore Civil Wars as they are more
destructive, so they are more rare, because they are more unnatural and
destructive to that which Men usually are careful to preserve, namely, their
own Societies. 3. It seems an improper and unsuitable Corrective, because
Accident and the Wills of Men have so great an Influence in the production of
Wars; whereby it may fall out that Wars may happen in those Ages, Times or
Places, and consequently, Devastations upon them where or when they need not to
correct. And though it be true, that a Plethory or Excess of Numbers of Men,
sometimes by a kind of Natural or at least Moral Consequence cause Wars, yet we
have hardly known any produced singly upon that Account; though it has
oftentimes occasioned Transmigrations, deductions of Colonies, and new
Plantations; and the World has been never yet so full, but a weaker or
oppressed Party have sound room to retreat from the violence or insolence of
their Oppressors.

4. Touching Floods and Conflagrations. It is true that Almighty God as he
manageth the forementioned Reductives by his Wisdom and Providence, so he has
done these especially in that Universal Deluge: But as they are instanced in by
the Philosophers as Natural or Periodical Events whereby Mankind is reduced to
an equability, we have no reason to believe them. Therefore I say, 1. That
there does not appear, either in History or in the Observation of Nature, any
such Periodical Floods or Conflagrations; those that we have Relations of
happened indeed near together, and in the same Country, viz. in Greece, had
they been Periodical or Natural, probably either by a continued Circulation or
Rotation, or else by the interposition of some reasonable intervals, the like
would have happened before in Persia or some Easterly parts of Asia, or since
in Italy or Germany, or some other Western parts of the World, which we have
not observed to be. And therefore this Supposition of the Hyems magna, whereby
parts of the Earth should be successively drowned, seems to be only an
Imagination, or at least it cannot be known with any tolerable certainty; in as
much as the Periods are supposed to be vast, and not happening within any
competent time to give us an Observation or Proof thereof. And therefore
although we yearly see a reduction of the numerous increase of Insects, by the
Winter Frost and Storms yearly happening; we have no warrant from thence to
imagine that great Winter that must make the like reduction of Men and Brutes;
for every Year gives us Experience of the one, but never any Age gave us any
reasonable Observation, upon which to build an Hypothesis of the like
Periodical Revolution of the other: and the same I say touching Conflagrations.
Indeed there have been accidental and particular Instances of both, but not any
Periodical Return or Revolutions thereof, quasi in quodam ambitu and circuitu
naturali. 2. If such were supposed, yet unless they were very sudden, and very
general, they would not be sufficient to make the Correction: Men would escape
Floods by running up to Mountains and Hills, and though some might perish
through improvidence, or though the suddenness of a Deluge, many would escape.
3. Natural and Periodical Floods or Conflagrations would not be suitable nor
commensurate to the Increase, which depending either upon Accidents or the
Wills of Men, would possibly be more in one place than in another: The Country
of Palestine would be more peopled than the Sands and Deserts of Arabia, Egypt
than the Mountains of Ethiopia; and fruitful Countries, or Countries open to
Trade, and safe from Incursions and Invasions; more populous than barren
Countries, or such as are out of the way of Trade, or subject to Inroads: But
Natural and Periodical Floods or Conflagrations would probably keep some
constant or ordinary Tract or Course, either from East to West, or from North
to South; and possibly keeping in such a Climate or Latitude, possibly in
another; whereby possibly these Plagues might be more fierce in those places or
Continents where the World wants People, and less vehement in those places
where there needs a Corrective for their excess: If these should be Universal,
they would destroy the Race of Mankind; if Partial, they would be perchance
weak and insignificant Reductives of the excess of Mankind.

When all therefore is done, though it be plain that these and the like
Calamities are certain Reductives of the excess of Mankind, yet they are
incompetent of themselves, and upon a bare Supposition of Natural or Accidental
Effects. But it is true, as they are either brought and inflicted, or managed
and governed by a most wise and intelligent Being, they are useful, and wisely
applied to this End among others.

But in the whole management and conduct of these Events and Occurrences
whereby Mankind has been reduced and corrected, we shall observe very easily
that Mankind has still increased, and the World grown fuller, even to manifest
Sense and Experience, which was the second thing I propose to be considered.

2. Therefore I do affirm, That notwithstanding all these Ordinary and
Extraordinary Occurrences that have afflicted Mankind, as shortness of Life,
diverse Casualties and common Diseases, loss of Men by Navigation, the
Intemperance and Luxury of Mankind, the Weaknesses and destructive Sicknesses
incident especially to Infancy, Childhood, and Youth, Abortions voluntary or
accidental, and all those ordinary Casualties incident to our nature. And
notwithstanding also those great and vast Consumptions by Famine, by
Pestilence, by strange and Epidemical Diseases, by Wars and Battles,
Sea Fights, Internecions, Massacres and Persecutions, Earthquakes, Floods,
Inundations, Conflagrations, or what other extraordinary or terrible and
universal Accidents that have happened to Mankind in any or all the Ages past
since the Flood of Noah; Mankind has notwithstanding all these increased and
grown fuller, the Generations of Mankind have exceeded their Decays.

And because this is an Assertion of Fact, it is impossible to be made out but
by Instances of Fact.

And although it be impossible for any Man to give an Account of all the
Nations of the World collectively, and so to make out the Fact; yet if the
Instance can be made out in one or two Nations, whereof a true and clear
Account may be given, it will be more than a common probability that the same
may be concluded concerning the generality of Mankind.

And therefore I shall single out the Instances of two Nations, touching whom
the clearest Account of their Original and Increase may be given, and such also
as had as great an Experience of the severest of these Correctives, and
possibly much greater than any determinate People or Nation in the World
besides.

The first Instance I shall give is the Nation of the Jews, and I choose this
People for my Instance, 1. Because their first Original, and the time wherein
it began is most clearly, evidently, and unquestionably known, and the time
wherein it was. 2. Because their several Increases and Abatements and
Successions, with the several times thereof, even down to the last Dissolution
of their City under Titus, is most clearly by a continued History plainly and
authentically discovered. 3. Because by the strange and admirable Providence of
God, even since the Dissolution of their State and Republic they have been to
this day continued a separated People from the rest of the World;
notwithstanding their remarkable dispersion among all Nations, among whom they
have yet remained distinct as a signal Monument of the Divine Truth and
Justice, and for what other secret ends and purposes, is best known to the
Divine Wisdom. 4. Because this People has been in all Ages exercised with as
many Plagues and Slaughters and Devastations of all sorts, as ever any People
under Heaven were. And 5. Because the particulars of these Devastations, and
the several Times and Ages wherein they happened, and oftentimes the Numbers
cut off thereby are Recorded by the several Authentical Histories of that
People, which are extant to this day. And 6. Because their Increase even at
this day, as in their several antecedent Periods, is signal and evident to all
the World. So that what is verified touching the Increase of that People, may
in all congruity of Reason be assumed and determined much more touching any
other People, and all the People in the World: since none had ever greater
Instances of Abatements or Correctives of the Excess of their Number than this
People. Lastly, Because there can be no pretense that their decays or
diminutions by those Occurrences were supplied by the accession and conjunction
of others of other Nations to them: Since it was their Privilege in which they
gloried, and which they strictly and religiously observed, To keep themselves
separate and distinct from the rest of Mankind.

I shall not be scrupulous or curious in the Chronological niceties touching
their several Periods, because in this and other Computations that I have used
I do not aim at curious or precise Computations, but only to show the Order and
Series of Things for the discovery of what I intend; and therefore shall take
the Account of Helvicus, as being plainest and readiest at hand for my purpose.

Isaac and Rebecca were the two next immediate Parents of all the Families of
Esau and the Edomites, and Jacob and the Israelites.

In the Year of the World 2108 were Jacob and Esau Born: I shall leave the
Families of Esau, and carry down that of Jacob.

In the Year of the World 2238 Jacob goes down into Egypt, having then 70
Persons descended from him; which Increase was in the compass of about 130
Years after the Birth of Jacob, and about 70 Years after his Marriage with
Leah. Genesis 46.27.

The Israelites increase in Egypt, yet not without a great destruction of them
by their severe Bondage, and by the Slaughter of their Males. Exodus 1.

In the Year of the World 2453 the People of Israel came out of Egypt, which
was about 215 Years after the going down of Jacob to Egypt.

In a short time after the Migration of the Israelites out of Egypt they were
numbered, and the Number of their Males that were above 20 Years old then
amounted to Six hundred and three thousand, five hundred and fifty, besides the
Levites; from a Month old amounting to 22000. Numb. 1.46. and 2.32. and 3.39.
and if we should take into the number of the Eleven Tribes Women, and Children
under 20 Years old, we should reasonably have more than triple the number, viz.
above two Millions.

From this time to the time of Phinehas we have no certain estimate of their
Numbers, yet in this Interval they had very great Abatements and Diminutions,
as will appear by these Instances.

That all this number of People above 20 Years old, except Joshua and Caleb,
died in the compass of their 40 Years wandering in the Wilderness, Number. 26.65.
yet some of them could not exceed 60 Years of age.

Of the Plague 34000 in the Wilderness, besides the Accomplices of Corah: Numb.
16.49. and 25.49. besides those that died of Fiery Serpents. Numb. 21.

After the death of all that were before numbered, they were again numbered all
except the Levites; and the Number of all the Males from 20 Years old and
upwards, were Six hundred and one thousand, seven hundred and thirty: among
these was the Land after divided by Joshua. Numb. 26.51, 53.

I do not remember any Numeration of the People from this time till the time of
King David, and in that Interval that People suffered very great detriments.

1. By the Wars with the Canaanites under Joshua, wherein though they were
victorious, yet it could not be without great loss of Men.

2. After this they endured in the time of the Judges great diminutions under
the Kings of Mesopotamia, Canaan, the Midianites, the Philistims, the
Ammonites, besides about 65000 Men slain in the Civil Wars with the Benjamites.

3. The Wars in the time of Saul, wherein though he was often victorious, yet
at last he suffered a great Slaughter by the Philistims.

4. The Wars of David, both with Foreiners and the Rebellious in his own
Kingdom; wherein though he were victorious, yet those Victories could not be
obtained without great Losses: In the Business of Absalom 40000 of the
Israelites slain and lost in one Battle, 2 Samuel 18.7. in the latter end of the
Reign of David, about the Year of the World 2925, which was 435 Years after the
Numbering of the People by Moses and Eleazar, David again Numbers the People,
and then the Account of the People of Israel was 800000 valiant Men that drew
the Sword, and of Judah 500000 valiant Men, 2 Samuel 24.9. in all 1300000
fighting Men: and if we should take in Women, Children, and Aged, it is
probable they were above five Millions.

So that in the space of 435 Years, notwithstanding all these Decrements they
were increased about three Millions.

The next Account of the Numbers of the Tribes of Judah and Benjamin only under
Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 17.14. and though in the interval between David and
Jehosaphat these two Tribes received considerable Allays by Wars, Plagues, and
Famines, yet the Number of the mighty Men of valor of Benjamin was 380000, and
of the Tribe of Judah 780000 mighty Men of valor. The Increase of Judah
between that and David's Numeration was 280000 fighting Men; and therefore the
Increase of Women, Children, and Aged not fit for War, must needs be much
greater and more considerable; and yet this was in a Period only of those Years
that intervened between David and Jehosaphat.

After this the ten Tribes were carried away Captives by Salmanasser, 2 Kings
17. and only Judah and Benjamin remained: so that now all our Account must run
upon these two Tribes, the rest being carried away, and probably confounded and
mingled among the Gentiles. And if we consider what Calamities these two Tribes
endured by Wars and Captivities from the time of Hezekiah until their
deportation into Babylon, we may reasonably suppose that they had as great a
Reduction as ordinarily could befall a People: Manasseh carried Captive to
Babylon, which probably was the issue of some great Siege or Battle; Josiah
slain in Battle by Pharaoh King of Egypt; Jerusalem taken by Nebuchadnezzar in
the 8th Year of Jehojachim, 2 Kings 24.12. again in the 9th Year of Zedekiah
the City again besieged, and after two Years Siege and great Famine and
Slaughter, taken. Jer. 39.12.

These severe Administrations of War could not be without great Desolations,
Slaughters and Mortalities, though their Number is not recorded.

The People were carried away Captive to Babylon in the Year of the World 3362
or thereabouts, which was about 437 Years after the Reign of David; seventy
Years after the Captivity, viz. about the Year of the World 3420, there was a
Return of the Jews under Cyrus, which continued in Partial Remigrations for
some time after.

The numbers of those that returned first with Ezra were 42360, Ezra 2.64. this
seems to be the greatest number: there were other Remigrations in the time of
Darius, and Artaxerxes, both in the 27th Year, though the certain number be not
mentioned. We will therefore take scope enough, and suppose them in all 100000
Persons, which is more than double to those that came up with Ezra.

These continued in a troubled condition from the time of the cessation of the
Persian Monarchy until the time of Christ, and rarely without Wars, as the
History of the Maccabees gives us an account; especially under Antiochus
Epiphanes, who made great slaughter of them.

After that, Pompey by Arms took Jerusalem and subdued Syria in general, not
without great bloodshed; and as they were naturally an unquiet People, so the
Histories tell us that the Romans and their Governors exercised great severity
and bloodshed among them.

And yet for all these Correctives and Decrements of this unquiet People,
Josephus tells us, that Nero willing to take some Account and Estimate of them
by their great convention and concourse in their Paschal Solemnity, found their
number to be Seven and twenty hundred thousand Persons, Joseph. de Bello
Judaico, l. 7. page 968. where Strangers might not be mingled with them in that
Solemnity.

The Destruction of Jerusalem under Titus and Vespasian is supposed to be under
the 66th Year after the Birth of Christ, about the Year of the World 4006 which
was about 586 Years after the Return under Cyrus: Josephus gives us an Account
of those that were slain at the Siege of Jerusalem, viz. 110000, and Prisoners
taken 90000, Joseph. lib. 7. cap. penult. besides the multitudes slain in
Cyrene, Alexandria, and other places not easy to be remembered.

By which we may reasonably conclude, That in the Period of about 600 Years
this Nation of the Jews increased to 27 times more than when they returned
under Cyrus; for then we allow the number of them that returned to be 100000,
but now they were increased to 2700000.

It is true, some of the Jews escaped this Slaughter and Captivity, suppose we
the number of those that escaped were a Million of Jews, such I mean as held
rigorously to their Jewish Law; for many became Christians, and left much of
the Jewish strictness, and possibly mingled with other Nations.

But if we should now examine the multitude of the Jews in Europe, Asia and
Africa, we shall find vast numbers of them in all the Trading Cities' and
Countries except England, France, Spain, Portugal, Naples and Sicily, from
whence they were formerly banished; yet even in those Countries from whence
they have been banished, they are in great numbers, but yet under the disguise
of other Names and Nations: But if all the Jews (I mean those descended from
the Reduces captivitatis Babylonicae) which are in Germany, Bohemia, Poland,
Lituania, Russia, Venice, Rome and other parts of Italy; in the Dominions of
the Turks, Persia, Arabia, India, Africa, at Alexandria and other parts of
Egypt, were collected into one Body, they would exceed in number any one of the
greatest Nations of the World, and yield an irresistible Army, if they had
Weapons and Courage in any measure proportionable to their Wealth, Craft,
Subtilty, and Numbers.

So that notwithstanding all the Abatements and Decrements they have had by
Wars, Oppressions and Internecions, Plagues, Famines, and other Calamities, we
find the Product of one Nation derived from only two Persons, Isaac and
Rebecca, in the compass of about 5000 Years swollen into incredible numbers of
Millions of Persons now existing, and known to be of that Lineage and Descent,
and still continuing unquestionably in that Distinction, besides those
multitudes derived from the Line of Esau, and the ten Tribes, which are as it
were lest and confounded, without any distinction among other Nations. And thus
far of the first Instance, concerning the Multiplication of the Nation of the
Jews.

The next Instance that I shall give shall be nearer home; the Kingdom of
England: I shall not give any Instance touching it before the Conquest, because
those times are dark, and besides, the Vicissitudes and Successions of various
Nations in this Kingdom renders the discovery of the Progress of Generations of
Men, or the Increases thereof, difficult; as Britons, Romans, Picts, Saxons,
and Danes.

The ancient Inhabitants were the Britons, the Body of which People has been
in a great measure shut up and contained within the Country of Wales; but what
by the transplanting of many of the Welsh into England, and by transplanting of
the English into Wales, it is not possible to say that all the Britons are
confined to the Country of Wales, or that none but Britons are there: and
therefore there can be no particular or evident Conclusion made touching their
Increase or Multiplication. But I shall take a shorter Period or Compass of
Time, namely, the last 600 Years or thereabouts since the Norman Conquest.

And although it may be true, that many Persons of Foreign Countries have come
into England and planted themselves here, so that the whole Increase of this
Kingdom cannot be singly attributed to those that were either Natives, or such
as came in with the Conqueror, but many Scotc^, Irish, Dutch, but especially
French, either by Naturalizations or Transmigrations have increased the
Inhabitants of this Island; yet considering that probably the Migrations of the
English into Scotland, Holland, France and other Countries, have made amends
for their Migrations hither: We may make a reasonable Conjecture, that the
Descendents from those that inhabited this Kingdom in the time of the
Conqueror, have increased exceedingly above what they were in that time.

And the Evidence thereof is this: King William the First, after his Victory
over Herald, did in the 16th Year of his Reign over England caul a Survey to
be made of all the Cities, Towns, Manors and inhabited Lands in England,
Northumberland, Cumberland, Durham and North Wales.

This Survey was finished in the 20th Year of his Reign, and the Book it self
preserved to this Day among the Records of the Exchequer, not only a Transcript
or Copy, but the very Original Book it self, and is called Doomsday: In this
Book are entered the Names of the Manors or inhabited Townships, Boroughs and
Cities, and the Owner of them, the Number of Plough-Lands that each contains,
and the Number of the Inhabitants upon them, under the several Names
appropriate to those Places: As for Instance, Ibi 12 Burgenses, 5 Villani, 5
Bordarii, 5 Nativi, 5 Radiminches, 5 Cotterelli; and the like, according to the
quality or condition of the Inhabitants: So that this Book in effect gives an
Account not only of the Manurable Lands in every Manor, Town, or Vill, but
also of the Number and Natures of their several Inhabitants.

To make a Calculation of the Number of Plough-Lands and Inhabitants through
all England, as they are recorded, and to make therewith a Comparison unto the
present State and Number of Inhabitants at this Day throughout England, is a
laborious piece of work, but it is not difficult to be done in any one County;
I have tried the Comparison in the County of Gloucester through some great
Boroughs, as Gloucester it self, Thornbury, Tetbury and other places, and in
effect through the whole County; and I do find,

1. That there are very many more Vills and Hamlets now than there were then,
and very few Villages, Towns or Parishes then, which continue not to this Day;
but now there are as many as then, and many more. The 5th of March, 9 E. 2.
there issued Writs to the Sheriffs of the several Counties, to return the Names
of the several Vills and Land-Owners in their several Bayliwicks, which was
accordingly done, and remains of Record in the Exchequer under the style of
Nomina Villarum; and the Sum of the Vills of Gloucestershire, together with the
five Boroughs of Gloucester, Bristol, Berkley, Dursly, and Newenham amounted to
234, which I take it are more than are in Doomsday, and yet not so many as are
at this day; and those that continue to this day, are far more populous than
they were at the taking of either of those Surveys.

2. That there is much more Tillage, and more Plough-Lands now than there were
then; which happens by the reduction of many great Wastes and Commons into
Tillage, or Meadow, or Pasture, which then were only Wastes, and therefore not
particularly surveyed because of no considerable Value, and not taken notice of
in that Survey.

3. That the number of Inhabitants now are above twenty times more than they
were at that time, as well in particular Towns, Boroughs, and Manors, as in
the general extent of the County; and yet that Survey, even as to the number
and quality of those that resided in those Towns or Manors, at least as
Householders, is very precise and particular: I have not yet made an exact
particular Calculation of the Number recorded in that Book through the whole
County, but I will give a few Instances of particular Towns, which may give an
estimate touching the whole.

Gloucester is now a very great and populous City, formerly before the time of
H. 8. a Borough: In the Survey of Doomsday it is surveyed distinct from the
Bertun of Glouc': the gross of the Borough is surveyed together in the
beginning of the County, but there are some other particular Burgages thereof
mentioned under the Titles of particular Men's Possessions; as, Terra Rogeri de
Lacy, Terra Elnuffi de Hesding, etc. The whole concretion of the City of
Gloucester consists partly of what was the ancient Borough, partly of
accessions from the Manors or Villages adjacent, as Barton and some others: I
shall therefore cast up the whole Number of all that were in Gloc' or Barton.

In the Survey of Gloucester there are reckoned 23 Burgages and Houses; 16 that
were demolished for the building of the Castle, 14 that were wasted, and some
that belonged to Osbertus Episcopus, not numbered, but yielded the yearly Rent
of 10 Shillings; which according to the usual rate of the Houses in Gloucester
at that time, which was at 5d or 6d a House, might produce 20 Houses, in toto,
73. Besides these, there are surveyed under the Titles of several Owners of
Lands sparsim through the Book, as under the Title Terra S. Dionysii, Ecclesia
S. Martini, and others, according to my best Computation and Observation, 82.
Besides these under the Title of the Poffessions of St Peter of Glouc', there
are reckoned up as many Burgenses as yielded the Abbot anciently the Rent of
19s and 5d, and 16 Salmons; but at that time 16 Salmons and 50s Rent, without
any certain number of Burgesses; but if we allow 6d for a Burgess, we may
suppose them to 100. The Total 255.

The Manor of Barton, or the Barton of Glouc', some part whereof has been
taken into the Suburbs of Glouc', was of two Owners; part was the King's Lands,
part belonged to the Abbey of St Peter's, but the whole number of the
Householders inhabiting the whole Barton, with its members, Tuffly, Barnwood,
etc. were as follows, Villani 56 Bordarii 39 Servi 19 Molini 04 Liberi
homines 10 In toto 128

And the Total of the whole Account of the City of Glouc', the Barton with its
members; Brewere, Upton, Merwin, Barnwood, Tuffly, Norwent, amounted then only
to 383.


And the single City of Gloucester within the Walls contains at this day near
1000 Houses and Households.

Again, the Borough and Manor of Barclay, with the members thereof enumerated
in Doomsday, viz. Alkington, Hinton, Came, Gosington, Dersiloge, Cowly, Ewly,
Nimsfield, Wotton, Simondshall, Kingscote, Beverscote, Oselword, Almondsbury,
part of Cromhall, Harefell, Weston, Elberton, Cromale, Erlingham, Escelword are
surveyed to contain in the whole to 590 Families, whereas at this time there
are near 5000 Families in this Precinct; the Parish of Wotton yielding upon the
point of 2000 Comunicants, and that of Dersilege above 500 at this day.

Again, Tetbury and the Hamlet of Upton belonging to it, the Survey of Doomsday
gives us an Account of about 73 Families of all kinds belonging to it: But now
I believe there are little less than 1500 Communicants in that Parish.

Sodbury: the Survey gives us an Account of about 46 Families of all sorts;
they are now near twenty times so many.

Thornbury, with the Hamlets thereunto belonging: the Account of Doomsday is of
105 Families of all sores; there is now near six times so many.

Aderly, a little Village at the time of making of that Survey, consisting not
of above 17 Families of all sorts; now above twice as many.

The like Instances might be produced, with the like evidence of very great
Increases in the Towns of Cirencester, Minchin, Hampton, Teuxbury, Campden,
Winchcomb, Avening, Westbury near Bristol, and generally through the whole
County of Gloucester; which I do not without just reason suppose has more than
twenty times the Inhabitants which it had at the time of the coming in of
William the First, which is not now above 604 Years since.

And if we should institute a later Comparison, viz. between the present time
and the beginning of Queen Elizabeth, which is not above 112 Years since, and
compare the numbers of Trained Soldiers then and now, the number of
Subsidy-men then and now, they will easily give us an Account of a very great
Increase and Multiplication of People within this Kingdom, even to admiration.

And let any man but consider the Increase of London within the compass of 40
or 50 Years, we shall according to the Observations framed to my hands find,
That the In-Parishes until the late Fire in that time have increased from 9 to
10, or a 10th part; and that the 16 Out-Parishes have in that time increased
from 7 to 12, and yet without any decrement or decay of the rest of the Kingdom.

By which, and infinite undeniable Instances that might be given, it is
apparent, that within the compass of the last 600 Years this Kingdom has
increased mightily in its number of Native Inhabitants.

And yet it is most apparent, that it has had as great Allays and Abatements
of the Multiplication of Mankind in it, as any Kingdom in the World. For
Instance,

1. In respect of the nature of its Situation, which is all Maritim, and
consists much in Navigation, which exhausts abundance of People by Diseases and
Casualties at Sea.

2. It has been as often visited with sore Pestilences, Epidemical Diseases,
and Mortality by reason thereof, as any Country: the experience of the last 60
Years gives us abundance of Instances thereof, and former Ages were as
frequently visited in this kind as later.

3. Foreign Wars, both at Sea and Land, have devoured great multitudes of our
Inhabitants; as those formerly with Scotland, France, Spain, and lately with
the Netherlands and French.

4. No Kingdom in Europe has had greater Experience of Civil Wars, nor greater
Consumption of Men thereby, than England has had since the time of William the
First: For not to instance in our Wars with the Welsh and Irish, let any man
read but the Histories of the Wars here in England between King Stephen, and H.
1. and his Mother, King John and his Nobles, King H. 3. and the Nobility;
between King E. 2. and the Earls of Lancaster and Mortimer; the Wars between
the two Houses of York and Lancaster, and their Partisans, from the time of H.
4. unto the beginning of H. 7. in one Battle between H. 6. and E. 4. killed of
one side 30000; the Rebellions in the times of H. 7. and others the Kings and
Queens that succeeded him, and the loss of many lives that happened by the
suppression thereof; the late cruel Wars within these 30 Years last past in
England; there cannot be Instances given in any one Kingdom of greater
Abatements of the Increase, by Wars and Internecions, than may be given in
England.

5. Let us also consider the vast Evacuations of Men that England has had by
Foreign Assistances lent to Foreign Kingdoms and States, by Volunteers and
Auxiliaries; as, to Scotland in the late Queens time, to France, to the
Netherlands, to Germany.

6. To these also add the vast numbers of Men that have transplanted themselves
not only into France, Holland, and our neighbor Nations, but also to Virginia,
Maryland, New England, Barbados, Bermudas, to Amboyna and other places in the
East India, and lastly, into Jamaica; we shall find upon these and other
Accounts, that England, has had as great Correctives of the Excesses of their
Generations within these last 600 Years, as any People in the World.

Add to these the great Famines and Pestilences which have happened within the
compass of 600 Years, recorded in History, and obvious to our own Experience.

And therefore, if notwithstanding all these Correctives the number of Men have
continually increased, and that in so vast and observable a degree above their
decrease; we have as much reason to conclude a parity in the rest of Mankind:
and possibly were we as well acquainted with the Concerns of other Kingdoms or
States, especially of the Netherlands and France, the Instances of this
Increase would he as much, and possibly more conspicuous than among us.

Upon the whole matter therefore I conclude, That as the Correctives instanced
in the last Chapter are not in themselves likely to be sufficient and suitable
to the Reduction of the Increase of Mankind to an Equability, especially in an
infinite succession of Eternal Generations: So by plain Experience it is
apparent and sensible, that de facto they have not done it in a finite limit of
Ages; but Mankind have notwithstanding them increased every Age, and the
multitude of them that are born and live, overbalance the number of them that
dye, communibus annis; or being taken upon a medium, though possibly some one
Year gave the advantage of Number to the Descendents, yet it is not common nor
ordinary, but more than two or three Years for one give the advantage of Number
to them that are born and live.

CAP. XI. The Consequence and Illation upon the Premises, against the Eternity
of Mankind.
THe great Assertors of the Eternity of the World and of Mankind, have
certainly gathered their Opinion principally from this, That they find that
Mankind is propagated by ordinary course of Generation, and this they see by
Experience: And as they do so now, so they did a hundred or a thousand Years
since, and as far as those Histories they credit give them account, it was so
in those times, and in the times before them, as far as Tradition could
instruct them. And although those various Occurrences of Wars, Pestilences,
Migrations, Floods, Changes of Religion and Languages have obscured the
Histories, Relations and Traditions of former times before those Histories that
are extant; yet they think it becomes them, as reasonable Men, to believe that
things have been always so as now they are; and that it were a fondness to
suppose or believe things to be otherwise than they have appeared in the tract
of all Times or Ages.

And upon the same ground that these Men assert the Eternity of the World, the
Instance and Argument now produced of the plain and experienced Increase of the
numbers of Men upon the face of the Earth, seems much more forcibly to conclude
against that supposed Eternity of Mankind. For it is plain and evident to
Sense, that the World grows every day fuller than formerly, notwithstanding all
those Correctives and Reductives thereof: And we have reason to think it is so
in all places, at least one with another, and in all Ages, and among all People
as we find it in England for these 600 Years, or among the People of the Jews
for above 2000 Years: For among these People, and in these Periods of Time
there have been as many and as great Diminutions and Abatements as ever were in
such Periods of Time: and yet though perchance in one Age they have diminished,
yet they have not been so diminished, but that in the compass of four or five
hundred Years their Increase above what they were before such Diminution, is
upon a medium always exceeding their Decay.

And since we have reason to believe what we see, namely, the Excess of
Generations above their Decays, we have reason to believe it was so always; and
if it were so always, it is not possible the Generations of Mankind could be
eternal.

For if we should suppose the Eternity of the World, an Increase of but one Man
in the Period of Millions of Years would have filled more space than all the
Earth or the Concave of Heaven could receive: For in as much as in a Duration
that never had a Beginning there must needs be infinite Millions of Years, the
Increase of one Man in every Million above what was before, must needs produce
an infinite coexisting number, and an infinite moles of Mankind; much more if
the Increase were in any measure proportionable to what our daily Experiences
give us Instances of. Whereby we find, that although it be possible that
several Families may be wholly extinct in a Kingdom in the Period of 5 or 600
Years, and though possibly in some one Age there may be a diminution of the
People of a Kingdom from what they were in the Age before; yet in the
succession of a very few Ages they again increase beyond the diminution, and
neither successively decrease, nor hold an equality; which we may reasonably
suppose to be the common condition of the World.

And as to that Supposition, That even upon a Natural account, when the World
grows too full of Inhabitants, they must break the Bonds of Society and Peace,
and so diminish each other by Internecions and Wars. As Air compressed, or
expanded beyond the measure of the Vessel containing it, breaks the Vessel
wherein it is compressed to give it self room. I shall only say, that although
the Pride and Ambition and Insolence of neighboring Princes or People, or the
sense of too much Oppression and Hardship has many times raised Wars, yet we
never knew Wars to grow merely upon the account of the Fullness of any Country:
indeed that Plethory has many times occasioned Emigrations, and
Transplantations, and Navigation, and increase of Trade or Manufactures and
other industrious Employments; but Wars have always grown upon other Occasions:
though, as I before observe, the great, wise, and intellectual Governor of the
World has by his overruling Conduct of the Passions of Men, brought about
ends for the convenience and benefit of Mankind in this respect also, as well
as to punish their Excesses and Enormities.

CAP. XII. The Eighth Evidence of Fact proving the Origination of Mankind,
namely, the Consent of Mankind.
I Come now to the Eighth and last Evidence of Fact, proving the Origination of
Mankind, namely, The general Consent of Mankind in that Persuasion; wherein I
shall pursue this Order:

First, to consider the more Popular or Vulgar Opinion of Nations in all or
most Places and Ages of the World, agreeing in this Sentiment or Persuasion,
and what may be reasonably concluded of the truth, or at least great
probability of the truth of that Supposition of the Origination of Mankind,
upon the Supposition of such a Consent. Secondly, to consider the more
restrained Persuasion of the Learned and more considerate sort of Men, that
guided themselves in their Sentiments not barely upon Popular or Vulgar
Opinions, but searched deeper into the Reasons and Evidences of things; namely,
the learneder Tribe of Men, Physiologists and Philosophers: And then I shall
also consider the several Suppositions of those that agreed in that Persuasion
touching the several Manners and Methods of such Originations, and wherein
their several Suppositions seem to be deficient, insufficient, or untrue.

First, touching the National or Popular Opinions touching the Origination of
Mankind.

There has prevailed among the generality of Mankind a common Persuasion, that
Mankind had an Original ex non genitis; and those Nations that pretend to the
greatest Antiquity, suppose themselves to be Terrigenae, or at least by some
other Method than the ordinary course of Generation.

Kircherus in his Oedipus Aegyptiacus, Syntagm. 3. Cap. 1. out of Maimonides
gives us an Account of the Zabei, descended from Cush, and inhabiting the Coast
of the Red Sea; that though they held the World eternal, yet supposed the first
Man Adam to be begotten in the Moon, of a Father and Mother, and from thence he
came into this lower World, and was called Apostolus Lunae, and taught Men to
worship the Moon: and for this he cites Maimonides, l. 3. cap. 29. though the
late Translation mention nothing of his proceeding from the Moon, but of his
coming out of India into Babel, and teaching Men the Worship of the Moon: this
Fable the Rabbi confutes. Diodorus Siculus gives us an Account of the Opinion
of the Egyptians, lib. 1. cap. 2. who though they pretend a vast number of
Years to have passed since the Origination of Mankind, yet they suppose it had
an Original; Et ab orbis initio primos homines apud se creatos: and they infer
it from the Fertility of their Soil by the Inundation of Nilus, which at its
recess leaves so fruitful a Tincture, that thereby and by the heat of the Sun,
Animals have their visible production, part after part: And yet both Aristotle,
l. 2. Meteoron. and Herodotus in Euterpe do with great probability evince that
the fruitfullest part of Egypt, namely, the part called Delta where the Nile
overflows, is an Exaggeration, or Ground gained by the Inundation of Nilus.

Herodotus, ubi supra, tells us, That in the time of Psamniticus sometimes King
of Egypt there was a Competition between the Egyptians and Phrygians, who were
the first People, or the Terrigenae, and that by the Experiment of the
Education of two Infants which should not be instructed, by their Natural
Speech in the Language of Phrygia; the Phrygians carried the priority. The
thing is fabulous, all the use that is to be made of it is, That there was a
common Opinion in the Nations of the World, that there was some Inception of
Mankind otherwise than by the way of Natural Procreation.

Laertius, in Prooemio, supposes the Grecians to be the first Men, A quibus
nedum Philosophorum, sed hominum genus initium habuit.

The above named Diodorus Siculus, lib. 4. cap. 1. tells us that the Ethiopians
claim a greater Antiquity than the Egyptians, who borrowed many of their Laws
and Customs and Religion from them: that as Ethiopia was the fittest and most
congruous place for the first Production of Men and Beasts, in respect of the
vicinity and constancy of the Sun; so, de facto the Ethiopians were the first
Men that were on the Earth, and Terrigenae. Ferunt, Aethiopes primos hominum
omnium creatos esse; cujus rei conjecturam ferunt, quod non aliunde homines in
eam accesserunt, sed in ipsa geniti merito Indigetes omnium consensu
appellentur. Et quidem verisimile est eos qui sub meridie habitant primos e
terra suisse homines genitos; nam Solis ardore terram quae humida erat
arefaciente, atque omnibus vitam dante, decens fuit locum Soli propinquierem
primo naturam animantium tulisse.

De Laet in his History of the Original of the Americans, page 178. tells us of
the Persuasion of diverse of the Americans, that held there is one God; Qui
omnia creavit, dein plures in terram defixerat sagittas, e quibus hominum genus
ortum and propagatum fuit: though they also held other inferior Deities: And
Page 106. Alii narrant, e quadam specu per fenestram exiliisse sex aut nescio
quot homines, eosque initium dedisse humano generi in loco qui ob eam causam
dicitur Pacari tampo; atque ideo opinantur Tambes esse hominum antiquissimos.
Vide Acost. l. 1. cap. 25. ad idem.

Thus it seems there has been in all Nations, that have had any manner of
Order among them, a common Opinion of the Origination of Mankind; though they
have dressed up the Supposition with various Fictions and Imaginations no less
vain than the Poets, who supposed Men to grow of the Serpents Teeth sown by
Cadmus, or the Stones thrown over their Heads by Deucalion and Pyrrha.

This persuasion and opinion of Mankind of their Original, might be conveyed to
the generality of Nations by some of these ways:

1. By some Tradition, derived down unto them from those that lived before
them; but then if we look after the original or first head of this Tradition,
it may be hard positively to define from whence it began; but it seems
probable, that it was from those first Parents of Mankind, and so the Tradition
founded in the Truth of the Fact, and originally delivered by them that
perfectly knew it to be so: It is true, there are, and have been very many
things entertained as true by Traditional Derivation, which either have not any
sufficient evidence of their Truth, or it may be some things that do oppose the
credit of it; and it were a piece of vain credulity to believe every thing,
that either vulgar Tradition, or the Artifices of Men, have imposed upon over
credulous succeeding Ages and Persons: And we see, that as the Origination of
Man has been traditionally received, so those Adjuncts and Fables with which
it has been dressed up, have been also received and believed with it. But to
this I say:

1. That the Origination of Man, as a Matter of Fact, could hardly be thought
of, but either by very considering and thinking Men, whereof hereafter; or by
such, as being the first Parents of Mankind, knew their Original. And if it be
said, they could no more know their Original than a Child new born: It is true,
if the Production of Mankind were such at first as it is now, or as some of the
mistaken Heathen thought it, (viz. in Infantia) it may be so: But we shall see,
that if Mankind had their Original ex non genitis, (as most certainly they had)
then the Formation of Mankind was in his full and perfect Constitution, and not
by a gradual progress from Infancy as now.

2. That the Tradition of the Origination of Mankind seems to be universal, but
the particular Modes or Methods of that Origination, excogitated by the
Heathen, were particular, and not common; and therefore, though these be
fabulous and deserve not our credit, yet they do not abate the credibility of
the universal Tradition. The common Tradition and consent thereunto of the
Existence of a Deity, carries in it a great moral Evidence of the Truth
thereof, although the particular superadditions and multiplications of Deities,
by the Fancies and Traditions of particular Ages or Nations, are fabulous and
untrue: Quod ab omnibus ubique and semper creditum est pro veritate habendum
est, though the various particular Modes, and Methods, and Hypotheses, are or
may be fabulous.

3. That Mankind had an Original might be known naturally, and without a
Revelation to the first Individuals of Humane Nature, and consequently might
with evidence and certainty enough, even upon a moral account, be communicated
by them to others, and to pass into an universal Tradition: But the Manner of
the first Production of Men, what gradations were antecedent to it could not
possibly be known to the first Parents of Mankind without Divine Revelation,
because it must needs be antecedent to their Being, and therefore the
particular Manner. therefore could not, upon a bare natural or moral account,
be any true Root or Foundation of such a Tradition as according to the Mosaical
Hypothesis of the Origination of Mankind, whereby we understand that Adam was
created out of the Dust of the Ground, and then had an Intellectual Soul put
into him; Adam might upon a natural account know that now he was, and that
before he was not; and he might upon a rational account know, that such a
Production of such a Being as he found himself to be, could never have been
effected without the agency of a most powerful and wise Being, which we call
Almighty God: And this Tradition, both that he was made when before he was not,
and that he was created or made by Almighty God, he might with as great
evidence and certainty traditionally communicate to his Descendents, as any
other matter of fact, or rational deduction: But he could never know the manner
of his own Production, or the particular Preparations antecedent to such his
Being, without Revelation from God, or some intelligent Being that saw or knew
the antecedents to his Constitution; neither could he without such Revelation
or Discovery, deliver the same over traditionally with any certainty of truth
to his Descendents. And consequently, the general Tradition of his Origination
has a Rode of Credibility in it, to such a Man as will believe that any matter
of Fact may be true that he sees not; though the particular manner of his
Orgination is not with any certainty credible to him, that either believes not
there is any Divine Revelation, or that believes not the particular Method
propounded is in truth a Divine Revelation

So that the general Tradition that Man had his Origination ex non genitis, is
a greater Evidence that it was true, than that he was made out of Arrows stuck
in the Ground; or, ex folliculis terrae innascentibus, as some Philosophers.

2. The Ground of this Persuasion has sprung from such of the Philosophers,
and other considerate Men, who upon a strict Enquiry and Examination have found
it impossible that the successive Generations of Mankind could be Eternal, and
consequently Infinite; and therefore have concluded with very great evidence of
Reason, that it must needs have some other Origination in some one Period of
duration, than what is now natural and common. But then being destitute of
Divine Revelation, or at least not giving due credit thereunto, and being
greatly in the dark, and not knowing well how to determine what that Method of
the Origination of Mankind should be, some took up one Fancy, some another, to
salve the Phenomenon, according as their Imaginations led them. And hence it
was, that some thought their Origination was not altogether unlike the
spontaneous Production of Insects; only these being Annual, required no great
contribution of Heavenly Influkes; but that of the Production of Men or more
perfect Animals, Non sine magna coelestium corporum conjunctione sive
mutatione: Others again, more soberly attributed it merely to the Power and
Wisdom of the glorious God: Others, to the efficiency of Angels; whereof in the
next Chapter.

And this Contemplation of such Philosophers and knowing Men coming abroad into
the World, the generality of Mankind subscribed to the truth of the grand
Hypothesis it self; namely, That Mankind had at one time or other, or by some
means or other an Origination differing from the ordinary and natural method of
Propagation now observed: And finding that the same held a singular congruity
to the nature of things, and the general Conception and Reason of the Humane
Understanding; the generality of the World entertained, and by Tradition
transmitted this Hypothesis to their Posterity.

But finding the Philosophers and Wise Men so uncertain and disagreeing, de
modo, and unable to give any satisfactory Resolution thereof; every Nation, and
almost every Person took up what particular Hypothesis pleased them for the
Method or Manner of such Origination; and herein the Wantonness of Poets, and
the Crafts of their Heathenish Priests and Hierophants abundantly gratified the
Fancies of the People with Superstructions and Inventions of their own.

And indeed it is observable, that all those ancient Traditions of things that
were truly done, and so delivered over and received by Mankind, as they have
for the substance and main of them been preserved by the strength of this
Tradition; so where the Holy Scriptures have not been taught or known, these
Traditions have been admirably dressed by Sophistications and Superadditions,
introduced by the Fantasies of Poets or the deceits of Heathenish Priests, or
by the gradual corruptings of the Traditions themselves. Thus the History of
the Creation, of the Flood, of the Tower of Babel, of Noah and his three Sons;
many of which are, for the substance of them, preserved among the Barbarous
People of the East and West Indies at this day, as appears by those that have
written the Relation, especially of the Americans, as Acosta, and De Laet have
nevertheless been covered over with diverse fabulous and devised Additions and
Stories: and so it happened also among the ancient Heathenish Writers, as has
been at large demonstrated, especially by Bochart in his Phaleg.

Now as touching the Opinion of the Learned Tribe, which, as before is shown,
fell into two Parties: The one holding the Eternal Successions of Mankind,
whereof in this Second Section: The other holding a First Inception of Mankind,
Ex non genitis.

The latter Opinion far out-ballanceth the former, both in the reasonableness
thereof, and the multitude and great Learning of those that so asserted it; and
should, according to the propounded Method, be here declared.

But because I intend in the next Section to examine the various Suppositions of
those of the latter sort, touching the Manner of the Origination of Man, I
shall reserve that Business to the next Section; wherein I shall at once
consider the Learned ancient Authors that hold the Origination of Mankind, and
shall also deliver and examine their several Suppositions touching the same.

SECT. III.
CAP. I. The Opinions of the more Learned part of Mankind, Philosophers and
other Writers, touching Man's Origination.
I Have in the former Parts of this Enquiry showed, that there have been among
Philosophers and other Heathen, and some modern Writers, Two great Opinions
touching Man's Origination: 1. Those that thought it indeed to be without any
Origination, but Eternal; and this Opinion they took up principally upon two
Reasons: 1. Because the Medium or Clew by which they guided themselves, was the
common, constant Method of Productions by successive Generations; and they
thought it more suitable to take their Measures, and make their Conclusions
consonant to the course of Nature, which they saw and observed, and judged to
be always uniform, and like itself; which could not be such, if Mankind had any
other Method of Origination than now it has: And in Natural Appearances,
Causes and Effects, they thought it not becoming the Genius or Spirit of a
Philosopher to call in any other Assistant or Producent than what was and is
the ordinary Rule, Course, and Law of Nature as they now find it. And by this
means they thought that they proceeded consonantly both to Nature, and to
themselves. 2. Because that among those ancient Philosophers that either
supposed the Origination of Mankind to be either casual, as Epicurus,
Democritus, etc. or to be natural, from the Earth, and conjunction of the
Influences of Heavenly Bodies in some Periodical Aspects; or partly natural,
and partly fortuitous, or at least spontaneous, as Insects arise: I say, in and
among these various Suppositions of an Origination of Mankind (yea and perfect
Animals) ex non genitis, they found so much incertainty, improbability, and
repugnancy, that they threw them all aside, together also with the Beginning or
Origination of Mankind; and took up that more compendious, and more suitable, as
they thought, to the Laws which they observed in Nature; and concluded, That
the Generations of Mankind and of perfect Animals were without beginning, but
always obtained in the same manner as now they are. Of this Opinion was Ocellus
Lucaenus, and likewise Aristotle, though in some places he seems to be
doubtful, and although Plato in his Timaeus seems to assert an Origination of
Mankind, yet in some other places his Expressions are doubtful: and therefore
Censorinus in his golden Book de Die Natali, reckons as well Plato as
Aristotle, Ocellus Lucanus, Architas Tarentinus, Xenocrates, Dicearchus,
Pythagoras, Theophrastus, to be Assertors of the Eternity of Mankind.

And this Opinion I have examined in the Chapters of the Second Section of this
Book, and offered Reasons Physical, Metaphysical and Moral against it. The last
Moral Reason which I offered was, The received Opinion of Mankind asserting the
Origination of Man, and that as well of the common sort of People as of the
Tribe of the Learned Philosophers.

The former I dispatched in the last Chapter, but the Suffrage of the Gens
literata I reserved to this Section, because thereby at once I may with the
same labor show the Opinions of Learned Men among the Heathen, asserting the
Origination of Mankind, and what their several Sentiments were concerning the
manner of it: And therefore I shall be constrained herein to mention the
Opinions of some of those Learned Philosophers above-mention, and to add some
others of the contrary Persuasion, which out-ballance the former.

2. The second general Opinion, was of those Learned Philosophers that held an
Origination of Mankind ex non genitis; and the Reason moving them to this
Persuasion was, not only the great Tradition that obtained generally in favor
of it, and the great reasonableness of the Supposition it self; but also the
many absurd Consequences, and indeed irreconcilable Contradictions that they
found in the Hypothesis of an Eternal Succession of Humane Generations without
beginning: Insomuch that the Assertors themselves of Eternal Generations were
doubtful of the truth of their own Persuasions, as will hereafter appear.

And those of this latter sort were even Epicurus himself, Anaximander,
Empedocles, Parmenides, and Zeno Citicus the great Founder of the Sect of the
Stoics, with those that followed or favored it. But above all, the great
Lawgiver Moses, who was divinely inspired; and yet if he had not that
advantage of Divine Infallibility, but stood barely upon the great credibility
both of his Person, his Learning, and the Hypothesis it self which he
delivered, he has as great a weight, even upon a natural, moral, and rational
account as any, or all the rest put together. But because I intend a particular
Explication of the Hypothesis Mosaica, I shall not mingle this among the other
Opinions, but reserve it for the next Section.

The Heathen Philosophers that held the Origination of Mankind ex non genitis,
have these things in general wherein they agree one with another, and with the
Truth it self; and some things wherein they differ among themselves, and in
some things from the Truth.

1. They herein agree both among themselves, and with the Truth, and with that
excellent and divine Relation of Moses, Genesis 1. That Mankind is not Eternal,
but had a Beginning ex non genitis.

2. They herein also agree among themselves, and with the Truth, That it is
most absolutely necessary (if Mankind had a Beginning or Origination) it must
needs be in a differing kind and manner from that common course whereby Mankind
is now propagated. This is asserted by those that hold the Origination of
Mankind by the Efficiency of Almighty God (consonant to the Mosaical
Hypothesis) either immediately, or partly by the Instrumentality of Angels, as
Zeno Citicus, Plato and others: it is also asserted by them that hold the
Origination of Mankind to be at first fortuitous, as Epicurus and Democritus.
And therefore as to these Persuasions and Suppositions, it is not only
necessary that they should suppose a differing manner of the first Origination
of Mankind from what now obtains; but it is consonant also to their Principles,
and the grounds of their Supposition that it must be so: This is also asserted
by those that suppose the Origination of Mankind to be purely natural, and
according to the constituted Rule of Nature. But yet this Supposition, though
most necessarily true where an Origination ex non genitis is once supposed, yet
it seems less suitable to the Principles of those Men that assert such a natural
Production of Mankind as is by them asserted, because they mancipating all
Productions and Effects to the Laws of Nature, and governing their thoughts,
and taking their measures barely by it, have no reason to think or believe any
other Method of Production of Mankind to have at any time been any otherwise
than as they see it now to be; which, as is before shown, was the reason why
Aristotle inclined to the Opinion of the Eternity of Humane Generations,
because Nature is presumed to be consonant to it self, and always to have been
what once it was.

3. But in the Explication of the Cause and Manner of this Origination of
Mankind, therein they differed very much among themselves.

This difference consisted principally in two great Considerations; 1. In the
true stating of the efficient Cause of this Origination of Mankind: 2. In the
Manner, Method, and Order of such Origination.

As to the difference touching the Cause of such Origination, and the nature of
that Cause thereof:

1. Some assigned a bare fortuitous Cause of the first Origination of Mankind,
as Epicurus, and his Explicator Lucretius; for although in some places they are
driven to assert some determinate Semina, of Mankind and perfect Animals, to
avoid that indefinite and unlimited excursion of Atoms; yet they that suppose
these Semina, do suppose a fortuitous Coalition of Atoms to the Constitution of
these Semina, and so upon the whole account it is fortuitous.

2. Some assign a natural determined Cause of the first production of Mankind,
namely, the due preparation of the fat and slimy Earth after a long incubation
of Waters, and some admirable Conjunction of (...) the Heavenly and Planetary
Bodies, in some certain Period of Time at a long distance from us; which as
naturally and necessarily produced the first Couples of Mankind, and likewise
of other perfect Animals, as necessarily and naturally as the return of the
Vernal Sun produces diverse sorts of Insects, which though they are called
sponte orientia, yet they arise merely from a Connection of Natural Causes, and
the various Ferments and Dispositions of the Elementary, and Positions and
Influxions of the Heavenly Bodies: Thus some of the Ancients, and also Avicen,
Cardanus, Caesalpinus, Berogardus.

3. Some of the Ancients, that most truly assign the Origination of Mankind to
the most High, Intelligent, Powerful, Beneficent Being, viz. Almighty God, and
the Beneplacitum and Fiat of his Omnipotent Will; as Zeno Citicus. And thus
their differences arose touching the Cause of this Origination.

As to the second, namely, the different Manner of the Origination of Mankind,
Censorinus ubi supra, Eusebius. praepar. Evang. lib. 1. cap. 7, 8, 9. and others
give it as follows.

1. The Opinion of Anaximander: Videri sibi ex aqua terraque calefactos,
exortos esse sive pisces, sive piscibus simillima animalia, in his homines
crevisse, foetusque ad pubertatem intus retentos; tum demum ruptis illis, viros
mulieresque qui jam se alere possent, processisse.

2. The Opinion of Empedocles and Parmenides: Primo, membra singula ex terra
quasi praegnante edita, and deinde coisse, and effecisse solidi hominis
materiam, igni simul and humori permixtam.

3. The Opinion of Democritus and Epicurus: Ex aqua limoque primum homines
procreatos; viz. uteros limo calefacto radicibus terrae cohaerentes primum
increvisse, and infantibus ex se editis ingenitum lactis humorem, natura
ministrante, praebuisse, quos ita educatos and adultos genus hominum propagasse.

4. The Opinion of Zeno Citicus, the Founder of the Stoical Sect: Principium
humano generi ex novo mundo constitutum putavit, primosque homines ex solo
adminiculo divini ignis, id est, Dei providentia, genitos.

Ovid, though he were a wanton Poet, and his Metamorphosis full of Fictions,
yet in the Description of the Creation he has outdone many of the more
serious Philosophers; and I believe was not only acquainted with the Mosaical
History, but with most of those Writings that were extant in that time,
containing the Origination of the World and Mankind; though he mingle his own
Fancies with what he so learned: He gives us an account of the Origination of
Man, Lib. 2 Fab. 2. and of other Animals, Ibid. Fab. 8. Of the former, Natus
homo est, sive hunc divino semine fecit
Ille Opifex rerum mundi melioris origo,
Sive recens tellus, seductaque nuper ab alto
Aethere, cognati retinebat semina eoeli;
Quam natus Iapeto mistam fluvialibus undis
Finxit in effigiem, moderantum cunct a deorum.


Touching the latter, the Origination of other Animals after the Deluge, he
gives an elegant Description, and from the Instance of the Productions after
the Inundation of Nilus; -- Ex eodem corpore sape
Altera pars vivit, rudis est pars altera tellus.


So, after the Flood, by the moisture of the Ground and heat of the Sun, --
Tellus Intulenta recenti
Solibus aethereis, altoque recanduit aestu,
Reddidit innumeras species. --


As to the Origination of brute Animals, he seems to ascribe the same in effect
as happens in the equivocal production of Insects.

But as to the Origination of Man, he seems to agree with the Stoics, but
gives thereof a fuller Explication; namely, 1. That it was a Seminal
Production, and not so fortuitous as that of Animals. 2. That these Semina
humanae naturae were either the immediate Productions of the great Opifex
rerum, or at least were left in the Earth by the Celestial Nature, while it
stood mingled therewith in massa Chaotica: By which means, it seems, he thought
not that the production of Mankind was by a gradual process and maturation in
the Earth, and from it, like the ordinary course of the Formative process in
utero matris, in the ordinary course of Generation; but by a shorter and more
compendious Method: For, according to the ancient Mythology, Japetus signified
the Heaven, and Japeti satus, or Prometheus the Son of the Heaven, the Divine
Providence which Almighty God exercised by the instrumentality of the Heavenly
Motions: And the Ancients attributed the Formation or Configuration of the
humane Body in its first original to this Divine Providence, whereby those
Seminal Particles before described being taken and included in convenient
Elementary Matter, the whole Composition was by the Divine Providence molded
up into the humane Shape and Consistency in its first Origination. This was
that Notion that diverse of the Ancients, and Ovid out of them had concerning
the first Origination of Mankind; vide Caelium Rhodogin. l. 7. cap. 19, and 20.
and seems to have some analogy with that Hypothesis of Plato in his Timaeus,
hereafter mentioned.

Thus we have an account of the Opinions, 1. Of the Pythagorean Philosophers:
2. Of the old Academicks: 3. Of the Peripateticks, all seeming to agree in the
Supposition of the Eternity of the World: 4. Of the Epicureans, under which I
include that of Anaximander and Empedocles, differing only in the modus: 5. Of
the Stoics, which give a true Account both of the Origination of Mankind, and
of the Manner of it: where I have been the longer, because it is a Key to all
that follows, and gives us a Scheme of it.

These several Opinions, and the Authors and Assertors thereof, I shall here
farther illustrate and examine.

1. Touching the Opinion of the Pythagoreans, because we have nothing extant of
his writing, I can say little more touching his Opinion; though some suppose,
he was not of Opinion that the World or Mankind was Eternal.

2. Touching Plato, it is true, he seems very various and Poetical in his
writing; and by reason of the Method of his Discourses, by way of Dialogues, it
is hard to determine what his Opinion was concerning the Eternity of the World,
or of the Generations of Mankind.

In the beginning of his third Book de Legibus, but especially in the middle of
his sixth, under the Persons of Atheniensis hospes, and Clinias, he intimates
his Opinion of the Eternity of the World and Mankind: Athen. Scire omnes
oportet, hominum generationem vel nullum prorsus unquam initium habuisse, neque
terminum habiturum, sed fuisse omnino semper and fore; aut si coepit,
inaestimabili ante nos temporis magnitudine incepisse. Clin. Plane. And again,
in his Menexemus, under the Person of Socrates commending the Country of
Attica; Altera ejus laus erit, quod eo tempore quo tellus omnia animalia
omnigena producebat, feras and armenta omnia; tellus duntaxat nostra ad hoc
sterilis erat, agrestibusque animalibus vacua, proprie vero ex omnibus
animalibus hominem genuit, qui caeteris intelligentia praestat, solusque jus ac
deos colit. And again, in his Timaeus, in the Person of Timaeus he gives us an
Account of the Original of Mankind, and the manner of it, to this effect; That
when Almighty God had made and set in order the great World, and endowed it
with a living Soul, and thereby it became a great Animal; and had also made a
sort of inferior Deities (dii ex Deo) and endowed them also with Immortality,
he brings in the great God bespeaking these inferior Deities; Accedite vos
secundum naturam ad animalium generationem, ita ut vim imitemini meam, qua in
ortu vestro sum usus. Atque ejus quidem animalis quod in ipsis tale futurum est
ut cum immortalibus appellatione conveniat, divinumque vocetur, principatumque
teneat, and justitiam simul ac vos ultro colat: Ego vobis semen and initium
tradam, vos caetera exequi par est, ut immortali naturae mortalem attexentes,
faciatis generetisque animalia, subministrantesque alimenta augeatis, and
consumpta rursum recipiatis. Haec fatus, in eodem cratere in quo mundi totius
animam permiscens temperavit, superioris temperationis reliquias miscendo
perfudit, etc. Satis autem and quasi sparsis animis, per singula singulis
convenientia temporum instrumenta, fore ut animal nasceretur, quod omnium
animalium maxim esset divino cultui deditum.

Thus he now gives us an account of the Creation of Man, namely, of his Soul by
the great God. Therefore Plato seems not to be reckoned among the firm
Assertors of the Eternity of Mankind, nor of the World; and accordingly his
follower Proclus herein agrees with his Master.

3. Touching Aristotle, and the Peripateticks that were his followers, as
Simplicius, Averroes, and others (except Philoponus) their Opinion seems to be
for the Eternity not only of the World, but of Mankind, and of the perfect
Animals: so that in l. 3. de Generatione Animalium, cap. 1. he determins, Quod
non fuit primus leo, etc. and in his way of reasoning follows Ocellus Lucanus,
who was a more ancient Philosopher, and tenaciously asserted the Eternity of
the World.

Yet Aristotle himself seems not to be over-confident of this Opinion, but
holds it as a Problem, and in some places seems to give Intimations to the
contrary. 2. Politic, cap. 6. Putandum est primos homines sive ex terra geniti
fuerunt, sive ex corruptione aliqua servati, ignaros fuisse, etc. and in his 3d
de Generatione, upon the various Productions of the Earth and Water, Ut animae
quodammodo plena sunt omnia: and in his 10th Problem, sect. 15. Qui de natura
disserunt, animantia in principio orta esse dicunt ingenti aliqua mundi
universique mutatione: and in his 64th Problem of his 10th Section, Quam ob
causam animantium alia non solum coitu sed etiam sponte naturae procreantur,
alia ex coitu duntaxat proveniunt, ut Homo and Equus, etsi non ob aliam causam,
tamen quod aliis gignendi tempus breve statutum est. Itaque fieri non potest ut
tempus quod vim obtinet generandi amplificetur prorogeturque, sed temporum
vicissitudine prorogationeque, ut prorogetur contingit; aliis multo generatio
ampliari solet: etenim vel anno vel december mensium spatio confici assolet, quo
pacto vel nullo pacto, vel ex coitu procreari illa necesse est. So that he
attributes the reason of the new production of Men and great Animals only to
the time that they are to be perfected in utero. And l. 1. Topicor. cap. 11. he
states the Question, Whether the World had a Beginning, or not? to be a
Problem; wherein probabilities are on either side.

By these passages of Aristotle himself, he seems not to be so positive in his
Opinion touching the Eternity of Mankind at least; but rather inclines to that
for the Eternity of Generations, upon these Reasons: 1. Because he was not
willing to suppose any other state of things in the World than what he found;
and since he never found any production of Mankind, or the perfect Animals, ex
non genitis, he therefore concluded them to have been ever produced in that
method that he found them in the ordinary and settled course of Nature. 2.
Because, as he was not satisfied with the strange and improbable Hypotheses of
Empedocles, Anaximander, and Democritus touching the Production of Mankind; so
he could not excogitate any of his own which had any clearness or certainty to
him, being utterly unacquainted (for ought we know) with the Mosaical
Hypothesis. 3. Because he being a great admirer of Nature, and the ordinary
proceeding thereof, he was not willing to entertain any such Supposition as was
not evident, according to the ordinary method of Nature, which he so much
venerated; especially such as might seem dissonant to his great Hypothesis of
the Eternity of the general Frame of the rest of the Universe.

And therefore, lib. 3. de Generatione Animalium, cap. 11. upon a Supposition
of a first Production of Men or Animals, he conforms his Thesis concerning them
to his general Doctrine: Quamobrem de prima hominum atque quadrupedum
generatione (si quando primum terrigenae oriebantur, ut aliqui dicunt) non
temere existimaveris altero, de duobus his, modo oriri; aut enim ex verme
constituto primum, aut ex ovo: quippe cum aut intra se habeant cibum ad
incrementum necesse sit, qui quidem conceptus vermis est; aut aliunde accipere,
idque aut ex parente, aut ex part conceptus. Itaque si alterum fieri non
potest ut effluat ex terra, quomodo caeteris animalibus ex parente, relinquitur
necessario, ut ex part conceptus accipiatur. Talem autem generationem esse ex
ovo aut verme fatemur. Ergo si initium ullum generationis omnium animalium
fuit, alterutrum de his fuisse probabile esse apertum est. Sed minus rationis
est, ut ex ovo prodierint; nullius enim generationem animalem talem videmus;
sed alterum tum sanguineorum quae diximus, tum exanguium, qualia sunt
insectorum nonnulla, and ea quae testa operiuntur, de quibus agitur. Non enim
ex part aliqua oriuntur, ut ea quae ovo nascuntur. Thus he conforms his
Position to his general Doctrine, upon a Supposition of the spontaneous
Origination of Animals.

4. I come to the general Doctrine of the Epicureans under which I include that
of Anaximander and Empedocles, who though they differ something in the manner
of their Hypothesis, yet they agree in the main for a kind of spontaneous
production out of the Earth. 1. Empedocles seems to think that the Limbs or
Members of Men grew here and there scattered and distinct, and that they were
after concrete together by Heat and Moisture, into the stature, as it seems, of
a full grown Man. 2. Anaximander thinks that they grew into the full stature of
Men and Women in the involucrum of something like Fishes, and then brake out
into the World, as it seems, in their perfect stature. And that near unto this
was the Opinion of Anaximander, appears by Plutarch, in Placitis Philosophorum,
l. 5. cap. 19. Prima animalia in humore nata corticibus contenta spinosis,
adultiora autem facta ad siccitatem descivisse, ruptoque cortice non multum
temporis supervixisse. Only in the recital of his Opinion by Censorinus and
Plutarch, they both seem to agree in this, that they were of full growth when
they thus broke their Prisons. 3. Democritus and Epicurus seem to think that
they were hatched in these Folliculi or Terrestrial Excrescences, and then
nourished by a Juice of the Earth, until they were able to shift for
themselves. Lucretius has given us the Doctrine of Epicurus in Verse, in his
fifth Book, Page 665. which is rendered in Prose by Gassendus, in Syntagmate
Philosoph. Epicur. sect. 2. cap. 4.

Tum ubi terra dedit primum mortalia secla,
Multus enim calor atque humor superabat in arvis;
Hinc ubi quaeque loci regio opportuna dabatur,
Crescebant uteri terrae radicibus apti;
Quos ubi tempore maturo patefecerat aetas,
Infantum fugiens humorem, aurasque petissens
Convertebat ubi natura foramina terrae,
Et succum venis cogebat fundere apertis:
Consimilem lactis sicut nunc semina quaeque
Quum peperit dulci repletur lacte, etc.
And again, Lib. 2. Page 256.

Denique coelesti sumus omnes semine oriundi;
Omnibus ille idem Pater est, unde alma liquentes
Humorum guttas matter cum terra recepit.
Foeta parit nitidas fruges, arbustaque laeta,
Et genus humanum, etc.
And afterward, in the same Book, Page 281. he gives us the reason why the
Earth gives not the same Productions now.

Jamque adeo fracta est aetas, effoetaque tellus,
Vix animalia parva creat, quae cuncta creavit
Secla, deditque ferarum ingentia corpora partu.
But although Epicurus and his followers suppose that small and imperceptible
Atoms of Matter are the first Principia of all Corporeal things, yet he does
suppose that these Principia are first molded into Semina, or Seminales
moleculae, which were the immediate Constituents of all complete Bodies,
whether animate or inanimate; whereby all things are contained and determined
within certain Species. Vide lib. 1. page 35.

At nunc seminibus quia certis quidque creatur,
Inde enascitur, atque oras in luminis exit,
Materies ubi inest quoiusque and corpora prima.
Atque hac re nequeunt ex omnibus omnia gigni;
Quod certis in rebus inest secreta facultas.
Which Gassendus thus renders, Sect. 2. Cap. 4. in Syntagmate Philosophiae
Epicuri, having given us an account of the Concretion of the Heavenly and
Elementary Bodies, he thus determins out of him concerning the smaller Parts of
Nature: De minus praecipuis and veluti partium particulis, videtur in prima
illa commistione effecta fuisse generabilium and corruptibilium rerum, varia
semina ex quibus res variae and conformatae tum fuerunt, and deinceps magna ex
part propagari etiam potuerint.

And this casual Production of Mankind at first was not only the Supposition of
Epicurus, but also of the Egyptians and Phenicians.

Touching both, Caelius Rhodog. lib. 2. cap. 11. Phoenicum quidem and
Aegyptiorum theologia, casu homines and reliqua animantium genera prorepsisse e
terra asseverebatur. And Diodorus Siculus, lib. 1. gives us a large Relation of
the Opinion of the Egyptians, very like to that of Epicurus and Anaximander;
wherein, after some declaration of the Manner of the first Separation of the
Elementary and Heavenly Bodies, he proceeds to tells us; Terram vero lutosam
evasisse, and omnino mollem: H^c primum cum Solis ardore densior evasisset,
ejus postmodum superficie vi caloris tumefacta, multis in locis humores esse
concretos, in quibus putredines tenui contectae pellicula sint excitatae;
quemadmodum in paludibus and stagnis Aegyptiis adhuc videmus accidere, cum
frigidam terram subito aestus aeris calefacit. Cum vero in humidis calore
adhibito generatio fiat, and noctu quidem circumfusus aer humorem praestet, qui
die Solis virtute consolidetur: tandem putredines illae ad summum perductae,
adveniente veluti partus tempore, exutis confractisque pelliculis, omne genus
educunt animantium: quorum ea quae majorem sortita calorem sunt, in superiorem
regionem volatilia effecta abierunt; quae vero plus terrae continebant,
serpentia, aliaque terrestria evaserunt animantia. Naturam aquosam nacta in sui
generis elementum delata sunt, and appellati Pisces: Terra deinde cum Solis
ardore, tum ventis deinceps arefacta, a gignendis majoribus animalibus desiit.
Sed quae generata erant, mutua commixtione alios animantes procreaverunt. Haec
and Euripides Anaxagorae Physici discipulus sentire videtur, cum in Menalippo
coelum and terram mixta olim fuisse tradat, separata postmodum generasse
singula, arbores, volatilia, feras, aquatilia, and omne mortalium genus. De
prima terrae generatione quamvis praeter opinionem nonnullis esse videatur,
tamen ea quae nunc fiunt testimonium his videntur afferre. Nam juxta Thebaidem
Aegypti, cum Nili cessavit inundatio, calefaciente Sole limum ab aqua relictum,
multis in locis ex terrae hiatu multitudo murium oritur: quod argumentum est ab
ipso orbis primordio animantia similiter omnia generata esse. Eodem modo quoque
and homines a principio genitos, in agris paestum quaerentes vixisse. And
again, in his second Chapter of that first Book: Tradunt Aegyptii ab orbis
initio primos homines apud se creatos, cum bonitate foelicitateque soli, tum
propter Nilum qui and multa generat, and suapte natura quae genuit facillime
nutrit: nam arundinum radices praebet, and loton and Aegyptiam fabam, multaque
praeterea ad hominum victum exposita. Prima animantia apud se esse ortae ea
utuntur conjectura, quod nunc etiam in Thebaidis agro certis temporibus multi
and magni generantur mures; qua ex re plurimum stupent homines, cum videant
anteriorem usque pectus and priores pedes murium partem animatam moveri,
posteriori nondum inchoata, sed informi. Ex hoc perspicuum fieri aiunt, ab ipso
orbis ortu primos homines Aegyptum protulisse. In nullo enim orbis part
accidit eo modo animaliae creari. I have transcribed it at large, as Eusebius
did before me, Lib. 1. Praepar. because it contains a large and full Exposition
of the Hypotheses of those Philosophers that thus suppose an Origination of
Mankind, and that by a spontaneous Production.

In these precedent Opinions of Anaximander, Empedocles, Epicurus, and the
Egyptians, there is something that agrees with that Truth that I have asserted,
namely, The Origination of Mankind ex non genitis. And for this purpose these
Instances are especially given by me. But there is something that I shall in
what follows impugn, namely, The Method or Manner of such Productions, which
according to these Men's Opinions is either purely Casual, as Epicurus and his
followers held; or at least Natural and Necessary, as Anaximander, Empedocles,
and some of the loose passages of Aristotle seem to import, viz. by some great
Conjunction of the Heavenly Bodies, and some great Natural Mutation in the
Elementary World.

5. I now come to the farther Examination of the Hypothesis of the Stoics, who
also agree in this main Truth, That Mankind had an Original ex non genitis: and
the Founder of that Sect has given a rational and true Method thereof, namely,
That this Origination was by the Power and Will of Almighty God: But when those
of this Sect came to give a more particular Explication of the Manner of this
Production, they seem to differ.

Tully was generally well inclined to the Stoical Sect, yet sometimes he is a
Stoic, sometimes an Academick, sometimes an Epicurean, and indeed in some of
his Discourses which he has digested in Dialogues, he seems to be every thing.

In his first Book de Legibus he has this passage touching the Origination of
Man: Nam cum de natura omni quaeritur, disputari solent nimirum ista: perpetuis
cursibus, conversionibus coelestibus extitisse quandam materiam serendi generis
humani, quod sparsum in terras, atque satum, divino auctum sit animorum munere.
Nam quod aliquibus cohaerent homines, e mortali genere sumserunt, quae fragilia
essent, and caduca: animum esse ingeneratum, a Deo: ex quo vere vel agnatio
nobis cum coelestibus, vel genus vel stirps appellari potest. Itaque ex tot
generibus nullum est animal, prater hominem, quod habeat notitiam aliquam Dei;
de ipsisque hominibus nullagens est neque tam immansueta, neque tam fera, quae
non, etiam si ignoret, qualem habere Deum deceat, tamen habendum sciat. Ex quo
efficitur illud ut is agnoscat Deum, qui unde ortus sit, quasi recordetur ac
noscat. By this he supposes that there might be as it were a Prosemination of
the Humane Fabric by the Conversion of the Heavens, and then the same were
stored with Souls immediately produced by Almighty God.

Seneca, following the received Opinion of the Vicissitudes of the Destruction
of the inferior World by Floods and Conflagrations, and the Restitutions
thereof by the Power of God, though he seems to admit Eternal Vicissitudes of
such Making, and Unmaking, and Restitutions of the inferior World, in the
latter end of his third Book of Natural Questions, before cited, Sect. II. Cap.
9. speaking of the Destruction of the World by Universal Floods: Qua ratione
inquis? eadem qua conflagratio futura est; utrumque fit cum Deo visum ordiri
meliora, vetera finire: aqua and ignis terrenis dominantur; ex his ortus, ex
his interitus. And in the end of that Book: Nec ea semper licentia undis erit;
sed peracto exitio generis humani, extinctisque pariter feris in quarum homines
ingenia transierant, iterum aquas terra sorbebit: natura pelagus stare aut
intra terminos suos furere coget, and rejectus e nostris sedibus, in sua
secreta pelletur Oceanus; antiquus ordo revocabitur, omne ex integro animal
generabitur, dabiturque terris homo inscius scelerum, and melioribus auspiciis
natus; sed illis quoque innocentia non durabit, nisi dum novi sunt.

And with this seems to accord the Judgment of Plutarch, 2. Symposiac. quaest.
3. and out of him, Macrob. in 7. Saturnal. cap. ult. where in the dissertation
of that seeming ludicrous Question, Ovumne prius an Gallina? the Disputant for
the latter concludes; Natura primum singula animalia perfecta formavit, deinde
perpetuam legem dedit ut continuaretur propagatione successio. And Plutarch,
Probabile est primum ortum ex terra temporis perfectione absolutum fuisse,
nihilque indigentem hujusmodi instrumentis, receptaculis, and vasis qualia nunc
ob imbecillitatem natura parat and machinatur parientibus.

This was the Sentence and Judgment of the Stoical Philosophers touching the
Origination of perfect Animals and Men.

Upon all which foregoing Discourse it should seem, That the generality of the
Learned World rather supposed an Origination than an Eternity of Mankind; and
this upon two great Motives.

1. A Tradition which seems generally to have been derived unto Mankind from
the first Parents thereof, and so generally believed and entertained.

2. A great congruity of Reason that attended this Hypothesis, and an
extrication thereby of the Minds of considering Men from infinite difficulties
which the Supposition of Eternal Generations does necessarily produce.

I should now come to those Philosophers and Learned Men of later Ages, Avicen,
Cardan, Pomponatius Cisalpinus, Berogardus, and others; which nevertheless I
shall referr to the next Chapter to be examined to another purpose.

CAP. II. Touching the various Methods of the Origination of Mankind.
HItherto I have endeavored to show those Evidences both of Reason and of
Fact, which seem to assert the Origination of Mankind; and I have concluded
with that last in the two precedent Chapters, namely, The Opinion and
Persuasion of the Unlearned and Learned part of Mankind that have supposed such
an Origination of Mankind, the weight or authority of which rests in the
consideration of those Means whereby this Opinion or Persuasion has been
ingenerated in Mankind: For the Opinions or Persuasions of Men, concerning
especially a Matter of Fact, have their weight or authority in argumentation
from that Principle or Motive of such a Persuasion: and this I have reduced to
one or both of these:

1. Some Tradition that has been derived, and derived in probability from the
first Parents of Mankind, that best knew their own Inception, which has since
accordingly prevailed almost in all Places and Ages.

2. The congruity of such a Supposition to Reason, and the Solution of those
Difficulties which must needs arise from an Eternal Succession of Mankind. And
this Motive of this Persuasion, though it began with the more thinking and
considering sort of Mankind, yet from them has been insinuated and derived
unto the rest of Mankind, and by them entertained, as consonant to the common
Reason of Humane Nature.

I have laid the weight of my reasoning touching the Origination of Mankind
upon the Reasons first given in the beginning of this Tract; and I have only
subjoyned those Reasons of Fact that might probably bear testimony to the truth
of the Supposition, and I have endeavored to show where the strength, and
where the deficiencies of those Evidences of Fact do rest; and which are most
concludent, and which not.

I have concluded all these Evidences of Fact, with this concerning the common
or general consent of the greatest and learned part of Mankind therein; and I
have concluded with this Evidence of Fact, not as if this were entertained by
all: for 1. It is not without Opposers, as Aristotle, Ocellus Lucanus, and the
Pythagoreans: and 2. Common Opinion or Persuasion of Mankind, especially
touching Matter of Fact, is very fallible and unstable: 3. In this very Matter
in question, there are by common persuasion of many of these Men, superadded
certain fabulous, incredible and untrue Surmises touching the Manner and the
Methods of this Origination, appearing in some of the Opinions delivered in the
former Chapter.

But the reason why I conclude with that Instance touching the Opinions of Men,
is, because it lets me into that which is the Second principal Part of this
Discourse, namely, The various Hypotheses of those that supposed, admitted, or
believed this Origination, which are in effect all contained in the former
Chapter, which I intend in the following Discourse to examine.

Therefore, having thus partly out of the common Persuasion of Mankind, but
principally by the other foregoing Reasons made my Conclusion, That Mankind had
a Beginning, now, as I think, delivered what may be said for the proof of this
Proposition, That Mankind had their Original ex non genitis, and in some good
measure established that Supposition; I now proceed to examine the truth or
probability of those several Suppositions which are before delivered, touching
the Means, Method or Manner of this Origination.

And not to examine every particular Adjunct or Explication of these several
Methods, I shall divide these general Suppositions of the Ancients touching the
Origination of Mankind into these three.

1. The Opinion, That the production of Mankind was ex non genitis, was
fortuitous or casual; such was the Opinion of Democritus, Epicurus, and some
others: the manner of the Explication thereof I shall hereafter consider.

1. The Opinion, That the production of Mankind was ex non genitis, was
natural, and was founded upon a natural concourse of Causes, especially the
disposition of the Earth and Water, and the Influx of the Heaven. This was the
Opinion of some of the Ancients, but much improved by some later Philosophers.

3. The Opinion, That the production of Mankind ex non genitis was by the
immediate Power, Wisdom, and Providence of Almighty God, and his mere
Beneplacitum. This was the Opinion of the Stoics, and differs but very little
from the Divine Truth touching Man's Creation, as it is delivered by Moses.

And that which is said either for or against these Methods of the production
of Mankind, will be also applicable to the production of the perfect Animals
that have their ordinary production ex conjunctione maris and faeminae, and not
otherwise; though what is said concerning those Animals will be more evident
touching Man, which is a far more perfect nature than other Animals.

First therefore I begin with the Opinion of the Epicureans, which was in
substance this; That there were eternally an infinite number of small
imperceptible Bodies, that floated up and down in a vast infinite Inane; and
these were the Principia of all other Beings beneath Almighty God: these they
call Atoms. That those Atoms were eternally and casually moved in this infinite
Vacuum, and by their mutual percussions the great Systems of the Heavenly and
Elementary Bodies were framed and concreted: That besides that concourse of
Atoms that constituted the greater Integrals of the World, there was a certain
coalition of Atoms that constituted certain Semina or Seminal Bodies, for the
storing and furnishing the greater Integrals of the Universe, especially the
Earth and Seas: That though the coalition of those Semina were casual, and by
an accidental or fortuitous aggregation of some Atoms; yet these were the
immediate, primitive, productive Principles of Men, Animals, Birds and Fishes,
and that determined them in their several Species: That those Primordial Seeds
thus fortuitously coagulated out of the Prima principia, or Atoms, were
scattered by their Motion into the Earth and Seas: That by reason of the
strength of the newly coagulated Bodies of the Earth and Water, and the heat of
the Sun, these Semina did bring forth Man, and Brutes, and Birds, and Fishes;
but that by the decay of the strength of the Earth and Waters, that Method of
production of Men and perfect Animals is ceased, and their production now
delegated ordinarily to Propagation: though in some places, and at some times,
especially between the Tropicks, such a Pullulation of Men and Beasts may be
supposed to be: That yet to this day the spontaneous production of some sort of
Vegetables and Insects continues still in force, the Earth and Waters being
furnished with a sufficient store of such Semina either of old or daily
production; and with a sufficient strength, by the help of the Solar or
Ethereal Heat, to perfect their productions: That the first spontaneous
production of Men and the perfect Animals was in certain Folliculi or Bladders,
excrescent from the Earth; and the growth of these Men and Animals gradual,
being first Embryones, then grown ripe for Birth, then breaking out of those
Folliculi, and furnished with nourishment from the Earth, instar lactis, till
they were able to shift for themselves.

Touching this Supposition, although it contain in it that Truth that I have
hitherto contended for, namely, That Mankind had an Original ex non genitis;
or, That the Generations of Mankind in that order which now it holds, was not
Eternal: yet the Manner or Method of this Epicurean Origination of the World,
and particularly of the perfect Animals, but especially of Mankind, is merely
fictitious, untrue, and impossible.

1. The Principia or Atoms of infinite number floating in Vacuo infinito, is a
thing merely invented, and has neither truth, nor evidence, nor probability in
it.

2. The Motion of these Atoms in this great Vacuum, unless first excited or put
into Motion by some intelligent active Principle, is fabulous and incredible.

3. The Coalition of these Atoms by fortuitous strokes or motions, and their
Coalition into that admirable Order and Constitution which we see in the
Universe, or greater Integrals of this Mundus aspectabilis, is utterly
incredible, and indeed impossible. But these things being beside my present
purpose, and deserving a large prosecution, I shall dismiss.

4. Touching these Semina, and the Coagulation of them by the fortuitous
coalition of Atoms, they were driven to this Supposition, because they found
themselves at a loss, if they should have supposed, that per saltum their Atoms
had been the immediate Constituents of Men and Animals; they could never have
salved that specification of things in their several kinds, and the
continuation of them in that constancy and order which is evidently found in
the natures of Men and Animals; but either there would be an utter incertainty
in the first Constitution of them, quidlibet ex quolibet; or at least it were
impossible that they should continue their Propagation of their kind, but the
constituent Atoms that should make up a Man, might have fallen into the
Constitution of a Horse, or a Lion. Lucret. ubi supra.

Atque hac re nequeunt ex omnibus omnia gigni,
Quod certis in rebus inest secreta voluntas.
And again, Lib. 2.

Non tamen omnimodis connecti posse putandum est
Omnia: nam vulgo fieri portenta videres,
Semiferas hominum species existere,
Quorum nil fieri manifestum est, omnia quando
Seminibus certis certa genitrice creata.
And again, it were never explicable by the various concourse of Atoms, that
there could be such an orderly, constant, and admirable accommodation of the
parts of the Body to their use, or one to another. It is truly said by Galen in
his 9th Book De Hipp. and Platonis decretis, l. 9. Quippe cum artem raro fine
suo frustrari, fortunam raro eundem assequi, nemo sit qui nesciat; quocirca
temerariam and fortuitam, neque artificialem causam fabricae nostri corporis
existimare, absurdum. And again, in that divine Book De Usu Partium, but
especially Lib. 11. that excellent Philosopher shows the gross absurdity and
impossibility that any happy concourse of Atoms can ever fit and settle that
congruity in the Parts of the Humane Body that is there. There needs no other
Confutation of the vanity of that Opinion, than that excellent Expostulation in
that Book, fit for the matter, but too long for the tenth of it to be here
transcribed.

And therefore to avoid that insuperable absurdity, they have substituted a
Medium between the Atomical Principles and the constitution of the spontaneous
Birth of Men; namely, these Semina, made up to be the immediate Principle of
these spontaneous Productions of Mankind, as also of perfect Animals in their
first production.

What Semina there were in the first Constitution of Mankind, I shall have
occasion at large to examine in the next Chapter: But at present it shall
suffice to say and prove, That there is as great an absurdity and impossibility
to suppose a casual production of such Semina, as there is to suppose an
immediate casual production of any Man or Animal omnibus numeris perfectum.

For this Seminium humanae naturae must have in it the Vital Nature, the power
of attracting to it self that substance which must serve to make up the
Individual: It must have the power and energy of that formative act, whereby
the Matter is conformed to its specifical Nature; it must have potentially at
least the whole Systeme of Humane Nature, or at least that Ideal Principle or
Configuration thereof, in the evolution whereof the complement and formation of
the Humane Nature must consist; and besides this, it must have in it at least
potentially all the Faculties of the Humane Soul, not only the vim altricem,
but the vim sensitivam and intellectualem, and all this drawn from a fortuitous
coalition of senseless and dead Atoms. Whereby these two grand Absurdities
would ensue:

1. That a sort of dead, senseless, unintelligent Particles of Matter, should
by their Coalition be advanced into a Being, that at least potentially has all
the Faculties of Life, Sense, or Intellect, and so arise to a perfection beyond
the Sphere and Circle of their own Nature or Power.

2. That though it might be possible, that by skill and the wise conduct of an
Intelligent Being, these Atoms might be so marshalled or qualified, that they
might advance to be a fit Seminium of a reasonable Creature, yet it is not
possible to suppose, that mere Chance or Fortune should make up these Seminal
Rudiments of the Humane Nature, because the Actions of this Seminal Principle
must be so noble and high, and yet so various and complicated, so curious and
choice, that it is never possible for Chance to make it up, and yet if the
least stamen of this Composition be out of order, the whole office and use
thereof is disappointed: And therefore the same Galen makes the processus
formativus foetus to be no less admirable than the goodly structure of the
Humane Body, and as impossible to be the work of Chance as the other: And
therefore in his Book de formatione foetus he says, Ego vero, sicut fabricam
nostri Corporis ostendi summam Opificis and sapientiam and potentiam prae se
far; ita demonstrari a Philosophis velim, utrum is Opifex Deus aliquis sit,
and sapiens and potens, qui and prius intellexit quale uniuscujusque animalis
corpus esset fabricandum, and deinde quod proposuerat potentia fuerit
assecutus; an Anima aliqua a Deo diversa. Neque enim naturae quae appellatur
substantia, sive corporea sive incorporea ea sit, ad summum sapientiae dicent
pervenisse, quam ne ulla sapientia esse praeditam inquiunt, unde eam tam
artificiose in foetuum formatione se gessisse credendum non est: Hoc enim ab
Epicuro aliisque qui sine providentia omnia fieri opinantur audientes, nullam
fidem adhibemus. And in the Conclusion of that Book he as well blames the
Platonicks, Dicentes Animam mundi foetus formare: nunquam tamen adduci potui ut
crederem Scorpiones, Phalangia, Muscas, Culices, Viperas, Vermes, Lumbricos,
Pytalas ab eadem fingi and formari, prope ad impietatem accedere hanc opinionem
ratus. So far was he from thinking it possible for the Nobler Natures of
Mankind, or perfect Animals, to be the work of the Anima mundi (much less of
Fortune) that he could not suppose it a sufficient Cause of the Generation of
Insects.

And besides all this, although a Man that has received the Principle of
Believing, that Almighty God might indeed ad beneplacitum mould up certain
semina humanae naturae, and endue them with that admirable Formative Power: Yet
surely for a Man that (as Epicurus did) pretends to be guided by the Conduct of
Nature only, to suppose a thing so strange to the nature of things, as they now
appear, that there should be another kind of semen humanum or animale than what
is molded in the Bodies of Men or Animals, and elicited from them by a
coincidence only of stupid, dead, and senseless Atoms, seems below the Genius
of a Philosopher. Oportet enim Physicum similiter se habere in omnibus.

5. And as his Supposition of these Semina, thus casually produced, seems
unconsonant both to the Reason and Course of Nature, so his Supposition of the
Manner of the Generation, and Production, and Nourishment of this Foetus, seems
a Fiction utterly inconsonant to the whole Method of Nature, in relation to
Mankind: For what Person, or what Age or Country, ever saw any such kind of
Production as this? any such folliculi humani foetus? Or that ever credibly
heard of any Man conceived nisi in utero muliebri? abating some of those Fables
that Fortunius Licetus delivers in his First Book, cap. 28. or such as have
been begotten by an abominable conjunction.

Again, how is it possible, that an Infant, whose Nature cannot be kept alive
one moment sine calore uterino, should be preserved in Bladders adhering to the
cold Earth? Or that that Infant, who by the very course of Nature cannot be
supported without the care and oversight of others for diverse Months, nay some
Years after his Birth, should be able sub dio and Jove frigido to preserve it
self? Again, who ever saw, or credibly heard of those venae lacteae arising in
the Earth, and yielding a suitable nutriment to a new born Foetus? These
Suppositions must withal suppose a total Inversion of the Course and Nature of
Things quite from what they now are, and in all Ages have been; which, though
it is true, those that admit a higher Principle than Nature, do and may with
sufficient warrant and consonancy to their Hypothesis admit, yet is utterly
unreasonable for such a Philosopher, who not only with some of the ancient
Peripateticks excludes any Divine Providence below the Moon, but wholly
exterminates it, ultra flammantis moenia Coeli.

And this is all I say at present, touching that Opinion which supposes a mere
casual Production of Mankind. There will be something in the ensuing Chapter,
which though it be applied to the Imaginary Hypothesis of the Natural
Production of Mankind, yet will be of use in relation to this Hypothesis of the
Casual Production of Mankind.

CAP. III. Touching the Second Opinion of those that assert the Natural
Production of Mankind ex non genitis, or the possibility thereof.
THe second Opinion is, that by a certain kind of natural Connection of Causes,
Mankind not only may be, but in their first Origination were produced ex non
genitis: Which though for distinctions sake from the ordinary course of
Generation we may call spontaneous or accidental, yet the same, if it were
true, were truly natural, and deduced by a certain Chain of Natural Causes; as
the yearly production of Insects, ex putri materia, or, as the Mice or Rats in
Egypt are supposed by Diodorus Siculus to be produced after the decrease of
Nilus in Egypt.

This seems to be the Opinion of some of the Ancients, that yet subscribed not
to the Hypothesis of Epicurus touching the casual production of things by the
uncertain concourse of Atoms, as of Anaximander and some others, which I shall
not need here again to repeat; and the same Opinion has been asserted by
others, but with these two Correctives.

1. That the same is no casual and fortuitous Production, by the mere casual
conjunction of Atomical Bodies, as Epicurus would have the first Semina, at
least of Men and Animals, to be made up; but by an ordinary, natural, and
necessary connection of Natural Causes and Effects.

2. That yet many of them blame the Ancients, as being too venturous in telling
us the particular Method or Order of these Productions out of Folliculi, or
Cortices spinosi, or Fishes, because that is not a thing discoverable by
Experience, or Natural Light; yet herein they agree, That this Production may
be, and has been a Natural Production ex non genitis, though the particular
Manner of it is not so easy to be certainly explained.

Hippocrates the great Physician seems to have inclined to this Persuasion;
for, Sect. 3. de Carnibus, he writes to this purpose; Quod Calidum vocamus, id
mihi immortale esse videtur; cunctaque intelligere, videre, and audire,
sentireque omnia tum praesentia tum futura, cujus pars maxima cum omnia
perturbata essent in supremum ambitum secessit, quod mihi veteres videntur
Aethera appellasse: altera pars locum infimum sortita Terra quidem appellatur,
frigida and sicca, multasque motiones habens in qua multum sane calidi inest:
tertia vero pars medium aeris locum nacta est, calidum quid existens: quarta
pars, terrae proximum locum obtinens, humidissima and crassissima. His igitur
in orbem agitatis, cum turbata esset calidi pars magna, alias in terra relicta
est, partim quidem magna, partim vero minor; and alias etiam valde parva, sed
in multas parts divisa, and temporis successu resiccata terra ista, in ea
tanquam in membranis contenta circum se putredines excitans, and longo tempore
incalescens, quod quidem ex terrae putredine pinguedinem sortitum est; and
minimum humidi habens, id citissime ossa produxit: And then assigns the Methods
of conformation of the Nerves, Veins, Arteries, and the rest of the Body in
conformity to this Supposition. So this great Physician and Naturalist delivers
his Opinion. Wherein we may observe, that he takes the Hot or Fiery Nature to
be God, knowing and understanding all things; which seems to be the ancient
Error of the Eastern Countries, especially the Persians.

Yet this is observable, 1. That he supposes an Origination of Mankind after
the Formation of the World. 2. Though the Formative Process of Mankind seems in
his Opinion to be in a sort Natural, yet he supposes it not purely so, but a
Production by those fiery Particles which were Particles of a Divine
Intelligent Nature. And though he be mistaken in the Method of the Origination
of Mankind, as shall be shown, yet he supposes it, Opus intelligentis Naturae
agentis per scientiam.

Avicen in the second Book of his Metaphysics, cap. 15. delivers his Opinion;
Possibile esse hominem generari ex terra, sed convenientius in matrice: which
Opinion Averroes his Countryman perstringeth with some indignation, Commentar.
8. Physicor. cap. 5. Iste sermo ab homine qui dat se scientiae, est valde
fatuus: his Reasons, I confess, are such as may not be admitted; for being a
rigid Assertor of the Eternity of the World in the state it now stands, he
forms his Reasons against the Opinion of Avicen principally, if not
altogether, upon that Hypothesis.

Cardanus, in his ninth Book, de Animalibus quae ex Putredine generantur,
discoursing about Locusts, has this passage; Et non solum ea minuta, sed and
majora animalia e putredine, imo omnia credendum est originem ducere; cum jam
de Muribus constet, and Pisces in aquis recentibus sponte generentur: but his
severe Corrector, Julius Scaliger, in Exercit. 193. calls it, Illa impia and
nefaria vox; Si Bos aliquando ex putri ortus est, cur post hominum memoriam ex
ejusmodi procreatione nullus exstitit? Caesalpinus, in his fifth Book
Quaestionum Peripateticarum, cap. 1. undertakes an entire Defense of the
Position of Cardanus, and contends not only that it is possible, but that de
facto it is true. The sum of his Opinion seems to be this,

That although the Soul of Man be of a higher nature and extraction, yet the
Body, and these Powers or Faculties of Life and Sense may be, and have been
formed ex putredine, without the conjunction of Sexes; as Weeds, Vegetables,
and Insects.

And that he means such a Production to be by an ordinary course of Nature,
he largely insists upon that Axiom of Aristotle, Sol and homo generant hominem;
which he understands in sensu diviso, and that there is in the heat of the Sun
an active, generative Principle, which in Matter prepared for its operation,
commonly called Putrefaction, produces a Seminal Formative Seed, sufficient of
it self for the production of the Humane Nature, as also of the nature of other
Animals.

That the Species of Animals are eternal, not upon the account of an eternal
succession by ordinary propagation, but by that succession that would arise in
certain great Conjunctions of the Heavens, and the heat of the Sun, which would
be productive of the Individuals of the several Species; though all the Species
of Animals were destroyed by Floods or other accidents, as possibly they might
be.

That although the ordinary Method of preserving the Species of Men and Animals
by ordinary Generation, be fitted for the ordinary continuation of the Species;
yet without this Method of production out of prepared Earth, Nature were
defective, and wanted a sufficient Expedient for the preservation of Species
upon great Occurrences.

That although this production of Men and perfect Animals ex putri be not
obvious to our ordinary Experience, it is not because the Supposition wants
truth, but because 1. Every place is not fit for such a production, but where
there is a constant and sufficient heat, duly to prepare and digest the Matter.
But the likeliest place for such production is some unknown place between the
Tropicks, where the heat is great and constant. 2. Because the maturation and
ripening of such Productions require longer time than that which is sufficient
for the production of Insects: for we see greater Animals, even with all the
advantages of the calor uterinus, require a longer time for their formation and
maturation; as, a Man nine months, an Elephant two years; and consequently,
their productions without this auxilium uterinum must require longer time.

Then he gives us a large account touching Insects, that arise ex putredine,
and yet are of the same Species with those that are produced per coitum; and
that when they are produced ex putri materia, yet they propagate successively
Individuals of the same kind: and that if greater Animals were thus produced,
they would be of the same Species with the like Animals propagated per
generationem ordinariam, and would accordingly propagate their kind; as many
Herbs and Trees arise spontaneously, yet are of the same Species with others
that are per seminationem, and produce Seed, and thereby continue their Species
as well as others that arise per proseminationem.

This I take to be the effect of his Position and his Reasons, which are very
learnedly and smartly refuted by Fortunius Licetus, in his first Book de
Spontaneo Ortu.

But yet there was one difficulty which Caesalpinus does not at all, as I
remember, obviate, which yet renders his Supposition utterly inexplicable;
namely, since the Heat and Influences of the Heavens, even in their supposed
extraordinary Conjunctions, must needs be uniform at those times, and in or
near those Climates wherein they happen, how comes it to pass that the same
univocal Heat does produce at that time any variety of Animals? why should it
not produce only Men, as the best of Animals, rather than Horses, Tigers,
Lions, etc. Again on the other side, since the disposition of all the parts of
Terrestrial Matter is so diverse, and qualified with infinite combinations of
Qualities and Particles, how it comes to pass, that in these great Conjunctions
there are not infinite varieties of things produced, but they are determinate
in certain Ranks and Species of Being; whereas the modifications of the Matter
are so various and infinite, that the Species of things would be infinite,
irregular, Humano capiti cervicem equinam. So that there seems necessary some
superintendent Intellectual Nature, that by certain election and choice
determined things in those determinate Ranks, and contained them within it: For
the heat and influence of the Heavenly Conjunctions and of the Sun being common
and universal, and the various Particles of the Earth variously modified and
qualified, there could never only by these means be any determining or
containing the Species of Animals within any determinate constant figures or
bounds: And this we shall hereafter find necessary, when we come to consider
the determination of Insects also in their several Species.

Again, he gives us not any reasonable Explication by this Hypothesis how the
discrimination of Sexes happen, how all things thus produced come to propagate
their kind, and to contain their Productions within the specific limits of the
natures of such Animals; all which were necessary to be done, to render his
Supposition of this natural production of Men or Animals ex putredine to be any
way tolerable.

Beregardus therefore in his 10th Circulus Pisanus has refined and rectified
this Hypothesis of Caesalpinus, and of Pomponatius that went before him; and
though he can never make out the truth or probability of his Supposition, yet
he has rendered it more tolerably explicable, especially in relation to the
forementioned deficencies; I will give the sum of his Supposition briefly, as I
understand it: And it seems thus;

That the Calidum innatum is that Altrix anima, and Princ^pium seminale sine
quo nihil gignitur, and is the Basis of Life in all things that have it; but
yet it is never single, and by it self, but is the first Rudiment of Life, and
determined by the particular Species of Life in every Individual that has
Life: for there is no vivens that is not either Equus, or Canis, or Vitis, or
some other determinate Vegetable or Animal.

That there are three kinds of this Life wherein it is specifically determined,
viz. Vegetable, Sensible, and Rational.

That at least the two former (he means the latter also, if he durst speak out)
are raised out of certain Seminal Principles, whereby the Calidum innatum is
specifically determined to this or that Specifical Life.

That these Semina are not eternal, because made up of things or Principia that
are pre-existing: this seems perfectly to agree with the Doctrine of Epicurus
before mentioned, whose Patronage he seems to take in the Person of Aristaeus,
yet with some Correctives, as is hereafter shown.

That there were in Nature various kinds of Calida, or Fiery Particles, or
Spiritus ignei, and various kinds of Humida and Frigida; these were eternally
floating up and down in small Particles, and variously agitated and mingled,
which made up by this mixture the constituent Semina of Vegetative and
Sensitive Natures.

That in this Constitution of the various kinds of the Spiritus ignei were the
constituent Animae vegetabilium and sensibilium, and the various kind of
Humores were the Oleum and Balsamum vitae; and according to the variety of
these Spiritus ignei, which were as it were Seminium naturae, were the various
Species of these Semina, and the various specifical production of Vegetable and
Sensible Natures arose from them.

That the Composition of these Semina was not merely fortuitous, as Epicurus,
but he gives us a more gentle Explication thereof; Praecipua vero and plane
divina est permistio ista, quae in particulas diffringuntur minutissimas, and
quantum satis est ad componendum semen misti alicujus aptissime coagmentantur,
ut non magis quam par est, neque minus illud efficient; quippe sunt naturae ad
hoc determinatae.

That these are the Seeds of all living things, and they were scattered up and
down in the Earth and Waters; and that therefore every living Being had its
proper Semen for his Origination there lodged.

That yet till the Matter wherein these Seeds were lodged were conveniently
prepared, there would be no production of Animals by these Seeds.

That the Semina of Mankind, and of the greater Animals required a greater and
more effectual preparation of the Matter, or a Menstruum for their production
put of those Semina, and therefore required the greater Conjunctions of the
Heavens for their production; though ordinary Conjunctions serve for the
production of Insects and Vegetables, namely, the regress of the Sun.

That by these Semina of all living Beings, though the World were eternal,
there might be successive Supplies and Reparations of Animals and Men; and
though the whole Species of Men and Animals were destroyed, yet upon the
returns of these great Conjunctions and Positions of the Heavens requisite for
a due preparation of the Menstruum in the Earth for these Semina, their Species
would be restored out of these Semina.

That the Terrigenae might either be produced adulti, and so able to shift for
themselves; or else be furnished with a convenient nourishment from the Earth;
or that they might be in their first production not like Infants new born, but
able to get their livelihood, as some young Brutes are.

Thus we have the Supposition of this witty Man also, who by the supposition of
these antecedent Semina, made up of the diverse Spiritus ignei and Humores, has
supplied what was wanting in Caesalpinus, or at least better explicated it; and
by supposing this mixture of these Spiritus ignei and Humores in their several
proportions, by something more than a fortuitous means, has something
rectified the exorbitancy of Epicurus; though still he suppose those Spiritus
ignei, which were as it were the various Souls of those various Seeds, and
afterward of the several Animals produced by them, were natural and eternal.

That which seems to have given the original groundwork of all these Opinions,
has been,

1. Some Expressions that fell from Aristotle, which are before mentioned, that
seem to give countenance to this Opinion.

2. A proud vanity in Men of Wit, to resolve all things into Nature and pure
natural and necessary Causes, unwilling to recognize the interposition of
Almighty God, and his Beneplacitum in the Origination of things, and yet
finding too many absurdities accompanying the Hypothesis of Eternal Generations
of Mankind, ex successivis genitis.

3. But principally the Observation of the spontaneous production of Insects
and little Animals ex putri materia, whose structure nevertheless is as
admirable as the structure of greater Animals; and that they also being thus
originally produced, yet propagate their kind by successive Generations, have
distinction of Sexes and Faculties: This, it seems, principally gave start to
this Opinion touching the like Origination of Mankind and greater Animals by a
natural spontaneous production.

And because this Instance of the natural production of Insects is that, which
as it probably gave the rise to this Opinion for the like production of Mankind
or other Animals, and seems to be the only experimental Instance that is given
to assert the possibility or probability of the other, I shall consider it
largely under these several Examinations.

1. Whether there be any sponte orta among Vegetables and Insects, but
especially the latter.

2. Admit there be, yet whether those sponte orta do arise merely from any
natural or accidental Cause.

3. Admit they may arise from any natural or accidental Cause, yet whether
there be any consequence of a like possibility in the Origination of perfects
Animals, but especially of Mankind.

4. Admit it may be possible in Speculation, yet how far forth de facto the
same has happened without the interposition of the Divine Power; which renders
it a supernatural, not a natural production.

CAP. IV. Concerning Vegetables, and especially Insecta Animalia; whether any
of them are sponte orta, or arise not rather ex praeexistente semine.
THere are several Ranks of Being in this inferior World, which have various
specifical Degrees or Ranks of Perfection one above another.

The first division of them is into things Inanimate, and things that are
Animate; wherein the latter have another, and a nobler Form, or (if that Word
be disliked) Nature than the former.

Of things Animate there are three distinct natures, the latter exceeding still
not only in degree but in kind, perfection, and excellence of nature the
former; namely, things vegetable, that have simply Life, with those operations
incident to Life. The second sensible, that have not only a Life of vegetation,
but a Life of sense, and faculties, and operations corresponding to it. The
third rational or intellectual, that has not only a Life of vegetation and
sense, but an intellectual Life, and faculties and operations subservient and
suitable to that Life.

Among Vegetables, as to the purpose in hand, there seem to be two kinds or
degrees: Some are the more perfect, which do not ordinarily arise but from
Seminal Particles immediately derived from the Vegetable, either the Root, or
the Branch, or the Semen formatum of these Vegetables; as an Apple Tree, or a
Rose, etc.

Others seem to be less perfect, because they seem oftentimes to arise
equivocally neither from Seed, Root, or Branch of the same Species, as well as
from it.

But even in all these there are none but arise from a vegetable Principle, and
not barely from what is inanimate; and for the most part, if not altogether,
from a vegetable Principle or Semen of the same kind.

1. It seems that the upper superficies of the Earth at least, is plainly a
Vegetable Nature; and that it is no more forcible Argument to say that the
Grass of the Earth, Nettles, Docks, Thistles, and such like common excrescences
are no more spontaneous productions in the Earth, than the Feathers upon Birds,
or the Hair upon Beasts or upon the Heads of Men are a spontaneous production:
for though these are excrementitious, and not really parts of the Bird, Animal,
or Man, but growing in the Pores of the Skin, and having the Roots there as the
Grass or the Thistle has in the superficies of the Earth; yet they grow, and
are nourished from that vegetable power that is in the nature of Animals: so
that they are but vital Excrescences from a vital portion of the Earth, namely,
its Superficies.

2. Again, it seems that there is scarce, if at all, any Vegetable that is in
the Earth, but it arises ex praeexistente semine specifico.

The Semina of Vegetables are of two kinds, according to their several natures;
some are formally Seeds, those Moleculae seminales, that are the choicest
spirituous parts of the Vegetable molded up into a specifical Seed: And hence
it is, that some smaller sorts of Herbs that yield a natural Seed dye the
Winter after they have produced; partly, because they have as it were performed
their trust that Nature committed to them for the preservation of their kind;
but principally, because they have delivered up into the Seed that Vital
Particle which maintained their own Life when they had it: And therefore such
Herbs, if their semination be prevented by being cut, survive to the next Year.

And these Seeds are very numerous and various, and many times very small,
whereby they are many times accidentally transplanted into great remote
distances: for Instance, sometimes by Floods of Water and sometimes by Winds,
sometimes by Birds, sometimes by Beasts, who taking them in among grosser
nutriment, and by reason thereof, and of their smalness, escaping without
maceration, they retain their seminal nature in their very Dung; and sometimes
by Exhalations, for the Exhalations will sometimes lift up things of some bulk,
together with the watery Vapors: we have seen it rain little grains like Rye,
which upon search have been found Seeds of Ivy: and therefore those small
Moleculae, that are almost imperceptible, may with much more ease be raised,
and transplanted as it were by the motion of the Clouds into other places or
Countries, which may be conjectured to be fortuitous, and yet are truly and
really univocal. This Pliny witnesses, lib. 19. cap. 3. of the Herb
Laeserpitium, whose Seed was transported, and sowed in a strange Country by a
storm of Rain.

Again, there be some Seminal Parts of Herbs and Trees which produce their
kind, though without that formal Seed whereof we have spoken; and commonly such
Seminal Parts are either of the more imperfect sorts of Herbs or Trees, or else
a very great coacervation of the Parts of those that otherwise require a more
regular Seed.

There is scarce any Tree but these three parts are actually prolifick of of
its kind; 1. The Seed: 2. The Root: 3. The Branch or Buds, with incision into
another Tree or Stock: the Branch of an ordinary Apple will not grow being set
in the ground, but the Branch of a Willow, Codling-Tree, or Vine will take root
being set in the ground. The Oak will not ordinarily grow but by the Seed or
Root implanted; but common experience shows us that a woody ground of Oak, or
any other Wood which has stood long, and is after felled, will run to Oak
again, though the Root be dead; a great quantity of the Leaves, Wood, Cortex or
Rind putrified in the ground will leave a Seminium in it, which will after turn
to a Wood of Oak again. And many Plants have all their Parts Seminal, though
not so vigorous as the regular Semen of those Plants; the Branches and Leaves,
nay if we believe those that pretend to have tried it frequently, the
Decoction, Infusion, Ashes of some Herbs scattered in good Mould and well
watered, will produce their proper Species. Vide Kircher. in Mundo subterraneo.
And I do persuade my self, that the common Dew exhaled from some sorts of Herbs
or Weeds, but especially from the common Grass, carries with it the Seminal
Tincture of the Herb, which being again descended by Dews or Rain upon the bare
and naked Earth, re-produceth the same Species; and hence it is that Grass,
which is the ordinary fruit of the Earth, and therefore most visited with the
Dew of Heaven, and re-exhaled again, does most ordinarily re-produce Grass. And
therefore Virgin-Earth taken out of the bottom of a Well and kept in a House,
will, if at all, be very long before it will gain that Vesture; but exposed to
the Air, where the Dew or Rain falls, it will soon be green, as those that have
tried it affirm; Sir Francis Bacon's, Not. Hist. Cent. 6. page 117. and upon
the same reason it is, that (as the same Author there observed) foreign Earth
will incline to bring forth Herbs of the same Country whence it was brought,
because probably impregnated with the Seminal Particles of the Country whence
it came.

It is true, many times Plants and Herbs, though arising by a specifical
Seminium of their own Herbs or Plants, will seem to change their figure, and
become of another kind; as by transplanting wild Flowers or Herbs into Gardens
where the mould is better, or e converso, the poorness or richness of the Soil
varies the shape or extent: Thus some say Corn will degenerate into Tares;
Fruits will degenerate, being fown: And again, mixture of Seeds, or Seeds
impregnated with Tinctures of other Seeds or things may change their smell,
color, taste, or figure. But in all these Transmutations, whether for the
better or the worse, still the Seminal Specifical Principle remains.

So that it may seem that we are too hasty and inconsiderate, in concluding
that all Trees and Herbs not produced ex semine formato, are therefore sponte
nata: for there be infinite means of transplantation of real Seeds, and very
many Seminia or Seminal Particles of Vegetables that we know not. I do
remember, many Years since, I found in a Ground that had no Oaken Trees in it,
nor very near it, yet every Year abundance of young Oaks growing up some two,
some three Inches high; and I thought them to be all sponte nata, and concluded
an Oak to be of another nature than I formerly thought: But Observation
corrected my mistake; for I found the Crows fetching the Acorns from a Wood not
far off, and when they had eat what they pleased, they hid the rest for their
future supply, but forgot them, and the next Spring they prospered into young
Oaken Plants. We are not therefore presently to conclude every Vegetable sponte
natum, because we see not its prosemination.

But the Consideration of Insects is that which is of more congruity to this
present purpose, because they are sensible Beings, and have in their little
Model almost, if not altogether, all the Organs and Faculties of the greater
Animals; yea and Fantasy and Imagination, and Memory, as appears especially
by Bees and Ants, who find their ways home from a great distance. But yet we
must say, that their Faculties and Organs, though admirable, yet are not of
equal perfection with those of the nobler kind of Animals, as will appear more
hereafter.

They also that seem to have their Origination ex putrido, or spontaneously,
yet it is evident to Experience that they do propagate their kind; contrary to
what was thought by Aristotle in his Book de Genesis Animal. lib. 1. cap. 1. who
supposes, At vero quae non ex coitu sed ex putri materia oriuntur, ea generant
quidem, sed genus diversum.

And touching these Insects, though they seem to be sponte orta, yet there is
much may be said that their Original is not spontaneous, but that even those
Insects that seem sponte orta, arise one of these ways: 1. Either immediately,
ex semine prioris Insecti ejusdem speciei; 2. Or mediately, ex hujusmodi
semine; Or, 3. ex vivo animali diversae speciei; Or, 4. ex mortuo animali
diversae speciei, seu cadavere: For some think that it is not easily grantable,
that a Being endued with Sense can by the course of Nature arise from a Being
without Sense, or at least without Life. Vide Kircher. l. 12. Mundi
subterranei; Fortunium Licetum, de Insectis.

Touching the first of these; many of those Insects that seem to be sponte
orta, do indeed immediately arise from the Semina of Insects of the same kind:
for these Insects for the most part ex coitu do produce an innumerable
multitude of little Eggs or Semina, that sometimes in the same Year grow to
Animals of the same kind; and sometimes their Semina are deposited in some
Cranies or Coverts of the Earth, or Trees Leaves, or other Receptacles that
serve for the Seminium or Store of the next Spring.

Malpighius, that has made a curious disquisition touching the Silkworm,
tells us, that the usual product of that Worm in one Year is never less than
300, but most often 500 Eggs, most of which foecunda; and the like is visible
in Caterpillars, Flies, Worms, Frogs, Locusts, Wasps, and all other Insects.

It is true, the Winter destroys most of these Insects, and many of their
Semina, and therefore the colder the Winter is, the less the next Spring is
infested with them: But many of these Semina are preserved till the next
Spring, and then they assume their specific Life by the heat of the
approaching Sun.

These Semina being very small and light, are many times dispersed into other
places by the Winds, sometimes carried away to other places by Waters and
Floods, sometimes exhaled into the Air with the gross Vapors drawn up by the
Sun, and poured down by Rain again on other places. And this multitude of these
little Semina thus dispersed, assuming in the Spring their natural kinds, give
Men occasion to think them sponte orta; whereas in truth they do as really
arise ex semine specifico, as the greater Animals.

And therefore credit is hard given to the Story of Diodorus Siculus, or of the
Poet out of him, concerning the Mice arising in Egypt, out of the Slime of
Nilus; Altera pars vivit, manet and pars altera tellus. Neither to the
confident Helmont, in his Tract De Imagine Fermenti impraegnante massam
Seminis, page 113. who tells us, that if a foul Shirt be put within the mouth
of a Vessel where there is Wheat, that in the space of 21 days it will turn the
Wheat into Mice; nor that other Relation of his in the same place, that the
Herb Basil being bruised, and exposed to the heat of the Sun some days, will
breed Scorpions.

And as concerning the productions of Insects out of Vegetables, viz. those
little Animals that are bred in Flowers and Herbs, there are some that think
they are not the natural production of the Vegetables, but that they are the
small Semina of those Flies that are lodged in the cavities of them; such as
are in the Leaves of Elms, or in the Leaves or Fruits of other Herbs or Trees,
as in the Oak-apple, the Hasel-nut, and some others.

And besides these formal Seeds, the several parts of Insects have also their
Seminal Nature in them, and produce often Insects of the same kind; see for
this the whole Tract of Kircher in his Mundus subterraneus, lib. 12. cap. 1.
and seqq. wherein he gives us the Solution of the ortus spontaneus of the
Barnacles in the Orcades and other Parts, by the Eggs of the Sea-Fowls that are
driven upon this Shore; and many Instances of the Artificial production of
Insects out of the macerated Materials of Worms, Frogs, Locusts, Shellfish,
Scorpions: whereby it appears that all their Parts are seminal, though not so
active and formative as their Formal Seeds are.

2. As to the mediate production of Insects, yet out of the Seminal Natures of
others of the same Species: Thus out of the Fimeta of Horses, Oxen, and Sheep
arise Scarabei or Beetles, and according to Kircher, ubi supra, Bees have their
production out of the Stercus Bovis; which yet he attributes to those Moleculae
seminales deposited in those Flowers whereupon Cows do feed, but not so
macerated in the digestion but that they retain their primitive Seminal Nature;
though perchance this may be too remote and laborious a reduction, and possibly
it were better to be reduced to that which follows, namely, from the Animal
vivum; upon which account he supposes, that Ants are Humanae urinae proles.

3. Therefore the third Original of Insects is from the living Body of another
Animal, whose excrementitious parts do naturally breed Insects, as Lice, Fleas,
Worms; yea and according to the Author's Observation, there is scarce any
noysom Disease in the Body but it breeds Worms: yea and according to a late
curious Anatomist, Kirkringius, there are scarce any Viscera of the Body of
Man, but has many sorts of Worms in it. And the Solution of these Productions
seem to be thus:

That the Sensitive Nature being divisible, communicates it self in various
degrees unto all that is united to the Body; the Chyle, the Humors, nay the
very Excrementitious Parts, the natural Excrements, the Urine, the Hair, the
excrementitious Sweat and Evaporations carry along with them the mean and low
Effluvia of the Sensible Nature or Animal Spirits.

That these Effluvia, when they are closed up in any viscous Continent that may
contain and keep them together from being presently diffused and wasted, assume
the form of an Animal, though not of the same nature, nor worth, nor
excellence, nor perfection of the Animal it self that produces it: for the
meanest and basest Effluvia of the Animal Soul accompany these mean and base
connexa of the Animal Body, namely, the foul Humors and Excrements. And hence
it is, that those nasty Productions, as Lice, Fleas, Cimices, the Worms in the
Intestines or Ventricle, nay in the Heart, Liver, Ears and other parts of Men
are bred: and from this participation of those baser Effluvia of the Animal
Spirits, the Hairs of Horses lodged in standing Water will gather life, and the
form of an Insect.

4. As the Animal vivum thus communicates a Sensible Nature to Insects produced
from it, so does the Cadaver or dead Body: Hence come generally Worms, which in
the heat of the Sun sometimes turn into Flies; and according to the Tradition
of the Ancient and Moderns, Bees grow out of the dead Bodies of Cows, Wasps and
Hornets of Horses; which nevertheless some attribute to a refiduum of those
Seminal Particles of the very Insects which these Beasts devour, with the
Flowers and Herbs where they are lodged.

And to maintain that general Supposition before insisted upon, That Viva and
sentientia non generantur ex non vivis and sentientibus; they say, That even in
the Cadaver there remain certain Animal Spirits, tanquam in vase, which serve
for the production of Animal Natures of this base and low allay.

And so in all those productions of Insects ex animale vivo vel cadavere, the
Semen of that Insect is a Vital and Animal Principle, though it be not,
immediately at least, of the same kind.

And because these Productions are not immediately of the Seminal Particles of
the Insect, but of a living nature of another kind, therefore always the
Productum or Insect is of a different, baser, and more imperfect nature than
the Producent.

And this is the Sum of what is observed by Licetus, de Sponte ortis, and
Kircherus, ubi supra, viz. Lib. 12. Mundi subterranei.

But yet though much of this be very true, and that Insects are not therefore
sponte nata, as people think, yea they are never sponte nata ex non viventibus;
yet I do doubt that it may be found by experience, that some sorts of Insects
do arise from Vegetables, at least of a very exalted nature: for the truth is,
that some sort of Vegetables seem to be in the next degree to the lowest sort
of Insect Animals, as may appear in the Plant called the Sensitive Plant and
some others: And therefore it is not impossible but some sort of Insects may
arise immediately out of some sort of Vegetables, as the Gurgulio, that arises
in the Wheat; the Wivel, that rises in the Malt; and the Hippuris or
Horse-tail, and the Liburnus or White Vine, that Kircher himself mentions in
the same 12th Book, Sect. 1. Cap. 9. to grow into an Insect in the Water; and
those Instances in the same Chapter of Franciscus Corvinius, that in every
Vegetable had observed a proper Insect bred in it, and living upon it; and the
experience of the growing of Moths out of the Seeds of Lavender, and Worms in
Rose-Cakes: these experimented Observations seem to correct the universality of
the Assertion, that Non nascuntur Insecta animalia ex non animalibus; though I
think it may be universally true, that they are not produced ex non viventibus,
they are always the production of the Semen or Seminal Particles of an Insect,
or of the Parts of an Animal or Cadaver animalis, or of that which is or was
vegetable.

Yet some there are, that think that these Insecta animalia that seem to be
produced immediately ex herbis, stirpibus, arboribus, and vegetabilibus, or
Animals of another kind; yet the first Seminium of these Insecta are either the
Semina, or the Seminial Particles of Insects of the same Species, percolated
through the various parts of Vegetables or Animals: In so much that Gassendus
that inquisitive Naturalist seems to think, that the very Lice and Fleas and
Worms in a Man, are but the Productions of the several Seeds of Animals of the
like kind; Cum in eodem homine ex sordibus capitis Pediculi, ex sordibus barba
Alae, inguinis Ricini, ex intercutaneo humore Cyrones oriantur, and ita de
caeteris; quonam alio id referamus quam ad diversa semina quae a diversis sive
plantis sive animalibus proliciantur, and sese ad diversas parts quatenus
congruunt, recipiant, accommodantve inter nutriendum?

I do not here take upon me a distinct and exact Discourse touching production
of Insects, it is one of the most abstruse, curious, and various Inquiries in
Nature: There be many that have busied themselves on purpose in it, to which
any one may have recourse, as Cardanus in his Book de Subtilitate, and scaliger
his Animadversions thereupon; Gassendus in Physicis, sect. 3. l. 4. cap. 1.
Kircher. l. 12. sect. 1, and 2. Aldrovandus, per totum; Fortunius Licetus, his
Book De Ortu Sponte nascentium; Vossius, De Origin Idololat. lib. 4. cap. 65.
and seqq. All that I shall say farther in it, is but this:

First, that it is most certain that many of those productions of Insects which
Men ordinarily take to be spontaneous, are yet in truth univocal from Insects
of the same species, their formal Seeds or Seminal Particles.

Secondly, that it is not certain that any production of Insects is
spontaneous, or not from the Seed of other Animals that were of the same
species: for we are not certain, but that the seminia or Seminal Particles of
these Insects may be percolated or derived by diverse Maeanders and long obscure
passages into or through the Bodies of Vegetables or Animals of another species.

Thirdly, that it is very probable that they are so traduced by these
experimental Assays that have been either experimented by Observation, or by
Art; whereby it is rendered evident to Sense, that their production at this day
may be, and often is of the semina or Seminal Particles of Insects of the same
kind.

The Consequence whereof is, That the production of all these little Particles
of Sensitive Life, as well as of the greater Animals, though at the first it
were ex non genitis, by the Power and Fiat of Almighty God; yet since that time
it may be probable they have their propagations univocal, Ex semine vel seminio
praeexistentis Insecti ejusdem speciei, vel formato vel analogo.

This Consideration may assure us, That the production at least of the
generality of Insects which seem to be spontaneous, is truly seminal and
univocal; though possibly upon a severe disquisition it may be found, that some
are merely spontaneous and equivocal Productions ex putri, whereof I shall give
a farther account in something that follows, especially in the next Section.

CAP. V. If it be supposed that any of those Insects at this day have their
Original ex non genitis, or spontanee; whether yet the same may be said a
Natural or Fortuitous Production.
I Come now to the Second Particular, which is this; That admitting there were
any such production of Insects at this day, whether the same were purely
Natural: Wherein I shall briefly say,

1. That it seems very probable, that the species of Insects were at first in
their first Creation determinate and certain; and although since partly by
degeneration, partly by various mixtures their species are changed and
multiplied, even as the perfect Animals in Africa, are by a mixture of species,
yet they were at first determinate.

2. That it seems the production of the first Insects was like to that of
perfect Animals: they were not produced ex semine, or per processum seminalem,
whether ex Ovo or ex Verme, but were produced in the complement of their
specifical and individual existence. For it is much more suitable to Reason,
and to the nature of things, that the Animal should have an antecedence to the
Seed, and that the semen should be rather the effect of an Animal at first than
an efficient; or according to Plutarch's Discourse, that the Hen should be
before the Egg, rather than the Egg before the Hen.

3. That yet if we should suppose that in the first production of Insects at
least, they should arise ex praeexistente semine, or that at this day they
should arise de novo; yet bare Matter were not possibly sufficient for its
production, without some Seminal Principle that might determine the Insect to
its kind, and advance in it that formation and organization of Parts, and
effect those admirable Faculties of Sense and Imagination which we see in them:
For it were exceedingly above the bare activity of Elementary qualities, though
the most active, as that of Heat, to raise so curious and admirable a Fabric
as the Bodies of those little Animals, much less the Faculties of Life, Sense,
and Imagination. And if it were possible that some of the qualities and
dispositions, or modifications, or temperament of Matter could arrive to the
production of any such little sensible Being; yet it could never be contained,
nor contain it self within any determinate species or kinds, but as the
modifications, temperaments and qualities of Matter are infinite and various,
according to its various Mixtures and Combinations, so the Productions would be
ever irregular, monstrous, and never colligated or contained in any certain
species.

It remains therefore that in the first production of Insects, whether at this
day, or in the first eduction of their species, if they were not produced in
the complement of their individual and specifical nature, they must necessarily
be produced ex aliquo semine congruo, and determinante materiam.

And certainly the Constitution of such a semen is, as I have before observed,
a work of great Wisdom, Intelligence, and Power, no way less than such a Power
that must have made an Individual of the same kind in his complete existence.
For the semen of every thing contains in it the small idea of that Nature which
it is to produce; which is as it were minted and stamped upon it, and contains
an admirable power of evolving and dilating it self, and bringing forth that
admirable Fabric, and that singular Conformation of Parts, and those wonderful
Faculties of Life, Sense, and Imagination, and the several Organs and
Operations belonging to it.

Some there are that have said, and with very great truth, That the smallest
Animal in the World sets forth the Wisdom and Excellence of the great Architect
of the World more conspicuously than the Fabric of the greatest Whale or
Elephant: as the smaller an excellent Watch is (if it have all its parts,
motions, order, and constancy) it more sets forth the skill of the Artist than
a greater Fabric. When a Man shall see in that Animal that well near escapes
his sight by reason of its smalness, as the Acarus, the Cyro or Hand-worm, yet
he shall plainly by the help of a Microscope behold in it all the conformation
of its little Limbs useful for its being; all the Operations of Senses and
Organs thereof; the several Faculties, Offices, and Parts subservient to it;
the several Viscera that serve for the exercise of Life and Sense, it must
needs render the Skill of the Author thereof admirable. But yet again, when
possibly the Seminal Principle of this little Animal bears it may be as small a
proportion to it as the Insect it self does to greater Animals, it may be a
little imperceptible Egg; and yet in that little Body all the Ideal parts of
this Animal and that Principle that immediately conforms the several Faculties
and Organs of this little Animal: The Power and Wisdom that conforms such a
little semen is no less wonderful, than if it had immediately conformed the
Animal without the intervention of such a Seminal Particle.

And therefore most certainly the Conformation of these little Moleculae
seminales, if any be antecedent to the production of these Insects, is a work
of intelligence, choice, election, design, and that of a most wise and
intelligent Being; and cannot be the production either merely of Chance, as the
Epicureans would have it; nor of that which little differs, namely, an
ignorant, unknowing, unelective Principle, for such is barely Nature, unless
they that use that denomination mean by it Almighty God.

And when I assert that these Moleculae seminales antecedent to the production
of any living or sensible nature, if there be any such, are produced by
Almighty God; it is not my meaning, that they are therefore immediately
created, or immediately put together or compounded (by the immediate Finger of
God) if I may use that Expression to render the sense I intend: But it is
sufficient, that the great and supreme intellectual Being having in his
infinite Wisdom the Prospect of all things, has so set and ordered the Motion
of Second Causes, to bring together and mingle the constituent Materials of
these semina, and he by his Almighty Fiat has annexed to such Compositions,
and imprinted upon them the stamp and efficacy of a Seminal Principle; it will
be equally the Work of Almighty God if these Compositions be brought together
by the Motion and Heat of the Sun, or by the powerful Motion and Determination
of various kinds of Ferments; some possibly originally created, and dispersed
in the Earth, Air, and Waters; others accidental, arising from the corrupted
and mingled Matter of dissolved Animals and Vegetables, whereof I shall in due
time, God willing, give a more distinct Account; as if they were immediately
created out of nothing: But the Mint, the Stamp, the Signature, the Seminal
Efficacy of this Molecula seminalis is the Intention, Election, and Fiat of the
glorious God, and can never be the bare production of a surd unintelligent
nature. So that although it should be granted, that the excrescence of those
Insecta animalia is not at this day from the semina insectorum, but that both
in the first production of them in Nature, and the yearly or daily production
of them now, they were ex seminibus non ex insectis decisis; yet those seminia
or seminales moleculae were not merely natural, as Nature imports a surd
production of things, but were the Work and Intention of the great and glorious
God of Nature.

So then we may hereby see what would be purely natural in these semina, what
not. 1. It were thus far natural that the material Particles thereof possibly
might have an existence in Nature before their Composition; whether these
Particles were partly those Ignei spiritus; and partly those Humores primogenii
that were interspersed in Nature, or possibly the constituent Essentials both
of the semina themselves and of the Individuals produced by them. Again, 2.
They might be thus far natural, that the immediate Instruments of the
conjunction of these Particulae seminales might be the Heat, or Influence, or
Motion, or Agitation of the Heavenly Bodies, or what other natural Instrument
the Divine Power might employ in their Coagmentation. 3. They would be thus far
natural, that when these Particulae seminales were conjoined together, and made
up into their Moleculae seminales, and when they had received their Signature,
their Energy by the Divine Fiat, they would naturally produce their Effect,
viz. the production of an Insect, when they had obtained a convenient Menstruum
to lodge it, and the kindly Heat to ripen them; this would be as natural as any
Operation of Heat or Cold, or other things are natural; which though they had
their first existence by the Supernatural Power and Will of God, yet when they
are in their existence they move and act according to that nature which is put
into them, which is the Law of their Being, given them by Almighty God.

But the Virtue that gives these Moleculae seminales their Energy of
Productiveness, of Life and Sense, their Determination in their several species
and Ranks, that mints and stamps them as it were with their Esse specificum
seminale, is the Institution and Fiat of the Divine Will and Ordination.

So that if there be at this day any semina of Insecta animalia ex non insectis
which gives them their several determinate species and natures, though I am not
of the mind of scotus, that they have an immediate Creation by God, yet I am
not of the mind of Beregardus, who thinks they are merely natural, and made up
and put together without the Pre-disposition, Ordination, or Signature of the
God of Nature; as the first power communicated to the primogenial natures of
Animals and Men, to have a Vis Seminativa and Prolifica was in the first
Creation of Mankind communicated to them by virtue of the Divine Institution
and Benediction, though the way of exerting that Power, when produced, was
natural.

But possibly much of what is in this Chapter is needless, if in truth the
individual natures of Insects were at first created by God, without any
pre-existing semen (as we are sufficiently taught, Genesis 1.20, 25.) and that the
Seminal and Prolifick Power was given to them as other Animals, and
consequently the seminia viventium were subsequent, and not antecedent to the
first Institution of the Animal Nature, and an effect thereof.

CAP. VI. Supposing the Production of Insects were totally spontaneous,
equivocal, and ex putrido, whether any Consequence be thence deducible for the
like Production of perfect Animals, but especially of Men.
IT is true, that Insects, and those equivocal Generations, have an admirable
perfection in their kind, not much unlike to those that we find in the more
perfect Animals, and indeed they are so much the more admirable, because their
little and almost imperceptible moles renders their distinction of Faculties
and Organs the more curious and artificial.

They have their several Faculties, the Senses of Sight, Hearing, Touch and
Taste; they have the digestive, egestive, and other parts of the Nutritive
Faculty; and though their individual production may seem equivocal, and of no
univocal Seed of the same kind, yet they have the Generative Faculty, and
propagate their species as well as perfect Animals, and have therein
distinction of Sexes, as appears by frequent experience, notwithstanding the
doubt or contrary Opinion of Aristotle; and although their Fantasy is more
lubricous and sickle than perfect Animals, yet it is evident that they have a
Fantasy, as appears by their Motions and little Operations; and as they have
Fantasy so they have Memory, as appears by the Returns of Bees and Pismires
to their homes from great distances: And as they have these Faculties of Life
and Sensation, so they have Organs accommodate and admirably fittted to those
several Faculties, namely, to Nutrition, Augmentation, Generation, Sense, Local
Motion, Fantasy, Appetite, which are so far from being contemptible, in
respect of the smallness and petiteness of these little Animals, that indeed in
some respect they are the more admirable, as a small Watch is an evidence of
greater skill and artifice than a greater, or as a small Picture drawn to the
Life commends the skill of the Painter sometimes more than a great Draught. But
yet for all this, we must not think that these little Animals are of an equal
perfection with the greater and nobler: Caesar's Image drawn upon a
Cherry-stone is a piece of great curiosity, but not of an equal perfection to
his lively Statue in Brass, or that a Fly is of an equal perfection with an
Eagle. Therefore I shall not fetch Arguments against the like spontaneous
Productions of the greater Animals from any contemptible valuation of these
smaller, and these little Models of sensible Life; for certainly they are
curious and elaborate automata, in respect of their admirable minuteness and
accuracy: But yet upon other Reasons it seems utterly inconsequential, that
because these smaller Particles of sensible Nature may be thus spontaneously
produced, therefore these greater Animals may be so; for it is apparent, that
in things of an equality of perfection, there is by the Laws and fixed Rules of
their several Natures several manners of their productions. If we should
compare Vegetables among themselves, some will arise ex surculo as well as ex
radice or ex semine, others will not; if we compare Sensible Natures among
themselves, that seem to have an equality of perfection, as some sorts of
Brutes and Birds, it will be hard to say which have the perfecter Nature, yet
the production of the latter are ex ovo, the former ex verme; the former
oviparous, the latter viviparous in the ordinary course of their natural
production; and as at this day the former is not producible ex Ovo, so the
latter not producible without it. The several natures of things have
distinguished them, as in their kinds, so in the manner of their production;
and whatsoever the perfection of Insects sponte orientia may be, there is no
Consequence to be drawn from the same to other more noble Animals.

But again, as there is no Consequence to be drawn from the one to the other,
so there is in the very nature of the one kind and the other, and in the
natural order of their production a great disparity and disproportion: so that
in truth by the very Constitution and Frame of their Natures, the perfect
Animals that we see only produced by the conjunction of Sexes and univocal
Generation, cannot by any course or consistency in Nature (without the
Supposition of Divine Power and Ordination) arise spontaneously: And that
appears 1. In the disparity of the natural Productive Principle of the one and
the other; 2. In the disparity of the natural Method of the perfecting of the
one and the other; 3. In the disparity of the Natures of the Animals of the one
kind and the other, having arrived to their complement and perfection.

First, touching the disparity of the natural Productive Principle of the one
and the other; although it be admitted that Insects and spontanee orta, do or
may arise from a Semen or Principle that is not univocal or formal; yet it must
needs be agreed that the Natural Principle of such their production must be
some analogal Semen, or some Seminal Principle that is suitable to such a
Production, otherwise quidlibet orietur ex quolibet; there must be something
that must determine the Matter to be an apt Seminium for such a Production, or
else the Matter must determine it self; either there must be some determinate
Vital or Spiritual Principle that is determined in it self, and determins the
Matter (which Paracelsus seems to hold, that Bodies were first Spirits; and
Aristotle seems to intimate, when he tells us, that Animarum omnia plena, and
when the Matter is fitly prepared, there is an illapse of this Vital,
Formative, Spirital Principle into it) or else the inherent qualities or
dispositions of Matter it self must be of force to mould it self up into these
Moleculae seminales, the Formative Principles of these sponte orta, (I speak in
the Language of those that erroneously hold no higher Principles but such as
are purely Natural.) But although such Seminal Particles as these may be
sufficient for the production of Insects, yet they are not naturally
accommodated for the perfection of the perfect Animals: For the Semen
prolificum for the production of perfect Animals must receive its specifical
conforming Principle, either by the Supernatural Power of Almighty God, or from
the Specifical Nature of the Individuals of both Sexes; and if we could suppose
an Anima vaga of the Sensible Nature, not confined to any Individual of the
same nature, nothing could be a Matter fitly prepared for its reception but the
Materia seminalis ex individuis elicita: neither is there any Matter, extra
compositum animale, capable to advance it self to the nature of such a perfect
Animal; for if either of these could be done, we had as much reason daily to
expect the like spontaneous productions of Horses and Sheep, as we find of
Frogs and Worms.

Again, the Vis conformatrix and Seminal Particles of Insects is most plainly
in Insects not confined to the semina formalia utriusque sexus commixta, for we
see almost all their parts are seminal, and will by putrefaction advance to the
production of their kind: Their productive power is not so strictly and
severely bound to the semen utriusque sexus: Many have told us by experience
and observation, that the Excrements of Flies, without any mixtion, will
produce immediately Flies; that the Resolution or Maceration of Frogs and Worms
will reproduce Individuals of the same species, as Kercher, lib. 12. Mundi
subterranei, tells us.

But there are no parts of perfect Animals that are productive of their
species, but the same is confined by the Laws of their Nature to a semen
formale ex utroque sexu decisum. It is true, that their parts corrupted, as
their Blood, Flesh, or Veins, will produce Insects and living Creatures of a
different and baser kind than themselves, as Worms, Lice, Fleas, Flies, but
they can never advance to the production of their own kind.

And the Reason is, because there is not possibly any transmission of that
specifical vital formative Principle to any other part but the semen formale of
the Individuals of that species, and that Vis formatrix activa vitalis and
sensibilis must be communicated either by virtue of a participation of all the
parts of the Producents, or by a kind of a specifical Idea, naturally produced
by that Nature from whence it is derived, which evolves and expands it self
being produced, or (which is more intelligible and probable than either of the
former) by a participation of the vital and sensible Soul to the semen
prolificum from the Producents, and there is no way of communication thereof in
perfect Animals, but only to that natural and genuine Semen constituted, mixed,
and ordered according to the Law of its Being; so that we cannot suppose any
seminal Principle of perfect Animals, but this semen prolificum utriusque
parentis, unless we shall gratis, and without either Reason or Example, wholly
invert the natural order of things, and substitute a Semen contrary to the
nature of the things that must be produced, or admit that which those great
Assertors of Nature think below them to grant, and will rather suppose a
thousand Absurdities than admit, namely, the Interposition of the Divine Power.

And 2. As the Semen formativum of perfect Animals is greatly differing from
that of Insects, and therefore not capable of a spontaneous production as
these, so it is apparent, that at least in animalibus viviparis it is
impossible to be preserved, sine receptaculo naturae congruo, scilicet utero
foemineo. The vital particles thereof are more fiery and volatile, and higher
advanced than that Semen that is or may be sufficient for Insects, and sine
convenienti receptaculo avolabunt spiritus vitales, and ex interventu vel
minimi frigoris mortuum and infoecundum evadet; but the Semina of Insects are
more viscous and less volatile, in so much that their Semina will remain all
the Winter in caverns and holes, and yet be fruitful the next Spring.

3. Again, the Semen Insecti being so small a Particle, and having as I may say
so small a portion of Soul in it, is soon formed and brought to maturity: We
may learn this in their univocal productions, or ex coitu, Scaliger tells us,
Exercitat. 191. l. 2. that the Gloworm brings forth his Eggs postridie post
coitum; Malpighius in his curious Disquisition touching the Silkworm tells,
that quarto post coitum die the Female brings forth ordinarily above 300,
sometimes above 500 Eggs, and these will lie all the Winter, and with the warm
heat of the Spring and some other assistance will prove vital, the next Spring;
and Aristotle, Hist. Animal. l. 5. cap. 27. tells us, that Araneae statim post
ova parta incubant, and triduo peragunt, and quatuor septenis diebus justa
accipiunt incrementa; and ibid. l. 6. cap. 37. tells us, that Mures si salem
lambunt pariunt sine coitu, and that even their young have been found with
young before they saw the light. By all which it is evident, That although
these little Moleculae seminales will retain their fecundity longer than the
Eggs of Birds, even a whole Winter, and possibly longer; yet when they have
obtained a convenient Matrix, and the warm cherishing heat of the Spring, the
formation, production, and maturation of Insects, and of that Semen prolificum
which they univocally yield in their regular production is speedy and hasty;
and consequently, that spontaneous Seed by which they may be produced, and the
spontaneous production it self is soon dispatched and perfected, a small portion
and continuance of heat and time may perfect the whole process.

But it is otherwise in the perfect Animals, especially in those that are
Vivipara, a long time is required for their formation and maturation,
notwithstanding the great advantage of the place, and heat, and supplies of
their formation and support, namely, the Uterus foemineus. Thus the same
Aristotle, lib. 6. Histor. Animal. gives us an account, whereof some go above
18 Months, as the Elephant; some 10 Months, as Cows and Mares; some 5 Months,
as Sheep and Goats; the least about 2 Months, as Dogs and Wolves: and this is
one Reason that Aristotle, Problemat. ubi supra, gives, why these perfect
Animals are not producible spontanee, nor sine conjunctione maris and foeminae,
vel sine utero foemineo. These Uteri terrestres fabled by Lucretius would never
be warm or close enough for the production of those Animals who naturally are
producible in utero foemineo, and the intervening Winter would soon make them
abortive, especially on either side of the Tropicks, where the heat and cold
have their vicissitudes: And therefore it was providently, though fictitiously
supposed by Cisalpinus, that Ethiopia must be the only native Country for such
spontaneous productions of the greater Animals and Men.

4. As the Earth was not a fit or competent Arvum genitale for viviparous
Animals, so the nourishment, increase, and support of these viviparous Animals,
dum in uteris morentur, according to the very exigence and formation of these
Embryones, cannot consist with any such spontaneous Productions: for besides
the soft and warm involucra of the Chorion and Amnios, we know the very fabric
of their nature has given them a means and Instrument of Nutrition, per venam
umbilicalem sanguinem maternum attrahentem and dirigentem: This could never be
supplied from any Terrestrial Veins, unless we should suppose that Succus
mutritius of the Earth to become menstruous, and converted into Blood or other
suitable consistence for the nourishment of the Embryo, or without any Reason
or Experience warranting it, so suppose that some other way of nourishment
should be in Embryonibus terrigenis.

5. Again, post partum viviparorum, praecipue generis humani, it is evident
that naturally the foetus is weak, unable to support it self without the
supplemental helps; care and superintendence of their Dams or Parents: some are
blind, as Whelps or Kitlins; some are destitute of those teguments that are
necessary to defend them against the cold, as many kinds of Birds, that stand
in need of the hovering of their Dams Wings for a considerable time after they
are hatched, and are utterly unable to provide their own food, but are hourly
supplied by their Dams, without which they must necessarily perish: and
generally all viviparous Animals that are of univocal production are for a long
time fed by their Dams Milk, without which, or some other artificial provision
subministred to them by the help of others, they could not support themselves
after their production; as young Horses, Dogs, Calves, Lambs: But this is much
more conspicuous in Humane Infants, who from the time of their Birth for many
Months can neither go nor stand, nor procure their own food, but stand in need
of the care of others to keep them warm, provide them covering, and preserve
them from being destroyed with their own Excrements. But on the other side,
those small Animals which are supposed to be spontaneously produced, stand in
need of no other means for their preservation, being produced, but that heat
and circumjacent menstruum by or in which they are produced: and although these
spontaneous productions, being produced, seem to propagate their Species by the
coition of their Sexes, yet for the most part these generated Individuals, Mice
excepted, retain still that natural indoles to preserve themselves, without any
other supervenient assistance than what was at first sufficient after their
equivocal production; this we daily see in the Eggs of Silkworms, of all sorts
of Flies, Caterpillars and Worms, which though in their secondary productions
by Generation, yet being ripened to foetation by the heat of the Sun, they live
upon Leaves and Grass, and take their food without the care or assistance of
those Parents that produced them; and carry along with them the indication of
that Method of Life which might be consistent with the condition of a
spontaneous production, which is no way competible to the condition of greater
Animals after their production.

6. Again, though the Faculties and Organs of a sensible as well as a vegetable
Life appear in the smallest Insects, yet it is but a weak and imperfect Life of
Sensation, and very little advanced above the Vegetable Nature. And this
appears by very many Instances, as namely, in their generation many Insects do
seem to arise from Vegetables without any other production; and they seem to be
little else but the Flos vegetabilis naturae, the more pure, active, lively
Effluvia thereof; as the Flies that grow in the little Vesiculae of the Leaves
of Elms and Currants, the Worms in the Galls of Oaks and the Burrs of Wild
Rose, the Worms and Flies which grow in the husks of Burrs; yea many times the
Parts of Vegetables divided from the Stock will turn into Animals, as the Seeds
of Lavander kept a little warm and moist, will turn into Moths; the Plant
called the Horse-tail laid into Water, will grow into an Insect. 2. This also
appears, that as the several parts of Vegetables, the Leaves, the Branches as
well as the formatum semen, are seminal, and productive of their Species; so
many times the parts of Insects carry with them a Seminal Nature effectual
enough to produce their Species, as has been asserted by the Experience of
many; which no way happens in perfect Animals. 3. This also appears in the
manner of their Life; for we often see in Insects divided each part keeps its
motion, as the several parts of Vegetables keep their animation; a Fly or Wasp
whose Head is cut off, yet the residue of his Body will live a considerable
time; Flies that seem dead either with Water or Cold, and continue so for some
considerable time, by the Heat of the Sun or warm Embers will revive and return
to Life and Motion; as a Branch torn from a Tree, that has been severed from
it three or four days or more, will resume Life by re-implantation and the
Solar Heat: And whereas the Eggs of a perfect Animal, as of Hens, Geese, etc.
will lose their Animatick Faculties being frozen or concrete with Cold, or
being kept two Months or thereabouts: the Seeds of Insects will continue
fruitful a whole Winter or more, and possibly as long as the Seed of Corn,
Oaks, or other Vegetables; as is apparent in the Eggs of Flies and Silkworms,
which though excluded in the last Summer will remain fruitful, and produce the
Insect this Spring, and possibly some time after; so that they are in the next
degree above Vegetables, and have a nature very analogal to them. But these
things are not so in greater Animals of an univocal generation; this also
appears in the great disparity of these degrees at least of perfection in the
perfect Animal, above that of Insects of a spontaneous production: For though,
as before is said, these little Animals have Faculties conformable to the
Sensitive Life, so that we may plainly discover, at least in many of them, the
Faculties as well as the Organs of Sense, Fantasy, Memory, Common Sense,
Appetite, Passion, Local Motion; yet the more perfect and univocal Animals have
greater strength and perfection in these Faculties, their Fantasy and Memory
more exact, their Appetite more perfect and free; if I may so call it, they are
capable of Discipline, which these smaller Animals are not: There is greater
variety, complication, and curiosity in the state, frame and order of their
Faculties, and a greater distinction and variety of operation in them than in
the smaller Pieces of Nature. There are more Wheels, more variety and curiosity
in their motions, more variety of ingredients into the Constitution of the
Automata of the more noble Animals, than in the Insects that are sponte orta:
so that for the Constitution of their Souls (the Principle of their Faculties
and Motions) there is required a more curious, elaborate, and elevated
Composition and Fabric than in these minute Animals. And hence it is, that
though it be not only possible but frequent that these Insects and minute
Animals may thus spontaneously arise, yet it has never been known so according
to the settled Laws and Order of Nature: It is impossible these greater and
nobler Animals can arise spontaneously, nor otherwise naturally than by the
mixture of both Sexes, and a Semen formatum and prolificum, received and united
in utero foemineo, and impregnated as it were with that Specifical Idea and
Formative Power derived from the Parents, and those other accessions which may
elaborate, rectify, and advance the Soul and its Faculties, and the Body and
its Organs to their due proportion and perfection. And therefore there is no
parity Reason in the production of Insects and perfect Animals, nor any
Consequence to be drawn from the spontaneous production of one, to the like
production of the other in any natural course, without the intervention of a
Supernatural free Cause effecting the same besides and out of the road and
course of Nature. And what may be said upon this account against the
Consequence of the spontaneous production of other Animals from the spontaneous
production of Insects, may with much more advantage be said against the
Consequence of the production of Mankind by any natural spontaneous production;
because the perfection of his nature, and the specifical excellence thereof,
does exceed the greatest excellence of other Animals far more than the noblest
Animals exceed the Insects. And therefore as the spontaneous production of
these Insects no way concludes the like production naturally possible in
greater Animals, so if it were naturally possible, and de facto true that the
greater Animals themselves were sponte producibilia and producta, it were not
at all conclusive, nor deducible from thence that Mankind were producible
naturally upon the like account. The nobleness of the structure of the Humane
Body, the great curiosity and usefulness of most of his Organs, especially of
his Tongue and Hand; the curious and useful configuration and disposition of
his Nerves and Brain, the admirable variety and quickness of his Phantasy, the
great retentiveness of his Memory, but especially the admirable power of his
Intellect, Reason and Will give him a far greater specifical perfection above
the most perfect Brutal Nature, than that has above the meanest Insects: And
therefore certainly, according to the ordinary Observations in Nature, and the
Rules and Methods observable therein, requires the noblest and most advanced
Method to produce it that Nature can afford.

But against these Reasons it may be, and is urged, That all these Observations
and Inferences are bottomed upon the state and course of Nature, wherein we see
things are in the state of things already settled; but in the first production
of things it might be otherwise, and must be otherwise, if we admit an
Origination of Mankind ex non genitis. And though in the ordinary course of
Nature, as now things are constituted, the production of Mankind is ex semine
formato ab utroque parente deciso, that his nourishment is per venam
umbilicalem, that it cannot be otherwise now but in utero foemineo, that the
state of Infancy now requires those adventitious helps that are above
remembered: Yet in the first state of Humane Production all these Suppositions
must be laid aside, as unaccommodate to that state; another Seminal Principle,
another method of Nutrition, another state and habit of the Foetus, must be and
may be supposed in the first production of Mankind than now is to be found in
the World, wherein the order of things is settled in a regular Method. If it
should be supposed that a Mouse or a Rat were produced ex putri, we cannot
suppose any such Semen, or Vena umbilicalis, or that it lived upon the Dams
Milk; all which are notwithstanding supposable and necessary, when that
equivocal Animal afterward propagates its kind.

I answer, That as it is true that Mankind and other Animals had an Original,
and an Original in quite another way than now it is, and ex non genitis; so it
is unquestionably true, that those Processes, Principles, and Methods which now
serve in the production of Humane Nature or other perfect Animals, are no way
conceptible, or applicable unto the first production of Man or Animals. And
therefore I must not only grant that these Modes of Production, Nutrition, etc.
are utterly ineffectual and unapplicable to the first Origination of Humane
Nature: But I must suppose quite contrary, that in truth it is impossible they
should be the Modes or Order of that first Origination.

But it must be remembered whom it is that I am here contending against, namely,
not against those that do, and that truly referr the Origination of Man to the
Divine Power and Will, and a Supernatural production: but against them that are
the great Venerators of established Nature, that think it below their Gravity
and Wisdom to recognize any other Efficient but what they find in Natural
Causes and Effects; nor any other Rule of things but what they see, that take
their Measures of their Conceptions and Sentiments from what is obvious to
Sense, and the common Observation of things as they now appear, and for the
most part frame all their Conclusions accordingly. And therefore that which I
herein contend for by these Arguments is this, That a Man that duly considers
the natures of things, and makes the course of Nature and the Observation
thereof to be the Rule and Guide of his Sentiments, though he be drawn by the
necessity of Reason, to grant and conclude that Man must needs have an
Origination, and that in another way than now he has, namely ex non genitis;
yet it is not reasonable for him to conclude that he had this Origination upon
a bare natural account, as the Insects and sponte orta have, because it quite
thwarts and crosses all the appearances of Nature, and is wholly incongruous to
the nature of things as they now stand.

And a Man that makes such a Conclusion must needs offer violence to his own
Reason and Experience, and depart from those Laws and Rules of Nature, which he
makes his Guide, and the Compass by which he steers his Judgment touching
things; and suppose that natural which is wholly different from what it seems:
And consequently, if the reason and nature of things compel a Man to assert
that Mankind had their Origination another way than that in which it now is,
the same reason and nature of things duly and impartially considered, must
needs evince that it had not its Origination from any either casual or mere
natural course of things: But by the Power and Will of a most wise,
intelligent, bountiful, free, and powerful Being; who according to his Wisdom
and Goodness first gave being to Man, yea and all other things, secundum
intentionem and beneplacitum suae voluntatis. And since it is apparently
necessary for any Man that will admit the first production of Mankind to be
totally in another Method than now, and since they that will suppose a natural
production of Man at first, must necessarily suppose a different production
from that which now obtains: And since no more is asserted by those that
suppose its Origination by the Will, Power, and Institution of Almighty God;
this latter Supposition is much more reasonable and explicable than theirs that
suppose the first Origination natural, yet totally different from what now it
is, which is the great thing I intend in this long process touching the
Origination of Man.

CAP. VII. Touching the Matter of Fact it self, whether de facto there has
been any such Origination of Mankind, or of any perfect Animal; either Natural
or Casual.
THis I propounded as a distinct Inquiry at the first, namely, Whether or how
far forth we have any Evidence of Fact touching any such casual or natural
production of perfect Animals, but especially of Man. But the truth is, that
this is but an Appendix to the former Chapter; for if there be any credible
Instance of any such Production, all or any reasoning against the possibility
thereof is but vain; for what has been naturally or casually, may be again.

But on the other side, if in all the Successions of the Ages of the World
there has not been any Experience or credible Instance of any such Production;
but contrariwise, since Mankind was first upon the Earth, both Mankind and all
perfect Animals have had their being by natural Procreation and Generation, by
conjunction of Sexes; it is a frenzy for any Man that pretends to Reason, to
suppose a natural possibility of that to be either from a casual or mere
natural Cause; which never had any Instance of its being or existence in such a
manner.

The World has now upon the shortest Account lasted above 5600 Years, and
within the compass of these Ages of the World there have been in many Nations,
especially among the Egyptians and Grecians, Men of great Wisdom and
Understanding, and singular Industry to search into the History of Nature, and
many of them have had great opportunities to know very much therein: and since
their times, especially the generality of the wiser and more inquisitive sort
of Men being allarmed by the Writings of those that went before them, have made
it their business to search yet farther, and the Learned in all Ages have left
the Essays of their Learning, Reason and Observation to succeeding Ages, and if
any Prodigy or considerable Production has happened in their times, they have
sent us the News of it: But never in all the Ages of the World since those 5600
Years has there been any credible Relation either of the casual or natural
production of a Horse or a Dog, much less of a Man or a Woman happening within
the compass of that time, abating some Poetical Fictions and Fables that have
no color of any Authentic History or Authority: And therefore Scaliger well
says, Exercit. 193. Si bos aliquando ex putri ortus, cur post hominum memoriam
ex ejusmodi procreatione nullus extitit? and therefore Aristotle, the wisest
Pagan Philosopher that ever wrote, and the strictest observer and searcher into
Nature, even upon the account of Experience and Reason tells us, Lib. 3. de
Genesis Animal. cap. ult. that there never has been, nor can be, according to the
Rules of Nature, any such Production; though by way of Supposition that it some
times had been, he gives us that Hypothesis of it that seemed to him most
likely: And upon this very account, and partly because he was not acquainted
with the Truths of God, or at least because he was not willing to acknowledge
any other Original of things but by Nature, he took up the Opinion of his
Predecessor Ocellus, touching the Eternity of the World, and of Mankind in it,
and so absolved the difficulty of the Manner of the Origination of Mankind by
denying it.

And therefore we have no reason to believe any such thing, since we find
nothing in any Authentic History of any Man, or perfect Animal, since the
first Being of Man upon the Earth has been thus produced, abating the Fables
of Poets touching the production of Men and Women out of Stones, by Deucalion
and Pyrrha, cast over their heads; the Serpents Teeth sowed by Cadmus, the
production of Castor and Pollux out of an Egg, and those forlorn Fables of
Beregardus; of the Green Man found in England in the Den of a Wolf 500 years
since; the Blew and Red Men of Rabbi Elcha, that came out of the Mountains of
Armenia: And therefore for want of any credible or particular Instances of any
such production, Caesalpinus supposes, that they are in some unknown Mountains
between the Tropicks, where the Heat of the Sun is more constant, fervent, and
equable, than in Climates remoter from the Equinoctial; though he neither does,
nor can give any Instance of such a production there or elsewhere. To excuse
this unexperienced Notion, and the difficulty of assigning any Instance
thereof, they allude these ensuing Apologies.

1. That these Productions cannot be but under some notable Conjunction or
Position of the Heavenly Bodies, which may be accommodate to such Productions;
which Positions or Conjunctions not happening but after vast and distant
Revolutions, the Experiment it self can rarely happen; and by length of time,
before the like Revolution return, it is forgotten.

2. That those Productions could not be but in Matter excellently prepared and
fitted for this production, which could not be but after some great and long
continuing Flood or Inundation, that might prepare and dispose the Matter for
the Activity of that great Revolution, and if these should not meet together,
or in some convenient nearness, the production of Mankind and perfect Animals
would be frustrated.

3. That in as much as provident Nature has had for many Ages, and yet has a
sufficient Seminium and stock, for the preservation of the Species of Men and
perfect Animals raised by propagation and the mutual conjunction of Sexes,
Nature is not necessitated to have recourse to this extraordinary way of
peopling and furnishing the World, and therefore it cannot be expected but
after some vast devastation, that may endanger at least the extinguishing of
the species of things.

To these things I say first in general, That if Men shall upon such a Method
of Arguing go about to establish a Supposition, that neither they nor any else
have ever known or experimented, and make a Conclusion of a thing as natural,
upon such Suppositions as never any Man knew or heard, to produce such effects,
Men may assume any thing to be natural, which yet has not footsteps in Nature
bearing any analogy to it. But to the particulars:

As to the first, it is unreasonable to make such a Supposition, for since it
is not possible for any Man to know whether there be any such Influence of the
Heavens to effect such productions, unless by Experience and Observations of
some Men, or some other way the notice thereof were given to Mankind, it being
a Matter of Fact, that can no other way be known but by Experience or
Revelation; and since the bare beholding of those Heavenly Bodies, being of
that distance, can never without Observation of Events give us any natural
estimate of their Effects, what they are, or may be; and since it must needs be
granted, that such imagined Conjunctions, as may be effectual for such
productions, are at vast unknown distances, and such as no Age before has, or
indeed can leave us any Memorial of; it must needs be a vain and precarious
assumption, to attribute any natural Efficacy to any Conjunction whatsoever for
such a production. The Ancient and Divine Historian Moses gives us indeed an
account of the Origination of Man, and all other Animals, but not upon any
natural causation or activity of the Heavens or Heavenly Bodies; but as he
gives us the History of the Things, so he gives us the true Resolution of the
Cause, not a natural but a supernatural Cause, namely, the Intention and
Volition of the Great and Wise God; and to exclude any imagination of a natural
or necessary Cause of these productions; does not only tell us in express
terms, that the production of them was by the Energy of the Divine Fiat, but
also that the production even of Vegetables themselves, that seem to have the
greatest dependence upon Celestial Influences, was antecedent to the
Constitution of those Heavenly Bodies. 1. As the Supposition of such a Natural
Causality in the Heavens is merely precarious, so it seems even to our Sense
apparently false; for we see every year, without any other than an ordinary
Conjunction by the Access of the Sun, Insects and Plants, sponte nascentia, do
arise; and we know, that ordinarily in the compass or revolution of 800 or 1000
years, very great and considerable mutations happen in the Position and
Conjunction of the Heavenly Bodies; and we know, that within the compass of
Authentic History these Revolutions have happened above thrice, and since the
latest Epoch of the Worlds Inception above five times; yet none of these great
Revolutions have for any thing we ever knew or heard produced any one Horse, or
Lion, or Wolf, much less any one Man, as a Terrigena. And therefore Experience
(the best means to settle such an Hypothesis) does not only not warrant it, but
is evidently contrary to it, and denies it.

2. As to the second, the Mosaical History gives us an account of an Universal
Deluge, about 4000 years since, which lay long upon the whole Earth; and the
Grecian History gives us an account of two very great Floods, namely, the
Ogygian and the Deucalian Floods; and every Year gives us an account of the
Inundation of Nilus in Egypt, a most fruitful Continent, and near the Sun,
whereby the Soil is made admirably fruitful; and there is scarce any Age but
some great portions of Land are laid dry, by the recess of some parts of the
Ocean, which had lain covered for many thousands of years before with the sea.
And as the universal Deluge was as great a preparation of the whole Earth, so
these particular Inundations and Recesses of the Sea left particular Spots of
Land as well prepared for such productions as can well be imagined; and yet in
no Age have we any Instance of any such production, abating the Story of the
Egyptian Mice which concrete after the recess of Nilus, which yet of most hands
are agreed to be Insects, and sponte nascentia ex putredine. Indeed Beregardus
tells us, ubi supra, out of Camerarius, that about Cayro, after the reflux of
Nilus there are often seen diverse Limbs or Parts of Men's Bodies; whether this
be true or no, or if true, whether they are not only relics of some Bodies
swept away by the Inundations of Nilus out of their Graves or Sepultures, and
torn asunder by the furious Cataracts of Nilus, is not clearly evident: But be
they what they will, or whether the Lusus naturae, yet they make nothing to
this matter, unless Camerarius or some other had seen those divulsa membra come
together, and configured into an humane Shape, and animated with a humane Life,
which neither he nor any other have yet affirmed or pretended.

3. As to the Third, I say, 1. If by Nature they intend the great and glorious
God, that most wise, intelligent, powerful Being, they do indeed in effect
affirm what I have designed to prove, but do not make good their Supposition of
such a Natural Cause as they declare in their Hypothesis, wherein they mean
only that natural connection and series of Causes whereby Natural Effects are
naturally produced. And if they intend by Nature that unintelligent series or
order of Natural Causes, or the blind and determinate Cause of Natural
Productions; How comes that Nature to know when and where this necessity of
Spontaneous Productions does happen, or in what proportion, measure, limits or
place it is necessary to be done? Such a provisional care requires a knowing
and perfectly intelligent Being, that operates ex cognitione, intention, and
voluntate; which is not to be affirmed of Agents purely natural, who do
therefore act according to a Law of necessity and determination; non ex
consilio and cognitione. 2. It is plain, that Insects and Vegetables
spontaneously produced, are produced every Year, and their production is as
natural as the access of the Sun and the constitution of the Earth: These are
procured every Year, whether there be any need of them or not, and possibly
sometimes in greater numbers than is convenient for this inferior World. And
although it be true, that the Divine Power does intend, or remit, or manage
these Productions secundum regimen and consilium voluntatis, yet it is most
evident these Productions are ordinary, animal, and natural, without choice or
design in inanimate Nature: If therefore these Productions be natural and
periodical every Year, why should there not be as well productions of Men or
perfect Brutes, if it were purely natural, as well as Frogs and Flies; since
the former may be of more use, especially in many desolate places, than always
the latter? How many great and vast Islands and Continents are there,
especially in Armenia, which have no considerable number of Inhabitants, if any
at all to people them? In Ireland there are great store of Wolves, and so there
were anciently in England, till they were destroyed by the Industry of the
Inhabitants: in Ireland their increase is by propagation, without any new
production; in England they cannot increase by propagation, because here are
none: How comes it to pass that Nature does not produce new Wolves in England,
as well as Frogs, Adders, Hornets and Wasps? If it be said, that Nature
neglects it because they are noxious; as this is to make Nature an intelligent
Agent, so it answers not the difficulty: For why does she then not destroy the
Species in Ireland upon the same account? But this is but a vanity: Nature as
well intends the existence of a Wolf as of a Sheep, where the means of its
production is equal, though Mankind prefer the latter, as more useful to him.
If any thing therefore of this deliberative nature be to be found in the
voluntary and intentional Regiments of things of this kind, it is to be
attributed to the great and supreme Rector of the World, who does work
according to Counsel, Wisdom, and Will.

Upon the whole matter therefore I conclude, That as well by the reason of the
thing, and upon true natural congruity, as also de facto and upon experimental
Observations, Mankind, no nor the perfect Animals are not produced, nor
producible by any mere natural Cause, as at this day, or in any Age or Time
since their first Creation, otherwise than by a natural production; which is
the Truth asserted by the Great Verulam, in his 9th Century, in fine.

As for the Heathen Opinion, which was, That upon great Mutations of the World
perfect Creatures were first engendered of Concretion, as well as Frogs, Worms
and Flies, and such like, we know it to be vain; but if any such thing should
be admitted (discoursing according to Sense) it cannot be, except you admit a
Chaos first, and a commixture of Heaven and Earth: for the Frame of the World
once in order, cannot effect it by any Excess or Casualty.

And as thus neither Casualty nor bare Nature cannot originate Mankind or any
perfect Animal ex putri, so much less can Art. The Chemists tell us, that by
reunion of separate Principles of Vegetables they will in a Glass revive a
Vegetable of the same species at least in figure and effigies; this has been
pretended, but I could never hear any Man speak it that saw it done.

But never was any so mad, except Paracelsus, that could ever pretend to make
up a Sensible Being, much less the Humane Nature: Paracelsus vainly and falsely
pretended to the raising of an Homunculus, but yet not without the help of
those Naturales geniturae utriusque sexus; wherein notwithstanding he lied, as
he did in many things else, which he never could effect notwithstanding his
vain boasting of his Skill.

Upon the whole Matter therefore I conclude, That the Origination of Mankind,
or of the inferior perfect Animals, neither was nor could be the Effect of
Humane Art or Skill, as Paracelsus; nor of Chance or Casualty, as Epicurus; nor
of Nature, as Cardanus, Caesalpinus, and some other Recreants in Religion and
Philosophy: But it was the free, powerful, and wonderful Work of the God of
Nature, who made all things by his Power and Wisdom; and having made them,
lodged in them and for them that pre-ordained Law of their Creation and
Existence, which we commonly call Nature: That Nature indeed is the Law or Rule
instituted and implanted by the wise and glorious God in things when made; but
in the first Effection of Mankind God Almighty, not Nature, was the Author. As
in my Watch, the Law and Rule of its Motion is the Constitution and Position of
its Parts by the Hand and Mind of the skilful Artist; but the Author or
Efficient of my Watch is the Artist himself, and not that Motion that is as it
were the Law or Rule of the Engine.

SECT. IV.
CAP. I. Concerning the last Opinion, attributing the Origination of Mankind to
the immediate Power and Will of Almighty God.
IN the foregoing Section and Chapters I have performed these things: 1. I have
removed the Supposition of an Eternal Existence of the Humane Species, as
altogether incredible, and indeed impossible. 2. I have established
consequently this Truth, That the Species humana had a beginning; and this I
have done principally upon natural Evidence of the incompossibility of an
Eternal Existence of successive Generations. 3. I have considered those
Evidences of Fact, or Moral Evidences of the Inception of Mankind, and removed
such as seem more fallible and less concludent, and subjoined such as seem to
be of greater weight. 4. Among these of the latter sort, I have considered the
general Tradition thereof, both of the unlearned and learned part of Mankind,
wherein among others I have considered the Opinion of those Famous Sects of
Philosophers, the Platonists, Epicureans, Peripateticks, and Stoics. 5. Though
I have made use of their common Suffrage, in order to the Proof of the
Origination of Mankind, yet I have not allowed all their several Notions, or
Hypothesis, touching the Method or Manner of their admitted Origination of the
Humane Nature. And therefore, 6. I having thus established the Thesis in
general, I have descended to the Examination of the particular Hypotheses,
taken up by various Philosophers, touching the same Origination: And those I
have distributed into these three Ranks; 1. Those that suppose an accidental or
casual Production of Mankind, which was principally the Opinion of the
Epicureans: This Opinion I have examined, and rejected as vain. 2. Those that
suppose this Production to be Natural, or by the bare Concurrence of Natural
Causes, as Avicen, Cardan, and some others; which I have likewise examined, and
rejected as utterly inevident and false. 3. There remains therefore the third
Opinion, that attributes the Origination of Mankind to the immediate Power and
Beneplacitum of the Supreme Intellectual Being, namely, Almighty God; and this
was the Opinion of diverse of the Platonists and Stoics.

This Opinion is in the general true, and agrees not only with the Divine
Doctrine of Moses, but with the exactest Measure and Rule of Reason, and the
Light of Nature it self; and as it is utterly impossible, that Mankind should
be without a beginning, so it is utterly inconceptible, that he should have any
other Original but this.

But although this general Supposition be thus consonant to Truth and the Light
of Reason, yet since the Manner of this Origination of Mankind by the Power of
God depends merely upon His own Beneplacitum, which might put forth and exert
this Act of His Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, in the production of Mankind
according to His good Pleasure, and the Arbitrium of His own Will. And since
Mankind, having their Existence after this production, could never by his own
Sense perceive or understand perfectly the Manner of his own production, and
consequently the particular Method or Manner thereof could neither be attained
by Humane Experience nor Ratiocination; we must necessarily either be utterly
ignorant of the Manner and Order of the Divine Procedure in the Origination of
Mankind, or we must know it only by Divine, or at at least Angelical
Revelation, and not otherwise. So that though the general Thesis of the
Origination of Mankind by Almighty God, be a Conclusion deducible by Reason,
partly by the remotion of all other means as incompatible and insufficient for
such a production, and partly by the observation of the Events and Effects in
Nature; yet that this production of Mankind was in this or that particular
manner, is a Truth distinctly cognoscible only by Revelation.

And hence it came to pass, that those great Searchers into Truth among the
Heathens, being either not acquainted with the History of Moses, or not
acquainted with the Divine Authority by which it was written, either delivered
their Thesis generally, that Almighty God produced Mankind by His Power and
Will, not explicating the particular manner thereof; or if they attempted a
particular Explication of the manner, they ran out into very uncertain,
various, and contradictory Explications thereof; which must necessarily be the
consequence of such particular determinations, where Man has not sufficient
light to guide and direct him. Zeno Citicus, the Founder and Prince of the Sect
of the Stoics, a wise and a good Man, contented himself with this general
Assertion touching this matter, as it is delivered us by Censorinus, in Die
natali, cap. 4. Zenon Citicus Stoicae sectae conditor, principium humano generi
ex novo mundi constitutum putavit, primosque homines ex solo adminiculo Divini
ignis, id est, Dei providentia, genitos. Plato, as far as we can collect his
Opinion out of his Timeus, attributes the Origination of Mankind to the
immediate Causality of an Intelligent Nature: But going further into
particulars, falls into conjectures, attributing the Effection of the Soul unto
the Great God, but the Fabrication of the Body to the Dii ex Deo, or Angels, it
seems according to the Tradition of the Egyptians. And this has been
ordinarily the unhappiness of Mankind, without the light and guidance of Divine
Revelation, that if they have at any time happened upon some sound and
substantial Truth, they commonly fix unto it Explications and Additions of
their own, which many times, by their inevidence, absurdity, or incongruity,
draw in question the Truth it self to which they are appendicated: Therefore to
settle, and fix, and quiet the Minds of Men touching their own first
Origination, and the Origination of this World, it has pleased the Divine
Wisdom and Goodness by the Hand of Moses to reveal unto Mankind, not only that
the World and Mankind had their Original, and that they had their Original from
Almighty God, as its Efficient both of the Matter and Form thereof; but also he
has therein declared the Series, Order, and Method of the production of all
Things.

It is true, the two former, namely, That the World had an Inception, and had
an Inception from God, is a Truth that by the diligent Improvement of natural
Light and Reason is attainable; but the Manner and Order of this Effection is,
as before is said, discoverable only by Divine Revelation: But yet though the
Manner thereof is not discernable barely by the light of Nature or Reason,
without the help of Divine Revelation; yet that Method and Manner once
revealed, as it stands so revealed to us by Moses, carries a very great
congruity to Reason; which though it cannot at first discover the Method or
Order, yet it cannot choose but suffragate to the reasonableness and
convenience thereof, being so discovered.

I shall therefore in what follows do these things; 1. I shall give an Account
of that Method of the Formation of all things, and particularly of Mankind, as
it is rendered to us by Moses. 2. I shall show the reasonableness and congruity
of the Scheme of Moses touching the Effection of Mankind, both in the general
and particular notion thereof, and the prelation that it justly has above all
other the Hypotheses of other Men. 3. I shall deduce from the whole certain
evident and necessary Conclusions, against those that deny the Existence and
Providence of Almighty God. 4. I shall also deduce some Conclusions evincing
the Reasonableness of an intended End for Mankind, or the Design of Almighty
God in his Creation, and what may be reasonably concluded touching the same.

CAP. II. The Mosaical History touching the production of the World and of
Mankind, and the Congruity and Reasonableness of the Mosaical Hypothesis.
IN that short yet admirable History of the Creation delivered by Moses in the
first Chapter of Genesis, he gives us an exact Account of the Origination both
of Mankind and of the whole World, and therein and thereby he resolves all the
Doubts and Difficulties which troubled the Heads of the wise and learned
Heathen touching the same, and resolves and extricates all those inconveniences
and perplexities under which the various Hypotheses of the Heathen World
infinitely labored.

1. He resolves us, That the World in that Constitution as now it is, was not
Eternal, no not that part to which the Ancients attributed Eternity most,
namely, the Heavens; whereby all the Foundations of Aristotle, Ocellus Lucanus,
and others touching the same, and all their subtilties and struglings to
support that Eternity, and to deliver themselves from those inconveniences that
attended that Supposition are in a few words rendered vain and frivolous.

2. He resolves us, That as the World in its present form and structure was not
eternal, so neither was the matter thereof eternal; which troubled Plato so
much, who though he supposed an inception of the formation of things into their
present order, yet could not digest an origination of Matter.

3. He gives us an account, That Time or successive Duration was not eternal,
but had a beginning; and that Motion, whose Measure Time was, had a beginning,
before which it was not; because no Mobile was more ancient than the beginning
of Time.

4. He gives us an account of a kind of production that the learned
Philosophers knew not, a production ex nihilo, by Creation, by the Almighty
God; which breaks and tears in pieces all those petite Axioms and
superstructions thereupon, which they had been long time in weaving, and by
which they formed much of their Philosophical Speculation: As the necessity of
eternal Matter, because nothing is made of nothing; the necessity of eternal
Motion, because every Motion must have some Motion anteceding the nature of
possibilities; which, and many more being desumed from Generation as it stood
in the settled course of Nature, and fitted and appropriated to it, are no way
applicable to the first Origination and Production of Being by Creation.

5. He gives us the true Efficient of Being, and the manner of his Operation,
namely, Almighty God, a most wise, intelligent, and free Efficient; and one
that in the first production of things did not work per modum naturae, or
necessarily, or as a natural or necessary Cause, as the Sun produces Light;
but per modum intentionis, volitionis, and electionis; for he was before he
created his Creation of the World, was in the beginning, namely of Time, and
created Nature; but he was before that beginning, namely, without all
beginning. But to pursue a little more distinctly the order of the Creation of
things positively, and not barely negatively, the Mosaical History touching the
Creation seems to be as follows.

1. That in the beginning, the first Apex of Time which began with the Being of
Matter, Almighty God created in one indivisible moment the first and common
Matter of all this Mundus aspectabilis, the Heaven and Earth. Verse. 1.

2. That in that first Creation, and for some continuance of time or duration
after this common Matter of all things lay indistinct and confused together,
without any order or distinction, expressed by those words, Genesis 1.2. And the
earth was without form and void, and darkness was upon the face of the deep:
And in this common Mass and Chaos were contained the constituent Matter of the
Celestial and Elementary World.

Which salves the Dispute touching the disparity of the Matter of the Heavenly
and Elementary World, which appears here to be the same in kind.

3. That this common Matter had these deficiencies in it, in and for some time
after its production.

1. It was without Form and Order:

2. It was without Light:

3. It was without Activity, Life, or Motion: and

4. All that Superficies which it had, bore the greatest analogy to Water,
though in that vast Abyss there was a confused mixture of other Matter.

4. That the Spirit of God moved upon the face of this great Abyss, [incubavit
super abyssi faciem:] What this Spirit of God was, whether the essential
Spirit, the Third Person in the Holy Trinity; or whether it were a created
Spirit, the Spirit of Nature, or as some will have it, the Anima mundi, created
by God to digest, inspire, and communicate an active nature to this confused
Moles, as some earnestly contend; or whether this Spirit of God were any other
than the emanation of his Power, I shall not determine: But whatever it was,
this Motion of the Spirit upon the face of this Abyss had these great
Intentions and Effects upon this confused Moles: 1. It derived into it motive
Powers or Energies, whereby the parts of it were agitated or moved, or at least
rendered more obsequious to the agitation and motion of that active nature which
was afterward created, namely, Light or Fire. 2. It did gradually digest and
separate its parts, whereby they became more capable of disposition and order,
according to their several designed and destined places, positions, and uses.
3. It did transfuse into this stupid, dead, and unactive Moles certain activity
and vital influence, whereby it did in general affect that which Aristotle
calls the common Life of Bodies, namely, Motion; and the several parts thereof
were impregnated with several kinds of vital influence, varied and diversified
according to their several parts and uses: As the gentle heat of the Hen seems
to communicate a vital influence to the Egg, only with this difference, that
the heat of the Hen seems to excite a pre-existing vital principle in the Egg,
rather than to give it: But the incubation of this Spirit of God did not so
much excite, as give a new vital power to the several parts of the Chaos; as
the vital Soul in Nature communicates vitality and activity to the Seminal
Particles: And this gives us an account how Activity and active Forms, Powers
or Qualities were derived into Matter, namely, not from Matter it self, or such
which is merely unactive and passive; but from another Principle, namely, the
vigorous influx of this Spirit that moved upon the face of the Water. Whereby
it is apparent that the Vis, Vigor, Activity or Energy that is in Natural
Bodies and in the Universe, as it came from no other Principle than Matter; so
it is an Entity of a distinct nature from Matter or material Substance simply
as such, and indeed an Entity of a nobler extraction and nature than bare
Matter or material Substance. So that in this Description hitherto containing
the first Stamina or Rudiments of the Universe, we have 1. The Efficient
thereof, Almighty God: 2. The manner of his efficiency herein, namely, Creation
ex non praeexistentibus: 3. The Matter of the Universe thus by Creation
produced, the confused Moles, containing in it self the Matter of all things:
4. The disposition, or rather indisposition of this Matter, dark, stupid, and
unactive: 5. The plastic, formative, digesting Principle that pervaded it, the
Spirit of God moving upon the face of the Waters.

-- Totosque infusa per artus
Men's agitat molem. --
The first Rudiments of the World being thus laid, and thus prepared and
influenced by the powerful Energy and Incubation of this Spirit of God; this
divinely inspired Historian gives us in the next place the next succeeding
order of Almighty God, producing and effectually raising out of this Matter the
greater Integrals of the Universe, namely, the Etherial and Elementary Nature.
Verse. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

As in the order of Reason, it was but fit and convenient that the production
and influencing of the Matter should precede the division, and distribution,
and orderly disposing thereof; so it was equally reasonable and convenient,
that the greater and more extensive parts thereof should be first laid out and
disposed into their several stations and orders, before the smaller and lesser
portions of Nature should be either produced or settled; and that the simple
parts of this great Chaos should be first extracted, before the mixed and
compounded Existences should be settled. For as the Chaos and common Lump of
Matter was as it were the first Matter of all things, so the more simple and
uncompounded parts thereof, the Etherial and Elementary Natures were as it were
the Materia secunda, or proxima of the ensuing Productions; and in conformity
to this first Divine Ordination of things, the instituted nature of Corporeal
Beings, he did observe the same method or order still in the Generation of
things. Wherein we may observe, that the greater and more comprehensive
Rudiments and Stamina are laid, and in some good measure formed, before the
lesser and derivative parts are formed and completed; as we shall have
occasion to observe when we come to consider the processus generationis of Man
and Brutes.

And now to come to those greater Productions, which are principally these; the
Light, the Ether, the Air, the Water, the Earth. First therefore touching the
Light, Verse. 3. And God said, let there be light, and there was light; and God
divided the light from the darkness, and the light he called day, and the
darkness he called night: and the evening and the morning were the first day.

Herein it might be fit to examine, 1. What this Light was: 2. How it was
produced: 3. How it was disposed or ordered; 4. In what order and character of
time it was so produced and ordered.

Touching these briefly, and first touching the nature of this Light. We may
observe in Fire two great operations or effects, first, Heat, secondly, Light:
It should seem that active Element, as it is commonly called, or rather, that
powerful, vigorous Entity, or Vis ignea lucida and calefactiva was produced by
the Incubation of the Spirit of God upon the face of the Abyss, and diffused
through the confused Particles of the Materia Chaotica; and that it was the
great Instrument which that Spirit did both communicate and use for the
preparation, digestion, and agitation of that Matter: but this fiery nature
being mingled and dispersed through the Matter, though it had one of its useful
effects, namely, Heat; yet it neither had nor could have Light, at least till
it were in some measure disintangled and severed from the Moles of gross
Matter, with which it was confounded and mingled; and till the lucid and
flammeous particles, or rather Vis ignea and lucida were lodged in a fit
Vehicle for its emission. So that in the work of this day Light was not
created, but only a considerable part thereof separated from the grosser
Matter, and disposed into an apt Vehicle to contain it. 2. And this answers
partly the second Inquiry, namely, How it was produced: not, as it seems, by
Creation; but the powerful Fiat of Almighty God called the Light out of
Darkness, that is, separated and severed the most lucid fiery nature, and
invested them with fit Vehicles desumed out of the Materia Chaotica, whereby
great part of that flammeous and lucid fiery nature which was created by the
Incubation of the Spirit of God, was in a great measure discharged from the
bond and encumbrance of the grosser Matter, and rendered useful for the beauty
and service of the Universe; but yet so, that there remained still in the parts
of the Moles a sufficient stock of connatural Fire and fiery Particles for the
heating, agitating, and digesting of their several parts for their several uses
and ends. As to the Third, it should seem, that 1. This luminous nature was
lodged in a suitable Vehicle to derive its Light and Influence to the exterior
Superficies of this Moles Chaotica. 2. That it was put into a circular Motion,
whereby in the space of a Natural Day it visited the whole Expansum by
successive rotation; so that as by its presence in any part of the Chaotical
Horizon it made Day, so by its absence therefrom it caused Night, as the Sun
does at this day. And this diurnal Rotation of this luminous Body was really
such, because there could not be otherwise that which the Text supposes, viz.
separation of the Light from the Darkness, and thereby the distribution of Day
and Night; so it was convenient, for the better digestion and preparation of
the remaining indigested parts of Nature. For doubtless that Light was of a
very great and penetrating Influence, being as it were the Flos and Elixir of
that most active and powerful Element. 4. The Time and Order wherein this
production of Light was, is said to be the first Day: what portion of duration
the disorderly Chaos had before this first production is utterly uncertain,
because not revealed; possibly it might be a very long time, but the perfecting
of the World in its formal order and constitutum seems to be in the compass of
six Natural Days, and the first Days Work is this of Light.

And although we must finally resolve the ordering and methodizing of all
things to the Divinum beneplacitum, whose Wisdom and Ways are unsearchable and
past finding out, farther than he is pleased to reveal them; yet it should seem
to be very consonant to the reason of things, that this eduction and
circulation of the Light should begin and be continued at least for the first
three Days of the World, without parcelling or distributing into those
Luminaries of the Sun and Stars: For doubtless the collection of this lucid,
fiery, active nature into so great a Body as probably it was, had even
naturally a most forcible energy, influence and penetration into the subjected
Chaos, and strangely prepared it for its ensuing offices and uses. Although we
must ever with all humility acknowledge, that the Great and Omnipotent God
needed not the subsidiary Instrumentalities of Nature to complete his Work, but
could do all things immediately, as he did most evidently in many of the
productions of Nature; yet if he were pleased to use this order in things, we
have reason to believe, that though he needed it not, yet when we see it done,
it was certainly so done with most exquisite Wisdom and Reason: He could in the
first moment have produced the whole World complete in all particulars, but he
chose not so to do, but did things in a successive order of six Days, and in
such a Method as was most agreeable to his good pleasure and infinite Wisdom.
What became of this Fiery Luminous Nature and Body, we shall see in the fourth
Days Work.

2. The Second great Integral seems to be that great and vast Body, consisting
of the Air and Ether, called the Firmament; Verse. 6. And God said, Let there
be a firmament in the midst of the water, and God made the firmament, and
divided the waters which are above the firmament from the waters that are under
the firmament, and it was so; and God called the firmament heaven: and the
evening and the morning were the second day.

This word that is translated in our English [Firmament] is rendered by
Linguists understanding the propriety of the word, to be Expansum or Expansio;
and much controversy has been, what is meant by the Waters above the Heavens;
some supposing a real existence of Waters above the Starry Heavens, to cool the
heat contracted by them or their rapid motion; others conjecturing it to be the
Clouds, which are above the middle region of the Air: both improbable enough,
the former a mere imagination, the latter little more; for, at this time, it is
apparent there were no Clouds, neither had it rained upon the Earth. Genesis 2.6.

It seems therefore that this Expansum, rendered here Firmament, is nothing else
but that limit or boundary between the more refined, liquid nature which we
usually call Air and Ether, and the grosser or fluid Element properly called
Water. So the Firmament was nothing else but that Expansum of Air and Ether
that are contiguous to the Superficies of the Water. The Reasons that induce me
so to think (which also explicate the Notion of the Supposition) are these:

1. Because frequently both in the Language of the Holy Scripture, and of
diverse of the ancient Heathen Authors, the whole Diaphanum of the Air and
Ether is in one common appellation called Heaven; which is the denomination
here given to this Expansum, (God called the Firmament or Expansum, Heaven:)
thus we have frequent mention of the Fowls of the Heavens, the Clouds of
Heaven, which yet are situated in that part of Heaven, which is the Aerie
Region. And again here, Verse. 14. the Sun and Moon are said to be great Lights
placed in the Firmament of the Heaven, which are yet placed in a Region of the
Ether, though above the Atmosphere and the region of the common Air, yet are
far below that liquid region of the Ether wherein the Stars move: and Verse.
20. the Fowls habitation is said to be in the open Firmament of Heaven, which
yet fly no higher than the lower region of the Air. So that the Heaven, and the
Expansum here called the Heaven, seems to be that great Expansum of the
Diaphanum including the more sublime and pure part thereof called the Ether;
and the grosser and lower part thereof called the Air, and the Waters above the
Firmament were that refined, rarefied, liquid Matter, which was Ether and Air;
and the (...) Waters below the Firmament were those gross and fluid parts of
Nature called ordinarily Water.

2. Because it appears, Verse. 9. that the Waters which were gathered together
in the Constitution of the Air, were the Waters under the Heavens, Waters that
were next contiguous to that common Expansum consisting of Air and Ether
called Heaven, there was nothing interposed between that fluid Water which
constituted the Sea, and that common Expansum called Heaven, consisting of Air
and Ether.

3. It seems that the great Moles Chaotica was in its appearance and external
consistency of a waterish nature; for it is said that the Spirit of God moved
upon the face of the Waters, which though it contained the confused Mass of all
things, as well those that grew into a more solid consistence, as the more
reformed or subtle Matter; yet in its first deformed exhibition of its
appearance it had the shape of Water, and therefore Plutarch, de placitis
Philosophorum, lib. 1. cap. 3. tells us, that Thales Milesius held that Water
was the common Principle of all things; which Position he learned partly by the
Analogy that he found therewith in things existing, whose first Rudiments and
last Resolution seems to be a watery or fluid substance; and partly by Tradition
from the Egyptians, or rather from the Hebrews, whose first habitation was in
that Country.

And the manner of the resolution of this Aqueous appearance into Ether and
Air seems to be this: This great aqueous Chaotical Mass contained in it
Particles of various natures, some more feculent and gross, as the Earthy
Particles, which floated up and down in it till they were driven down by the
Fire and Heat, or otherwise by some disposition (...) or agitation of that
Incubation of the Spirit of God, were disposed and subsided in the middle of
this Aqueous substance, which became in time the Moles terrestris: Other parts
less feculent than these resided in a Region or Circle next to that grosser and
more feculent Sediment; but by virtue of the Divine Disposal the Incubation of
the Spirit and the Energy and Efficacy of that great circulating Fiery Nature,
which was maintained in a continued rotation about the Massa Chaotica, called
Light; and that internal, hot, and fiery Nature that still resided within the
Body of the Massa Chaotica, the more subtle and pure particles of this Watrish
Matter were separated, divided, and exhaled from it, and constituted that
Consistency that is called the Air and Ether, here called Heaven.

And this diaphanous Body of the Air and Ether thus extracted from the Water
varied in degrees of Subtilty or Rarity, according to the degrees of its
elevation; the more high and elevated parts being more pure, according to the
degrees of their ascent; and the lower more feculent and thick, and filled with
more gross Exhalations and Vapors arising from the contiguously subjected
parts; and therefore it is said, Genesis 2.6. There went up a mist from the earth,
and watered the face of the ground.

And I am farther induced to think, that those Waters above the Firmament or
Expansum were no other than this Ether and Air raised and separated from the
Massa Chaotica, upon these Reasons; 1. Because there seems to be a great
congruity between the Water and the Air, in their quality of liquidity or
moisture. 2. Because there seems to be a more connatural Transmutation of
either into other; the Air, and for ought I know, the Ether, which is but a
purer sublimated Air, by condensation easily re-assuming the nature of Water,
and the Water by heat and rarefaction easily assuming the nature of Air, and by
the continuance and constancy of that heat containing it self in that
consistency. And from hence it is that the Waters were the common material
Principle of both the Fishes and Fowls. And if we may conjecture, that great
Inundation, Genesis 7.1. was not by a new Creation of Water, but by the wonderful
and powerful Condensation of the Region of the Air; which seems to be that
opening of the Windows of Heaven, whereby great portions of the Aerial and
Etherial Matter discovered themselves to be Water. 3. Because we have no other
part of Holy History that gives us an account of the production of that vast
Continent of the Air and Ether out of the Chaotick Mass but this place. And
here we must observe once for all, That there was no Creation of Matter after
the Beginning; it was all created in that moment of Beginning. 2. That from
that Creation till the first Day, wherein Light was produced, there was that
continued preparation, impregnation, disposition, and agitation of Matter by
the Spirit of God. 3. That all the Productions of the Six Days (except the
Creation of the Soul of Man, and Angels) were not by any new Creation, but by
separation of the parts of that pre-existing Matter, formation of them, and
composition and effection of Beings out of the first created, disposed, and
ordered Matter, by the Power of Almighty God, and the influencing them with
those active Principles which we usually call Forms, Energies, and Active
Qualities.

3. The Third great Integral of this lower World, especially in the Work of the
third day, was the dividing of the Earth and Waters, Verse. 9. And God said, Let
the waters under the heaven be gathered together, and let the dry land appear,
and it was so; and God called the dry land earth, and the gathering together of
the waters he called seas.

The Divine Historian herein brings us to the Formation of this lower Globe of
Water and Earth, and the distinction thereof.

This portion of the lower World seems to be the whole residue of the visible
Chaotical Mass, which by the former Rectification was reduced to a small
portion, like the Caput mortuum after Distillation; for out of it had been
before drawn those two mighty and large portions of Matter, namely, the Fiery,
and Flammeous, and Lucid Nature imbodied in a Vehicle sufficient to contain and
receive it in the Work of the first day; and secondly, the Expansum, the vast
Body of the Air and Ether in the Work of the second Day.

So that this Elementary portion of Earth and Water seems to be as it were the
sediment and relic of the Massa Chaotica.

And those other two vast Extractions being drawn from it, it seems this lower
Region of Nature consisting of an aggregation of Water and Earth by the Divine
Disposition of things, either immediately, or partly by the instrumentality
either of the ambient Fire, or by the implanted tendency of the grosser
Particles to one common Center of this residue of a Chaotick Mass, the gross
Terrestrial parts subsided into the middle of the Water; and though it was in
bulk far greater than the Water, yet it had there two concomitants with it: 1.
The Water by reason of its fluidity and penetration mingled it self, as far as
it could at least, with the superficies of the Terrestrial Sediment, to some
considerable depth into it, so far as it could pierce, until it were excluded
by the denser coagulation of the Earth. 2. The Water did encompass the whole
Terrestrial Globe to some proportionable depth or thickness, though not equal
to the quantity of the Earth. So that as the circular Scales of a Pearl
incompass one another, so did the several ext^racted great Integrals cover one
another.

The first extracted Nature was the Light, the Fiery or Luminous Body; which
must needs be uppermost, because first drawn off from the Chaotick Mass. The
second, the Ether and Air drawn off, encompassing the remaining part of the
Chaotick Mass. The third, the Watery Consistence, left in a circular subsistence
by the subsiding of the Ball of Earth into the common Center of the Universe.

And by this means the Earth was not at all conspicuous, but involved in an
involucrum of Water; so that it must necessarily be, 1. That hereby the whole
Superficies of the Earth was covered with Water. 2. That the upper part of it
must needs be a moist muddy substance, fluid and lubricous, like Slime or Mud.

The appearance therefore of the dry Land was by the excavation of certain
Sinus and Tracts of the Earth, and exaggerating or lifting up other parts of
the Terrestrial Matter; and by this means the Water subsided into those Caverns
and Valleys prepared for its reception: Whether this excavation of the
Terrestrial Body, or elevation of other parts thereof whereby the Water
subsided, were immediately by the immediate Power of God; or whether he did it
by the instrumentality of the Water, working room for it self in the more soft
and penetrable part of the Earth, and exaggerating and raising Islands and
Continents in other parts by such exaggeration; as we see is done at this day
by the Ocean, producing Islands, and enlarging Continents: Or whether by the
instrumentality of the Fire, either subterraneous or ambient, raising up the
Earth, or what other immediate way it was done; most certainly it was done by
the Will, Direction, and Regiment of the Divine Wisdom and Power: so that it is
truly said, Job 38.10. He brake up for it its decreed place: Prove. 8.28. He
gave the sea its decree, that the waters should not pass his commandment.

Hitherto the Divine History has given us an account, 1. Of the Materia prima
of all Corporeal Beings, the Massa Chaotica: 2. The Materia proxima or secunda
of all other Corporeal Beings being the simple Elements, and the next Matter of
all Mixtions or Composition: 3. The Natura ignea; calefactive, lucid, and
penetrating the Elementary Matter: 4. The Natura aetherea and aerea, the
Expansum: 5. The Natura aquea, or the Water: 6. The Natura terrestris, or the
Earth. And then he proceeds to those mixed or compounded Natures, drawn out of
those or some of those simpler Existences, the Furniture of the Earth and
Heaven.

I shall therefore now proceed to his Description of the Production of Mixed
Natures and Vegetables, in part of the third day; Celestial Bodies in the
fourth day; Fish and Fowls in the fifth day; Brutes and Man in the sixth day.

1. Therefore touching the production of Vegetables, Verse. 11. And God said,
Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed, and the fruit-tree
yielding fruit after her kind, whose seed is in it self upon the earth; and it
was so.

Here we have the beginning of the Vegetable Nature; and mark, what I say
concerning this, will be applicable with some variation to the Brutes and Fish.
We have three sorts of Vegetables here described, 1. Some that seem to be of
the lowest rank, and such as we do find oftentimes sponte orta, the Grass. 2.
Those Herbs that are of a more perfect nature, which as they bear Seed, so they
do not usually arise but by it. 3. Trees bearing Fruit and Seed, being the
nobler sort of Trees; but this includes all kind of Vegetables, as well Trees
that bear not Fruit or Seed, as those which do.

In the production of these Vegetables, these things are observable:

1. The Supreme Efficient, the Word of Command of the Divine Will was that
which was the Supreme productive Efficient.

2. The subordinate Instrument [germinet terra] wherein we have these two great
Truths delivered, 1. That the Earth yielded the Matter of Vegetables. 2. That
the Earth was now impregnated to be an active Instrument to this production,
and concurred therein, at least instrumentally, with the Supreme Efficient, and
that Activity that was in the Earth did not arise merely from the Matter, for
that in the beginning was purely passive, but 1. by the Fecundating Principle,
the Spirit of God moving upon the Face of the Chaotick Matter; 2. by the
powerful Energy of the Fiery and Luminous Principle, that partly resided in the
Earth, partly encompassed it; 3. but principally by the Efficacy of the Word of
the Divine Command, which was no other but the determination of His Efficacious
Will.

3. But though the more solid Matter of these Vegetable Productions was the
Earth, yet it was the Earth conjoined with that vigorous Fire, which was
mingled with that active Air or Ether that was interspersed in it, and that
fruitful Water which remained conjoined with it.

4. That this Production was not by any formed antecedent Seed dispersed in it,
but immediately, the Vegetable Individuals were antecedent to any Semina that
might be productive of it; and according to the true Method of Existence of
Things in their first Origination, the Herb and Tree were the Cause, the
Original of the Seed, the Seed was not the Original of the Herb or Tree, though
in the secondary production by generation the Semen precedes the thing
generated, according to the Order settled after the first production of things,
which does reasonably solve the Dispute of Plutarch, Whether the Hen were
before the Egg, or the Egg before the Hen?

And as the Supposition, that the first Principle in the Origination, either of
Vegetables or Sensitives, to be ex praeexistente semine seems incongruous and
unreasonable, I mean as to perfect Vegetables or Animals, so it is idle and
needless: For certainly the same Infinite Power, that could form a Semen
univocum, to be the immediate Principle of an Animal or Vegetable, in the
primordial Origination of them, could with equal facility form perfect
Individuals of the several Species, and endue them with a prolifick power of
propagation of their kinds, by seminal Principles decised from them; and no
lesser Power and Wisdom was required to mold up a specifical operative Semen,
than to frame the Individual or Species to be produced by it.

5. The Supreme Power of the Great Efficient of Vegetables, as well as Animals,
was seen in this, in that it determined their Species, which, Matter alone, nor
any Universal Cause purely natural, could never have done, in respect of their
universal common indeterminate Nature, which could never fix nor settle in any
determinate specific production. Therefore, in that the Individuals of
Vegetables, Fish, Fruits, and Birds, as well as Men, were made after their
kinds, it ascertains us, that this Origination of things was by a Wise, Free,
Intelligent Being, full of Power and Wisdom, acting secundum intentionem
electionem, and voluntatem.

6. By virtue of this Divine Intention, Ordination, and Command, these three
things were settled touching Vegetable Natures, (which is also true concerning
Animals, as to the two latter of them at least) 1. The Earth was endued with
prolifick vital Energy, whereby it was enabled with the vigorous assistance of
the Fiery Nature included in it, and accompanying it, to put out many
spontaneous productions of some ordinary Vegetables, and probably of some
Insects, and to exhibit a succus nutritionis to support all kind of Vegetables
and many Animals in their vital existence, 2. The Individuals of Vegetables of
all sorts, as also of Animals, Fishes, Fowls, Insects, and Man, were in a
moment of time produced in their full and perfect complement, laden with their
Fruit and Seed, without ruining the natural gradual process of Maturation,
which was to ensue in the course of future Generations; and this could not be
done, either by force of any natural fecundity that was then in the Earth, or
the bare strength of the formed natural accommodation of Light or Heat; for
though it be true, that the natural fecundity and heat of some Climates, and
also artificial fecundations of Matter, may conduce much to the acceleration of
Maturity, yet it is hot imaginable, that these could be ripened into the full
growth and burden of Fruit in the period of a Day, but by virtue of a
supernatural Efficient and Power, namely, the Energy of the Divine Command,
[Germinet terra, etc.] 3. The third admirable Demonstration of the
Immediateness of the Divine Power, Wisdom, and Ordination, is this, That
Vegetables, as also Animals and Mankind, were endued with a Power, Faculty, and
a certain Law fixed and radicated in them, to transmit their specifical Nature
to succeeding Individuals by propagation and seminal traduction, whereby their
Species might be preserved, and this was done by force of the Divine
Institution and Benediction; the Vegetables were produced with their various
Semina in them, ready formed for their several specifical productions, in their
full and perfect stature, quasi per saltum, and endued with a prolifick power
of multiplication of their kind, by virtue of that Sovereign Institution and
Commission [Be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the Earth,] Genesis 1.22, 28.

2. I come now to the Fourth Days Work, Verse 14, 15, 16, [And God made two
great Lights, the greater Light to rule the Day, and the lesser to rule the
Night, and he made the Stars also.]. It is true what I before observed, that
first Matter of all things corporeal was made, and this only was properly
Creation or making out of nothing, and all corporeal things, that were made
within the compass of the Six Days, was Creation only per analogiam, for it was
only separation and distribution of that Matter which before existed in the
Materia Chaotica, or else an elevation or rectification of some parts of that
Matter, or a composition out of it or of some parts of it; it was effectio or
creatio secunda, not creatio prima; and though the Word [Create] be applied to
some things that were thus effected, as Verse. 21. yet it is not purely creatio
prima, or ex nihilo, but creatio secunda ex praeexistente materia.

Now, What was the Matter of these Heavenly Bodies, the Sun, the Moon, the
Stars, for in this Fourth Day all the Matter of the Chaos was before
distributed into these four Simpler Natures, Light or Fire, Air or Ether,
Water, and Earth?

The first Matter of these Heavenly Luminaries therefore was the common
Chaotica materia; but the Materia proxima out of which they seem to be
constituted, were principally those two great Natures which were separated from
the Chaos the first day, viz. The Fiery Nature imbodied in a suitable Vehicle,
and the second day the Ether or Aerie part: these two great Integrals of the
first Universe were far greater than all the rest of the Chaotick Matter, and
therefore might very well subminister the principal and predominant Matter for
those great and vast Luminaries the fixed Stars, the most whereof are far
greater than the Globe of Earth and Water: But to the Constitution of the
Planetary Bodies, which seem to be more gross than the Stars, there was a
greater proportion of more gross and feculent Matter added to the Fiery and
Aerial Particles in their coagulation, though in some of them more, in some
less, according to the various degrees of subtilty and grosness of their
constitution.

And these goodly Bodies being formed and molded, it should seem that that
great and mighty flaming Light which was made or produced the first day; and
for the two ensuing days had rolled about the rest of the Chaotick Mass, was by
the Glorious God distributed into those several Heavenly Vessels of the Sun and
Stars, who succeeded unto, and as it were inherited that primitive Light now
divided among them, according to their several measures and uses.

For although the Almighty Wisdom and Power could have made all this Fabric of
the World in its full complement and perfection in one moment, and although he
produced and perfected Vegetables, Brutes, and Man in one moment, without the
gradual procedures through those several stations and degrees which Nature now
observes; and so he could have done in the production of all other the
Integrals of the Universe; yet he seems in some parts of this Processus
formativus of the Universe to use sometimes such Methods, Means, and
Instruments, and such Times, Periods, and Orders as might seem to bear in some
measure a congruity to a Natural Procedure; thus he used that Motion or
Agitation of the Spirit for the ripening and influencing of the vast Mass; he
first begins with the production of those more simple constituent Particles of
Matter which might yield Matter suited and prepared to Mixed Natures.

And it is not unreasonable for us to think that this great flaming Light in
the first three days of the Creation was used as a most suitable Instrument for
the Rarefaction, Digestion, Separation, and Distribution of the remaining part
of the Chaotical Matter in those greater Agitations that it had in the
production of the Ether, the separation of the Water, and the arefaction of
the Earth; which Processes required a more severe and violent, active
Instrument than was necessary, or indeed suitable to those smaller Mutations
which were after made; and probably if that piercing and great Lucid Nature had
continued its Revolutions about the World, it would have been too strong and
violent either to the production, or conservation of those Animals and Mankind
that were now to be produced.

And so the diffused Light that circulated about the Universe, is now this
fourth day distributed into these several Heavenly Bodies; 1. Because now its
use in that former state and method of its existence ceased. 2. It was now for
the use of the Universe to have it distributed and ordered into those several
Vessels, the Sun and Stars, that might with a gentler and better regulated Heat
and Motion influence the World. 3. It was now more for the Beauty, Order, and
Ornament of the Universe, for the Glory and Honor of the Divine Wisdom, Power,
and Goodness to distribute this Light into several Vessels, and according to
various measures and proportions, and accommodated with several Motions; than
to keep it in one vast and terrible Body circulating the Universe, which
unrefracted might have been too penetrating and violent to the other parts of
Nature.

And this seems to be the Method of the Origination of the Heavenly Bodies: For
though the firt Verse tells us, that In the beginning God made the heavens and
the earth, we have no reason to suppose that the Etherial Bodies and the
Heavenly Luminaries were completed in the moment of Time, (whatever may be
conjectured touching the Coelum Empyraeum;) for it is evident that Light the
firstborn of the Universe was not made till the first day; the Expansum or
Ether till the second day; nor the Heavenly Host, the Planetary and Fixed
Stars till the fourth day.

I shall not here contend much touching the System of the Universe, whether the
Earth be the Center thereof, or the Sun, whether it consist of so many several
Systems or Vortices, whether every Fixed Star has its Vortex, and the Sun the
Center of the Planetary Vortex; only thus much I shall say, 1. That this Diving
Hypothesis delivered to us by the hand of Moses seems wholly to contradict the
Supposition of Solid Orbs, and strongly concludes that the Heavenly Bodies are
moved in liquido Aethere. 2. It seems rather to countenance that System of the
Universe that supposes the Earth to be the common Center thereof, than (...)
the imaginary Hypothesis of Copernicus, Galileus, Kepler, or Des Carts. 3.
That it utterly contradicts the Hypothesis of Aristotle and Ocellus, and the
Pythagoreans touching the Eternity of the World, or of the Heavens; and
likewise the Fiction of Democritus and Epicurus of the casual Coalition of the
Universe by the motion or interfering of Atoms.

3. I come to consider of the Fifth Days Work, touching the production of Fish
and Fowls; Verse. 20. And God said, Let the waters bring forth abundantly the
moving creature that has life, and fowl that may fly above the earth in the
open firmament of heaven; and God created great whales, and every living
creature that moves, which the waters brought forth abundantly after their
kind and every winged fowl after its kind; and God saw that it was good.

The great Engine of the Heavenly Bodies being now constituted in that excellent
state and order for the use and conservation of animal Life, God Almighty
proceeds in a most exquisite order for the production of Animals; and because
the Waters were in themselves a more ductile, and possibly a more fertile Body
than the Earth; and also, because caeteris paribus, the Fowls and Fishes are
not of an equal perfection in their natures to the Brutes or Terrestrial
Animals; for these have certainly a more digested constitution, greater variety
and curiosity in their bodily texture, and a higher Spirit and Soul, of nobler
Instincts, and more capable of Discipline than the Fowl or Fishes. Therefore,
as the production of Vegetables anteceded the production of Animals; so the
production of Animals aquatil and volatile preceded the production of
terrestrial Animals.

What may else be said in relation to this Days Work, I shall deliver in the
Consideration of the next first Part of the sixth Days Work. Therefore,

4. The first Part of the sixth Days Work comprised the production of
Terrestrial Animals; Verse. 24. And God said, Let the earth bring forth the
living creature after his kind, and cattle, and every creeping thing and beast
of the earth after his kind; and it was so.

The Reasons why Terrestrial Animals had their production after the Fowls and
Fishes, have been partly before intimated, and shall be here somewhat farther
considered: And they are these,

1. Although Almighty God be not bound or straightened in his Operation to the
sequaciousness of the Matter, yet it is not improper for us to suppose that he
may pursue the Laws of his own making, where it consists with his design and
intention: The production of Vegetables by the Earth was indeed earlier; but
then the energy of his Instrument the Light, perchance was stronger than after
the distribution thereof into the Receptacles of the Heavenly Luminaries.

2. Ad plurimum, the nature of Terrestrial Animals was a more refined nature
than that of Fowls and Fishes, and therefore as the Matter might reasonably
expect a longer mora for its Concoction, so the Method of Creation, caeteris
paribus, proceeded from the less elaborate Integrals of Mixed Bodies to the more
elaborate, concluding with Man.

And this preference of the Brutes above Fowls and Fishes, appears 1. In the
manner of their natural procreation, the Brutes being ad plurimum vivipara, the
others arising ad plurimum ex ovo. 2. In the great variety of their bodily
composure; the texture of the Bodies of Brutes being far more curious, and
fuller of variety than others. 3. Ad plurimum, the animal Faculties of the
brutal Soul are far more perfect than those of others, their Fantasies and
Memories refined, they have greater and more lively Images of Reason, and more
capable of Discipline than either Fowls or Fishes.

Now touching the production of Animals, whether Terrestrial, Aquatil, or
Volatile, we may observe that they are in the ordinary course of Nature of two
kinds: Some, which arise among us no otherwise, nor in any other manner than ex
semine, which we usually call perfect Animals, and arising by univocal
generation; others there are that be imperfect, arising spontaneously in the
Earth, Air, and Water, as Worms, Flies, and some sort of small Fishes and watery
Insects.

This being premised, I shall now set down some Suppositions which seem to me
truly to explicate the production of these Animals, which are these that follow.

1. Although the predominat Matter in the constitution of Fowls and Fishes were
Water, and in the constitution of Terrestrial Animals were Earth; yet that
Water nor that Earth were not simply such, but were mixed and impregnated with
the other Elementary Principles.

2. That all the Species of perfect Animals of all kinds were constituted in
their several Sexes in the fifth and sixth day of the Creation, but yet we must
not think that all those kinds which we now see were at first created, but only
those primitive and radical Species: How many sorts of Animals do we now see,
that yet possibly are not of the same Species, but have accidental
diversifications, as we may observe in the several Shapes and Bodies of Dogs,
Sheep, Pyes, Parots? which possibly at first were not so diversified; some
variation of the same Species happen by mixed Coition, some by diversity of
Climates, and other accidents.

3. That the first Individuals in their distinction of Sexes were not produced
according to those Methods of Nature which they now hold, nor ex aliquo
praeexistente semine, but by the immediate efficiency of Almighty God, out of
the Matter prepared or designed for their Constitution.

4. That they were made in the first instant of their Constitution in the full
perfection and complement and stature of their individual and specifical
nature, and did not gradually increase according to the procedure of animal
augmentation at this day: and the reason is, because those gradual
augmentations arise from the Seminal Principle which gradually expands it self
to the full growth; but here they arose not from any such Seminal Principle,
but the Hen was before the Egg.

5. There was no mean portion of Time between their Formation and Animation,
but both were together, they were living Beings, and living Souls, and living
Creatures as soon as they were formed.

6. That consequently the Formation of the Body of these Animals was not as now
it is, by the Formative Power of the Soul, which must needs be gradual and
successive, as we see it is, and must be at this day in all natural
Generations; but the Formation and Information of them was by virtue of the
immediate Fiat, Determination, or Ordination of the Divine Will.

7. That in their Origination, the Species of these Animals were determined
neither from the Matter, nor from the universal Cause, the Celestial Heat; but
by the Divine Intention and Ordination.

8. That by the same Divine Ordination and Intention, the Faculties
specifically belonging to every Individual were annexed and alligated to it,
especially the power, conficiendi semen prolificum, and speciei propagandae ex
mutua utriusque fexus conjunctione.

9. That although by the Divine Power and Ordination all these perfect Animals
did arise from the Earth, yet that Prolifick Power of propagating of them was
never delegated or committed to the Earth, or any (...) other Casual or Natural
Cause; but only to the Seminal Nature, derived from their Individuals, and
disposed according to that Law of propagation of their kind, alligated as
before to their specifical and individual nature.

And therefore it its perfectly impossible that any of these perfect Animals
can be casually, or naturally, or accidentally produced by any Preparation of
Matter, or by any Influence of the Heavens, without the miraculous
interposition of Almighty Power; because the Earth, or those Influences have
not this power concredited to them, but their production is irresistibly
alligated to the Semen innatum and conjunction of Sexes; the Earth can as
naturally produce a Sun or a Star, as it can a Man, or a perfect Animal.

10. Whether those imperfect or equivocal Animals were created or no, it is not
altogether clear;, possibly some might be then produced, whose kinds were
likewise producible spontaneously after; but it seems beyond contradiction that
all were not.

11. As by virtue of that general Commission or intrinsic Prolifick Power
given to the Earth to produce spontaneous Herbs, as Grass, etc. it does
naturally produce such Herbs; so by virtue of that common Commission given by
Almighty God to the Earth and Water, and to that Spirit of Nature diffused in
it, it does naturally produce those equivocal insect Animals which arise out of
them.

The same Law of the Creator that has eternally excluded, or rather not
committed to the Earth or Water the power of producing perfect Animals, has
given and committed to them by concurrence of that Vital Heat of the Sun and
the common Spirit of Nature residing in them, a Productive Power of some
equivocal insect Animals in Matter fitly prepared.

Touching therefore the Origination of Insects I shall declare my thoughts as
follows; 1. That by virtue of the Divine Fiat the Earth at first did produce
some Individuals of several kinds, which is imported under the words [Every
creeping thing after its kind.] 2. That as I have before shown, the greatest
part of the Insects that are commonly produced, and seem to be spontaneous
productions, are yet the univocal and seminal productions of Insects of the
same kind. 3. That yet it is a certain Truth, that some Insects are, and have
an Origination since the first Creation without any formal, univocal, seminal
production; some out of Putrefaction, some out of Vegetables, some by very
strength and fracedo of the Earth and Waters quickened by the vigorous Heat of
the Sun, which infuseth into some Particles of Matter well prepared and
digested a kind of Vital and Seminal Principle. Some have thought the very Sun
and Earth are endued with a Vital, yea and with a kind of Sensitive Nature, and
thereby enabled as it were to spin some prepared Matter into vital and sentient
Semina for those insect Animals: But we shall not need to trouble our selves
with that uncertain Speculation; we are sure that the greatest part of the
Superficies of the Earth being daily and hourly impregnated with the corrupted
and dissolved Particles of Vegetables and Animals, is at least highly prepared
for the spontaneous production of Insects and Vegetables of some kinds; and the
benevolent Heat of the Sun has a great influence thereupon to be the
Instrument of Almighty God in these Productions: but it is his Sovereign
Institution that committed to the Sun, the Earth, and the Waters and their
Particles to produce some insect Animals, and therefore they produce them, as
Worms, Flies, Frogs; but he has not concredited or committed to them that
primitive Productive Power of perfect Animals, nay not of some noble
Vegetables, fine praeexistente semine univoco.

Thus we have considered the History of the Worlds production, and the
reasonableness thereof. Now to the production of Terrestrial Animals, (for of
the Creation of Man I shall speak in the next Chapter.)

It is true that there are two sorts of natural Integrals whose History is here
omitted, and yet that omission not without great reason; because it seems their
production was in a manner accidental and spontaneous, depending upon the
various mixture of Materials formerly created, namely, Meteors and Minerals:
the former consummated in the Aerie Region by the apposition and mixture of
diverse Excretions and Exhalations of the other parts of Nature; for we neither
find, nor have any cause to look for Clouds, Comets, or Meteors in the compass
of the first six Days. The latter seem to be Concretions and Digestions in the
Bowels of the Earth, either altogether or for the most part begun and perfected
after the Six Days Work, by the energy of the external, and Celestial, and
internal, and connatural Fire and Heat.

Some Jews and Cabalists there have been that have supposed those six Days to
be of different length and extent from these Natural we are acquainted with,
and that those six Days, especially the three first and three last thereof,
differed exceedingly one from another, and that as the three last were of a far
greater length and extension than our ordinary day or night; so the three
former were exceedingly larger than the three latter of the six, and the
computation of the whole by Six Days was only by a kind of Analogical
Expression to give Mankind a distinction of the Order of Production; and they
suppose, 1. That the Divine Author by this distribution of Days did not intend
any determinate portion of Time, much less days or times conformable to the
length of our days, but certain Mysterious Numbers of Times; and therefore
Philo Judaeus in his first Book Allegoriarum Legis, tells us, Rusticanae
simplicitatis est putare sex diebus aut aliquo certo tempore mundum conditum,
complevit sexto die opera, intelligere non debes de diebus aliquot, sed de
senario perfecto numero; and then takes a great deal of pains in illustrating
the Mystery of that Number. 2. Because they would willingly introduce a kind of
natural production of things according to a natural method, and gradual and
successive procedure, without the Supposition of an immediate concurrence or
interposition of a Supernatural Influx or Causation; and therefore because the
separation of Light, the first Days Work, naturally required a great time; as
also the rarefaction and separation of the Expansum, the separation of the
Bodies of Earth and Water, and likewise the maturation and production of
Vegetables out of it might require a longer time than some of the subsequent
days Works, therefore the three first days were much longer than those that
follow: And again, since each of these great Works attributed to the three
latter days were great Works, required great digestion, and separation, and
maturation of the Matter for the Heavenly Bodies; as also for the maturation of
living Animals, and their production: that even those days might be conceived
of a dimension or computation much larger than our Days, and possibly than our
Months, or Years, or Ages. But these seem to be vain Conjectures, introduced
merely to exclude an intermixture of a supernatural concurrence in the speedy
production and formation of things, and not warranted by the Holy History, but
contradicting it: For we have no reason to imagine that the sixth day was of any
other dimension than the seventh day, wherein God Almighty rested; nor the
fifth any longer than the sixth; neither was it at all necessary the days
should be protracted to that length of time for two Reasons: 1. Because if we
should be so vain as to suppose a long process, somewhat suitable to what we now
see in Nature, for the separation, disposition, and production of the Six Days
Work; yet certainly there was a time intervening between the first Creation of
the Materia Chaotica and the very inception of its complement into that Order
that the Six Days Work exhibit to us; and although that time is not
determinately set down, yet we may justly think it a long time: And again, in
that long interval there was a powerful Agent subacting, disposing, and
influencing the Massa Chaotica, expressed by the Spirit of God moving upon the
face of the Waters; whereby if it were necessary to have such a preparatory
process toward the formation of the World antecedent to such formation, it was
not wanting here, and every Particle might thereby be so ripened and prepared
that they might successively give their apparences in those portions of time
wherein they are ranged by the Sacred History. 2. Although in the Creation of
the World and the Integrals thereof, Almighty God seemed something to conform
to the reasonable Order of Causes suitable or congruous to Effects, and did not
put forth such an immediate Activity in the Production of things as he did in
their first Creation; this being done in an instant, that successively,
gradually, and yet per moram: Yet he was not bound to observe all the
Ceremonies and Formalities of Natural Effects; neither did he, but by his own
immediate Power gave a greater expedition to the first production of things,
than that which he instituted for the standing, fixed, and ordinary Method of
future production and maturation of things to be generated after their first
Origination: And as it was impossible without the apposition of a Supernatural
Being and Causation, that the Matter of things should be created out of
nothing; or being so created, could without the Operation of a Supernatural
Intelligent Being raise it self up to the admirable Fabric wherein it was
finally perfected; so it is not reasonable to deny to such a Supreme,
Supernatural, and Infinite Power an effectual maturation and completing of
things in those portions and orders of times that best pleased him, and which
his Wisdom judged most agreeable to his Works and Ends. We find every Command
of the Divine Will in the Creation of things answered by an immediate obsequium
in the created Matter: If He say, Let there be Light; Let the Waters be
gathered into one place; Let the Earth bring forth, etc. the obsequious Matter
presently answered the Command with a Fuit ita, It was so. Not as if there were
any Vocal Command given out to the Matter, but the secret Command and
Determination of the Divine Will governed the Matter into an immediate
conformable Production, according to the Idea residing in the Divine
Understanding; He spoke and it was done, be commanded and it stood fast. This
best became the Majesty and Sovereignty of the Lord of all things.

CAP. III. Concerning the Production and Formation of Man.
HAving taken the former brief Survey of the History of the Creation and
Formation of the rest of the Universe, I shall now proceed to what I
principally intended in the discussion of that History, namely, the Formation
of Mankind, Genesis 1.26. And God said, Let us make Man in our own image, after
our likeness, and let him have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the
fowl of the air; and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that
creeps upon the earth; so God made man in his own image, in the image of God
created he him, male and female created he them; and God blessed them, and said
unto them, Be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the earth and subdue it, and
have dominion over the fishes.

Touching the Creation of Man I shall observe these things.

1. The Efficient of this first Production of Mankind was Almighty God, by the
counsel and determination of his own Will: The Creation of Man is ushered in
with a Prologue unlike the Creation of other things, viz. by a kind of
deliberation; not as if the Divine Wisdom stood in need of counsel, advice, or
concurrence of others, or of a mora deliberativa with himself; for known unto
him were all his Works from the beginning, and by one simple, instantaneous,
and indivisible Act he foresees what is fit to be done, and judges and
determines the same: but it is added as a Mark of Attention, and an Elogy of
Prelation of this Work of the Creation of Mankind above the rest of the visible
Creatures.

Some of the Ancients have thought this Deliberation was real, and to have been
made with the superior World of Heavenly Intelligences; Nec (si fas sit ita
loqui) Deus quicquam fecerit, donec illud expenderit in familia superiori: and
it should seem that the Opinion of Plato in his Timaeus, That Almighty God did
advise with the Dii ex Diis, or the Intelligences or Angelick Natures, and used
their assistance in the Creation of the Bodies of Men, though he himself formed
their Souls; seems to be derived from the inspection of the Mosaical History or
Tradition of it, whereof he gave us his Sense or Exposition, that this
[faciamus hominem] was by the concurrence or subordinate cooperation of Angels.

Others, with far greater evidence, do think it was the Deliberation and
Conclusion of the Three Persons of the Holy Trinity.

And some again interpret it to be only a Majestic Expression touching
Almighty God, more regali, in the Plural Number; but touching these Conjectures
I shall say no more but only this, That the first Origination and Production of
Man was by the immediate Efficiency of Almighty God, not as if God Almighty
used any Manual or Physical Plasmation of a Man, as the Statuary makes his
Statue, or as the Poets feign Prometheus molded up his molle lutum into the
Humane Shape, and animated him by diffusion of Fire into him fetched from
Heaven; but by the Word, or Determination, or Fiat of his Omnipotent Will Man
was formed and made.

2. The constituent Components out of which he was made were of two kinds, 1.
His Corporeal and Animal Nature was the same with the Matter of other
Terrestrial Animals, namely, the Elementary Matter, whereof Earth was the
predominant. 2. His Spiritual Constituent as I may call it (though in union
with the Sensible Power it be his constituent Form) was a Spiritual Substance,
created and infused by Almighty God, Genesis 2.7. And God formed man of the dust
of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and man
became a living soul. This Text gives us briefly, 1. The Matter of his
Corporeal and Animal Constitution, the Dust of the Ground, or as elsewhere, Red
Clay. 2. The Nature or Kind of this other constituent part, the Breath of Life,
a Vital, Spiritual, Intellectual Substance or Nature. 3. The Union thereof to
the Body, and Animal Nature breathed into him. 4. The result from that Union,
Man became a living Soul, the whole Composition taking denomination from his
nobler essential Constituent. And this short History gives us the best account
that can be of the true Nature of Man, namely, that he consists of two
essential constituent Parts, 1. His corporeal and animal nature, which though
it were not only gradually but specifically different from, and advanced above
the Brutal Nature both in the Elegance, and Usefulness, and Majesty of his
corporeal Fabric, and in the excellency and perfection of his animal
Faculties, as in due time shall be shown: Yet in his essential part he seemed
to have a nature in some way common with them, both being material, and both
their Faculties of the Animal Nature directed and subservient to a Life of
Sense, and therefore corruptible and mortal in it self. 2. His Intellectual
Nature, which is spiritual, immortal, created immediately by Almighty God; that
as in his Animal Nature^ he was the highest of living, corporeal, and visible
Creatures, so in his Soul or Intellectual Nature he seems to be constituted in
the lowest rank or range of Intellectual and Immaterial Beings, by this means
he seemed to be Nexus utriusque orbis.

I have before observed in the Order of Natural Beings with which we are
acquainted, that there seems to be an admirable gradation in things, and the
lower rank of Natural Existences have some rough draughts, and strokes, and
shadows of those perfections which are in the superior: Minerals are a degree
below Vegetables, yet they seem to have some shadow of the Vegetable Life in
their growth, increase, and specific configurations. The lowest degree of Life
seems to be the Vegetables, yet in many of them and their Faculties, they seem
to have some kind of rough strokes or draughts of the Sensitive Nature, and the
highest advances of the Vegetable Nature seem to come up to the confines and
borders of the lowest Form of Sensible Beings, and to participate of somewhat
of Sense; which appears not only in the natural production of Insects out of
the finest parts and effluxes of most Vegetable Natures, but also that some
such things there are that seem in their very nature of Plants to have a kind
of lower connection of the Animal Nature in them; as appears in the Sensitive
Plant or Planta modesta, and those Canes in the Kingdom of Angola, that are
filled with a Worm growing from and continuous with it, called Trombe. Again,
in the Animal Province there are diverse sensible Insects, both aquatil,
volatile, and terrestrial, that seem to be in the very next Rank of Nature to
Vegetables: and again, some of the superior sort, especially of Terrestrial
Animals have quandam imaginem and umbram rationis, and are advanceable by
Industry and disciplinable Acts to a great perfection, and seem to be the next
rank of natures below the animal nature of Man, as Elephants, Horses, and some
others; but the nature of Man, though in the animal part of him he is the
highest rank of visible Animals; yet in his intellectual nature he seems to
participate of the angelick nature, and is next below them in the specifical
existence of Soul, Psalm. 8.5. He was made a little lower than the Angels, and
participates of the highest degree of Animals and the lowest degree of
Intelligences; participating of both natures, to keep as it were a continuity
between the upper World and the lower, and to maintain a communion with them
and between them.

3. We have here also the Idea or Model according to which the Humane Nature
was framed, namely, after the Image and Similitude of God; wherein we are to
take in Man constituted in his full and complete nature, namely, in the union
of his two Essential Parts, his Animal Nature, and his Intellectual. What this
Image and Similitude of God was, or wherein it consisted, is variously
disputed, I shall first consider what it was, and then what it is and was.

1. It was not (...) any corporeal Similitude or Image; for the Divine Nature
is incorporeal and invisible, and therefore has no Image or similitude of that
kind.

2. It was not any Image adequate to the Divine Perfection and Excellence, as
the Impression in the Wax is the adequate Image or Representation of the Seal,
and as large as it: for God's Perfections are infinite both in extention and
intention, and no finite Being can be an adequate Image of an infinite Being or
Perfection.

3. It was not an Image that takes in all the resemblance of the Parts of
Divine Perfections or Excellences, as the little Image upon Caesar's Coin
resembled Caesar's Effigies, or a new born Infant resembles a full grown Man;
for neither the Perfections nor the Being of God do convenire in uno aliquo
genere univoco, with those of Man: the Perfections of God are not representable
by any created Being in a true propriety of their nature, no more than in their
degree of intention or perfection.

4. Neither do I take it, that this Image or Similitude is only meant of that
Idea of the Humane Nature in the Divine Understanding, conformable to which Man
was made; for though this be true, yet it is not all it says, nor all that is
meant; because it would give Man no greater preference than the very Vegetables
that were made the Third Day, which were made according to the Ideal Image
thereof in the Divine Intellect.

5. Neither do I think it was meant of the Second Person in the Trinity, who
was the express Image of the Father, the brightness of his Father and the
express Image of his Person; for although Christ assumed Humane Flesh, yet it
was many Ages after: and in the Language of the Scripture and the Ancients, in
the Creation Man was made like unto God, but in the Work of Redemption the Son
of God became like unto Man: Phil. 2.7. Made in the likeness of Man.

6. Neither do I think that the Image of God here meant was the greater World,
the Universe, which though it be an excellent Image of the Divine Excellency,
namely, of his Majesty, Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, and sets it out far more
than any single created Nature can; especially if we take the Universe in its
full comprehension both of the visible and intellectual World. And though it be
true that Man is a kind of Abridgment, a little Abstract of that greater World
in his Intellectual Nature, resembling in his Soul the Mundus intelligibilis of
created Intelligences, and in his Animal Nature bearing an admirable Analogy to
the Mundus aspectabilis; and so in both Natures conjoined, being the little
Image or Portraiture of the great and universal World: for though this is a
Truth, yet it seems it was not the Truth intended.

7. Neither do I think it was intended of that resemblance which in his
Intellectual Part he bore to the good Angels, who of any particular created
Natures best resemble Almighty God; being pure, immaterial, intellectual,
powerful, immortal, wise, and benevolent Beings: though this be also a Truth,
that the Soul of Man seems to be the lowest rank of Angelical Natures, yet it
seems not the Truth that is here intended: for it is plain that the Image of
God here meant, is spoken with respect to the entire Humane Nature, and of the
whole Compositum, as appears in the reason after given by God, upon the
interdiction of Murder, Genesis 9.6. which had been an improper reason if applied
to the Soul, which is immortal, and incapable of death.

But the meaning of this Image of God seems to be this: That as all Excellency
comes from that most Excellent Author of all Beings; in whom all Excellencies
are lodged formally, or essentially, or virtually; so this Excellent Author did
these things in relation to the Humane Nature: viz. 1. He gave him a capacity
greater than any other visible, single, created Being to receive the noblest
Excellencies: 2. That he gave him as great a Capacity as possibly might be
consistent with such a nature to receive Divine Excellencies: 3. That he filled
that Capacity with all those Excellencies that he was thus capable of, saving
only that of a necessary immutability in the fruition of all those Excellencies.

Now these Excellencies with which the Humane Nature was filled, and which made
him, as much as was possible for such a created Being, to resemble his Maker
were these:

1. In the structure of his Body and Animal Nature, most singular Majesty,
Beauty, Strength, and Usefulness.

2. In his Soul a whole Constellation of Divine Excellencies, viz. in the
Nature of it, Immortality and Spirituality; in the Faculties of it, a light and
clear Intellect, a free and incoacted Will: in all which he highly resembled
the most intellectual and freest Being in the Habits of it, Knowledge in the
Understanding, enabled by the noblest Object, God himself, and all other
Objects of use and convenience to him: in his Will, rectitude.

3. In his whole Compositum, perfect fruition of all that suitable good to his
nature, wherein he consisted in Happiness, Immortality, or a possible
persevering in Life without dying, Power and Authority over this inferior World
and all things therein, as God's Vicegerent upon Earth, in which respect
Governors are said to be Gods: a sufficient power and strength as well in the
Frame of his Animal Life, as in the sagacity and advantage of his
Understanding, to exercise that Dominion and Sovereignty; and lastly, a due
Order, Subordination, and Regiment of all his Faculties.

Of these Perfections some were accidental or adventitious to the Humane Nature
by the Benignity of Almighty God, and concredited thereunto upon condition of
his Obedience to the Command of God; and upon the breach of that Condition were
either utterly lost, as the indissolubility of the Union of the Compositum, by
one Man's Disobedience Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin: Others were
abated, as the Excellency of his Knowledge, Righteousness, the fruition of
Happiness, the Perfection of his Sovereignty over the Creatures, the
Gloriousness and Beauty, and much of the Vigor of his Body, the exquisite
Order and Subordination of his Faculties; but his Essentials, the Immortality
of his Soul, the Faculties of Intellection and Will, and the Natural Beauty and
Usefulness of his Body remains, notwithstanding that terrible Concussion;
whereof somewhat more hereafter.

4. We have the Method of this Production of Man; it was not by or from any
mere Natural Cause, but by the immediate Command of the Divine Will, Wisdom,
and Power: it was not from any Semen naturally, accidentally, or intentionally
formed, and so by a gradual maturation and growth ex uteris terrestribus, or as
the foetus humanus is perfected at this day: For it was not possible that any
such Seminal Principle should be formed casually, or by any mere Natural Cause,
as has been already shown: And although the Divine Power could have perfected
all, as well Man as the other Animals, by first forming such a Semen, and
giving it either a gradual or speedy production, as Insects are at this day
produced; yet 1. It was utterly superfluous to have used such a processus
formativus ex semine, because it required no less than an Almighty Power to
have molded and fashioned, or actuated such a Semen as to have produced Man by
an immediate Supernatural Formation and Production: and therefore since the
same Power was requisite in both, it is not at all necessary nor reasonable to
suppose so long a process as first to form a Semen, and by a Seminal Process to
have perfected the Humane Nature, and the Holy History expressly imports the
contrary. 2. If we suppose a Semen prepared by the Divine Power, that
Production that must arise thereupon must either be immediate and sudden, if
not absolutely instantaneous; or it must be gradual, and pass through all these
spaces of Time, gradual Formation, and accession of Growth and Increase, as we
see in embryone and foetu nuper nato: We cannot suppose the former but we must
suppose it to be otherwise than natural, and call in the Divine Power to effect
it, as much as in an instantaneous formation, sine praecedente semine: And we
cannot suppose the latter, because it is expressly contrary to the description
of the Humane Production, for it was done within the compass of the Sixth Day;
and the formation and perfecting of the Humane Nature was immediately finished
after the Omnipotent Command and Determination of the Will of God, it was no
sooner said [faciamus hominem, etc.] but it was done.

It is true, in that ordinary Law which Almighty God has instituted in Nature
already established by him, there are regular, and successive, and gradual
procedures, and it is convenient it should be so: and it is true also, in this
short period of the Six Days Work, within which the Universe was finished,
Almighty God observed a certain convenient Order, making that to precede which
was fittest and most useful to precede in order to the production of things;
but as to the speed and dispatch of Productions, the Almighty God used the
Majesty that became the Excellency of his Greatness, and obsequious Matter
presently yielded to the Power of his Command, Fiat, and factum est; Psalm.
33.9. He said and it was done, he commanded and it stood fast.

Therefore although now in settled Nature, and according to the standing Laws
of the Divine Wisdom Man is first conceived ex semine, then lodges 10 Months
in utero muliebri, wherein during that time he is gradually formed and
perfected; and then after his Birth gradually increases, passes through the
impotency of Infancy, the weaknesses of Childhood, and the follies of Youth
before he comes to a ripe and full age, yet it was not so here; in the same
moment the Body is formed in its full and perfect nature, and the Animal Soul
and Faculties together with it and the Rational Soul infused in the same
moment, without any priority of Time, but only of Order and Nature: So that Man
was at the very same moment a perfect Organical Body, with all his Nerves,
Veins, Viscera, Bones, and Parts conformed, a Vital and Sensitive Nature joined
with it, and a Rational Soul infused, without first living the Life of a Plant,
then of an Animal, then of a Man; the whole Scene was performed in one moment,
and so it became both the Greatness of the Divine Majesty and Power; and so it
was necessary to be in the first production of Man, although in the succeeding
procedure of natural Generations it must be and was otherwise, because the
supreme Wisdom and Will judged it so.

And although to any Man that will duly consider almost any thing, there must
of necessity be another Rule or Law for the first production of things, than
there is or may be in the ordinary regiment and governing of Generations when
Nature is once established; yet the want of this Consideration has bred all
those vain Errors of those Philosophers that asserted the Eternity of the
World; and of those others, who being not satisfied with that Hypothesis; but
driven by a kind of necessity of Reason to acknowledge an Origination of
Mankind, yet could not deliver themselves from fancying that Humane Productions
must needs be as like those they now know, as they could well frame them: And
therefore according to these Men the Earth must be conceited to be Matter, and
the Sun vice Patris, and the Earth must have her Uteri and Succus nutritious,
and the Increase of Mankind must be by some such gradual process as we see in
natural productions or sponte nata; and they cannot easily bring their Minds to
believe the instantaneous production of Man by the immediate Power of God,
because it has a gradual process in ordinary natural Generations: and yet the
same Men can give themselves leave to imagine, Hominem oriri posse sicut blitum;
though never Experience of former Ages since the existence of Men upon the
Earth give us any Example of it, bating only the Fictions of some Poets.

Maimonides, lib. 2. cap. 27. has observed this Mistake, and singularly
confutes it, by evincing, That if Men go by this Rule of Judgment the nature of
things in their Original, as they find them in their Constitution, being
constituted, they will disbelieve the most certain Truths. Neque argumentari
licet ullo modo a natura rei alicujus post illius generationem and firmam
subsistentiam in perfectione sua ad naturam ejus eo tempore quo movebatur ad
generationem quod si vero his erras, plurima tibi orientur dubia and absurda,
ut pro falsis habeas ea quae vera sunt, and vice versa pro veris ea quae falsa
sunt; and gives this Example, Suppose a Child of a ready Wit, whose Mother died
shortly after his Birth, should go alone with his Father into some uninhabited
Island, where he was bred up without the sight of any Beast or Woman, and there
should inquire of his Father, Quomodo and qua ratione facti sumus,
existentiamque nostram accipimus? cui pater, Unusquisque nostrum generatur in
ventre cujusdam individui speciei nostrae, nobis simillimi, quod foemina
vocatur; in ventre autem existentes exiguum admodum primo corpusculum habemus,
movemus, nutrimur, and paulatim crescimus, and vivimus donec ad certam quandam
magnitudinem venimus; tum aperitur inferius in ventre porta quaedam, and
eximus; nec tamen postea crescere desinimus, usque dum ad hanc circiter quam
vides quantitatem pervenimus: Puer ille orbus statim iterum quaeret, dum ibi
parvi fuimus, ibi viximus and nos movimus and crevimus, an quoque comedimus and
bibimus, ac per nares respiravimus an excrementa ejecimus? respondetur ei quod
non: ipse sine dubio hoc incipiet negare, and demonstrationes extruere, ex
impossibilibus argmentando ab ente perfecto, and dicet, quilibet nostrum si per
unicam horam careat respiratione, mori cogimur; quomodo credi potest aliquem in
utero clauso per tot menses vivere potest? And so goes on with the young Man,
forming very strong Arguments against this most certain Truth, merely by the
misapprehension of Inferences from the nature of things in their perfect
Existence, to the nature of things in their Original.

It is true, Men must be wary and considerate before they conclude against the
Frame and Order of things as they appear in Nature, because otherwise Men may
take liberty to conjecture any thing, which is certainly unbecoming a
Philosopher, especially who pretends to govern himself by the Phenomenon of
Nature, and it is that which we have before condemned. But on the other side,
to suppose that impossible in the Origination of things which we find not in
things already settled, is too hasty and rash a Conclusion; especially when we
are driven to confess another kind of Origination of Mankind than now is, and
do not find any so probable and so free from absurd Consequences, so ancient,
so convincingly delivered, as that by the Divine Historian Moses.

And this is so much the rather credible, because it is impossible to conceive
that Man could have his first Origination but from an intelligent, most wise
and powerful Efficient, unless a Man shall offer violence to his own Reason;
and certainly to such an Efficient such a Production is not only possible, but
suitable to be supposed.

5. We have here prescribed and determined the Law and Means of the natural
production of the Individuals of Mankind in their future production, according
to that Method and Mode which has in all Ages ever since by the course of
Nature been observed, namely, by Propagation by mutual Conjunction of their
Sexes, though this could not be the Method of their first production.

And this Prolifick Power of production of Mankind by successive natural
generation, was by the Virtue and Efficacy of the Divine Institution and
Benediction given to Mankind in his first Creation, and by virtue thereof that
Power and Faculty is continued in them, and traduced to the succeeding
Individuals to this day; and accordingly, Virtute divinae ordinationis and
institutionis uterque sexus appetitum illum procreandi innatum habent, membra
and vasa huic facultati subservientia hucusque obtinent, and diversitate sexuum
eidem officio necessaria gaudent, quod non vel cafus, vel stupida and coeca
natura obtinere potuerunt, sine ordinatione, appropriatione, institutione summi
and sapientissimi numinis, ejusque volitionis and determinationnis: And as this
Law of future Generations was thus given to Mankind, and quasi alligata to
them, so it is exclusive of any other either casual or natural way of
Generation, except it be by Miracle; and therefore we must now suppose a
possibility of an utter abrogation of this natural Law, if we should suppose
any other kind of natural production of Mankind should after this first
production of the Humane Nature be possible: We may with as fair a Supposition
imagine that a Man should be produced by the natural conjunction of Sheep or of
Lions, or a Star be produced ex putri materia terrestri, as to suppose a Man to
be produced accidentally, casually, or naturally in any other Method than this
Divine Law of Nature fixed in the Humane Nature by the Divine Institution has
determined, unless as great a supernatural Miracle should happen by the Divine
immediate Power, as did in the Conception of the Messiah.

6. As subservient and necessary to this Law of future Generation, we have here
the distinction of Sexes, [Male and female created he them.] This distinction
and conjunction of Sexes in order to the propagation of Mankind, was part of
that Law and Order that the Wise God instituted for this end.

And certainly there needs not any clearer Argument that the production of
Mankind was not a Work of Chance or blind necessary Nature, but a Work of a
most Wise, Intelligent, Powerful Being, that adapted the discrimination of
Sexes to the propagation of Mankind; either Sex without the other being in
Nature utterly unprofitable and unuseful to that end, without which the
succession of Mankind must have been determined in the first Individual.

And it is no less evidence of the continual active Providence of that Great
and Wise God, that the succession of both Sexes is continued in that equal
proportion, as that there is no grand disparity in the propagation of
Individuals of either Sex.

This diversity of Sexes was not in the same Individual, as if Adam had been
Androgyna, or one double Person conjoined or continued, consisting of both
Sexes (till they were after divided and severed) as Plato in Symposio, and many
of the ancient and modern Jews have thought; but the first Creation of Adam in
virili sexu being perfected, the production of Eve ex latere Adami was the very
same Day of his Creation miraculously performed by Almighty God; for the Words
[Male and female created he them] referr to the whole entire complement of the
Creation of Man, which was not till the Formation of Eve. There may be
something mysterious in this business of the Manner of Eves Formation which may
be hard to unriddle.

It is enough, that God Almighty before the end of the Sixth Day formed both
Sexes of Mankind in order to the common help of each other, and the propagation
of the future Generations of Mankind: the History therefore of the Formation of
Eve, though mentioned in the second Chapter, and after the Benediction of the
Seventh Day, must necessarily be referred to the Sixth Day, wherein it is
expressly affirmed that both Sexes in distinct Persons were then created, [Male
and female created he them;] and such transpositions are not unusual, neither
in the Holy History nor in other Histories.

The first Chapter gives the brief and orderly Relation of the whole Series of
Times, and Things done in them; and the second Chapter is only a fuller and
more explicit Declaration of some things that are briefly and compendiously
delivered in the first Chapter, as appears not only by the Relation of the
Formation of Eve, but diverse other passages relating to what was transacted in
the first Chapter.

7. The Formation of Man was the last Work of the Creation, the last Work of
the last Day: and the Reasons of this Order seem to be these; 1. Because in the
Method of the Creation of Sublunary Natures Almighty God proceeded from the
less to the more perfect and curious Parts of the visible Creation: as first he
made Vegetables, then Fishes and Birds, then Brutes, and Man in the last place,
as the most perfect, and containing not only the Faculties of Vegetables and
Animals, and that in a more perfect nature, but also a superadded,
intellectual, spiritual Soul. So he was the noblest part of the Creation, at
least of this lower World. 2. Because Mankind should be furnished to his hand
with all things convenient and useful to his existence and operation, as the
Grass was provided before the Brutes were created, so before the Creation of
Mankind Fruits of the Earth were provided for his food and delight, a Paradise
for his entertainment and employment of his Senses and Industry, Idleness being
not indulged even in Paradise; and the goodly Furniture of the visible World
both Celestial and Sublunary, to raise his Admiration, Contemplation, and
Delight. 3. Because God Almighty intended him a liberal Patrimony, which he
would furnish and complete in all its numbers before Man was created, and as
soon as he had created him, gave him this inferior World, as his Usufructuary
and Steward at least; but yet withal gave him a subordinate dominion of that
whereof he made him his Steward: and this great Benefactor prepared this Gift
of this inferior Terrestrial World to be ready for his Creature Man's reception
as soon as he had a Being, and accordingly gave it him with all its Furniture.
Genesis 1.28, 29.

8. That Man was by Almighty God in his first Creation in a state of perfect
Felicity and Immortality, but under a condition of Obedience to the Divine
Will, Command, and Law; that he had implanted in his Mind and Conscience
certain Principles of Moral Goodness and Righteousness, which are the Original
of those common Notions of Good and Evil, as so many secret Byasses and
Inclinations to the observance of the Good and avoidance of the Evil. And as
even the inferior Animals have implanted in them secret Instincts and Tendences
for the preservation and advance of their sensible, individual, and specifical
natures; so these implanted Notions and Moral Inclinations in the Mind of Man,
were therein lodged to guide and lead him in a conformity to his excellent
Constitution, and for the attainment of an intellectual and eternal Good; and
these, though the vigor and brightness of them were much abated by his Fall,
yet were transmitted with his nature to his Descendents.

And this is the Original of those common Notions which yet remain in the
Humane Nature, though refracted and abated by the Fall of Man; this is that
common Light and Law of Nature which to this day in some measure prevails in
the generality of Mankind, to the Acknowledgment, Adoration, and Reverence of a
Deity and Moral Righteousness; this is that Law of Nature mentioned by the
Apostle, Romans 1. written in the Hearts of Men, whereby they do by Nature the
things contained in the Law: But of this I shall write somewhat fuller in the
ensuing Chapter.

9. Besides this Moral inscribed Law, God Almighty for the trial of Man's
Obedience, gave him a positive Law prohibiting the eating of the forbidden
Fruit, under pain of temporal and eternal Death and Curse; and Man was left in
the hands of his own liberty, to obey or disobey it.

10. That Man being left to the free liberty of his own Will, though furnished
with sufficient abilities to have obeyed Almighty God, yet by the temptation of
Satan, his own sensual appetite, and ambitious affectation, violated his
Maker's Law, and broke that Condition upon which much of his Perfection and
Happiness was conferred upon him; and although he retained his Essentials,
namely, his Essential Constitution, this Spirituality and Immortality of his
Soul, his Faculties of Understanding and Will, he thereby incurred these
unhappy deprivations.

1. A loss of the immortal state of his Composition, being now obnoxious to the
separation of Soul and Body.

2. A very great abatement of that temporal Felicity he had in this Life, and
obnoxious to the everlasting separation from God, with the Death of the Soul.

3. An abatement and diminution of those Habits of Knowledge and Rectitude of
Soul, and a great weakening and decay of the vigor and activity of connatural
implanted Notions or Inclinations.

4. A great disorder in the due subordination of his Faculties, and a great
confusion and corruption prevailing upon his noble Faculties, and weakening,
disordering, and abasing them.

5. An impair of that Sovereignty and Dominion over the Creatures, who rebelled
against Man as soon as he forsook his Maker.

6. Diseases, Disorders, Weaknesses, Sicknesses, Harbingers and Forerunners of
Death attaquing his Bodily Constitution.

7. A transmission of these Hereditary Imperfections and Decays to his
Posterity.

And herein and hereby we have an Account of that great Quaesitum among the
Learned Heathen, (where yet for want of this Discovery by the Holy Scriptures,
they could never attain the full knowledge and reason) namely, the Original of
Sin and Evil, and those many Corruptions, Defections, and Miseries of Mankind.

And thus much concerning the Divine History of the Creation and Defection of
Man.

CAP. IV. The Reasonableness of this Hypothesis of the Origination of the
World, and particularly of the Humane Nature, and the great Advantages it has
above all other Hypotheses touching the same.
THat the World had a beginning of its Being, at least in that order and
consistence that it now holds, I have showed in the beginning of this Book;
Again, if there could be any imaginable doubt or question, whether the great
Integrals of the World were eternal, and without beginning, yet I have showed,
that Mankind, or the successive Generations thereof, ex ante genitis, is in
Nature and Reason impossible, and in Fact and Experience apparently improbable,
and therefore that there were some common Parents of Mankind, who had their
beginning of existence, and that in some other way than they are now produced.

All that have supposed an Origination of Mankind ex non genitis, have admitted
something either of Matter analogous to it, out of which Mankind has had such
his Origination (which we also admit as to all his Constituents at least, but
his Soul) and therefore the great Debate has been touching the Efficient, or
that Being, or Nature, (or whatever we shall call it) that first compounded,
formed, and constituted the first Parents of Mankind in that essential and
individual state, consonant to that specification of Humane Nature which we
daily now see.

Every thing that has a beginning of Being, must either have it from it self,
or from some other active, efficient, and constituent Power or Nature,
antecedent to it in time, or at least in Nature, or both.

To suppose that the Humane Nature at first constituted it self, were to
suppose it to have a propriety of existence to it self, which were a palpable
absurdity and contradiction, for then it should be before it was. Therefore it
is necessary, that the first Origination of Humane Nature should be from some
other beginning or cause antecedent to it, besides the Matter out of which it
was constituted.

And whatsoever the Being or Cause originating Humane Nature was, it must be in
nature of an Efficient, namely, something that did actively put together the
constituent parts thereof, and formed it into that consistence and existence
whereby he became Man.

We cannot by any means suppose any such Efficient or Being, or thing that did
subire rationem efficientis, but one of these four: 1. An uncertain casual
conflux of Particles of Matter that casually compounded a Semen humanae
naturae, and so though the immediate Semen, thus constituted, may obtain the
Name or Notion of the immediate Efficient, yet the true Efficient of that Semen
(if we may be allowed to call it by that name) was Chance or Fortune. 2. An
implanted blind determinate something, which we call Nature, which by a fatal
and necessary connection of surd and irrational Causes and Effects produced the
first Parents of Mankind, as the like Nature by the like necessity produces
yearly Worms and Flies, and other Insects that have not their existence by
univocal Seed: Both these two Suppositions have been before examined and
rejected, as impares huic negotio. 3. The illapse of some pre-existent or
animating formative Principle, which we may well call the Soul or Anima, that
as in the Generation of Mankind by ordinary procreation we see the formative
power is some refined active Spirit or Soul in semine delitescens, that
fashions the Matter, and actuates it with vital sensible Faculties and
Operations; so the illapse of some such active substance or powerful Being,
illapsing into Matter and united to it, might form it into that constitution
which it enjoyed. 4. and Lastly, Or some superior, powerful, wise, and
intellectual Being, that did form, fashion, actuate, and constitute the first
Parents of Mankind.

The two former being as before laid aside, I shall use a few words touching
the third Supposition, of which little has been before said, and so pals to
the fourth and last and true Supposition of the First Efficient of Humane
Nature.

3. Therefore touching the third Supposition, concerning the production of
Mankind by virtue of such Illapse of Forms, we may suppose it to be intended
one of these two ways: 1. Either that with Origin we should imagine a Mundus
animarum that had real and individual Subsistences: Or 2. that there were some
common Element of animate Existence, not divided into individual Existences,
but one common rational and vital Nature, whose Particles illapsing into Matter
might produce such first Existences of Mankind, and so though in their union to
Matter they do subire rationem formae, yet they do likewise subire rationem
efficientis, as to the formation of Mankind, as the vital Principle in the Egg
becomes not only the form of the Chick, but also in the first formation thereof
is the disposer of its Organs and exercise of its Faculties, and so does subire
rationem efficients immediati in the formation of the Foetus.

As to both these in general, I say, 1. That they are precarious Suppositions,
without any just reason to evidence, either that there were such pre-existing
individual Souls, or a common reasonable Spirit. Again, 2. The Supposition that
these should be the immediate Efficients of the Humane Nature, is likewise
precarious and inevident. 3. Even they that suppose either such an individual
or common pre-existing Nature, must be forced to suppose them eternal
independent Beings, and this will have as many difficulties in it as the
Eternity of Mankind; or else if they be supposed created Beings, yet still
there will be a necessary recourse unto an infinite uncreated eternal Being
that must create them. And 4. consequently the Framers of these Suppositions do
with much more difficulty and laboriousness form intermediate Principles of the
Origination of Mankind, which with less difficulty and greater congruity may be
resolved into the immediate Efficiency of Almighty God, according to the Divine
History. 5. And besides all this, if Men will needs suppose a Formation of Man
by the illapsing of Souls into prepared Matter, because they see this is the
Method of Formation in the ordinary course of Generation now, they must also
suppose the progress of the Formation and Maturation of the Humane Nature: This
way must be gradual and successive, which will be attended with all those
difficulties which are before observed in the Supposition of casual or natural
production of Man in his first Origination. But in particular to those several
Suppositions, and First, touching the first of these: The Opinion of the
pre-existence of Souls of Men, and their descent into Bodies, though it has
been countenanced by Plato and some that follow him, has chiefly as it seems
been entertained by some of the Jews, and some few Christians, both recognizing
the true God, the Immortality of the Soul, and future Resurrection: For the
ancient Jewish Opinion vide wisdom 8.19, 20. [For I was a witty Child, and had
a good spirit, rather being good I came into a Body undefiled.] Among
Christians, Origin much asserted this Opinion. But whatever may be said
touching the truth or falsehood of the Opinion it self, it can no way support
the primitive Origination of Mankind by the illapsing of such Souls into
elementary Matter.

First, It exceeds the power and activity of such imagined, pre-existent Souls,
to form and animate Matter into the consistence of a Man without the
intervention either of the immediate power of God, or at least without that
instituted Method fixed by God in the Generation of Mankind ex semine.

And that it does so exceed the activity of Souls thus to do, appears in this,
that although there is according to that Supposition of a Mundus animarum a
sufficient stock of existing Souls, and if there were not, yet those that once
informed humane Bodies survived after the dissolutio compositi, and yet we
never heard since the first formation of Man that any such new formation has
been made, nor any illapse of any such Soul into any other Foetus, but what
has been formed according to the established Law of the successive production
of Mankind ex mixtione seminis utriusque sexus. Nay the more considerate
Pythagoreans, and those Jews that held the Transmigration of Souls, never
supposed any transmigration into any spontaneous production of Man or Animal,
but only into such as proceeded ex univoca generatione; and what has never
been done, yea never supposed to have been done, we have no reason to suppose
possible to be done by any natural and finite Efficient, for such these Souls
must be whether they pre-existed or not.

And therefore though in the Resurrection the separated Soul is supposed to
reassume his own Body again, yet this seems not to be by any natural power
residing in the Soul to form the Body and reunite it self to it, but must be
attributed to that Almighty Power of the Glorious God, and to the working of
His Mighty Power, whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself; and by
the very self-same excess of power, whereby he first created Man upon the
Earth, shall he form, raise, and reunite the Humane Nature in the Resurrection,
vid. 1 Cor. 15.1 These. 4. Mat. 13. Mat. 24. Christ the Son of and raised
himself; but in the Resurrection the Dead shall be raised by the Power and
Command of the Glorious God.

Secondly, It is not supposed by those, that the Souls of perfect Brutes had
any existence antecedent to their first production; for their Souls are not of
a self-subsisting nature, they cannot exist out of them, but begin with them,
and dye with them; so these in their first production could not arise by any
such illapsus animarum into elementary Matter, but we must attribute their
primitive Formation or Creation to the Command of the Divine Will; and so if we
give them any Origination, we shall upon this Supposition give them a nobler
Origination, and by a more immediate interposition of the Divine Power and
Will, than to that of Man, which seems unreasonable.

As to the Second, It is true the Platonists attributed an Universal Soul to
the Universe, the Anima mundi, which though they sometimes suppose it a created
Intelligent Nature, yet in other places we shall find them attributing so great
power and energy to it, that it seems they made it to be no other than God
himself. But when they held their Supposition of an Anima mundi as a created
Existence subordinate to Almighty God, although they attribute many of the
great Appearances of Nature, both in their production and government to this
Universal Spirit, yet they dare not assert unto it the Efficiency of the first
Original of Humane Nature by it; and if they should, yet this their Supposition
would have this flaw in it, that they take greater pains, and run the hazard of
more difficulties, by supposing the Origination of Man from this Anima mundi,
than if they should with us suppose the immediate Origination by the Divine
Power; neither do they gain any thing by it. But this I may possibly resume
again hereafter.

But the Supposition whereof we took notice before is this, That there is a
threefold created Universal Nature, viz. a Natura mentalis, common to Men and
Angels; a Natura sensitiva, common to Animals; and a Natura ignea, which is the
common Principle of Vegetation.

And therefore as the communis natura ignea is dispersed through the Universe,
and by participation thereof to particles of Matter gives an existence to the
Vegetables of several natures, so the communication of the communis natura
sensitiva might at first give an original to perfect Sensitives, as perchance
it now does to insecta sponte nascentia; so the participation of the Natura
mentalis to some portions of elementary Matter may also give the origination of
the first Men and Women in the World.

Two things I should say to this:

First, Although it be true, that the abstraction of the Understanding, ranging
the Souls of living things under these Distinctions and generical Notions, has
given us the Notion of one common Mentalis natura, and one common Sensitiva
natura, and one common Ignea natura; yet it will be hard to prove, that there
are any such real common Natures really existing, but in the Individuals
thereof. We have the common Notion of Natura animalis, and yet never any Man
could make out, that there was any Animalis natura but what existed in the
Individuals, or that here ever was or can be really existing any Animal with
it, not determined in some more contracted existence than an Animal.

Secondly, I must needs confess there is a fair probability of Reason offered
by many Learned Men of this triplicity of existing common Natures, and it
carries a great analogy with many other Phenomenon in Nature, and therefore I
dare not generally deny it, though the explication of the manner of their
Existences, their particular Natures and Uses, be difficult. But if it be
admitted (as possibly it may be) that there is some common Element of Mental
Nature, another common Element of Sensitive Nature, and another common Element
of Ignea Natura, and that the several Ranks of Beings, Rational, Sensitive and
Vegetable, participate of these respective Natures, as their common Store or
Element from whence they are derived, and therefore for instance the Rational
Soul in Man were a participation of that common Element or Stock of the
Mentalis natura; yet still we must go higher for the Origination of Mankind,
for this would be no other than as it were the Materia prima or communis of the
Souls of Men.

1. Either this Natura mentalis is indivisible, and communicated entirely
without any distribution of several divided parts of it to all Men, as the
common Heat of the Sun is communicated to a thousand Men together, and then all
Men will have one common Soul, and there will be no individuation nor principle
of individuation between Mankind, for the same universal indivisible Soul
reasons and wills in every Man, which would be unintelligible and absurd.

2. Or to uphold Individuation in the Persons and Souls of Men, this common
Natura mentalis must be either truly several divided Souls, with Origen's
Mundus animarum; or else, though this common Nature be actually one at first,
yet it is divisible, and potentially many: and so the several Souls of several
Men must be so many several Particles or Ramenta of this Universalis natura;
and either this portion thereof must be by the superior Activity of Almighty
God, or else it must have a kind of natural division of it self, according to
the division of Matter qualified and organized to receive it: If the former,
still there is dignus vindice nodus; for God Almighty must be called in to
distribute and participate the portions of this Mental Nature: if the latter,
then what shall become of the Individuation of the Soul after Death? It will
return back, and be drowned as it were in the Natura mentalis, or be
annihilated; and if it keeps its Individuation, it must be by the Power and
Interposition of Almighty God.

3. But be it what it will, suppose it be the common Matter as it were of the
Souls of Men, and therefore now in the ordinary course of Propagation, by a
kind of settled Law in Nature may communicate it self or any portion of it self,
to the natural productions of Mankind; yet where do we find, that either it
ever did, or can of its self form a Body out of Elementary Nature, and unite it
self unto it? Or how could that be done without the ordinary method of
Generation, to dispose and organize the Recipient or organized Body, or the
interposition of a superior Intelligent Nature, that must form and unite it;
and if it ever did, or could do the same by its own immediate Activity, why do
we not see the same thing done daily without the course of ordinary Generation
ex Semine, since this commune Elementum mentale still is supposed to exist, and
of the same efficacy as ever it was?

4. It is observable, that in all these kinds of Suppositions either of one
Mundus animarum individualium with Origin, or of a common Elementum mentale,
whether divisible or indivisible, nothing can be done without taking in the
Power of an Omnipotent God, either in the first Creation of these Souls or
Elements, or in the direction, ordering and governing of their illapses into
Matter, or of the preparing and organizing of Matter in the first Origination
of Men, or in the separating or individuating of these Elements, or in the
uniting of them to Matter, or in giving the Law, and Rule, and Institution of
their future Regiment, or indeed in all of these: And so Men have needlessly,
and without sufficient evidence multiplied Entia, and yet such as are not
effectual to the solution of the Phenomenon; nisi Deus intersit; and all this
plainly expedited with the same ease, and less perplexity and multiplicity, by
the immediate Command of the Divine Will and Power in the first production of
Things, according to the plain, explicable, and intelligible System given us by
God by the hand of Moses, namely, an immediate Formation of Man, an immediate
Creation of an Immortal Intellectual Soul, and an immediate Union of both Parts
of the Compositum by Almighty God.

5. Indeed if it be supposed that one common Mental Nature may be specifically
appropriate to the Humane Nature, (not taking in the Angelical) the difficulty
of the specification of Humane Nature by that common Mental Principle may be
removed, because the Humane Nature is but one Species; yet the Supposition of
one common Sensitive or Vegetable Nature, as the common Constituent of Animals
and Vegetables, leaves us under this perplexity and difficulty, namely, How
from that common Sensitive Nature there arises diversity of Species of Animals
and Vegetables; or since the Principles are but of one kind, how comes the
Species to be several: And on the other side, if the variety of Species arise
from the different modification or qualification of the Matter, How comes it to
pass that there is any fixedness and determination of the Species of Animals or
Vegetables, or that they are contained and conserved in the same Species; since
the modifications and qualifications of Matter are various, and irregular, and
infinite, neither do they keep in one fixed modification or qualification, but
the same is hourly changed. It remains therefore, that although we should admit
such a Natura sensitiva or ignea, either in some common Masses, or interspersed
and diffused through the whole Mass of Elementary mixed Matter, we must be fain
to suppose something else that must determine these common and Homogeneal
Principles into determinate Species; or at least, that there are as many
Sensitive Natures specifically distinct as there are Species of Animals in the
World. These Suppositions therefore are not sufficient to explicate the first
productions of perfect Animals, at least without multiplication of inevident
and unexplicable Suppositions.

6. I therefore come to that true, and plain, and necessary Conclusion, That
the first production of Mankind, yea and of perfect Animals, was wrought
immediately by the Efficacy of an Intelligent, Wise, and Powerful Being,
distinct from the things produced: and this is the great Truth that in all this
Discourse I aimed at, and am now arrived at.

And I shall not need go any farther for the evidence of this Truth, than the
Contemplation of the Thing it self, (Man,) in which we shall find so many clear
Evidences of an Intelligent Efficient, that we need no other, and the common
Instances will evidence the Reasonableness of such a Consequence. If I should
behold a House with several Rooms and Stories, excellently contrived with all
Offices and Conveniences for Use, Doors, Windows, Chimneys, Stairs, and every
thing placed and digested with Order, Usefulness, and Beauty, a little Logic
will induce me to conclude that it was the Work of an intelligent and skilful
Architect, though I did not see him building or finishing it. If I should see a
curious Watch, curiously wrought, graved, and enameled, and should observe the
exact disposition of the Spring, the String, the Wheels, the Balance, the
Index, and by an excellent, orderly, regular Motion described, discovering the
Hour of the Day, Day of the Month, and diverse other regular and curious
Motions: Or if I should see such a goodly Machina as some ascribe to
Archimedes, whereby in distinct Spheres or Orbs the situation of the Elementary
and Celestial World were represented, and all these put into their several
Motions, consonant to that we see in the Heavenly Bodies, by the means of
Springs or Weights artificially placed, I should most reasonably conclude, that
these were neither Casual not simply Natural Productions, but they were the
Work of some intelligent curious Artist, that by design, intention and
appropriation wrought and put in order and motion these curious Automata.

And certainly, if I or any Man of Reason should in this moment behold a parcel
of red Clay, and in a moment should see that arise into the Figure of a Man,
full of Beauty and Symmetry, endued with all those Parts and Faculties which I
see in my self, and possibly far more glorious, exquisite, and beautiful; and I
should observe him presently after this Formation use all the Operations of
Life, Sense and Reason, and this kind of production never seen before: That
common Reason which should tutor me to think that that Watch, that Machina
before mentioned was the Work of an Intelligent Nature, would much more enforce
me to believe that this admirable and stupendous production of such a Nature
unexampled before, would enforce me to believe and confess that this were the
immediate Work not only of an Intelligent Being, but of a most Wise and
Powerful Being, that could thus in a moment frame, animate, and endow such an
excellent Creature as this.

And yet certainly the first created Parents of Mankind were constitute in a
Nature specifically conformable unto that Nature which Mankind now has, and as
we have no reason to believe they were any way inferior to the present
Perfection of Humane Nature, so we have very great reason to suppose them
constituted in a greater degree of Beauty and Perfection than the most perfect
Man that has been ever since their Formation, (except the incarnate Son of
God.)

Although I do not intend in this place to take a large Survey of the
Perfection of the Humane Nature, because it is in part done already, and I
shall reserve it, God willing, for its proper place and season; yet because my
Scope here is to evince, that the Supposition of the first production of
Mankind is an unquestionable Evidence of the Existence of a most Wise and
Intelligent Being; and that the strength of that Evidence rests in the due
Contemplation of the Excellence of the Humane Nature and Faculties, and those
other Appendices thereunto; and that it is not possible to conceive any other
but an Intelligent Efficient (working by Choice, Wisdom, and Appropriation)
should be the first Producent, Former, and Constituent of such a Nature. I
shall take a short Survey of the Humane Nature, Perfections, and Appendices,
which may give any Man a handle to improve it farther to the same end; leaving
the fuller Discourse of the Humane Nature as a Reserve, also whereupon a fuller
Improvement may be made of this Consideration and Conclusion.

And upon the diligent Observation of this Argument it will evidently appear,
That the modelling, framing, compounding, ordering, and endowing the first
Prototype and first Copy of the Humane Nature was neither an Act or Event of
Chance, or of a Surd, Inanimate, Unintelligent Nature, but was a Contrivance
and Work of Design, Skill, and Intention, a Transcript of that Idea which
resided in an intelligent Being, a Work of a wise and powerful Being; yea such
a Work as could never have been made by any less than the most intelligent,
wise, and powerful Being, exceeding the more single Wisdom and Activity of any
created Intelligence at least, unless acting in and by the Commission, Virtue,
and Strength of the Almighty God.

Now these Excellencies in Man that demonstrate an Intelligent Efficient are of
two kinds, 1. Such as immediately concern his nature: 2. Such as are distinct
from it, but relating to it.

1. Therefore concerning those Excellencies that concern immediately his
Nature; and these discover themselves and the Wisdom of their Efficient. And
these Excellencies are considered either simply in themselves; or 2. Composite,
and with the several Subserviences and Accommodations to their Ends and Uses.

As to the first Consideration, there are many Excellencies in the Humane
Nature which manifest a far more eminent Excellency in his first Efficient.

The Symmetry, Beauty, Majesty, and admirable Composure of his Body, to which
there can be nothing added, nor detracted, without a blemish to it.

The admirable Faculties of his Soul, those that concern him in his lowest rank
of Life, the Faculty by which he is nourished; those that concern him in his
middle rank of Life, Soul and Sensation, Memory and Appetite; those that
concern him in his supreme rank of Life, Intellect and Will; those that concern
him in his whole Compositum, the Generative Faculty.

The admirable Union of his Soul to his Body, whereby he becomes one
Intellectual Being, though consisting of Principles of differing natures.

These and such as these would be largely prosecuted, for they do evidence an
intellectual, most wise Efficient, that could thus erect, and thus endow such a
Fabric. But that which I most reckon upon, is that admirable Accommodation
that is found in the nature of Man, which does most undeniably demonstrate an
intellectual and wise Efficient, working by Intention and Design: for instance,
It is indeed a very great evidence of an Artist that can make the Wheel of a
Watch, or the Spring, or the Balance, but the destination of the Spring to the
String, and the String to the Fusee, and the accommodation of every Wheel, and
their position and fabric one to another, and the Balance to correct and
check the excess of the Motion, and the Index to the Table, and to fit the
Table with Divisions suitable to the Hours, and to put all into such a regular
Motion as demonstrates the Hour of the Day: This adaptation of things of
various and several Natures and Structures one to another, and all to some
common End or Design, is so great an evidence of an Intellectual Being that
works by Intention, by Election, by Design and Appropriation; that nothing can
be opposed against it: And therefore I rather choose to prosecute this compound
Consideration of the Humane Nature, the adaptation and appropriation of things
therein one to another, and to common Use; which is the most evident Argument
of such an Efficient as I have before described in the first Fabrication of
Humane Nature.

It were the business of a Volume to pursue all the Particulars of this kind, I
shall only instance in some.

1. The admirable accommodation of the several Parts of the Humane Body to make
up one Continuum, yet consisting of diverse Parts distinct in their individuals
and kinds, the mortising of the Bones one into another, the binding them
together by Nerves and Muscles and Tendons, the Veins and Arteries for the
carrying of the Blood diffused by several Ramifications from their Roots to the
uttermost extremities of the Body, their differing Coats, Anastomoses and means
of Communication for the Circulation of the Blood, the distributions and
ramifications of the Nerves; indeed the whole Frame of the Humane Body is an
Engine of most admirable contrivance and mutual accommodation of Parts, which is
so much the more admirable, because many of the Parts are distinct not only in
the Roots and Numbers, but in their Nature and Constitution; yet make up one
most beautiful Continuum, by the mutual accommodation and admirable
contignation of the several Integrals thereof.

2. The admirable accommodation of Faculties to the convenience and use of
Humane Nature, for Instance, the Digestive Faculty to preserve Life, the
Generative Faculty to preserve the Species; his Faculties of Sense are
accommodated to a Sensible Being, for as much as he is to converse in a
Corporeal World, and with Corporeal Beings, there is no one quality of
Corporeal Nature that he has occasion to use or converse with, but he has a
Faculty by one of his five Senses to receive and discern. Again, in his
Intellective Faculty it admirably serves him for the Ends and Uses of his
Being; he was appointed to govern, direct, and rule other Animals, and
therefore he has the advantage of a superior Faculty above them, whereby he is
able to exercise that Direction and Government: He was made to be the Spectator
of the great Work of God, to consider and observe them, to glorify and serve
that God that made them; and he is accordingly furnished with an Intellective
Faculty answerable to his condition.

3. The admirable accommodation of Faculties with subministring Faculties, and
Organs subservient, appropriate, and convenient for their exercise: For
Instance, Local Motion is necessary to Mankind, and accordingly he is furnished
with Animal Spirit, Nerves, Muscles, Tendons, and Limbs admirably contrived,
and destined, and fitted to Local Motion. The Intellective Faculty is furnished
with the organical Fabric of the Brain, and the subordinate Power of Sense,
Fantasy and Memory, to assist it in its exercise while it is in the Body:
Facultati generativae and prolisicae subministrans facultas seminificationis,
ac organa eidem deservientia, appetitus naturalis, voluptas quaedam alliciens
organa generationi dicata, and distinctio sexuum, sine qua juxta legem in
natura post primam humanae naturae formationem insitam, hujusmodi speciei
propagatio fieri nequivit. The Digestive Faculty, furnishing the Blood, the
Blood increasing the Body, and supplying the Treasuries of the Spirits, the
Spirits again supplying and maintaining the Offices of the Faculties. So that
not only the Blood, but the whole Corporeal and Animal Nature is in continued
motion and mutual subserviency.

I might be endless in this Contemplation, but because it is evident to any Man
that considers, and I design a larger discussion of this Business when I come
to consider the Parts and Faculties of the Humane Nature, I shall not give
farther Instances therein.

And the Use that I make of it is this, That although it might be supposed
possible, that either Chance or Nature might in some simple narrow things
produce very curious Appearances, as the Configurations of Asterites, of
Crystals, of Salts in their several shapes; yet when in such a complicated
Nature as Man is, consisting of so many various Parts, various in their
position, nature, and use, there shall be found such an exact adaptation of
every thing one to another, as to serve the whole and every part; this in the
primordial Constitution and Formation must needs be the Work of a most wise,
intelligent, powerful Being, that operates secundum intentionem,
appropriationem, and intelligentiam.

2. Let us come then to those Appendices and relative Respects of other things
to the Humane Nature, we shall easily find in it this Consideration also, the
Footsteps and Evidences of an Intelligent Nature in the Constitution of him, by
that admirable accommodation of things without him of different nature from
him, to his use and convenience.

In the Operations or Works of Intelligent Agents we may easily see, that
according to the degree or perfection of such Intelligence there is variety in
their Work or Production: An Intelligent Agent that is but of a narrow
Intelligence, as his Prospect is commonly short and weak, so his Work seldom
attains more than a narrow and single End. But if the Agent be of a large and
comprehensive Intelligence and Wisdom, his ends are great, and most times
various and complicated, and the same Operation or Work may have diverse many
(...) Ends and Uses.

Almighty God therefore being of infinite Wisdom and Power, foresees and
effects great and various Ends in one and the same Work or Operation: Take for
Instance that goodly Creature the Sun, What a complication of excellent Ends
and Uses there are in that glorious Body? It is the Fountain, communicating
Light to the Earth, the Air, and all the Planetary Bodies; it is that which
derives Heat, and is the great Instrument of deriving Fruitfulness and
Fertility to the inferior World; it distinguishes Times and Seasons by its
Motion; it raises, and digesteth, and distributeth the Watery Meteors for the
benefit of this inferior World, and infinite more advantages of this kind. And
therefore it is the narrowness of our Understanding, that when we see one
excellent End or Usefulness in any thing, to conclude, that God Almighty
intended no other.

And therefore it is too hasty and vain a Conclusion, to think that the
glorious Bodies of the Celestial Host were made merely for the service of Man;
and it is also folly and presumption to conclude, that even the things of this
inferior World, though principally designed for the use of Man, were merely and
only destined for the service of Man: Almighty God has the Glory of his own
Greatness, and the Communication of his own Goodness, as the great End of all
his Works: Yea and we have reason to think, that even in these inferior Beings
of this lower World which are delivered over to the use and service of Men, God
Almighty had other Ends that possibly we know not, nay possibly in the
Effection of the least minute Animal Almighty God intended a Communication of
so much of his Goodness and Beneficence to it, as might give it a kind of
complacency and fruition suitable to the capacity of its Existence, though
subordinate to other Ends.

And yet not only in these inferior Existences of this lower World, but even in
the Fabric, Order, and Economy of the superior World there is to be found an
admirable accommodation of them one to another, and to this Steward and Tenant
of Almighty God of this inferior World, called Man.

1. If we look upon the Celestial World, we have an admirable accommodation
thereof to the convenience of Mankind; it presents to his View, and thereby to
his Understanding, the most noble Spectacle of the Celestial Bodies, their
Order, Beauty, Constancy, Motion, Light, conducting to the knowledge and
acknowledgment of the Power, Wisdom and Goodness of God: it gives him an
account of the progress, and parts, and succession of Time; these are
advantages that no Irrational Nature can make use of.

But the Influence of the Heavens are a common Benefit to Man and all Sublunary
Natures; but yet the inferior World seems in a great measure directed for the
benefit of Mankind; some in common to him and the Brutes, as the Air for
Respiration, the Fire for Warmth, the Water for Drink, the Earth for Fruit and
Habitation.

But in this lower World there seems many things directed to the special use of
Mankind; for besides Domestic Animals especially allowed for his Food, there
are some that serve for his Employment, Motion, Exercise, and Food, as the
Tillage and Planting of the Earth for his Food; some for his Medicine, as
Herbs, and Gums, and Minerals; some for his Clothing, as the Furrs, Wool, and
Skins of Beasts; some for his Habitation, as the Timber and Stone; some for his
Fuel, as Wood, Coals, and Turf; some for his Defense and Manufacture, as Iron
and Steel; some for Commerce, as the Metals of Silver, Gold, Copper, the very
Situation of the Seas, the Magnes; some for his Ornament, as Silk and Jewels;
some for his Journey and Labor, as Horses, Oxen, Camels; some for his
Necessity, some for his Delight: Infinite more Instances may be given, whereby
it will evidently appear that this lower World is accommodated to the use and
convenience of Mankind in a special and remarkable manner; whereby it may be
evident to any considerate Man, that the Formation of the World and of Mankind
was by the same wise and provident Power; and that as the Humane Nature is
accommodated to it self, so this World is accommodated to the exigence and
convenience of the Humane Nature.

When I have considered the admirable Congruity of all the Parts of Christian
Religion, and how it corresponds, and is adapted to the convenience and
condition of the Humane Nature, and how those antecedent Prophesies, Promises,
and Directions of Religion in the Old Testament, bear an admirable congruity to
the Model of Religion in the New Testament, notwithstanding the vast distances
between the manifestations of them, and how all the Scheme of Divine
Dispensations from the beginning of the World bear an admirable accommodation
each to other, and to the Evangelical Doctrine; it gives us a strong Moral
Evidence that the same one God was the Author of this Religion, that although
there seem a diversity and variety in the Administrations, yet when I look upon
them together, compare the congruity of what goes before to what follows, it
seems one most beautiful Piece, fitted and accommodated in every part to the
other; and hereby I satisfy my self that it is the true Religion, that it is
all of one piece, and one common Author of it, namely, the God of Truth.

And so when I consider the Humane Nature, and the admirable accommodation that
one part thereof has to the other, and also look upon the Mundus aspectabilis,
especially this lower World, wherewith we are by reason of its vicinity best
acquainted, and observe how admirably the same is accommodated to the Animal
Life of Man: And although the Parts thereof are distinct, various, distant, yet
there are drawn from it Lines of Accommodations and Communication to the Use of
the Humane Nature, so exactly and appositly, that I cannot choose but
acknowledge one common Author both of the greater and lesser World, and such an
Author, as made and disposed all things by the highest Wisdom and the wisest
Choice. If there had been diverse Authors of the greater and lesser World, there
could never have been an accommodation of things so disparate one to another,
unless both had acted in subordination to one common third Being, or by one
common Counsel.

Again, it was not possible that Casualty or Chance could have accommodated
things of various kinds one to another: If Chance could make a Beam of a House,
and could have made Tenants at either end, yet it is not possible to conceive
that Chance could cast it to be just of a fit length to answer the congruity of
its contignation to another piece of Timber, or fit the Mortises of other
pieces of Timber to those Tenants, or fit the particles and scantlets to answer
just one another; this must of necessity require a Workman that works by
Understanding, Choice, and Appropriation, because it requires accommodation of
several things of several kinds to one End by several Means.

Thus therefore when I see the admirable accommodation of Humane Nature to its
own existence and conveniences, the admirable accommodation therein of things
of different natures one to another, as Organs to Faculties, Sinews to Bones,
Nerves to Muscles, Spirits to Nerves; when I see the excellent accommodation of
this lower World, especially to the Humane Nature, although they are in
themselves several and heterogeneal, I cannot (without violence to my own
Observation, Experience, and Reason) I say I cannot but attribute the first
Formation of Humane Nature, yea and of all the Universe, to one most Wise,
Intelligent, Powerful Being; who did all things according to the counsel of his
Will, after the most wise and excellent Idea of his unsearchable Understanding.

CAP. V. Concerning the Nature of that Intelligent Agent that first formed the
Humane Nature; and some Objections against the Inferences above made, and their
Answer.
HAving in the foregoing Chapter reduced the Origination of Mankind to an
Intelligent Efficient, effecting it per modum efficientis voluntarii, and per
intentionem, I shall in this place inquire what kind of Intelligent Efficient
this was, for among Intelligent Beings there is one Primum, the Glorious God,
whose Understanding, Power, and Goodness is infinite; there are also
acknowledged by the Heathen, Intelligentiae a primo, those which Aristotle
calls by the Name of Separate Intelligences, Plato calls Dii ex Diis, and we
commonly call Angels, very glorious and powerful Creatures, which Plato takes
into the Business of the Creation of Man, as to the Corporeal Frame.

And it seems to be, that the Effection of the Humane Nature in any part
thereof, is not attributable to the Angels, neither as instrumental, much less
as principal Causes.

1. As to the Soul of Man it seems beyond dispute, for that was a created
Substance, and Creation of any new Substance being an infinite Motion, is not
within the power of any Finite Nature: the Pretense therefore rests only as to
the Corporeal, or at least Animal Nature.

2. Therefore I say that the Formation of the Bodily, much less the Animal
Nature of Man, in order to the reception of the Soul, was neither coordinately
nor instrumentally the Work of Angels. And the Reasons that seem sufficient to
make out this Truth, are these:

1. It seems utterly above an Angelical Power to organize the Body of the
Humane Nature: for though it is true, that in the established way of
Generation, the Parents, who are inferior in nature to Angels, do organize the
Body, at least mediante semine, yet that is done in the virtue and strength of
the Ordination and Institution of Almighty God: So that as well Man as the
Semen genitale are the Instruments deputed by Almighty God in virtue of his
Supreme Power to propagate the Humane Nature. And therefore since the first
Formation of the Humane Nature was a new Formation, not according to the Laws
established after in Nature, the first Production of Mankind was immediately by
the Almighty Power, and not by the Power of any subordinate Intelligence.

2. Again, it could not possibly be, but that the Humane Nature must be
completed in an instant: For how is it conceptible, that first there should be
Corpus formatum, with all the Organs, Vessels, Blood, and Spirits disposed and
ordered in their several Cells and Motions, unless Man had been then at the
same time animated as well as organized? For the outward shape or stature of a
Man is no more a fit Receptacle of an Animal, much less of a Rational Life,
than a Statue of Wax or Stone. The same Hand therefore that animated; formed
and fashioned also the same Humane Body in the same moment, by virtue of the
Volition, Determination, or Faciamus of the Divine Will.

3. As we have no manner of evidence of the Angelical concurrence or
instrumentality in the Formation of Man or of any of the lower Animals so there
is no necessity at all of such a Supposition. And we are not to multiply Causes
without necessity, for as the bare determination of the most powerful and
efficacious Will of God was sufficient to bring Being out of Nothing, so the
like determination of the same Will was sufficient to form Man out of the Dust
of the ground, without taking in a subordination or instrumentality of Angels.

Again, if we should suppose the cooperation of Angels in the Formation of the
Body of Man, it must be in the strength, virtue, and efficiency of the first
Cause; which as it gave the Angels their Being, so it must give them the
efficacy power, and virtue to be instrumental in this Formation; which as we
have no warrant, so we have no probable reason to admit, since the first Cause
was all sufficient for this Effect without their assistance.

4. The admirable Structure of the Body of Man, the accommodation of it to
Faculties, the furnishing of it with Faculties accommodate to it, even as its
Animal Nature (though we take not in the reasonable intellectual Soul) imports
in it a Wisdom, Power, and Efficacy above the Power of any created Nature to
effect: If it should be in the power of an Angel, by applying actives to
passives, to produce an Insect, nay a perfect Animal, yet the Constitution and
Frame of so much of that in Man that concerns his Animal Nature were too high a
Copy for an Angelick Nature to write, unless thereunto deputed and
commissionated by the Infinite God, which Commission we no where find, and I am
very sure a bare Naturalist will not suppose.

5. Again, there is that necessity of a suitableness and accommodation of the
Parts of the Body to the Faculties of the Soul, and e converso, that any the
least disproportion or disaccommodation of one to the other would spoil the
whole Work, and make them utterly unserviceable and unapplicable one to the
other. It was therefore of absolute necessity that the same skill and dexterity
that was requisite to the first Formation of the Soul, must be used and
employed in the Formation of the Body; and if an Angel were unequal to the
making up and ordering of the Soul, he could never be sufficient to make a fit
organical Body exactly suitable to it.

Upon the whole matter I therefore conclude, That not only the Soul, but the
very Animal Nature in Man, and not only that, but the Formation and Destination
of his Bodily Frame, was not only the Work of an Intelligent Being, but of the
Infinite and Omnipotent Intelligent Being, who in the same moment formed his
Body, and organized it with immediate Organs and Instruments of Life and Sense,
and created his Intellectual Nature, and united it to him, whereby Man became a
living Soul.

And this, as the necessary Evidence of Reason, does first drive us to
acknowledge a Being, or first Formation of the Humane Nature ex non genitis;
and secondly, to acknowledge that this first Formation of the Nature of Man was
not by Chance, Casualty, or a mere Syntax of Natural Causes, but by an
Intelligent Efficient; so we are upon the very same and a greater Evidence of
Reason, driven to acknowledge that Intelligent Efficient to be the Great and
Wise and Glorious God, no other Cause imaginable being par tali negotio.

And indeed, if once we can bring Men but to this one Concession, That the
original Efficient of the Humane Nature was an Intelligent Being, any Man
pretending to Reason will with much less difficulty admit that Efficient to be
the Almighty God, than any other invisible, intelligent Efficient, which we
usually call Angels or Intelligences: And the Reasons are these, 1. Because
though we that are acquainted with the Divine Truths do as really believe that
there are Angels as well as Men, yet the Natural Evidences of the Existence of
Almighty God are far more evident and convincing, even upon a Rational and
Natural account, than that there are Angels; for the former being a Truth of
the highest moment and importance to be believed by all, has a proportionable
weight and clearness of evidence, even to Natural Light, more and greater than
any other Truth: And hence among the Jews the Sect of the Sadduces believed the
Existence of God, yet denied or doubted the Existence of Angels or separated
Intelligences. 2. Because the very Supposition of an Angelical Nature does
necessarily suppose the Existence of a Supreme Being, from whom they derive
their Existences. 3. Because the great occasion of Infidelity in relation to
Existence of Almighty God is, that sensual Men are not willing to believe any
thing whereby they have not a sufficient Evidence, as they think, to their
Sense: The Notion of a Spiritual and Immaterial Being is a thing that they
cannot digest, because they cannot see or by any Sense perceive it, nor easily
form to themselves a Notion of it. He therefore that can so far master the
stubborness of Sense, as to believe such a Spriritual Intelligent Being as an
Angel, has conquered that difficulty that most incumbers his belief of a God,
and we that can but suppose or admit the former, cannot long doubt of the
latter. He therefore that can once bring his thoughts to carry the first
Origination of Mankind to the efficiency of an Angel, must needs in a little
time see a greater evidence not only to believe a Supreme Deity, but to
attribute the Origination of Mankind and of the goodly Frame of the Universe to
the Supreme Being; as necessarily best fitted with Power, Wisdom, and Goodness
to accomplish so great a Work, and that without the help or intervention of
Angels or created Intelligences, who must needs derive their Being, Power, and
Activity from him.

There remains two or three Objections against the force of the Consequence of
the Existence of Almighty God, and his Efficiencies in the production of
Mankind in their first Individuals, which I shall propound and answer.

1. Object. What need there be laid so great a stress upon the Primitive
Formation of Man, as that it could not be done but by the Power and Wisdom of
an Almighty Intelligent Being? since every day's experience lets us see, that
by the mixture and coition of Man and Woman, Et ex semine ab utroque deciso, in
utero muliebri per spatium december mensium ad plurimum producitur hujusmodi
natura humana, quem tot elogiis magnificamus; that which we every day see to be
an effect of finite Creatures in the daily production of Individuals of Humane
Nature: Why must we needs call in no less than the Wisdom and Power of God
himself, to be the immediate Efficient of the first Formation of the
Individuals of that nature, which we see every day produced by the common
efficacy of Nature and efficiency of the Parents; Vel ad minus, seminis
utriusque sexus in utero foemineo conclusi?

In Answer hereunto, I shall not at this time or in this place enter into the
dispute how far the Divine Efficiency concurrs immediately in the ordinary
Generation of Mankind, nor how far the entire Humane Nature, as well his
Rational Soul as his Body and Animal Nature, is attributable to Parental
Generation, these will be proper for another place: but for a full Answer
hereunto I say, 1. That there is not the same measure to be taken of the
competency or sufficiency of an Efficient in the production of the Humane
Nature, as it stands now established, and in the first formation of the first
Individuals of that nature ex non genitis.

It is true, it is in settled and established Nature, within the compass of the
immediate efficiency of both Sexes, and seminis prolifici ab eisdem decisi, to
form the Humane Nature in that gradual process and method that is now consonant
to Nature; but if all the Men on Earth and Angels in Heaven should now go about
to form the Humane Nature ex non genitis, either out of the Elementary
Material, or by the help and direction of the Celestial Influences, or by any
Irradiation even from an Angelick Nature, it could not be done; It was
therefore a vain piece of madness Paracelsus to pretend to the formation of a
Homunculus, when by all his pretended Skill he could not protract his own Life,
being already constituted to the common period of an ordinary old age. But 2.
This Potestas generativa in the Humane Nature is part of that admirable
Efficiency which Almighty God exercised in the first Formation of Mankind and
of other perfect Animals; and this Faculty is performed in the Humane Nature,
and traduced from one to another by the immediate efficacy, virtue, and energy
of that first Divine Efficiency. In this Generative Faculty therefore though
the Parents are not simply passive Instruments, the Semen prolificum is not
merely a passive Instrument in the production of Humane Nature, yet both are
Instruments, and Efficientes vicariae and subordinatae, in respect of Almighty
God; and the activity that either of these Instruments have, they have from
that God that first formed the Humane Nature, and implanted and alligated this
activity to them. In the first formation of the first Individuals of Humane
Nature this Vis prolifica was immediately constituted in them by Almighty God,
with power not only to produce their kind, but to transmit this Vis prolifica
to those they so produced: and although the immediate production now seems to
be by the immediate efficiency of the Parents, and their prolifick Semen, yet
it is done by virtue, and in the power of the first efficiency of Almighty God;
Qui cum hanc indidit primis individuis in eorum prima formatione, ac perpetua
quadam lege successivis individuis quasi alligavit and connexit. So that as
when I behold a Man at this day, his corporeal Figure, his Faculties, I see but
as it were a Copy or Transcript of the first created nature of Man in the first
Individuals, I mean as to their Essentials; so I look upon the successive
Generations of Mankind, to be but a continuation of that first generative
Faculty concreated with the first Man, and protracted or extended unto all
succeeding descendents from him: And therefore I have all the reason
imaginable, when I behold the successive Generations of Men, and the actuating
of that Faculty, retro trahere ad primam originem; and to acknowledge it to be
no less the Efficacy of the Divine Efficiency in the thousandth Generation from
Adam, than it was in Adam himself: Just as if I should take a Wedge of Silver
of one Inch square, and gild it over with Gold, and should after draw it by Art
into a Wire as small as a Hair, to a Mile in length, every Inch of that silver
Wire has the very same tincture which the first Wedge had: Though this
resemblance holds not in all things, it serves to explicate what I mean,
namely, the Facultas generativa, which was by God Almighty given to the first
Parents of Mankind, and was bound to their Species. And though it be now at a
remoter distance from its first efficiency, yet it has its continuance and
efficacy by virtue of that First Efficiency, and the Institution and Ordination
of that most Wise and Powerful Being. So that even at this day the univocal
generation of Man (yea and of all perfect Animals) is no less the Efficiency of
Almighty God than it was in the first production of it, though it be more
remote in respect of the intervenience of more successive instrumental Causes.
And therefore we are mistaken, if we think that the generation of Men or
Animals is purely by virtue of the instrumental Causes, without regard to the
first Efficiency of Almighty God; which though it perpetuates it in a settled
regular way, now called therefore Natural, yet it is by the Force, Virtue, and
continuing Energy of the first wise, powerful, and efficacious Institution of
Almighty God. And so nothing is gotten by this Objection, but to re-mind us to
acknowledge and admire the admirable Wisdom, Power, and Goodness of God, in the
first establishment and continued protraction of this Law of Seminal
Propagation.

And this is the true reason of the constancy and fixedness of the Methods of
Generation, and why they do not transire ultra limits; why those Animals that
are produced per ovum, do not, cannot produce viviparous, as Birds, and some
sorts of Fishes; and why those that produce vivipara, or per vermem, do not
produce per ovum; why without extreme accidents all perfect Animals produce
Individuals conformable to their own similitude, and specific nature and
likeness; namely, this is the true reason, In the first formation of the
Individual of these Species, the most Wise God, who foresaw what was most fit
and convenient, did engrave these several Laws and inviolable Constitutions in
the natures of the things first produced, and chained and connected them to
their Species by an inviolable Law, not regularly changeable by any Power but
by his Power that Enacted them: And therefore it is not in the power of an
Angel to alter the established Method of the Generation of things, because it
is a Law instituted by the Supreme Lord. And although Monstrous Births may
casually arise, as in due time may be observed, yet the production of vivipara
per ovum, or of ovipara per vermem, or of Men or perfect Animals, aliter quam
per conjunctionem maris and foeminae, are prohibited by the settled and fixed
Laws established by the God of Nature in the first formation of Individuals.

2. Object. You lay much stress upon the admirable Fabric not only of Man but
of perfect Animals, the regular and excellent order and composure of their
Parts, the accommodation of their Organs to their Faculties, and of their
Faculties to the convenience of their Nature: and yet there is scarce the
smallest Insect but has the same Faculties and Organs as exquisitly
accommodated to their use as the greatest Animal, nay they are so much the more
curious, and the Art of the Artificer so much the more commendable by how much
the smaller they are. If a Flea or a Fly has as exact a symmetry,
organization, and diversity of Faculties as an Ostridge or an Elephant; the
curiosity of the Art is more admirable by the smalness of the Volume: And yet
these do every day arise spontaneously, and it may be propagate their kind
after their spontaneous production, or it may be have only the existence of a
Day; neither is it reasonable to think that all these Insects thus
spontaneously arising, were first produced in the fifth or sixth Day; or that
the Semina formata of every Worm or Fly that has arisen this day or yesterday,
were created in the first Creation of things, and lay concealed and unactive
for above 5000 Years; and yet in these sponte nata we see no necessity nor
evidence of any immediate Divine Efficiency, for some are every day produced ex
putri, sine praeexistente semine. Why therefore is so much weight laid upon the
first Origination of Man or perfect Animals, as if it must needs require the
immediate interposition of Almighty God, when we are content to referr the
Origination of Works possibly of as wonderful a fabrication as many at least of
perfect Animals, to a lower Cause?

I Answer, It is true that there is a great curiosity in the Texture and
Faculty of Insects, and that there are very many that arise not ex
praeexistente semine, but either of Vegetables, or of that which we usually
call Materia putris; and it will be too hard a task for any to maintain that
all Insects do arise of univocal Seeds derived from their own Species, or that
all the Species of Insects were created the fifth or sixth Day; neither shall I
with Scotus affirm that the Forms of such Insects are derived from Heaven, and
diffused into Matter, whereby they mould themselves into their distinct
Existences.

But as the God of Nature gave a seminal prolifick power to perfect Animals and
unto Men, and did bind and connex this Method of their future Generations unto
their Nature, without which though they had been constituted otherwise in a
most perfect Constitution, they could never have multiplied their kind. So as
to the production of many Insects, Almighty God has given such a prolifick
nature to the Earth and Waters, in a certain due mixture irradiated and
influenced by the Sun to produce diverse sorts of Insects by virtue of these two
great Benedictions given to the Water, Genesis 1.20. and to the Earth, Genesis 1.24.
as the two great prevailing Elements in spontaneous generations; and as by
virtue of the Divine Benedictions given to Animals and Men, [Increase and
multiply, and replenish the Earth and the Waters;] Genesis 1.22, 28. so by virtue
of that first Command to the Waters and Earth, [Let the Waters bring forth
abundantly the moving creature that has life; and let the Earth bring forth
the living creature after his kind, and the cattle and creeping thing, and the
beast after his kind.] The spontaneous propagation of Insects by the Earth is
by virtue of this Command as effectual, and in its kind as natural by virtue of
this established Law, as the production of Animals per mixtionem, though not so
perfect.

And from the Efficacy of this Divine Institution it comes to pass, 1. That
their Textures and Faculties are curiously disposed; for the Elementary Nature
in conjunction with the Heavenly Influence does produce them as Instruments,
and in the virtue of the first Institution of the Glorious God. 2. That though
there is a great variety and multiplicity in their Species, yet they are not
infinite, but determinate. 3. That according to the variety of Climates and
various disposition of Matter, Insects are variously produced: this Climate
produces that Insect that another does not; and this Herb, this Wood, this
Flesh, that Insect that another does not; and the same is observed in Herbs and
spontaneous Plants.

And hence it is, that all the Art in the World can never make the meanest
Insect out of any other Matter, or any otherwise disposed, or any otherwise
irradiated, than what would of it self naturally produce an Insect of that
kind: But this shall be farther illustrated in the Answer to the next Objection.

But although it be true that these little Insects discover the wonderful
Wisdom and Power of God, in their vicarious productions by the commissionated
and influenced Elementary Nature, yet they come exceedingly short of those
perfect Animals who have a nobler and more elaborate production by univocal
generation, and infinitely short of the excellency of the Humane Nature: And
therefore there is no parity of Instance in the first formation of an Insect ex
non genitis, and the first formation of the Humane Nature: Every Year gives us
Instances of a new spontaneous production of Insects, and this by virtue of
that primitive commission and vital vigor thereby concredited to the Earth and
Waters irradiated by the Sun. But never any Age gives so much as a shadow of an
Instance of the production of any perfect Animals, much less of Man by any such
spontaneous Method; and that the latter gives a greater and more eminent
Specimen of a Divine Power in its primitive formation, than the former in its
spontaneous production.

3. Object. It is evident that the malignant Spirits have power to produce
Insects, as appears by the Magicians producing of Frogs in Egypt by their
Enchantments, Exodus 8.7. and therefore the resolution of the spontaneous
productions of Insects into the Energy of the Divine Command seems
unwarrantable. And if he may produce those which are really endued with an
Animal Life, why not those Animals that have their ordinary production by
univocal Generation, and why not also Mankind.

And the Satyrs and Fauns whereof some of the Ancients write, seems to be
productions out of the common road of humane production.

I Answer, 1. Touching the supposed Fauns and Satyrs, they were either Fables
or Illusions, and no credit to be given to the Histories of them. 2. Admitting
it should be within the power of good or evil Angels to produce Insects, yet it
would be no consequence from thence to their efficacy of producing perfect
Animals, much less Humane Nature, which is in another superior rank of Being
above the noblest Brutes, and excessively above the rank of Insects: We might
as well conclude, because a Man can make a Candle he can make a Star. But 3. As
to the efficacy of good or evil Angels in effecting of Insects, 1. It is of no
great difficulty to suppose that good or evil Angels may bring or transport the
Semina or Spawn of Insects to other places, and possibly thus it might be done
by the Egyptian Magicians. 2. It is very true, that the Angelick Natures have a
very great knowledge of Natural Efficacies and Virtues, and a great power of
transporting, uniting, and applying Actives to Passives; whatsoever therefore
is effectible by the most congruous and efficacious application of Actives to
Passives, is effectible by them. And since there are many Insects that arise by
the connatural efficacy of Elementary Matter, and by the due preparation of the
same, and by the due application thereof unto the incidence of Celestial Heat
and Influxes; it may be in the power of these knowing and active Spirits, by a
transportation and application of such Matter, and by the position of them in
such an Influence as is natural for their production, to be instrumental not
only to the acceleration of such productions, but to the productions
themselves: But though still the efficacy of the production is not applicable
to the efficiency of these Spirits, but to the natural vigor of those Natural
Actives and Passives that are by them brought together, and they cannot produce
a Fly or a Frog beyond the activity and efficacy of Elementary Matter and
Celestial Heat: (And hence it was, that the Egyptian Enchanters could produce
Frogs out of the Rivers of Egypt by the assistance of evil Spirits, because the
Waters and temperament of the Soil and Climate was able to have done it, if
those parts thereof were transported and united unto one place, where being
brought they would probably without the help of a Magician have been formed
into that Insect:) Yet when the same Artists were trying to produce Lice out of
Dust, a Matter simply unsuitable for such a production, they could not effect
it, but acknowledged it was the Finger of God: Exodus 8.18, 19. We see that Man
by his little narrow skill and power, by applying Actives to Passives, may do
things of not unlike a nature; as the acceleration of the growth of Seeds by
Mineral Preparations, the production of Mites in Cheeses by infusing Wine; and
many tell us of a strange production and multiplication of some Insects by the
juxta-position of several Ashes and Solutions of Insects, and by other means:
none of which ways are estranged from the knowledge of those experienced
Spirits.

But it seems utterly beyond the power of any Created Nature to produce any
Insect, but by the juxta-position and application of that Elementary Body and
Celestial Heat that is natural and proper for such a production: and much more
is it impossible for any Created Power to produce any Animal, though never so
small or inconsiderable, whose production is by the standing and fixed Laws of
Nature mancipated and chained to that common Method of Production settled in
Nature, by the Conjunction of Sexes.

And therefore, though an evil Angel may produce a Frog or Snake by the due
application of Actives to Passives, as before is declared, yet he cannot with
all his power and skill produce a Dog or a Cat, or any other Creature that by
the Laws and Institution of Nature is only producible by the Conjunction of
Sexes.

And the reason is, because these Laws which are instituted and settled in
Nature when it is fixed and established, are no other than the Laws of the
Sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth; and although he may dispense with, alter,
or suspend his own Laws, yet no created Being has that power of it self to
suspend or alter these Laws settled by the God of Nature, no not in any one
individual thing; and therefore it is not possible for Angel or Devil, without
the immediate Commission from the God of Heaven, to make any spontaneous
production of such an Animal as by the established Law of Nature is to be
produced by natural propagation, and not otherwise.

But herein I do not understand, 1. Such Insects as though producible by
Propagation, yet are naturally likewise producible, ex putri, as Frogs, and
many other Insects; for Nature has allowed them both ways of production. 2.
Neither of Incubation; for many Animals that are ovipara, and cannot produce
ovum foecundum sine utriusque sexus natura, yet may be excluded by artificial
Incubation as well as natural; this is not only within the power of Angels, by
applying an artificial Heat, but even of any else. The Eggs in Egypt are
hatched in the Sun, or by the heat of Ovens or warm Ashes.

CAP. VI. The Reasonableness of the Divine Hypothesis touching the Origination
of the World, and particularly of Man, and the preference thereof before all
the other precedent Suppositions.
UPon a diligent Observation of the various Suppositions and special Methods of
the ancient Philosophers, touching the Origination of Mankind and of the
Universe in general, these improbabilities of their truth and sufficiency will
appear to any considerate Man. First, They are destitute of any satisfactory
Evidence, to any person that is not strangely and impotently engaged to them,
either because they are his own Conceptions, or the Conceptions of some persons
of whose Learning or Wit their Disciples or Followers are too fond admirers.
There are commonly two Ingredients that make Men fond of a pre-conceived
Opinion: 1. Self-love and admiration; when a Man has fashioned a Fancy or
Imagination to some height, he falls in love with it because it is his own, and
is with great difficulty drawn from it. 2. Affectation of Esteem, which has a
double effect upon Men, namely, the affectation of Praise and Vainglory, as
having found out some Conception singular, novel, or that may give a Man a name
of a high Mercurial Wit; and on the other side, a shame and disdain to retract
that which he has once publicly asserted.

The truth is, that many of the several Hypotheses of the Aristotelians,
Epicureans, and of diverse of the other Ancients touching the original or
fundamental state of the Universe and Mankind, are mere Inventions and Fancies,
having no other foundation or evidence of their truth, than merely their own
Fancies and Conceptions. And it is not reasonable to think it should be
otherwise; for since the Manner of the Origination of Things must in common
Reason be thought to be of some other Mode or Order than what we see now in
Nature, and since the particular Manner or Method of this Origination of Things
is such a Matter of Fact as cannot possibly lie in the compass of humane
discovery merely by the strength of Ratiocination or a bare humane Tradition,
(for it is a Matter of Fact that precedes the supposed existence of Memory, at
least of any Man) it must necessarily be that Mankind must be ignorant of it,
unless it be revealed unto him by some that might certainly know the Fact it
self; and therefore the Conceptions of Men touching it must needs be as
confused, roving, uncertain, and inevident, as the Discourses or Conceptions of
a blind Man that never saw, touching Light or Colors.

But the Medium of the discovery of the first Formation of things delivered by
Moses, is that which can only give us a true Notion of them, namely, Revelation
to a Man that conversed with Almighty God face to face, and the Communication
thereof to Mankind by this Man divinely inspired, and informed touching this
Fact by him that alone could give him the true account thereof, namely, God
himself. Although I do not doubt, but besides this Divine Revelation to Moses,
there was a Divine Manifestation thereof to the first created Man in that
fullness of his first illuminated and perfect state of created Nature, and from
him that Tradition was derived, and preserved in that Line of the Patriarchs in
which the most important Divine Truths were conserved, and traduced from Adam
to Moses.

That which may illustrate my meaning, in this preference of the revealed Light
of the Holy Scriptures touching this matter, above the Essays of a
Philosophical Imagination, may be this: Suppose that Greece being unacquainted
with the curiosity of Mechanical Engines, though known in some remote Region of
the World, an excellent Artist had secretly brought and deposited in some Field
or Forest some excellent Watch or Clock, which had been so formed, that the
original of its Motion were hidden, and involved in some close contrived piece
of Mechanism, that this Watch was so framed that the Motion thereof might have
lasted a Year, or some such time as might give a reasonable Period for
Philosophical Conjectures concerning it, and that in the plain Table there had
not been only the description and indication of Hours, but the configurations
and indications of the various Phases of the Moon, the Motion and Place of the
Sun in the Ecliptic, and diverse other curious indications of Celestial
Motions; and that the Scholars of the several Schools of Epicurus, of
Aristotle, of Plato and the rest of those Philosophical Sects, had casually in
their walk found this admirable Automaton, what kind of work would there have
been made by every Sect, in giving an account of this Phenomenon? We should
have had the Epicurean Sect have told the bystanders according to their
pre-conceived Hypothesis, that this was nothing else but an accidental
concretion of Atoms, that happily fallen together had made up the Index, the
Wheels, the Balance, and that being happily fallen into this posture, they were
put into Motion. Then the Cartesian falls in with him, as to the main of their
Supposition, but tells him, that he does not sufficiently explicate how this
Engine is put into Motion; and therefore to furnish this Motion there is a
certain Materia subtilis that pervades this Engine, and the moveable parts
consisting of certain globular Atoms apt for Motion, they are thereby and by
the mobility of the globular Atoms put into Motion. A third, finding fault with
the two former, because these Motions are so regular, and do express the
various Phenomenon of the distribution of Time, and of the Heavenly Motions;
therefore it seems to him, that this Engine and Motion also, so analogical to
the Motions of the Heavens, was wrought by some admirable Conjunction of the
Heavenly Bodies, which formed this Instrument and its Motions in such an
admirable correspondency to its own existence. A fourth, disliking the
Suppositions of the three former, tells the rest that he has a more plain and
evident Solution of the Phenomenon, namely, the Universal Soul of the World,
or Spirit of Nature, that formed so many sorts of Insects with so many Organs,
Faculties, and such congruity of their whole Composition, and such curious and
various Motions as we may observe in them, has formed and set into Motion this
admirable Automaton, and regulated and ordered it with all these congruities we
see in it. Then steps in an Aristotelian, and being dissatisfied with all the
former Solutions, tells them, Gentlemen, you are all mistaken, your Solutions
are inexplicable and unsatisfactory, you have taken up certain precarious
Hypotheses, and being pre-possessed with these Creatures of your own Fancies,
and in love with them, right or wrong you form all your Conceptions of things
according to those fancied and pre-conceived Imaginations. The short of the
business is, this Machina is eternal, and so are all the Motions of it; and in
as much as a Circular Motion has no beginning or end, this Motion that you see
both in the Wheels and Index, and the successive indications of the Celestial
Motions, is eternal, and without beginning. And this is a ready and expedite
way of solving the Phenomenon, without so much ado as you have made about it.

And while all the Masters were thus controversing the Solution of the
Phenomenon in the hearing of the Artist that made it, and when they had all
spent their philosophizing upon it, the Artist that made this Engine, and all
this while listened to their admirable Fancies, tells them, Gentlemen, you have
discovered very much excellency of Invention touching this piece of Work that
is before you, but you are all miserably mistaken, for it was I that made this
Watch, and brought it hither; and I will show you how I made it; first, I
wrought the Spring, and the Fusee, and the Wheels, and the Balance, and the
Case, and Table; I fitted them one to another, and placed these several Axes
that are to direct the Motions of the Index to discover the Hour of the Day, of
the Figure that discovers the Phasis of the Moon, and the other various Motions
that you see; and then I put it together, and wound up the Spring, which has
given all these Motions that to see in this curious piece of Work: and that you
may be sure I tell you true, I will tell you the whole order and progress of my
making, disposing, and ordering of this piece of Work, the several materials of
it, the manner of the forming of every individual part of it, and how long I
was about it: This plain and evident discovery renders all these excogitated
Hypotheses of these Philosophical Enthusiasts vain and ridiculous, without any
great help of Rhetorical Flourishes or Logical Confutations.

And much of the same nature is that disparity of the Hypotheses of the Learned
Philosophers in relation to the Origination of the World and Man, after a great
deal of dust raised, and fanciful Explications and unintelligible Hypotheses.
The plain, but Divine Narrative by the hand of Moses, full of sense, and
congruity, and clearness, and reasonableness in it self, does at the same
moment give us a true and clear discovery of this great Mystery, and renders
all the Essays of the generality of the Heathen Philosophers to be vain,
inevident, and indeed inexplicable Theories, the creatures of Fantasy and
Imagination, and nothing else.

1. This therefore is the first Advantage of the Mosaical Hypothesis of the
Origination of things above the Philosophical Theories touching the same; the
latter are inevident, conjectural, and indeed apparently false; the former
contains an Evidence of it self, by its consonancy, to the only manner that can
be sufficient for such a Discovery, and the plain, evident; and congruous
relation of it.

2. All the Philosophical Theories (except that which carries the Origination
of things up to Almighty God) are full of infinite intanglements, difficulties,
and inconsistencies, that ever and anon break out and discover themselves;
whereby they are enforced by a continual substitution of new Suppositions, to
piece up and mend the breaches that arise upon such inconsistencies, and so
avoid those intolerable absurdities that their Suppositions do necessarily
occasion. And again, sometime are fain utterly to lay aside some of their
former Positions, as utterly undisciplinable and ungovernable by any subsidiary
Explication, by reason of their gross absurdities and apparent impossibilities.
This appears by some of the former Debates touching the Epicurean and
Aristotelian Suppositions, and many more may be given in this matter.

But the first Chapter of Genesis, as it is perfectly consonant to it self, so
it labors under no difficulties or absurdities, but all parts thereof are
easily and apparently reconcilable one with another, and with the common reason
of the things delivered upon the account of that common Supposition upon which
the whole is bottomed, namely, the Efficiency of the most Wise and Powerful
Intelligent Being.

Since therefore it is evident that Truth is ever consistent with it self, and
that which contains any irreconcilable absurdity or contradiction with it self
or any other Truth, can never be true: we have all the reason imaginable to
give the preference to the Mosaical Hypothesis, as consonant to it self, and to
all other Truths that are; and on the other side, to reject the Epicurean and
Aristotelian Theories in this matter, each of which contains irreconcilable
difficulties in themselves, and contradictions to evident and demostrable
Truths.

3. The third observable is this, That the Holy History gives us such an
Efficient, and such an Efficiency of things that gives us a plain, and clear,
and evident Solution of all those admirable Phenomenon that we see both in the
Universe, in the Motions, Orders, Positions, Influences, and Conveniences of
the whole Universe, and of the several great Integrals thereof, and likewise of
that admirable Beauty, Order, Symmetry, Usefulness of Parts, and Organs of
Faculties and Powers that are to be found in Animals, and especially in Man: of
these admirable congruities of Powers, Motions, and Instincts not only in the
Animal and Vegetable Province, but also in the very inanimate Bodies; by giving
us the Almighty, most Wise, most Bountiful God to be the first Author of the
World and of Mankind, and to be the Contriver and Institutor of that Law in
things created, which we usually call the Law of their Nature, which is nothing
else but the Will, the Rule, the Institution of the most Wise, Powerful, and
Intelligent Being. And let Men toil themselves till their Brains be fired, and
study and invent from Age to Age, to give us any other Explication of most of
the observable Phenomenon, in Nature, they will toil in vain, and substitute
unto us nothing but empty, watrish, and unsatisfactory Solutions, or mere
Whimsies, Chimaera's, and Falsities, instead of Truth and Reality: And this is
the admirable preference of the Divine History of the Origination of Things,
that it gives us a solid, plain, evident, congruous Solution of all the
admirable Phenomenon in universal and particular Beings, wherein our Minds may
rest, and quiet themselves; which those Philosophers neither do nor can do,
that use any other Method of the Origination of Things. What reason can there
be assigned of the position of the Elementary and Heavenly Bodies in that most
convenient position and situation, the usefulness, order, and regularity of
their Motions, Heat, and Influence? Why the Motions of every thing are directed
with the most suitableness to the convenience of the Universe, and to its own?
Why a Stone or a Bar of Iron moves downward, what is within it, or without it,
that excites or directs it? What reason can there be assigned of that admirable
accommodation of Meteors, the Wind and Rain, nay the very Thunder and
Lightning, to the use and benefit of the Elementary World? What reason can be
assigned of the admirable Fabric of the Body of Man, that singular beauty,
destination, and symmetry, and convenience of Parts and Organs, that admirable
constitution and ordination of his Faculties, especially that of his Intellect?
What reason can be assigned of the wonderful order and procedure of the
generation of Men, yea and of common Animals: All done with that order and
uniformity, with that convenience and regularity, that it exceeds the
imitation, and even the the comprehension of the wisest Man in the World?
Touching these and infinite more of these admirable Appearances in Nature, the
first of Genesis gives us a plain, reasonable, evident Explication, by letting
us know that these were the Works of the most Intelligent Being, the Works of
the most Wise and Glorious God: And the reason why they are so admirably,
wisely, and excellently framed and ordered, is because they were made and
ordered by the great Skill, Wisdom, Power, and Design of the Glorious God.

But now if we come to demand of these wise Philosophers a Solution of the
admirableness of these Phenomenon, we shall have such Solutions as must make us
first unreason and unman our selves, before we can subscribe to them, or at
least we shall have such a Solution as no way countervails the value of the
Work, or else shall give a Solution of Idem per idem, or else by somewhat else
that is utterly unintelligible.

Ask Democritus and Epicurus, and by their favor, some of their late the
Atomists will tell us, that all or the greatest part of this is by chance,
casual position, and mode, and motion, and figure, and texture of Atoms: and he
that believes this whiles he hears it or says it, is in a full capacity of
believing any thing, though never so unreasonable. Let any Man but ask his own
Reason fairly, whether he can believe this that he thus says, I appeal to that
Man, whether he does or can really believe himself when he says it. Ask another
sort of Philosophers for their Solution of it, they will tell you that Nature
is the Cause, and a sufficient Solution of all these things: But what is that
Nature, where is it, is it the nature or disposition of the things themselves?
Then it explicates it no otherwise but thus, That things have this excellency
and order, because it is their nature to be so, or, they are so because they
are so: But if by Nature they mean some separate Existence, what then is it? Is
it a Body or Spirit, is it a reasonable, an intelligent Being, or is it a surd
and stupid Existence, or else is it a Law or a Rule selfsubsisting? If it be a
reasonable, intelligent Existence, we differ but only de nomine; that which I
call God they will call Nature, at least unless they suppose it an inferior
intelligent Being, and then the difficulty is only made somewhat more; that a
subordinate intelligent Being was able to produce such Effects which appear to
all Men to be Works of the greatest Power, and Wisdom imaginable. On the other
side, if they suppose it to be a mere surd unintelligent Being, how comes it to
pass that they carry in them the greatest evidence imaginable of the most
perfect, and consequently of the most intelligent efficient Agent? Again, will
they suppose it a Norma, Rule, or Law of a most excellent frame and order, (and
indeed in so conceiving, they conceive truly that Nature is such a Law or Rule)
but still this does not explicate the Phenomenon of Nature, without supposing
somewhat more: A Law or Rule is not in it self effective or active, neither can
it subsist or exist without an Agent that either gave it, or works by or
according to it. The Laws of a State are the Rules of its Government, but this
Law must be given by some Power, and some Power there must be that must act
according to it, otherwise a Law is a stupid, dead, unactive, and unconceivable
thing: And therefore a Law or Rule singly explicates not any the Phenomenon of
Nature without a Being that gives this Law to things, or acts, or makes things
act according to it; and then we are in a great measure where Moses brings us,
only with this difference, the Law by which this great World was made, was no
other but the Determination and Beneplacitum of the Divine Will, determined or
qualified (if we may use that improper word) with the highest and most
sovereign Wisdom and Power: And the Law by which things thus made were for the
future to be governed, was that instituted Rule and Order which this Sovereign
Lord contrived and placed in created Beings; and thus indeed, Opus naturae est
opus intelligentiae. Nature therefore may have these various acceptations, viz.

1. As it signifies that Principium activum that gave every thing its Being;
and thus it imports no other than Almighty God, that Supreme Intelligent Being,
though improperly called Nature; viz. Natura narans.

2. As it imports the Things or Effects principated or effected by this
intelligent active Principle, or the Effects or Creatures of God, or Natura
naturata, and this has a double import, viz. i. For the first and immediate
Productions of that Principle, namely, not only created Matter, which was the
Productum primo primum, but also the things first produced in their several
kinds or natures, or Producta secundo prima, as the first Vegetable, Animal,
and Humane Individuals: or 2. For those Mixtions and Productions which
afterward had their productions in the World by successive mixtions and
generations, which include all Productions, which though in relation to their
dependence and first production of their kind, are still the Creatures of God;
yet in relation to their immediate Causes, are productions of second Causes.

3. As it imports the Law and Rule and Method and Order, of the production and
government and process of created Beings; and this of two kinds, 1. The Law and
Rule of the first Creation or Production of Beings; as the production of the
first Individuals of Animals, Vegetables, and Men: and herein though Almighty
God proceeds with admirable Wisdom and Order, yet he used no other Law or Rule
than the immediate Determination of his own most wise and perfect Will,
suitable to the Business he had in hand, wherein there was necessary and fit
another kind of Regiment and Order than was afterward instituted. 2. The Laws
or Rules instituted and appointed by the same most wise God to things already
constituted; this is the common and ordinary and regular Law of instituted
Nature: and these two Laws or Rules were different, and necessary that they
should be so. In the first Constitutions of Beings God Almighty proceeded by a
Law suitable to that Work, namely, according to the wise Counsel of his own
Will, that was best and fittest for that Work; he proceeded more suddenly, and
by the immediate interposition of his own Power the Vegetables constituted in a
moment, or very speedily, and within the compass of a Day came to their full
and perfect maturation and growth: so also did the Fowls, and Fishes, and
Brutes, and Man, without any considerable mora between their first formation
and complement or individual perfection: But the Law instituted for things
already formed and settled was of another kind; Vegetables, Animals, and Men are
in the Laws of their future existence to pass through those gradations and
steps and methods which we see now in use, for the formation, production,
increase, and perfection thereof. Again, in the first production of things,
though sometimes the wise God used in some measure the order of second or
instrumental or effective Causes, yet he bound not himself to that Rule;
though, as we have formerly observed, the instrumentality of Heat might be used
in separating the Expansum, and the arefaction of the Earth, and the production
of Vegetables; and though the instrumentality of the perfected Celestial Bodies
might be some way instrumental toward the maturation of Nature, toward the
production of Animals: and though he used the Matter which he had created to be
the substratum of the Corporeal Natures, even of Man himself; yet the great
Energy and Power whereby he completed all things, was above and beyond the
activity of second Causes; yea when he used the instrumentality of second
Causes, his own Powerful and Omnipotent Hand was engaged in the advancing of
the efficacy of the second Causes, which he used beyond their natural strength
and efficacy, there was much that was supernatural and miraculous, as well in
the first separation, distribution, and formation of things, as in the first
Creation of the Corporeal Matter out of nothing. But in the succeeding process
and procedure of created Nature he fixed and established certain powers and
activities in things, and a certain order and connection between them and their
effects, and governed and regulated the motions and productions of things
according to those implanted powers and connexions; and this we call the
instituted Law of Nature, namely, the activities and powers placed in created
Beings, and the mutual connexions and concatenations of things to such
activities and powers: which Law was at first instituted by the God of Nature
to be the common and standing ordinary Rule for things, settled and fixed in
their created station. And therefore we are far from denying a Law of Nature or
Calling in the immediate efficiency of the great God, or a miraculous
interposition in all the ordinary procedures of things already fully settled and
statuminated by the first Divine Efficiency. That which we only say in relation
to Nature already settled is but this, that 1. The primitive and fundamental
powers and activities of things were placed in them by the immediate Will and
Efficiency of God; it is this that gives the power to Heat and Fire to
dissolve, dissipate, rarifie, and consume; to Cold to condense; to heavy Bodies
to descend; to all the Celestial Bodies their Motions, Influences, and
Positions; that gave the Generative Faculty to Men, to Brutes, to Fishes; the
Productive Faculty to the Earth and Waters; the Receptivity to Semen and
Intellection, etc. 2. That he by a continuing Influx does support and preserve
all things in their being, order, and activity. 3. That this which we call the
Law of instituted and statuminated Nature, is his Law and his Institution, and
the connection of natural Effects to their natural Causes is his Institution,
his Law, his Order.

And therefore we do neither deny a Law of Nature, or a connection between
natural Causes and Effects, but that which we justly blame in these Men that
pretend themselves to be the great Priests of Nature, and admirers and adorers
of it, is, 1. That they do not sufficiently consider and observe, that this
which they and we call Nature, and the Law of Nature, and the Power of Nature,
is no other but the wise instituted Law of the most wise, powerful, and
intelligent Being, as really and truly as an Edict of Trajan or Justinian was a
Law of Trajan or Justinian; Sic parvis magna: and 2. That they do not warily
distinguish between that first Law, in rebus constituendis; and this second Law
of Nature, in rebus constitutis; but inconsiderately misapply that Law and Rule
and Method which is ordinary and regular, constituted, and fitted, and
accommodate to Nature already settled; as if the same were and ought to be
necessarily the Rule and Law in the first formation and settling of things:
which is an Error that proceeds from the overmuch fixing of our Minds to that
which in the present course of things is obvious to Sense, and not adverting,
that the first Constitution and Order of things is not in Reason or Nature
manageable by such a Law, which is most excellently adequated and proportioned
to things fully settled.

Therefore, besides that Law which the Divine Wisdom, Power, and Goodness has
fixed in Nature fully statuminated, we must also suppose a Law and Order of the
Divine Wisdom, not rigorously bound either to second Causes or present stated
Methods in the first production of things. And this the due Consideration of
the different nature of the state of things in fieri and in facto esse, will
easily persuade, that the most wise God that has established a fixed, regular,
ordinary Law in things already settled, which he rarely departs from; yet used
another kind of order, namely, the regiment of his own Will and Wisdom, and if
I may with humility speak it, a dictatorian power, more accommodate to the
first production of things. And thus much for the comparison between the
Mosaical and Philosophical Theories touching things, and the great advantage
and preference of the former, as most suitable to the true nature, state, and
reason of things. And now I draw toward a conclusion of this long Discourse,
and shall therefore in the last place give an account of those Consectaries,
Consequences, and Corollaries which are evidently deducible from this
Consideration of the Origination of Mankind by the immediate Efficiency of this
Supreme Intelligent Being, Almighty God: and indeed, principally for the sake
of these Consequences and Corollaries has all been written that precedes in
this Book, and it is the Scope, End, and Use of the whole Book, which I shall
absolve in the next Chapter.

CAP. VII. A Collection of certain evident and profitable Consequences from
this Consideration, That the first Individuals of Humane Nature had their
Original from a Great, Powerful, Wise, Intelligent Being.
I Now come to that upon which I had my Eye from the first Line that was
written touching this Subject, namely, the Consequences and Illations that
arise from this great Truth contained in these Conclusions.

1. That Mankind had an Original of his Being ex non genitis.

2. That this Origination of Mankind was neither casual, nor merely natural.

3. That the Efficient of Man's Origination, was and is an Intelligent
Efficient of an incomparable Wisdom and Power.

First therefore, we have here a most evident, sensible, and clear conviction
of a Deity, and a confirmation of Natural Religion, which consists principally
in the acknowledging of Almighty God to be a most perfect Eternal Being, of
infinite Wisdom, Goodness, and Power, and a due habitude of Mind, Life, and
Practice, arising from that Principle.

It has been commonly observed, that the particular or instituted Religions
since the Creation have had their Proofs by Miracles, which were as it were the
Credentials to subdue the Minds of Men to assent to it. Thus the instituted
Religion of the Jews, given by the hand of Moses, was confirmed by the great
Miracles done by God by the hand of Moses, in Egypt and in the Wilderness: and
the Christian Religion had its Confirmation by the Miracles of Christ and his
Apostles, who did wonderful things, beyond the reach and power of created
Agents or Activities, which were therefore Miracles; such as were governing of
the Winds and Seas, healing of the Sick by a touch or word, raising the Dead,
etc.

But it is farther said, That Almighty God never used Miracles to evidence the
truth of his own Existence, Power, Wisdom, Goodness; or for the establishing of
Natural Religion, or the confuting of Atheism.

But I take it, that there are really as many Miracles for the evincing of the
truth of Natural Religion, viz. the Existing of Almighty God, as there are
Works in Nature: For although it be a great truth, that the Laws of Nature, as
the Positions of the Heavenly and Elementary Bodies, their Motion, Light,
Influence, Regularity, Position, propagation of Vegetables, Animals, Men, and
the whole Economy of the Universe is by the Divine Wisdom, Power, and Goodness
settled in a regular course; so that now we call things Natural, and Works and
Laws and Order of Nature; and being so settled and fixed, cease to be Miracles:
yet in their first Institution and Constitution, they were all, or many,
Miracles, Works exceeding the activity of any created or natural power, and
accordingly ought to be valued, and really are so; and it is nothing else but
their commonness, and our inadvertence and gross negligence, that hinders the
actual estimate of them as great and wonderful Miracles: As I have often said,
if at this moment all the Motions of the Heavenly Bodies should cease, or there
should be a general stop of the Propagation of Animals, Vegetables, or Men, if
Men's Reason should generally fail them, and for the most part they should
become like Brutes, if the Light of the Sun were darkened, or the great Luminous
or Planetary Bodies should bulge and fall foul one upon the other, or that
disorder or confusion should generally fall upon the Works of Nature, and break
that excellent Order that now obtains among them, we should be full of
admiration of such a Change, and account them Miraculous: And the reason is,
because the sense of the Change is at present incumbent upon us, and we cannot
choose but take notice of them as strong, unusual, miraculous Prodigies: When
all this while Natures course holds regularly, the Wonder and Miracle is ten
times greater in the state of things as they now stand, than it would be in
such a discomposure of Nature. The Motion, and Light, and Position, and Order
of the Heavenly and Elementary Bodies is a greater Evidence of the Divine Power
that put them and keeps them in Motion, than if they all rested. And it is a
greater Miracle that a Man was constituted upon the Earth, that he has a power
given him to propagate his kind, that he lives ordinarily such a portion of
time in the World, that he has the use of Reason and Understanding; I say
there is more of Miracle in it, than in the want of it: Only there are these
three things that abate the value of it among Men, 1. The commonness of the
benefit and wonder renders the Observation thereof little. 2. Mankind is
negligent in improving his Observation, he never rubs the Corn out of the Ear,
and so by inadvertence, supineness, and negligence, suffers things of this
nature to slip away without notice. 3. We rarely carry things to their
Original, but take them as we find them; whereas if we did as by a Clew follow
the Works of Nature to their Original, we should find the Divine Omnipotence
and infinite Wisdom at the upper end of the Chain, and the Worms themselves no
other than Miracles in their first constitution. He that considers the
admirableness of the Frame of Humane Nature, especially of his intellectual
power, and that is but acquainted with himself, will without arrogance or
vainglory conclude that Man is the most admirable Creature that this lower
World affords, a Creature to which all the visible Creatures of this lower
World seem in a great measure to point at, as their End. And therefore if the
first Individuals, the common Parents of Mankind were at some one time
constituted, there was a very great deal of Power, Wisdom, and Intelligence
employed to the making up of such a Piece as this: If we see an excellent
Picture to the Life, or a Statue, there will not need much Rhetoric or Logic
to persuade or evince, that surely it was not done without an excellent,
knowing, and intelligent Artist. And certainly that Efficient, who ever he was
that did at first compose and make up the admirable Structure of the Humane
Body, all the Organs, Nerves, Veins, Arteries, Viscera, Bones and other
Integrals thereof; that endowed it with the Faculties of a vegetable and
sensible Nature, that gave him a reasonable, intellectual self-moving Soul,
with all its subordinate Faculties; that so strangely and stupendiously united
two such different Essentials of a reciprocal and intellectual nature, was some
intelligent Being, and such an intelligent Being that was not only of a far
more admirable Wisdom and Power than Man, now the best of the visible
Creatures, appears to be; but of such an excess of Wisdom and Power, as cannot
be found in any known Being, besides him that we call Almighty God.

And if any Man shall say, as needs he must, that surely it must be granted,
that he was of a Power and Wisdom far more excellent and perfect than that Work
he thus made; but how are we sure that he must be God? May it not be some Being
that admirably surpasses the perfection of Humane Nature, and yet may it not
be something less than infinite, somewhat inferior to God, may it not be some
Angel, some separated Intelligence? To this I say, 1. That Man that can be
forced by this Work to acknowledge an Intelligent Being transcendently beyond
the Power and Wisdom of a Man, a Power that he never saw, but only collected
from the eminence of an Effect which surpasses the activity of any Being that
he has ever seen with his Eyes; a Being that acts by choice, election, and
intention: I say, that Man that can once admit an invisible Being of an
efficiency equal to such a Work, has broken the strength of Atheism; since
whatsoever can be alleged to evince such an Existence, as the Objection
supposed does, may be alleged efficaciously to prove the Existence of a God;
since all that can be said for the Existence of the former, that and much more
may and must be said and granted for the Existence of the latter, namely, God.
2. But again, since the measure of any Man's conception touching, the infinite,
sovereign excellence of an Efficient must needs be the excellence of the Work;
if therefore a Man does not, cannot know any more admirable created Existence
than himself, he cannot expect a greater Evidence of a more transcendent Power,
Wisdom, or Goodness, than he that was the Efficient of such a Being as himself
is: It Is possible he may suppose some more excellent Inhabitants of the
Heavenly Bodies than he himself is, but this is more than he knows; and it is
true the Sun and Stars are goodly beautiful Bodies, but he does not know that
they are any more than fiery Balls, that naturally give light and heat: but as
he has no evidence, so he has no evident reason to satisfy, that they are
animate, much less intellectual; and consequently, for any thing a Man knows he
himself is incomparably a more excellent Being than they: it is true, they last
longer, and so does a piece of Marble, I speak not to disparage those beautiful
Beings, but to enforce the Argument ad hominem; that to the first formation of
a living Intelligent Nature there is as great a Power requisite and
conspicuous, as to the formation of the noblest Creature that we see or know:
And I should not question, but that that Power and Wisdom which were equal to
the first formation of the Reasonable Nature, were equal to the formation and
efficiency of the Sun or the brightest Star in Heaven. Since therefore I can
judge of the measure or excess of the Power and Wisdom of any Efficient by the
nobleness and value of the Effect, and I know not any sensible Being of greater
worth, value, and wonder than Man; I have reason to believe that he that first
formed Man is a Being of the greatest and most transcendent Power, Wisdom, and
Goodness that is imaginable; and that Being which I have reason to believe to
be of the greatest Power, Wisdom and Goodness, I have reason to believe to be
Almighty God, who is Optimus Maximus. And if it be said that the conviction by
this Argument is so much the more infirm, because I see daily that Man begets a
Man, and so the efficiency no more proves the Existence of God, than it proves
the Father to be God that begets a Son of his own likeness and species; I say
the Instance is so far from weakening the Inference, that it rather enforces
it: For the first formed Parents of Mankind were also endued with this
generative power, by virtue of that first efficiency upon the first individual
pair of Mankind; so that the generative power in Man is but an effect of that
redundance of Power that was in the first Efficient of the Humane Nature:
Indeed if any Man, or all the Men in the World could constitute a Man in any
other way than by natural propagation, it were an Instance that would
sufficiently confute the Inference. But the generative power and faculty being
but a part of that admirable effect that was wrought in the formation of the
Humane Nature, it rather advances, than any way depreciateth the Power and
Wisdom of the first Efficient of Mankind, that he was formed together with such
a power of propagating his kind.

2. From hence we learn not only that there is a God, but in some measure we
learn what he is. As this Work, the primitive Effection of the Humane Nature,
could never be effected but by an Intelligent Being, so when we see such a Work
as this, we cannot choose but acknowledge that he is transcendently wise,
transcendently powerful, transcendently good; that such was his Power and
Wisdom, appears by his Work, and that such was his Goodness, appears, in that
freely without any motive or advantage to himself he formed this excellent
creature Man; it was but to communicate his abundant Goodness, and to give
Being to an Intelligent Nature that might be capable of the participation of
his Goodness and Bounty commensurate to his nature. We also learn, that as he
made an Intelligent Being, so he is a Transcendent Intelligence; He that made
the Eye, shall he not see? It is very true, the perception of Sense is the
lowest kind of perception, and the perception of rational and discursive
Intellection is of a higher rank than the perception of Sense; the Intuitive
perception is nobler than that of Ratiocination; but the perception, if I may
use that word, in Almighty God is of a transcendent perfection above all these,
and includes them all, but not under those allayes that render other kind of
perceptions less perfect: He sees and hears and knows, without an Eye, without
an Ear, without an Object. He that could create an Intellectual Being, does
most perfectly understand and know, for he could not be destitute of any
perfection whereof an incorporeal Being could be capable; and since he made a
Being capable of Intelligence, certainly he had a greater and more perfect
Intelligence. And here I cannot choose but re-mind some things again that I
have formerly intimated, viz. 1. That those that go about to attribute the
Origination of Mankind to a bare Order or Law of Nature, as the primitive
Effector thereof, speak that which is perfectly irrational and unintelligible:
for although a Law or Rule is the Method and Order by which an Intelligent
Being may act, yet a Law or Rule or Order is a dead, unactive, uneffective
thing of it self, without an Agent that uses it, and exercises it as his Rule
and Method of Action. What would a Law signify in a Kingdom or State, unless
there were some Person or Society of Men that did exercise, and execute, and
judge, and determine, and act by it, or according to it? And therefore
Aristotle, in the Books de Mundo attributed to him, though in the description
of God, as to the constancy of his working, he style him (...). Lex
aequabiliter in nos fusa, nec transpositionem nec correctionem ullam recipiens,
praestantior and firmior omnibus quae in tabulis descriptae contineantur. Yet
he rests not in that description, but tells us that he is a Being, that acts by
Empire and Command and Will: Quod in navi guhernator, in curru auriga, in choro
praecentor, in civitate lex, in exercitu imperator, hoc idem in mundo Deus. So
that to the effecting of the Humane Nature a bare independent Law is
incompetent, but there must be an Intelligent Being, whose Will that Rule and
Law which we call Nature is. 2. That although the Manner and Method that the
Divine Power and Wisdom used in the first formation and effecting of the Humane
Nature, is not cognoscible by the Light of Nature, without Divine Revelation,
because none but Almighty God was acquainted with or present at that Work, and
his Power and Wisdom might use various Orders or Methods in its first
effection: yet the Conclusion, that this Work, whatever particular Method it
had for its effection, was the Work of a most powerful, intelligent, wise
Being, acting by Intellection, Will, and Intention, is a Truth apparently
evident to the Light of Nature and Reason, and as infallible a Demonstration of
a Deity, as if a Man could have been present and seen the Work done; as I do
most rationally conclude an excellent Watch or other Automaton was the work of
an intelligent Artist, though I do not know the particular manner how he made
it, unless I am particularly informed thereof by him.

3. From hence we learn, that the Divine Providence extends to this lower World
and all the things therein, and is not only confined to things above the Moon,
as Aristotle would have it.

He that condescended to the effection not only of Man, but of all the Animals
of this lower World, certainly had a regard to them, and would not leave them
without the regiment of his Providence, which were the Works of his own
immediate Power and Will.

It is true, the ordinary regiment of the Divine Providence in things natural
is ordinarily managed by this regular and ordinary Law of Nature whereof we
have spoken before. But yet he deals not by the World, as I deal by my Watch;
when I have wound it up I take no more care of it, but it moves according to
the regular composure of it; but he communicates a general Influence to it,
whereby it is supported in its Being and Order; and as he manifested a more
special care in the fashioning of Man, so he affords him a special Providence
in his regiment.

4. From hence we learn, not only the Original of those admirable Faculties in
Man, especially of the light of his Understanding and the liberty of his Will,
whereby he resembles his Maker; but also from whence he had that Intellectual
Soul, not out of the Matter whereof his Corporeal and Animal Nature was
constituted, but of a higher and nobler extraction, namely, by Creation he
breathed into him the breath of Life.

5. From hence we learn to be confirmed not only in the Notion of the
Immortality of the Soul, but in some measure the reason of it: It was a created
Spiritual Nature, infused into him by the Almighty efficiency and infusion of
God.

6. From hence we learn, that Mankind is of kin to both Worlds, the Celestial
and Elementary, nexus utriusque mundi, capable of a felicity beyond the extent
of this inferior World.

7. From hence we also learn from whence these common Notions, especially of
the Existence of a God, and these anticipations of some Moral Principles of the
Veneration of God, Righteousness, and Justice are evidently to be found in the
generality of Mankind; (but where they are impaired by corrupt Customs or
Education) from whence those Operations of the natural Conscience are
discernible in most Men antecedent to any Instruction or Education, the
original of those common Notions that more immediately concern the Intellective
Faculty, and Moral Inclinations that more immediately concern the Volitive
Faculty, seem to be two; the first more primitive and radical in the Soul, the
second not altogether so radical and primitive, yet such as have also a natural
connection with and to the Soul. First therefore as to the first of these: The
Soul of Man, as it came out of the hands of the Glorious God, so it had
engraven in it these Impressions and Characters of some great and intellective
Principles and rational Propensions, that serve secretly to direct and incline
him to these common Notions and Sentiments. So that whether the Souls of the
Descendents from Adam were traduced from him, or whether they are immediately
created and infused by God, (a Dispute not seasonable in this place) yet those
real Characters, Impressions, and rational Noemata and Instincts (though
weakened by the Fall, and the contracted Corruption of Humane Nature) are
brought with us into the World, and grow up with us; whereby Mankind has not
only those great excellencies of his Faculties, Understanding and Will, but a
certain congenit stock of Rational Tendencies and Sentiments engraven and
lodged in his Soul, which if duly attended and improved, are admirable helps to
the perfecting and advancing of a Rational Life. And therefore, as the Divine
Goodness did not only give the Faculties of Sense and Perception to the
Sensitive and Animal Nature, but also lodged in their sensitive Souls certain
connatural and congenit sensitive Instincts (not acquired by Experience, but
congenit with them) whereby they are directed and inclined to what is
conducible to the sensitive good of their Sensitive Nature; so the Rational
Nature is furnished with certain congenit Notions, Inclinations, and Tendencies
born with him, but improved and perfected by the exercise of Reason and
Observation, whereby he is inclined and directed antecedently to the good of a
Reasonable Life or Nature.

These differences seem to be in those congenit Inclinations and Instincts of
Animals and Men, 1. In the nature of them, those anticipations that are in
Animals are merely sensible; those in Men intellectual, moral, and suitable to
the Operations of a reasonable Being. 2. In their end, those of Animals are
only in order to a sensible good, and the regiment of a sensual Life; those in
Men are directed to the use and benefit of a rational Life, and not only so,
but in order to the acquest of a supernatural and eternal Life. 3. In as much
as the Sensible Nature is not endued with Intellection and Will, and therefore
not properly capable of a Law in the true and formal nature of a Law; therefore
those Instincts that are lodged in their nature, are merely Inclinations, or
natural Propensions, or Biasses; But the Humane Nature being endued with
Intellection, Reason, and Liberty, and therefore capable of a Law in its true
propriety and formal nature; those rational Propensions and Inclinations in the
Humane Nature, are lodged in him by the great Governor and Lawgiver of Heaven
and Earth, per modum legis obligantis; and the insition and engraving of those
Notions, Propensions, and rational Tendencies are in nature of a promulgation
of that Law, the inscription thereof in their Hearts, and means, helps, and
assistances to their observance thereof. And herein lies the true Root of the
Obligation of the natural Law and natural Consciences, so excellently
decyphered by the Apostle in the two first Chapters of the Epistle to the
Romans; and this I call the primitive and radical Insition of the Law of Nature
in the Soul. 2. But besides this primitive Insition, there is a secondary yet
natural Insition of the Law of Nature in the humane Soul, which expands and
improves it self as the exercise of Reason increases; which is a certain
congruity between the Faculties of the Soul, the Intellect and Will, and those
Truths of indisputable importance in the Understanding, especially that of the
Existence and Regiment of Almighty God, and those moral Sentiments of Good and
Evil that in their discovery concern immediately the Understanding or
Synteresis, but in their exercise concern more immediately the Will: That as we
see by a certain connatural congruity between the visive Faculty and the
visible Object, and as we taste by a connatural congruity between the Faculty
and the Object of Taste; so there is a connatural congruity between the
intellective and volitive Faculties in the Soul, and those communia noemata of
these great important Truths both intellective and moral, whereby the Soul
perceives, and relisheth, and tastes true and good, and inclines to it.

8. From the Consideration of this Effection of Man by the Power and Goodness
and Wisdom of the glorious God, we have the discovery of that infinite
obligation of Duty, Love, and Gratitude of all Mankind unto Almighty God. To
give a benefit to a Being already existing, carries in it an Obligation of the
person benefited to his Benefactor, juxta modum and mensuram beneficii. But God
Almighty is the Benefactor of Mankind in the greatest imaginable amplitude and
comprehension: he gave him Being, the vastest and most unlimited Gift, and he
gave him such a Being, so advanced, so excellent, and perfect, and accommodate
with all the conveniences that his nature was possibly capable of; and although
Man wilfully threw away a great measure of his Happiness, yet he has still so
much left as binds him to an eternal Gratitude and Duty to God, both as his
Maker and as his Benefactor: and the Posterity of Adam has still continued
upon them the same reason of Duty and Gratitude: I shall not here, as I said,
enter into the Consideration of the propagation of the Humane Nature. If the
Soul of every person propagated be created and infused by God, then every
person seems related unto Almighty God in a way little different from that of
the first formed Man: But if the Soul be also propagated as Light or Fire from
Fire or Light, by a kind of Irradiation from the Soul of the first Man, yet
still we are all his Offspring, every Man owes more of his Being to Almighty
God than to his natural Parents, whose very Propagative Faculty was at first
given to the Humane Nature by the only virtue, efficacy, and energy of the
Divine Commission and Institution, and the Parents of our Nature are but
vicaria instrumenta Numinis, in the propagation and formation of our Nature.

9. From hence we learn the true Foundation, and Root, and Extent of that
Subjection that the Created Nature owes to Almighty God, namely, on the part of
Man there is dependence upon God, as the root and support of his existence,
there is the obligation of love, gratitude, and duty, as to his greatest and
most sovereign Benefactor: But this is not all the foundation of Subjection on
the part of Man, and Authority on the part of God, but there are certain
radical foundations of the Divine Authority and Sovereignty over Man; namely,
1. A right of Propriety, nothing can be more a Man's own than that which he
gives a Being to: But the propriety that any Man can have in what he makes, is
still limited and qualified; first, because he is not himself his own, he owes
his Being to God, and therefore without the help of Divine Indulgence his
acquests are like the acquests of a Servant, acquirit domino. And besides, the
Matter is not his own, whatsoever he makes, he makes out of that Matter that
was not his own: But the propriety that Almighty God acquires in his Creatures
is absolute, because he himself is a Supreme and Sovereign Efficient, none is
above him; and because the Matter out of which he effected Man and all
Corporeal Existences was perfectly his own, it was Matter of his own making. 2.
A right of absolute Dominion and Sovereignty over his Creature; where the
property is circumscribed, limited, or qualified, the dominion is so too; but
an absolute sovereign property carries with it an absolute sovereign dominion
in the Proprietor. 3. An infinite irresistible power to exert the right of his
Dominion according to his Will: The two former Considerations give him a
sovereign authority over his Creature, a right, jus disponendi; but authority
or right being divided from power to execute that authority and exact obedience
to it is lame, but the glorious God has not only an absolute right of
propriety and dominion over his Creature; but an infinite irresistible power to
rule, order, and dispose it according to his Will: Almighty God tells us,
Jerem. 18. that as the Clay is in the Potter's hand, so are Mankind in his
hand, yea and in a far greater subordination and subjection to his Power; the
power of the Potter over his Clay is a finite limited power, we see in the same
place it resisted and disappointed his intention by its untractableness: But
the power of God over his Creature is an infinite power, he that by his power
made him in an instant, can in an instant dissolve or annihilate him: And yet
this infinite Power of God is under the management of a most wise, and holy,
and pure, and gracious Will; and therefore though his Propriety be absolute,
his Dominion boundless, his Power infinite, yet the exercise of his Dominion
and Power is full of Goodness, suitable to the most perfect nature of God: I am
God, and not man, therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed. Here therefore
we have that great Question among some of the Ancients satisfactorily answered,
namely, What is the Root of all Obligation in Mankind, whence comes the
Obligation in the Consciences of Men, what is it that binds Men to keep their
Faith, their Promises? It is the Law and Command of him that has sovereign
Authority to command, and infinite Power to exact Obedience, and to punish the
want of it; all other foundations of Obligation are but weak and deficient
without this, or in comparison to it.

10. In this History of the primitive state of Man, and his defection, we have
the Solution of that great Quaesitum that troubled the ancient Philosophers,
especially the Stoics, namely, Whence or how came it to pass, that not only
that great disorder happens in things of this World, especially in the nature
and practices and customs of Mankind, some would have it from Matter, some from
one thing, some from another; we see here a plain Solution of the Quaere, That
it came not from God, no nor from Matter, but by the defection and disobedience
of the first Man, which brought Death into the World, and Sin and Corruption
and Depravation and Disorder into the Humane Nature, and brought disorder and
discomposure upon the greatest part of this lower World; which as it was
principally made for the service of Man, so it suffered a great Concussion and
Breach by the Disobedience and Apostasy of Man: and from this unhappy root
arises all the Disorders and Confusions in the humane World; for although the
Fall of Man did neither alter the essential Constituents of Mankind, nor wholly
raze out the Engravings of those common Notions, Sentiments, and rational
Instincts that were in them; yet it did in a great measure impair and weaken
them, and brought in a very great deordination and discomposure, setting up the
lower Faculties in rebellion against the superior; so that the wiser and more
morate part of Mankind were forced to set up Laws and Punishments, to keep the
generality of Mankind in some tolerable order.

11. This reasonableness, congruity, and consonancy to common Light and Reason
in the Hypothesis of the Formation of the World and Mankind, and the great
preference that it has above those Inventions of the ancient Philosophers
touching the same; the admirable Solution of many of those difficulties which
are hereby solved, does give a very great valuation and esteem to the truth and
Divine Authority of the Scriptures. It is true, their Authority is above the
contribution of Humane Reason, or any Supplies it can bring either to its Truth
or Authority: but yet when a Man shall see so great a clearness and plainness
and reasonableness in the Holy Scripture touching this great Truth, so many
difficulties and absurdities thereby avoided, so great a suffrage and
attestation of Reason and common evidence bearing witness to this Truth, and to
such a Truth as could never be at first particularly discovered without Divine
Revelation, yet being discovered, carries in it nothing of absurdity, but a
singular congruity both to it self in the several parts of it, and to the
common Reason.

It is true, a great though a Ministerial and Humane Suffrage to the truth and
excellency of the Holy Scriptures, strengthens our Faith, which God knows
stands in need of all the contributions that may be, to bear up our Souls
against that root of Infidelity that is in us; and may be instrumental and
preparative to bring those to the belief and veneration of the Scriptures who
are without, and hardly perswadible, but by those media that bear a congruity
to their natural Light and Reason.

12. And therefore we have infinite reason to bless and magnify the gracious
God, that has lent us his Holy Scriptures to inform us in things to be
believed and to be done, and to contain and preserve us infra cancellos
certitudinis. The Lord knows, and we cannot choose but daily observe in our
selves a strange mobility and instability in our Imaginative and Intellective
Faculty, roving after every thing and in many things that we know, and much
more in things we know not, framing strange Chimaera's, finding out many
Inventions, was the first effect of the departure of Mankind from a revealed
Truth, and searching after unknown and forbidden Knowledge.

And this has been the course and walk and disease of our restless, moveable,
unstable, Mercurial Brains ever since in matters of Philosophy, in matters of
Religion: The merciful and wise God therefore, to keep in and regulate the
extravagant and witless Spirit of Man, and to give us the clear knowledge of
things necessary and useful, and to prescribe and fix bounds, and banks, and
limits to our moveable, unstable, and unfixed Minds, has given us these Sacred
Oracles both to enlighten and inform us, and to fix and contain us within the
bounds and limits of Truth and Sobriety.

13. I have before touched something concerning a common Tradition that might
obtain in the generality of Mankind, concerning the Origination of the World
and Man; and here we may find a reasonable discovery of something touching the
root of this Tradition, namely, the Holy Scriptures, especially that of
Genesis; for we find very much, among the ancient Heathen especially, touching
the Creation of the World, the Observation of the Seventh Day, the Flood, Noah
and his three Sons, though by other Names; and diverse other things, wherein
though they mingle some of their own wild Notes, yet they bear a great analogy
to the Relations in the Scriptures, and seem borrowed from them, or from the
Hebrews, to whom that great Treasure of the Scriptures was committed. And if a
Man consider how many Opportunities there were for the communication of the
Jewish Learning to the rest of Mankind, even in the ancient times, especially
to the Egyptians, with whom they long dwelt, and with whom Solomon was joined
in affinity; so the Babylonians and Chaldeans during their Captivity there to
the Grecians, by the intercourse they had with them after the breaking of the
Persian Monarchy: it will render it an easy Supposition, that much of the
Jewish Learning was derived to many of the learned Heathen, though they
oftentimes mingled with it some Conceptions of their own: Plato and diverse
other Grecians borrowed much of their traditional knowledge from the Egyptians
and they from the Hebrews. Vide Seldom. de Jure Gentium, etc. lib. 1. cap. 2.

14. Since Man in his first Original is the Work of the most wise intelligent
Being, it is evident that Almighty God in this effection of Man did intend an
end and scope of this Work: an intelligent Agent acts ex intention and
volitione, and therefore proposes in his Work an end or purpose in it, and the
designation of an end in working is the great perfection of an intelligent
Agent: Agents that are simply Natural, or that are directed but by implanted
Instincts, act by a kind of necessity of Nature, their activity and vigor
putting it self forth not by choice or election, but driven by the activity of
their nature. And although it is visible that all, even the most necessary
operations of unintelligent Causes in the World, are directed unto certain
excellent ends, yet the election of and direction to these ends is not in those
necessary and natural Causes themselves; but is in that intelligent Efficient
that intended and designed that end, and endowed the natural Agent with those
active Faculties or Powers which might be proper and serviceable to such ends,
and mancipated or bound to them certain Instincts and natural Motions
subservient to those ends. As in things that are artificial, my Watch gives me
an account of the Hour of the Day, that is the end thereof; but it is an end
not designed or intended by the Watch, but of the Artist that made it.

And although in sensible Creatures there seems to be an Image of Intelligence,
and they move more perfectly to their several ends of their several operations;
as in choice and eating of their food to preserve their individual nature, in
generation to preserve their specifical nature, yet the truth is, those
designations of the ends of these operations, and the furnishing them with
instincts in order thereunto, is due still to that Intelligent Being, namely,
the glorious God, which has by his Wisdom determined these sensible Creatures
to these ends, and by these means, in the first institution of their natures.

15. And upon the same reason it follows, That since Almighty God is the Maker
and Efficient of Man, it is not only reasonable and just, but natural, and in a
manner necessary, that the designation of Man to his end should belong to him
that was his Efficient. And therefore although the supreme intelligent Being,
that Efficient of Mankind has made Man an intelligent Being, endued him with
Will, whereby he is in a manner Dominus suarum actionum, and a kind of Image of
his Maker, yet he is not the Lord and disposer of his own end; for though Man
be made an intelligent and free Agent, and therefore in those actions that move
from himself he has the privilege of an intelligent Agent, and propounds his
end to himself in those actions: yet he was not the Efficient of himself, and
therefore cannot proportion to himself the end of his Being, but that belongs
only to that intelligent Efficient that gave him his Being; and therefore that
Efficient can only be the Propounder of that end which is commensurate to his
Being.

16. Since Almighty God is not only an Intelligent Agent, but the highest, most
wise, powerful, and perfect Cause; and since it seems to be most suitable to
such a wise Being to proportionate the ends of his Works in some measure
suitable to the worth and value of the Work. And since Man is the work and
effection of God, and noblest work of his that we see in this inferior World,
we have just reason to conclude, That Almighty God made Man for some end, and
for some such end as may bear a proportion to the nature, condition, and
quality of the Work it self.

There seem to be but two ways to know the end that an intelligent Agent
propounds in any action or work, 1. The first is plain, explicit, and clear,
viz. When that Agent reveals and discovers what is the end he intends in the
work he does: and thus it has pleased the glorious God to acquaint us in the
Holy Scriptures, that his intent in making Man was his own Glory, and to make
Man a Vessel of everlasting Happiness. But because in this place we are only
making natural deductions from the effection of Man by God, I shall refer the
consideration of the former to its proper place. 2. Therefore the second is by
collection of natural and reasonable Consequences from the nature of the
Efficient, and the worth, value, or condition of the Effect; and this medium
though it be not so clear, particular, and explicit as the former, yet it does
give us some account touching the nature and kind of the end that is probably
propounded by the Efficient: but touching the same in the next Chapter.

CAP. VIII. A farther Enquiry touching the End of the Formation of Man, so far
as the same may be collected by Natural Light and Ratiocination.
WE may easily observe in general in the Works of Nature, and in every
particular thereof, three kinds of admirable Accommodations.

The first is, the Accommodation of every thing to the common beauty and
integrity of the Universe: As in a curious piece of Landscape there are orderly
interspersed Clouds, and Trees, and Flowers, and Rivers, and Houses, and
Arches, and Ships, and Fish playing, and Birds of several kinds, some flying,
some swimming, some perching, yea various Flies and Worms and Insects, and all
contribute to the beauty and ornament and variety of the entire piece, though
each has a particular beauty of its own: So in this great and glorious Frame
of the Universe not only the Celestial Bodies, but all the Animals and
Vegetables, even to the least Fly, or Worm, or Flower, or Herb, contribute to
the beauty, glory, ornament, and variety of the whole; and make up one common
demonstration of the admirable Wisdom of that great God, that made it valde
bonum.

And certainly under this Consideration it is apparently evident, that Man
contributes no small portion of beauty and ornament to this goodly Frame of the
Universe: For if we should suppose that all the Integrals of the inferior World
were as now they are, only destitute of the Creature called Man, it would soon
appear that it wanted much of that beauty, and comeliness, and perfection which
it now has by the accession of this excellent Integral of the Universe; which
though it has its residence in the lower region thereof, yet in the common
compute and estimate of the whole it contributes to its beauty and integrity.

The second Accommodation of every thing, is to some other part or parts of the
Universe; and this though it may be single, or a respect only between some one
single part and some other single part of Nature, yet for the most part we
shall find every thing in Nature has an accommodation unto very many other
things; the Wisdom of Almighty God being multifaria sapientia, has admirably
evidenced it self, in giving almost every thing in its nature a complexed and
complicated accommodation to various other things of differing kinds and
natures. This is more eminently conspicuous in the Heavenly Bodies; for
Instance, the Sun is accommodated to the use and convenience of the Planetary
Bodies, and of this inferior World and of every part thereof, by his Position,
by his Light, by his Heat, by his Motion it procures Generation for the
replenishing of the Earth, raises Clouds and Vapors to irrigate and water it,
it occasioneth Winds to move and communicate those Irrigations, it gives
variety of Seasons, measures of Times, and infinite more accommodations to
other things. If we come lower, to the Elementary World, the Air is
accommodated as a fit medium for the derivation of Light and Influence from the
Celestial Bodies; it is the vehicle of the Meteors, the means of Respiration,
the food and life of the vital and animal Spirits, and many the like
accommodations. If we consider of Animals, we shall find admirable
accommodations in them one to another, and especially to Man: the Horse,
high-spirited, yet very docible, fitted for swiftness, carriage, and agility,
by the make of his Body, his Neck, his Mouth, his Back, his Hoof; the Ox
patient, painful, strong, fitted for draught; the Camel fitted for strength,
and a natural Saddle for Burden; the Cow for yielding Milk; the Sheep for
Clothing; the Beasts and Birds of greatest use being most commonly made tame,
and affecting a spontaneous subjection to Man: among the Vegetables some are
for Food, some for Medicines, some for Smell, some for Taste: nay that seemingly
most abject part of Nature, the Insects, even the worst as well as the best of
them, have their accommodation to other things; some for Food to the more
perfect Animals, as Flies, Worms, etc. some for Medicines both for Men and
Animals; nay the very venomous Insects are accommodated to the salubrity of the
Earth and Waters, collecting the unwholsom Juice of either into their own
consistency; and many that are poisonous and hurtful, yet carry with them
Antidotes and Remedies, as Vipers, Scorpions, and diverse others.

Although in the lower World there are various accommodations of things one to
another, yet the chief and ultimate accommodation of things seems principally
to terminate in Man. The Grass of the Field is accommodate to the use of
Animals for their food, and so are the Insects for the food of Fish and Fowl,
but these in their last particular accommodation are for the food or other use
of Man. On the other side, Man is accommodate to the convenience and use of the
Vegetables and Animals, but not in a way of Subservience or Service, but in a
way of Regiment, Order, Empire, and Protection, which he is enabled to exercise
over the Creatures of greater strength and bodily force, by the advantage of
his Faculties wherein he exceeds them: Thus he is accommodate to the Vegetable
Nature, by Planting and Husbandry; to the Animal Nature by subduing the unruly
and hurtful, by the disciplining and managing the docible; by protecting the
domestic, by providing for their wants. The accommodation of Brutes to Men is
an accommodation of an Inferior to a Superior; the accommodation of Man to
Brutes is an accommodation of a Superior to an Inferior, an accommodation of
Regiment and Protection.

The third sort of Accommodation is of every thing unto it self; either in
relation to its proper Species, by propagation of its kind; or in relation to
its individual nature, which is that which I principally mean to speak of. We
may observe at least in every Animal, 1. An accommodation of Faculties suitable
to his nature, use, and convenience, which are principally these; Cogitation,
Sensation, Fantasy or Imagination, Appetite and power to Move it self, though
in various degrees of perfection. 2. That all these Faculties are terminated in
a sensitive Life, or Life of Sense, and go no farther. 3. That all those
Faculties are exactly fitted with Organs proportionate to their Faculties, and
the specifical perfection of them: the Organs subservient to the Faculties of
the meanest Insect, are as exquisitly accommodated and fitted thereunto, as the
Organs of a Horse or an Elephant are accommodate to the specifical Faculties of
that Animal. 4. That the wise God has proportioned Objects of the Appetites of
every Animal exactly suitable to those Appetites, and a connatural prosecution
and dexterity in the assecution of them: so that no natural Desire or Appetite
is in vain, or notional only, but really fitted and accommodated with an Object
proportionable to it. 5. That every Animal has its highest complacency and
contentment in the attainment of the suitable Object of its Appetite, and this
is its commensurate Happiness; the Fox, or the Lion, or the Otter has no
greater dexterity in the getting of his Prey, nor greater contentation in his
acquest; than the Be has in getting Honey, or the Spider in catching his Fly.

These things being thus premised, we have therein generally included the
natural Method whereby we may by the Light of Nature search out the true and
special End for which we have reason to believe the great and wise Efficient
made Man.

It is true, that some things Man has in common with the rest of created
visible Beings, as that he is a corporeal Being, has Life and Sensation, and
is a beautiful Piece of the Furniture of this lower World. In these things
therefore, or by them, we are not to seek that special End for which man was
made; because under these and the like Considerations he seems to have a common
parity with other created Beings.

But our search must be, 1. Whether there be not some peculiarities in the
Humane Nature, some Faculties and Powers, something in his Constitution, and
some adaptations and appropriate accommodations therein peculiar to his nature,
and of a far more advanced use and perfection than those of the best of other
inferior Animals; For if we find such in Man, we have just reason to believe
that the most wise Efficient of the Humane Nature, as he raised Man to a
greater eminence not only of gradual but of specifical perfection above the
common Animal Nature, so he designed a more excellent and noble End for this
more excellent and noble Work: For thus it became the greatest Wisdom, to
design a more noble End to that which he constituted a more noble Being. 2. We
are also to search wherein this excellency and preference of the Humane Nature
above the Animal consists: For as the former Consideration gives us a general
Conclusion, That because the Humane Nature is more excellent than the common
Animal Nature, therefore the End or Design of the Constitution of the former is
of a nobler kind than the Design of the Constitution of the latter; So this
particular Consideration of the excellencies of the Humane Nature above the
Animal, gives us some Estimate, Crises, or Indications what those Ends may be
which the wise Creator intended in the making of Man, namely, such Ends as hold
proportions to those eminencies and excellencies wherein the Humane
specifically exceeds the Animal Nature.

Plato, though a great Assertor of the Creation of Man by the Wisdom and Power
of Almighty God, yet in his 7th Book De Legibus seems to have too light an
Expression concerning the End of the making of Man, and of those many
excellencies in the Humane Nature, namely, Hominem Dei ludo esse fictum, atque
id vere ipsius optimum esse. It is below the Dignity of the Divine Wisdom, to
think that he made Men, and endued them with those excellent Faculties, only to
behold them as a Play or a Scorn; or as the inconsiderate part of Mankind
please themselves with beholding of Interludes, or Cock-fighting, or
Bear-baiting: the Comical part of the Lives of Men are too full of Sin and
Vanity, and the Tragical part thereof too full of Sin and Misery to be a
delightful Spectacle unto the pure and wise God, who certainly propounded more
serious Ends than such for so noble a Structure.

The Saying therefore of Plato must be understood only analogically, and
Epictetus may be his Scholiast, who wishes every Man to remember, Te esse
actorem talis fabulae qualis Magistro probata fuerit; si brevis, brevis; si
longa, longa: si mendicum agere te voluerit, fac eam quoque personam ingeniose
repraesentes; ita si claudum, si principem, si plebeium: hoc enim tuum est,
datam personam been effingere, eam autem eligere, alterius. Teaching us by the
similitude, that every Man's Station is subject to the Divine Providence, and
every Man's Duty is to be contented with it.

But to return to the Consideration of the specifical Excellence of the Humane
Nature above the Animal Nature, and the deduction of those Ends which we may
from thence reasonably conclude to be specifical to him, and intended by his
wise Creator.

1. It is apparent that Man is the noblest of all the visible Creatures, at
least of this inferior World, the Complement and chiefest Ornament thereof,
without which it would be destitute of the most glorious Integral thereof: that
all the visible Creatures of this inferior World as it were concenter in him,
and are directed to him or his use, as their immediate End: that he is an
Abstract or Compendium of the greater World, as might easily be evidenced by
the induction of particulars: that he has complicated in him all the
excellencies of the Elementary, Vital, and Animal Natures; that he has
superadded thereunto a singular beauty, and majesty, and usefulness in the
Structure of his Body, the admirable Faculties of Intellect, Reminiscence, and
Ratiocination, the Faculty of Speech, institution of Signs to express his
inward Conceptions, Principles, and Habits, Intellectual and Moral liberty and
empire of Will, whereby he may, if he please, govern his sensitive Appetite,
Passions, and inferior Faculties: So that he is nexus utriusque mundi, the
common Angle wherein the highest and noblest of Material and Corporeal Nature
is joined to the Spiritual and Intellectual. By all which, and many more
Perfections, he is the noblest Instance of the Divine Power, Wisdom, and
Goodness in this inferior World.

The Universe indeed is the great and goodly Type and Image of the Excellency
and Glory of its Creator, but it is a vast and comprehensive Volume, not
comprehensible by any Understanding but his that made it: But this lesser World
Man is a more compendious Abridgment, nearer unto us, and more discoverable by
us; and though yet it has exercised the investigation of most industrious
Minds and Searches without a full and perfect discovery of the least part of
all its Eminencies, yet in respect of its vicinity and obviousness to
Observation it yields a distinct and perceptible Evidence to us of the Wisdom
of its Maker. Thus the Humane Nature objectively and passively exhibits unto
intelligent Beings a wonderful and admirable manifestation of the incomparable
Wisdom, Goodness, Power, and Excellency of him that first created it; and this
was one End of Almighty God in the Creation of Man. And although it be true,
that such is the Self-sufficiency and Happiness of Almighty God, that it is not
capable of any accession by all the Instances of his Wisdom and Goodness in the
Works he has made, nor by any Glory or Praise that from them can return unto
him; yet it is not an End unworthy of the most perfect Being, to render his
Magnificence and Goodness conspicuous, and to receive that deserved Honor and
Praise of his Works that is the just Tribute due unto him.

2. The Divine Essential and Eternal Goodness is inseparable from him, and this
is the root of the Divine Beneficence, which latter though in its effluxes and
emanations it be under the regiment of his own most holy and wise Will, yet it
is diffusive and communicative. That the World was at all made, is the Effect
of this Divine Beneficence, which when it had nothing besides it self unto
which it might communicate it self, it made all things, that according to their
different natures and receptivities might participate of the Divine
Beneficence: To things vegetable he has given the Faculty of Life, Vegetation,
and Growth; this is one participation of the Divine Goodness, per modum else
viventis: and again, he communicates to these Faculties suitable Objects
answering those Vital Faculties; to Sensitive Nature his Beneficence has
communicated those Faculties of Sense as well as Life, and then communicates to
them a farther efflux of his Beneficence, by communicating to them the Objects
grateful and useful both for Life and Sense: thus his Beneficence is
communicated to them per modum boni sensibilis; but to Man his Beneficence is
communicated not only per modum boni vitalis and sensibilis, which yet he
enjoys as other Creatures, but per modum boni intellectualis and voliti.

First, by giving him those nobler Faculties of Intellection and Will, and then
by communicating to those Faculties Objects suitable to those Powers or
Faculties, namely, Intellectual Truths to his Understanding, and Moral,
Rational, and Divine Good to his Will; and among all those, vera and bona, that
are communicated to these Faculties by the Divine Beneficence, God himself, his
Goodness, Truth, Will, Perfection, are the chiefest verum and the chiefest
bonum. So that no Creature below Man is capable formally to know, to love, to
enjoy God, as the chiefest Truth and chiefest Good: And this also seems to be
another End of the Creation of Man, that being made a Creature endued with
Understanding and Will, he might be receptive of the Effluxus of the Divine
Beneficence in a nobler way than the other visible Creatures of this lower
World.

3. As under the first Consideration Man is more eminently an objective
manifestation of the Divine Glory, than other visible Creatures; and as under
the second Consideration Man is more receptive of the Divine Beneficence than
other visible Creatures: So upon farther examination we shall find, that Man
was made in a capacity to be a more active Instrument to serve and glorify his
Maker than other visible Creatures, which was another End of his Creation
specifically different from the End of other visible created Natures, which
will appear by the farther consideration of those two great distinguishing
Faculties, his Understanding and Will.

I shall not go about to make a large Description of those Faculties, or the
Operation, but only observe so much touching them as may reasonably evidence
the preference that Man has therein above the inferior Animals, and the
Inferences that arise thereupon touching the End of Almighty God in the making
Man.

And first for the Intellective Faculty: As in Animals the Faculties of Sense
internal and external, especially the Visive Faculty, places Animals in a rank
of Being far above the insensible Creatures, and accommodates them exquisitly
to a Life of Sense; so the Intellective Faculty placed in Man puts him into a
rank of Beings far above the most perfect Animals, and accommodates the Humane
Nature to an Intellectual Life. And the pre-eminence of this Faculty above the
Faculty of Sense, will appear if we consider the Operations thereof; I shall
instance but in two, namely, intellective Perception and intellective
Ratiocination or Discourse: 1. For the intellective Perception; the
Understanding perceives many things which are not perceptible by Sense or
sensitive Fantasy or Imagination; for Instance, it has the perception of
Substance or Being abstracted from all sensible qualities: it has the
perception of the truth or falsity of a Proposition, it perceives the
Conclusion and the Evidence thereof in the Premises, and many more intellectual
Objects which never did nor can fall under the perception of Sense or
Imagination: And although we cannot clearly understand all the Operations of
the Brutal Fantasy, because we are distinct from them, and they have not the
instrument of Speech intelligible by us to express their perceptions; yet we
may know that this is true by our selves, for we may perceive that we do
perceive these Objects not to be perceptible by our Faculties of Sense, but by
some other Faculties distinct from that of Sense or sensitive Imagination.
Again, in those Objects that are objective to Sense, the intellective
perception discovers somewhat that is apparently unperceived by the Sense or
sensitive Imagination; for Instance, the Heavenly Bodies, the Sun, Moon, and
Stars are equally objected to the view as well of Animals as Men; but yet by
the help of intellective perception Man perceives that in those Objects which
neither the Brutes, no nor Man himself by the bare perception of Sense or
sensitive Fantasy does not, cannot perceive: The perception of Sense gives us
the Sun no bigger than a Bushel, and the Stars than a Candle, cannot discover
an inequality of their distance from us; judges the body of the Moon to have
as many changes in figure and quality as it has various Phases or Appearances,
the Sun really to set, the Limb of the Heavenly Horizon to be contiguous to the
Earth: but the intellective perception finds the quantity of the Sun and Stars
bigger than the Earth, and by the Parallaxes and Eclipses finds the Stars more
distant from us than the Sun, and that than the Moon; perceives distinctly
their several Motions, Orders, Positions, and makes distinctions and
computations of Time and Duration by them, and overrules and confutes the
perception of Sense and Imagination by another kind of perception, above the
perception of Sense. 2. Touching Ratiocination or Discursive Operation, the
precedure thereof is above the reach of the sensitive Fantasy, though this
seems to carry some weak and imperfect Image thereof: For Instance, sometimes
not only the media discursus and the processus discursivus are out of the reach
of Sense, but the very subjectum discursus is imperceptible to Sense: such are
that processus discursivus of the Understanding touching complexed Notions or
Universals; touching the abstracted Notions of Being, Substance, Entity, and
transcendents in Metaphysics; such are also the discursives of moral good and
evil, just, unjust, which are no more perceptible to Sense than Color is to
the Ear; and yet touching these Subjects the Intellect forms Discourses,
deduceth Illations and Conclusions. Again, in matters Mathematical and
Physical, though in the concrete, and in their subjects they are objective to
Sense, yet the media and processus discursivus whereby the Understanding makes
Conclusions, and Inferences, and Illations touching them, are of a range and
kind quite above the range of Sense or sensitive Imagination; thus upon certain
data or postulata in Geometry, the Intellect forms Conclusions, which though
Mechanically and Experimentally true, yet are elicited by a Processus
discursivus, quite above the activity of sensitive Fantasy. And though
matters Physical, Bodies, and Tangible qualities, and their several powers,
manner of production, and diverse other things relating to them are sensible
Objects; yet the Intellect uses a Processus discursivus, whereby it
investigates Truths, and draws Conclusions that are quite above the scantlet of
Sense or Fantasy, ascending up from the Effect to the next Cause, and thence
to the next, and thence gradually to the First Cause of all things. So that
though oftentimes the foot or root of the Discursus intellectivus be bottomed
in some sensible Object, perchance of no great moment and importance, yet by
this Processus discursivus the Intellect rises higher and higher, and quickly
takes a flight out of the ken or reach of Sense, in Consequences, Discursive
Inferences, and Conclusions; and follows the Chain higher and higher, till it
come to the uppermost ring thereof, fastened, as the Poets wittily feign, to
the Throne of Almighty God.

And thus far of these two excellent Operations of this Intellective Faculty,
namely, Intellective Perception and Discourse. But besides these operations and
active exertions of the Understanding, there seems to be two kinds of
accommodations to it, which are admirably serviceable to the improving and
perfecting of its operations; the one internal, the other external.

The internal is this; As we find in the Sensitive Nature certain congenit or
connatural Instincts, whereby they are secretly and powerfully biassed, and
inclined, and carried to their proper sensitive Good, either individual or
specifical; such as are their inclination to that Food that is suitable for
them, their Appetitus procreativus, their care for their Young, and infinite
more; so there seems to be lodged in the Intellective and Rational Nature
certain Rudiments and Tendencies, whereby they are carried to the good of an
intellectual Life, certain communes notitiae, lodged and connaturally implanted
in the Intellect, which serve as a kind of connatural inward stock for the
Understanding to work upon, and also as a secret biass and inclination to carry
him on to the good of an intellectual Life: Such as are a secret inscribed
Notion that there is a God, that he is to be worshipped, honored, served, and
obeyed; and certain inscribed common Notices of Moral Good and Evil, that make
him propense to Justice, Honesty, to do as he would be done by, and the like.
And although evil Customs, and the prevalence of the sensual Appetite may in a
great measure weaken and impair those common Notions when they come to
particulars and particular applications, yet it is evident in all Ages and
Nations, by a kind of connaturality Mankind has ever retained these two great,
and noble, and discriminating denominations, namely, first to be Animal
religiosum, arising from the energy of those infinitae notitiae relating to
God; and to be Animal politicum and sociale, arising from these insitae
notitiae of Moral Good and Evil, and those connatural insitions of Morality
implanted in his nature, which are the great and chief support of humane
Society.

The external accommodation of the Intellective Faculty, is that admirable
Wisdom and Goodness of God, that has so ordered things, that first of all
Mankind is accommodated with those Faculties of Sense, especially that of
Sight, whereby he may perceive all sensible Objects that arrive within the
distance of their activity: And secondly, in that he has exposed a very
considerable part of his admirable Works to that Sense of his. Had Man been
born blind, though his intellective Faculty had been excellent, yet that
Faculty had been very unactive, in this Life at least, because the Basis or
Root of much of its operation depends upon the reception of sensible visible
Objects: and had he been endued with Sense, yet if the excellent Works of God
had been at so great a distance that they had not been perceptible by him, he
had wanted a great contribution to the perfecting of his intellective Faculty.
The Divine Wisdom and Goodness has so ordered things, that he has not only
that receptive Faculty of Sense, especially that of Sight, but has also
presented to his view a great and considerable part of the Universe with great
advantage, beauty, and clearness, the inferior or Elementary World with all its
variety and store, and the prospect of the goodly Celestial Bodies, their
positions, motions, beauty, order, and excellence. And this goodly Apparatus of
the Universe thus objectively derived to his Understanding, furnishes it with
an outward Stock, upon which it may trade and exercise it self with great
delight and advantage; viz. 1. The knowledge of things Physical and Natural,
the State, Order, and Economy of Nature; the Virtue, Efficacy, and Energy of
Second Causes, and their Effects: herein he has a vast extent of the Inferior
and Celestial World to exercise himself in, and certainly this bare knowledge
is a thing of excellent improvement and contentation of the Intellect, and far
exceeds all sensible Delights; in so much that many wise and knowing Men have
chosen to sequester themselves from the common Employments and Contents of
Mankind, for the sake of a Life of Philosophical Speculation: But this is the
lowest part of that knowledge that is hereby acquirable, there is yet a more
noble and excellent knowledge acquirable hereby, that advances and improveth
the Intellectual Nature to a very great and high perfection. 2. Therefore that
knowledge that is hereby acquirable is the knowledge of the Glorious God, the
first Creator, and great Conserver and Governor of all things. I have before
said, that the Goodness of God had lodged an inward Stock in Man whereby to
improve his Intellectual Nature, namely, those communes notitiae of the
Existence of a God, and that he is to be worshipped, served, and obeyed, the
common Root of Religion in Mankind; these are in him like the first Rudiments
of the Foetus, the Embryo of Religion, or the Egg as it were out of which it is
hatched. The contemplation of the admirable Works in the World does exceedingly
fortify and improve those first Rudiments of Natural Religion, digests them
into their just formation. In these we see, and admire, and glorify the Power,
the Wisdom, the Goodness, the Presence of God; from these we learn his Unity,
his Eternity, his Immensity, his Providence, his Justice, his Mercy: And as
thus ascendendo we learn to know God by his Works, so again descendendo we
learn our duty to praise, glorify, magnify, honor, love, fear, and obey him,
to depend upon him, to delight in him: and by this means Natural Religion
arrives to a great advance, and the Intellectual Nature mightily perfected and
improved; and Man becomes not only a passive, a receptive Instrument to
glorify his Maker, but an active Instrument of his Glory; which was, as is
premised, another End of Almighty God in the making of Man, namely, That he
might be an active intellectual Instrument to glorify God, and in glorifying
him, the more fully to enjoy him, and his favor, love, and goodness.

4. As thus the Intellective Faculties render Man fit actively to serve and
glorify his Maker, so also that other Faculty of his Will contributes also in
like manner to render him fit for that employment. We shall for this purpose
only consider these two Properties in the Will.

1. The liberty of the Will, whereby it has power to determine it self, and is
free from all force and coaction; and upon this account, namely, that Man is
not only an intellectual Creature, but also has liberty of Will, he becomes a
Creature properly susceptive of a Law, and capable of Rewards and Punishments;
that which acts out of coaction, as bare Instruments, or out of necessity, as
bare Natural Causes, or a determined Instinct, as Brutes, are not properly
capable of a Law but only analogically, and what they do is not properly an act
of Obedience, because they cannot ordinarily do otherwise. Therefore as his
Intellective Faculty gives him the power to know his duty, so the liberty of
his Will is that which gives him the power truly to obey.

2. The second property of the Will is, that it is moved and drawn to that
which is good, or at least what appears to be so. The sensitive Appetite is a
power subservient to a sensitive Nature, and carried to a sensible Good; but
the Will is a rational Faculty, a Faculty of an intellectual Nature, and
carried to an intellectual Good as its proper Object, and therefore with most
earnestness, to the most noble and supreme Good, which is Almighty God. So that
as by the liberty of his Will Man is capable to be an active Instrument to
serve and obey his Maker, so by this property of his Will he is by a just
suitableness drawn to will and desire, and in enjoyment to delight in God as
the chiefest Good, the most noble and suitable Object of its choice and motion:
And we may observe, that the Divine Goodness and Wisdom, to promote and advance
this act of the Will, in choosing and loving Almighty God as his chiefest Good,
has exhibited himself unto Mankind in all the manifestation of Goodness and
Beneficence imaginable, has made him Lord of this inferior World, provides for
him, supplies him, and endears him to himself with all those manifestations of
Mercy, Goodness, and Bounty that his nature is capable of, whereby he may be
won to love God not only as the chiefest Good, but also as his chiefest
Benefactor. And thus by the due consideration of both these Faculties of
Understanding and Will, we may reasonably conjecture, that the End of Almighty
God in creating Man, was to make such a Creature as might actively know, serve,
glorify, love, and obey his Creator, and in that his Service, and Obedience,
and Love, enjoy the Love and Favor of that God whom he thus loves and obeys,
because we find his Faculties admirably fitted for such an end and use; and
certainly the wisest Agent must needs be supposed to design such an End to any
Work as is suitable and commensurate to the thing he makes: And these seem to
be those Ends for which the wise God created this noble Creature Man, which do
more specially relate unto God.

5. I shall now consider the Ends of Man as they mutually relate one to
another. There are these particularities in the Humane Nature that singularly
commend Man each to other; namely,

1. A great love and propensity to Communion and Society; Aristotle somewhere
in his Politics tells us, that among Animals Bees seem to be the most
sociable, but that Man is by nature more sociable than Bees.

2. That there are implanted certain connatural tendencies, or moral Principles
that do most naturally suit with humane society; such as the first Rudiments of
natural Justice, Charity, and Benignity, without which it is impossible that
humane society can be upheld. And this appears hereby, that though it is
apparent that evil Educations and Customs have much defaced and weakened the
Principles of Morality among Men, yet they could never extinguish it, but even
among the Briars and Thorns the Rudiments of natural Justice and Morality have
arisen, and all the Order, and Government, and common Regiment of Societies
have been maintained and preserved by it: Naturam expellas furca licet, usque
recurret.

3. That the benefit of Speech, and those other instituted Signs peculiar only
to Mankind are of great and principal use in maintaining and upholding Society
and Communication between Mankind: by these each Man communicates his Thoughts
and Conceptions to another; each Man instructs, directs, and advises another,
and makes another partaker of his own Knowledge, Wisdom, Counsel, and Advice;
by this, Contracts and mutual Commerce are upheld, the mutual Faith of each
other given and taken, and infinite other advantages: by all which
particularities and accommodations of Humane Nature subservient to mutual
Society and Love, it seems reasonable to conclude, That the wise God intended
as one of his Ends of the Creation of Man, that Man should be beneficial to
Man, should be instrumental for the good of humane Society.

4. There appears in Man, besides the speculative power of his Intellect, a
certain admirable ingeny and dexterity in discovering and perfecting diverse
Arts as well Mechanical as Liberal, for the benefit, delight, and convenience
of the Humane Nature: The great Arts of Government Political, Civil, and
Oeconomical, the Arts of Husbandry, and Improvements of Nature for Food,
Clothing, Medicine; the Arts of Geometry, Arithmetic, and artificial Measuring
and Partition of Time; the Arts of Architecture, Navigation; the Art of
contriving Letters, Writing, Printing; the Arts of Music, and Observations of
the Laws, Orders, and Rules of the Motions and Positions of the Celestial
Bodies, or Astronomy; and infinite more, which by the Ingeny and Industry of
Man have been invented, discovered, or perfected in all succession of Ages, for
the use, benefit, and delight of Mankind.

And although we may observe an admirable sagacity and dexterity in many
Animals, in certain kind of artifices convenient for their use and the use of
Mankind, as in the nidification of Birds, Bees, Silkworms, and diverse others,
yet Man has still the prelation; 1. In respect of the variety and multiplicity
of his Artificial Inventions and Effections: commonly the Artifices of
Irrational Natures are single and determinate, but the Arts invented and
effected by Man are multifarious, various, and almost infinite. 2. Besides, his
rational Faculty is more excellent and perfect than the Faculties of other
Creatures in relation to Arts, and more fruitful in it. 3. That one Instrument
his Hand, which Aristotle well calls Organum organorum, is admirably suited and
fitted to all variety of Artificial effections more than any of the Organs of
other Creatures, as our own Experience without the induction of many
particulars may easily demonstrate and evince. By all which, and many other
peculiar and distinguishing adaptations and accommodations of the Humane
Nature, we may reasonably conclude, That the wise God in lodging of these
particularities in the Humane Nature, had one End and Design to make Humane
Nature beneficent and useful to Mankind and to humane society. And therefore
that Precept so often inculcated by Christ and his Apostles of Love, Charity,
and Beneficence from Man to Man, was no other than the re-enacting of that old
Commandment, and directing Man to one of those Ends for which he was made, and
which has so many Indications of it self by the peculiar Constitution, Make,
and Accommodations of our Faculties.

6. But yet farther, the Creation of Man seems to have a farther End even in
relation to this inferior World, and the Animals and Vegetables themselves,
which deserves to be observed.

First, We may easily observe among the Creatures of this lower World inferior
to Man, that there are several Ranks of Beings, like so many several Provinces,
but especially the Animal and Vegetable Province. Among Animals some are
fierce, strong, and untameable, as Lions, Tigers, Wolves, Foxes, Dragons,
Serpents; and these stand in need of some coercive power over them, that they
destroy not the Species of more profitable, and yet weaker Animals. Again,
there are some Animals that are more useful and serviceable to Man, which are
more obnoxious to be preyed upon and depredated, and their Species to be
utterly destroyed by the invasion of the more fierce, voracious, and unruly
Animals, as Sheep, Cows, and diverse others, which stand therefore more in need
of protection and preservation; and those of the more voracious and fierce
nature are less subject to be disciplined, tamed, and brought into subjection;
the other are by their very nature more domitable, domestic, and subject to be
governed: and the like we may observe in many kinds of Fowls; as there are
Beasts of prey so there are Birds of prey, and others more manageable and
obnoxious to injury.

Again, if we look into the Vegetable Province, some Herbs and Plants are more
tender and delicate, and stand in continual need of cultivation, and their very
Seeds stand in need of a more than ordinary care both in reference to their
preservation and prosemination, without which in a little time their very
Species would be lost, or at least strangely degenerate; such are many sorts of
Fruit Trees, Herbs, and choice Flowers. Again on the other side, there are
multitudes of spontaneous productions of Vegetables, or such as are so hardy
and prolifick, though less profitable or useful, that without a superintendent
industry to correct their excess, would usurp the whole face of the Earth, and
make it a Wilderness, as some sorts of hardy Trees, Weeds, Thorns, Briars, and
other more unprofitable excrescences; nay the very Superficies of the Earth
without a superintendent Cultivation would grow either marshy and boggy by the
defluxion of Waters, or altogether weedy and overgrown with excessive
excrescences: And though much of this either infertility or unprofitable
excrescence might be the fruit of the Sin of Man, yet the Wise God that foresaw
this Sin and the Effect thereof, was not wanting in providing a fit provisional
Remedy against it; that so this part of the Work of his Creation might retain
its beauty and use. And though after the Fall of Man this difficulty of this
Employment was greater, by reason of the Curse that thereby befell the Earth,
yet even before the Fall the nature of his Employment was the same: He put the
Man into the garden of Eden, to dress and to keep it. Genesis 2.

In relation therefore to this inferior World of Brutes and Vegetables, the End
of Man's Creation was, that he should be the Viceroy of the great God of
Heaven and Earth in this inferior World; his Steward, Villicus, Bailiff or
Farmer of this goodly Farm of the lower World, and reserved to himself the
supreme Dominion, and the Tribute of Fidelity, Obedience, and Gratitude, as the
greatest Recognition or Rent for the same, making his Usufructuary of this
inferior World to husband and order it, and enjoy the Fruits thereof with
sobriety, moderation, and thankfulness.

And hereby Man was invested with power, authority, right, dominion, trust, and
care, to correct and abridge the excesses and cruelties of the fiercer Animals,
to give protection and defense to the mansuete and useful, to preserve the
Species of diverse Vegetables, to improve them and others, to correct the
redundance of unprofitable Vegetables, to preserve the face of the Earth in
beauty, usefulness, and fruitfulness. And surely, as it was not below the
Wisdom and Goodness of God to create the very Vegetable Nature, and render the
Earth more beautiful and useful by it, so neither was it unbecoming the same
Wisdom to ordain and constitute such a subordinate Superintendent over it, that
might take an immediate care of it.

And certainly if we observe the special and peculiar accommodation and
adaptation of Man, to the regiment and ordering of this lower World, we shall
have reason, even without Revelation, to conclude that this was one End of the
Creation of Man, namely, To be the Vicegerent of Almighty God, in the
subordinate Regiment especially of the Animal and Vegetable Provinces.

1. The Earth, and Vegetables, and Animals stand in need of such a Superior
Nature to keep them in a competent order: an ordinary Observation lets us see
how soon those Regions uninhabited by Mankind become rude Forests and
Wildernesses, how destitute they are of those mansuete Animals, being exposed
without a protector to be the prey of savage Beasts.

2. Man, by the advantage of his intellectual sagacity and contrivance, is
fitted for this Regiment: For although there be many Beasts much stronger than
he, as Lions, Tigers, Wolves, and others, yet he is by the advantage of this
Faculty enabled to avoid, and over-match, and subdue them, and by the advantage
of this Faculty has power to reclaim those that are reclaimable, though of
greater strength than himself; as Horses, Elephants, Camels, and to protect and
provide for the safety and food of those that are either by Art or Nature
rendered mansuete, as Horses, Sheep, Oxen, and to make them subservient to his
ends and uses.

3. Though of all other visible Creatures Man seems the least provided with
natural offensive Organs, yet by the advantage of his intellectual Faculty and
that admirable Organum organorum his Hand, he is infinitely advantaged with
artificial helps to defend himself, and subjugate the most contumacious and
furious Brute: The Lion, the Bear, the Tiger, the Wolf, the Horse, the
Elephant, the Bull are furnished with natural offensive and defensive Munition;
but by the advantage of the Hand, Man is able to provide himself more
serviceable Artillery, as Swords, Pikes, Arrows, Darts, Nets, Trapps, Toyls,
and to use them with greater security and advantage.

4. We may also observe a kind of connatural necessity imposed upon Man to
exercise this Economy and Regiment over Animals and Vegetables, for his own
preservation and defense; without the exercise of this Regiment he would be
overrun with savage and noxious Animals, he would want the speed of the Horse,
the industry of the Ox, the Clothing of the Sheep, the Milk of the Cow: without
this Regiment he would be without Corn to feed him, Wine to refresh him,
Medicine to recover him, the Earth would become a barren Forest or Wilderness,
overrun with Briars and Thorns. And it is observable, That as the wise God
has put all things in motion and action, the Heavenly Bodies, the Elementary
Natures, the Meteors, the Animals; so it is his Wisdom to preserve Man also in
bodily as well as mental motion, and by a kind of necessity driven him from
sloth and idleness; if he will live he must eat, and if he will eat he must
labor. Though by the Fall of Man his labor is fuller of toil and vexation,
yet labor and industry was part of his duty and employment in the very state
of Innocence.

As he has a busy office and employment committed unto him, namely, to be
God's Vicegerent and subordinate Officer in the Regiment of the Vegetable and
Animal Provinces, so he is under a necessity for his own preservation, and
under an advantage for his own profit and convenience, industriously and
vigilantly to exercise the Province committed to him.

Thus the infinite Wisdom of Almighty God chains things together, and fits and
accommodates all things suitable to their uses and ends.

5. And yet farther, there seems to be found in the Humane Nature certain
Affections that carry it on effectually to this employment, his love to
himself, his safety, his convenient supplies, wealth, and plenty, invite
industry and pains, and a complacency and delight attends the acquests of
honest industry and pains.

2. Hitherto we have seen this part of the End of Man's Creation, namely, to be
a subordinate Rector of this inferior World, a Tributary King thereof by
Investiture from God himself, which Investiture was conferred upon Man in his
first Creation, Genesis 1.29. and again renewed after the Fall and Flood, Genesis
9.3. Psalm. 8.6. Thou have made him to have dominion over the works of thy
hands, thou have put all things under his feet. But there is yet another
Office, another End in the Creation of Man, with relation to this inferior
World and the Furniture thereof.

Almighty God in the goodly Frame of this World has manifested the exceeding
greatness of his Wisdom and Power, as in the Heavenly Bodies, the Sun, the
Moon, the Stars, the Elements, the Meteors, the Minerals, the Vegetables, the
Animals, they all make up a most magnificent and stately Temple, and every
Integral thereof full of wonder, and bears the Inscription of the infinite
Wisdom, Goodness, and Power of the Glorious God; yet still all these are but
passive, receptive, and objective reflections of the Goodness and Glory of God:
there is not a Grass in the Field, not a Tree in the Forest, nor the smallest
insect Animal, the Fly, the Worm, but bear an Inscription of the incomparable
Wisdom, Power, and Goodness of the Glorious God. But yet these cannot actively
glorify their Maker, they understand not their own original nor their own
excellence; the noblest Cedar in the Field, nor the vastest Elephant in the
Indies, nor the goodliest Whale in the Ocean have not the sense of their own
excellence, nor from whom they had it, nor can actively and intentionally
return Praise and Glory to their Maker, for they want an intellective Principle
to make those discoveries or returns.

6. The Glorious God therefore seems to have placed Man in this goodly Temple
of the World, endued him with Knowledge, Understanding, and Will, laid before
him these glorious Works of his Power and Wisdom; that he might be the common
Procurator, the vicarious Representative, the common High Priest of the
inanimate and irrational World, to gather up as it were the admirable Works of
the Glorious God, and in their behalf to present the Praises, Suffrages, and
Acclamations of the whole Creation unto the Glorious God, and to perform that
for them, and as their common Procurator, which they cannot actively,
intellectually, and intentionally perform for themselves. It is true, the whole
Creation does objectively and according to their several capacities set forth
the Honor and Glory of their Creator, and cry, Blessing, honor, glory, and
power be unto him that sittteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb, for ever
and ever; Revelat. 5.13. and the Psalmist, Psalm. 148. calls upon them all to
perform that duty: But Man above all visible Creatures is able to perform that
duty intellectually and intentionally, and fitted to be the common Procurator
and High Priest of unintelligent Creatures, intelligently on their behalf to
present all their Praises and Acclamations to their common Creator, Lord, and
Sovereign.

I have now done with those Ends for which we may reasonably conjecture Man was
made; First, in relation to Almighty God; that he might actively Know, Love,
Serve, Honor, and Obey Him: Secondly, in relation to others of Mankind; mutual
Beneficence, Justice, and Charity: Thirdly, in relation to the inferior
Creatures; to be their subordinate Regent under God, and to be the common
Priest for the rest of the visible Creation, to present their Recognitions and
Praises to their Maker.

I now come to consider what we may reasonably conjecture might be the End of
the Wise and Glorious God in the Creation of Man in relation to himself. The
former Ends were such as were terminated without him, either to God, the rest
of Mankind, or the unintellectual Creatures; but this Enquiry is touching that
End that is terminated in himself; the former were Ends of Office or Duty, this
of Fruition or Enjoyment.

And in this Enquiry I shall first proceed Negatively, to show what this End is
not; and then Affirmatively, as far as the Light of Nature and natural Reason
will dictate (for in this Discourse at present I go no farther) what it is, or
may be reasonably concluded to be.

As to the former, or Negative Procedure,

1. Therefore I say the proper, peculiar end of Man in point of fruition is not
a sensible fruition, or a Life of Sense, but somewhat that is higher, nobler,
and of another nature. It is true, that as Man agrees in the animal Nature with
other Animals, and consequently has a Life of Sense as well as they, therein
they participate of one common end: but that which we are enquiring concerning,
is, the specifical peculiar End of Man, appropriate to, and designed for him as
such; and therein it is that we affirm the end of his fruition is not the end
of a sensible Being, but of a Nature specifically and vastly different from it.
And this I shall prove, and also illustrate by these following Reasons and
Conclusions.

1. As I have before observed the Method of search and enquiry into the
specifical or peculiar end of any Existence, is by observing the specifical and
peculiar existence of Faculties of that Being; for we have reason to think,
that the specifical and peculiar end thereof is somewhat that bears a
specifical proportion to those Faculties and Excellencies: thus we reasonably
conclude, That since the Animal Nature has a specifical and peculiar
excellence and faculty above Vegetables, namely, the faculty of Sense, that
therefore its proper end of fruition is not a bare fruition of a vegetable Life
or the commensurate Good thereof, but a Good that is superior, and accommodate
to the Life of Sense. And upon the same account we may conclude, That since the
Excellence and Faculties of the Humane Nature are of a higher Make and Order
than that of Sense, namely, an intellectual Faculty; therefore the peculiar end
of the Humane Nature is not terminated in a Life of Sense, or a fruition of
that Good which is not only proportionate or accommodate to a sensible Life or
Nature, but in a fruition of something answerable to the eminence and nature of
an intellective Faculty. Now it is apparent to any considerate Man, that the
Operations, the Objects, the Delight of the intellectual and rational Faculties
of Understanding and Will, lie higher than the Faculties of Sense, and have
little communion with them: The very contemplation of natural Causes and
Effects, if we went no higher, are not in order to a sensitive Good, but often
deprive us of it: the contemplation and action of moral Virtues are above the
reach of Sense; tranquillity of Mind, peace of Conscience, perception and
fruition of the favor and love of God, the satisfaction of the Understanding
in that contemplation, the motion and tendency of the Will toward it as its
chiefest Good: These are things that delight and please the Intellectual
Nature, (if not basely and grossly immersed in, and prostituted to the Animal
Nature) are more grateful, sapid, and delightful to the Mind, than the best
Apparatus or Provisions of a sensible Good.

2. Again, it is apparent that the very excellency and preference of the
Intellectual Nature does render the fruition of the Good of Sense less good,
less satisfactory, than it is to the Brutes: the Good of Sense is so far from
being the specifical or peculiar end of Man, that the very Make, Texture, and
Order of his nobler Faculties renders it not only incomplete, but deficient,
and less competent to him, than if he had not this excellency of Faculties
which are specifical to his Nature. And therefore certainly it can never be
that Good that is the appropriate end of fruition in Man, for it is less good
to the Beasts, and that even upon the very account of the excellencies of his
Faculties: I shall give many Instances hereof.

The fruition of the delights of Sense in the Beasts are more entire, simple,
and unallayed than they are in Men; because it is apparent, that in the
Intellective Nature there is something that checks, controls, and sowrs the
fruition of Sense, namely the Conscience, which has oftentimes a contrary
motion, and checks the inferior Faculties of Sense, even when it oftentimes
cannot control it, it chides and allays the contentation of sensual Delights;
so that even in Laughter the Heart is sorrowful: but the Brutes have no such
correction of their Delights in fruition of Sense, but are entire in their
enjoyments.

Again, it is a great perfection of the Humane Nature, that it has a more
fixed, strong, and compact memory of things past than the Brutes have: A Brute
forgets his fruitions when they are past, has not the sense, much less the
memory of any faults or follies committed by him; and therefore his present
fruitions are not sowred with the remembrance of those better seasons of
delight that he once had: But Man has ever a remembrance of what is past, he
remembers his faults and follies, and what sensible advantages he lost by this
or that inadvertence, oversight, or folly; if his prosperity or fruition were
formerly greater, it depreciates his present enjoyment: so that the excellence
of his memorative Faculties makes his present enjoyment faint, weak, and
tastless.

Again, Man has a more exquisite sense of present incumbent evils than the
Beasts have: as his fruition of the sensible Good he enjoys is not so entire as
the Beasts, so his sense of any incumbent evil is more sharp, quick, and
galling than that of the Beasts, and thereby his present sensible contentations
are sowred and allayed. When Haman had all the sensible Honors, Wealth,
Affluence, that the Court of the greatest Monarch in the World could yield him,
yet the want of a bow from Mordecai sowred all his enjoyments, and made him
sick for the want of it. And when Ahab had all the Honors and Provisions that
a Kingdom could afford him, yet the want of Naboth's little Vineyard rendered
all his enjoyments tastless. And this Consideration is easily improveable, if
we consider that the very state and condition of our sensible Life has many
more distastful and sharp ingredients than the brutal Life has; and the
greatest sensual Contentments in Man are commonly haunted with more than one of
these displeasing Guests: The Beasts have no sense of reproach, dishonor,
disgrace, which yet sit close upon Men, especially of great Spirits and
Enjoyments. The Diseases and Distempers in Man are ten to one more in number,
and sharper or longer than in Beasts: and any of these render the best sensual
Enjoyments either tastless or vexing.

Again, and most principally of all the rest, the Brutes have little prospect
to the future, if any at all; their provisions for things to come, as for the
Winter, for their Young, and the like, seem not so much acts of distinct
knowledge or foresight of the future, as certain connatural Instincts alligated
to their nature by the wise and intelligent disposition of their most wise
Creator. And hence it is, that they have no consideration or fear of death till
they feel it; and if they have a good Pasture at present, they are not
solicitous how long it will last, or what they shall do after: they are not
tormented with fears of what may come, because they have no anticipations or
suspicions of what may be in the future; and by this means their enjoyments are
sincere, unallayed with fears or suspicions, they fear not death, because they
are not sensible of their own mortality till they feel themselves dying: But
the case is quite otherwise with Man, the excellency of his Faculties, and the
impression of Experience and Observation gives him a foresight of many things
that will come, and a strong suspicion of many more that may come; and by this
means he anticipates Miseries, and becomes twice miserable: first, in fears,
pre-apprehensions, and anticipation, and then again in the actual undergoing of
it; and if those suspected and feared evils never overtake him, yet he is
equally if not more miserable than if they did: For his pre-apprehensions and
suspicions renders them as sharp as if they were felt, and many times sharper,
by the apposition of the most hideous and aggravating circumstances that his
thoughts and fears can fashion. And this very advantage of anticipation and
foresight, which is a perfection and excellence in Man above the Brutes,
saddens his Joy, galls and frets his sensual Contentment, and upon the very
account of his own excellency and perfection renders the fruition of a sensible
good utterly incompetible to be that end of fruition which the wise God
designed for him: Thus when he has Wealth and Plenty he is under a thousand
cares and fears, sometimes of false Accusers, sometimes of Thieves and Robbers,
sometimes of Fire and Casualty; and while he is rich and plentiful in fruition,
he is poor and miserable by anticipation: If he be in Health and Strength,
whereby sensual Goods have their proper gust and relish with him, yet he is
under the fear of Sickness, Pain, and Discomposure, which fear renders the
Disease in a manner present before it comes, and so gives a distaste and
disrelish to even his present fruition.

And now if it be said, That as this sagacity and foresight sometimes gives a
disadvantage under Enjoyments by the Passion of Fear, so it makes an amends
under sensible Inconveniences by the Affection of Hope: I answer, It is true,
it does make some amends, but yet it is not answerable.

For first, the anticipations of Fear are ever more vigorous than the
anticipations of Hope. 2. The objects, means, and occasions of our fears in
relation to sensuals, are ever more and greater than the objects of our hopes;
because we are obnoxious more to dangers, and those of diverse kinds, than we
are to deliverances and recoveries from sensible evils. 3. But that which is
instar omnium is this; Death puts a period to all sensual Comforts, and this
Death is certain will overtake us, and we know not how soon; and this foresight
of Death is a certain foresight, and a continual object of certain fear. And
this fear of Death, and the anticipation thereof is always present with us, and
we cannot deliver our selves from the fear and foresight of it, no more than we
can deliver our selves from the thing it self; and commonly the anticipation
and fear of Death is more terrible, and dressed up in a more hideous prospect
than Death it self. And this one provision and anticipation of Death, is that
which makes all sensual Goods utterly incompetible to be a suitable end of
fruition to a Man, upon these two accounts, viz. First, that this presensation
and anticipation of Death does sadly allay all sensible enjoyments, makes them
weak, and renders them ungrateful. The Expression is excellent, Heb. 3.15. Who
through fear of death were all their life time subject to bondage: the
delicacies of a Man in Bondage lose their taste and relish. Again secondly, it
presents all our enjoyments as determined or determinable in a short time,
which takes off the value of any sensible enjoyment. It must needs be, that
sensual enjoyment must be abated, when he that enjoys it does in the very
enjoyment thereof know it must not last long: a Beast enjoys his full Pasture
with greater contentment, that yet shall be taken from him, or he from it to
morrow; than any Man can enjoy the sweetest Provision for his Sense, while he
is under the actual sense that he must dye to morrow. The advantage of the
anticipation of Death is that which renders it impossible that a sensual good
can be the ultimate good of fruition to Man, since it is by that very advantage
rendered a less good to him than to the Beasts that perish.

The Proof of the Immortality of the Soul of Man belongs to some of the
following Discourses, I shall not now launch out into that Deep. But to me this
very Consideration, that the very excellence of the humane Faculties,
especially that whereby he has a prospect and considerate anticipation of
Death, renders the good of Sense less good, delightful, and pleasant to this
excellent Creature Man than it is to the very brute Beasts; has been a strong
Moral Evidence, that there is an immortal Soul in Man, for which an immortal
Good is reserved: Because it seems not suitable with Divine Wisdom and
Economy, that the Brutes should have a greater felicity than Man; yet so it
must be, if the end of Man's fruition were only a sensible Good, or a Good
suited only to the Life of Sense.

2. And surely if the good of Sense be not the adequate end of humane fruition,
then much less can those things be the end of fruition intended for Man, which
are but provisional and subservient only to the good of Sense; and such are
Honors, Grandeur, Power, and Wealth, they are but so many subservients to the
acquiring or performing of the good of Sense, or the fruition of a sensible
Life to him that has them, and therefore lower and less valuable than those
things for whose sake and use they serve.

And thus far I have gone in the Negative, whereby I have endeavored to evince
that the good of Sense, the fruition of those good things that serve for a
sensible Life, Meat, Drink, Clothing, the Pleasures and Delights of the Senses,
the expletion of the Faculties of the Sensible Nature; their motions are not
the peculiar end of fruition designed by the wise God to the Intellectual
Nature of Man. I come to consider it Positively, That there is an end of
Fruition, and what we may reasonably conjecture it may be.

That Man was created for an end of fruition appears, 1. From the nature of the
Efficient: It is, as before is observed, the property of every intelligent and
wise Efficient in all his Works and Actions to intend an End, and an end
suitable to the value of the work, but that is not always an end of fruition to
the work it self; it is sufficient, that there is an end in the work: Many
times a wise Agent produces a work or effect in order to something else, an
instrument subservient to some other thing; and thus he might have made Man
only to serve, glorify, and honor his Maker, as a Man makes a Saw or a Watch
as an Instrument for his own use, without any communication of a Good of
fruition to the thing thus made. But as Almighty God is a most wise Efficient,
so he is a most benign and bountiful Efficient; He made all things not only for
the glory of his Wisdom, but for the communication of his Goodness to the
things He thus made, according to the measure and capacity of their
participation. He made the inferior Animals for the glory of his Wisdom and
Power, and for the service of Man, and yet he communicated to them so much of
fruition and enjoyment, and of such a Good as was suitable to their nature,
namely, a sensible Good. There is not the meanest Insect in the World but has
a Good of fruition proportionate to its nature, namely, of a sensible Good in
which it delights, and which it endeavors to preserve. And thus as the Wisdom
of this great Efficient made Man the most excellent of Visible Natures, for an
end, and such an end as was suitable to the excellence of the Nature he thus
made, namely, actively to serve and glorify his Maker; so the Goodness and
Beneficence of this bountiful Efficient designed an end of fruition to this
Creature, and designed unto him also such a fruition, and of such a good as is
proportionate to the excellence of that Nature he thus made: And otherwise he
should have been proportionally less beneficent to the noblest of sublunary
Creatures, than he is to the meanest of living Animals, which together with the
end designed in them in ordine ad aliud, have an end of fruition of such a Good
as is proportionate to their being, nature, and capacity.

2. And as thus the contemplation of the Efficient, and his Beneficence to
other created Beings, induces us to conclude an end of fruition designed to
Man, so the contemplation of the Work it self concludes the same. Man has in
the peculiarity of his nature these two great Powers and receptive Faculties,
whereby he is rendered amply capable of a great enjoyment, namely his
Understanding, whose proper Object is Truth, and the noblest Truth that is, and
its proper action is directed to that Object, namely, Intellection and Will,
whose proper Object is [Good,] and the greater and more sovereign the Good is,
the more suitable it is to this power, and the proper act of this power is to
reach after, and desire, and embrace, and delight in its Object: and the
filling of these two receptive powers with the chiefest intellectual Truth, and
with the chiefest and intellectual Good, is that which perfects, advances, and
enableth these Faculties or Powers.

And this does lead us to a just discovery of what that end of fruition is, for
which Man was designed by his beneficent Creator, namely, such as is suitable,
answerable, and proportionate to those Powers or Faculties in Man whereby he
excells all inferior Animals, his Understanding and his Will; and herein
consists his happiness, his end of fruition or enjoyment.

1. As to his Understanding, the great and general fruition of Good therein is
Knowledge: Now I shall distinguish these Objects of Knowledge or Scibilia into
two kinds; 1. The Scibilia subordinata, which being united to the intellective
Power by that act or habit which we call Knowledge, do advance and perfect this
Power or Faculty in a subordinate way, measure, or degree; such is the
knowledge of Natural Causes and Effects of Arts Liberal or Manual, of Rules of
justum and decorum, of Moral Truths, and the like: this gives a subordinate
perfection and fruition to this Power varied and diversified according to the
worth of the Objects, and the perfection or clearness of their perception. 2.
The Scibile supremum, which is the ever-glorious God, his Perfection,
Attributes, Wisdom, Power, Goodness, his Will, and Commands, so far forth as
that infinitely perfect Being is cognoscible by our finite Understanding: This
is the supreme Truth, the highest fruition of the intellective Power, and the
greatest perfection of an intellective Nature as such.

2. Again, as to the power of the Will, it has likewise Objects of Good
answerable to the former distribution. 1. The subordinate Good of Moral
Virtues, Honesty, Sobriety, Justice, Temperance, and all the train of Moral
Virtues; these being united to the Will in their acts and constant habits, the
Will enjoys a great Moral Good, tranquillity of Mind, complacency and delight.
2. The Sovereign Good, which is the glorious God, reached after by the Will as
the chiefest Good, and enjoyed in the manifestations of his Love, Favor,
Presence, Influence, and Beneficence: this fills the vastest motions of the
Will, fills it with Peace, Contentation, and Glory, and keeps it nevertheless
in a perpetual motion, by returns of Gratitude, humble Love, Obedience, and all
imaginable extension of it self for the Service, Honor, and Glory of that God
that has thus bountifully given to the Soul a power in some measure receptive
of his Infinite Self, and fitted that power with a proportionate Good, even the
Goodness and Bounty of the ever-glorious God.

And now because Man has a double state, namely, a state in this Life in
conjunction of the Soul with the Body, naturally dissolvible, and a state of
Immortality after this Life, either in the Soul alone, or in the Soul in
conjunction with an immortal Body, as shall be shown in its due time: therefore
proportionable to this double state is that fruition which Almighty God
designed for his End.

1. In this Life, the proportionable fruition of Man is that which is
compatible to the state he has here, namely, the knowledge of God and his
Works in a measure suitable to the intellectual Capacity in this Life, the
sense of the Divine Love, Favor, Goodness, and Protection, the sense of his
own Duty to God, to Man, to himself, with a cheerful endeavor to observe it:
And from these arise dominion over his Passions and inferior Faculties, and the
due placing, ordering, and moderation of them; a resignation of his Will to the
Divine Will, and a dependence upon his Goodness, Power, and All Sufficiency:
and from all these arise peace of Conscience, contentation and tranquillity of
Mind, in which even the wisest of Heathens placed the greatest Happiness
acquirable in this Life.

2. After this Life an immutable state of everlasting Rest and Happiness in the
Beatifical Vision of God, and fruition of so much of his Goodness and
Beneficence as a glorified Soul is capable of: for it is reasonable that the
end of fruition of an Immortal Nature should be an everlasting Good,
commensurate in its intention and duration to such an Immortal Nature.

And now if any Man shall enquire if this be the End of Almighty God in the
Creation of Man, How comes it to pass that all Men attain not this End, or how
comes it to pass that Almighty God comes to be frustrated of the End which he
thus designed, as well in relation to his own Glory, as the Good of Mankind?

I Answer, first in general, That this Enquiry belongs to another way of
Examination, namely, herein we must have the assistance of Divine Revelation,
both to answer this Enquiry and to guide us in it, which in this place is not
designed to be prosecuted.

2. Yet more particularly thus much I shall say, 1. That the wise God has as
it were twisted his own Honor and Glory with Man's Felicity and Happiness; if
Man decline to honor, glorify, love, and obey his Maker, and casts off the
primary and chief End of his Being, it is just and necessary that he be
deprived of the End of his own Fruition and Happiness, which is the Reward of
his Duty. 2. The Liberty of the Will was the great Prerogative of the Humane
Nature, and Almighty God having furnished that Nature with all conducibles to
enable him to obey, and to continue him in that Obedience, Man by the abuse of
his own liberty deprived himself of his own felicity: When we speak therefore
of the End of Man we speak of it as God made him, not as Man made, or rather
unmade himself.

But of this End of the means of his Restitution by Christ, and the admirable
System and Connection of the Divine Providence in relation to Man in his
Redemption, belongs to another Discourse: We are in this preceding Discourse
but in the outward Court of the Temple, where the Gentiles came, or might come
by natural Light or Ratiocination.

Therefore to conclude all,

Almighty God out of his abundant Wisdom, Goodness, and Beneficence as he has
made Mankind, so he has fitted him for a double End, namely, to glorify his
Maker, and everlastingly to enjoy him, and in order hereunto has given him a
double station, and in each of these a differing kind of fruition of his Maker,
viz. a station in this lower World, and a station in the glorious Heavens.

His station in this lower World, is during the time of his mortal Life here
below; and in this station the glorious God has furnished Mankind with all
conveniencics and accommodations suitable to it, as the comfortable
Accommodations of his sensible Life, the Comforts of humane Society, the Use
and Dominion of his Creatures, the admirable Faculties of his Mind, the Books
and Instructions of his Word and Will, the goodly Works of Creation and
Providence, the Tenders and Ayders of his Grace and Guidance, the Effluxes and
Manifestations of his Favors and Love, the Anticipations and Hopes of Eternal
Happiness; these and many more such as these, the Bountiful God affords to
Mankind, even in this state of Mortality, which may and do render it in a great
measure very comfortable.

But withal he lets us know, and we must know, That these are but as so many
Bounties to render our passage through this Life the more easy and convenient
to our selves, and the more serviceable to our great Lord and Master: This is
not to be the place of our rest or final happiness, but a place of exercise and
probation, a place of preparation for our future and more durable state; we are
here as it were but put to School to learn our Duty and our Lessons, we are but
as young Plants planted in a Nursery, till we come to a convenient size and
fitness to be removed, and then we are to be transplanted into another and a
richer Soil. In this World we are as it were Seeds ripening upon the Trees or
Stalks till they are fully digested and ripe, and then as the Seeds drop into
the Ground and become the Seminary of a new Plantation: so by Death we drop
into Eternity, and become the Children, the Embryones of the Resurrection, and
then we come into that second and blessed station, the Country of our Rest and
Happiness, our Home, and the End of our Being; where we shall ever behold the
Glory of the Glorious God, and glorify him for ever; where we shall have the
perpetual, sensible, vigorous, satisfactory Manifestation and Influences of his
Love to all Eternity, and enjoy that Blessedness which Eye has not seen, nor
Ear heard, neither has entered into the Heart of Man to conceive: And this is
the great End of the Glorious God in making this great goodly Creature called
Man, whose Body is but the Husk, the Shell of that vital, immortal Beam of
Light, Life, and Immortality, that Seminal Principle of Eternal Life, the Soul,
irradiated and influenced by the Sacred Spirit of Life and Love, and if God
lend me Life and Strength, shall in my next be handled.

FINIS.



