THE DEATH OF King Charles I. Proved a Downright MURDER, With the Aggravations
of it. IN A SERMON AT St. Botolph Aldgate, LONDON, January 30. 1692/3. To which
are Added, some Just Reflections upon some late Papers, concerning That King's
Book.

By RICH. HOLLINGWORTH, D.D.

LONDON, Printed by R. Norton for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1693.

To the INHABITANTS Of St. Botolph Aldgate, LONDON, Who are true Lovers of Old
England indeed.
My good Friends and Parishioners,
THere is a certain bold Libeller, who has been pleased under the Name of
Ludlow a Regicide, to load me with a great many reproaches and false Stories in
several lewd Pamphlets, in order to prejudice you against my Person, and
thereby to hinder the success of my Ministry amongst you; which, thanks be to
God, has had very little effect as yet, and I hope never will: for I must say
thus much, that I have found the Love and Respects of abundance of You rather
increase than diminish, ever since I undertook the honest and just Defense of
King Charles the First into my hands; but however that You may not repent of
standing by me in this good Cause, I think it very necessary to take this
occasion to defend my self against an Imputation of this bad Man's, to wit, of
Forgery, a Sin of which if I thought, or knew my self guilty, I should Blush,
nay Tremble, ever to come into a Pulpit, to Preach the Doctrines of the Gospel
either to You, or any other persons whatsoever; and therefore, I shall with all
freedom and unreservedness let You into the Knowledge of this thing, which he
calls Forgery.

Being the last Summer at my Lord Bishop of London's, I accidentally met with
the Reverend Mr. Lamplugh Son to the late Archbishop of York, who was pleased,
knowing that I was engaged in the Cause of King Charles the First, to show me
Mr. Henderson's Deathbed Declaration, which he found in his Father's study,
and upon my request, to lend it me, which after I had read, and found so very
Honest, so plain and hearty a Character, and so agreeable to what by an
uninterrupted Tradition had been delivered down to us of this Age, both by
English and Scotchmen, namely, that Mr. Henderson after a through acquaintance
and conversation with King Charles the First at Newcastle, went away perfectly
changed as to his Opinion of that King's Sanctity, Learning and profound
Judgment; and with great grief that he had been instrumental to the Miseries
that Good Man was brought to, at that time: I say, it being so agreeable to
what was so generally said of Mr. Henderson, I, after I had showed it to many
Persons of great Character and Consideration in Our Church, and by them
encouraged to make it more public resolved to Re-print it, that the World
might see how much that Great and Good Man was abused by this Libeller, who so
impudently brands him with the Name of Nimrod, Pharaoh, and unaccountable
Tyrant, which Character, as it wonderfully pleased all that wish well to our
English Monarchy; so it had the contrary effect upon our Commonwealths men, and
therefore in half a Years time this Scribler makes a shift to get Two pretended
Papers to Prove this a Forgery: The First is, as he tells you, a Letter from a
grave and worthy Gentleman who lived in Scotland about that time, and was very
conversant in the great Affairs of that Kingdom: And what says this grave and
knowing Gentleman to this affair? why he tells him, he never heard of this
Declaration neither there nor here, and that had it been true, to wit, that
there was such a one, the World would have been full of it. Strange, that this
Man so conversant in the great Affairs of Scotland at that time, should not
hear of a Declaration of the General Assembly, as to the Falsehood and Forgery
of that Book; and therefore this very thing must make any Man, not prejudiced,
call in question the Truth of the Assemblies Declaration, especially
considering this bold Man puts it out, without any attestation from any Public
Notary, or any other Creditable Witnesses, whom he might have employed to
search the Records, and therefore I believe upon this account the World will
lay the Forgery at his Door, and not at mine; especially when I tell him this
Story, that I have from a great and undoubted hand: That Mr. Henderson when he
came from Newcastle to Edinburgh, did design to unbosome himself in the great
Church at Edinburgh, as to the Virtues of that great King, and the Reasons of
the Change of his Opinion of Him; which was understood by some great Leaders in
the Assembly, and therefore they hindered his Preaching; after which he fell
Sick and Dyed, and no doubt to unburthen and ease his Mind, drew up in this
Declaration what he intended to Preach, had he been permitted. And now, I
think, my Good Neighbors, You will say I have sufficiently defended my self
from the base Imputation of a Forgerer.

The other things I shall trouble you with the account of, are some Papers said
lately to be found, which plainly, as they say, make it out that King Charles
I. was not the Author of that Book, which for forty odd Years has gone in his
Name. These Papers, by the kindness of the Gentleman in whose hands they are, I
have examined twice, and I am very sorry, for Dr. Gauden's Memory sake, that
they have been so much exposed, because in my Remarks upon them, some things
must fall very hard upon that Prelate, which I should be very averse to, was
not the Name, Honor, Religion and Learning of King Charles concerned, which, I
hope, will excuse me amongst all Men that understand the difference of Persons,
especially of a King and a Subject.

The first Paper I shall take notice of, is a Petition to the King for the
Bishopric of Winchester, which, indeed, for his Memory's sake, ought by no
means to have been exposed to view; it is so Romantic, so childishly cracking
and boasting of his Heroic and Secret Service, that a Man would think the poor
Man had utterly forgot and lost all the impressions of common Policy and
Prudence, and was resolved to provoke the King to command him out of
White Hall; as a Man not fit to be a Country Curate, much less preferred to
the wealthiest Bishopric in England: But the best of it is, though he had the
vanity to draw it up, he was yet so wise as not to present it, which is plain
from his own mouth; for Page 5 of Dr. Walker, we have this Story, That the last
time Dr. Walker saw him, which was after he was Lord Bishop of Worcester Elect,
he asked him whether King Charles II. knew that he wrote the Book? He gave him
this answer; That I cannot positively and certainly say he does, because he was
never pleased to take express notice of it to me: The truth of it is, when I
consider that Dr. Walker says, That Dr. Gauden took the Covenant; and that when
Mr. Zach. Crofton charges Dr. Gauden as one of the number of Covenanters: And
Dr. Gauden denies all, Page 275. of Anti-Baal, and says, That Mr. Crofton
reckons without his Host, when he made him one of the number of Covenanters,
and positively assures the World, that he never took any Oaths but those
appointed by Law, no League nor Vow, and that if he had done it, he must have
had no peace 'till he had publicly repented, and recanted such Dissimulation,
which he abhors as Hell. I say, when I read this, I wonder at, nay, I believe,
nothing that Dr. Gauden either said or did, in order to get a fat Bishopric:
but before I leave this Paper, give me leave to say, that the Style is so like
to all his other Writings, and so altogether unlike the King's Book, that I
will as soon believe that Mr. Ralph Venning, who Writ two Books, called Milk
and Honey, and Orthodox Paradoxes, or that Mr. William Seckar, who Writ the
fulsom Sermon, called the Wedding Ring, could have Writ the Whole Duty of Man,
or Mr. Baxter's Saints Everlasting Rest, as that Dr. Gauden could Write the
Eicon.

The next Paper is a Letter to my Lord Chancellor Hide, still for the
Bishopric of Winchester: And the Truth of it is, here he displays himself to
the full, and shows his Virtues all at once; and how far the World ought to
give credit to his pretenses, for he downright offers to commit the sin of
Simony, and bids one half of the Bishopric of Winchester to get the other; a
fit Man indeed, to Write such Holy and Divine Meditations as are contained in
the King's Book; who rather than miss his Ambitious Aims, will enter in at the
door of Perjury, and, I am sure he that will forswear himself, will not fail to
tell a falsehood, when Covetousness and Pride have the Ascendant of him.

The next and last Paper I shall take notice of, is a long Narrative of Mrs.
Gauden's, all which depends upon her Husband's Truth, and which will not hold
together when it comes strictly to be examined. She tells you of an intercourse
betwixt King Charles the Second and Dr. Gauden, about the Book, and the King
upon satisfaction that he wrote it, promised him the Reversion of the
Bishopric of Winchester; and yet as by the former Story appears, the King,
even after he was Elect of Worcester, never said word to him of any such thing.
She further positively asserts, that her Husband sent the Manuscript to the
King at the Isle of Wight, and that the King received it, and sent Bishop Duppa
to give Dr. Gauden an account of it: and yet, page 5. of Dr. Walker, he asking
Dr. Gauden whether the King had ever seen the Book, he gave him this Answer, I
know it certainly no more than you; but I used my best endeavors that he
might, for I delivered a Copy of it to the Marquess of Hartford, when he went
to the Treaty at the Isle of Wight, and entreated his Lordship, if he could
obtain any private opportunity he would deliver it to his Majesty, and humbly
desire to know his Majesty's pleasure concerning it. But the Violence which
threatened the King, hastening so fast, he ventured to Print it, and never knew
what was the issue of sending it. Here is brave work, my Masters, Dr. Gauden,
by Dr. Walker, downright giving Mrs. Gauden the lie. She tells you in another
place, that it was some few days after the King's Murder, that her Husband got
the Book, Printed it: whereas it is well known, the Book was Printed off before
the King's Murder.

But commend me to the last positive assertion of this Lady, for she tells you,
that some of the Rump-Parliaments Friends took the very Manuscript her Husband
sent to his Majesty, and appointed a private Committee, to find out the
business. This had been brave for Mr. Milton, and I am sure we should have
heard of it again and again, in his Answer to the King's Book; and no doubt
that Remnant of the House that sat and were so grieved at this Book, and lost
so much ground throughout the Kingdom, by Virtue of this Book, would have sent
this news all over the Nation: but not one word of all this, but the Book
passed, as it ought to do, for above 12. Years together, as the King's own. And
so I take my leave of Mrs. Gauden, but not without expressing my hearty sorrow,
that I am absolutely necessitated to these Remarks and Reflections upon Dr.
Gauden and his Wife; for I take no pleasure neither in speaking ill of, nor
doing ill to any Man or Woman whatsoever.

But it may be some will say, pray why did my Lord Chancellor Hide seem to
believe it: I answer, that he was perfectly imposed upon, by Dr. Gauden, and
knew nothing of the matter it self; for he never saw the King's face after he
left Oxford, being always excepted out of Pardon by the Parliament, and so
became wholly a stranger to the King's private Transactions.

And now, my good Friends and Neighbors, I shall only trouble you, by asking
you whether those are not very credulous Men, and have Throats that will
swallow Mountains, that make these vain contradictory Papers weigh down the
evidence of Major Huntington; who after Nazeby fight, procured so much of the
King's Book as was then drawn up from Fairfax the General, and delivered the
Papers with his own hand to the King, who received them with great joy, and
told him, that he esteemed them more than all the Jewels he had lost in his
Cabinet, which was attested to me by Mr. Cave Beck, a Reverend, Pious and
Learned Minister, now living in Ipswich, from the mouth of the Major, in a
Letter under his own hand: and also by Mr. Ric. Duke of Devon, and several
others in the same County to Mr. Read, Archdeacon of Barnstaple, who all had it
from the Major himself; or will weigh down the Evidence of that holy, humble,
modest and admirable learned Man Dr. Dillingham, sometimes Fellow and Master of
Emanuel College in Cambridge, who declared to his Son, which I have formerly
Printed from a Letter writ by himself to a Reverend Minister in London, That
his Father read in the King's Closet at Holdenby, presently after he came from
Newcastle, several Sentences newly writ, as he supposed, by the King's own
hand, which he afterward found exactly in a Chapter of the King's Book; the
Truth of which Story has been very lately confirmed to me by the Reverend Mr.
Saunderson, late Fellow of Emanuel College, to whom that learned Doctor did
tell it more than once: Or, further, Whether these vain and unaccountable
Papers will weigh down the Evidence of Sir John Brattle, lately deceased, who
has declared a hundred and a hundred times, within this last year, to my self
and others, That he assisted his Father in methodizing the King's loose Papers,
which made up the greatest part of this Book in the Year 1647. and which were
brought to his Father by the King's Order, by Bishop Juxon for that purpose; or
weigh down the credit of that holy, honest and courageous Sufferer Mr.
Simmonds: All which Characters will appear in a few Weeks to be true of him, by
his Book called, The Vindication of King Charles the First, which was Printed
in 48. and now Reprinted again by my self, who all along in his Sickness, and
to his last Breath, declared it to be the King's own Book, and none others,
whose only fault was in the trust reposed in him by the King to Print and
Correct this Book, that he showed it to Dr. Gauden, and let him too much into
the knowledge of it, who thereupon, Mr. Simmonds being dead, and the Marquess
of Worcester too, who, if living, could have disproved, to his shame, all his
Pretenses, in order to serve his ambitious ends, sets up for the Author of the
Book. Or lastly, weigh down the Evidence of the Reverend Mr. Long, who so
sacredly has declared, that he heard Dr. Gauden declare, and often affirm, that
he was fully convinced, that the Book was entirely that King's Work. I now, my
good Friends, appeal to you all, to judge betwixt these so much cryed-up
Papers, and the Evidence against them for that great and good King; and I leave
my self in your hands, and the hands of all the dis-interested and unprejudiced
part of the Kingdom, to judge whether I am guilty of Forgery, that great sin a
late Barbarous Libeller lays to my charge.

I shall detain you no longer than to tell you, That the reason of my Zeal and
Labor in the Vindication of this King, next to my satisfaction in his Personal
Virtues, it, that the Principles by which this King was Murdered, and by which
his Murder is now justified, will, if they prevail once more, destroy our
English Ancient Monarchy, and tear up by the Roots again, the best constituted
Church in the World; and by the Grace of God, as I will never contribute to
such a Design, so according to my small Ability, I will in my place endeavor
to prevent it, let what will come of Me and Mine. My good Neighbors, praying
for your Health and Happiness, and thanking of you for your continued kindness
to me, I am your hearty loving Friend and Minister.

RICH. HOLLINGWORTH.

TO THE Counterfeit LUDLOW.
SIR,
WHereas you challenge me as to the Truth of the Story concerning Mrs. Gauden
to a Lady, if you please to come, or send to me, I will direct you to that
Reverend Person, who will satisfy you, that a Lady told him above sixteen
years ago, that Mrs. Gauden told her, That she questioned the Eternal State of
her Husband, because he pretended to be the Author of a Book, which to her
knowledge he never wrote. And when you know him, you will say I am not out,
when I say, He is as considerable a Person as most that wears a Gown.

Imprimatur.

Guil. Lancaster.

Good Reader,
YEsterday, being the 15th of February, a very Worthy and particular Friend of
mine, was pleased to come to my house, and to inform me, That one Captain
Rhodes, together with his Mother, could give me a farther account of King
Charles the First's Book; upon which I gave the said Captain a meeting the last
Night, who was pleased to invite me to his House this afternoon, being the 16th
instant, where and when the Mother, a grave, serious Gentlewoman, did declare
to me, that her Husband Dr. Rhodes, Minister of Haughton and Thorpe near
Newark, did live in Newark in the time it was a Garrison, while the King was
there, and that the King came often to her House, to discourse with her
Husband, and that her Husband did conduct the King in a disguise, from Newark
to Oxford, and was with him often, from that time till his being a Prisoner in
the Isle of Wight, where he attended him also; in all which places he saw those
parts of the King's Book which he then drew up, Written with his own hand,
being so intimate with the King, and so entirely beloved by him, as to be
admitted into his Closets and secret Communications: all which her Husband
often told her as great Truths; and the said Captain, her Son, did declare to
me, which he will when lawfully called restifie upon Oath, that he was in
company with Sir Francis Leake, and one Major Millington a Sectary, and his
Father, when a discourse arising about this Book, his Father solemnly laid his
Hand upon his Breast and said, upon the Word of an Honest Man, I have at
several times, and in several places, seen and read these Papers, Writ with the
King's own hand. This Captain Rhodes and his Mother live in Mansel-street in
Goodman's Fields, within two doors of the Green Man, and will justify the
Truth of what I have said, to any that have the curiosity to ask them. And now,
Mr. Ben. Hatley, who against Faith and Promise, exposed these false and
ridiculous Papers to public View, at the Rummer in Queen Street, and suffered
a silly abstract to be taken by the Counterfeit Ludlow: much good may your
Design do you, though I assure you Dr. Gauden's Relations have no reason to
thank you.

MATTHEW XIX. 18. Jesus said, Thou shall do no Murder.
WHEN God Created Man, He designed that his Issue and Posterity should live in
Love and Peace with one another, mutually Helping and Assisting each other,
according to their several Necessities and Straits: and therefore, when Cain
rose up against his Brother Abel, and embrued his Hands in his Blood, the great
God, to show his abhorrence and detestation of the Sin, tells him, that the
Voice of his Brother's Blood, was come to Him from the ground; and in Judgment
makes him a Vagabond and a Wanderer, and afterward makes a standing Law in
order to deterr Men from a Sin, that did so break in upon the Reason of his
Creation, and the Laws of Society; That whosoever did shed Man's Blood, by Man
should his Blood be shed. And when He gave the Ten Commandments by the hands of
Moses to the Children of Israel, He inserted this for one, Exodus 20. That he
should not kill. And our Savior who came to fulfill all Righteousness, and as
He tells us himself, Matthew. 5. Not to destroy, but to fulfill the Law, namely,
To set things in a clearer Light, to found the Practice of them upon Nobler
Principles, to carry them to Nobler Ends, and to give Men greater Spiritual
Aids and Assistances to perform them, than the Jews had under the Paedagogy of
Moses: He repeats and justifies this particular Law, making the observance of
it, one of the conditions of Eternal Life, and tells the Man in the words of my
Text, Thou shall do no Murder.

In the handling of which Words, I will briefly fix the true Notion of Murder,
of Killing our fellow Creatures, those of the same Rank and Order of Being with
our selves; and then see whether the Murder we are appointed by the Wisdom of
the Nation This Day to bewail, is not according to that Notion of Murder, a
real Act of Murder, and not a piece of Justice, as many wicked Men, at this
Day, call it, and consequently does not deserve to be abhorred and grieved for
by all Men that wish well to the Kingdom, and in order to it do endeavor to
atone that displeasure which the Shedding, and the Vindicating the shedding of
Innocent Blood, may justly raise in the Divine Breast, and which may provoke
God still to pour down his Judgments upon us for so doing.

And certainly there is no good Man in the Nation but will conclude,
considering the Circumstances and Dangers we are in, threatened by a powerful
Enemy abroad, and weakened so much, by so great destructive Divisions at home: I
say there is no good Man but will conclude, that we ought to do all that lies
in us to procure the Blessings, and the kind and seasonable interposals of
Divine Providence to secure our Armies by Land, and our Forces by Sea, and so
to prosper them, that we may be delivered from the hands of our Enemies, and
all that hate us, our Nation and Religion. And he that by Vindicating the
crying Sin of Murder, does contribute toward Divine Provocation, he is so far
from being a Friend to the Laws and Liberties of his Country, that he is the
greatest Enemy they have, and ought by all Men trusted with Public Offices
either Spiritual or Secular, to be both publicly instructed, and with all good
Temper to be reproved too, that so he may be reclaimed from a Sin that has so
poisonous an influence upon the Good of the Community of which he is a Member.

First therefore, As for the True Notion of Murder, the thing forbidden in the
Text; In short, it is nothing else but the taking away another Man's Life
without a Warrant from God, or Man deputed and entrusted by God, in a Judicial
way to bring Men to such a piece of Justice as deprives them of their Lives.
For, it is plain from Scripture, that many Men's Lives have been taken away, by
an immediate Command from God, which justified the Act, and took away the
Notion, and consequently the Guilt of Murder. And it is as plain, that there
are many Acts of Wickedness that God ordered the Lawful Magistrate, for the
appeasing of Divine Wrath and the Good of Humane Societies to put Men to Death,
which Laws have had their force in all Nations and Countries whatsoever, and
indeed, without which, Humane Societies would quickly be dissolved, and the
World would be like nothing but a Wilderness or Desert, full of Men turned into
the nature of wild Bears and Tigers; and where you have one violent destruction
of a Fellow Creature, you would have a thousand. So that the Murder of my Text
is nothing else but a pretending and undertaking to be Master of another Man's
Life, without any Commission from God, or any Legal Trial by Men, according to
the Laws of the Country in which they live, and to which they are bound to
subject themselves. So that this brings me to the work and business of this
day, namely, to consider, Whether the Death of King Charles the First was a
Murder, yea, or no, or an Act of Justice, as some wicked men do still pretend
to call-it?

Now here let us consider whether they had a Commission from God to do it. Now
a Commission from God must either be by a Voice from Heaven, or else by the
Ministry of an Angel sent by God, or some other way by which God did convey His
Mind and Purpose to His People of old; none of which were ever pretended to, as
the ground and reason of this great Man's Death, by any that had a hand in it.
And therefore let us see what Warrant they had from the Laws of the Land. The
Laws of the Land, What are they, or upon what Authority are they founded? Why,
according to our Constitution, all Laws flow from the Power of King, Lords and
Commons; the Lords and Commons framing and preparing Bills, such as they
conceive for the Good of the Country; and the King, by his Royal Fiat, giving
Life and Being to those Bills, upon which they immediately become obligatory to
the People of the Land: to violate or transgress which, is attended with such
Pains and Penalties, as those Lawmakers who make up the Legislative Power of
the Nation, think good and meet to enact; and whatsoever is offered as a Law,
made without the concurrence of these Three Estates together, is an Invasion
and Encroachment upon the True and Essential Constitution of the Kingdom: For
neither the King without the Lords and Commons, nor the Lords and Commons
without the King, can bind the Subject to any thing under the Notion of a Law
of this Kingdom. This, my Beloved, is our happy Frame of Government, which
certainly is the best the World can show, and under which we ought to sit with
great delight and pleasure: And they that go about to set any of these Three
Powers, contrary to the Law, above their places, are great Enemies to this
excellent Constitution, and their Projects and Contrivances, their Arguments
and Proposals, have always been of very unhappy consequence to the Kingdom in
general: And for my own part, I do here profess my self so great an Admirer of
this happy Constitution, that by the Grace of God, my little Finger shall never
be employed to make any jar in the Harmony and Concurrence of King, Lords and
Commons; and I will always submit by doing, or by suffering, to whatsoever they
shall Enact: And though they should pass into a Law, what I in Conscience could
not comply withal, yet I think it my duty not to Resist, but to be passively
Obedient; which I account the true Notion of Non-Resistance and
Passive-Obedience; two Doctrines, which if not maintained and practiced in this
sense I have named, all Government is precarious, and will be in danger of
being unhinged, whenever a number of discontented and ambitious Persons get
together, with Force and Strength, in order to carry on their wicked and base
designs, and to answer and gratify their unreasonable dissatisfactions.

Well, this being the true Notion of the English Laws, pray let us see whether
King, Lords and Commons, ever consented to a Law, that enabled one part to
destroy the other, the King to destroy and null the Being and Authority of
Lords and Commons; or the Lords and Commons to sit upon, judge and take away,
the Life of their King. And here I challenge the boldest Assertor of the
Justice of the Murder of this Day, to show me any one word, from the beginning
of the Statute-Book to the end thereof, that looks this way, or gives such a
Power into any of the three parts of the Legislative Powers Hands: And if there
be no Commission from the Law of the Land, then certainly this Death must be
called, and is, a true and real Murder, the Thing forbidden in my Text. A Law
to do it! No, no; they could not perpetrate this Act, before they had broke in
upon the whole Frame and Constitution of the Government; and they made their
way to it by the most undutiful, rude and barbarous Acts, that History almost
can parallel. For at that very time when the good King had made such
Concessions as the House of Commons Voted a ground for Peace: and when the
tired and harrassed Nation expected their Swords to be turned into Plow-shares,
and the Spears into pruning books, at that time did an insolent Army, through
Pride, Covetousness and Perjury, violently assault their Masters, who had set
them on Work, and all along paid them their Wages, and stopped and laid hold of
many of the Members as they were going into the House, and put them under a
restraint, even to such a number, that very few, considering of what number the
House ought to consist, did remain behind: which Few, notwithstanding, took
upon them the Name of the People of England, and in a short time, after some
Votes, which rooted up and destroyed the very Fundamentals of our Government,
Voted the Trial of the King as a Traitor, and named Commissioners to sit upon
him, and when they sent the Bill to the Lords for their concurrence, who nobly
rejected it, for so doing, they Voted away all the Authority of the House of
Lords, though it be by our Constitution the Highest Court of Judicature in the
Kingdom. By such unheard of, and Barbarous Ways, they made way for the King's
Trial, and at last for his inhumane Death.

And now I appeal to any Man of Sense, Reason or Religion, whither this was not
a real Murder, and I ask with what Brow any Man that pretends a Love for his
Countries Constitution, can advocate and plead for such an illegal Act; an Act
of a few Men who took upon them an Authority our Law knows nothing of.

But to put the thing out of doubt, and to satisfy you to the full, that this
was a real Murder, I will give you an Abstract of the Act, made by the
Parliament upon the Restoration of King Charles the Second, many of the Members
of which, were persons excluded by the Army, in order to the violent cutting
off King Charles the First.

They declare in that Act, That The horrid and execrable Murder of our late
most gracious Sovereign King Charles the First, of ever-blessed and glorious
Memory, has been committed by a party of wretched Men, desperately wicked and
hardened in their impiety, who-having first plotted and contrived the ruin and
destruction of our excellent Monarchy, and with it, the True Reformed
Protestant Religion, which had been long protected by it, and flourished under
it, to carry on their pernicious and traitorous designs, threw down all the
Fences and Bulworks of Law, subverted the very Being and Constitution of
Parliaments, that they might have a way opened for any further attempt upon the
Sacred Person of his Majesty. Further they declare, That by many odious Acts
they had fully strengthened themselves in Power and Faction -- seized upon his
Royal Person -- erected a prodigious and unheard of Tribunal, which they called
an High Court of Justice for Trial of his Majesty, and at last with force and
cruelty they brought his Sacred Majesty to the Scaffold, and there publicly
Murdered him before the Gates of his own Royal Palace. And because by this
horrid Action, the Protestant Religion has received the greatest Wound and
reproach, and the People of England the most unsupportable Shame and Infamy
that it was possible for the enemies of God and the King to bring upon us --
Further it says, The Fanatic rage of a few miscreants, who were as far from
being True Protestants, as they were from being True Subjects. Therefore we the
Parliament do hereby renounce, abominate and protest against that impious Fact,
that execrable Murder, and unparalled Treason committed against the Sacred
Person and Life of our said late Sovereign, and all proceedings thereunto. And
be it hereby declared, that by the undoubted and fundamental Laws of this
Kingdom, neither the Peers of this Realm, nor the Commons, nor both together in
Parliament, nor the People collectively, nor representatively, nor any other
Person whatsoever, ever had, have or ought to have a coercive Power over the
persons of the Kings of this Realm.

And for the vindicating our selves, and as a lasting Monument to Posterity, of
our inexpressible detestation and abhorrence of this Villainous and Abominable
Fact; Be it Enacted, that every 30th. of January shall be for over hereafter
set a part to be kept and observed in all Churches and Chapels in his
Majesty's Dominions as an Anniversary day of Fasting and Humiliation to implore
the Mercy of God, that neither the Guilt of the Sacred and Innocent Blood may
at any time hereafter be visited upon Us and our Posterity. Then it goes on to
Attaint as Traitors and Regicides, Oliver Cromwell, Edmund Ludlow, etc. as
notorious Wicked and Active Instruments in prosecuting and compassing that
Traiterous Murder.

And now, my Beloved, I hope, when the Wisdom of the Nation in Parliament has
declared it self so fully and freely, I say, I hope, there is none in this
Congregation will deny this Fact to be a real and downright Murder, in the
sense of my Text. Give me leave in the next place, to show you the Aggravations
of this Murder, that so you may be affected with it, and thereby answer the
Reason of the Day, and the design of those that appointed it, and consequently
help to the keeping of that Divine Vengeance, which other men's justifying and
abetting of it may justly pull down upon our heads. And the truth of it is, the
Aggravations are great and many, and surmount all my little Rhetoric to make a
just description of; but however, as far as I am able, I will give you them.

I. Consider the Aggravation from the Persons that contrived and accomplished
this horrid Murder; they were Men that had sworn true Faith to him again and
again, who had taken the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, who took the
Protestation, by which they promised to defend and secure the King's Rights;
who took the Covenant, by which they engaged at the same rate, and to the same
purposes; Men that had consented to Messages upon Messages, Petitions upon
Petitions, under the Name and Notion of His Majesty's most humble and dutiful
Subjects; who aimed at nothing, and called God to witness they had nothing more
in their eyes, than the safety, honor and welfare of His Majesty's Person and
Government; and yet these Men embrue their hands in His Blood, and break
through all the Ties and Obligations, these Oaths laid upon them, in order to
kill and take possession of what he had. Now certainly, my Beloved, this thing
ought mightily to be bewailed upon this account; and God must needs be angry
with that People, who magnify and vindicate not only the shedding of Righteous
Blood, but the working their way to it, through Perjury and Perfidiousness,
through Breaches upon Promises, reiterated and repeated again and again: And
therefore upon this account I recommend to you weeping, and wailing, because
Perjury and Murder are great and crying sins.

II. Another Aggravation of this Murder is the Person that suffered, and that
was King Charles I. and here let us see whether he deserved such a barbarous
death. I am very far from thinking him a man in a state of Perfection; and I do
acknowledge there were Errors and Failures in his Government, he came early to
the Crown, and therefore might be imposed upon; but I hope every Man does not
deserve to be knocked of the Head for every particular slip of his life; if so,
the best Kings that have Reigned would not have died natural deaths; neither
David nor Solomon, neither Hezekiah nor Josiah, nor any other Prince, recorded
for virtuous and very good men.

But, however, whatsoever his imperfections were in the beginning of his Reign,
I am sure before the Quarrel began with him, he rectifyed them all, and
consented to remove all those things that were accounted grievous, and indeed
filled the Statute-Book with more Privileges than it does afford now; for a
succeeding Parliament took away some things then established, which they, in
their great Wisdom, thought neither fit for a King to grant, nor People to
enjoy. The truth of it is, this Great Person, take him in all considerations,
deserved a far better Lot than he met withal; and many of those that at first
entertained hard thoughts of him, and engaged against him, upon Conversation
and Acquaintance with him, repented of what they had done; and as they ever
after bore a great esteem for him, so in all their discourses afterward
represented him, as one of the best of men they ever met withal; particularly
the Learned and Pious Mr. Vines, who said to some Friends of mine, That if ever
there was a Solomon since Solomon, it was Charles the I.

And truly no wonder; for certainly he was a Man endowed with as many Virtues
and Graces as most Princes that ever sat upon a Throne. His Devotions in the
way of the Church of England were constant and regular; his Discourses pithy
and profitable; for he was a man of great Parts and admirable Improvements; his
Behavior was affable and courteous; and so long as he was able, possessed of
his own Inheritance, he was greatly Charitable, and ready to lend his helping
hand, in promoting any public Good, which I could make out by many Instances;
further, his Chastity, considering the Temptations he as a King might be
supposed to be under, is scarce to be paralleled; and his Temperance
acknowledged, by all that were about him; his Patience was in some sort like
that of his great Master's the Holy Jesus: and tho he met with as great
affronts and indignities, as ever Man did that wore a Crown; yet his very
Enemies confessed that they could not throw him into a Passion, nor ruffle him
so far as to break out into undecent and angry Reflections; how he behaved
himself at his Trial, and immediately before his Death, and at the hour of
Death it self, pray search the History, and you will be satisfied, that he was
acted by a more than ordinary Divine Spirit; one instance I cannot omit, and
that is, when he was going through the Park toward the Scaffold, with a Guard
about him, he spoke to Two Persons that did more immediately attend him, that
they would go faster, saying, That he now went before them to strive for an
Heavenly Crown, with less solicitude than he had oftentimes bid his Soldiers
to fight for an Earthly Diadem; and how he went out of the World with a clear
Soul without the least revenge, but praving forgiveness for his Enemies, you
may find in the True Account of the passages at his Death. And pray, my
Beloved, what Cause was there now for this Great and Good Man's Murder? Yes,
say some wicked Men, he was a Tyrant and a Papist. A Tyrant, that is strange!
that gave to his People all they could reasonably ask, and frankly offered to
consent to any thing that did not strip him of his Kingship, and that was
consistent with his Honor and Conscience. If such a Man be a Tyrant, then You
and I must all of us change our Notions of things, and call Good Evil, and Evil
Good.

And as for the Imputation of Popery, there is no Man that reads his History
with an unprejudiced Mind, can believe the least inclination to it, if Living
and Dying in perfect Communion with the most excellent Church in the World, if
offering to do any thing that might preserve and support the Protestant
Religion, be arguments of a Papist; then I must confess the Imputation is just:
but what Man of the Church of England is not a Papist at this rate? But thanks
be to God, as he refuted this Reflection by the whole Series of his Life, and
by his solemn Protestation at his Death, when he was just going to give an
account to God; so I think the Members of this Church have Preached, Printed
and said enough in the late Reign, for ever to silence and shame this
Reflection and Imputation out of the World. So that hitherto we find no cause
of Death in him at all, even if by the Laws of the Land he had been rightly
tried by a just Power that had as just an Authority to bring him to an Hearing
and Trial: and therefore this is a great aggravation of his Death, that a Man
of Innocence and Goodness, a Man of Virtue and Piety, a Man indeed of a most
Exemplary Life, should be thus Butchered, and that by those, who had no more
Authority to do it, than you have to fall a cutting one another Throats as
soon as this Sermon is ended. And therefore upon this score, This Death ought
to be bewailed, and there is great reason for the observing This Day in order
to prevent the Judgments that may come upon us for shedding, and for the
vindicating the shedding of this Innocent Blood.

III. Another Aggravation of this Murder, is the Consequences of it. Alas,
after the Sacrifice of this great Person, Nobles fell by their bloody hands,
and the best Families were either Banished or Imprisoned, and their Estates
Confiscated; a bloody War with Scotland was commenced, and that free Nation
brought into a perfect slavery, and that which was a thing of deplorable
consequence, this Good Man's Children were Banished to seek their Bread in
strange Countries, from whence proceeded the Miseries, especially of the last
Reign: and therefore those Men that fly in the face of the Two last Kings,
should do well to consider where they were forcibly bred, and how they came to
be bred there, who sent them out of their own Country, and exposed them to
live upon the Bounty of Popish Princes: if King Charles the First had lived out
his time, they no doubt had been bred up in the strictest way in the Protestant
Religion, as professed in the Church of England, and no doubt would have
maintained its Interest and Honor both at home and abroad by Virtue of the
Principles of their Education, which must without all dispute have taught them
to Love and Honor, to Support and Strengthen the Protestant Interest over all
these Western Parts of the World: and therefore we must thank these Murderers
of this Good King, for the misfortunes of the last Reign, and for the Fears
that are upon us at present.

And now having proved the Murder, and showed you the Aggravations of it, give
me leave to ask you, whither we ought not to be serious in the observation of
this Day? And whether they be not great Offenders, and bad Men, that ridicule
the Day, and call it in scorn the madding Day? Whether they be not Men of
mischievous and provoking Principles, that still continue to assert and
justify this barbarous Act? And whether we may not expect great Judgments to
fall upon us upon this account?

Come therefore, my Beloved, let us all seriously bethink our selves, and
consider what great reason we have to do every thing that tends to pacify
Divine Wrath at this time, and to procure His Prefence to go along with us. You
all know, that we have at this time the greatest and dearest things that belong
to us, lie at stake, to wit, our Religion and our Laws; we have a potent Enemy
to encounter, who yet scorns us, and bids defiance to all the conjoined Forces
on this side Europe; an Enemy, who if he prevails, will certainly bring us into
the condition of his own Subjects, both as to Religion, Liberty and Property;
and therefore, Oh! thou good God, give us the Interposals and Watchfulness of
Thy Providence; lend us Thy mighty helping Hand in this our time of Trouble;
let us be under Thy Conduct and Guidance, and preserve still our Noble Prince,
and let him be under the shadow of Thy Wings, and make his Enemies to flee
before him. And blessed are, as the Psalmist says, the People that are in such
a case, and who thus have the Lord for their God. I, but my beloved, tho God is
ready to help us yet he has proposed conditions on our part in order to an
interest in his Power and Presence; we must eschew Evil, and do Good; we must
forsake the wickedness of our ways; we must not speak evil of Dignities, nor
curse the King, no not in our hearts, we must not shed Innocent Blood, nor
vindicate and justify it when it is done. If we are resolved upon such courses
as these are, we must expect to be dealt withal by the great God accordingly;
we must follow the example of David, and cry, Deli^^^ us from Blood guiltiness,
O God, thou God (...) Salvation, And beg that we may be warned thoroughly from
this sin, and cleansed from this iniquity. I, this is the way to have success
attend our Counsels, and our Engagements both by Land and Sea. Give me leave to
speak plainly to you; and I hope those, if there be any such, as I am
satisfied: there are, that came with a design to make themselves merry here to
day with our preaching and praying, will go away with better and more serious
Thoughts, and that because the happiness of their Country is concerned in
their holy and pious resentments of, and indignation against this horrid
Murder. But if all this will not prevail with you, give me leave to tell these
sort of Men, that are resolved to abuse this great Martyr, and laugh at the
observation of the Day, that at the same time they abuse the King and the
Queen, who this Day solemnly observe it; that they abuse the Two Houses of
Parliament, who have appointed Preachers to set out affect them with the sin of
the Day: And withal let me tell you, notwithstanding all their professions of
Honor to, and kindness for King William and Queen Mary, yet they are
unmannerly and clownish, ill bred and rude persons; for if King Charles I had
had no personal Virtues to recommend him to the World, yet methinks they should
be so civil, and so far make good their pretensions of Honor and Affection to
K. William and Q. Mary, as at least to hold their Tongues, and keep them from
railing against him, and that barely because he was the King and Queen's
Grandfather.

And now though I have said so much as I am sure will convince all good men, yet
I am satisfied there are a Generation of Men will not cease to vent their rage
against this great Prince, and in order to it have very lately cried up, and
triumphed in a discovery of some Papers, which seem to rob him of the glory and
honor of being Author of his excellent Book: which Papers I have read, and
find them Romantic and vainglorious, making a simoniacal offer, in order to
obtain the best Bishopric in England, and withal so contradictory to plain
evidence two years before they are pretended to be writ by the Author, and so
vastly different from the noble Air, and Style, and Spirit of that excellent
Book, that I do here in the face of this Congregation, challenge the Party to
Print the Papers, and do assure them they shall have a just Examination and
Consideration in a due and convenient time; and this great King's Memory will
still be preserved by that great and excellent Book, which indeed it is almost
impossible to believe any man could write, but he that was in his Circumstances
and Condition, and under such Thoughts, as such a Condition, when Sanctified,
is usually attended withal.

FINIS.

