THE HARLOTS VAIL REMOVED: And her lying refuge swept away by the power of
Truth, with which she was smitten and wounded.

Being an Answer to a book published in the name of about 60, persons of the
Independent-Baptized, and mingled peoin the midst of Babylon, intit'led The
Church of Christ in Bristol recovering her Vail. But is manifested to be a
bundle of falsehood and hypocrisy, a refuge of lies and deceit under which they
labor to hide themselves, as with a vail.

Likewise an Answer to Thomas Ewins his word, in the close of the said book, in
which he acknowledges himself no Minister, and is proved no preacher of the
Gospel, but in confusion, and a Minister of Satan, and Robert Purnel a false
prophet, etc.

Also a Short Rebuke of Ralph Farmer, for lying and dissembling in the case of
Constant Jessops removing from the Parish of Nicholas in the City of Bristol,
in which he the said Farmer was a chief solliciter, though being got into his
place he would excuse himself, by lying, in print.

To which are added A few words manifesting the woeful fall, and degenerated
condition of Richard Fowler, who in a late declaration put in to the Court of
Exchequer against 15. persons for Tithes, is styled the lawful Vicar of the
Parish Church of Westerleigh in the County of Gloucester, And for hire is become
a Lecturer in Bristol: Who has occasioned several men that fear the Lord to be
cast into prison, for refusing (through tenderness of conscience) to swear how
many Colts, Calves, Lambs, Pigs, Geese, Hens, Ducks, Aples, Eggs, Oblations,
Offerings etc. they possessed in several years, that of it he might have Tithes.
Which monstrous practice he once so much disowned, that he declared himself
burdened to receive voluntary contribution from those that gave it not freely.

By Dennis Hollister.

They are all grievous revolters, walking with slanders, they are brass and
iron, and are all corrupters, reprobate silver shall men call them because the
Lord has rejected them.

As a cage is full of birds, so are their houses full of deceit. As a fountain
casts out her waters, so she casts out her wickedness. Violence and spoil
is heard in her. From the least of them even unto the greatest every one is
given to covetousness; and from the Prophet even unto the Priest, every one
deals falsely.

And as Troops of Robber wait for a man: So the company of Priests murder in
the way by consent, for they work lewdness.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1658.

THE HARLOTS VAIL REMOVED.
Friends,
AFter I received your feigned accusations from the the mouths of your
Messengers, and under one of their hands, I did with much faithfulness and
plainness return you an answer, which if you had read amongst you and observed,
I intended no further contest; But when through deceit and hypocrisy, it was
not permited to be read, I began to pre^^^^ for the press and to lay open your
deceit, which so far exceeded; yet with so, much tenderness did I proceed,
that for your sakes, I delayed the printing of it about a year, waiting if God
would give you the sight of your evil and repentance for the same: But
perceiving you to wax worse and worse deceiving and being deceived, setting
your mouths against heaven and in your deceit to glory, I gave order for its
Printing but not to be made public, till my further order; Neither did I
suffer m^ books (being printed,) to be published in Bristol, no not in my own
family, nor among my near relations, till by the hand of a faithful Messenger,
I had conveyed them amongst your selves, and into the hands of many amongst
you, to whom of a truth, my love was hoping that upon the perusal thereof, your
consciences might be awakened, and the witness of God therein raised, and so
your hearts not being hardened, his voice ye had heard, and to repentance had
you been brought, by him who is come and calls unto it, and so your sin had
been covered, and by him forgiven, and by me not permitted to be published, but
in oblivion had it been buried for ever. But after I had waited several days
and found that notwithstanding anguish and torment were upon you, who in your
consciences were smitten and wounded, so that some durst not read my book, but
presently returned it; others beginning to read, could not, but laid it aside,
others reading it, shed more tears, then they read lines, (as themselves have
said) and yet against it hardened themselves, and repented not: And others
reading it, and reproved by it, fell into much rage and fury, and therein
publishing it themselves amongst their rude companions, endeavoring to raise
lies and falsehood against it. I say, when these and such like effects
appeared, and not till then, I consented to the making my books public, by
which I perceive the sense of guilt, and so of torment being increased, you
grew exceeding angry and wrathful: But if ye had stood in that which convinced,
its like I had no longer, in public view contested, because I do neither
desire, nor endeavor your destruction, but your salvation (God is witness.)
Neither in a spirit of anger and bitterness am I dealing with you, whose
welfare I am seeking, not your hurt: But in the fear of the Lord am I
faithfully dealing with you, (of whose state and condition I am not ignorant)
not daring to use flattering and deceitful speeches, as others do, crying peace
and safety to that against which (I know) the wrath and righteous judgment of
God is near to be revealed; but in much plainness, in a spirit of soberness and
moderation do I tell you the truth, and (whether ye will hear or forbear) the
time is at hand in which ye must witness it, notwithstanding (to hide your
selves and cover your shame) ye are striving to recover your Vail, and
vindicate your selves: And (having given heed to many false seducing and lying
spirits) ye have written a book for that purpose, which I received from you by
the hand of a stranger, supposing the conscience ye had of the deceit and
falsehood ye therein used so far prevailed, that none among your selves could
appear to deliver it. But your Book I have perused, and do find that your
business therein is, not to answer mine, entitled The skirits of the Whore
discovered: But by subtilty and deceit, the spirit of falsehood and lying to
cover and vail your selves from the stroke of that truth, which by
demonstration and plainness, is therein declared, and manifested against you:
So that (although I had much rather be quiet, waiting on the Lord, than to be
thus contending, yet for the sake of truth and further manifesting of the
deceit and hypocresie which abounds among you) I am once more by you
constrained to appear in the public war which (in this mighty day of the Lords
power) is begun, between the Beast, the fals-Prophet, and the Lamb.

1. And first I must tell you, that (notwithstanding 1 advised and warned you
in my former book, that if ye returned an answer, ye take care, it be to some
purpose, and not a parcel of weakness, and confusion, etc. yet) I find the
conception and birth, which by you (who call your selves a Church of Christ) is
brought forth into the world, is the same in which you have given so much
advantage, to lay open your shame, and discover your skirts, beyond and above
others, yea many of the Parish Assemblies of which you speak; that I know not
how to let it pass without rebuke.

2. I take notice that that little book (entitled The skirts of the Whore
discovered) has been made effectual (through the power of the mighty God of
Jacob) so that the dart is struck through the liver, and the arrows of the
Almighty stick fast in the hearts of the Kings enemy, and torment is upon you
on every side, because your skirts are discovered, that passers by see the
shame of your nakedness, and that (instead of turning unto the Lord who has
smitten and wounded you, whose tender mercies are toward you, and therefore
has often warned you) with foolish Ephraim of old, you are running to the
Assrians for help, and into Aegypts land a place of darkness are ye gone,
seeking to recover a vail to hide your selves from the face of the Lamb, who is
the Light of the World and of the Temple, in whose light ye are seen and
comprehended, and the deceit of your Religion and powerless profession known
and manifested, against which the hand of the Lord is lifted up, though ye see
it not, nor are ashamed, but (under your traditional and deceitful forms and
ways) seek to hide and cover your selves, as with a vail, making lies your
refuge, and under falsehood hiding your selves, bringing the woe and the wrath
more and more upon your selves, who cover with a covering, but not of Gods
spirit, rebeling against the light not knowing its wais, nor abiding in its
paths.

3. That notwithstanding (according to the prophesies that went before the true
light is now come, and the glory of the Lord is arisen, and the children of the
Lord are walking in the light of the Lord, and calling others thereinto, yet
darkness has covered the earth, and gross darkness the people, and therefore,
through the blindness of your minds, whilst ye go about to vindicate your
selves from the stroke of that which was justly and truly declared of you in
The skirts of the Whore discovered, ye manifest and prove your selves to be the
same, that is to say, no Church of Christ but an harlot, etc. And this ye do in
the very Title of your book, which is; The Church of Christ in Bristol,
recovering her vail out of the hands of them that have smitten and wounded her,
and taken it away, a practice never heard of among those that were the Churches
of Christ, in whom the vail is done away; Col. 2.19.
for the Churches of Christ were all baptized by one spirit into one body, and
united to one head, even Christ, from which all the body, by joints and bands,
having nourishment ministered increases with the increase of God, And where
Christ is witnessed, the vail is removed, and done away, I Cor. 3.13, 14, 15,
16, 17.18.
yea, though it was over the heart in the reading of the old Testament that the
people could not see to the end of that which is abolished, yet in Christ it is
done away, and his Church, who witness him their head and from him have
nourishment ministered, comes with open face to behold the glory of the Lord,
and by it are changed into the same image. etc. But to this are you strangers
and aliens, who are recovering the vail out of his hands that has taken it
away, that with it ye may be covered, Genesis 38.14.
like Tamar the harlot sitting by the way whiles the witnesses of Christ, and
Ministers of the new Testament, do not (as Moses) cover their face with a vail,
that the people may not see to the end of that which is abolished, but use
great plainness of speech, directing the minds of the people to the light, to
the anointing, to the unction which is in them which guides them into all
truth, showing the father, and things which are to come, to which agrees the
Prophet Isay, who speak as he was moved of the Lord, and said, The mountain of
the Lords house, shall be exalted above the mountains, etc. and in this
mountain the Lord will destroy the face of the covering cast over all people,
and the vail which is spread over all Nations etc. and to this also do agree
those that speak as they were moved of the holy Ghost: Isa. 25.7.
But ye who know not that one spirit, nor the Baptism, nor the body, nor the
unity, nor ever came to witness the head, from which nourishment is ministered
to the body, and in which the vail is removed and taken away, but are
recovering it out of his hands who has smitten and wounded you, I s^y ye are
hereby manifested and proved no Church of Christ, but an harlot, a Synagogue of
Satan, a cage of unclean spit its, upon whom the Lord has stretched forth the
lines of confusion, and stones of emptiness, and made you an habitation for
dragons, and a Court for owls, in which the wild and cruel beasts of the earth
[who have no habitation in God] inhabit.

4. That notwithstanding you would seem to reprove me for vain boasting, etc.
though ye know in your own Consciences I speak very soberly of my self, without
boasting, and far beneath what I was in yours and centers account, till I told
you the truth, yet have ye published a book, [and a pretty big one too] mostly
to commend your selves and on the other. And although ye seem [among other
things] to boast of your stability, etc. yet let me tell you I well remember
the time, when but few amongst you stood stable to your own principles of
Churches and ordinances (as ye call it) but were, like children tossed to and fro
with winds of doctrine, embracing a Religion which consisted in great swelling
words of vanity, without power: At which time Robert Purnel (as stable as he
is) undertook to prophecy the downfall of Independency, Anabaptism, etc. and
said by faith he saw it full, by the coming of Christ in spirit, and this he
published in his book, entitled Good tidings for sinners, Great joy for Saints.
And besides, if ye were indeed so stable, as ye would have the world believe,
how comes it to pass that at this day, ye are so rossed with blasts and
winds, and know no stability, but so many of you are of late, turned
Anabaptists, which formerly was so odious, and so sad a principle, that Hannah
Tailor was near casting cut from amongst you for entertaining it. But it is
true, ye hold fast deceit, and refuse to return, in which ye are as stable as
most that I ever knew, and equal with those Parish Assemblies, in which (ye
make sore complaint) people will rather continue than remove to you, since your
skirts are discovered.

5. That ye are offended with me for using bitter and violent expressions
toward you, in which (ye say) nothing of the spirit of Christ appears, but the
contrary; And that ye are otherwise taught, then to render evil for evil, and
railing for railing, but rather to bless, having the example and precept of
Christ for it, yet notwithstanding your book abounds with ^ayling, reviling and
evil speaking: And where ye cannot amongst your selves frame and make up
enough, ye endeavor, the best ye are able, to take up something from others,
whom ye do not name, and perhaps I never saw, and cast the reproach of it upon
me, telling me of Luciferian pride, folly, impudency, malignity, untruths,
etc. All which is the proper fruit of the corrupt fountain, from whence it
came, to which it is again returned. But by this the sober Reader may take
notice, how directly ye are found in the steps of your fathers, the Scribes and
Pharisees, who crucified the just one, and said and did not, etc. And what use
it is ye make of Christ his precepts and examples, that is to say, to make them
a veil or covering, under pretense of which to hide your selves in your ungodly
and wicked practices, whiles in words ye would seem to condemn it, just ^e the
harlot whose words are smooth and pleasant, but her paths lead to the chambers
of death, and how can ye say, nothing in my book appears like the Spirit of
Christ, when so much of it is the very words of Scripture which ye say is the
word of God, and the Scripture says the father the word and holy Ghost are
one, are they one and not a like? are they one and yet contrary? or are not ye
rather in blindness and confusion, understanding neither what ye say or of what
ye affirm?

To your Reader ye express your trouble and griese, that I, a man once famous
for professing the truth, did, upon the coming of the people called Quakers,
own and plead for them, and by so doing drew many a poor soul, out of the ways
of Christ (as ye say) into the ways of those miserable deluded people.

To which I reply, that I did (upon the first publishing of the glad tidings of
salvation, by the Ministry of righteousness) obtain mercy, to own and embrace
the same, and by it was turned to God, out of the ways of misery, delusion
and deceit, in which ye yet abide, is true: But that I drew any out of the
ways of Christ, is false, and from your father, by whom the eyes of your minds
being blinded, ye wander, and by him are led in the dark and blind paths of
lying deceit, and delusion, toward death and destruction. And therefore ye
tell the Reader I prepared a letre. with this inscription, for the people
called independents, and by my subtilty engaged two of your brethren, to
present it to the Church, which is an absolute lie, at which ye could not but
blush, had ye not a whoores forhead, for no such inscription at all, was upon
any letter of mine. But for the hands of Robert Simpson and Robert Purnel, etc.
Neither do I know any subtilty used to engage them, farther than in plainnes
and honesty to read it in their hearing and demand their freedom to comunicate
it to those who sent the charge by them to me, and this ye term subtility and
deceit, when the subtilty and designed deceit is among your selves, who kept
my defense from being communicated to those, for whom it was intended, fearing
(as ye confess, it might draw away more from amongst you: And this was no
disappointment at all of my ends, neither was I enraged at it (as ye say,) But
it is another lie, and your torment thereby is increased, because opportunity
was thereby administered, to discover your skirts, and lay open your shame,
which otherwise (its like) had not been. And whereas ye tell your Reader, ye
cannot without being guilty of my sin, let my folly go unreproved, but have set
forth these plain words of truth and sobernes, etc. This is like the rest, a
refuge of lies, for neither true, nor sober it is, but full of lies and
deceit, of which I know no page free. And so ye need not trouble your selves,
with the guilt of my sin, ye have enough of your own. And it is plain and true,
that the liars are without, and for the lake, etc. which is your portion, from
him who will clear the innocent, etc. with whom ye are not companions in
tribulation, nor are grieved for the afflictions of Joseph, nor sensible of
this day of Jacobs trouble; nor know the welfare of Sion, nor the faith of the
Gospel, nor the testimony of Jesus, which is the Spirit of prophecy.

And so I come to your book it self, In the first line of which ye demand, Did
I never read, that the Church of Christ in Scripture is resembled to a natural
body, wherein are many members united each to other, and most of them to one
head and by one Spirit, and say, that as in the natural body; there may be many
infirmities, so in the mistical body? etc. I answer nay, I never read such a
thing in Scripture, but can read you who put this queston, as blind as the men
of Sodom, that saw not the way; for, where in Scripture, is the Church of
Christ resembled to a natural body, I say, a natural body in which are many
infirmities? Again, where does the Scripture say, that in the Church of Christ,
there are many members united each to other, and [most] of them to one head,
and by one spirit^? Is there any unity in the Church of Christ, and not by the
Spirit? And are not all who are by the Spirit united together, by the same
Spirit united to the head? And is not the Lord that Spirit, in which the vail
is removed? But Babylon is your City; your first building is confusion, and
had ye not thus expressed your selves, ye had not so clearly manifested your
gross ignorance, both of the true Church, her members, the head, and the
Spirit. But having thus done, ye apply your selves to your blind mistaken
conclusions, drawn from what before ye had ignorantly propounded, And say, that
as in the natural body there may be many infirmities, so the mystical body
also may be subject to distempers, etc. To which I say, In your tittle page ye
style your selves the Church of Christ (though ye never proved it) but your
language is the harlots, and not the Churches; In Scripture I read of a natural
body and a spiritual body, but never of a mystical body so expressed (that
comes from the Harlot.) But if by mystical body ye mean your selves, then I
easily grant, it is indeed subject to destempers enough, which ye number up;
and say, is undigested humors, want of closing with truth, and receiving
untruth, windy humors of pride, high-mindedness, and giving heed to lying
Spirits, violent headiness, in stead of well tempered zeal for God and
godliness, etc. All which (it is like) ye speak from good experience, and if ye
had added much more of that kind, to which ye are subject, I know and bear
testimony that it is true. But if by mystical body, ye mean the Church of
Christ, of which he is head, and has washed from all her sins in his own
blood, and redeemed from all iniquity, and presents holy and unblamable;
without spot or wrinkle, then do ye speak falsely and wickedly, blaspeming the
body of Christ, which is holy, in which dwell no lying spirits nor windy
homours (as ye call it) of pride and high mindedness, etc much less is it
subject to those things, but is more than Conqueror over it, and is subject
only to Christ who is the head, where other Lords have not dominion, but being
made free by the Son of God, is free indeed, while such as you are subject to
such distempers and wicked spirits and humors, by which ye are overcome, and
in bondage, and never came to witness redemption and freedom by the Son of God,
who gave himself for us, as Paul says, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, Now if Paul's words be
true, as indeed they are, then is your mystical distempered, surfeited, windy
humorous, proud, high minded, feavorish body, which gives heed to lying
spirits, no Church of Christ, but an absolute Harlot, And so have ye your
selves manifested your own body as filthy as ever I declared it; And so what
wrong have I done ye? ye say in my former book there is contained many things
too low, and beneath you to read, peruse or answer, thereby manifesting your
Pride; for his soul that is lifted up, is not upright. And the Harlot sits as a
Queen, and counts it beneath her, to answer what is spoken to her in truth; But
I perceive ye are making good the title of your book, covering your selves with
such filthy stuff, where ye cannot answer, and yet he that reads and
understands, would think ye little regard what ye say, or into what confusion
ye run, so ye can but think to hide your heads, for notwithstanding ye said but
now it was below and beneath a Christian, much more a whole Church, to read, or
answer my book; yet presently ye say, ye shall take the Lords Counsel, and
answer the Author: Is it beneath and too low for you to read or answer, and yet
does the Lord Counsel you to answer? or does the Lord Counsel you to answer
what is beneath you to read? Why should ye thus take the Lords name in vain to
cover and hide your deceit? Know ye not that ye cannot be by him held
guiltless? But this is pitiful stuff, to come from a whole Church, as ye call
your selves, need enough ye have to seek a covering to hide your folly: Ye say
my Pamphlet is stu^t in the middle and both ends with many unsavory and
unchristian like expressions, and speak of vain boastings, absurdities and
untruths, but mention not the particulars, nor make it appear, and so I shall
let it pass, as one of your lying refuges. Ye say, how sadly is that Scripture
Acts 20.30. fulfilled both on us and you? etc. I answer, nay not on you, who
are far from the condition of the elders of the Church of Ephesus, to whom Paul
spoke, whom the holy Ghost had made overseers of the flock of God, which he
with his own blood had purchased, and they did feed who were turned from the
darkness to the light, but I say, this belongs not to you, who love darkness,
and hate the light, of which they were children, and came to see with open
face, as in a glass, the Lords glory, which condition is witnessed in measure,
by thousands at this day of those whom ye call miserable deluded people;
Neither is it fulfilled in me, who do not speak perverse things, to draw people
from the truth, which is the light, but have declared the truth concerning you.

Ye say, when ye had read the title of my book, and considered the people
included and intended by me, ye could not but stand amazed, etc. I answer, yea
and well ye might, and be ashamed, and confounded that ever a people professing
themselves the Church of Christ, should be so notoriously found in the Harlots
steps without so much as a show of a true covering in which to hide themselves
from the rebuke of what was spoken of them as in your book the Reader may
perceive, but are driven to so many lying refuges, to vindicate your selves,
and all in vain, for your covering is short. Ye say, Is it not an high degree
of Luciferian pride, for a poor Creature to set his foot upon the neck of all
the assemblies and Churches of the Saints, calling them the w^ore; And then put
your silly interpretations upon my words, us some of you use to do upon the
Scriptures, and draw your mistaken meanings thereon, and then tell me of
Shimei's cursing David, and of your resolutions, etc.

To which I reply, The assemblyes and Churches of Saints, oh how lovely are
they unto me? because the living presence and power of God is there manifested;
In which I have chosen rather to be a doorkeeper, and to suffer reproach with
the people of God, (which was David's portion) than to dwell with you in the
ungodly Tent, where Shimei that Curser is. But the voice of the Lords thunders
being heard in the earth, and his lightenings gone forth, and his just
visitations come and coming upon the Harlot or great whore, whose judgment is
now come, I do, according to my measure, bear testimony against her (your
surfeited body) though she call her self a Church, and cover her self with
scarlet, as with a veil, yet upon her neck do I tread, and all her glory do I
despise, and upon all her pride and Luciferian spirit do I trample, for just
and true is he that has judged her. And notwithstanding ye begin to wail and
lament, like them, Rev. 18. ( whose merchandise was destroyed, saying, O how do
the daughters of the Philistines rejoice and the uncircumcised triumph? will
not every profane person that sees us go in the streets, say, Lo there goes
one of the skirts of the whore, one of the synagogue of Satan, one of the cage
of unclean birds, etc. And if we reprove them, will they not say, one of your
selves have written and published it? And then tell how your enemies will
scourge you with the tongue, and condemn you, etc. Reply, If this be so, and
the Philistines and profane persons, in whose nature ye are, and with whose
spirit ye agree, do thus behave themselves toward you, yet know, and see the
Scriptures fulfilled, and as ye have loved cursing, reproaching or reviling, so
it is unto you, and the measure which ye have meted, is measured to you again,
and the day of the Lord is upon all the. Heathen, and as thou have done, it is
done unto thee; and thy reward is turned upon thy own head; Lock back, call to
mind, and remember, how over your high places and in your meetings, before
these whom ye call uncircumcised, Profane Philistines (with which your
assemblies are filled) ye have not spared to blaspheme and to speak evil of
that ye understand not, some of your mouths being full of cursing and
bitterness, equal with others of Jacobs enemies (with whom ye became as one in
the day of his calamity, when he appeared small and descised) foaming out your
own shame, greatly provoking and enraging the evil spirits, in the minds of
your evil hearers against the innocent, and harmles, who dwelt peaceably in
their Tents amongst you, moving only as the Lord moved them, for which mount
Esau, where the prophanenes is, the Philistines uncircumcised in heart (both
Rulers, Priests, and people of all sorts and sects) combined to repreach,
abuse, persecute and devour, with whom ye have joined, as if your tongues had
been your own, and no Lord could control them. But being a little rebuked by
the power and spirit of the living God, ye begin to cry out; and say who has
his tongue unteid, and does not speak to vindicate the undeceived innocence,
etc.? (As if in one hour your glory becautie, and costly attire were laid in
the dust) and that if it had been a Turk, a Heathen, or an open enemy, that had
done this, ye could have born it, and so tell of sifting up my heel against
Christ, crucifying him a fresh, and putting him to open shame, etc. All which
being your own conditions, uttered forth from your fountain of blindness and
arrogancy, I shall only return it into your own bosoms, from whom it came;
who cannot look the Lord in the face, nor stand in the least of his appearings,
but with the rest of the untoward generation, have set your selves, and taken
Counsel together against the Lord of life and glory.

Ye say, Little did ye think, I would have acted so well like Judas, as first
to betray you with a kiss, calling you friends, and then deliver you into the
hands of your enemy, to scourge you with the tongue, etc.

Reply. Did I therefore act like Judas and betray you, because I called you
friends, and in faithfulness told you the truth? Know ye not that it was the
word of Christ to Judas, who was the betraier, and never the word of the
betraier, to the betrayed one. And do ye not by this justify the guilty
betrayer and condemn the innocent betrayed one? How well may the passers by (as
ye say) clap their hands and wag their heads, and say is this a Church that men
call an assembly of Zion? And are these your gathered Churches, about which
there has been so much contending? Truly the very heathen amongst you may
easily discern you, as far from an assembly of Zion as is betwixt Zion and
Egypt. And how much more seen and known are ye by the Children of Light, who
never can believe your self separation to be the way of God, nor the Separated
Congregations (as ye call them) the Churches of Christ, but the harlot, whilst
they are only in the outward Separation, and not separated within the precious
from the vile, and from that which makes a separation between God and them,
living in pride and high mindedness, receiving and embracing untruth, and
rejecting and not closing with truth, but give head to lying spirits, to which
with the rest of the World, the heathen who know not God ye are subject. Ye
seem offended that I style you the mingled people and call you the Independent
Baptized, etc. To which I say, I styled you as ye were, and if ye count it a
reproach to be termed so, is it not a greater reproach to be so? But is it not
manifest you can be in covenant with that which is truly a reproach to any
people? But it is as death to have it published, which is the harlots property
who sports and pleases her self in her evil wates, but shames to have it
known. Ye seem to bewail my condition, and labor to perswad the Reader, that I
spoke reproachfully of some blessed institution of Christ, which he in his own
person practiced, when he was about thirty years of age, and left as a standing
ordinance of the new Testament to all generations, till his coming again.

Reply. By it I suppose ye mean a commanded or an appointed thing, and then I
take your meaning to be, that your outward washings, in rivers of waters, which
ye call Baptism, is a blessed appointment of Christ, practiced by himself? and
left a standing Ordinance of his, and of the new testament to all generations,
till his coming again, To which I reply, Baptism with water was John's Ministry
who came to prepare the way of the Lord, and said he shall Baptize you with the
holy Ghost, I come baptizing with water, and how then does it appear that it is
a blessed command of Christ, and left by him as a standing ordinance of the New
Testament, to all Generations; it is true. Christ was Baptized of John, and so
it became them to fulfiill all righteousness. I say to fulfill it, and did he
by that leave it a standing ordinance of the New Testament to all Generations?
etc. Christ was circumcised, and fulfilled the Law, and did he by that appoint
and ordain Circumcision, and the Law of Moses to be a standing Ordinance of the
New Testament to all generations? And Paul who was a Minister of the new
Testament made after the death of the Testator when the new Testament was in
force, said, Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel, etc.

But ye do always e^re not knowing the Scripture, nor the power of God.

But friends, in the four and twentieth page, it is said, it was signed in the
name and by the consent and appointment of the whole Church, by Robert Purnel,
Thomas Ewine, Robert Simpson, Richard Moon, John Andrews, and Bryant Hanson.
Now if they signed it not by the consent and appointment of the whole company,
then have they recorded themselves a company of liars, who say and publish that
which never was. But if they did it by the appointment and consent of the
whole, ^hen are many, if not the greatest part of your company recorded to all
Generations a company of hypocrites and deceitful workers, of rebellious and
disobedient Children, who (knowing the institutions (as ye call it) of Christ,
which ye say is bles'd, which he practiced and left as a standing Ordinance of
the New Testament to all Generations) do neglect and disobey it, and are out of
the practice thereof, To which give ear O earth, and hear O heaven and be ye
astonished, what a people; professing themselves the Church of Christ, boasting
of their abilities in giving account of their faith, and of walking up to the
commandments of Christ, in obedience and conscience, and yet be found so
rebellious and stiff necked, neglecting and disobeying that which themselves
have published to be the institutions of Christ; Yea those institutions which
are blessed, which he in his own person practiced, and left as a standing
ordinance of the New Testament to all Generations, etc. Know ye not that
rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and to hearken is more acceptable than
sacrifice? and if he that knows not his Masters will is worthy of stripes,
what will your portion be, who profess ye know it, and can admonish others for
neglecting it, and yet your selves be found in the utter disobedience? I know
in this, ye will need a vail, but it will never hide nor cover your shame. And
for me to tell such a people, they are not a Church of Christ, but a harlot, a
Synagogue of Satan, etc. is not to blaspheme God, and his Tabernacle, of both
which ye are ignorant, and in your blindness worship ye know not what; neither
is it a writing contemptuously, as ye say, against any who in conscience are
obedient to Christ, but it is for your advantage and profit, if to it ye give
ear. And for the account ye can give of your faith, of which ye boast, I say,
that where true faith is, it purifies the heart from lying hypocrisy and
deceit, and is a mystery held in a pure conscience.

And Thomas Ewine acknowledges in the 52, 53, 54, pages, he does very much
question (as I know he has cause) whether ever himself, or many of you have
received the spirit, to establish and confirm, or to open and reveal the
mysteries of the Kingdom, or to beautify, and adorn you with gifts and grace,
to purge, purify, cleanse, and sanctify, and make you holy, or to fill you
with the spirit of faith and prayer, and when all this is wanting amongst you,
ye are sure in a very bad condition, such as the Church of Christ under the new
Testament was never in, and so might forbear boasting, either of your faith or
obedience, till another spirit from the Lord is powered upon you: And ye might
forbear so much washing the outside of your vessel in rivers and brooks, tell
your infide comes to be cleansed, sanctified and made holy.

In your fifth page ye seem again displeased, that I call you a mingled people,
etc. and say if some with me had been faithful to their light, and practiced
baptism, they might he mingled too, and that but one of those that have
practiced that Ordinance (as ye call it) with you are fallen away.

Reply. It seems then, ye acknowledge there is a light which convinces, to
which people ought to be faithful, how dare ye then to reproach and speak evil
of it, and are not obedient, when by it your evil deeds are reproved. And if it
be the light as ye grant it is that convinces of the need of your water
Baptism, how comes it to pass, ye were once so near casting out of Hannah
Tailor (as aforesaid) for embracing it; and what great glory is it, that but
one of your Baptists are convinced of truth, and turned from darkness to the
light? etc. Know ye not that Christ Jesus the light of the world said,
Publicans and harlots shall enter into the Kingdom before the Hypocrites? And
what advantage was it to the priests and their generations, when Christ came a
light into the world, that but few of them believed in the truth, and were
obedient to that which the world with themselves opposed, and said it was the
Devil? But if ye were able truly to manifest that but few of your company were
proud, cocovetous envious, back-biters, oppressors, extortioners, unjust
dealers, etc. living in the customs and manner of other Heathens, but by the
power of God were turned from it, this had been something, and so had not ye
been mingled, as now ye are.

Ye say, Has not Christ called and owned you his Church, and that I can
testify ye were at first rightly constituted, and have professed that Christ has
manifested his presence amongst you? etc.

To which I say. That ever Christ called such a surfeited body as yours a
Church of his, is denied, and testimony is born against it. But that his
presence was amongst you, and manifested to many, who by the power of it are
drawn and separated from amongst you is granted, though ye have neither known
nor received him, but cast him off, and were not obedient, but have rebelled
and vexed his spirit, so that by the weapons of his power is he fighting
against you, with whom it is but the beginning of sorrows, and if ye turn not,
he is whetting his glittering sword, and his hand takes hold of vengeance, etc.
And if, as ye say, ye were at first rightly constituted, then are ye your
selves (not I nor others with me) Apostates and backslidden from that in which
at first ye were gathered: For then ye did disown those called Anabaptists and
their practices, in which ye were so zealous, that ye did often admonish and
reprove, and were near the casting out Hanna Tailor (as I have said) now called
Hanna Packer, because she owned it; But now ye do own the Anabaptists and their
practices, and ye your selves become Practizers thereof, as ye confess, and do
admonish and reprove others, who in conscience and obedience to the light of
Christ, cannot conform to your customs and traditions, but by his power
reproves them, standing in that, by which at first they were convinced, and
gathered out of the world, and all its pollutions, so far as to them it was
made manifest. And therefore all your feigned words of backsliding and
back-sliders Apostatizing, and Apostates both in your title page, and other
places in your book, is clearlie turned upon your selves, who are the Apostates
and back-sliders of which ye speak, and to whom belong all the reproves and
admonitions ye pretend to others who are obedient to the light, by which the
deceit of your will-worships and inventions is made manifest and denied, as
was that of Parishes and other assemblies before: And as for the Churches of
Galatia and Asia; Alas! what have ye to do with them in whose life ye are not,
and are shut and cast out, an^ (...) the cursed ground, where the briars and
thorns grow, and the beasts of prey feed, and with the persecutors of the life
of God, which they witnessed, are ye joined against the truth, and proudly have
ye labored to trample upon, and cast it to the ground, but all in vain, for
over your heads it is exalted, and life and immortality is brought to light,
and reigns for ever more.

Ye say, Those who were styled a synagogue of Satan, were a company of proud
boasters, that said they were Jews and Apostles and were not, but did lie;

I answer, just so are ye, who boast your selves the Church of Christ, but are
not, and his commands to observe, but do not; and so are liars in the light
which is true, and lights every man that comes into the world, are ye tried
and found so; and therefore are no Church of Christ, but a synagogue of Satan,
where the owls the Bats, and venomous beasts inhabit, in which cruelty and
persecution dwells.

Ye tell how ye have tried some; as the Church of Ephesus did, and found them
who boast of persecution, to be liars, and their books and doctrine to be
contrary to the glorious Gospel of grace, etc.

To which I say, The condition of the Church of Ephesus ye know not, who were
quickened, raised, and set with Christ in heavenly places, not dead in
trespasses and sins as ye are, They walked not in the vanity of their minds,
like other Gentiles according to the course of the world, serving lusts and
pleasures, as ye do; but from it were gathered to the light, in which they were
made able to judge and try both persons and doctrine, because it is the light
which makes manifest the hidden things of darkness, etc. But ye who hate the
light, and like the owls of the desert, love to be in darkness, not in light,
and therefore cover your selves with a veil, that with open face ye may not see
the glory of the Lord, ye are not able to judge or try as they did, and
therefore in your darkened minds call light darkness, and darkness light,
rejecting the corner stone, who is the head of the Church, speaking
reproachfully of perfection, and those that attain it, when Christ commanded
his to be perfect, as their heavenly father was perfect, and his Ministers
pressed to the attainement of it.

Ye say, Was it ever heard that a man, either Prophet, Apostel, or any that
f^ared God, and expected to give an account of his words and actions, did
assume that boldness, as thus to judge a people professing godliness, because I
said, ye were found a synagogue of Satan? etc.

To which I say, what I said in that particular stands unanswered by you, only
ye would deceitfullie veil it over, to evade the matter in hand, and in stead
of answering what I said, propound so pitiful a question, was it ever heard,
etc.? To which I say, was there ever a people so blind, as to take to
themselves the name of a Church, and for so long time profess the Scripture,
and some of them gain so many hundred pounds for trading with them, as some of
you have done, and now to say, Was it ever heard, that any man, Prophet,
Apostel or any that feared God, was so bold, as thus to judge a people
professing godliness, as if ye had never read the Scripture; Were not Isaiah
and Jeremiah Prophets, who cried against the Jews a people professing
godliness, and said, Ah sinful Nation, a seed of evil doers, children that are
corrupters, that have forsaken the Lord, provoked the holy one of Israel, etc.
Hear the word of the Lord, ye Rulers of Sodom, give ^are to the Law of our God,
ye people of Gomorrha, Hell has enlarged her self, and opened her mouth,
without measure^, and their glory and pomp shall descend into it. How is the
faithful City become an Harlot, and with thy whordoms, the land is polluted,
etc. Was not John the greatest of Prophets, who said to a professing people, O
generation of Vipers, etc. And did not Stephen. a man full of the holy Ghost,
say, ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist
the holy Ghost, etc.? And did not Christ Jesus, the light of the world, say, O
generation of Vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of Hell? And to the
chiefest professors, ye are of your father the Devil, etc. And did not
Babylon, the mother of Harlots from whence ye proceeded, profess godliness,
and so bewitched the Nations with her sorcerie? etc. whom John saw, and said,
she is become the habitation of Devils, and the h^^d of unclean spirits, and a
cage of hateful birds, where ye may read yourselves, and your condition at this
day, who are indeed fallen, and become the habitation of Devils, and foul
Spirits, and unclean and hateful birds, and cruel devouring beasts inhabit your
hold, who live upon the prey and spoil of that which falls into their net, of
which sort I perceive your cage is much filled since my departure, which
happily occasions you to boast and tell the world your number of 60 persons,
which are not now mingled as it was, etc. But if I should manifest what I know,
of some of your washed (but yet filthy) members ((...) I forbear) many might
wonder, that ever such a people should account themselves the Church of Christ.
And whereas ye bespeak my condition sad for judging and condemning (as ye say)
near 60 persons, etc. whose way, spirit and principles I am well acquainted
with: And know ye are without, and not in the life, as I often told you, whiles
I was amongst you. How sad must your condition be, who reproach, revile, belie,
judge, and condemn the generation of Gods children, who are many thousands,
whose way, principle and spirit ye cannot know nor comprehend, but speak evil
of that ye know not, calling them miserable deluded people, wandering in the
dark and blind paths of deceit and delusion, toward death and destruction,
but cannot truly demonstrate any thing, in which the deceit and delusion
lies, but belie the light which is their glory. But ye account it strange,
that we run not with you to the excess of ^iot, and therefore speak evil of
us, for which ye must give an account.

Ye say, ye shall easily grant that my fellowship with you in the things of
God, was but outward; for had it been inward, and spiritual, I would have
continued in it, but as it is written, 1 John 2.19. they went out from us,
because they were not of us, etc.

Repl. What fellowship I had with you, must needs be in that in which your
fellowship stood, which is outward things, beyond which ye cannot see, being
covered with a vail, and not able to see to the end of what is abolished, and
so are shut out of that condition and fellowship, of which John there speaks,
And was as truly applied formerlie to you by the Parish Masters and their
Companies as it is now to me by you. But I shall freely grant that I went both
from the Parish Priests and also from you, because I was not of you, and that
had I been of you, I had continued, etc. But God having prepared better things
for me, than that which is abolished, and waxes old, and is now perishing, and
in love manifested his Son, and by his powerful arm gathered me unto it from
amonst you all, I was not disobedient, but by him am made freely willing in my
measure, to renounce and forsake my share in Egypt and Babylon, and all that
is on this side the promised land, that in it, with John, and those to whom he
writ, and all that are faithful to the light, I may, have fellowship, and know
him that was from the beginning before the Scriptures were given ^or^h. For
John, and those to whom be writ had fellowship in the light, and so that which
they had heard and seen and handled, that they declared, and that which they
declared, was that God is light, and those that walk in the light as he is in
the light have fellowship, etc. And they that walk in darkness, and say they
have fellowship with God, are liars, He that keeps ^is word, in him is the
love of God perfected, The anointing which ye have received of him, abides in
you, and ye need not that any man teach you, but as the same anointing
teaches you of all things, and is true, and is no lie, etc. He that commits
sin is of the Devil, and the Son of God was made manifest, to destroy the
works of the Devil, and whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin, for his
seed remains in him, and i^ this the children of God are manifest, and the
Children of the Devil, This was their condition, and the doctrine which they
preached, who had an unction from the holy One, and knevv all things, from and
out of which the Antichrist went into the world, because they were not of
them; for had they been of them, they would have continued with them. But
now what is this to you, who know not that which was from the beginning?
And so are declaring that which others have heard and seen, but never heard,
savv, nor felt it your selves, who walk in darkness and know not God but
hate the light, condemning that in which their fellowship stood, that cry
down the anointing, and true Teacher within, opposing those that declare
that by committing sin the children of God are manifest, and the children of
the Devil pleading for the kingdom of the Devil, vvhiles ye are here, and
declaring that your mystical body may be subject to distempers, and vvindie
humors of pride, headines, high mindedness, and giving heed to lying Spirits.
I say, what is this to you, who are as far from the condition of which John
writes, as the East is from the West, manifesting your enmity thereunto. And
might not the Pharisees, whose righteousness exceeds yours more fitly apply
those words to Paul, to John, and all that turned to the light, and by it
gathered from amongst them, testifying against them, that their work are evil,
Or might not the Parish Masters, as rightly apply it against you, and say you
went out from them, because ye were not of them, as ye do it to me? But in this
also, your covering is too short, and your shame appears.

And whereas ye tell me of spreading before the Lord, ta^nts, scorns, false
accusations, etc. of which ye say my Pamphlet is full; but name none, I shall
not ^ need take notice of it, farther than to tell you, it is a lie framed by
you, to cover your shame, and that taunts, scornings, and false accusations,
are denied by all the children of light, who by the anointing within, which
leads into all truth, are taught and guided, and it is to be found without,
where the God of the world rules, and the unclean and cruel beasts inhabit,
and are distempers of your mystical body.

In page 8. Ye seem to tell me of some absurdities in my proceeding, begging
the question, and drawing inferences, etc. Which also is but your refuge of
lies, etc. But ye say, I style you a Synagogue of Satan, and then heap up
threat^nings against you as such.

Repl. I truly styled you a synagogue of Satan, and proved you so, by what
lodged in and amongst you, which was by your own messengers acknovvledg^d,
as in my former bo^k I declared, and from which ye have not vindicated your
selves, but over your heads it stands and the judgment thereof ye cannot
escape; except ye repent. But to your refuge of lies ye again betake your
selves, saying I do like the persecutors of old, who first wrapped the Saints in
skins of beasts, and then set dogs upon them, to ^ear them.

Repl. This is your own case, and the work in which ye have been employed by
your Master some years past, as well as in your present book, in which ye
speak of wretched Quakers (a title of reproach) used by you, and others of
Ishmaels seed, at which the dogs of Egypt open their months, and would rend
and ^ear, if not by the power of the Lord restrained, and with a sheeps skin
have I not covered you, but a^^ laying open and manifesting your wolvish
nature, though ye would cover your selves with sheeps clothing as with a veil.
And why should I set dogs and persecutors upon you, who are of the same nature
and Spirit with them, And the world loves its own, And because ye are of the
world, and speak of the world, the world hears you, and in it you glory.

And whereas ye tell me of heaping up Scriptures against you, which concern you
not: and how like it is to Ra^shak^h. etc. I say it is your own, it is your
portion, from it ye cannot fly, nor have ye at all acquitted your selves, but
over your heads it stands, and your vail covers not your shame, who by the King
of Babylon, are employed to reproach and revile the servant of the Lord, whom
he has redeemed, out of kinreds, tongues and people, and through the
regeneration brought, following himself who judges the false Prophets and
deceivers who are seen and witnessed against thoroughout the Nations, where the
voice of Gods thunders is heard, and the well-^avoured Harlot is discovered,
upon whose neck do I trample, who shall never the Church of Christ be found, In
which I am not mistaken, but from his presence, your sentence is come forth, to
whom ye say, ye will make your application as David did.

And whereas ye speak so much af applying pr^mises, to those to whom they
belong not, etc. It is your own case, who being proved an Harlot, and have not
proved your s^lves a Church, would have that applied to you by others, and do
apply i^ to your selves, which belongs to the Church, and that which is the
Harlots portion, and Proper to you, ye love not to hear nor receive.

In your 9. page, ye pretend three reasons, why my defense, which ye call my
letter, could not be received, and read amongst you, etc. But whether it were
indeed reasons why ye read it not, or else a feigned pretense, and lying shift
since found out to veil your deceit, that of God in your own Consciences will
bear testimony, for ye say, your first reason was, because it was not directed
to the Church, but as it were in a deriding manner, to the people called
Independents. Which is an absolute lie, for it had no such direction at all
upon it, but, For the hands of Robert Sympson and Robert Purnel, etc. And how
then could that be a reason why it was not read? Besides, If it had been
directed To the people called independants, was not that a sober direction? Was
i^ like deriding, except ye begin to be ashamed of that by which which ye have
been called, and which your selves have owned? But he that taught and devised
for you that lie, has taught you many more in your book, which in its season,
may be manifested* Secondly, ye say, I refused to hear your messengers, and
therefore ye had no warrant to receive or hear my letter; Which is another
absolute lie, for I heard them out patiently, what they had to say, and
afterward replied; and the^ themselves acknowledged, some of them staid near
an hour, and sc^^lded, etc. And so far was I from refusing to hear what they
said, that after they had spoken, I, not being able to remember the
particulars, desired to have it in writing, that I might consider it, and
return an answer, which accordingly was done, which answer ye received not, and
have published this lie to the world as the reason of it.

Ye say, some of you understood, it was my main design, to draw away some more
to me, etc. which ye give as your third reason. To which I reply, Who were
those some that understood what my design was in that letter, which ye never
read, nor opened, nor saw what was in it, till after I published it; Is there
any diviner among you, who by the Spirit of divination, can tell what was
contained in that which he neither saw nor read? or is it another lie, devised
since my defense was published, and pretended to be a reason why ye read it
not, above 12. months before? or else is it Robert Simpsen and Robert Purnel,
to whom I read it before I sealed it, that is the some among you, that give
those reasons? If it be the latter, then let all the world take notice of their
falsehood and deceit, in whose hearing I read what I had written, and
afterward demanded their freedom to communicate it to you, etc. Who replied,
they were free and saw no reason why it should not be publicly read, and
therefore promised to do it, etc. And that after all this they should to you
pretend reasons why it should not be read, were strange hypocrisy, and wicked
deceit. But however it is evident ye have been giving heed to some lying
spirit, in some of your members, by whom ye are led, which have thus
distempered your humorous body, and caused you thus to err from the right
way, for which truly, my Soul pitieth you, and sorely do I mourn over you.

As for what ye tell me of jearing at your weakness, and feebleness, fasting
days and prayers, etc. and in page 23 of scoffing, scorning, and deriding, in
which ye say, I outstrip all others, it returns upon your own head, who stand
guilty enough of such things But what I writ in that particular, I writ in
words of soberness, and not ^^^^ingly, as the sober Reader may perceive, and
Tho. Ewins. confesses page 62. I writ more seriously, and did not jeer.

In page 10. ye fall a commending your brother Simpson (as ye call him) for his
humility integrity and godliness, To which I might reply in the words ye
mention, page 18. Let another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth, a
stranger, and not thine own tips, because Rob. Simpson signs this his own
commendations. But ye say, in the margin, it was inserted by some of you,
without his knowledge. To which I reply, Did he then sign that which he did
not know? If so, then let all that read consider, what credit may be given to
that which is published, and comes forth under your names, who sign and
publish ye know not what. But if Rob. Simpson did know what he put his hand
unto, but was ashamed to own his own commendations, etc. then are ye, that
are offended, that I owned you not a Church, taken with another lie in your
mouth, saying, some of you inserted it without his knowledge, when he did know
it. But if ye think to hide your selves, by saying he might not know it when
ye inserted it, though before he put his hand to it, he might know it: Then I
demand, Is not here that equivocation, evasion and mental reservation found
upon your selves, which ye would cast upon me, because I said I owned Baptism
and the Lords Supper, which was and is true, and dearly do I love it, and
long to be more a partaker therein: And all your traditions and beggarly
elements in which ye deceive your selves, I deny, and against both it and you
do I bear testimony.

And as for those many reproachful, contemptible, reviling expressions, ye
scatter here and there in your book, calling me foolish, deluded man, etc.
Comparing me with Rabshekah, Judas, Ralph Farmer, etc. I say its not much to
me, to be numbered by you, amongst transgressors, and the worst of men, who am
so much desirous, and by any means pressing to know and witness, him which made
himself of no reputation, but was obedient, even him who is the light of the
world, and the life of men, who was a man of sorrows, and acquainted with
griefs, and hid not his face from shame, etc. Who was never known to the
wisdom of the world, but by it, in those that professed the Scriptures, was
reproched, reviled, persecuted and murdered, and the servant must not be above
his Lord: And therefore from those who are of the World, and speak of the
World, and the World hears, do I not expect better usage. And woe were me, if
all men spoke well of me. But over it all do I rejoice, and in it do I glory
knowing that even in your own Consciences, a witness I have, that vindicates
me, and condemns you: To which it were well, if ye took heed, before it be too
late.

Ye say, ye will not d^p^e your power, but resolve to do your duty, etc. By
which, I suppose, ye mean, some immitation, or invention, which to your selves
ye fancy of separating some from amongst you, and the power ye have to do it,
ye will not dispute, etc. And so something ye will do, and e^^i^e God to it, to
whom ye say, to do it and your power ye will not dispute. And is not this the
Harlots voice? Is not here the self same spirit appearing which was and is in
the Parishes, and their Priests, the Pope, the Bishops and all that adulterous
generation against which you did once bear some testimony, who when any saw
the pollutions, corruption: and defilements that were in their ways and
worships, and separated from it, would be offended, and sometimes excommunicate
them (as they called it) and their power they would not dispute, which is the
practice of the Harlot; for the Churches of Christ witnessed the power of God,
and disputed with small and great, etc. But ye say ye are a Church, though ye
never proved it, nor will dispute your power, but are proved an Harlot. But I
must tell you ye must prove your selves a Church of Christ by other manner of
Arguments and Demonstrations of power then your mere saying it i^ so, or else
no child of Light, who walks in the Light, and by it is guided, can believe it
whiles your fruits manifest the contrary. And what if ye (that the Scripture
may be fulfilled) do hate, reproach, and separate me from your Company, and
cast out my name as evil, for the Son of man's sake, who is the light of the
World, and has enlightened every man that comes into the World? Is not this a
blessing to me, and am I not in that day, to rejoice, and leap for joy, my
reward being great in Heaven? Your fathers in like manner dealing with the
Prophets, Luke 6. And truly ye may spare your labor, and save your
threat'nings, for your powerless pretenses, are to me as light as vanity, and
not worth the mentioning, And by the powerful arm of the good shepherd, whose
voice is heard, am I eternally separated, and gathered from amongst your
ignorant and crooked ways, never to return to Egypt again, nor have fellowship
with you in your unfruitful works, which by the light are reproved.

Ye confess it is a sad sentence and spotted garment with which ye are
clothed, and say ye durst not proudly boast, as do others, and presently
justify your selves, and boast that ye never observed so much of the evi^s
before mentioned, in those now together as ye have seen in me, and some of
those that went away, etc.

To which I say, are ye not then w^ful hypocrites, to profess your selves, a
Church of Christ and to walk according to his rule and boast of your faith and
obedience, and yet acknowledge ye saw, pride hipocresie, slandering, envy,
backbiting, railing, lying, etc. which (...) the evils there mentioned to
break forth more in us, then it did in any of you, which truly is too too much,
and never reprove it, nor manifest dislike thereof, tell now, that we are
absolutely by the power of the Lord separated from amongst you, and have born
witness, that your works and ways are evil, and now ye tell the word those
things, which are but your lying accusations, else why had ye not put them into
your pretended admonitions? It is like ye are hard put to it, that to vail your
selves, ye must so commonly betake your selves to those refuges of lies. And
how can one believe a word ye speak, who will seem to speak so solemnly, and
profess (as ye say) ingenuously, things so absolutely false, and untrue, that
by it, ye may be veiled, etc. Truly ye want a bridle for your tongues; and the
pure fear of the Lord placed in your hearts, which might prevent these
distempers, windy humors, and Lying spirits, etc.

In page twelve ye come to the five things in your admonition, a copy of which
(...), having by you, therein ye insert verbatim, and yet in numbering ye forget
one, and make but four. In page twenty four ye say, ye doubt not of the
faithfulness of your Messengers, and in page ten do commend Robert Simpson (who
was one of them) for his integrity and godliness, and in page thirty four
Robert Simpson says, he did engage himself, to write out a copy of what ye
did by them charge as sin upon me, which he did truly, and deliver to me; so
then, since ye say, ye insert it verbatim according to the copy, and he says,
he writ out and delivered to me a true copy, If what ye published, and what he
writ out and delivered, agree not in every particular, then is he or you, or
all together proved not the Church of Christ, the pillar and ground of truth,
but an Harlot, and a company of Hypocritical liars, and false asserters. But
what ye have published, and what he writ out and delivered, do not agree in
many particulars, Therefore are ye no Church of Christ, but an Harlot.

For, besides some small difference in the first particular, which I shall not
mention, Robert Simpson says, Secondly your contemning and neglecting some of
the Ordinances of Christ, and this he says is a true copy, etc. and ye say,
Secondly your contemning of some and neglecting of others of the Ordinances of
Jesus Christ and this ye say (if ye could be believed) is verbatim, etc. And
yet how much it differs, let the Reader judge, one says, your neglecting of
some and contemning of others etc. which is much different, the one says of
Christ the other adds sayings of Jesus Christ. But how comes this to pass, that
one says, it is a true copy and the other, that they insert it verbatim and
yet no better agreement. The Reader may understand that after I had answered
Robert Simpsons copy, in my former book, and manifested, and laid open the
deceit, and Hypocrisy of this people, and reproved them faithfully and
sharply, for pretending to admonish me for that, of which themselves are
guilty they betake themselves to the refuge of lies to be veiled, publishing to
the world another thing, and say its verbatim, And that they sent not to
admonish me for neglect of water baptism, but for speaking contemptuously
against it, and that I spoke falsely and did them wrong in calling them
hypocrites, etc. for charging me with neglect of water baptism, which they say,
they did not, but only for contemning of it, when under the hand of their
messenger it appears, as before, that they sent to admonish me for neglect and
and contemt of some of the Ordinances of Christ, which said their Messengers,
were baptism in water and breaking of bread; so that it appears evidently to be
a plain, and studied untruth, and feigned thing, and not verbatim according to
the copy; and yet so impudent and void of the fear of God are they that they
dare say they shall leave it to the God of Ordinances to judge, etc. O horrible
falsehood and deceit! Oh impudent and hard-harted people, not only to speak and
publish lies under your own hands, one contradicting the other, but to entitle
the Righteous God to judge, etc. Thereby thinking to vail themselves and hide
their shame, but all in vain, for the Lord is destroying the vail and the
covering cast over all faces, etc. And ye are seen and comprehended, who may
read, that he that speaks lies cannot escape, and that the lying lips and
double tongue cannot stand in the presence of God. And how dare ye then
contrive and publish such filthy faise things, and leave it to God to judge?
Do ye think he is altogether such a one as your selves, etc? or is the
scripture fulfilled upon you, and there be none amongst you that understand it,
etc. but are all gone out of the way, the throat being an open Sepulcher, and
their tongues using deceit, destruction and misery being in your ways, who
the way of ^^ace have never known, and no fear of God is before your eyes: And
to you may I return your own words, that I stand almost amazed to think unto
what an height of impudence and wickedness ye are allreadie come, and whether
may not poor fallen creatures run (if God stop them not) since ye ar^ ^^^eady
so hardened.

(...) Simson says, Thirdly your extreme censoriousnesse and rash judgi^^
^nely of men abroad but also of the Church. Mat. 7.1. Romans 14. (...) the Church
of Christ an Harlot. And ye say, Thirdly your extreme ^tiousnesse and rash
judging not only of persons abroad, but also of the ^^urch, contrary to Mat.
7.1. Rom 14.3, also your calling the Church an Harlot, leaving out the word
(Christ) in which the strength of all did lie. But why were these words left
out, being ye say ye inserted them verbatim? the Reader may take notice that
after I had received the copy from Robert Simson, of what ye had charged upon
me, viz. rash judging and calling the Church of Christ an Harlot I replied the
charge was false and from the father of lies, for I never called the Church of
Christ an Harlot, but do own it dearly; but the Harlot is an Harlot and not the
Church of Christ, and so demonstrated by the spirit that acted you, that ye
were not the Church of Christ, but an Harlot, from which ye not being able to
vindicate your selves betake yourselves again to this refuge of lies, and say
ye insert the charge verbatim, when ye did it not but left out the main thing
therein, contained, without which your charge has little weight, for though I
never called the Church of Christ an Harlot, yet I have both said and proved
that ye who call your selves a Church, are an Harlot and not the Church of
Christ, and do again plainly say, and declare it so, and might farther prove it
were it needful, which it is not, since my former proof stands good, and not
controlled by you, nor you giving proof that ye are a Church of Christ And I do
once more say, and affirm, that your charge is false, and from the father of
lies who was a liar from the beginning. And your labor might be saved in using
arguments to prove that I said ye were an Harlot, and not a Church, I had so
plainly published it. But here ye would persuade the Reader I came in with
mental reservations, and ask, is it honesty, or any thing but deceit and
hypocrisy, because I said I did not call the Church of Christ an harlot but
the people in Bristol? etc.

To which I say were ye not quite blind and full of deceit and subtlety, ye
might easily see and know, that I spoke plainly and truly, without your
mentals, and other carnal stuff, when I said, and manifested, that I dearly
owned the Church of Christ, which were all living stones, etc. and did clearly
bear testimony against you that ye were not so, but an Harlot, and herein I
appear both just and honest toward the Church of Christ, and toward the
Harlot in hearing testimony to the former and against the latter, in which no
deceit nor subtilty appears, but just dealing; and all your equivocations and
mental reservations (as ye call them) together with your shameless
unchristian-like practices (in which ye appear one with the black spirit of
Ralph Farmer) is denied, together with all lies and the father thereof; but the
Church of Christ is lovely, etc.

Robert Simpson says, Fourthly your asserting in the Church principles
contrary to Truth: as first, That faith is an eternal thing. Secondly, That
Christ and says is all one. Thirdly. That Christ Jesus is not the object of
faith. And ye say, Fourthly, Your asserting in the Churches doctrines contrary
to truth; as first, that we did not know what faith was, and that faith was an
eternal thing. Secondly, That Christ and Faith is all one. Thirdly, That Christ
is not the object of faith. Fourthly, Your speaking reproachfully of the
blessed scripture, affirming they were blind, and a pla^^^ to souls, and
further saying that they were not the word of God nor the rule of life: and
this ye say is verbatim, and therefore must be examined. And first, I find that
the copy says principles contrary to truth, and ye say, doctrines contrary to
truth, and that is not verbatim. But I take notice that I having given true
answers to each particular aforesaid: contained in the copy, and published it
in The skirts of the Whore, etc. which stands in sound and wholesome words
unanswered by you, by which your shame appears, of which being sensible, ye
labor to recover your vail to hide your falsehood, and having given heed to
lying spirits, ye again betake your selves to your wonted refuge, and say,
having the copy by you, ye publish it verbatim, And say, First, That we did
not know what faith was, every word of which is forged and feigned, and not in
the copy delivered to me, and therefore well might ye say, whether may not a
poor fallen people run, if God stop them not. And it is no wonder ye began your
book, pleading for the kingdom of the Devil, saying that, as in the natural
body there may be many infirmities, so the mystical body (by which its like; ye
mean your selves, who are not a spiritual body as the Church of Christ is) may
be subject to distempers, and among many other things, make mention of windy
humors of pride and high mindedness and giving heed to lying spirits, etc. Its
like ye had some sense what spirit ruled you, to which ye intended to give
heed, and with what filth and falsehood ye intended to fill your book; and the
lying refuge, to which ye intended to betake your selves, before ye drew such
false conclusions in the beginning thereof. But this is not all in the copy
delivered to me, in this fourth branch were inserted but three particulars,
which are before mentioned, to which ye add a fourth, viz. your sp^aking
reproachfully of the blessed scriptures, affirming they were blind, and a
plague to souls, and farther saying, they were not the word of God and ru'e of
life, and this ye say is verbatim, notwithstanding, that which here ye make as
a fourth particular in the fourth general, is in the copy a fifth general
including three Particulars, and so do your selves afterward reckon it,
notwithstanding (in the wisdom of God) ye are lest to ensnare your selves and
manifest it to all the world, saying it is verbatim when ye have left one of
your five things mentioned, but the line next before.

Its like the pangs of a traveling woman are upon you, who have so long cried
peace and safety to your selves that the sword of the Lord is upon you, and
your eyes utterly darkened, that ye cannot see: But the blind have so long led
the blind, that ye are all fallen into the ditch, and under pretense of
recovering a veil, have manifested your shame, and published things which ye
endeavored to persuade the world to believe is true and verbatim, according to
the copy which in three or four pages, your selves contradict, manifesting
your falsehood, at which so many of you, as are not given up to hardness of
heart, may be ashamed and blush, for if such things had been pubpublished by a
diviner, or a particular person amongst you, that had been to your shame, but
for a whole company of sixty persons (who call themselves a Church) to agree in
such works of darkness and wickedness, and no one amongst you free, is such a
thing, as has hardly been heard before in our days, etc. And notwithstanding
my former answers, to the three particulars mentioned in the copy stands good,
and not touched by you, yet I find you deceitfully nibbling at the heel, and
going on falsely to accuse, saying I asserted that as Christ was the great
light of the world, so he was the great faith of the world, none of which was
in the copy, nor I suppose spoken by me, but is another lie invented among
you, because I then knew him not the light of the World that lights every one
that comes into the World, while among the diviners, and sorcerers I stood,
by whom the light is denied, And I could not say, he was the great faith of the
World, because both to you, and the rest of the world, who are of the world,
and speak of the world, and believe not in the light, both Christ and faith is
a Mystery hid and unknown, and is none of theirs who in their imaginations talk
of objects, etc. and deny the light, and know not the only foundation but by
sorcerie, and wicked art would divide that which God has joined: And so ye go
on telling many words spoken by one and the other, which truly I take to be but
so many lies invented, to serve you as a vail, for if your memories are so
short, and your wits so confounded, that ye are not able, or willing to draw
sixteen or twenty lines out of a copy, which (ye say) is by you, without so
much falsehood, and untruth, as is before mentioned: how can a man believe, ye
are able and willing to remember and truly publish without forgery and
falsehood, so many words and passages, which so many years past were spoken (as
ye say) in several meetings. And whereas in my answer to what ye say touching
faith being an eternal thing, ye say I allege, 1 Timothy 1.9. and tell me I show
my weakness in abusing the words and sense of the Apostle, this is another lie,
as the Reader may perceive who reads my book, for I said, faith is a mystery
held in a pure conscience, and unknown to all ignorant and vulturous eyes, as
well as to yours, etc. And asked whether that faith, by which the Saints are
justified, by which they overcame the world, saw him which is invisible, by
which their hearts are purified, by which Enoch was translated, that he saw not
death and is the substance of things hoped for, etc. be eternal or carnal, etc.
In stead of answering which ye publish a downright lie, and say I a^leadged
such a scripture, and abused the words and sense of the Apostle which I did not
as the Reader may see; so that although those who are given over to believe
lies, may happily embrace what ye say, yet none (whose eyes are truly opened
by him that is given a light to the Gentiles) is like to believe what ye say,
though ye together join, to frame and to publish so false an accusation, which
is so visible, that all that read both our books may perceive it, and it had
been well, if ye had taken my former advice, and been silent, till by the true
light ye had been guided and known how to speak truth, for though hand join in
hand, the wicked shall not go unpunished, nor he that speaks lies escape. But
as I said the sool will be meddling, etc.

In your sixteenth page, ye labor to cover your selves the best ye are able,
that all beholders may not see your shame, by what is charged upon you in The
skirts of the Whore, where it is demanded why ye had not questioned me for
these things sooner, and whiles I was amongst you? And why ye would suffer
principles contrary to truth to pass without rebuke, etc. To which ye reply
that I was presently opposed though for a solemn dealing, ye did it not till I
had left the Church, which ye say perhap^ was your sin: But considering the
state of the Church ye knew not how to set about it, though some saw ground
enough to do it, etc. To which I reply, O woeful Church in a woeful sad state
and condition indeed which is worthy thy serious consideration, who with thine
own pen, have confessed and published to the world, that thou knew thy duty
and sa^est ground enough to do it, but knew not how to set about it.

Art not thou worthy to be beaten, with many stripes? Oh wicked and sloathful
servant whose judgment is come; and into darkness art cast, and so no marvel
that some amongst you, did oppose some manifestations of truth, whiles I was
amongst you, of which you speak; for I know some son of Baliel was there, who
knew not the Lord, some blind guide, who leads the blind into the ditch, who for
the wages of iniquity, has labored to curse the Israel of God, and to make
you stumble at the stumbling stone, who often opposed the life and power of
truth, as it was made manifest, and against it contradicted, as I before made
mention, whose judgment lingers not, etc. But I take notice, how unwilling the
harlot is to confess her own guilt, and therefore says, perhaps it was her
sin, which is but a deceitful shift, from a just stroke for her hypocrisy; and
if ye could speak truth in this particular, ye might have told the world
plainly, that whilst I was amongst you, ye had not whereof justly to accuse
me, of which I know I have a witness in your consciences, so that most that
then were of the company loved and prized me dearly, and many were sorely
grieved at my departure. But when nothing could prevail, because into Egypt
again I could not go then and not before some Diotrepes, that loved
pre-eminence, prating against the innocent with malicious words, by degrees
made a party, and devised those pretended accusations, and with much deceit,
and deceivableness of unrighteousness prevailed with you, to charge upon me,
etc. which if ye had clearly manifested and not drawn this further guilt of
lying, etc. upon your selves, some had been excusable, but now ye must bear
your shame and judgment whatsoever ye are.

But now ye come to a fifth branch of that ye call an admonition, though in page
13. where ye say ye insert it verbatim, ye number but four, and that which here
ye put as a fifth general branch, ye there make a fourth particular in the
fourth general, and yet ye say its verbatim: But in this also, not only your
falsehood, but also your confusion is so fully manifested, that I need say no
more, but leave it to the Reader to judge.

But ye say, It is for speaking against the Scriptures, affirming they were
blind, and a plague to souls, and that they are not the Word of God, nor rule
of life, and this ye would have understood to be verbatim, though like the
rest, it will easily appear to be a parcel of falsehood, hypocrisy and deceit,
for besides your own confusions before mentioned, in the Copy delivered to me
by Robert Simpson, which he says is true, and ye (...) testimony he is
faithful, it is thus, Your speaking reproachfully of the precious Scriptures of
truth, as first, affirming, that it was a blind to souls, and secondly, one of
the greatest plagues of the Land, and thirdly, affirming farther, that it is
not the Word of God, nor rule of life.

Now let the Reader, whose eye is opened, judge how these agree, The person
sent to admonish at the same time or thereahouts, gives it under his hand, that
what he writ out, and delivered to me, was a true Copy of what he received.
And the whole company, after they received an answer thereunto, devises and
publishes another, and say it is verbatim, though it much differs from the
former: The latter says, the charge there mentioned was verbatim, in these
words, Speaking reproachfully of the blessed Scriptures, affirming they were
blind, and a plague to souls, etc. the former in these words, Speaking
reproachfully of the precious Scripture of truth, as first affirming that it
was a blind to souls, and aly. one of the greatest plagues of the land; The one
puts both together, The Scripture is blind and a plague, the other divides them
into two particulars, and says first, a blind to souls, and 2ly. one of the
greatest plagues of the Land; the one, that the Scriptures were blind, the
other, that it is a blind, the one, that they were blind, and a plague to
souls, and never mentions the Land; The other, that it is first, a blind to
souls, and 2ly. a plague; yea, one of the greatest plagues of the Land, and
mentions not souls: The one says, The precious Scriptures of truth, The other,
the blessed Scriptures, and mentions not the words (of truth) And yet if any
man is given over to believe lies, ye will persuade him all this is true and
verbatim, that is, word for word, according to the copy. And that
(notwithstanding this lying spirit, which is found in your mouths, to which ye
give heed; ye are a Church of Christ, or a mystical body (a word of deceit from
the bottomless pit) which may be subject to this spirit, as it plainly appears
to all beholders, ye are by what your selves have published. And truly the day
has manifested you very much, and ye cannot be hid but by the light your deeds
of darkness are and will be reproved, and your pretended admonition farther
manifested to be but studied accusations, and from your father the devil, who
was a liar from the beginning, and abode not in the truth.

Now as that which ye call your admonition, and say ye did insert verbatim as a
bundle of lies and confusion as has been manifested, so is that which ye call
your proof; for in page 13. ye say because I said those things (that is to say
your charge) are studied accusations, and from the father of lies, etc. ye
shall therefore prove every tittle to be true. And in page 18. ye say ye have
proved every tittle to be true and clear; and in page 26. your 3 Messengers who
boast that they received their Commission from God to this work, say that the
things that they charged me withal are all true in every syllable of it, as
does appear by the foregoing answer of the whole Church. Now then if ye have
not proved every tittle of your charge to be true, and if it do not appear by
your foregoing answer, that every syllable of that with which your Messengers
charged me is true, then are ye proved (both those that did send, and those
that were sent) no Church of Christ, but a company of liars and false
asserters. But ye have not proved every title, and every syllable thereof to be
true, and therefore are ye no Church of Christ, but a company of liars, for
first ye charged me for leaving the Church, and now ye say, that I have left
the Church is true, but no proof thereof have ye given, neither is it true
which ye say, for the Church I have not left, but to witness the Church I have
left the harlot, and that I have absolutely forsaken, left and renounced
fellowship with you in all your idolatrous heathenish ways and worships which
stand in the will and time of man, and not in the will and power of God; and by
the mighty arm and power of the Lord am I separated from amongst you, never
again to have fellowship, nor communion with you, in those unfruitful works of
darkness, which by the light are reproved, is granted, else could I never know
nor witness the Church of Christ which is in God the father: But that ye are
the Church of Christ is denied and was denied, and by your fruits, and what
lodged in you were ye proved an harlot, a synagogue of Satan, etc. which stands
wholy unansvvered by you. And therefore it is not true, but a lie, to say I
left the Church, when I was separated from the Harlot, that I might witness the
Church. But suppose it had been true, that I had left the Church, by what have
ye proved it? Why only your selves say it is so, but that is no proof, and yet
this is more than tittles and syllables, it is whole sentences, ye a general
charge not proved, except what the harlot speaks (to save her head, when to
judgment she is brought) is to be believed and admitted as a proof.

But ye go on and say, that my so doing has drawn away some, grieved others,
and opened the mouehs of many to speak evil of the ways of Christ which is
clear, and plain, and not a studied accusation, but a real thing, which has
been grief, and sadness to the Church.

To which I reply if the Harlot or Synagogue of Satan, might be believed in her
own case, when she speaks not truth, then what ye say were of some value. But
from the Church have I drawn none, nor been a grief, nor sadness (that I know)
to her, with whom in some measure I have unity. Neither do I know of any whose
mouths I have justly opened, to speak evil! of the ways of Christ which are
pure and spiritual; So that the whorish and adulterous harlot cannot see it,
who is grieved and sadned at my departure, whose judgment is come and her
torments from the living God are pouring, and therefore has she opened her
mouth very wide, and from her unclean fountain and spirit of envy is pouring
out of stoods of reviling and bitterness, not only when she assembles in her
harlots houses, and Idol Temples with the rest of the proud and persecuting
World, where the Churches of Christ after they were gathered did never
assemble, but in her books and pamphlets speaking evil as she can, not only of
the Church and ways of Christ, which she understands not, but of Christ Jesus
himself who is come a light into the World, ane is the light of the World,
which has enlightened every man that comes into the World, and this is clear
and plain, and no studied accusation, but a real thing and her proper sentence
justly due is gone forth from the presence of the Lord, and over her head does
stand.

And notvvithstanding ye say, I gave no word or reason of my departure, the
sober Christian ye mention will easily perceive that this is another refuge of
lies, for it was reason enough of my departure, to deny you to be a Church of
Christ, and to prove you an harlot, a Synagogue of Satan, a cage etc. And all
this I have done notwithstanding ye blush not to say I gave no reason of my
departure, etc. But I perceive that which troubles you is that I who so well
knew you, and was so long as an Elder amongst you; whom ye did so often choose
and elect to that employment; and so highly esteemed, should now so sadly
apostatize (as ye call it) as not to acknowledge you a Church.

To which I reply, Were ye indeed a Church of Christ, how gladly would I
acknowledge ye? But till ye prove your selves so, I may (in the words of Thomas
Ewins to Ralph Farmer, in the 60 page of your book) tell you, though you be so
wise to propose, I cannot be so foolish as to grant it, lest I make my self a
transgressor like unto you, and rebel against the light, which has manifested
you.

But now let me demand your proof; for although ye say, ye would prove every
tittle, and had proved every tittle of what ye charged me withal, yet is here
no proof at all produced to prove that I drew any from the Church, grieved and
sadned many, or opened the mouths of any, to speak evil of the ways of
Christ, yet is this more than a tittle or a syllable, it is many words and
sentences.

Oh foolish people and unwise! how has the Devil, the god of the world, and
Rulers of the darkness blinded you? why, is there no fear of God before your
eyes? who are adding one iniquity to another, as drunkenness to thirst, and
yet bespeak your selves a Church. And because ye have recovered a veil, with
which your selves are blinded, do think all others must be veiled too; but
where Christ is witnessed, the veil is removed, and in the light of Christ,
which ye have despised, and set at naught, are ye seen and comprehended, and
your hypocrisies, inventions and traditions, will-worships, carnal ordinances,
together with that lying spirit, to which ye give heed, are in the same light
judged, denied, and witnessed against as that which to the Lord is abominable,
and burdensome, in which he has no delight, but his soul hates because it is
iniquity, and a loathsome thing ( Isa. 1.16.)

But from you whom have I drawn away? Why had ye not mentioned one that some
color of truth might appear? or that by it also ye might be reproved, who of
the strong and mighty arm and power of the Lord are ignorant, by which he has
powerfully drawn and gathered many from amongst you (as well as from others who
in the like deceit, are worshipping they know not what) into his mountain of
holiness, which he in this his day is setting up, and establishing over your
heads, and a top of all mountains, in which to his people the Lord is making a
feast of fat things, of which those that pour out a drink offering to that
number, must not eat; in which mountain the Veil is removed, the shadows taken
away, no Lion or carnal devouring beastly thing can ever come; but in it is
the way of holiness known and witnessed, and life, light and immortality
reigns for evermore, and the true and living God, in spirit, life and power,
known and worshipped, who is light, and in whom there is no darkness at all.
And so, although gross darkness has overspread the Egyptian land, where the
Diviners, the Sorcerers, the Taskmasters and oppressors dwell, yet in Jacobs
Tent there is light, by which the deeds of darkness are seen and reproved: And
therefore although ye have taken liberty to vent your lies and slanders, and
false accusations against the innocent, over your high places, when ye assemble
by troops in harlots houses, where the children of light dare not come to
reproove and gainsay it, except they are thereunto powerfully moved of the
Lord, to testify against your deceit and abomination: Yet must ye learn
wisdom, and take heed of printing and publishing such stuff to the world,
else may ye be sure, whilst ye seek to cover it with a veil, your iniquities
will be marked, your filthy sepulcher opened (which is already but badly
painted) your skirts more discovered, so that shame and confusion will be your
portion for evermore, except ye repent: And therefore of this be ye warned.

In your third branch ye lay the charge thus, viz. your extreme
censoriousnesse, and rash judging, not only of persons abroad, but also of the
Church, etc. And tell the world ye will prove (yea that ye have proved) every
tittle and syllable of these things to be true, when ye have not endeavored so
much as a show of proof for ought ye speak touching persons abroad, but past it
over as if ye had never spoken it: And yet this is tittles and syllables, yea
words, etc. But a bridle for your tongue ye want, who have so long given heed
to lying spirits, that now ye appear to love lying, more then to speak truth,
and (being out of the fear of the Lord) speak ye care not what.

I come now to your fifth branch, and shall not trouble my self again with
those many lies, falsehoods, and contradictions which I there find in what you
say is verbatim, having mentioned some of them before, but shall examine your
proof of that also, and see if every tittle of it be proved, or whether ye may
not be proved liars in this, as in the rest.

Ye say, I did at a meeting at mine house affirm the first part of this
branch, viz. That the Scriptures were blind, and a plague to souls: And for
proof, ye again produce your own saying, it is so, and that some of you sitting
over against me, do well remember how I spoke it, Clapping my hand upon the
book or table, saying, That Book or Scriptures was one of the greatest blindes
and plagues to men's souls this day in England. And that ye will again affirm,
and set your hands to it that I spoke those very words.

To which I say, There was a time in which many false witnesses were brought
against him who was the truth and the light, but they agreed not. And when by
the truth ye are examined, it will be found, that ye also are far from agreeing
in testimony; for proving what your selves affirm, if your own testimony were
admitted in your own case, which it is not. Ye say, ye will again affirm, and
set your hands to it, that I spoke those very words. And what words are they?
Not the same in the charge, which ye say is verbatim, but is much otherwise,
and so the charge is fallen and false, as the Reader may see: And who are they
that will affirm and set their hands to it? Are they the whole company, or but
a part? If it be the whole, then many or most of you will affirm and set your
hands to that which themselves have confessed they never heard: If it be but a
part, and not the whole, then that which ye have already said, is altogether
false, and untrue, and your testimony invalid: For what is said, is said by the
whole, or else those that signed it, are in this, as in other things,
abominable liars.

Again, in what ye say ye will affirm, and set your hands unto, there appears
much uncertainty; for ye say, I clapped my hand on the book or table, but on
which I perceive ye are ignorant: And ye say I said that book or Scripture.
Now if ye so well remember the manner of speech, as ye say ye do, it is much
ye cannot remember the matter. But having before accused me for saying the
Scriptures were a blind to souls, and a plague to the Land. Now ye say, It
was, the book or Scriptures that I said was one of the greatest blindes and
plagues to men's souls this day in England. Manifesting your selves to be at a
loss and in confusion, not able to say, whether it were the Book or the
Scriptures, or what it was, for indeed it was neither: And so the charge or
accusation is quite fallen, and by your selves brought to naught.

And why are these words, viz. one of the greatest plagues, etc. in England,
now added? being left out in the place where ye say ye did insert verbatim: Is
here no designed subtilty and deceit? Is all proved? Are here no tittles, nor
syllables neglected in the proof? Or is what ye have published like to be true,
or fit to be believed? Let the Reader consider it.

But ye say, some of you sitting over against me (it is like, at the Table) do
well remember, etc.

But why had ye not told me, who these some were that sat over against me, and
do remember it? For I know but four that were wont to sit with me at the Table,
and with three of them have I spoken, neither of which could to my face say or
affirm, they ever heard me speak such things, and then the some is but one,
and that is an hireling too, a Diviner, a deceitful worker, that daubeth with
untempered mortar, and cries peace, peace, to that to which the Lord speaks no
peace, and his testimony is little worth; for if ye say he sat over against me
at the Table, when I spoke such words, Jane Frye contradicts him, who is the
only person besides himself, that ever I heard, or could learn, had the
shameless confidence to say, she heard me speak these things, with whom I had
conference in the presence of other witness, and demanded where it was spoke,
she replied, in mine own house at a meeting; I cold her it was much many
others heard it not as well as she. To which she replied, it was after the
meeting was done, and I was risen from the Table, and stood out in the room,
and there clapped my hand on the Book, and spoke as before. And that her self,
with her sister Hassard, and her sister Anne Davis, went out into the streets,
and bewailed it; which I knowing not to be true, sent to Anne Davis to enquire
the truth of it, by a relation of hers, who answered, that she never heard me
speak such words, nor any thing like it: So that it is evident, false witness
do not agree; for ye say, some of you sitting over against me, which must needs
be at the Table, upon which, or upon the book, ye say, I clapped my hand, when I
spoke. But she says, it was after the meeting was done, and I was gone from
the Table, in which is no agreement. She said, Anne Davis with her self and
another went into the streets and bewailed it: but Anne Davis denies that ever
she heard it. She said, standing out in the room, I clapped my hand upon the
book, and said, the Scriptures were a plague, etc. But ye say, I clapped my hand
upon the book or table, and said, the book or Scriptures were blind and a
plague; but cannot agree whether it was a Book or a Table, a book or Scripture:
And so are all in confusion, being led by a lying spirit, and able by agreement
to prove nothing. Besides ye say, the book or Scriptures, but in the copy
delivered to me, it was said the Scriptures of truth, in which is no agreement.
Besides all this, one of you being asked, if ever he heard me speak those
words, answered, that he heard me speak to this effect, That the Scriptures,
as men go to work with it, making it a pattern of all manner of vice and
wickedness, was one of the greatest plagues, etc. And being demanded then, why
ye had not laid the charge in the very words that were spoken, he was silent as
to that, and said, he had already purchased jealousy from some in the Church,
as one that was in danger, etc. And this I have under the hand of him to whom
it was spoken.

Now let all, to whom true judgment is known, judge what differing testimony
here is, and how like it appears to that of old, in which no agreement could be
against the innocent: And how desperately-wicked ye appear under a cloak of
Religion, accusing for something, but cannot manifest for what, but in it
contradict your selves: And in some things Jane Frye is nearer the matter than
the other 59. or thereabouts who false witnesses are found; because after a
meeting was ended, in which Thomas Ewins had been speaking about that Idol
called Divinity, and the people mostly gone, and I rose from the Table, and
standing near the middle of the room, did there say, and declare, that that
accursed thing called the body of Divinity was a plague to the land, or words
to that effect, of which I told you before, though ye wickedly shut your eyes,
and not observed it because it was the truth. And were it not so, it had been
one with that spirit to which ye have taken heed.

But suppose credit were to be given to such a generation, who in testimony
do not agree, but are proved as before, etc. yet to the Reader would I say,
what probability of truth can be in what they say I affirmed, viz. That the
Scriptures of truth were one of the greatest blindes and plagues to men's souls
this day in England, as if truth could be a blind and a plague to souls,
when it is a lying spirit is so to yours. And notvvithstanding I never made a
trade of the Scriptures, nor preached for hire, nor divined for money (as
others do) nor ever coveted any man's gold or silver, or apparel amongst you,
nor accepted thereof, when by some I was earnestly pressed thereunto; but on the
contrary have administered something largely of these things amongst you. Yet
from the Scriptures did I daily discourse, as opportunity I had; and by it have
convinced many amongst you, of your pride, formality, and other evils; so that
once ye were very much awakened, and brought to some sense of your condition,
after ye had been too much taken with the doctrine of some called Notionists,
which it may be, is the same ye now call Ranters, whose principles and
doctrines, by the Scriptures, I did withstand and oppose, and with much labor,
and sore wrestlings was I instrumental to deliver you out of their mouths, to
whom many of you were become a prey; I say, much awakened ye were, and the
spirit which convinces of sin, began to work, until another Ministry of
unrighteousness came, which, for the wages of iniquity, taught you to err, and
(when ye were convinced of sin, and troubled within, and saw your filth and
wickedness appear; by which your peace was broken, and your consciences
awakened, and true judgment took hold on the transgressor) pressed you to
believe lies, and shut out that which troubled, and said it was temptations of
the Devil, and that your sin was done away, and that God saw it not, that it
was all pardoned, daubing with untempered mortar, crying peace, peace, to that
to which no peace is spoken from God, by which your bonds were made strong, and
the hands of evil doers strengthened, that they turned not, nor repented, which
wicked doctrine of the Devil, by the Scripture I opposed, and withstood,
persuading you to the last, not to build on the sand, but come down to the
rock; and told you, your peace was but security, which the Devils goods may
attain, and that all your assurance, in which ye gloried, was but vain
confidence, which in the time of trial would deceive you; and so far did I
dispute it with you, daily, by the Scripture that Thomas Ewins, your public
Preacher told me, I dashed his comforts, and weakened his hands, so that he was
not able to preach, but when into the Pulpit he was to go, fear and trembling
sometimes took hold upon him, so that if necessity had not been upon him to
speak, the people being assembled, he should not have spoken a word, and told
me of retiring to his former Calling, and leaving the City, with much more.
Others who loved to have smooth things spoken, that they might be at ease in
Zion, who put far away the evil day, complained (as he said) that all the
comforts and joy they received and gathered from his Ministry all the day, was
dashed and broken by me in the evening. Others complaining, at last confessed I
led you safely, though not comfortably; and all was, because the Devils Kingdom
was disturbed, and his goods not suffered to be at peace; and in your
consciences do you know, that by the Scriptures I demonstrated what I said; to
which I was as true as any amongst you whatsoever. And if in this ye shall say
I boast, remember its you that have compelled me, and if ye have a mind to
gainsay or contradict any particular of it, do it honestly, plainly, and
down-rightly, not coverty and deceitfullie as ye have done before, that when I
come to reply, I may have something like as from men, to speak unto, and not as
from a company of foolish tossed children. For although to this was I was at
first averse, yet by the power and presence of the living God, shall I be free
and able to quench your thorns, scatter your deceit, and remove your veil, and
discover the Harlots skirts.

But friends, suppose all ye say were granted, and that I had indeed, whilst I
was amongst you entertained, and asserted many principles contrary to truth,
and said, that the Scriptures of truth were a blind to souls, and one of the
greatest plagues of the land, (which I have, and utterly do deny,) And suppose
it were granted an error, and a very great sin so to say and affirm, yet was
not all this done in your meeting, whilst I was one and amongst you? and not
then reproved nor gain said. And was it not then time for all that feared the
Lord, and loved the truth to depart out of such an Assembly, in which such
things are permitted to be entertained and published without rebuke? Was there
any safety in being one with such an Harlot, though she call her self a Church?
And are not these things spots, whilst the true Church of Christ, which is his
glorious body, is without spot or wrinckle? Surely, little cause have any who
know the truth, and love and believe in the light, to be grieved or sad'ned,
that any be drawn from such an Assembly; and happy for me was the day, in which
the light manifested you, and from amongst you separated me, to another people,
where no such principles are entertained, nor permitted to be vented. And for
mine own part, I do freely declare to all the world, that since, by the power
of the good shepherd, I was gathered from amongst you, I am fan from
entertaining or uttering any such things: but do dearly own the Scriptures of
truth, as given by inspiration, and see them of great use and service. And if I
received and entertained such principles, contrary to truth amongst you, with
you I also left them, to whom the Scripture is of little use, more then to talk
of, and trade with for an advantage; and by wresting and corrupting the same,
make use of it as a veil to cover your deceit and filthiness, but the life
thereof do not witness.

But I have not yet done with your testimony, in page 13. where ye say, ye
insert your admonition verbatim. Ye charge me with asserting in the Church,
doctrines contrary to truth, one of which is, that the Scriptures are not the
Word of God, and every tittle of this, ye say ye have proved; notwithstanding,
ye have not proved any thing of it to be true, but only ask if I did not at a
meeting at the Red-lodge in the Garden-house, before near twenty people say so?
one of you being by, etc. Truly the Harlots forehead is very hard, if at this
she do not blush: What! Lay a general charge, and say ye will prove, and have
proved every tittle, and yet can say nothing, but ask me if it were not so. And
in page 12. and 13. ye lay this thing to be asserted in the Church, and say ye
will prove every tittle, and now ask me if I did not speak it at the Red-lodge
in the Garden-house, which was at a meeting of those ye call miserable deluded
people, who are wandering as ye say, in the dark. At which time say ye; one of
us was by. So then, by your own confession, either those ye call miserable
deluded people, who are wandering in the dark, must be the Church, or else ye a
company of liars. And let me tell you, these things are not only aequivocations
and mental reservations, of which ye speak, but downright lying and deceit. And
because I asked where the Scripture called it self the Word of God, ye say, for
answer, ye shall give me four plain places instead of many; three of which
places have not these expressions in them, viz. the Word of God, much less that
the Scriptures calls it self so; and the fourth place says, for laying aside
the commandments of God, ye hold the traditions of men, and full well ye
reject the commandment of God, that ye may keep your own traditions; and
again, making the Word of God of none effect thorough your traditions. Now
although in this Scripture, the Word of God is mentioned, yet does the
Scripture therefore call it self the Word of God? Or rather do not ye manifest
your selves to be those that do err, not knowing the Scriptures nor the Word
of God, which was before the Scripture was written, and from which the
Scriptures were given forth, who through your own traditions, and the
traditions of other men, do go about to make the powerful Word of God (by which
all things were made, and forever are upheld) of none effect. And therefore ye
say, what shall we go to light a candle to the Sun? Have not many judicious and
godly Writers proved that the Scriptures are the Word of God? To which I reply,
Many men have both said and written it, from whose traditions, not from the
Scriptures, ye have received it; and amongst others, those ye call Popes,
Papists, Priests and Jesuits as well as other ignorant and unlearned men, who
wrest the Scriptures as ye do, have asserted, and do affirm it, and in their
printed books called Catechisms, and Christian doctrine, have laid it down as
principles and fundamentals (as they as well as you call it) to be learned of
all good Christians; in which ye may find also the ground of your word,
mystical body, Sacraments, and some of that ye call institutions, and most, if
not all, your invented and carnal observations used in and about the worship of
your God, for which no ground being in the Scripture, ye and others have by
tradition received it from the Popes, Cardinals and Priests, and other Heathens
that know not God. But those that knew and ministered of the Word of God, which
was not a dead letter, but quick and powerful, commanded that men should not
say, Who shall ascend into heaven to fetch Christ from above, etc. for the word
of faith, which they preached, was nigh even in the mouth, and in the heart.
And this is that which against your selves ye have rejected that ye may hold
your own and other men's traditions, received as aforesaid, and so do bear the
character of those wicked men, of which ye speak, that cast the Word of God
behind their backs, who hate to be reformed thereby.

And so having in your blind minds, without the fear of God, rambled thorough
what ye had to say, in pretense of proof of that ye call your admonition, which
indeed is but studied accusations, and from the father of lies, and invented by
his instruments amongst you, as before I said, In the close ye say, Ye have
proved every tittle to be true and clear, so that ye are no liars nor false
accusers, but must turn that back again upon me, professing to all the world I
have wronged you in what I have written.

To which I reply, I wish ye had been found innocent before the Lord, and both
true, and clear, and no liars nor false accusers, then I needed not so to have
spoken; but instead thereof, ye are found more and more guilty, adding iniquity
to iniquity; so that were it needful, I could reckon up many more of the lies,
slanders, and false accusations, of which ye stand guilty: To close this
particular, for I profess to all the world, ye are become such a Synagogue, and
Cage of false, lying, and deceitful spirits, that to my remembrance, I never
met with the like, nor did believe was to be found upon the earth, under the
title of a separated Congregation, of whom the Parish Assemblies may say (as ye
say they will) they were better to remain as they are, then come amongst you,
except they intend to be made, twofold more the children of hell then they are
already; for instead of proving your selves no liars nor false accusers, and
the things ye charged me withal to be true and clear; how clearly and truly are
ye proved (yea have proved your selves) by many degrees, greater liars then
before; so that what is justly charged upon you, and said of you, in the skirts
of the whore, stands over your heads, in that authority and power of truth,
that ye shall never be able to return it back, nor free your selves of it, for
it is your portion, and ye must bear it; and laboring to acquit your selves,
being guilty, ye have brought upon your head, much more of the same righteous
judgment, so that, notwithstanding all your consultations with all those lying
spirits, to which ye have given heed, for whose entertainment in your mystical
windy humored body ye plead, the better to recover your veil, and hide your
shame, yet is your vail removed, your coveting ripped off, and your shame
manifested more then before, and your selves in your imaginations confounded,
which from God is the portion of those that hate the light, and bring not their
deeds thereto.

In pages, 18, 19. I find a parcel of deceitful stuff, scarce worth answering,
yet can hardly let pass something without rebuke; I find you blaming me for
flattering and commending my self, as ye say, when your selves have published a
whole book, mostly to vindicate, flatter and commend your selves, and one
anothor in your evil ways, till your iniquity is found out to be abhorred: Why
had ye not cast the beam out of your own eyes, before ye had meddled with motes
in mine, and better considered the Scripture ye mention, viz Let another man
praise thee, and not thy own lips. Again ye say, Amaziah was not blamed for the
good he did, but because he did it not with a perfect heart, and yet your
selves speak contemptuously of perfection, and those that labor to attain it.
Ye say, ye knew my spirit, and what I did pretend to, and observed my gross
mistake, but were not willing to offend me, etc. which is deceit and
hypocrisy, for the true Church cannot bear them that are evil, but testifies
against them. And whereas I had said, the knowledge ye had of Christ, shall
profit you nothing, and that your habitation was in deceit, and thorough
deceit ye refuse to know the Lord, etc. Ye say, in this thing ye did not
violently oppose; and then its like ye confess it, as knowing it was the truth,
and why then had ye not repented. Ye say, some of you did often tell me, that
your comforts stood not so much in a knowing, as in an acknowledgement of
Christ to be, that which he is said to be in the Scriptures, and that ye own no
other knowing of Christ, then understandingly to know him in his person without
you. etc. which is the sum of most of the 19. page. And so have declared, and
clearly manifested the ground and foundation of all your Religion, comforts,
joy and peace, to be one and the same with the foundation of the Religion of
the Pope, Jesuits, drunkards, swearers, profane, ignorant and superstitious
people of the world, namely, an acknowledgement of Christ without you, to be
that which he is said to be in the Scriptures: And so the devils in this
particular excel you, who did not only acknowledge him, but knew him, who he
was, Jesus the Son of God. And (concerning the Ministers of Christ, which those
of your literal profession, opposed and persecuted) cried out, these are the
servants of the most high God. But the comfort, joy and peace of the children
of light, stands not in your ground of general acknowledgement of Christ
without them, to be what the Scriptures declare him to be, but in a particular
knowledge of him, as by the spirit of holiness he is revealed within them,
whereby they come to witness him the Son of God, with power by the resurrection
from the dead; and so Paul knew him, and so to know him, was, and is eternal
life, and witnessed so to be, by those to whom he is so revealed: But this is a
mystery, hid and unknown to all that lie in the death, and never come to
witness the first resurrection, but declare the ground of their comforts to
stand in that in which the wicked of the world, with them are one. And this is
not to slight and nullify that glorious person in heaven, as ye falselie say
many of our way do, scoffing and jeering at you, for speaking of the person of
Christ, and thinking to be saved by the blood of him that dyed at Jerusalem,
which is but your false accusations and slanders, and proceeds from the same
fountain and spirit of envy and wickedness, as Ralph Farmers bundles of lies
did, in which he and ye are one, and at an agreement for scoffing and jeering,
lying, and false accusing, being the works of darkness, in which your
generation are exercised, is denied by all that walk in the light, which is
our way, and the way everlasting. But to declare against your folly, and
your thinkings to be saved by the acknovvledging of Christ without ye (whilst
of him and his life, ye are ignorant, living in wickedness, lying, hypocrisy
and deceit, hating the light, and erring from the right way) is no error, but
love to your souls, who pretend honor to the person (but hate the light) of
Christ, and know not his Gospel, which is the power of God, nor his way, which
is everlasting, and lives; nor his Ordinances which are living, spiritual and
true, not traditional, invented, and carnal: The consideration of which,
together with the lying spirits, to which ye give heed, might justly cause you
to mind whether ye are not those that stumble at Christ the corner stone, and
do cause others to stumble at him, who is now come, and witnessed in life power
and spirit; and living demonstrations thereof are given and manifested in
thousands, who by experience have known and felt the dove-like spirit of
Christ, of which ye speak, though both to you and others, who live in envy,
murdering the just, and betraying the innocent, pretending honor to the name,
but hating the light, and persecuting the power of Christ. This is hid, and ye
say, ye will not believe it.

And if those that owned and seem to honor the Scripture, in which Moses wrote
of Christ, did not believe, but crucified him, when in flesh he was made
manifest, no marvel then if ye do not believe, who call the very words of
Scripture (in which to you I spoke, page 21. of my former book) strange and
unchristian expressions, surely ye are strangely erred from the way of truth,
and true wisdom, who live in such confusion and deceit, one while calling the
Scriptures the Word of God, and rule of life, when by wresting it ye can serve
your lusts; but when by it ye are reproved for your wickedness, then ye call it
strange and unchristian expressions, and say, The Lord rebuke your railing, as
if the Scripture, which ye term the Word of God and Rule of life, were railing,
and the Prophets, and holy men of God, which gave it forth, were railers,
because it bears true testimony against your wicked ways, as well as others,
for the words I mentioned are recorded, Isa. 57. 4. Psalm. 2.1, 2, etc. and in
some other Scriptures, as the Reader will perceive, that reads my former Book.

But ye say, its easy to heap up good words right or wrong: Alas poor blind
people, by what blind guides are ye led? Is it strange and unchristian
expressions, and yet good words? Are they good words, and yet vvrong? What
exceeding confusion are the children of darkness brought into, in this day of
the Lords power, in which light is risen out of obscurity, and the Lords
glory appeared, etc.

In page 21. Ye say, Though some of our way have shouted, and cried Hosannah,
holy, holy, King of Israel to James Nayler, etc.

To which I reply, When will ye be weary of lying and false accusing, which is
the work of the Devil; for none of our way ever so cried to any man: But that
which is our way, is the truth, and the life, and is everlasting, the light and
life of men, from which whosoever turns aside, forsakes the right way, and
turns to lying vanities, as some in this day of the Lords visitation have done,
who must bear their burden. But ye are easily seen of what generation ye are,
who watch for an occasion to speak evil of the way of Truth, and the Saints,
and Children of light, who in the fear of the Lord do walk, and in his Council
abide, which to you is not known, who are glad with an advantage by any means
to speak evil of the way of Truth, and the people, who (being gathered into
it) are for its sake become strangers in the earth, and to their familiar
friends, and aliens to their mothers sons, as all their fathers were. But in
this again are ye and Ralph Farmer one; and by one and the same spirit are ye
guided, to whom it is known, that those that cried as aforesaid, are not of our
way, but denied and witnessed against before ever they did those actions. But
if I should go about to gather up the actions and expressions, contrary to
truth, which I have known and heard pass from some of your way (which is a
very broad way) how abominable filthy would it appear. But I forbear, farther
then it may be for your advantage. Yet let me ask, if none of your way which
is the broad way, leading to destruction, did tell me it was the pride of
Mordecais heart, that bovved not to Haman: And another, that the Rulers and
Elders had sinned, if they had not crucified, or put Christ to death, because
they judged him a blasphemer. And another, that the Pope and Jesuits do believe
in Christ. But this I cast not upon you, whom I know not particularly guilty;
but that ye may see the unjustnesse of your own accusations, and that the
guilty ones may see it and be ashamed.

Ye fall a wondering at my shamelessness, as ye call it, in mentioning, that
some of you did beat in your meetings, like the enemies of Christ in the
synagogues, And say, ye will declare to all the world the truth of this story.

To which I say, if ye can at last declare truth, it is well, and fit ye had
done it sooner: But ye tell how Satan has raged at your vvomens praying, in
which its like ye mistake, and that it was the witness of God that strives
against your hypocrisy, as it did of old against your fathers, when their
ways were corrupt before the Lord: And vvoe unto you, when it shall strive
no more.

Ye say, Two wretched women came rushing into the room, one of which had been
an old Ranter, the other a late member of this Church. Whereas they had been
one as much a member with you, as the other, and neither are Ranters, but in
soberness do walk, and so came into your meeting; and, as ye say, told you,
the prayers of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord: With which you were
disturbed, and the Woman forced to give over.

reply; Its like then there was power in what was spoken, and its manifest the
very words of the Scripture are your disturbance. And therefore, like the
Gadarens who in this are your pattern, ye desired as ye say, these disturbers
to depart your room (as they did Christ to depart their Coasts:) But when they
departed not, ye exceeded your pattern, as ye your selves confess, and would
have put them out (its like) by force, which ye say is all the beating and
occasion of it: Which is an absolute lie, for down the stairs ye would have
thrown them, as your fathers would have thrown Christ down the brow of the
hill, which to do ye did attempt, haling, beating, and pinching them till their
bodies were sore, in which your marks they did bear a long time after. So that
here appears no truth nor ancient godliness, but the contrary in them that did
it, and this wickedness do I not justify, being condemned by the light, to
which it is abomination, and a more wicked thing than for two sober women to
come soberly into your meeting, and declare amongst you the truth; whether ye
hear or forbear.

In page 23. ye endeavor the best you can to veil your selves from the stroke
of truth, contained in Psalm 83. and in the Prophecy of Obadiah. But all in
vain, for it is your portion, and ye must bear it; from him who with
righteousness does judge the poor; and your demanding what gross darkness is
upon my mind, that I should be crying out against you that are innocent, will
not veil you. Nay, notwithstanding ye demand again, whether I be not joined
with all the Papists, Atheists, Ranters, and all the ungodly rabble of the
world, in this one great design of the Devil, to break in pieces the Churches
of Christ, etc. And then mention under the name of Anabaptists, Independents,
Sectaries, Schismatics, etc.

To which I answer, nay, with the Harlot I am not joined, for then must I be
one body with you. But from among you all am I separated by the power of the
Lord, to witness his presence, And therefore your selves, with all Papists,
Atheists, Ranters, and ungodly rabble of the world, who in the great design of
the Devil are joined, to hate the light, and persecute and oppose the life and
power of God, do I deny, and stand a witness against. And although ye are the
many-headed Beast in diverse forms, sects and opinions, under the name of
Papists, Atheists, Independents, Anabaptists, etc. and upon a like ground
pretend to Christ's person, Gospel, and Ordinances, as before I said, and with
one mouth, and with one shoulder, cry out against, and oppose his light and
living presence, for which ye associate and take counsel together of one and
the same lying spirit, yet ye must be broken, and as a new threshing instrument
is the Lord making the worm Jacob, to thresh your mountains, as chafe, and
your little hills as dust: And the day of your distress and visitation is
begun, in which all that see you shall wag the head, who with the most
embittered enemies are joined against the light and life of God, and with
Atheists, Drunkards, and profane persons, who live in scoffing, scorning,
reproaching, and deriding, in slandering, falsehood and lies, do ye assemble,
teaching the wicked of the world your ways, and the Children that have not
understanding, to blaspheme the light, and living way to the Father, which is
your own returned.

But can ye be honest and own what ye say, and now fly from it? If so, then I
demand, Is it indeed the great design of the Devil, to break in pieces the
Congregations in England, under the names of Independents, Anabaptists,
Sectaries, etc. as ye pretend it is? If nay, then are ye false and deceitful
in what ye have written: If yea, then is there a false Prophet, and Minister of
Satan to be found amongst you, in whose mouth he has been a lying spirit, to
which ye ought to give no longer heed. For Robert Purnell, in his book
entitled, Good news to sinners, great joy to Saints, declares the contrary.
And in page 65. undertakes to be a Prophet, and says, a few words by way of
prophecy of the downfall of Presbytery, Independency, Anabaptisme, etc. And
then he calls upon all the servants of the most high and mighty God, heirs of
promise, and sons of Zion to look for great alterations and changes, and to see
what desolations God will make in the earth, and for nothing but the Lord to be
revealed from heaven, which says he will be mighty in his dispensations,
exceeding glorious in his revelation, and strong and powerful in his
operation, and will bring to pass his determinations, and destroy in this
mountain the face of the covering cast over all people, and the veil that is
spread over all Nations; which veil he says, is knowing Christ and Christians
after the flesh, which Paul did not do, after his eyes were opened, etc. And so
he goes on to manifest how Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, etc. are
all veiled with the same veil, And therefore says he, what I say to one Sect,
I say to all, ye shall speedily receive a total rout. Ye have gathered your
selve together, but ye shall be scattered, yea ye shall be broken in pieces.
Ye all have built your outward house of external discipline upon the sand, and
it must fall, because it is not grounded upon the Rock Christ. Ye have made
your communion the ground of your union, and that must fall, because it is not
the Lords, but man's building: And himself puts the question how he knew
Presbytery, Independency, Anabaptisme, and the rest of the Sects must down, and
answers, if Abraham by faith did see the day of Christ coming in the flesh many
years before he came, why may not I (says he) and others see the day of Christ
coming in the spirit (to destroy all fleshly forms) some few years before it be
finished: And again says he, I have by faith seen all these opinions fall, and
have heard from many others, that they have seen them fall also. Therefore that
which I have heard and seen declare I unto you, that ye might have fellowship
with the father and the son in the spirit; for then, says he, and not till
then ye will give over saying, as in effect ye do, I am of Paul, I am of
Apollo. Then ye will not so much cry up the form, but endeavor the power of
godliness. These with many more, are his words, as the Reader may see in his
foresaid book.

Now therefore, if it be true, that all these forms are fleshly, and are not
built upon the Rock Christ, but upon the sand, are not the Lords, but men's
building, and therefore must fall, and be broken to pieces, and scattered, and
speedily receive a total rout. And that he by faith has seen it all fall; and
has both heard and seen what he declared, that is to say, Christ Jesus coming
in spirit to destroy them, that people might have fellowship with the Father
and the Son in the Spirit. Then are Robert Purnell and you found directly in
the steps and practice of your Fathers, the Scribes and Pharisees, who (when
Christ came in the flesh, according to the Prophecies that went before) said,
It was the Devil a blasphemer, a friend to publicans and sinners, etc. For ye,
now that Christ in spirit, in life and power, is appeared, mighty in
dispensations, glorious in revelation, and very strong and powerful in
operation, making great alterations, changes and desolations in the earth, and
revealing himself from heaven, breaking down and scattering what he has not
built, nor gathered; destroying and breaking in pieces those Forms and Sects of
yours, which he says are fleshly, not built by the Lord but men; not upon the
Rock, but upon the sand, and speedily receives a total rout, etc. I say, since
Christ is thus appeared against all those Forms, that his people may have
fellowship with the Father and the Son, in the spirit, and not cry up the Form,
but endeavor to know the power of godliness, according to the very words
himself has said; both Robert Purnel and you agree to call it the design of
the Devil, asking if I be not joined with all the Papists, Atheists, Ranters,
and ungodly rabble of the world, in this one great design of the Devil, to
break in pieces the Churches of Christ? And say, has it not been the attempt
of one power after another, to rent, break, and scatter the Congregations in
England, under the names of Independents, Anabaptists, Sectaries, etc? And has
any party gone so far in this wicked practice as you, etc? Nay, say you, was
there ever any party in England, or the Nations adjacent, that have offered
the like violence to the Lord Jesus Christ, his person, in his Word, in his
Gospel, his Ordinances, his Saints, his ways, etc. as you and your party have
done, etc? Notwithstanding it be the very thing (and no other) which he in his
said Book says, By faith he saw Christ in spirit, coming to perform, a few
years before it was finished; which few years, its like are now accomplished,
it being about eight years since the said Book was published; so then that
which Christ comes in spirit to perform, ye call the great design of the
Devil, and a wicked practice, and those who with Christ in his work are joined,
bringing to pass his determinations, ye say are joined with Papists, Athiests,
Ranters, and the ungodly rabble of the world.

But why do Robert Purnell and you now call Independent, and baptized
Assemblies the Churches of Christ, when he had before declared them fleshly
Forms and Sects, not built by the Lord upon the rock, but by men, upon the
sand, and must fall, and be broken, and scattered, and receive a total rout;
and that he saw Christ in spirit, coming to destroy them, that his people might
have fellowship with the Father and the Son by the Spirit; and that what he
declared, he had both heard and seen, manifesting to all the world (against
your wills) that that which ye call and cry up as the Churches of Christ, and
Assemblies of Zion, are indeed but fleshly Forms and Sects, not built by the
Lord, upon the Rock Christ, but by themselves, upon the sands, which Christ
comes in spirit to destroy, and therefore must fall and be broken, routed and
scattered: and that notwithstanding among your selves it is known and
manifested to be so, by a spirit of faith (as R. P. says) by which it was
seen; Yet ye hold the truth in unrighteousness, and do err from the spirit,
else might ye know, that the Churches of Christ, which are in God the Father,
are not fleshly Forms and Sects, like yours, but is a spiritual house, an holy
habitation for God, by whom it is built upon the rock of ages, the foundation
of the Prophets and Apostles, Christ being the cornerstone, against which all
the gates of Hell, and powers of darkness, shall never prevail, to break,
scatter, destroy, or cause to fall, but as mount Zion shall it stand, and a
burthensom stone shall it be, against all fleshly Forms and Sects that fight
against it, in this day of the Lords appearing in the power and glory of his
spirit, to break in pieces, scatter and destroy all your fleshly Forms and
Sects which he never built upon the Rock; but your selves have built upon the
sands, and so are no Churches of Christ, but the strong holds of Satan, in
which he having blinded their minds, keeps his goods in peace, and under
pretense of beating up the form, the power of godliness, is there denied and
not known. But the desires of the flesh and of the mind, are there served
equally as among other people, and this I do see and know, otherwise had I not
declared it unto you. And so into the pit that ye have dug are ye fallen,
and in the works of your own hands are ye snared; and not I, but ye are found
joined with the ungodly rabble ye mention, in the great design of the Devil,
opposing the truth, blaspheming and offering violence to the Lord Jesus Christ;
and well may I return your vain words into your bosoms, and say, Ah pour
deceived people, what gross darkness has now seized upon your minds? Where are
your eyes, (and may add) what blind guide has misled, and bewitched you, th^^
ye should be crying out against me, for that in which I am innocent, and your
selves so notoriously found to practice? And this from amongst your selves, and
out of Robert Purnels mouth are ye judged.

But if what Robert Purnel has said be not true, but a lying spirit has led
him, and that by faith he did not see Christ in spirit, coming to destroy the
fleshly Forms of Independency, Anabaptism, and other Sects there mentioned, and
so declared a false vision, which he neither heard nor saw; notwithstanding he
says, he had heard and seen it. Then is Robert Purnel a liar, a false Prophet,
a deceiver, that causes the people to err, by his lies and by his lightness,
and his faith, by which he saw is vain, and he to the true faith found
reprobate, and the reward of a false Prophet must he receive, that has seen
vain visions, and spoken lying divinations, Ezekiel. 13.8, 9. Because ye have
spoken ^^nity, and seen lie, therefore behold, I am against you, says the Lord
God; and mine hand shall be upon the Prophets, that see vanity, and divine
lies, they shall not be in the Assembly of my people neither shall they be
written in the writing of the house of Israel. And his Cabinet richly stored,
in which he proclaims a remedy for every malady, and a ready way to attain
salvation, as is said; its like, is filled with deceit, and all kind of
venomous filthy stuff, such as comes out of the mouth of the false Prophet, the
dreamer that speaks a vision of his own heart, and not from the mouth of the
Lord, and therefore e^res in vision, and stumbles in judgment, which
whosoever believes and follows, is like to find the ready way to
destruction, and not to salvation, of which let all people bevvare; and since
you proclaim your selves an Assembly of the Lords people, and boast of your
obedience to all his Commandments and Ordinances written as you say in his
Word, and that your feet has held its steps, and not gone back from the Lord,
nor declined the Commandments of his mouth, and tell of your readiness to deal
with them that are evil, etc.

You are charged every particular of you to look to it, and approve your selves
faithful and obedient to what is written, and as you intend to answer before
the Lord D^cline not the Commandments of his mouth, who has said, Woe to the
foolish Prophets that follow their own spirits, they have seen vanity and lying
divinations, saying, the Lord says, and the Lord has not sent them, etc.
Because ye have spoken vanity, and seen lies, therefore behold I am against
you, says the Lord God, and my hand shall be against the Prophets that see
vanity, and devine lies, they shall not be in the Assemblies of my people,
neither shall they be written in the writings of the house of Israel; Ezekiel. 13.
Now if Robert Purnels Prophecy aforesaid be not true, but a lying divination
and a vain vision, then is he by an express Commandment of the Lord not to be
in the assemblies of the Lords people; and therefore look to it, be not
deceitful nor false in what your selves have published, for in it you will be
observed, and your obedience and faithfulness to what you say is your Rule,
will be tried, and if you are found false and treacherous, your iniquity will
be marked, for you have made your selves public, and must be manifested and
remember you are warned of it in time; and Robert Purnel is advised to consider
it, and repent thoroughly, if place for repentance to the false Prophet may be
found and with shame and confusion let him manifest the same, owning his just
condemnation for so horrible a transgression. But if his said Prophecy be
true, and Independency and Anabaptism so called, together with other things
there mentioned, be but fleshly Forms and Sects not built by the Lord, but by
men, not upon the Rock, but upon the sand, and that Christ is come, and coming
in spirit to destroy it, and therefore must fall and be broken, as he declares;
then let both Robert Purnel, and every one of you look to it, and repent in
time of your horrible wickedness, in blaspheming the work of Christ, which he
in spirit is come to perform in this his mighty day, calling it the great
design of the devil, etc. otherwise the just judgments of our God (whom we
serve, who is the Creator of the ends of the earth) ye cannot escape, who is
near to be revealed from heaven, in power and great glory, taking vengeance of
all blasphemers and disobedient ones, and will render tribulation and anguish
upon every soul that does evil; and in this am I seriously under fence of your
condition, and therefore do warn you of these things, whether you will hear or
forbear; and as for any other false Prophets and Deviners amongst you to whom
the mysteries of Gods Kingdom (which to the Saints is given to know) is not
revealed nor opened, and so have seen nothing but vanity and lying devinations
revealed; The Lord has said, he is against them, and they shall not be in the
Assemblies of his people; and it concerns you to take notice of it, least you
manifest your selves to be those that flatter with your mouths, and lie with
your tongues when your hearts are not right with God, nor you steadfast in his
Covenant: And your own words ye may take to your selves, O stand still, smite
upon your thighs, and blush for shame at what ye have done, for though man,
Harlots have played the harlot, yet thou excellest them all, who upon a lofty
and high mountain have set thy bed, and speak loftily, and that it is
beneath thee to answer many things contained in the skirts of the Whore,
fulfilling the Scriptures, Pro. 30.19. There is a generation, oh how lofty are
their eyes, etc!

But the day of the Lord is dawned, in which the eyes of the lofty must be
humbled, and your lofty looks abased: Yea, the day of the Lord of hosts is upon
every one that is proud and lofty, and by him who shall be alone exalted in
this his day, shall all those be brought down that dwell on high; and by the
feet of the poor, and the steps of the needy is he treading down the lofty
City to the ground. And with you have I no kindred, part, nor inheritance, who
inherit lies and falsehood and with it would be veiled. But a witness against
both it and you I stand, and the harlots nakedness must I discover, and her
advice to the contrary is rejected, because it is her portion from the Lord;
and by her to have my name cast out as evil for the Son of man's sake, is a
blessing, at which I may rejoice, and leap for joy.

And whereas ye wish me to take notice, that ye desire your three Messengers to
answer for themselves, that their faithfulness may appear, etc. This is a
piece of deceit, like the rest; for Robert Purnell, Robert Simpson, and
Richard Moon, who were the three Messengers, to desire themselves to answer,
and presently put their hands to their own desires, with three more, two of
which were never of the people with which I walked, and the other long since
removed his habitation near thirty miles distant. But however being by
themselves desired, because they had none else, to desire it of them, they like
themselves begin to answer, and after many vain and idle words, they say they
received their commission from God, to this work, and met together, and
considered the particulars, of which they were to admonish their backslidden
Brethren and Sisters.

Reply. Here they blaspheme the holy and dreadful name of God, by entituling it
to their lies and slanders, who never gave commission to false Prophets, liars
and slanderers, to admonish any of his, but reproved such, saying, They run,
and I sent them not, therefore they shall not profit the people: And so it is
with you.

But from what did your brethren and sisters, as ye call them, backslide more
than from your deceitful ways and practices, which to God are abominable? If
ye say, it is from your outward fellowships, ways, and worships, Then the
Parshes, from which ye have separated your selves have the same thing to
admonish you of: And ye justify those filthy polluted Priests, who cast out
the names or persons of some from amongst them, ^^t John ^^l guilty of (...)
because they separated themselves from their polluted worships. Besides, one
of the three said, by faith he saw the downfall of all these Sects and Forms,
and that it was not of Gods building, and that he saw Christ coming in spirit
to destroy it: And then how is it that ye are not ashamed to say, that to get
out of that which God never built, is backsliding? And that God gave you a
commission to admonish any for departing out of that which Christ in spirit
came to destroy. But your God (who is the God of the world) that gave you
such a commission, and put you upon those works of wickedness is denied,
together with your selves, who his Commissioners are, with all your
pretended admonitions inventions and deceitful stuff, which to the children
of light are manifest, and seen to be as light as vanity.

They say, They knew much themselves, and what they knew not, they were fully
satisfied by the mouths of many faithful and true witnesses.

Reply. Where were they found? in many particulars, sithence ye are already
proved an unfaithful company of liars and deceitful workers.

They say, In the name of the Lord, and in obedience to his command, and in a
filial fear to God, love and pity to our souls, they did admonish, etc.

Reply Did they know the name of the Lord, which is dreadful to all deceivers,
false prophets, and hypocrites, they would not dare to name it, whiles they
live in iniquity; but out of his name are ye all shut, and have no portion in
that which is a strong tower, to which the righteous run, and are saved. Who
for your rebellion and disobedience against his name (who live out of his
fear) which is the light of the world, are by the light judged and condemned,
who in your vain minds talk of love and pirty to souls, but never came to
witness the living soul, nor the quickening spirit, where the true love and
pity comes to be witnessed.

But did your three Messengers in the name, and in the fear, and in obedience
to the Lord admonish? How then came it to pass, that they came to a near
relation of mine, and told her, in the name of the Lord, etc they were sent to
admonish her also of something, as sin. To which she replied to Robert Simpson
that spoke, Have not thou something in thee that tells thee thou do lie in
the name of the Lord? For, what sin do I live in which thou know? To which
he said; Dear sister, I do not say, in practice, but in judgment. To which
she replying, What is my judgment? Can thou tell? He appeared confounded,
and said, Do not you hear those men (meaning those called Quakers) Now is not
here deceit and wickedness, to pretend to admonish people in the name, fear,
and obedience of God, and at last know not for what, but ask if she did not
hear those men, which Robert Simpson himself had often done (it is like more
often than she at that time.) Now have ye not read that God is not mocked? but
what ye sow, the same ye must reap. Why then do ye thus to the flesh sow
corruption, falsehood, lying and deceit, and make mention of the name of the
Lord as your covering?

To what they said to me in particular, I need not say much, because what I
said before stands unanswered, and in power over your heads, only they say, the
things they charged me withal are true, every syllable, as appears by the
foregoing answer of the whole Church, which is false, and those they call the
Church proved liars: And whereas they say, they did not fear me, neither did
their consciences accuse them. In this they presently gave themselves the lie,
and say the reason they staid not was, because they found my spirit the time
before as a boiling furnace boiling over, and scalding all that stand near it,
which made them resolve not to stay the second time. Now what deceit and
wickedness is here? Who can believe a word that comes from amongst you, who
are out of the fear of God, and therefore regard not what ye say. For I having
charged them in my last, that they fled as men surprised with fear, or accused
by their own consciences: They deny it, and say it is false, and that they
neither feared me, nor were accused, etc. And yet in 6. or 8, lines have fully
granted what I said, saying the reason they staid not, was because they found
my sprrit as a boiling furnace, boiling over and scalding, etc. Now is it not
evident, they feared lest they should be scalded? and what was there that
scalded, but the witness of God within themselves? Poor men! I knew they were
wounded, tormented, and scalded by the witness of God, in their own
consciences, testifying against their hypocrisy and deceit, so that they could
not stand, nor abide it; for the day of the Lord is now great, and who may
abide it; for it is like refiners fire, yea it burns as an oven, and all that
do wickedly are as stubble, and not only scalded, but burned must ye be, and
neither root nor branch shall be left. And the false Prophets that see vanity,
and divine lies, and all that embrace and receive them, who must not be in the
assembles of Gods people, are not in a capacity (as they say) for those that
fear the name of the Lord, to converse withal. Neither is dried stubble in a
capacity to contend with those in whom the spirit of judgment and burning is,
left thereby they be both scalded and burned.

But Robert Purnell and Robert Simpson, were it not meet for you to take liced,
and beware, lest (whiles ye pretend a Commission from God, to admonish others
for backsliding, who are not at all drawn back, but are of those that believe,
to the salvation of their souls, who for the hope set before them, do endure
the Cross, and despise the shame, and with much patience, through many
tribulations, the race do run, and through good report, and evil report, as
deceivers, and yet true, do pass, pressing on, if by any means they may
attain to the resurrection of the dead, and to apprehend that for which they
are apprehended of Christ Jesus.) Ye your selves be not found in Satan's work,
and indeed gone back, by many degrees into the world, and the pollutions
thereof, being entangled and overcome by that which once ye seemed in a measure
to have escaped, and so your latter end become worse then your beginning. And
therefore to you, or to one of you I say, do not eat and drink with the
drunken, do not fill your selves with wine and ftrong drink, nor spend the
creation of God upon your lusts: Do not spend your time out of the fear of the
Lord, in pleasure and wantonness, in lightness and vanity, abusing the
servants of the Lord, For he is at the door, and ye know him not, that will cut
you asunder (except ye repent) and all your inventions, traditions, foolish
customs, and carnal washings, will not hide nor help you: And this is a
warning to those of you that forget God, and cast his law, which is light,
behind your backs, to consider, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none
to deliver you, who as unsavourie salt are become, whose ill savor is gone
abroad from Alehouses and Taverns (too much frequented) sporting your selves
with the enemies of God, with which ye now begin to appear as one, rather than
to be grieved for the afflictions of Joseph, or to become companions of those,
who for witnessing the power and life of Jesus, do suffer by the world, the
generation of Vipers, as ever they did of old. And this is all the fruit I know
that your invented washings have brought you to, and yet for this time I do
very much spare one of you.

But why are Robert Simpson and Thomas Ewins so much troubled, that my letters
to each of them are made public; for what is published was written to them
many months before, without an intent to publish it, and in all that time,
which one of them acknowledges, was above a year, no answer was given in word
or writing, nor any word spoken to me about it by them, testifying dislike, as
if all were quiet and well. But now it is made public, and brought to light,
and their deeds seen and openly reproved, how angry do they appear, crying out
of wrong, lies, etc. and after me pour their floods of contempt, reproach and
scorn, notwithstanding, under their hands it may appear, I was before called
their honored Brother, and when of worldly honors I could accept (though I
did not, as others seek it) and when into his mouth I could freely put, Thomas
Ewins to me cried peace, and in my absence declared he had little or no
encouragement to abide in Bristol, were it not for me But since to the light I
have been turned, and by it convinced of the blindness and falseness of your
minds and worships, and could not put into his mouth, as before, how does he
bite with the teeth, and prepare war against me, though his weapons appear too
weak and carnal to prevail, against which the bow is in strength; and the
Reader, whose eyes are opened, will easily perceive, that had not the things
been true, which to each of them I writ, and not at all to be gainsaid, nor
contradicted, they would in all that time, either in words or writing, plead
their own innocence against me, who had so much wronged them as now they
pretend: But being very true, and not to be gainsaid, the subtilest beast in
the field (it is like) persuades them to be quiet, that it be not noised abroad,
but in oblivion kept: But since, beyond their expectation it is come to light,
and they cannot prevent it; some course (if it be possible) must be taken, that
it be not believed. And therefore (how falsely soever accused) it must be of
lies, falsehood, and folly, though themselves feel the power of it, standing in
truth and wisdom, and have not told the Reader in what the folly and falsehood
lies: But (by all the means they are able) labor to recover a veil, though but
little have either they or you done, more then to ensnare your selves in your
own works, whose webb is not become a garment, neither do your works profit,
for your works are works of vanity: But how comes it to pass, that my letters
were true, and not to be contradicted before they were published, but are not
so now? Why only thus, our skirts are discovered, our sepulcher is opened,
and our nakedness is now made manifest, that people (as we pass the street)
point us out Notorious, and at us vvag the head; so that before the people
(that are not vvilfully blind) we and our povverless, hypocritical profession
(which stands in words and forms, not in spirit and power) are like to
receive but little honor.

Now because they have written severally, I shall reply particularly: And
first to Robert Simpson, in whom (me thinks) I see most honesty, though it be
clouded and covered with much deceit and hypocrisy, which the light
reproves: And had I not a desire very much to spare him, for the honesties
sake, the second stroke would exceed the first: And because I perceive his
main work (as well as yours) is to seek a veil of deceit, under which to
hide himself from the stroke of truth, and to attain it, spends himself in
many light, vain, and angry words, which have little weight, I shall not
trouble my self, nor the Reader in speaking much to it, for of it self it
falls, yet I would not that he should so often take the name of the Lord in
vain, as he does in the beginning of what he speaks, for the Lord will not
hold him guiltless. But in page 29. he says, If the charge I laid upon him
were so indeed, how sad were his condition? Well might his countenance be
changed, and his thoughts trouble him.

To which I reply, That though he has labored till (he says) he has
forgotten himself, to vindicate or cover himself from what was truly laid upon
him, yet from it has he not delivered himself, but the charge stands good, in
sound and sober words, in the power of truth, and whiles he covers his sin be
cannot prosper. And whiles he adds one iniquity to another, he cannot come
into Gods righteousness: And oh! that he would consider it, and lay it to
heart whiles he has time, that in the day of the Lords anger, which is at
hand, and as a destruction from the Almighty shall come, he might be hid and
find mercy of the Lord, with whom his vain speaking of a witness he has in
heaven brought from thence into his heart, and confirmed by the Spirit of
Truth, and of his being taken up into the Mount to confer with him, who has
all power given him and of a Warrant sealed and given forth from him that has
al power, etc. is of little account, whiles he understands not what he speaks;
For the Kingdom of God comes not with observation, but the kingdom of God is
within, and in his Kingdom he is who dwells in heaven, where the Father, the
Word and Spirit agree, of which all blind Pharisaical Professors are ignorant
and cannot know it, till in the light, and by the spirit it be revealed and
made manifest.

And whereas he says, All that he, with the rest, laid at my door, was to a
tittle true; and that neither he nor his brethren have any reluctance for it.
This is all falls, for I have before proved it lies and deceit, and themselves
have confessed they found that which boiled like a furnace, and scalded all that
stand near it, and they were near it, and so resolved not to stay another time.
And judgment is now laid to the line, and righteousness to the plummet, and
all refuges of lies and deceit are to be swept away, and by truth and soberness
such hiding places are overflown, and in soberness do I stand; and so much to
my self am I come, that I see many of his words there mentioned to veil and
cover himself, to be light and vain, and not worth answering, and that what I
writ, was both sober and true, without fawning and flattery, in which many
among you are too much exercised, who love to have smooth, not true things
spoken, and would have me peaceable, gentle, and full of mercy to hypocrisy,
deceit and wickedness, all which is for judgment, and no peace from God is
spoken to it. And therefore without partiality do I declare against it in him
and you, as well as in others, and to my self am I not a stranger. And this is
pure wisdom from above, and moderation, known unto all that receive and believe
in the light, by which that spirit appearing in my former book, is justified,
though to you that hate the light, and by the light are condemned it is as gall
and wormword. And for sporting my self, and insulting over him; I did it not,
but it is another refuge of lies; for I told him before, I did not insult over
him, nor delight in his woe and misery, but was sorely grieved, as still I am,
to see how the wicked one, whom the Lord would destroy, was exalted in him and
you, and what I writ is true. And whereas he says, I was not a in a sober
mind, but at a distance from it, and true speaking (when I mentioned to him the
portion of liars) and that not any thing he said was a lie, but what he said I
had not his hand to, as his particular affirmation; and so goes on speaking
many words, but to what purpose I cannot see, except it be by words to darken
the Readers understanding. But if I mistake not, that which he would do, is to
vindicate himself from being a liar, with what else I charged upon him in my
former Letter, by telling me he said I had not his hand to it, as his
particular accusation. And if this be his meaning, then is it gross deceit, for
I never said or thought it was his particular accusation, but a general
accusation delivered by him, in which himself and each other particular, was
included, and so I spoke to him in soberness and pity, my very howels moving
toward him, knowing my self innocent, and that it was a dreadful thing for him
in the Name or the Lord to speak a false vision or thing. I asked him, how he
durst come to me, and in the name of the Lord tell me, I said the Scriptures of
truth were one of the greatest plagues of the land, when I never spoke nor
thought such a thing. To which he replied, he never spoke it, nor laid it to my
charge, though out of his own mouth it came; and when I told him I had it under
his hand, he denied it. When I told him I could show it him, he replied, if I
could, he would acknowledge himself a liar; upon which ground I charged him for
it as before, and so I do still, and good were it for him, if he owned the
judgment and repented, for otherwise he cannot escape. But if he forgeting
that his hand was to his paper, did run himself into the evil of denying it, as
is before expressed; yet if (when he came to the sight of his error) he had
clearly acknowledged it, and owned his condemnation and repented, to which in
love he was advised, there had been mercy for him: but being convinced and
reproved of the evil, hardened his neck, and labors to hide and cover his sin,
adding one iniquity unto another; here he cannot prosper, but brings himself
justly under, not only the judgment and condemnation mentioned in my former
Letter, but more and more misery due to those that rebel against the light, by
which they are reproved, and to those that add iniquity unto iniquity, and must
not come into Gods righteousness. And from it all the waters in Jordan can
never wash him, not the Rocks and Mountains cover him, nor all your outward
observations, imaginations and willworships, preserve him, till he own the
light, by which he is convinced and reproved, and the just condemnation thereof
pass upon the rebellious, and the transgressor which has sinned, and he
brought to repentance, and the acknowledgement of the truth; and so his soul
come to be saved in this mighty day of the Lords power. And this is not from a
violent heat of wildfire, as he calls it, but from a spirit of soberness,
soundness and truth, and is true love to his soul; and the time is near, in
which he that rebukes plainly shall find more favor then he that flattereth
with his lips, and my end is not to make him a transgressor before all, as he
supposes, but according to my measure to advise him, into the way, the light,
the life and the truth, which leads out of transgression, into the
inheritance of the Saints in light; and in this I do not equivocate, nor evade,
as he falsely charge me, but do speak plainly and truly, though at it, both
he and ye are offended. And both Baptism and the Lords Supper I do own, as
before I said; and all your traditions, imaginations, inventions carnal
observations and will-worships I do deny, who in the many things (about which
ye are troubled) oftend all, and are not come to the one Baptism, by which the
Saints were baptized into one body; nor know not the Cup of the New Testament,
nor the bread of life, which is the life of men, nor the fruit of the Vine, of
which Christ with his Disciples drank new in his Fathers Kingdom; and so are
feeding your selves with that which will never satisfy, but is corruptible,
and must perish in the using. And the ground on which ye stand and question me
is not good, but of God is rejected, and briars and thorns does it bring forth,
and its near unto cursing. And whereas he says, though he was not present when
I spoke so reproachfully of the Scriptures, yet he did believe it, and still
does.

I Reply, Here is plainly, and without equivocation, as he calls it, the ground
of your lies and slanders, false accusations and charges, as well as of your
windy, heady, and powerless Religion, (that is to say) your believing things,
which ye neither heard nor saw, but have got by tradition and hearsay from
others, as he confesses of himself in this particular, and few can believe it
besides those that are given over to believe lies, because there is no truth at
all in it. And although he says, I had not his hand in particular, to what he
heard not, yet I know I had it to the whole, of which that is a part; and I
have it to that which he denies, and says, I had it not; and well was it that
I had it under hand, or else how stiffely would it be denied and gainsayed, as
it was directly at first, and after plain conviction, what shuffling and deceit
is here used amongst you, to hide and cover it, though to little purpose? And
had I not by the wisdom of God, had a Copy of your charge, signed by some of
your selves, how must all your lies and forged accusations (which ye publish
and say was verbatim, and proved to a tittle and syllable) pass for truth,
because ye say it is so, which by the said Copy is proved not verbatim, nor is
proved true, but the contrary.

And whereas Robert Simpson declares I had no ground at all, to lay that
agravavation of lying upon him, viz. a lie invented, a lie prosecuted, a lie
denied, and the lie proved, and afterward advises me not to evade nor
equivocate, but speak truly, and deal plainly.

Reply. I have before dealt so truly and plainly, without flattery, that ye are
offended, yet I shall take his advise, and plainly declare, the lie was
invented amongst you, when ye studied your accusations, the lie was prosecuted
by your Messengers, who charged me with the guilt of what ye had falsely
contrived. The lie was denied by Robert Simpson, when he denied that he spoke
such a thing, or laid it to my charge, though I had it under his hand; and the
lie by me stands proved, both on you and him, from which ye can never deliver
your selves by all your shifting and striving, but like a bird in the snare,
the more ye strive, the more ye are entangled, till ye acknowledge your
iniquity, and own your condemnation, and repent. And so Robert Simpsons
weapons being but the wrath and deceivableness of man, and not under promise of
a blessing from God, are found too carnal (as he acknowledgeeth) to war against
the Lamb and his followers, whose weapons are not carnal like his, but mighty,
thorough God, to the pulling down, and laying low all high things, so that no
lying refuges, nor deceitful coverings, are able to stand. But the Armies of
the world, who follow the beast, to make war with the Lamb, do fly and fall
before them. Glory to him that sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb for
evermore.

A Reply to Thomas Ewins his word, as he calls it.
I Find Thomas Ewins, in the beginning of his word, as he calls it,
acknowledging the receipt of my Letter above a year since, never intending to
answer it; but since it is published, takes himself bound to answer, and makes
use of Solomon's words, to cover his deceitful pretenses, just like one whom God
abhors, which teaches for hire, and devineth for money, and corrupts the
Scriptures, with which he trades; for does he not know that the true reason of
his intending never to answer, was (not lest he should be like unto me, as he
pretends, but rather) knowing the guilt, dreaded the contest, and would gladly
bury it in silence; but being made public, holds himself bound to answer, not
lest I be wise, etc. but lest (his wickedness and deceit being made manifest,
and he proved out of the ways, and out of the life of the Ministers of Christ,
and in the ways and steps of those Masters, whose gain came in by devination)
he in this might suffer loss, and account himself bound to prevent it; and by
sorcery and wicked art, makes use of Solomon's words as his covering.

Now because his word is so large, and so little of worth or wisdom contained
therein, being a parcel of dead and dull stuff. And because his ignorance,
lightness and confusion, is so plainly to be read in his own lines, by all that
walk in the fear and counsel of the Lord, I shall not trouble my self, nor the
Reader, with answering every particular, as it lies, but rather out of his heap
of confusion, take up a little, letting the rest remain.

In the first place, he finds fault with me, for publishing his acknowledging
himself no Minister of the Gospel, and declares the grounds on which he denied
himself a Minister, but not a Preacher of the Gospel, but has mist to insert
the true ground upon which I so declared him; which was, that in serious
dispute or discourse he has not been able by the Scriptures to maintain
himself a Minister of the Gospel, but made to acknowledge the contrary, and
that before several witnesses But how is it, that he denied himself, as he
says, to be a Minister, but not a Preacher of the Gospel? Did any ever preach
the Gospel, who had not the treasure of it in their earthen vessels? Or did
ever any who had the treasure within them, preach and not minister of the same,
as good stewards of the grace of God? Truly, he that is such a man
(notwithstanding he may vainly boast of his abilities, and approbation, and
being sent forth by men) had need to seek a better proof of his Ministry, or
else must never be owned by Christ, as one of his.

He says, he denied himself a Minister of any Parish in Bristol, a Minister in
Office, not having been called, constituted, or ordained, etc And that he has
put off that honor and dignity, from a sense of the weight and excellency of
that high calling, and of the great unworthiness and unfitness he saw in
himself of so glorious an employment; but says, that he has been and is
(though the unworthiest upon earth) a Preacher and a publisher of the glorious
Gospel of the grace of God, both in Wales, and now in Bristol, he has no need
to seek a proof of me or any other man.

To which I say, his own proof is too light and empty, to prove him a Preacher
of the Gospel; and in it self sufficiently discovers him no Minister of Christ,
but in confusion; for the Ministers of Christ were called, but he confesses he
was neither called, constituted, nor ordained a Minister in Office, which I
take for granted, and then is he to prove that they who were no Ministers,
either called, constituted, or ordained, were preachers of the glorious Gospel;
and likewise, that they who were preachers of the Gospel, were not Ministers.
But in this his ignorance, folly and confusion, are made manifest, for can a
man be a Preacher and publisher of the glorious Gospel, and yet no Minister,
either called, constituted, or ordained? and can he that is no Minister, either
called, constituted or ordained (as he has confessed he is not) be a publisher,
and a Preacher of the glorious Gospel? Was not he a Minister? And did not he
make full proof of his Ministry, who preached the Word, who did the work of an
Evangelist? Paul was appointed a Preacher, and he was called to be an able
Minister; but Thomas Ewins has not been able by the Scripture to maintain that
he is a Minister, but enforced to deny the same; and now has given it under
his hand, that he was not called, constituted nor ordained; therefore being no
Minister, he is no Preacher of the Gospel, but in confusion. And it is much to
see what poor shifts the children of darkness are put unto, now in the day of
the Lords power, wherein light is risen out of obscurity, and they that hate it
are discovered, and to the least child of light, made manifest and denied.
Besides, the Gospel is the Gospel of the kingdom; and to those who were
Preachers and publishers thereof, it was given to know the mysteries of that
kingdom, which to others was in parables and dark sayings, that seeing they
might see, and not perceive, etc. And the Gospel is a great mystery, which has
been hid from ages and generations, but is now made manifest to those to whom
God would make known what is the riches of the glory of that mystery which
(says Paul) is Christ in you, the hope of glory, whom we preach; And by
revelation, says he, God made known unto me; the mystery, and the hidden
wisdom of God we speak in a mystery, which God ordained before the world unto
our glory, and that which none of the Princes of this world knew, nor eye has
seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man, has God
revealed unto them by his Spirit, who were the Ministers of Christ, and
Stewards of the mysteries of God: But Thomas Ewins has confessed, that he did
question whether he had received the Spirit, to open and reveal the mysteries
of the Kingdom unto him, and so to him the vision of all is but a sealed book,
and to him it is but in parables, and dark sayings, as it was to ages, and
generations past, to whom God revealed not the mysteries of his Spirit, but
seeing, they did see, and not perceive. And how then can he be a Preacher or
publisher of the Gospel, yea the glorious Gospel which is the Gospel of the
kingdom, to whom it was never given to know it, neither has he received the
Spirit, to open and reveal it, as is manifest under his hand. Poor man! were
he not very blind, he might be silent, and not boast to the world, that he
needs not a proof of any man, that he is a Preacher and a Publisher of the
glorious Gospel of the grace of God in Bristol, who is so notoriously ignorant
of it, that (by his own confession) he has not received the spirit, to open
the mystery of it to him, as the Saints had in the Primitive times, and so is
intruding into things he has not seen, vainly puffed up with a fleshly mind,
and would needs be a Teacher, but understands not what he says, nor whereof he
affirms, but confesses, he questions whether he has received the Spirit, to
open and reveal the mysteries of the Kingdom, and yet says he is a Preacher of
the glorious Gospel, which is a mystery hid from all, but those to whom it is
revealed by the Spirit.

But he says, his reward is on high, and that God has given him a seal of
his Ministry in Bristol, and he trusts hundreds can say, the Lord has been,
and still is with his Ministry, quickening, comforting, teaching, etc.

To which I say, whose work is this, or of what is it a seal? In page 52. he
confesses he questions whether he had received the spirit to seal, etc. and
yet here says, God gave him a seal of his Ministry, etc. He has before
denied himself a Minister and now given it under his hand, that he was neither
called, constituted, nor ordained, etc. and yet says, his Record is on high,
and that God has given him a seal of his Ministry. Is he no Minister? and yet
has God given him a seal of his Ministry? What Babylonish confusision is here?
Has he a seal of nothing? or of a lie? Can he have a seal of that which is
not? Or has he a seal and not of the Spirit? Is not the Record (he says) he
has of this on high, even with principalities and powers, and spiritual
wickednesses, where the powers of darkness rule? But how shall one trust? or
in what can one believe such a man, who would seem to speak with so much
solemness and seriousness, when he speaks so much confusion, contradiction,
and falsehood: And well were it, that not not only he, but ye all would learn
to dread the name of God, and fear to take it, so commonly as ye do into your
mouths in vain, to veil and cover your deceitful pretenses, lest by him ye be
not held guiltless.

But he says, It is true, I am no preacher of that, which you, and some of
your way call the Gospel, namely to bid every man turn to the light within,
neither did I ever read or hear that any of the Prophets, Apostles, or holy
men of God, did preach such a Gospel.

To which I say, he being no Preacher of that thing (as he terms it) which my
self and some of our way call the Gospel, he is no Preacher of the Truth of
God, nor the Gospel of God, which is the power of God to salvation to every one
that believes. And so out of his own mouth let him be judged that he is no
Preacher, nor Minister, either by call or practice, who does not preach that
which we call the Gospel, which is not in word, but in power, And no other
Gospel do we own, but that which is the Gospel of the kingdom, the power of God
to salvation, which is not in word, but in power, and is the mystery hid from
ages and generations, but is revealed by the Spirit to those whom God would
make known the riches of his glory, etc. But, says he, namely to bid every man
turn to a light within.

What then does he bid them turn to, the darkness? and to follow the
darkness? Does he think that good Doctrine? Luke 11.34. The light of the body
is the eye; therefore when thy eye is single, thy whole body is full of light;
but if thine eye he evil, thy whole body also is full of darkness. Take heed
therefore, that the light which is in thee be not darkness. Where there is a
single eye, is not the body full of light? Where the eye is evil, is not the
body full of darkness? And was not this Christ's doctrine, who bids people take
heed that the light within them be not darkness? And were they not to take heed
to that which was indeed light within them? of which the body was full where
the eye was single, and to walk in it. And the Apostle, who was a Preacher and
a Minister of the Gospel declared, that the light makes manifest the things
that are to be reproved. And also that which may be known of God, is manifested
even in them which were wicked, and committed uncleanness, yet still they
knevv the judgments of God against such things. And is it not good to take
heed to that which manifests sin, unrighteousness, and deceit, and brings to
a knowledge of the judgments of God against such things; and if turned unto,
and vvalked in, leads out of unrighteousness and all deceivablenesse: But the
light which shines in the heart, to give the light of the knowledge of the
glory of God he likes not to retain: But has showed his ignorance or
wickedness, if not both, and is joined amongst the vain rabble, and wicked
company, not only of the people, but also of those called Teachers, which
himself calls an ignorant, ungodly, lazy, proud, scandalous, soul-murthering
Ministry, who have made themselves base and contemptible in the eyes of all
good men, and in the consciences of many bad: And well were it, if he knew what
that is in the consciences of many bad: which joins with all good men against
such a Ministry, who himself with the bad is joined in denying and opposing
the light, of which the servants of God declare, and direct unto, and which the
Prophets, Apostles, and holy men of God in Scripture did bear testimony of,
and that true light, and no other, do those whom he calls Quakers direct unto,
which the Scriptures abundantly make mention of. The Prophets, who spoke as
they were moved by the holy Ghost, preached and directed to the light, and
groaned after the enjoyment thereof, saying, Ah! send out thy light and thy
truth, and let them lead and bring me to thy holy hill, and to thy tabernacle,
and accounted it misery enough to go to the generation of their fathers, and
not to see the light, which (say they) was sown for the righteous. And Isaiah
by the spirit of Prophecy declared, that the people that sat in darkness saw
a great light; and upon them that sat in the shadow of death, has the light
shined: And that the light of Israel shall be for a fire, and his holy one for
a flame, which should burn and devour his briars and thorns in one day, And
that a light to the Gentiles would God give, that should be his salvation to
the ends of the earth: To which light the Gentiles should come, and Kings to
the brightness of his rising. And the Sun shall no more be thy light by day,
nor for brightness shall the Moon give light unto thee; but the Lord shall be
thine everlasting light, and thy God thy glory. And Christ, who is the light
that lights every man that comes into the world, says, I am come a light
into the world, etc. Believe in the light. And John, who prepared his way, did
bear witness of him, that he was the true light which did enlighten every man
that comes into the world: And this is prepared before the face of all people,
a light to lighten the Gentiles, to give light to them that sit in darkness,
which is the glory of his people Israel. And after Christ was ascended, and
people were not to say in their hearts, Who shall ascend to bring Christ down?
or descend to fetch him up, etc. Paul a Minister of the Gospel was sent to turn
peoples minds from darkness to the light; and to the light did he turn them,
and said, God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined
into our hearts, but to what end? Why, says Paul, to give the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God, etc. But of this Thomas Ewins is no Preacher, to
wit, to turn people to the light within, which shines in the heart, to give
the knowledge of the glory of God, etc. But against this, says he, came Henry
Jesse from London, to establish and confirm the people of Bristol, etc. This he
calls the pernicious Doctrine of the Quakers, and would persuade his Reader,
that those who bid turn to the light within, do shut up the Kingdom of Heaven
against men, and do thereby take them off from believing in the person of
Christ.

But this is an absolute lie, and in this he is one with the Pharisees, for
they denied the light, and opposed the truth, which enlihgtneth every man: And
he proclaims himself no Preacher of that, namely, to tmrn to the light: So in
this is he joined with the Pharisees, to shut the Kingdom of heaven against
men, by denying the Light. For no man can ever knew God, nor into his kingdom
did enter, whilst he denied or opposed the light in him, but they that entered
did own it, and the saying of the Reprobate is not much to be heeded.

He says, he supposes we would have him give over Preaching, and come to our
way, and that one told him he kept many from receiving and embracing the light.

To which I say, He does his uttermost to hinder, if his words or writing may
do it, and with the God of the world, and all his Ministers throughout the
Nations is he joined, to do what they can to keep blind the minds of all that
believe not in the light, lest the light of the glorious Gospel should shine
into their hearts, to give the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of
Christ. Yet indeed the good of his and all men's souls we do desire; but all
his hypocrisy, falsehood and deceit we do deny: And if he own our way, which is
the true light, the true and living way, his mouth would soon be stopped for
declaring against it: And for all his denying it, he may once find it a swift
witness against him, it may prove as a fire in his bowels, and as a candle to
search his in most parts; and the condemnation it is of all those that hate it,
as the Scripture witnesses. And Christ exhorts to believe in it, and in it did
the Saints walk, and in it had they fellowship, which condemns the unbeliever:
But of it he is no Preacher, and therefore do we confess he is no Minister for
God, for though in words he seems to confess something of the light, yet like
a man filled with confusion, speaks he knows not what, but utters his own
folly, and speaks of a twofold coming of the Spirit into the hearts of
believers: The first is that by which the eyes of men's understandings are
opened, and they turn from darkness to light, faith and repentance wrought in
the soul, etc.

Upon which I demand, were they believers before they were turned unto the
light in which they were to believe, or had their eyes opened? If yea, prove
it; If nay, then by his own confession, there were eyes of men's understandings
to be opened, and light to be turned unto; and yet he says, he never read nor
heard that the Prophets, Apostles, or holy men of God preached such a Gospel,
namely, to bid people turn to the light, etc. Now how shall we trust him? or
which of his words shall we believe? who confesses he is no Minister but
uncal'd, unconstituted, unordained, etc. No Preacher of that thing we call the
Gospel, namely to bid men turn to a light within them, and yet the eyes of men's
understandings must be opened, and they turned to the light, and yet says he,
to bid men turn to the light within, takes them off from believing on the
person of Jesus Christ.

He says, He administers the Lords Supper to this people in Bristol, as they
are a Church of godly sober Christians believing in Christ, though some of them
mis-baptized, not having light to see right Administrations, but reckon
infant baptism sufficient; yet as further light comes in, they are willing to
walk up in it: In the mean time we can bear with them in love, as we desire
them and others, to leave with us in other things.

But to it I say; Though ye be joined hand in hand in darkness and deceit,
agreeing to bear with one another therein: Yet the children of light, plainly
and clearly see your folly and confusion, and bear witness against it. Tho:
Ewins declares himself against bidding turn to the light within! yet his
mis-baptized people, as he calls them, have not light to see the right
Administrations of Baptism, but reckon Infant Baptism sufficient, yet as
further light comes in, says he, they are willing to walk up in it. So then
he acknowledges they want light to see: And that, as light comes in, I say, as
it comes in, they are willing to walk up in it (and yet he says) he is no
Preacher of this thing, to wit, the light within. It is pernicious doctrine; It
shuts up the Kingdom against men, and takes them off from believing on the
person of Christ. Poor blind man! how is he made to condemn himself, in that
which he in words is forced to allow. But these mis-baptized people, who have
not light to see right Administrations, but reckon Infant Baptism sufficient,
are his believers, and with one another can ye bear in love, in your
darkness: It is like he knows in his own conscience that infant baptism is
not sufficient, being neither he nor you can prove it an Ordinance of Christ,
and so follow traditions for Doctrines: And its no wonder that they want light,
who follow such a guide. who has so plainly denied the same, and would fain be
a Teacher, but understands neither what he says, nor whereof he affirms.

But he says truly, I know no thorough-paced godly man, Anabaptist, or others
in Bristol, but do show love and respect to me in their way, only in this,
they walk according to their light, and so do I; but they think I am too
large in my principles, and I think them too straight in theirs; Yet, says
he, we do not differ, but can bear with each other in love.

Reply. Here again is his confusion manifest: He denies them who bid turn to
the light, and he is no Preacher of that, and yet his mis-baptized people want
light, and those he calls thorough-paced Anabaptist, or others, who show
respect to him in their way. They walk in their light, and he in his, and yet
to bid turn to the light, is to deny believing in the person of Christ. Now let
all who fear the Lord, consider his words, who says he is no Preacher of that
we call Gospel, namely, to bid every man turn to the light in him: And the
Quakers doctrine is pernicious, they shut the kingdom of Heaven from men; they
take people off from believing in the person of Christ, by bidding them turn to
the light in them (says he) and yet himself acknowledges the first coming of
the Spirit is to open the eyes of men's understandings, and to turn them from
darkness to light, and to work faith and repentance in the soul. Now
according to his own words, are not they in darkness, and unconverted, who are
not turned to the light? And is it not good to turn to the light, that the eyes
may be opened, and the soul converted? And yet he is no Preacher of this.

Again he says, the mis-baptized people want light, but as further light comes
in, they are willing to walk up in it. Here is want of light confessed, and the
coming in of light acknowledge, and the turning to the light was before
granted, and yet to bid people turn to the light within is pernicious doctrine.
By this is the Kingdom shut: Oh miserable blind guide, and Idol shepherd!
how has gross darkness overspread thy face? and thy Sun gone down at
noonday.

Again, Them he calls thorough-paced Anabaptists, they walk according to their
light, and he walks according to his; they think his principles too large, and
he thinks theirs too straight. Here is acknowledged their light and his light,
and before, want of light, and coming in of light. And yet Quakers have done
mischief in Bristol, and their doctrine, says he, is pernicious, how so? why,
they bid men turn to the light within them. Poor man! what is become of his
rule now for turning to the light, that is pernicious doctrine. To try things
by the light, were to deny Scripture to be the rule: But now with him, here is
their light, and his light, straight and large principles, and mis-baptized
ones that want light to see right administrations, etc. But now, by what are ye
guided? and where, and what is your rule? Have ye not all lost it? and are all
gone out of the right way, wandering ye know not where, in your imaginations,
who rebel against the light, and know not the way thereof, nor abide in its
paths: And in your own darkness are joined, every one against the servants of
God, who bid turn to the light, which is pure, which lights every man that
comes into the world, which is no pernicious, (but sound) Doctrine; for if it
be good to watch, and good to walk in the true light, then it is good to turn
men to that light. And if the Lord would have all men to come to the knowledge
of the truth, then it is good that all men be turned to the light, which shines
in the heart, to give the knowledge of it, in the sace of Christ, and to bid
people to take heed to that light, to walk in that light, and believe in the
light, which lights every man, that is sound doctrine, and those that love
not the light, nor walk in the light, nor believe in the light, are left
without excuse, and the light come is their condemnation, and by the light are
they already condemned, who believe not in the light, which lights every man
that comes into the world; and (whatsoever the false Prophets and Ministers of
unrighteousness say to the contrary) is of little weight.

Again, Robert Sympson, in page 33. declares, that that light which is in me,
and in all men, if not put out, would tell me, that that thing which he there
asserts, is true. Now here is light confessed to be in me, and in all men, and
that light to be in all men, which is in me (and the Scripture says, that was
the true light which lights every man) which should answer that which he
affirms and minds to be truth, if not put out; And if so, then that is a good
Ministry which opens blind eyes, and turns from darkness to light. Then, it
being so, what have those servants of the Lord done, for which thou so highly
chargest them who are sent of the Lord, to bear witness of his name, and to
declare his truth, and bids take heed to the true light, and turns to it to the
opening of the blind eyes, that people may see the way to everlasting life, and
have their feet guided in the way of peace, with whom the Lord of a truth is;
though Thomas Ewins, with the rest of the deceitful workers, and Ministers of
Satan (who love darkness, and hate the light) do reproach and belie them, he
uttering his confusion and envy against the innocent, telling the world, the
Quakers (as he calls them) have done such mischief, and their doctrine is
pernicious, they bid all men turn to the light, thereby to draw them from
believing in the person of Christ; and he is no Preacher of that thing they
call Gospel, and calls them miserable deluded people. Oh vain man! who boastest
thy self in thine evil way; how is night come upon thee, and darkness
overshadoweth thee? And how art thou reeling and staggering like a drunken man,
who have spoken and written so of the light, thy self, as is before mentioned,
and yet art not ashamed to belie and reproach the servants of the living God,
as thou have done, for laboring to turn people from darkness to the light, who
having received a Ministry from the Lord, as all the Ministers of Christ did,
not from men, as the false Apostles and deceitful workers and Ministers of
Satan did; they labor, not accompting their liberties nor lives dear unto
them, so that they may finish their course with joy, and the Ministry, which of
the Lord Jesus they have received and therefore in much patience, in
afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in imprisonments, in
tumults, in labors by knowledge, by long suffering, by kindness, by the holy
Ghost, by love unfeigned, by the Word of truth, by the power of God, by the
armor of righteousness, by honor and dishonor, by evil report, and good
report, as deceivers, and yet true, etc. do they approve themselves the
Ministers of Christ, and witnessed it is in the consciences of men. And Thomas
Ewins words, being honestly considered, with what is replied thereunto, may not
his own sayings be justly turned upon his head, page 49. may he not blush to
speak or write such things? Will Jehovah, the great and glorious God ever own
such railings and revilings (to which I add) lying and deceiving, to be a
testifying from him? Or will he ever justify him in what he has written and
published? Oh! be ashamed and confounded, poor deluded man; for how has he
manifested himself a blind guide? They, (that is, the Anabaptists) think he is
too large in his principles, and he thinks them too straight in theirs, and yet
they do not differ, but can bear with each other in love. Truly the Devil may
love his own work, which is to lead people in darkness and blindness, and there
have his instruments fellowship. But will any man that fears God, and weighs
his words, believe (or own him in) what he says? How can it be that they
should think one thing and he another? he have large principles, and they
straight? they in their light, and he in his, and yet not differ? And may not
he be justly reproved, as well as the Author of Satan enthroned in his Chair
of Pestilence in that they both agree to charge mischief done in Bristol on
those called Quakers. And Tho. Ewins is in that joined with R. F. one walking
in his light, and the other in his, yet they differ not, but are both opposers
of the true light, and the children thereof, who in the same do walk as were
their fathers in all generations. But in it are they both discovered to be out
of the right way, and the children of light, who walk in the light, stand
witnesses for the Lord against them both, and that principle of darkness,
blindness and deceit in which they walk, and from which their corrupted works
of reviling and persecuting the innocent without a cause proceeds. But the day
is come in which the Lord is gathering his people from such (to give T. E. his
own words) an ignorant, ungodly, lazy, proud, scandalous, soul-murdering
ministry, who deny the light, and with the God of the World are joined, to
blind the eyes of peoples minds, least the light of the glorious Gospel
should shine unto them. I say least the light which God commands to shine out
of darkness, should shine into the heart, to give the knowledge of the glory
of God, of which light, and no other, the servants of God declare, and your
folly is manifesting apace, glory to the Lord for evermore; for although he
that preaches the Gospel witnesses the new covenant where the law is written
in the heart and the spirit, put into the inward parts, and although the
scripture witnesses that the law is light and written in the heart, and that
the word is within in the heart and in the mouth, Prove. 6.23. Romans 10.8. Deuteronomy.
30.14.
the anointing which is true and is no lie, and teaches all things, so that
the saints need no other teacher abides with in the witness as within the
Kingdom of God is within the light which gives the knowledge of the glory of
God shines within even in the heart, 1 John 2.27. 1 John 5.10. 1. Cor. 4.6.
Christ is within, God is within, who dwells and walks in them, whose bodies
are his Temples, yet this blind, ignorant and unlearned man is not ashamed to
publish that he is no preacher of that Gospil, viz. the light within, but
declares it pernicious doctrine, and that he never read or heard that any of
the Prophets, Apostles or holy men of God did preach such a Gospel, etc.

And for his speaking of Sarah Latchet, and asking how I can style her a
Servant of Jesus, who is an Apostate, and an excommunicated person, going on in
such railing, and calling him a deceiver? Another time saying, the prayers of
the wicked are an abomination to the Lord. And another time let fly at him
with a multitude of railing and reviling terms, such, as he says, they use to
give to the Ministers of the Nation, etc.

To this I say, In that she did bear true Testimony against him, I own it as a
service in the Truth, and her being excommunicated as he calls it, by those who
deny the true light, proves nothing to the contrary, nor her calling him
deceiver, or saying the prayers of the wicked are abomination to the Lord, for
so are their services and sacrifices, and to deny and bear Testimony against it
is no Apostasy, upon a true account, and to be hated and separated by such,
from their company, and by them to be reproached, and to have ones name cast
out as evil, for the Son of man's sake, who is the light of the World, is a
blessed thing, rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy, for behold your reward
is great in heaven, for in like manner did their fathers unto the prophets,
Luke 6.22, 23. and his word (excommunication) is turned back into his bundle of
Popish or Heathenish ignorance, as that which was never used by the Ministers
of Christ. And if Sarah Latchet be excommunicated (as he calls it) then its
like those that did it are ashamed of their work, for she knew it not; but
says he, she let fly at me, with such railing terms as they use to give the
Ministers of the Nation.

To which I say, why should not he be testified against as well as they, being
at least in many things found in their steps and practices: But for reviling
speeches let him look at home. He says, she called him Deceiver, and said, the
prayers of the wicked were abomination to the Lord, and this by him is termed
railing and reviling, though it be according to the Scriptures, which proceeded
from those that spoke as they were moved of the holy Ghost. But he in his
answer to Ralph Farmer, says, the inlet and outlet, the fore-door and
backdoor of much of Englands misery, and consequently of Bristols, is an
ignorant, ungodly, lazy, proud, scandalous, soule-murthering Ministry, who
have made themselves contemptible and base in the eyes of all good men, and in
the consciences of many bad. Now if this be so, the Quakers (as he calls them)
did not all the mischief in Bristoll, as he falsely says they did, for now he
says, the inlet and outlet, the fore-door and backdoor of much of the
misery of England and Bristol, is an ignorant, ungodly, lazy, proud,
scandalous, soule-murthering Ministry: And so has he proved himself a liar,
and a false accuser, which the Ministers of Christ were not But who is the
rayler and reviler now? They that bear true testimony against him and his
generation, according to Scripture? or Thomas Ewins in speaking his own
corrupted words out of his polluted and unsanctified fountain, who by his own
confession questions whether ever he had received the Spirit, to purge and
purify, cleanse and sanctify believers, and make them holy: But if it be so,
that the misery of England and Bristoll, is such a Ministry as he has before
expressed, and which he terms the Ministry of the Nation, ought they not to be
testified against? and he also, so far as he is found in their condition? And
may it not well be said, that it is the great misery of many poor souls in
Bristoll, that such ignorant and blind guides as ye are, are followed, which
is the inlet and outlet, the fore-door and back door of so much confusion, as
is at this day amongst you, one bearing with the other in your darkness, and
in your straight and large principles, till ye become all quite blind, and
stark drunk in your imaginations, reeling and staggering, so that many poor
people are even at their wits end, and have followed you so long, till their
souls are even famished, and they fallen into misery. But glory to the Lord
God of life, who has caused light to shine out of darkness, and out of
obscurity, by which the deceitful veiles and coverings of the soul-murthering
Ministry are made manifest.

And were those savoury words for Thomas Ewins to say, It were fitter such an
idle huswife were whipped, and sent to Bridewell to work, then to go about
railing at people as she did? Let shame cover his face for ever, when he looks
back on his own words, which are so well like the words and deeds of the
Ministers of the Nation, which himself calls the soul-murthering Ministry,
that he which reads, may easily perceive them to agree, and that one and the
same spirit leads and guides them all. And did not Thomas Ewins let fly at her
in envy, when he spoke such words, and has thus confessed it, to his shame among
those that are not willing to join hand with the wicked, and to take part with
evil doers: And for his saying that she cursed and rayled, that is but the
invented refuge of his lying spirit, for the words he sets down as hers, are no
such things. And for his charging her to be idle, that is from the same root of
lying, she having been known to be diligent in an honest employment, and lives
not by others labors, as do the soul-murthering Ministers as he calls them,
who preach for hire, and divine for money, and against those that put not into
their mouths, they prepare war: And take liberty to themselves from their high
places, to reproach, revile, slander and belie them that fear the Lord, and
are obedient to Christ the light of the world: But if any who feel the burden
of the word of the Lord, and witness it, as a fire in their bones, and being
weary of holding it in, are made to pour it out against the soul-murthering
Ministry, etc. For this, they must to the whip, to prison, to Bridewell, etc.
And in this Thomas Ewins is discovered: And for his saying, o be ashamed and
confounded, poor deceived man, because I said, she testified from the Lord: I
say his own words are turned upon his own head, and to bear witness in truth
against his deceit, I call a testifying from the Lord: And it is apparent it
reached him, and his bottom was stirred up, to give forth such filthy unsavory
words, more like a persecuter, then a Minister of Christ; so that he may well
blush, to write his own folly and confusion, for me his words reach not.

But he would devise a thing of his own, and make a little Logic, as he calls
it, to show his skill, and to evade the thing in hand: And when he has uttered
his abominable lies, asks, is this good Logic? I say it is his own, and not
being good, he may be ashamed of it; for they that read his lines, may read his
folly. He says, in my letter I endeavor to parallel her with Paul, and her
sufferings with Paul's sufferings, and him with Paul's persecutors: All which is
so notoriously false, and from the father of lies, that were he not past
feeling, a man would marvail how, without blushing, he can write such plain
lies, and untruths, when nothing like such a thing appears in my letter to him,
as the Reader may see. In which letter I do not so much as once mention her
name, much less do I endeavor to parallel her with Paul, or her sufferings
with Paul's sufferings: But that which I did was, to reprove Thomas Ewins for
his unsavory words and practices in opposing the truth, and them that come to
witness against his deceit, whom he threatened with Bridewell, with whipping,
etc. And by his fruits I tried him, according to the Scriptures, and found him
out of the practice of the true Ministers of Christ, and directly in the steps
and practices of the enemies of Christ, and his Gospel, and therefore plainly
told him it was the Devil that cast the Saints into prison; It was wretched
Pilate that scourged Jesus: It was those Masters, whose gain came in by
divination, joining with the rude multitude, that carried Paul and Silas before
the Magistrates, and caused them to be beaten, and cast into prison; It was
Jesus that told his Disciples they must be so used by the world, the generation
of vipers, etc. It was Paul the able Minister of the Spirit, and not of the
Letter, that proved himself the Minister of God in patience, in tumults, in
stripes, in imprisonments, etc. But it was Thomas Ewins a Minister of the
letter, and not of the Spirit, that is, threatening the servants of God, and
witnesses of Jesus, with stripes, with whips, and with Bridewel. Now let all
that read, but honestly consider, how from these expressions, and the like, a
man who has any fear of God within him, can be so knovvingly wicked, as to
affirm in print that I endeavor to compare her with Paul, and her sufferings
with his. And how vvofully (it is like) by wicked art, he can corrupt the
Scriptures, and belly the Prophets, and Apostles, and holy men of God that gave
them forth, who are deceased, that dares to affirm things so directly false
and untrue, as done and published by a man, whom he knovvs to be yet alive,
and able enough to see and discover his wickedness. And how blind, and like
to fall into the ditch are all those that will believe, or receive for truth
all that comes from so false a speaker, who, I might easily prove is far out
of Paul's condition, who was a Minister of Christ, and Preacher of the Gospel,
and called to the work. But Thomas Ewins has denied that he is a Minister,
either called, constituted, or ordained; And therefore is he no Preacher of the
Gospel. Paul was sent to turn the Gentiles from darkness to the light. But
Thomas Ewins says, to bid people turn to the light within, is to cause them
to cease from believing in the person of Christ. And he is no Preacher of that,
namely, to bid people turn to the light. Therefore is he no Preacher of the
Gospel.

Again, Paul and the Ministers of Christ in meekness instructed those which
opposed themselves. But Thomas Ewins, when one came to oppose him in his
deceit, said, It were fitter such an idle huswife were whipped, and sent to
Bridewell. Paul went into the Temple and Synagogues, to declare against them
that held up the Idols Temple and shadovvs, from whence he was haled out,
imprisoned, and abused. But Thomas Ewins stands up in the chief place of the
assembly, and Pharisee like he stands praying in the Idols Temple, and some
that bear witness against him, he threatens with whips and Bridevvel; and
some are haled out and imprisoned; for he confesses, page 58. in the margin,
that one is now imprisoned for disturbing him: Therefore Thomas Ewins and Paul
are not alike.

Again, Paul was not sent to baptize, but to preach the Gospel, and to turn to
the light. But Thomas Ewins does either baptize, as he calls it, that is to
say, wash the outside of the people in brooks and rivers, when the inside is
full of hypocrisy, deceit and wickedness, not being sent, or else he was sent
to do it, and from the light does he turn. And of that Gospel is he no
Preacher, therefore no preacher of that Gospel which Paul preached.

Again, it is the work of the Devil, the god of the World, to blind the minds
of those that belive not in the light, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of
Christ should shine unto them, and into their hearts, to give the knowledge of
the glory of God. And Thomas Ewins is no Preacher of the light, but lest the
light which God commanded to shine out of darkness, should shine into peoples
hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of
Jesus Christ, he labors hard to blind their minds with prejudice against the
light, telling them, it is pernicious doctrine; they that preach it, shut up
the Kingdom, and take people from believing in the person of Christ. Therefore
is Thomas Ewins a Minister of Satan, and a Co-worker with the Devil, in
blinding peoples minds, and turning them from the light.

And now all this being considered, will it be unequal for me to couple him
with Ralph Farmer, though he would couple me with him, and say, he wondered that
I and they, who are so different in other things, can all agree to cast stones
at him; which is a lie, for I joined not with Ralph Farmer, to cast stones at
him, whose blood-thirsty spirit I do deny, and with it have I no union, but in
soberness and seriousness I write the truth concerning him. But he asks me if
I be not joined a brother in bitterness with him, that is to say, R. F. I
answer, nay, I am no brother in bitterness with him, but all brotherhood and
affinity with that bitter, envious, bloody, persecuting spirit, with which ye
both are acted and ruled, I do utterly renounce and disclaim, who in my measure
have unity with that meek and gentle spirit, which with God is of great price,
and therefore hated and persecuted by Satan's instruments; but I perceive there
is something in what I writ, that has discovered his deceit, and he is much
hurt, that his works of darkness are laid open. Surely there is an arrow that
has reached the heart of the Kings enemy, he says I writ a Letter to him,
about a year ago, and now published it to the world in such a subtle manner,
as that he who reads my title page, would verily believe he were some dreadful
Persecutor. Alas poor man! how is he handled and troubled that his works of
darkness are made manifest, and his skirts discovered? Oh! Had the deceit been
hid, and the wicked persecuting spirit been covered, he would have born it; but
to have it published, that Passers by behold and take notice of it, this he
likes not, but is sorely troubled and wounded at it. And did he not, on this
consideration, lest deceit should be made manifest, conceal the answers to the
Antiquaeries, but suffered them to be printed long time after he received the
answers, as if no answer at all had been given to them. Poor blind man! he is
of a large principle, and can bear with those that think vain traditions
sufficient, and not differ from those that are thorough paced in other things.
But to be plainly and truly dealt withal, to have the deeds of darkness
reproved and manifested not to daub, not to sow pillows, not to cry peace to
them that go on in their imaginations. But to reprove sharply, to lay open the
skirts of the Whore, to cry aloud, and not to spare, but declare against
transgression and sin, and to reprove it in the gate. O this is accounted
harsh, the false Prophet cannot endure it, it disturbs his peace. This with him
is not modest, but Ralph Farmer, who he confesses, jerks, jeers, quibbles, and
scoffs, and utters such words, as he look upon to be the fruits of a frothy
brain, and the product of a spleenish temper, which he says, might better
become the mouth of a Stage Player, then the pen of a Minister, is more modest
then I. But how so? Why he does not name me, one may read his words, and yet
not know whom he means; but says he, you have named me, ye have laid me
open, ye have published only name in your Frontispiece, which whosoever reads, will
think I a (...) a Persecutor. Oh! how is he troubled at this, that deceit and
wickedness, should be brought to daylight, and that they that go about to
hide their work in the dark, should be laid open. And this was the condition of
his generation all along, they could not endure to have their deeds discovered;
and therefore it was that the servants of God, who were sent to bear witness
against them, found such hard and cruel measure, which he is now filling up,
who have all one purse, he has cast in his lot amongst them, and if his
council be taken, one must to the whip, and another to the prison, as he says,
for disturbing him, and has published it to his own shame, and what disturbs
him he has manifested; but is not he an evil doer that hates the light, and
will not bring his deeds to it to be tried, least the light should reprove him,
but he is no Preacher of the light. To which I say, the day has manifested him
and others, and no veil nor deceitful covering, can any longer hide them from
the manifestation of the light, though they can bear with one another, even in
those things which his own words bespeak quite contrary, and not differ, yet
they who fear the Lord, cannot join with you, but; as the Lord calls them to
it, must bear witness against you all, and the Lord is now gathering his people
from amongst you, and he is your friend, that deals plainly with you, and tells
you the truth, though ye may account me your enemy for so doing, and say I have
acted like Judas. But what have I done? Why, published your deceit openly, and
discovered the skirts of the Whore, and now her children bestir them to recover
her veil, but all in vain, for all your veils of deceit must be plucked off and
naked must ye be, and open rebuke is better then secret love; and those that
deal uprightly cannot cry peace to the wicked. And seriously did I write, and
was not immodest toward him, nor you, though ye have all vented out your
selves against me, and bid^ne be ashamed and confounded; but neither ashamed,
nor confounded am I, nor shall I be, for bearing witness to the truth, against
all your deceit; and with Ralph Farmer, may Thomas Ewins be yoked or coupled,
for he confesses R. F. gave him the right hand of fellowship, and in his steps
is he found, he in his light, and the other in his, the one straight in his
principles, and the other large in his, yet in this ye differ not: Ralph Farmer
denies the light, and speaks, and writes against it (which none of the
Prophets, Apostles, or holy men of God ever did, but it was their glory, even
that which was prepared before the face of all people, a light to lighten the
Gentiles) and so does Thomas Ewins: Ralph Farmer is found among that generation
that preach for hire, and devine for money; and so is Thomas Ewins: Ralph
Farmer stands praying in the Synagogues (which some call a Church) has the
chief place in the Assembly, and is called of men Master; and so it is with
Thomas Ewins; some of those that come to bear witness against Ralph Farmer, are
imprisoned, sent to Bridewel and cruelly whipped, and many strips laid upon them,
being the same usage, that the Messengers and witnesses of God in former ages
received from the adulterous and wicked generation of ignorant, soul-murthering
Teachers, Rulers and persecutors; and one of those that came to bear witness
against Thomas Ewins, he confesses is now in prison; and he gives his
judgment against another, that it was fitter such an idle Huswife were sent to
Bridewell and whipped, etc. But says Thomas Ewins, I did it but once, upon which
you conclude, I am no Minister of the Gospel, but a persecutor of the truth. I
answer. And well I may, for he that is a persecutor of the truth, is no
Preacher of the Gospel; and he that lusts after a thing, has committed the
thing in his heart, and out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks;
and a clear fountain sends not forth such filthy stuff, but by such fruits is
the devouring wolf known. And for that, that he pleads it was but once; I say,
Cain killed his brother but once, Herod slew the innocent children but once,
and Judas betrayed his Master but once, and yet sin did so lie at their doors,
that the just judgments and vengeance of the Lord, they could not escape.

Again, Ralph Farmer speaks and writes against those people called Quakers,
whom he revile, slanders, and belies, and seeks occasion to speak evil of them,
as was the manner of blood-thirsty persecutors; and Thomas Ewins helps on with
his strength, and so does his company. And something it was, that he confesses
Ralph Farmer gave him the right hand of fellowship, and was satisfied in his
call. By all which, and much more that might be said, it is manifest that one
and the self same spirit guides them both, only one has a larger measure, and
the other a straighter, about which they need not differ. But however, as
Pilate and Herod, in some things they do disagree, and are at odds, yet in one
are they joined against the Lamb, who is the light, of which the servants of
God do bear witness; and although their light hit not in every thing, yet are
they joined hand in hand against the true light; and although Thomas Ewins in
word has denied himself a Parish Minister, yet by his fruits is he manifested
to be amongst them, and of the same spirit with them, and the day has
discovered him, and sufficiently is he proved in confusion; and truly your
covering is the Lord ripping off, and your skirts are discovered, and the
mingled people in the midst of Babylon, where are some misbaptized people,
wanting light, to see right administrations, but think their Infant Baptism
sufficient. Others are thorough-paced Anabaptists, some walking in straight
principles, others in large, one thinking one thing, and another another, and
yet you differ not. Now is not this child like the mother, and will not such a
son help to recover the veil, to cover his mothers skirts, that ye may all bear
with one another in darkness, that your works may be hid? but the Lords ways
are not yours, and therefore must your skirts be laid open, and your heels made
bare, for the year of the redeemed is come, and the glory of the Lord is arisen
upon his people, as in days of old. Therefore must Babylon, where the darkness
and confusion is, be troubled and recompensed; amongst which your lot is now
fallen.

And for the answers to the 16. quaeries which I published, and he mentions, I
own them, and not a word therein has he disproved, but tells me he might
commend my wit in putting them forth after the man is dead. To which I say, its
like he writes one thing, and thinks another, which with him may be an usual
practice. But how can I commend his honest dealing, upon a just ground, who had
the answers delivered to him in writing, some months before the quaeries were
published. And was that honest or commendable for him, to be the conveyer of
16. Antiquaeries to me, and in short time received an answer from those to whom
the Antiquaeries were directed, and either conceal them himself from John
Pendarvis, or else he neglect to take notice thereof, and in his book several
months after, published the said Antiquaeries by the name of quaeries, as if
they had never been answered; now if he had not printed the quaeries, or
printing them, had also printed the answers, and so had replied thereto; or, if
they could have disproved them, it had been something like men, but to print
the one, and conceal the other, is so absolutely foul and deceitful, that it
was the cause of publishing those answers, that he with all that were concerned
in that deceit, might be manifested. And if Thomas Ewins will clear his fellow
which is dead, he may, and then his own hypocrisy will the more appear. And
whereas he confesses those quaeries were once answered by another, and
pretends the answers agree not: And that if four more had answered them, they
might perhaps have come as near in their answers, as six of the Preachers of
England might do, in their interpreting a place of Scripture: To this

I say, wherein do the answers differ, or how does it appear that they agree
not, for he manifests nothing of it: And since he could manifest nothing, why
does he give his tongue and his pen to slandering? But does one answer build up
that which another throws down? or does one confess that which another
denies? It Is true, one answer may be larger then another, and good reafon, for
there was something in the Antiquaeries, which was lest out, when they were
printed by the name of Quaeries; and was not that a difference among
themselves, one while to send them by the name of Antiquaeries, and after they
were so answered, to print them by the name of Quaeries. Besides, did Matthew,
Mark, Luke, and John differ, and not agree? and therefore reproveable by him,
because of the thing of which they all declare, they use not one and the
self-same words, and no more, but one is larger in his Declaration then
another: And whereas he seems to compare the Antiquaeries to the Scripture,
and the answers to the meaning or interpretation the Priest put thereon, I say,
his comparison will not hold; for the Antiquaeries, in which were lies and
deceit, are not to be compared to the Scriptures of truth: And if he be not
wilfully blind and ignorant, he may see his own confusion, and his companions,
who are of differing principles, as much as is betwixt straight and broad, and
yet, says he, we differ not; and yet himself would slander others in secret
for differing, but no ways makes it appear wherein. And so in this, as well
as in other of his works, has he manifested his own folly, and all the said
answers stand uncontrolled by him in the least.

But why appears he (in page 44. and 63.) ashamed of his call by those called a
Church? and says, he (that is, Ralph Farmer) dealt dis-ingenuously in telling
how they sent for him out of Wales, etc. when he knew he was sent for by the
Mayor, some Aldermen, many of the Council, and other Gentlemen and
Commissioners of the City of Bristoll? For were he not blind, he might be
silent, and not have declined his Call by those himself calls a Church, and
claimed it from the powers of the earth, who in the gainsaying generation are
found, from whom the servants of God, who bear testimony to his name, and in
his power are sent and moved to declare against the abominations and false
worships of the times, have and do receive the like measure now, as the
Prophets and Ministers of the Lord in former ages did from the Rulers and false
worshippers of their times, when of the Lord they were sent and moved to
declare against the same. And what friends to the Gospel and power of
godliness, the generality of those aforesaid have been, is not unknown, who
in their several days appeared as bad as they durst, under the powers that
controlled them, persecuting not only the life and power of godliness, but
even the form of it also; a more particular account whereof, in due season may
be given as occasion is ministered, to the shame and everlasting contempt of the
persecutors, whose names must rot.

1641 1642
But can it be forgotten, how they in former days, persecuted, imprisoned,
indicted, arraigned, and bound to good behavior, the people called Puritans
and Sectaries, for religious meetings, which they called Conventicles, and for
opening shops upon Popish Holy Days, which themselves popishly idolized, and
suffered Ryots, Tumults, and Insurrections to be made upon the people, who then
were up stirred to bear testimony against those abominations. And how wickedly
fierce and cruel they were in the time of the late Wars, persecuting,
imprisoning, and destroying the lives, liberties and estates or those called
flound-heads, contriving and imposing pernicious oaths upon the people, to
ensnare the innocent, as by their own Record it may appear, which if any
through tenderness refused, how crully they were persecuted and tormented, is
not easily forgotten, And although for a season, the people of God were
delivered from the jaws of the oppressor^, and the oppressed ruled over them
yet since, by the change of times, wickedness is exalted, and opportunity is
administered for the oppressors to appear, how soon, and how zealously are they
acting (as before) against an innocent people, who fear the Lord, and in
obedience to him cannot how to their wills and lusts, but as they are moved of
the Lord do declare his Counsel and assured judgments against false worships,
and worshippers, and other abominations, bearing true testimony for the name
of the Lord, against it ^^ld the world that the works thereof are evil, yet
how cruelly they have for this persecuted them, under the name of Quakers, as
formerly they did under the name of Roundheads, Puritans, and Sectaries, is
not forgotten, nor the numbers that have been imprisoned to satisfy their
wills and lusts, when no law of the Nation was broken, nay, nor the shedding
the righteous blood of several of them, by cruel whippings in their Prison
houses, etc. like the enemies of God in former ages, Who eat up the Lords
people as bread, and accounted them as sheep for the slaughter.

And whose Minister then is he like to be, who by such a generation is sent to
preach a Gospel? And whose servant is he like to prove, that glories in his
Call by such a people? And where is his rule or example for this, except in
Balaam the false Prophet and Diviner, who erring from the Spirit, by which he
savv the goodly Tents of Jacob and blessed Israel, being sent for by the Rulers
of Moab the enemy of God for the love of promotion, the revvard of divination,
and the wages of iniquiry, out of several high places, endeavored to curse
the people whom God had blessed.

And whereas he declares his consenting to, and helping on the accusations,
which he calls admonitions sent to me and others. I say. Alas poor man! how
vvilling is Diotrephes to have pr^-eminence, and therefore meddles in things in
which he is not concerned, prating against us with malicious words, not
receiving the Saints, but forbidding them that would. And according to your
own principles, what has he to do in consenting to, or helping on
admonitions in the Independent Church (so called) in Bristoll? who is himself
an Anabaptist, and a member (as he says) of another Church in London, and was
never admitted a member by those of Bristoll, only by them was sent for, to
preach for hire: And by the Mayor, some Aldermen, Counselors, Gentlemen, and
Commissioners (as he calls them) had the revvard of Divination promised, which
(as I remember) was a 100 l. or 120 l. a year with promotion to the honor of
a public Lecture so called, in the middle of the City. But (I say) what has
this man to do (being a mere hireling, and never admitted, nor received a
member) to trouble himself, in helping on accusations against those who have
denied him, and never approved his carnal observations, nor large principles,
only like Balaam his elder brother, being sent for as aforesaid; has a mind
to comply with the Rulers of Moab, in cursing those whom God has altogether
blessed: And blessed shall they be of the Lord, whose living presence they know
and feel in the midst of them: And neither the Rulers of Moab, nor all the
false Prophets in Bristoll nor England shall, be able to reverse it; and this
may you all know in the day wherein ye will desive to ay^ the death of the
righteous, and that your latter end may be like thens.

And whereas he tells of many who can say, the Lord is with his Ministry,
comforting, refreshings and quickening their souls etc. I say, the blind may
lead the blind till they all fall into the ditch. But how can it be that the
Lord is with his Ministry, who himself is no Minister, as he has confessed? And
how can there be comforting and refreshing administered, from him who has not
received the Spirit to comfort and cheer drooping souls, and fill them with
refreshment, as he gives it under his hand? But this I say, I knew many poor
souls who (before he came) had some sensibleness of their conditions moving in
them, by which they began to be awakened out of that security and deceit, in
which they had been a^ ease, who after they had sucked in and embraced his
deceit, he dawbing them with untempered motter, strengthening the hands of evil
doers, by promising them peace, healing the hurt of the people lightly, crying
peace, peace, to them, while they walk in the imaginations of their hearts,
persuading them to believe lies, and that their sins are pardoned, forgiven and
blotted out, when their lives and conversations declare the contrary, quenching
and grieving the good spirit of God, and crucifying afresh the Son of God, who
is the faithful and true witness, who is come and does convince the world of
sin, and bears true testimony within against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, which by him was called the temptations of Satan. I
say, after this woeful Doctrine came to be received and embraced, they again
fell asleep in ignorance and security, and now live in pleasure and much
wantonness, whose last estate is worse then the first. And this is for some
amongst you to observe for your good.

And how well might he save his labor in many pages, in which he so vainly
boasts and commends himself for a Preacher and publisher of the glorious
Gospel, that needs no proof of man, etc. And the many hundreds that can say,
the Lord is with his Ministry, etc. I say, how well might he be silent in this
his own commendations, who presently gives it under his hand, that he much
questions whether he has received the Spirit of the New Testament, to open and
reveal the mysteries of the Kingdom, which to the Saints is given to know. For
that Gospel which the Ministers of Christ did, and do preach, and is indeed
glorious, is the Gospel of the Kingdom, and that Gospel was and is a mystery
hid from ages and generations, but was and is manifested and revealed to them
by the Spirit; which Spirit he having not received, the mysteries of the
Kingdom, and of the Gospel thereof, to him are not opened, but are hid, as it
was from ages and generations past. And then (poor man!) what has he to
preach, or to minister; or with what can he quicken, comfort and refresh poor
souls, and turn them to God, as he speaks? Well may he feed them with ashes,
wind and confusion, with lying visions, with a vision of his own heart. And by
a spirit of Divination, may he cause them to err from the right way like
Balaam. But with the bread of life, the immortal food, the power of God, the
life and quickening of the Spirit, the hidden mysteries of the Gospel, in which
the glory of God is manifested, he is not entrusted, neither of it can he at
all minister, to whom it is hid, and not opened, nor revealed. And are not all
those blind, and like to fall into the ditch, that are led by such a guide?
expecting to receive joy, peace, establishment, comfort, refreshment from him,
who is out of it all, can do nothing well, but is dry, barren and empty, in
the pollution and defilement, not purged, cleansed, nor sanctified, nor adorned
with spiritual gifts, but is himself out of it all, and gives it under his
hand that it is so? And how dares he say, his record is on high, and that many
souls that lay weltring in their blood of ignorance before he came, are now
turned to God: For although the children of the night, and of darkness may
flatter, and please themselves in their imaginations and lying visions, yet how
can he be an instrument to turn souls to God, who (himself) is out of all
(etc. as is before mentioned) and can do nothing well, nor knows that God, to
whom he pretends to turn souls, for God is light, and in him is no darkness at
all; and those that turn souls to God, turn them to the light, for God is
light, but of this is he no Preacher, but accounts it pernicious doctrine to
bid people turn to the light.

And whereas he says (page 59.) it is his daily care and work to preach the
Kingdom of God freely to sinners, and the Lord Jesus Christ as the way to the
Kingdom, and to invite and encourage poor souls to come into it, I say, his
ignorance both of the Kingdom of God, and of Christ the light which is the
way, is seen and comprehended: For the Kingdom of God comes not with
observation, but says Christ (who is the true light, and the way to the
Kingdom) the Kingdom of God is within you, and in his Kingdom he is, who is
light; and he that is the way, and the truth, the same is the light, that
enlightneth every man that comes into the world: And all that are invited and
encouraged to come into the Kingdom, are invited and encouraged to come into
it where it is, and that is within, and not in outvvard observations; and
those that are encouraged to walk in the way that leads into the Kingdom,
are encouraged to receive and walk in the light, which is the way, Christ
Jesus, the light of the world; and so all that preach the Kingdom of God,
preach it within, and all that ever preached Christ, the way to the Kingdom,
preached the light, for he is the true light. But against all this has Thomas
Ewins declared, not only his ignorance, but also his enmity, and says, to bid
people turn to the light within, is pernicious Doctrine, of it is he no
Preacher, and those that preach this Doctrine, do shut up the Kingdom against
themselves and others. Alas, poor blind man! what a pitiful thing (of a
Preacher) is he, whose eye is so utterly darkened and made blind, by the god
of the World, to whom he turns, or with whom he keeps multitudes of souls,
that now the day is so much appeared, he cannot see, but is groping as in the
night, vvearying himself in his imaginations, stumbling at the light, which is
his condemnation; but the glory of Gods Israel, who receive, and believe in
the same.

And whereas he says, he preaches that Gospel of glad tidings, which Christ
gave Commandment to be preached to all Nations, in which the everlasting love
and good Will of God in Christ is declared to lost sinners, I say, that Gospel,
of which the Apostles of Christ were not ashamed, is the power of God to
salvation, to all that receive his love, and believe in the light; but against
all that walk after the flesh, according to the course of this world, in the
imaginations of their hearts, not believing in the light, nor to it are
obedient, but hold the truth of God in unrighteousness, the wrath of God is
revealed, and thorough the Gospel which is the power of God, is tribulation and
anguish ministered to every soul that does evil, and against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, and the Gospel of the grace of God teaches to deny it,
which Gospel according to the Commandment of Christ, is now preached, not
only thoroughout this Nation of England, and the domions thereof, but in most
or all other Nations, I know in the world; so that the chief Cities and Seats
of the Pope and Turk are not exempted; and the Ministers thereof have not loved
their lives unto the death, nor accounted any thing too dear, or too much to
suffer, so they may but finish their testimony, and the Ministry which by God
is committed to them for the Elects sake, and from other Heathens do they
receive the like measure abroad, as they do from their own Countrymen at home,
and account it not grievous to suffer for the name of Jesus, whilst the
Ministers of Satan that work deceitfully, destroying souls for dishonest gain,
are at ease in their wealthy Parishes and Lectures, living in pleasure and
idleness, not serving the Lord, but their own bellies, and by pleasing words
deceive the souls of the simple, speaking evil of that they understand not,
persecuting the truth, and evilly entreating the Messengers thereof, for which
they must give an account.

And for what he speaks of Mary Prince (which he calls Mrs. Prince) accusing
her of envy, hypocrisy, railing, reproaching, jeering, scoffing, etc. I say,
Alas! poor man, why had he not first pulled the beam out of his own eye, before
he had sought motes in another eye; for, Mary Prince, for many years past has
had, and still has so large a witness, not only in his own conscience, but in
the consciences of many other her enemies, of her meek, sober, and good
conversation, beyond many, which he himself accounts the people of God, that I
need not say a word in her behalf, but let wickedness be upon the head of the
wicked and false accuser.

But for what is she accused (as aforesaid?) why, for this, namely bearing true
testimony against his deceit, and (as he says) called to the people at his
Lecture, and bid them beware of him, for she had heard him say, that he had not
the Spirit of God. To which I say, I never read of any of the Ministers of
Christ that were owners of a thing called a Lecture, but why does he call it
his Lecture, but because for hire he preaches it, and so the hire of about 24
l. a year, being his, he calls it his Lecture? But was it not good counsel she
gave the people? namely, to beware of him, that by him they might not be
deceived. Let the Reader, but consider and justly weigh what himself gives
forth, from page 51. to page 55. and he may easily see how needful and
necessary it was, for her that knew him well, to give such warning, being
thereunto moved; for if a man will take upon him to be a Preacher and a leader
of others, who has not received the Spirit of God, to open and reveal the
mysteries of the kingdom of God, nor to comfort and refresh drooping souls, nor
to strengthen and encourage them with boldness to do and suffer for God, to
purge, purify, cleanse, sanctify and make them holy and fruitful, and grow in
grace, and fill them with meekness and love, and make them spiritual, and unite
them together, and to adorn them with spiritual gifts and grace; nor to fill
them with a spirit of faith and prayer; yea, if he has not received that
spirit, without which he can do nothing well; how exceeding needful is it that
people be warned thereof? and how great is the love of the Lord, in giving them
warning in time? for what can any soul receive from such a blind, unholy,
unsanctified Ministry that can do nothing well except it be by it to be led
into the ditch and caused to wander in the dark and blind paths of deceit and
delusion toward death and destruction, which is your own words to the Reader.
And if Thomas Ewins be not the man whose condition this is, and has published
himself so under his own hand, let the sober Reader judge; and so Mary Prince is
clear of the blood of them that received not warning, and Thomas Ewins his
accusations turn heavily on his own head, but her they cannot reach, who has
delivered her own soul, by giving them warning.

And whereas he says, I tell in my Letter, I was warned from invisible lights
to beware of him, and that by visible light he discerned his speaking was but
little acceptable to me and others, after he began to oppose, though before he
was the excellentest man that ever I met with.

I say, what high and excellent thoughts he had of himself, may be perceived,
and because he accounted himself so excellent, it is like he persuades himself,
that I accounted him so too, in which he is mistaken; for, I was so far from
it, that himself declares that his speaking had so little acceptance with me
and others, that we were observed often to go out of the meeting when he was to
speak, which is an absolute lie too, though by reason of his flattering,
daubing and deceit, there might be cause enough, and grief it is to see men of
corrupt minds to oppose the truth. And for several years, his preaching and
devining, to me appeared so dry and empty, like other of the worlds Teachers,
that is was truly a grief and burden to me to sit under it. And for what he
speaks of my saying I was warned from invisible lights to beware of him, it is
a visible lie, in which he is too much exercised, and no such word was
published by me, but that I was long since warned from invisible sights or
manifestations, to beware of him is true; something of whose woeful condition
was then manifested, and may be accomplished, toward which he hastens apace.
But his enmity and hatred against the light, (which is the glory of Gods Israel
is such) that he cannot but belie it. And to him I say, that which God has
prepared before the face of all people, a light to lighten the Gentiles, has
discovered and manifested him no Preacher, nor Minister of Christ, but a
persecutor of the life and power of God. And in the day of his distress and
anguish, which is coming from afar, in which the men of war shall not find
their hands, but weep bitterly, in which the strong shall be as tow, and all
hands be weak, and all knees be feeble, and all faces gather paleness, in which
our God shall roar out of Sion, and utter his terrible voice from his holy
Temple, before which all the earth shall tremble, in which the Lords salvation
shall be manifested for his people, in the destruction of all his enemies; I
say, in that day, which is at hand, and as a destruction from the Almighty
comes, shall he see and know that by the same spirit of Prophecy, which was
of old, in the Prophets and holy men, and promised in this day to be poured out
upon sons and daughters, is hi^ condition seen and known, and of it has he
been truly warned. And that it is not for naught, that the Lord has sent his
servants, in his dread and power to warn the wicked, though they turn not from
their wicked ways. And also that it is not for naught that those servants of
the Lord, that stands in his counsel and receive his will (from whom God hides
not the things he is about to do in the world) have not loved their lives unto
the death, but given their backs to the smiters, and their cheeks to them that
pull of the hair, nor hid themselves from shame and suffering, for their reward
is before them, and their God is with them, whose acceptable day to them is
manifested, though the Egyptians cannot see it, glory to his name for evermore.

And whereas he tells of his success and prosperousness in his work, and the
large room he has got in the peoples hearts since I left him, and the use he
is of to the desolate Church.

I say, in his work of deceiving souls does he prosper among you, more then
whilst I was there to withstand his daubing work, who now leads captive a
company of silly people, laden with sins and lusts enough, who has none to
withstand him, or tell how long; and woe for you was the day, in which the Lord
left you to such a guide, in whose hearts, that which makes desolate has room
enough, and is of use to lead on toward perdition, which is the work of that
which is neither called, constituted, nor ordained to minister for God.

And now Thomas Ewins, whereas in thy conclusion, thou say thou expectest
many sharp arrows of bitter words to be shot at thee, both by me and others,
and that thou matterest it not much, having written in plainness words of truth
and soberness, rather for vindication of the truth, then of thy self, etc.

I say, Thou have sorely mist in both, and have written lies, falsehood and
confusion, as is plainly proved, to thy own shame, and for it must thou come to
judgment and no veil of deceit can hide or cover thee: And that which I do, is
plainly to lay it open, and manifest it, that thou may blush and be asha^ed,
without shooting sharp arrows of bitter words against thee, that being the
practice of the men of thy generation, the soul-murthering Ministry, of which
thou declarest, who do not only speak bitter words, but also act cruel actions
against the innocent, and thou helpest it on; so that if thy counsel were
taken, some must to the whip, some into prison and into Bridewel for testifying
against vain and deceitful worships, which thou can not prove to be
according to the Scriptures, but are traditions of men. And indeed you are
plainly manifest to be not only out of the power of godliness, but also out
of the true form in which the Saints were. One sort following your strait
principles, and another your large, till ye become drunk in your imaginations,
and have quite lost the right way, setting up your own inventions, which the
Lord our light and life is come to discover, destroy and confound, glory and
honor to his name for evermore: And with thy flattering several persons that
little regard thee, and the badnesse of thy spirit therein appearing, I shall
not meddle, nor yet declare how much thou contest under the black spirit of
Ralph Farmer. But as brethren in wickedness and lying I shall leave you
together.

Only I must a little correct Ralph Farmer, whose book entitled The Impostor
dethroned, etc. I have seen, and part thereof have read, and find it so like
the former, that a man might wonder how you that differ so much in some things,
(being in your straight and large principles, and various lights) should agree
so well in the works of darkness to oppose the true light, but that ye all
having given heed to the same lying spirit, in your distempered humorous
bodies, are by it led in the self-same way of lying, deceit and wickedness,
which is the Devils work. And although I am not willing to trouble my self
much with the filthy spirit of that worthless man, nor to take into the
loathsome channel of his monstrous birth. Yet seeing how abhominably filthy,
wicked, and impudent he is in the business of Constant Jessops removing out of
the Parish of Nicholas, in which I know he was a chief Actor or Solicitor;
notwithstanding by shameless lying in his foresaid book, he labors to cover
his deceit, and excuse himself, I cannot let it pass; but (for the
information of all those that are concerned therein, who can believe and
receive truth, and for the manifesting the woeful deceit, and false-heartedness
of this loathsome man) declare, that notwithstanding he there affirms, that all
he spoke to me of that business was, that the opposition in public was not
fit to be suffered to hinder a settlement, and to alienate men's affections,
etc. And that this was occasional by his coming to my house, and staying for
the coming in of Mr. Cradock (as he called him) who (he was informed) lodged
there, and that what he spoke had respect to another brother as well as to Mr.
Jessop, he says, of whose casting out he did not know, nor had any hand in one
way or other, by writing, speaking, or suggestion to any person whatsoever; and
that outing and banishing from the City was so far from his expectation, and
seemed to him so rigorous, that he publicly taxed and declared against it,
and that he never spoke with me at any time after that occasional discourse
aforesaid, which says he, was before Mr. Jessop preached that Sermon, for
which he was cast out: And that he never used that argument to me, that till
Mr. Jessop was removed the City would not be in quiet, etc. Yet after Constant
Jessop had preached that Sermon for which he was cast out, and after the
Committee (of which I was a member) had questioned the same; and after the
business had there lain still a while, and little or nothing done in it, by
reason of his many friends therein that pleaded his excuse, did Ralph Farmer
come to my house, and (after his wonted complement set his back against my
Chest, and looking hard upon me, said to this effect, Mr. Hollister, what do
you intend to do? To which I replying to this effect, what do I intend to do;
why? what is the matter? why (said he) about Mr. Jessop: To which I replying to
this effect, what have I to do with Mr. Jessop? he said he heard I lay still,
and did not prosecute him, or words to that purpose. To which I replying that I
was no prosecutor of him, neither did I hear him. But if any man had ought
whereof to accuse him, and brought it before the Committee when I was present,
it was like I might do what was just, or as became me, or to that effect. With
which he not being pleased, used many words to provoke and stir me up against
Constant Jessop, and at length, something passionately or zealously said these
very words (or to the same effect) Mr. Hollister, I shall seriously tell you my
judgment: If you neglect to take the advantage of this present opportunity for
casting him out, I profess we are never like to have peace nor quiet in the
City: And in many other words declared against his Presbyterian spirit, and the
bitterness of it, and spoke of his subtilty, by reason whereof another
opportunity might not be gained, if this was lost, with much more of like
nature: So that I may truly say, that to my knowledge, I was not so much, nor
so earnestly pressed and solicited by any other man whatsoever against Constant
Jessop, as I was by this false hearted and deceitful man, though he is so
impudent and void of shame to deny it, and publish it as aforesaid. And I say
again, all this was after Constant Jessop had preached that Sermon for which he
was cast out, and not before, as he falsely pretends, neither do I know nor can
believe he had any other business in the world to me, at that time, but only to
endeavor to provoke and stir me up against his brother, that he might be cast
out: And that what he speaks of his coming and staying for Walter Cradock, is
absolutely false; for in many years together he lodged not at my house, but at
the Governors, and elsewhere. Neither can I remember or do think that at that
time he spoke a word to me against any other of his brethren besides Constant
Jessop, against whom his sole business was, thinking him not prosecuted
vigrously enough. And of this his coming to my house, and speaking as
aforesaid, or to the same effect, other sufficient testimony that then were
present, and heard, and observed it may be produced: And what I have said, is
true in substance, and (as near as I can remember) in words and syllables. And
it is true, that when the effect of his own solicitation was accomplished in
his brothers remove, (I was informed) before the people he declared against it,
as if he were innocent, and had been no actor against him, which to me
appeared so loathsome a piece of hypocrisy, deceit, and double-dealing, that I
durst never trust him since, but have declared against him, and to several of
his acquaintance manifested much of the substance of what is here published.

But whether Ralph Farmer knowing himself (in comparison of Constant Jessop)
so inconsiderable, that till he was removed, himself had no hopes of
preferment by that generation, did more secretly endeavor his casting out, and
when it was done, declared against it, that he might not be suspected by his
friends and people; but with the more ease might obtain his place, I shall not
determine, but leave it to the witness of God to manifest, though time has
pretty well manifested him, to all that are not blind. And so far was it seen
before, that Constant Jessop himself before he was cast out; being in company
with some of the Parish, and speaking of the business in hand, told them he
feared that his place would be farmed over his head, meaning (as he expressed
himself) that Farmer would get it from him. And of this his friend Thomas Bub
(among others) may inform him; and all this I suppose was about the time, in
which (he tells the world) some of our powers were so great, that the life and
death of men's preferments lay in our hands: And so it is like, for preferment,
sake he did it, for which also, whiles he thought our power so great, he had a
mind to be one with us then called Independents: And therefore at another time
applied himself to me, telling me he was convinced of the necessity of being
in a Church Way, and propounded his desire both for himself and his people
(which to himself he had gathered) to join with us, and make but one Church,
provided, as he said, that we would consent to the completing it with
officers, in which he spoke so much that I perceived he sought for preferment
among us, after which he had labored elsewhere in vain, And therefore told
him how vain it was for him to effect such a thing from us, who (I thought)
were so far from it, that before he could be accepted as a member,
satisfaction would be required touching his leaving a Church (so called) in
Canterbury, etc. By which (its like) he saw such little hopes of preferment for
him, through my hands, that I heard no more of him about the business. But
having obtained the end of his solicitation, in his brothers remove, he
applies himself both to his place and people; and when, by the change of
times, vile men were exalted, he rode over both, and conquered it as his own,
and now calls it his, and so is become a blind guide to those called
Presbyterians, and an enraged enemy to those with whom under a cloak of
Religion, for the sake of preferment, he assayed to join, whiles as he says,
the life and death of it lay in their hands. But, says he, one of the
Congregation told him, if he would be one of the Congregation, he might be
chosen Pastor, and that she was told, if he might be chosen Pastor, he would
join with them, which it is like, made the man very confident of the business,
and was the end of his foresaid proposition to me, notwithstandinng all his
feigned deceitful pretenses to the contrary, a thing so common and usual with
that generation of hirelings, that who is it that may not see it. But were they
not woefully blind that could entertain the least thought of choosing so
pitiful a piece of ignorance, confusion and ambition, as Ralph Farmer, to be
their guide, who had before proclaimed himself not able to preach for want of
Books? and told the people he could but expound till they came: And was it not
my crossing of him in his ambitious thoughts, and desires, that filled his
heart with poison and rage, which he pours forth in so many corners, though
in neither of his books has he found vvherevvith to hit me. But all his lies,
slanders, and false accusations, being as light as vanity, and not vvorth the
mentioning, do I trample upon. And surely woe were me, if such a man as he (a
worse than which is rarely found) spoke well of me.

But why does he so much reproach, belie, and abuse me for being a member of
the little Parliament? Does he not know how honorably Oliver Cromwell declared
them in his speech in the Council Chamber? And why is he so envious, that my
self, with others were so truly serviceable there to our generation, according
to the will of God, with our Bibles in our hands, and were willing to spend and
be spent in the service of our Country, not seeking our selves, but the ease
and profit of the people? and did not, like other Governors, eat the bread of
the people, nor were at all chargeable unto them, read Neh. 5.14, 15. For he
might know, that the memory of the just will be blessed. when the name of the
wicked (hireling Priesthood) shall rot: For a spirit of Justice and Government
was God pouring sorth upon that Assembly, which made unclean spirits, and
devouring beasts that live upon the prey and spoil of others, to tremble; of
which he, its like, was not unsensible; And had they sat but a little longer,
it is like the Land had been cleansed of such, and the people delivered from
many sore and heavy yokes of bondage and slavery under which they have been
held for ages and generations past, by Popes, Bishops, proud domineering
Priests, and other Tyrants; and England had known a day, in which there had not
been a Diviner, a false Trophet, a parish Priest, a Hireling Shepherd, a cruel
Beast, a devouring Wolf, nor an unclean spirit left in the Land, guarded with
a law, to destroy souls for dishonest gain, to rob the poor, the widow, and the
fatherless, and fill the prisons with innocent men, as they do at this day.
But a howling of the Shepherds had been heard, whose pride and glory had been
spoiled, and a year of rejoicing to the people had it been, in which no
devouring beast had been permitted to live by the sweat of their brows, not to
devour the fruit of their labors; but every man in quietness and peace
preserved under his onw Vine and Fig Tree to fit, without fear of imprisoning
their persons, and ruinating their families, and estates, to satisfy the
beastly lust of the devouring Priests, who like greedy Dogs can never have
enough. But to the everlasting shame of their profession to all generations for
ever, have occasioned more just and innocent men to suffer, and to be cast into
prisons, and holes, for not satisfying their filthy desires, than is by all the
rest of the Parish besides. To whom be it known, that though Joseph; liberties
and privileges, by the unrighteous are betrayed, and he through envy be sold
into Egypt, and by the Egyptians be falsely accused, imprisoned and abused,
yet is he a fruitful bough by the Well, his branches run on the wall, his
enemies must serve him, and all his brethren how before him, and over all the
Egyptian Task masters, Magicians, Sorcerers, and oppressors must he be Ruler,
whose bow abides in strength, and whose Fathers blessings have prevailed above
the blessings of his Progenitors, unto the uttermost bounds of the everlasting
Hills; he that reads let him understand.

But why is he like the troubled Sea that cannot rest, but casts up his mire
and dirt at me in particular, as a member of that Assembly, he might know I did
not there basely seek my self, like the men of his generation, with the receipt
of many thousands of pounds, as the Parliament records make it appear; neither
was I basely servile to the wills and lusts of men, for preferments sake,
neither by fear nor flattery, love not hatred, savor nor frowns, nor any other
base ends whatsoever, was I prevailed upon, to betray the cause of God, and
sell my Countries birth right and privileges for naught, nor to enslave my
Contrymen and posterity for ever, to the arbitrary wills and lusts of any,
but as an English Parliament man did I stand, for the just rights and
privileges of the people, and a testimony for them did bear against the
tyranny and oppressions of Priests, Rulers and other Tyrants, and that
abominable monster of consolidation (to the wrong and oppression of the people,
and the breach of the privileges and Charter of Bristol, to fill the purses,
and satisfy the lusts of Ralph Farmer and John Knowles, whose hire already,
its like, exceeds the Bishops in come) I did not promote.

And why does he so wickedly accuse me of pride and strutting, like
Nebuchadnezzar, in an Airy Kingdom, foming out the shameful filth, of his
polluted heart, thinking to defile me with his lies and slanders. But that the
fool has said in his heart, that there is no God, and being corrupt does do
abhominably, and says, God sees it not, for he that takes the mighty from
their seats, and resists the proud, setting them at a distance, has respect to
the humble, and exalts them of low degree. And is it not known I neither
sought nor desired great things, nor places for my self, but free to serve my
generation, in place accounted by men least honorable, and was sorely grieved
when tidings came, that I was chosen to sit in Parliament; and truly may I say,
in more then an ordinary cross I went. But the Scripture words were heavy upon
me, viz. Thou therefore, arise and go, lest I confound thee, for I did not know
the Lords end in choosing me. And has not this accuser heard, how, in the
Parliament House I withstood and opposed my own Election to the Council of
State, and the Commission of the Admiralty and Navy, when by the then General
and his Council I was nominated and reported to the House as a fit person to be
added thereunto, and notwithstanding I was contrary to my own mind voted into
those and other places of power and trust; yet when in them I came to sit, I
was so exceedingly burdened with those great titles and seeming honors which
were there given, that both in the Council of State, and other places, I was
made to deny and declare against it, as not fit for those that fear the Lord,
etc. And does not he know that although I have long time been in Commission of
the Peace and other powers, so that himself has published that the life and
death of men's preferments lay in my hands (for few or none besides of those, of
whom (...) speaks, were in power) yet for the sake of him whom the builders
refused, have I laid down these things, that with the Saints and people of God,
who follow the Lamb, I might for a time suffer afflictions and reproaches from
him and others, whose portion is in this life, rather then to sit upon Throns
with Princes of the earth? And why then is he not ashamed so basely to reproach
and belie the innocent, but that (as I said) the fool has said in his heart,
there is no God? But why had he not looked at home, and among the proud men of
his own generation, whom pride compasses as a chain, and violence takes hold
as a garment, who compass Sea and Land for preferment sake, and know how to
turn into all forms and shapes (true honesty excepted) to obtain those titles
and shows of honor, which the people of God, by faith refuse, and when they
have obtained it, be-pride themselves in their Airy Kingdom, vapouring like
foolish boys, to the shame and wonder of those that are sober and wise, and
the mighty pride of his own heart, as well as his envy, covetousness, wrath and
foolish madness, is so much manifested by himself, and seen, observed and
judged by the men of his own generation, that I need say no more, nor yet
declare how proud and Lordly he is become, since by wicked art he got Constant
Jessop removed, and himself possessor of his place and people, with the
advantages thereof, that like Haman, all must bow to his Lordly spirit, or
suffer, if he can accomplish it. Nor yet tell what a stir he keeps against
Independents, Anabaptists and others, that go from their Parishes and hear not
him, and in the behalf of his Office and Ministry, pleading for double honor,
for the lawfulness of forms of prayers (its like he wants a service book) for
keeping off Hats, whilst he reads the Scriptures, reviling those that honor
him not, (not considering that the time is come, in which the Scripture must be
fulfilled, viz. a vile person shall not be called honorable, nor the churl
said to be bountiful.) All which with much more silly stuff, in which he is
exercised, together with his pettish, passionate, and unman-like behavior, is
so well known and manifested, that what Boy or Girl of ordinary understanding,
is there that sees it not? So that with Thomas Ewins's words to him I may
conclude, that the inlet and outlet, fore-door and backdoor, of much of
Englands miseries (and consequently of Bristols) is such an ignorant, ungodly,
lazy, proud, scandalous, soul-murthering Ministry, who have made themselves
contemptible and base, in the eyes of all good men, and in the consciences of
many bad. And so much for Ralph Farmer; for what need I spend much time in
manifesting such a man, who never appeared in any season (that I know) a man
fearing God, and denying himself, but the contrary. And to accomplish his main
ends of covetousness and ambition, has attempted more ways, offices, and
callings, and more wickedly turned with the times, into more forms and shapes,
then any other man I know. And when nothing appeared so like to effect it, as
the art of preaching and devination, soon turned from ticker-making, and
soliciting, etc. to preaching. And when Independency was in honor, and the
life and death of preferment (as he calls it) lay in the hands of those that
professed it, feigned himself as one of them; but when wickedness began to be
exalted and not only the power, but the form of godliness to lose its credit
with men, how soon was he turned Presbyter? and in wickedness excelled, acting,
speaking and railing as aforesaid. But when the times of refreshing from the
presence of God appeared, and life and immortality, which for ages past had
been ^^^id, was brought to light, and witnessed in power, by those who were
chosen heirs of salvation; what a woeful persecutor is he become? who, if he can
but obtain a power to do according to his will, its like both Saul and Bonner,
in comparison of him might be accounted merciful men; and therefore I need not
spend much time in manifesting him, who is so loathsome already to many of his
own generation.

When such a man as Richard Fowler, of Westerleigh, in the County of Gloucester
(who about the year 1645, was Preacher to a people without Algate, London) a
man once accounted as famous for Religion and godliness, for tenderness of
conscience, and self-denial, as most I then knew in England, a man that in the
time of the late Bishops, was by them accounted factious, not submitting to
their corrupt decrees, but refused to wear a Surpless, to take upon him a
Parish charge, to baptize and administer Sacraments so called to multitudes,
with the rest of that stuff; and declared against Tithes and forced maintenance
for preaching, and took but a little voluntary contribution from the people to
whom he preached; and perceiving some of them to give it grudgingly, declared
it a burden, and much against him to receive that which came not freely, and
desired his friend that gathered it, not to receive it; yea, and accounted it
persecution, and a grievous thing in the Bishops and their generation to summon
him to their Court, for refusing that which thorough tenderness of conscience
he could not do, complaining grievously under the burden thereof, pressing
hard upon his friends to suffer him to depart the Nation, for the liberty of
his conscience, is now so woefully fallen and degenerated, become worse then his
former persecutors, that through him far more cruelty is done unto others, then
ever was by those unto him; who being become a Parish Priest, bearing the name
of the lawful inducted Vicar of the Parish Church of Westerleigh, has
occasioned a Declaration to be put into the Court of Exchequer, in the year
1657. against 15. persons of the said Parish, for not paying him Tithes, four
of which cast into prison for refusing to swear how many apples and eggs,
oblations, offerings and Tithes were due to Richard Fowler, or to his Elders in
his behalf. In which Declaration it is said, that for years past he the said
Richard Fowler has been invested and inducted into the Vicaridge, etc. whereby
he is lawfully entitled to receive oblations and Tithes; and that from the
time of his induction into the said Parish Church, has continued Vicar, and
officiated the Cure, in administering the Sacraments, etc. to the Inhabitants of
the Parish, and that all kinds of Vicaridge Tithes are due to him, as Calves,
Colts, Lambs, Wool Milk, Piggs, Geese, Apples, Eggs, fruits of Gardens,
Offerings, and other Tithes accustomed to be paid to Vicars, etc. Oh, how is it
that he does not blush at this! I well remember the time in which he would have
been ashamed to own such stuff: What! to profess himself a Minister of Christ,
and a Vicar of a parish Church, and a Minister of Christ, and inducted into a
Vicaridge, a Preacher of righteousness, and officiate Cures, in administering
Sacraments to parishes, for which all kinds of Tithes become due to him, a
Preacher of the Gospel and the new Covenant or Testament, and claim a right to
Tithe Colts, Calves, Lambs, Piggs, Geese, Ducks, Hens, Bees, Milk, Wool, Apples
and Eggs, nay to oblations and offerings; the very name of which in this kind
is loathsome, and long has appeared so to those that believe and know the truth.

And is not the false Prophet, the great Bishops of Rome, the chief of Vicars,
the head of the rest, whom Christ the head of the true Church, will and does
judge and confound. Oh poor man! how is blindness happened unto him? And how
far is he degenerated and gone back from his former tenderness and honesty,
and has not only taken upon him the loathsome name, but entertained the cruel
nature of the enemies of the Lord, and occasioned a malicious, false lying
Declaration to be put into the Court of Exchequer against 15 persons for not
paying him Oblations, Offerings and Tyths due to him, as the lawful inducted
Vicar of the Parish Church of Westerleigh All which being out of the Doctrine
of Christ, and of the Scripture: and in the constitutions and appointments of
the chief Vicar of Rome, from whence his Title, his Office, and dues his come,
all that keep the word of Gods patience, in this hour of temptation that has
tried him, do testify against, and deny: For which, and to ensnare the
innocent, has he occasioned a request to the Court of Exchequer, that the 15
persons aforesaid might be commanded, under certain penalties to appear at the
said Court, and put upon their corporal oaths, to declare what Oblations,
Offerings, and Tithes are due, or how many Hens, Ducks, Geese, Pigs, Eggs,
Apples, Lambs, Calves, Colts, etc. they have kept in several years. O horrible
wickedness! how does he abase himself to hell? sucking up such filthy stuff,
the v^r^ excrements of those whom God has cast out, and left their names as a
curse to his chosen: Was ever Minister of Christ so ignoble and base, as to sue
people that fear the Lord in Courts, for Tithe eggs and apples, hens, ducks,
geese, beef and pigs? And did ever Minister of Christ occasion his people to be
commanded, upon great penalties, to appear in Courts to swear how many apples
and eggs they had, that of it he might have Tithes? when Christ Jesus himself
expressly commanded his, not to swear at all. And he that was his Minister
said, Above all things my brethren, swear not at all, And yet this man, who
would be accounted a Minister, labors to have the servants of God compelled to
swear how many eggs, apples, hens, ducks, geese, and piggs they had, that of it
he might have tithes due to Vicars, as if he had never read in the Scripture,
That he that breaks the least of the commands, and teaches men so, shall be
called least in the Kingdom of Heaven, who does not only teach, but to his
power compel men to break them, that by it he may have gain: And is not he in
this a Minister of unrighteousness? whose end must be according to his works;
who has not only occasioned the foresaid request to be made to the Court, but
a Writ of Subpoena to be procured, by which four of the foresaid persons were
commanded, under very great penalties to appear at Westminster upon a certain
day, where they all appeared in their persons, to answer the accusations; yet
because through tenderness of conscience, they could not swear, thereby to
break the command of Christ, who says, But I say unto you, swear not at all,
and choose rather to obey God then men. The said Vicar occasioned a Warrant of
contempt to be procured, and all the said four persons to be apprehended, and
cast into the common Goal of Gloucester, among Thieves and Murderers, where
two of them are yet remaining, (the relations it is like of the other two having
satisfied the lusts of the covetous Vicar, they are released. And now are not
those blinds that cannot see from whence this comes? And will not all, in whom
any honesty rules, blush when they read it, especially when they understand the
circumstances or aggravations thereof, as the time when they were cast into
prison ( viz. just in the beginning of harvest, whilst the fruits of the Earth,
with which God had blessed them, were in receiving, that was the time in which
they were taken away, by which means the fruits of the Earth had perished, and
they in their outward estates been much ruinated, had not the Lord otherwise
provided, contrary to the wills of this viperous generation; who knowing the
season, and that some of them had little or no help to manage the affairs of
the whole harvest, with a pretty large stock of Cowes, and other Cattle, yet
were so desperately wicked, that at the very beginning of the said Harvest was
the Master carried away, and cast into prison, where he has remained above a
year, and for ought I yet know may there end his days, as a witness for God
against this wicked and adulterous generation of persecuting Priests and
Tyrants. Yet this is not all, but the Master being cast into Prison, means was
used with his Landlord (so called) being another Priest, to cast him out of
his Living, and his servants out of the house, which accordingly was soon
effected: And although there was a desire from some of his friends, that for
money or moneys worth, the house only might be kept for half a year, no
other place being found at present, in which to put the stuff, yet was
refused: An engagement (as was said) being made to the contrary to Westerleigh
men, which it is like, were the Vicar, or his generation. But at last, another
house being procured for present necessity, only for half a year, in which to
put the goods, for which a Covenant was made, and possession delivered, and
part of the money paid, and the goods preparing to be sent thither; The man
that let the house (as himself told me) was sent for to the Vicars house, and
persuaded not to suffer the servants of the man so cast into prison, to come
there with their goods, using many arguments to that purpose, which not
prevailing, the Vicars wife (as he told me) told ^him, if he suffered them to
come there, she would buy no more meat of him, he being by occupation a
Butcher, whereupon he brake his Covenant, took away the key of the house, and
kept it by force, being but about three days before they were to remove out of
the other house, and so both his servants and goods became scattered into
several places, as liberty could be got, otherwise must it have layn in the
open fields. And after a friend of his, beholding the unrighteous actings and
wretched dealings of this miserable generation against the innocent, had bought
and purchased a house for the present benefit of the imprisoned, I shall not
now much mention the unjust endeavors of this evil people, both by offering
to corrupt the seller thereof with large money, and with the same to provoke
the wife against her Husband, not to surrender, with other such like deceitful
wicked practices, of which I have been informed, but leave it to the witness
of God in their own consciences to reprove.

But these are the actings of Richard Fowler Vicar of Westerleigh, and his
Elders, against some of his Parish, and particularly Richard Hollister, whose
father was the chief (if not the only) procurer of him to the said Parish, upon
whom with his generation of Priests, and that they call preaching, he freely
spent much more of his outward estate, besides much labor and travail for many
years together, in getting and gathering his hire, etc, then he left to his
Wife and Children when he dyed: And yet this is the woeful recompense his
posterity do receive from the hand of this woeful degenerated man, even in the
very place and habitation, in which the deceased Father showed him so much
kindness, yea, and Richard Hollister himself to him has voluntarily
contributed for many years over and above his Tithes, well near as much as they
came unto, besides other kindnesses, though by Richard Fowler all is forgotten,
and he become come like a ravening Wolf, that for the lucre of about 10 s. per
annum, claimed for tithes, and that but for about 2 or 3 years. And a great
question, Their feet run to evil, and they make have to shed innocent blood,
their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity; wasting and destruction are in their
paths, the way of peace they know not, they have made them crooked paths,
whosoever goes therein shall not know peace.
if not altogether out of question whether by their own Law, it be due to him
or not, has not only cast him into prison, but strives as aforesaid to devour
him: And these are the fruits of his and their Religion, and Ministry, of which
let all that fear the Lord beware.

And that the evil spirit of envy, blood and cruelty in the Chief Priest and
Elders, may the more fully appear: The Warrant for apprehending and carrying
the aforesaid persons to Prison, was committed to the hands of common Bailiffs,
whose profaneness and wickedness I need not mention, yet they being conscious of
the honesty of their prisoners, promised them liberty to go to their houses,
and order and settle their business, and meet them at a place appointed the
next day. But having been a little absent (its like with the Priest or Elders,
or some of their evil generation) their minds were changed, and cruelty
raised, so that with much harshnesse and threatening they carried them away, not
suffering them to go to their houses to exchange their clothes, nor abide where
they were till their servants brought them. But Richard Hollisters servant
hasting after with necessary apparel, the greatest kindness he obtained, was
liberty to shift himself, and exchange his apparel under a wall or hedge,
notwithstanding the Bailiffs themselves (when out of the view, or oversight of
the Priest and Elders, with their persecuting crew) offered themselves to be
bound for them, if they would accept it, professing their shame to carry such
men to prison. And coming into Gloucester City, desired them to meet them at
the Prison house, professing their shame to go with them as prisoners through
the streets. And so into prison being cast, their bonds became famous to the
advantage and honor of truth; And they suffering in patience and meekness, do
in quietness rest; their inward consolation abounding proportionable to their
outward sufferings, which to their adversaries and persecutors adds torment:
And one of the Elders, out of the abundance of his heart has spoken, They
shall lie there till they rot in Goal, or to that purpose: And Richard Fowler
in his wrath has said, They shall there abide these seven and seven years ere
be release or fetch them out, not considering how many thousand talents must be
forgiven him, or he under it sink into perdition for ever, (who for apples,
and eggs, tithe pigs, geese, ducks and hens) occasions the people of God, who
to the Lord stand more faithful than he, to be cast into prison (Read Matthew.
18.24. to the end) for not complying with him to his covetous ends, in
breaking the Commandments of Christ. But the Scripture must be fulfilled (
Hos. 6.9.) And as troops of robbers wait for a man, so the company of Priests
murder in the way by consent, working lewednesse: And yet for pretense does be
make long prayers, (...) 23.14 (...) ^8.4, 5,
and with his Elders and Proselyte: keep a monthly fast (so called) a day to
hang down the head like a bull-rush. But to them all I say, Ye fast, but your
lusts remain still: Ye fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist
of wickedness. (...) 5.11.3.
Ye should not fast as ye do this day; for the Fast which God has chosen, is
to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens which (...) lay
and fasten, to let the oppressed go free which ye imprison, and that ye
break every yoke. And therefore, to what purpose is the multitude of your
sacrifices, oblations, and fastings, whose new Moons and Sabbaths, whose solemn
assemblies, meeting, and feasting: are iniquity, and a trouble, of which the
Lord is weary, and his soul hates them, and when ye make many prayers, he
will not hear; whiles your hands are defiled with blood, and your fingers with
iniquity, whose lips have spoken lies, and tongues muttered perverseness, none
calling for justice, nor pleading for truth, but conceive mischief, and bring
forth iniquity, whose feet run to evil, and make have to shed innocent blood;
whose thoughts are thoughts of iniquity, wasting and destruction are in their
ways, and the way of peace they know not: Who have made them crooked paths,
whosoever goes therein, shall not know peace: And therefore is judgment so
far from you, and justice overtakes you not. But you look for light, but behold
obscurity, for brightness, but ye walk in darkness (ye grope for the wall
like the blind, as if ye had no eyes. Ye stumble at noon day, as in the night,
and are in desolate places as dead men, ye look for salvation, but it is far
from you) For your transgressions are multiplied before the Lord, and your sins
testify against you: speaking oppression, conceiving and uttering from the
heart words of falsehood and cruelty, by whom judgment is turned away backward,
and justice stands afar off. Truth is fallen in your streets, and equity
cannot enter. Yea, truth fails, and he that departs from evil, is made by
you a prey. And the Lord has seen it, and is displeased, and is putting on the
garments of vengeance for clothing, and is clad with zeal as with a chake,
and according to their deeds, accordingly will be repay fury to his
adversaries, and recompense to his enemies, till they fear the name of the
Lord from the west, and his glory from the rising of the Sun, whose spirit has
lifted up a standard, when you, with the rest of his enemies are come like a
flood. And why do ye garnish the sepulchers of the righteous, and think, if ye
had been in the days of your fathers, ye would not have been partakers with
them in the blood of the Martyrs and servants of God: When truly ye bear
witness, that ye allow their deeds, and are filling up the measure of their
iniquities, That upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth
from the foundation of the world, who are plainly found in the very steps of
the former Persecutors, and at this day do hate, persecute, and imprison the
Lords people for that, for which (among other things) the Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Bishops, Doctors, Priests and Vicars did hate, persecute, and
imprison the Martyrs and servants of God in former days, viz. refusing to swear
at all, and declaring against payment of Tithes, of both which the Reader may
find instances enough in Foxes Histories, commonly called the Book of Martyrs.

And because every Reader may not have the advantage of reading those Books
being of so large a volumn and price, I shall give a touch of what I find
therein recorded, touching the testimony the Martyrs did bear against the
Priests Tithes, and swearing, referring the Reader to the Histories themselves,
in which he may find it more at large.

In the first book, page 621. the fourth Article against Walter Brute, a famous
Martyr, is, That he has labored to inform men and companies, that no man is
bound to give Tithes or Oblations: And that if any man will give them, he may
give them to whom he will (excluding thereby their Vicars.) And in page 622.
another Article against him is, That Tithes are mere alms: And in case the
Curate be evil, they may lawfully be bestowed upon others, by the temporal
owners: And in a public instrument brought forth and published against the
said Brute (mentioned in page 623.) it is said and declared, that the sald
Brute, before the Bishop of Hereford, did say, hold publicly, and affirm,
that Christian people are not bound to pay Tithes, neither by the law of Moses,
nor of Christ: And that it is not lawful for Christians in any cause, nor in
any case, to svvear by the Creator, nor by the Creature. And in page 632.
Walter Brute having before his persecutors, declared against Tithes
(manifesting how they belong to the Tribe of Levi, and were not promised to
the Tribe of Judah, out of which Christ came. And of the change of the Law, by
which Tithes were once claimed, etc.) says, I marvail that you learned men
do say, that Christian folk are bound to this small ceremony of payment of
Tithes, etc. It Is plain (says he) that the Tithes were given to the sons of
Levi, for their serving in the Tabernacle, and in the Temple of the Lord, as
the first fruits were given to the Priests. And since the labor of those
sacrifices did cease at the coming of Christ, how should these things be
demanded, that were ordained for that labor? And since first fruits are not
now demanded of Christians, why are Tithes demanded, except it be because
Tithes are of more value and worth then first fruits? And besides says he, why
are the Lay people bound to the payment of Tithes, more then the Priests from
having possessons of realities and Lordships among their brethren? And again,
says he, If we be bound to Tything, we are debtors to, and bound to keep the
whole Law; for, to say, we are bound to one Ceremony of the Law, and not to
others, is no reasonable thing; for, says he, we are bound to all or to none.
And so he goes on, showing how our Priests were one with the Pharisees, leaving
off the ceremonies of the Law, keeping only the Commandment of Tithes. And
how plain it is, that Christ was a Priest after the order of Melchisedech, of
the Tribe of Judah, not of Levi, and gave no new Commandment of Tything any
thing, to him and his Priests. And when his Disciples said, We have left all to
follow thee, what shall we have? He did not say Tithes shall be paid you; and
that since, neither by the Commandment of Christ nor his Apostles, people were
to pay Tithes; it is (says he) manifest and plain, that neither by the Law of
Christ, nor of Moses, Christian people are bound to pay Tithes, but by the
traditions of men, etc.

The like testmony is born again Tithes, by (that valiant Martyr William
Thrope, of whom the Reader may read more at large, in the foresaid Book of
Martyrs, where the largeness of his testimony, the greatness of his sufferings,
and the resolution of his spirit for the Lord, against the Priests and Tithes,
as well as swearing is recorded in p. 693. It appears, he was accused to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, by the men of Shrovesbury, for saying, 1. That the
Sacrament after consecration was bread. 2. That Images should in no wise be
worshipped 3. That men should not go on pilgrimage. 4. That Priests have no
title to Tithes. 5. That it is not lawful to swear in any wise. And in page
700. the Archbishop accuses him, for deeming holy Church to have erred in the
Ordinance of Tithes, and other duties to be paid to Priests. To which Thrope
answers, That Tithes were given to Levites and Priests by the old Law, that
came of the lineage of Levi, but our priests came not of that lineage, and that
Christ, all the time of his preaching lived by pure alms, and so did the
Apostles by his example, or by the travel of their hands; and that every priest
that Christ approves, knows, that the Disciple is not to be above his Lord,
etc. Upon which, said the Archbishop, Gods curse have thou, and mine, for this
teaching, etc. To which Thrope answered, in the words of one of their Doctors,
which he supposed was St. Jerome, That those priests that now under the new Law
do challenge Tithes. do in effect say, that Christ is not become man, nor
suffered death. And also that (since Tithes were the wages limited to Levites
and priests of the old Law, for bearing about the Tabernacle, slaying of
beasts, and other observations pertaining to their Office,) those priests that
now challenge or take Tithes, deny that Christ is come in the flesh, and do the
office of the old Law, or else they take Tithes wrongfully.

Upon which the Archbishop said, They enforce people to expugne the freedom of
holy Church. To which Thrope answers, Why call ye the taking of Tithes, and
other duties, that now priests challenge wrongfully, the freedom of holy
Church? Since, neither Christ nor his Apostles challenged, nor took such
duties; and therefore says he, all such giving and taking ought to be called
and holden, the slaverous covetousness of men, etc. And when the Archbishop
demanded why he did not speak against Lords, Knights and Esquires, as well as
against priests, he declares, that since Chrysostom says, that Priests are the
stomach of the people, and since, by the vitiousness of the Priests, both Lords
and Commons are most sinfully infected; and because the pride and covetousness
of priests, and the boast they make of their dignity and power, destroys not
only the virtue of priesthood, in priests themselves, but stirs up God to
take vengeance both on Lords and Commons that suffer them, it is needful says
he, to be busy about them.

Famous Wickliff, also bears testimony against Tithes, priests, etc. who (as
the History declares) had by his doctrine, born so large a testimony against the
proud, covetous, oppressing generation of priests and persecutors in his days,
that they greatly persecuted him, whilst he lived, but by the power and wisdom
of God was preserved to dye in his bed, and so not being able to reach his
life, they proceeded to judgment and condemnation of his Books, and certain
articles they had collected against him; some of which were, that he held, that
Tithes (or tenths) are pure alms, and that the parishoners may, for offense of
their Curate, detain and keep them back, and bestow them on others, at their
own will and pleasure, and that the priests are bound to get their living by
the labor of their hands, and he that gives any alms to them is accursed, or
in danger thereof; against whom the rage of the persecutors was such, that 41.
years after his death, they dug up his bones and burned them.

Much more might be mentioned of these and others of the Martyrs and holy men
of God, who in their several times suffered grievously, manifold torments and
miseries, and loved not their lives unto the death, bearing testimony for the
Lord, against the corruption in doctrine and practice, of the priesthood of
England, and particularly against Tithes, and swearing at all. And should I but
mention all that is there recorded, and how they suffered imprisonment, yea,
death it self, bearing testimony against swearing upon a book, and swearing at
all, in any case, in any wise, by the creature, or by the Creator, and against
Tithes, and covetous wickedness of priests, Curates and Vicars; time would
fail me, and what I have said may suffice for a taste. And by it may Richard
Fowler and his Elders be tried, yea, may try themselves, in whose steps they
are, and whether they are one with the Saints and Martyrs of God, who were
evilly entreated, imprisoned and persecuted by the wicked generation, for not
swearing at all, and withstanding the payment of Tithes, oblations, and dues
claimed by priests, or else one with the priests and persecutors that murdered
the Saints, spoiling and imprisoning those that stood faithful to God,
testifying against such evil things? and whether it is not as deep hypocrisy
in them, outwardly to seem to approve the Martyrs, and condemn their
persecutors, whilst themselves are doing the same things, as it was for the
priests and Elders, Scribes and pharisees, that murdered Christ, and
persecuted his Saints, that then were alive, to approve the prophets, and
condemn their persecutors, saying, Had we been in the days of our Fathers, we
would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the Prophets? etc. And
whether, in honesty, Richard Fowler and his people ought not to deny and
disclaim the Martyrs, and justify their persecutors, or else repent, and own
the shame of their present practices, which by the testimony of Martyrs is
condemned? And if Richard Fowler, thinking to excuse himself, shall pretend it
was not he, that formerly was not free to take a parish charge, to be
maintained by Tithes, nor voluntary contribution from those that gave it
grudgingly, and accounted persecution a grievous thing in the Bishops days,
from him only to be summoned to their Courts, though by them he was not
imprisoned that has committed this villainy aforesaid, but it was his two
Elders, viz. Richard Hollister of Cop-hill, and Thomas Prigg, that have done
it; and that he by Indenture has let them his Tithes. I say, if he thus plead,
then is the wickedness of his heart, and the naughtiness of his spirit, the
more made manifest, who being convinced of the badness of the work, was ashamed
in it to appear himself, and yet would put others upon the doing thereof. And
for him to pretend the letting his Tithes by Indenture, is horrible deceit,
and the priest and the Elders are not wise, who in their own declaration put
into the Court, have said, the Lease bears date the 17. day of March, 1656,
when as the Subpoena, by which they summoned the aforesaid persons was dated
long before; so that either his zealous Elders and proselytes were complaining
and persecuting their neighbors for Tithes before their Indenture was made, or
they had that show of a title, or else Richard Fowler himself was the man that
did it, of which being ashamed, he afterward for a cloak, makes a pretended
Lease to others, or rather the Priest with the Elders and people of
Westerleigh, consult and agree to persecute the innocent, and therefore
supplication was made that they might be sent for, and commanded to swear how
may eggs and apples were due to Richard Fowler, which they in obedience to
Christ refusing to do, for whose name sake they suffer; presently solicitation
was made, that power be given to cast them into prison, as it was by the wicked
Caldaeans, to cast the three children into the firery furnace, bebecause to the
Lord they stood faithful, and did not bow to that to which by the command of
the Babylonish King, they were required, and so the Scripture is fulfilled, and
the Devil has cast some into prison, where being faithful unto death, they
will receive the crown of life in the approaching day, in which the cruel
Beast, the false Prophet, and those that make war with the Lamb, is to be cast
alive into the lake, and tormented for evermore.

But has Richard Fowler done honestly, or as he would be done unto in this
matter? If yea, why then did he cry out of violence and wrong, of grievousness
and persecution, when by the former persecutors he was much more tenderly dealt
withal, and not commanded to swear to accuse himself, nor was ever imprisoned
for refusing thereof? And would he not have accounted it a vile and a most
wicked thing in the Bishops and their generation, if they by their means and
interest, had not only cast him into prison, but his family out of doors,
using all means they were able, so unjustly to ruinate, spoil and undo him in
his outward estate, whilst they kept him in bonds, and that for so small a
matter, as a few Tythe-apples and eggs, etc. unjustly demanded? If so, why then
does he allow himself in the practice of that which he condemns in others,
since God is no respecter of persons?

And were it not good for him, to remember, from whence he is fallen, and
repent, and call to mind what himself has spoken in my hearing, in many of
his Sermons, made in the former persecutors days, from these and the like
Scriptures, Matthew. 23.37. O Jerusalem! Jerusalem! thou that killest ^he
Prophets and stonest them that are sent unto thee, etc. Mark. 10.29, 30. There
is no man that has left house, or brethren, or sister or father, or mother, or
wife, or children, or land, for my sake and the Gospels, but he shall receive
an hundred fold, etc. But many that are first shall be last, and the last
first. 2. These. 2.3, etc. Let no man deceive you by any means, for the day of
the Lord shall not come except there be a ^a^ling away first, and the man of
sin be revealed the son of perdition, etc. And when dangers appeared very near,
and he with others kept a public Fast in the Steeple-house of Westerleigh.
Esther 4.14. If thou at this time altogether hold thy peace, then shall their
enlargement and delivernance arise for the Jews from another place, etc. And
how he then applied it against the persecutors, in behalf of the persecuted:
And are not Philip Rampington, and Edmond Bonner fit subjects for him to mind,
who for a time professes the truth as it was made manifest in those days, and
suffered great persecutions for the same, especially Philip Rampington, as the
histories of Martyrs declare. Yet, at length, growing great, and in favor with
the world, and embracing the same, became as vile persecutors as any of the
rest, under whose bloody spirit the innocent servants of God, who stood
faithful to him, suffered very grievous tormentings: And how Rich: Fowler is
degenerated, may be seen, who once cried out grievously of persecution, which
himself endured, yet has occasioned, and does occasion the servants of God at
this day, to suffer manifold more than himself endured by the Bishops, and
that upon the same ground, and for the very same things, for which the former
servants of God did suffer by their persecutors.

And did not he know, or believe, that Richard Hollister, Richard Atwood, Henry
Alsop, and John Champneys, could not in conscience swear at all, before he
occasioned that request to the Court, that they might be sent for and commanded
to swear? And if so, then whether himself with his Elders did it not, to
ensnare and betray the innocent? And whether in this he is like a Minister of
Christ? Or whether in it both himself and his Elders are not one with the
wicked Presidents and Princes of Babylon, who sought an occasion against
Daniel, which the Reader may read, Dan. 6.

All which at present is left to the consideration of those therein concerned,
till another opportunity by the wisdom of God, is administered, for laying open
the wickedness of this generation, of which this is but a little, only let all
the world take heed and beware of a generation of deceivers and false Prophets,
who come in sheeps clothing, but inwardly are ravening wolves, who by their
fruits may be known; they are greedy dogs that can never have enough that seek
for their gain from their quarter, That bite with their teeth, and cry peace,
peace, and prepare war against them that put not into their mouths: That make
merchandise of the people, and destroy souls for dishonest gain, casting men
into prison for not breaking the Commandments of Christ, and sue them at the
Law for Oblations, Offerings, and Tithes, etc. For since Richard Fowler, one of
the best of that generation, who once was so tender, as before is said, is so
woefully degenerated, and become brutish, breaking the bonds of Religion,
nature, and friendship, to devour the harmless, what may be expected from the
rest of those, who for a pretense make long prayers, and devour widows houses,
and are exercised in such wicked practices, whose blessings the Lord our God
has cursed, and whose seed he has corrupted, and is now making them
contemptible and base before the people, according to the Scriptures: And the
mighty day of the Lord, which to such is darkness, and not light, is come and
coming, and hastes greatly. And the abomination which makes desolate, is
standing where it ought not. And let him that reads, understand, for the time
is at hand.

When the righteous turns away from his righteousness, and commits
iniquity, and does according to all the abominations that the wicked man does:
all his righteousness that he has done, shall not be mentioned: in his
trespass that he has trespassed, and in his sin that he has sinned, in them
shall he dye,

Ezekiel. 18.24. Woe unto them, for they have gone in the way of Cain, and run
greedily after the error of Balaam for reward.

Thus says the Lord, Let my people go, that they may seve me.

Postscript.
THe Reader may observe how the Scripture is fulfilled, Hos. 6.9. As Troops of
robbers wait for a man, so the company of Priests murder in the way by consent,
etc.

For as in many other places the faithful servants of God has been (and is) by
the company of Priests cast into prison, and some for less then twelve pence
(...) for Tithes has there been kept for several years, and others until they
have died and perished under the cruelty of the unmerciful Priests. So Richard
Atwood of Westerleigh in the County of Gloucester, one of the servants of God
cast into prison as aforesaid by the Priests and Elders of Westerleigh, has
there been kept so long that at length the outward man is perished, and upon
the fifteenth day of the fifth Month, 1658. he laid down his earthly
tabernacle, a testimony against this blood-thirsty generation of Priests and
persecutors, whom nothing did satisfy but imprisonment to death, and that for
so small a matter as a few Tithe Apples and Eggs, etc. And for that through
tenderness of conscience he could not swear how many he had.

And Richard Fowler who is called a Minister, and Thomas Prigg and Richard
Hollister of Cophill who are called his Elders, and all others of their
generation who had any hand in, or were consenting unto this wicked act, may
sadly consider and lay it to heart, for the righteous perishes and the
merciful are taken away, Isa. 57.1. and that to which the Lord has no respect
is wroth and is risen up against its brother, and him has slain, Genesis 4.4. to
12. the voice of whose blood cries from the ground, and from the earth is he
accursed that has shed it, and inquisition for it will God make who has tried
the righteous and found it faithful unto death, but the wicked that has loved
violence has his soul hated, Psalm 11. and upon them will he rain snares, fire
and brimstone, and a horrible tempest which is the portion of their cup from
him in whose sight the death of his Saints is precious; And Richard Atwood
bearing forth his Testimony till death, had the crown of life, and place of
peace and rest to him made manifest, and in it did rejoice, and over his
persecutors was he made to mourn, and greatly did he lament the sad and woeful
condition of Richard Fowler from whose hand he suffered, and long before he
fell sick, did he declare how sensible he was that his life must be laid down
before his persecutors would release him, or to that effect, and so envious was
some of this generation, that after they had so song imprisoned him, and got
his life for a spoil, whereby his wife is become a widow, and his children
fatherless, yet their envy ended not, but as friends had brought his body
from the place where it had been imprisoned, to his own house, which was above
twenty miles, and from thence (...) carry (...) it to the place of burial, they
met them (...) demanding the best of his goods for a H^^^lot to the Lord of the
Manor (so called) and being desired to stay till the (...) way (...), they
refused, (...) till a copy was produced, by which it appeared, that but five
shillings could be demanded.

And what a woeful, cruel and black religion and ministry this is, that
brings forth such fruits, let the Reader consider:

THE END.
As for Robert Purnels Book entitled, A Cabinet richly stored, etc. which in
the end of yours is proclaimed to be in the press, I have perused, and find
it so loathsome and noisome a piece of ignorance and conceited vanity of
confusion, and soul murdering stuff, in which are so many broad and crooked
ways leading to perdition, that whosoever follows, is never like to know
peace nor salvation to his soul, and in which the ignorance, blindness, and
sottishness of the Author so much appears, that those of his own generation
who are not blind, may be ashamed, and a Service Book Priest blush to own: And
so I need say no more, but let him that reads consider.

ERRATA.
PAge 1. l. 5. read. people. p. 9. l, 37. after the word Philistines r. and p.
9. l. 38 for reprech r. reproach. p. 9. l. 44. for becauty r. beauty. p. 11. l.
6 r. 10. p. 16. l 36. before gathered r. were p. 16 l. last but 3. take out a
after I shall not. p. 18. l. 21. for and scoulded, r. and were scalded. p. ^0.
l. 37. r. you before your ignorant and crooked p. 21. l. 17. for there in ye in
insert verbatim r. for ye therein insert verbatim. p. 21. l 34. if Christ for
of Chapter p. 21. l. 38. r. your neglecting and contemning of some, etc. the other
says your neglecting of some and contemning of others, etc. p. 22. l. 26. for
the throat r. your throat and their tongues for your tongues p. 25. l. 6. to
left out p. 26. l. 34. for whatsoever r. whosoever p. 3. l. last but 3 (...)
for were p. 58. l. 35. is for as p. 70. l. 23. for is r. it p. 78. l. 10. for
his r. is.


