THE HOLY FAST OF LENT Defended against all its PROPHANERS: OR, A Discourse,
showing that Lent-Fast was first taught the World by the Apostles, as Dr.
Gunning, now Bishop of Ely Learnedly proved in a Sermon Printed by him in the
year, 1662. by his Majesty's special Command. Together with a Practical
Direction how to FAST.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1677.

THE HOLY FAST OF LENT Defended against its PROFANERS.
TO go about to prove that the Holy Fast of Lent was first taught the World by
the Apostles of our Lord Jesus, I know very well, is, as they say, Actum agere,
to do what has been done; and that very efficaciously fifteen years ago, by
Dr. Gunning, now Bishop of Ely. in his Elaborate and useful Treatise on this
Subject; Printed by his Majesty's special Command, in the year 1662. And I
persuade my self, had the rest of the Clergy taken but a quarter of the pains
in Reading and Studying that Rational Discourse, which the Learned Author did
in compiling of it, they would have been so well satisfied of the great benefit
of Religious Fasting in general; as also that the first Planters of
Christianity were the first Institutors of the Lent-Fast in par-ticular; that
they would not have dared, but to have Religiously observed it themselves, and
to have taught the like Observation to their Parishoners in their respective
Districts. But it being too too manifest, that very little notice is taken of
that Sacred Penitential time, either by Priest or People, I resolved to press
its observation not only by renewing my Lord of Ely's Arguments; but also by
superadding some particular Reflections of my own.

Omnipotent Jesus, who wrought so many Miracles of Love when you were upon
Earth, Curing the Blind, Deaf, and Dumb; now from Heaven work upon me a miracle
of Justice, and Wither my hand, or strike me Blind, if I be about to write any
thing in favor of Superstition or Will Worship: But if I design nothing, but
to persuade a practice which was taught the World, either by your Blessed Self,
or your Holy Apostles, Bless me according to your great mercy, and bless my
poor Labors to all those, into whose hands they shall come.

I confess it was my Unhappiness to be Educated in Puritanism, or
Nonconformity, and to look upon the keeping of Lent as a fruitless
Superstition: But thanks be to Almighty God, I now dare no more eat Flesh in
Lent, than I dared to Work upon a Lords Day, when I was a Nonconformist. But
how was this strange Change wrought in me? I Will tell you: Reading in one of
Bishop Andrews his Sermons upon Ash Wednesday, how we were to take notice, that
before Popery was batch'd, St. Hierom taught the keeping of Lent was an
Apostolical Tradition, etc. Hereupon, I began to reason with my self: If the
Apostles ordained the keeping of Lent, why should not I keep it? And I confess,
setting my self to the keeping of it; before Easter I was so satisfied of the
great benefit of Religious Fasting, that one might as soon have persuaded me,
that Honey was not sweet, as that Fasting was not strangely profitable to the
Soul, or that Lent-Fast had any thing of Superstition in it: So true did I find
those words of our Blessed Savior, John 7 17. If any one will do his, that is,
Gods Will; he shall know concerning my Doctrine, whether it be from God, or I
speak from my self.

My dearest Friends, would you indeed gladly be satisfied, whether Fasting in
Lent be Superstition or no? Set your selves in a Christian manner to Fast that
Holy Time, and you shall know whether such a practice be from God, or a human
Invention? That is, Content your selves every day in Lent with only one
temperate Meal, of less Savoury and less Nourishing Victuals; not out of any
Superstitious intention, as if one Meat were more unclean than another, but out
of a Pious design to humble your selves before God for your sins, judging your
selves unworthy of the coursest fair, and the smallest quantity; judging your
selves, that you may not be judged of our Lord. Take the Rod into your own
hand, and gently Chastise your selves here, to prevent the more severe
Animadversion of your Lord hereafter: Being well assured that the All-merciful
Jesus will not permit the same faults to be punished twice. If you punish your
selves for them in this World, He Will not punish you for them in the other;
provided your exterior Humiliation be accompanied with a hearty interior
repentant sorrow. It is not imaginable what difficulty our proud Nature makes
to condemn it self, though never so deservedly: To acknowledge for example a
practice to be Holy and Good, which for many years we have totally neglected as
Superstitious, and to no purpose. A little experimental knowledge of the great
Spiritual benefit of Religious Christian Fasting, would strangely conduce to
open our Eyes to see the force of such Arguments, as prove Lent-Fast to be
Apostolical. Had we a little tasted how good it is for the Soul, to afflict the
Body with Fasting, we should easily be persuaded to see a pious observation of
Lent was well worthy the Institution of the Apostles, and well worthy our
Blessed Lords Fasting forty days, to animate us thereunto. And the truth is, In
this latter Age, amongst too too many Christians, little more than the name of
Fasting being retained, the thing it self, according to the Primitive practice,
being in a manner lost; no wonder vast multitudes should easily be persuaded to
deem Lent an useless Superstitious Ceremony. Having put away a good Conscience,
as to a Religious Observation of that Holy Time --, no wonder if we made
Shipwreck of our Faith, of its Apostolical Institution. Too too many Christians
in Lent, and upon other Fasting-days, giving themselves all liberty of drinking
Wines, and other strong Liquors, both at Meals and betwixt Meals, and stuffing
themselves plentifully, at Noon, with all sorts of Fish and other Viands, which
their Purses could reach, provided they were not Flesh; and pampering Nature
again in the Evening with a large proportion of solid Sustenance, and with
whatsoever quantity of strong drink they please; no wonder if such Fasters as
these were easily convinced, such a Lent-Fast as this was never appointed by
the Holy Apostles of our Lord Jesus. Is this the Fast our B. Savior excused
his Disciples from, as above their spiritual strength, till such time as they
should have received the Holy Ghost after his departure? Is this the Fast that
has a power to cast out Devils; to obtain the Holy Ghost for our selves or
others; to appease God All-mighties Anger toward a particular Person, City, or
Country? Would Nineveh, think you, have escaped the Destruction which Jonas, in
the Name of Almighty-God threatened it with, had its King Proclaimed and
practiced such a Fast as this? Might he not rather justly have feared, for such
a damnable Hypocrisy of pretending to humble himself by Fasting, when he did
nothing less; that he and his people, instead of within forty days, within
twenty should have been utterly destroyed.

I remember to have read, how that the Primitive Christians, to excite in their
souls a more lively sense and apprehension of our B. Saviors humble Birth, and
painful Death, were wont often to go to Bethlehem and Mount Calvary, there to
make their Prayers and Meditations; reflecting, and no doubt with a singular
profit to their Souls, that there their dear Redeemer was humbly born, and here
the same Redeemer pitiously died for them. But the Devil envying these good
Christians, their so profitable Devotions, by a cunning device, thus thought to
deterr them from them. He suggested to the Pagans, to set up the Statue of
Adonis in the Stall of Bethlehem, and the Statue of Venus on the Mount of
Calvary, so that the Devout Christians could not now go either to the one place
or the other, to help their Religious Piety, without seeming superstitiously to
worship Venus and Adonis. A lively representation methinks this, of the
notorious abuse the same Devil has put upon us Christians in our yearly
Observations of Christmas, in memory of our Saviors Birth, and weekly
Observation of Friday, in memory of his Death. The Primitive Christians weekly
observed the day of our Lords bitter Death and Passion, afflicting their Souls
for their sins with penitential sorrow, and their bodies with rigorous Fasting,
both the quantity and quality of their Diet, rather expelling Death than
cherrishing Life. The same first Christians yearly observed the time of their
Lords Nativity, but so Religiously, as it was manifest their study was to
fatten their souls with devout Meditations, and not to pamper their bodies with
delicious fair: The Devil envying the Church of Christ, so great profit, from
the pious observation of these Holy Times, he suggests to sensual Libertines so
to profane the Holy Time of Christmas, with excessive Rioting, that none could
profess to keep it without playing the Debauche; and so to abuse the Religious
Fast of Friday, and other times of Christian Abstinence by an intolerable
excess in all sorts of Fish and Wine, and dainty Comfitures, that none could
pretend to observe them without playing the Hypocrites, professing to afflict
their bodies with Austere Fasting, when they pampered them by delicate
Feasting. But what Remedy? Abandon the profane Abuse, and recall the first
Pious use. Demolish the Statues of Venus and Adonis, but help your Devotions
still by Visiting the Sanctified places of our Lords Birth and Passion.

Though you must give me leave to tell you, that I fear, were the matter well
examined, it would be found that not others uncouth, exotic manner of Fasting,
but our own Inordinate desire of eating when we will, what we will, and as much
as we will; that is of not Fasting at all, is the true cause of our Cavilling
at the Holy Fast of Lent, and other times of Abstinence. Let it be. Some, who
pretend to Fast, do nothing less, abstaining indeed from Flesh, but giving
scope to their Sensuality in other things: But they say, Carpere vel noli, vel
meliora face. Either do not carp at our Fasting, or else Fast more strictly
your selves. And those who are so forward in Reproaching to their Neighbors
their Mock-fasts, I fear if they were obliged to Fast, would find but
difficulty enough, even to fast so largely, as they do, whose Fastings they
carpe at. And though indeed you may find too too many Libertines, who study by
all means possible to avoid the difficulty of Church-Fasts, by excessive
Drinking, and intemperance in Meats not prohibited; yet those of a better
Conscience, though they come far short of the rigor of the Primitive Christians
in their Abstinence, yet do so Fast, as their fasting days, are days of real
Mortification unto them. As for Libertins, its rather to be wondered they will
deny themselves, even to abstain from Flesh, than that they take the liberty
they do upon Fasting-days. Do not so wholly fix your Eyes upon the Cockle, as
you take no notice at all of the good Corn.

But to the Point undertaken to be proved. How may one, who with his soul,
desires nothing more than to observe most Religiously all Apostolical
Ordinations, be satisfied that the Holy Apostles of our Lord Jesus ordained the
Quadragesimal Fast of Lent as a time of Abstinence and Humiliation for all
Christians? Let him thoroughly satisfy himself, that Fasting is a Christian
duty, and has a singular force to cast out the Devil to obtain the Holy Ghost,
to appease the Allmighties just Anger, and which shall have a singular reward
in Heaven. And moreover, let him reflect, if any Credit be to be given to the
Old and New Scripture, and to Eccesiastical History, the more eminent any one
has been for Piety and Sanctity, the more exemplar have they been for Fasting
and Abstinence. Moses, Elias, Daniel, Judith, Anne, great Fasters under the
old Law; St. John Baptist, our Blessed Savior, St. Mary Magdalen, and all the
Apostles under the Gospel. St. Paul testifies of himself, that he Fasted often:
Our B. Savior assures us concerning all his Disciples, that when he was taken
from them, they should Fast. To say nothing of our Basils, Hieroms, and
Augustines, etc. whose Fasts were very frequent and very rigorous, and yet we
cannot, without injury to the Apostolical College, surmise, that those later
Fathers of Christ's Church, should surpass either in Piety or Abstinence, the
first Planters of Christianity. By which it is evident to every Christian Man,
that Fasting in general is very well becoming every good Christian; and that he
hardly deserves the name of a Christian, who wanting neither health nor
strength, yet Fasts not at all. And indeed, if we examine the matter well, we
shall find that one great end of our Lord Jesus, His coming into the World, was
to save us from our sins, by Teaching, by his Doctrine, and by enabling us by
his Example, and other gracious Assistances, fervourously to practice the
propitiatory Humiliation of Fasting. Our All-wise Mediator, understanding very
well, that could he but bring us heartily to Repent us of our sins, and to
express the sincerity of our interior Contrition by exterior Humiliation or
Fasting; such was the genius of his Eternal Father, that he could not but
pardon us, how great, or how many soever our sins might be: But on the
contrary, we refusing to Repent, and that even in Sackcloth and Ashes, that
is, with such a Repentance as shows it self by some exterior acts or other, no
Prayers, no Tears, no Blood, no Death of his could possibly obtain our pardon,
except we would Repent, Perish we must, and that Eternally.

But what conduces this to persuade Lent-Fast, was appointed by the Apostles?
Very much. For we having hence, that Fasting is a necessary Christian duty, and
strangely conducing to save the World from sin, it evidently follows, it was
well worthy the Apostles, the better to secure so useful a practice, to
determine certain days every ye^r, in which all Christians should be obliged to
humble themselves by Abstinence, as to the quantity and quality of their Food;
they knowing very well by the Unction of the Holy Ghost, what we know by too
sad experience, that the generality of the people being left to Fast when they
pleased, would please to Fast seldom or never at all. Nay moreover, it follows
hence, that the Institution of set-days of Abstinence was not only well worthy
of the Apostles, but also that it cannot well be understood how they could be
faithful to their charge of the Souls of the whole World, and neglect by the
proviso of such an Ordination, to propagate to all Generations an Universal
practice of Fasting amongst Christians. For, though it were granted that the
Primitive Christians were so fervorous both in Piety to God, and in
Mortification to themselves, as they neither stood in need of set Holy Days to
invite them to their Prayers, nor of set Fasts to invite them to Penitential
works. Every day was a Lords day to them, so long and frequent were their
devout Prayers, and other spiritual Exercises; the whole year was one continued
Lent unto them, so rigid was their daily Abstinence. Although, I say, all this
were granted to the Honor of the Primitive Christian fervor; yet it lying upon
the Apostles to secure all Christian practices, not only for their own days,
but to all Generations, as much as in them lay; and they foreseeing by the
light of the Holy Ghost, how apt tepid Posterity would be to excuse themselves
from all obligation of the hard and troublesome duty of Fasting upon any
set-times, had they been left free to Fast when and how they pleased; this, I
say the H. Apostles foreseeing, their very Office seems to have obliged them
from the beginning to ordain not only certain Festival days, but certain
Fasting days also, lest after-Generations should say, Our Ancestors went to
Heaven without Fasting-Lent, or other set Fasts, and why may not we? And
indeed, had not the Holy and long Fast of Lent been instituted by the first
planters of Christianity over all the World, Provincial, or General Councils
would have found it too hard a task to have obliged all Christian Countries to
an observation so repugnant to the natural inclination of Mankind. And this
consideration alone does not a little incline me to believe that the Apostles
of our Lord Jesus did actually, and indeed ordain the Christian Lent- Fast.
For, is it a likely Story that the Apostles and Primitive Christians Fasted as
seldom, and in such a manner as our Non Conformists do, only deferring their
good Flesh-meal till three a Clock in the Afternoon for five or six times a
year: But when Christians in after-Ages grew cold in all Christian exercises,
they fell to Abstinence from flesh, contenting themselves with less nourishing,
and less savory Viands toward the Evening, three days every Quarter, and forty
days every Year, besides the Eves of several Festivities, and two days of
Abstinence every week? Is this, I say, a likely story? Or is it not rather much
more likely that the Holy Apostles, all over the World, taught their first
Converts, both by their Example and Doctrine to Fast very often, and very
strictly? but after-Ages growing more languid, as in all Christian exercises,
so especially in Fasting, as hardest and most contradictory to flesh and blood;
at length they came to Fast so remisly, even upon days of the very Apostles
Ordination, that they added to one full Meal about Noon, a Collation at Night,
and that such a one too, as would hardly have been allowed a Primitive
Christian Faster for his whole days Refection? I desire the impartial Reader
would be pleased to consider which of these two is the more likely story, and
to incline accordingly toward the belief of Lents being an Apostolical
Ordination. Or did the Primitive Christians Fast indeed very often, and very
strictly, urged hereunto by their extraordiuary fervor, but without any
extrinsical Law obliging them hereunto, upon any set-days or times; but in
after-Generations, the Primitive inward fervor being lost, did Christians
generally Fast seldom, and very remisly; which their Pastors observing, and
watching for their souls good: Did they hereupon Ordain Lent, and other Fasting
days as an extrinsical help to recover in their languishing Flock the Primitive
Christian practice of Fasting? According to that of the Apostle, The Law is not
made for the Just Man, but for the Unjust, 1 Timothy 1. 8. This might not without
some probability be surmized, were it not contrary to all Ecclesiastical
History, which makes mention of Lent in the most Primitive times, as I shall
say hereafter.

But Efficaciously to prove the holy Fast of Lent was taught the Christian
world by the Apostles of our B. Savior. I confess I was not present when St.
Peter, or S. Paul, or any other of the Apostles Preached to their first
Converts the observation of Lent. Neither were you present, I believe, when S.
Paul writ his Epistle to the Romans; and yet I persuade my self, you think you
are able to satisfy any reasonable man that he did write it. Then why may not
I be able also, to prove satisfactorily that the holy Apostles did teach the
Observation of Lent, though I was not present at any of their Sermons or
Exhortations to that purpose? Or perhaps, will you say, You matter not who writ
the Epistle to the Romans. Having diligently Read and perused it, you fear not
with all confidence to aver, whosoever writ this Letter, I am sure the Holy
Ghost Indicted it: I know it by its very style, and its other intrinsecal
Virtues, there is a Divine Character stamped upon it, by which I clearly
distinguish it from all human Writings; and this suffices me, to make me
receive it as a rule of my Faith and Manners. But this would be small
satisfaction to a Pagan, who doubts of the Divine Authority of that holy
Epistle, unless you could make him also discern that Sacred Impress, which you
say you so clearly distinguish; take heed you do not mistake. It Is Education I
fear has made both you and me bear that Reverence we do to that and whatsoever
else Portion of holy Writ we receive. Had we been Educated in Judaism, in all
likelihood we should have as little regarded the New Testament, as we do now
Mahomets Alcaron. I could tell you also, that I know by the nature of Lent it
self, it must be Instituted and first taught by Missionants sent from Heaven,
and enumerating the singular benefits that accrue to a devout soul, Religiously
observing of it; I could moreover make even you, or any other Non-observer of
it, as well as my self see it must needs at first come from a good Spirit, that
wished Mankind well, for that it so strangely conduces to the perfecting of
human Nature, and to the adorning of it with many excellent Virtues. For
example: If I Fast to afflict and humble my self before God Almighty for my
sins, my Fasting is an act of Repentance. If I eat less my self, that I may
have the more to give to those that are in Necessity, my Fast is an act of
Charity. If I Fast the better to dispose my self for Prayer, it is an act of
Religious Devotion. If I Fast, judging my self not worthy of any Delicacies,
nor of my fill of even the coursest Fare, it is an act of Humility, and disposes
my soul moreover as little to affect fine Clothes or stately Dwellings, as I do
good Victuals; and consequently moderates my desires of Money and Riches, which
are not desirable by corrupt Nature, but for these or such like uses. If I
Fast, that I may be better able to pay my Debts, or provide my Children
Portitions, it is an act of Justice and Christian paternal Piety. If to moderate
my inordinate Appetite of Meat and Drink, it is an act of Temperance. In fine,
it is hard to name a Virtue which Fasting does not strangely help to procure,
maintain, and increase. And after all this, can either Pagan or Christian deny
the holy Fast of Lent to have a Divine Character stamped upon it? and must it
be still stigmatized with the ignominious brand of Superstition and
Will Worship?

But how do I know assuredly the Apostles of our B. Savior taught the
Primitive Christians to Fast in Lent? Am I able to produce a grand Jury of so
many Venerable old Men, who have been miraculously kept alive ever since, and
are ready to avouch as much upon solemn Oath? No, not I. How do I then know it?
Has an Angel appeared to me, and told me as much? No. How then? Why, how did
the Israelites, who lived above two thousand years after the Institution of the
Sabbath, know, that God Almighty commanded their first Father Adam to keep it
holy? They had no book of it; the Book of Genesis being written above two
thousand years after by Moses. I conceive they knew it thus. Adam instantly
upon God-Almighties Command, set himself Religiously to observe that day, and
taught his Children to do so also; his Children practiced and taught their
Children downwards, till Moses his days. Nor had any reason to doubt of the
Divine Institution of that first holy day, because it was not transmitted and
recommended to them by a Book. Nor would it have been a sufficient excuse for
any one then to have pretended, how could they be certain that some of their
Ancestors betwixt them and Adam, had not of their own head superstitiously
devised a Religious observation of that day before all others; unless they
could have produced some positive evidence of such an Innovation. In like
manner I say concerning the holy Fast of Lent. The Holy Apostles first taught
the observation of it in the several Countries where they Preached the Gospel;
their Converts fell to the practice of it, and taught their Children in like
manner; and so one Generation another, till our present days, and this all over
the Christian World. Now, unless Non-Conformists can show when this burdensome
precept of Fasting-Lent was imposed upon Christendom since the first planting
of Christianity, I cannot see how they can more excuse themselves from this
Obligation, than could the Israelites excuse themselves from the keeping of
Saturday Sabbath, which was ordained two thousand years before they were born;
and there was also as yet no written Word of God at all for any such
observation. But what proof can be brought, that all intermediate Generations
since the Apostles, in several Christian Countries, have kept Lent? A much
stronger then Jacob could bring to prove to his Children, that Saturday-Sabbath
had been kept ever since Adam. He could only produce the Testimony of the
present Generation, that so they had been taught by their Fathers and
Grandfathers time out of mind; nor had they any Tradition amongst them of a
later beginning of such an Observation: Written Records, Divine or Human he had
none. I, besides the Testimony of those of the present Age in several Christian
Countries, who affirm that they have Immemorially from the first planting of
Christianity amongst them, Religiously observed Lent, will produce by and by
Records of above a thousand years standing for its Apostolical Institution.

But positively to prove that the Apostles appointed Lent, I argue thus. Two
hundred years ago, England, France, Spain, Germany, Italy, and all the Eastern
Church, universally Fasted Lent, as it is evident by the Records and Annals of
our own and those other Christian Countries. Therefore the Apostles taught Lent
to their first Converts both in the Eastern and Western World where they
Preached. For it cannot be imagined that so many several Countries, Kings, and
Subjects, Priests, and People, could by chance fall upon the yearly practice of
Abstaining from flesh forty days before Easter: Therefore, they must either all
at first be taught so by their first Masters of Christianity, which is the
Conclusion intended to be proved; or some Universal Supreme Authority,
Ecclesiastical or Civil, must so have commanded them to do; or some Preachers
first in one Country, and then in another, must so have persuaded them to do in
some Age since. But no Annals of our own, or other Christian Countries make any
mention of any such Preachers, or any such Ordination made by any general
Council, Pope, Prince, or Emperor. Nor yet have we, or other Cbristian Countries
wanted Ecclesiastical Historiographers, who in their Memorials have taken
notice of far lesser matters than such an Innovation as this must needs have
been, had the Apostles taught the World no such Observance. And the truth is,
it is pure Ignorance in Ecclesiastical History, and the works of the Primitive
Fathers, that makes so many waver in the Belief of the Apostolical Institution
of Lent; in which, if they were well Conversant, they could not possibly doubt
of it. Further, Not only two hundred years ago; but twelve hundred years ago,
Lent was Universally observed in the whole Christian World, both in the Eastern
and Western Church, as is manifest out of the pious works of the prime Pillars
and Pastors of Christ's Church, in the fourth and fifth Century of Christianity.
Nor do the Opposers of Lent deny so much, and therefore appeal to the first
300. years after our Savior; for which time, and for which only, they pretend
the Christian worship was untainted, and not infected with the Superstitious
observation of Lent. And no doubt they have a great deal of reason to think so
Charitably of the Primitive Christians, who for the first 300. years after our
Savior, were all over the World sought after to death, for their Religion,
that they would have a care to keep that Religion unspotted, and teach the same
faithfully to their Posterity, which they were all ready every day to dye for,
and many of them actually did dye for. Besides, what a reproach would it be to
our B. Savior, that his Church should be Universally overrun with
Superstition within 300. years after his Death; and yet Moses should be able so
to establish a Religion, as it should be transmitted to Posterity untainted for
many Generations? Especially when our Lord had promised that he would so firmly
settle and found his Church, that all the power of Hell should never be able to
prevail against it. But methinks our Adversaries might extend their Charity to
the Christians of the fourth, fifth, and sixth Century, and not think they
would have so little regard to the Religion taught them, and Sealed to them by
their Ancestors with their dearest blood, as immediately to change and corrupt
it; and by it so altered and corrupted, infect themselves and their Posterity
as much as in them lay, to all Generations, with a dangerous Superstition and
Will Worship.

Let us suppose then that for the first 300. years of Christianity, the Church
of Christ in England, Italy, Greece, and other Countries observed no such thing
as Lent-Fast; and consider by what means possible, the fourth Age could not
only bring it in all over the Christian World, but bring it in so secretly and
covertly, that the prime Doctors of the fifth Age should not be able to discern
that this new burden was superadded to Chri^tianity by their immediate
Progenitors, but should be verily persuaded that such an observation had
immemorially from Generation to Generation descended to them from the first
Planters of Christianity, the Apostles. And yet its evident that the fifth Age
did not only keep Lent, but also kept it as an Apostolical Institution; and the
prime Christian Doctors of that Age have left it upon Record in their
diservedly admired works, that they kept this Holy-fast as an Observance taught
them by Tradition from the Apostles. Hear their own words; St. Hierom in his
Epistle to Marcella: We Fast one Lent (Quadragesimam) within the compass of the
whole year, according to the Traditions of the Apostles, in a season fit for
us. The Montanists keep three Lents in the year, as if three Saviors had
suffered. Now, if for the first 300. years there had been no such observance by
Christians at Rome, but if in the fourth Century some Bishop of Rome, or some
Provincial or general Council, or Christian Emperor had first introduced it,
could a Priest of Rome, and one well versed in all Ecclesiastical matters as S.
Hierom was, err so grossly, as to mistake so new an Institution for an
Apostolical Tradition, that is for an Observance taught the City of Rome from
Father to Son, from the Apostles? For the Greek Church, hear the Testmimony of
Theophilus, Patriarch of Alexandria (to the Patriarchs of which See, it was
entrusted by the first General Council, that they should yearly signify
beforehand, to the rest of the Church; as well as their own, the true time of
Easter.) In his first Paschal Epistle he writes thus: Let us cure the diverse
wounds of Vices, etc. And so may we enter the Fasts at hand, beginning Lent the
30th. day of the Month Mechir (as it were our February, the Egyptians reckoning
30. days in every month) The week of the salutary Pasch, on the 5th. day of the
Month Pharmuth, (or April) and ending the Fasts according to the Evangelical
Traditions on the Evening of the Saturday, being the tenth of Pharmuth; and on
the next Lords day, the 11th. of the same month, let us Celebrate the Feasts.
The like he says in his second Paschal Epistle; and again he says, according to
the Evangelical Traditions. I add the Testimony of S. Cyril, Patriarch of the
same Alexandria in the next Age, in his 20th. Homily de festis Paschalibus. So,
to let us keep a pure Fast, beginning the Holy Lent from such a day, ending
also the Fasts on the 7th. day of Pharmuth, late in the Evening, according to
the Traditions Apostolical. The same S. Cyril, in 19. other of his Homily,
cited by B. Gunning, de festis Paschalibus (Preached in so many several years)
refers the same Fasts of Lent to Tradition, Appointment, or Instruction
Evangelical. The Law of Abstaining in Lent, was always in the Church, says the
above cited Theophilus Alexandrinus. Now, can it be imagined that these two
Learned Patriarchs (to whom, by the whole Christian Church was committed the
care of signifying the due time of Lent and Easter) had the Holy Fast of Lent
been so lately brought in by some Universal Ecclesiastical or civil Authority,
could be ignorant of it, and think, and tell all the World also that they had
been so taught to end Lent from Generation to Generation, from the Apostles?

Let it be. The Pastors of Christ's Church in the fourth Century, met together
in a General Council, though for the first 300. years there had been no such
Custom amongst Christians to Fast Lent, might make a Law of Abstinence from
certain Meats for 40. days before Easter, and command the whole Christian World
to obey it; but they could not possibly have the Impudence to annex to such an
Ordination; and thus we have been taught to Fast by Tradition from the
Apostles, when they all must needs know themselves to be the first Ordainers of
such an Observance: Nor could they possibly impose upon their Posterity such a
belief, but their Posterity must needs know that such a custom was no Antienter
than their immediate Progenitors. Which being so, how comes it to pass, that S.
Hierom, and other Learned Doctors in the fourth and fifth Century, tell us that
they kept Lent by Tradition from the Apostles; if the Holy Apostles were not
the first Teachers of it, but some particular Preachers, or a General Council,
or some civil Ecclesiastical power since? The first opposers of Lent, though
they had the Impiety to call it Superstition and Will Worship, yet they had not
the Impudence to say they had been so taught to call it from Father to Son,
ever since the Apostles, but pretended their Ancestors for many hundred years
had been in blindness and ignorance; but they by reading the Holy Scriptures
and Writers of the first 300. years, found there was no such observance in the
Primitive Church. In like manner, had the keeping of Lent been an Innovation,
the first Introducers of it must have pleaded for it in the fourth or other
Century, as the Opposers of it in this latter Age pleaded against it. They must
not have said, Abstain from certain Meats in the Holy Time of Lent, for so we
have been taught to do from Father to Son from the Apostles, for every one
would have known this to be a notorious Lie; but they must have pretended to
have more light than their immediate Progenitors, and have said the Apostles
and Primitive Christians used such Abstinence; but fervor of Piety decaying,
the world for some Centuries had laid aside that holy, but troublesome
Mortification, and they were stirred up by Almighty God to retrieve that
Religious Primitive custom: But no Ecclesiastical History, in so much as any
one Christian Country in the world, makes mention of any such manner of
introducing the Holy Fast of Lent; but on the contrary, wheresoever Lent is
observed, the Observers of it profess from Generation to Generation to have
observed it, from the first planting of Christianity amongst them; and
wheresoever Lent is not observed, its Non-observers do profess only from such a
time to have not observed it; and their Ancestors before that time, for diverse
Generations, ever since they cannot well tell when, had blindly observed it;
whence it is manifest that the observation of Lent is the ancient Christian
practice; and its non-observance a Novelty.

And indeed, had the keeping of Lent been a Novelty, and not heard of in the
Primitive times, its observance being so burdensome and contrary to flesh and
blood; and besides, as its Opposers say, Superstitious also, its not possible
it should be introduced not into one, but into all the Christian Countries of
both the Eastern and Western Church in a short time, and with a small industry
of its Introducers, and without great opposition both from good Men for its
Superstition, and from bad Men for its troublesomeness, to Corrupt nature. But
no Ecclesiastical History, though far lesser matters be Recorded, makes mention
of any such opposition made against Lent in its first bringing in, or how, or
by whom it was brought in, even into so much as one particular Diocese. But all
Records testify that the prime Doctors, both of the Greek and Latin Church, in
the fifth and sixth Century, have been most Religious Observers, and Zealous
defenders of it, which certainly they would never have been, had Lent been a
Superstitious Novelty, and not heard of in the first 300. years. And indeed,
whosoever maturely considers the genius and temper of the Christian Doctors and
Bishops for the first five hundred years after our Savior, will find it
impossible for all the power of Hell to impose a Novelty upon them. For they
were not like the seeming Zelots of our Age, pretenders to new Lights; but
their Profession was, not to correct Antiquity, but faithfully to deliver to
Posterity what they immemorially from the Apostles had received from their
Ancestors; and their great Answer to Introducers of new Doctrines or Practices
was: Nihil novandum nisi quod traditum est. We must Innovate nothing, but stick
close to what has been delivered to us by our Forefathers. Does a Montanus
upon pretext of Divine Inspiration, endeavor to impose upon Christians the
observation of three Lents in the year; the Church of Christ replys by one of
her prime Doctors, S. Hierom; We Fast one Lent within the compass of the whole
year, according to the Tradition of the Apostles: The Montanists keep three
Lents in the year, as if three Saviors had suffered. For other Instances, I
refer my Reader to the Golden Treatise of S. Vincentius Lerinensis against
Innovations. As for Pretenders to discover new truths by reading of the Holy
Scriptures, its easily conceivable how such persons may be imposed upon by
subtle Sophisters, and lead into Superstitious practices, and made to believe
Erroneous Doctrines, to wit, by bad and new Interpretations of good and ancient
Scriptures. But on the other side, how shall a Teacher of Novelties deceive a
Country, which is resolved to hold fast whatsoever Doctrine or Practice was
taught them by their immediate Progenitors, who received the same Doctrine or
Practice by an uninterrupted delivery from Father to Son from the Apostles. Let
him pretend Scriptures, and bring a thousand places out of the Law, Psalms,
Prophets, and Apostles, what will the Reply be? The Scriptures you allege we
Reverence, and have ever been taught to Reverence, them as Divine; but we have
been taught to interpret and understand them in another manner and sense then
you allege them. Let him pretend Authority of Doctors, as Learned as Origin,
or as Holy as Cyprian; nay, if he will, a whole Provincial-Council as numerous
as that in Africa, which determined Re-baptization of Persons Baptized by
Heretics; they reply, We must not Innovate, we must hold to what was taught us
by our Ancestors. What means then to make persons thus disposed to leave their
ancient faith and practice, and admit of a Novelty? you must prove to them that
you and they, and other Christians in several Countries have been taught so to
believe by your immediate Predecessors, and uninterruptedly from Father to Son
from the Apostles; but then you cease to be a Preacher of Novelties contrary to
the supposition. Apply what has been said to our present Controversy.

Now that the study of the Christian Church in the fifth Century was, not to
deliver to Posterity, Doctrins of her own devising, but carefully to keep what
she had received from her Fore-elders, and faithfully to teach her Children
what she had been taught by her Fathers, is manifest out of S. Vincent cited
above, who lived in that Age, and testifies that often asking of very many his
Contemporaries famous for their Sanctity and Learning, how he might be able to
discern the truth of the Catholic Faith from the falsity of heretical pravity;
he always received this Answer in a manner from them all: That if he desired to
remain sound in his Faith, he must fortify it; first with the Authority of the
divine Law, and then with the Tradition of the Catholic Church; that is as he
explicates himself afterward: He must examine what has always, all over the
Christian Church, and by all Christian Doctors, or in a manner by all, been
Believed, and hold to that against all Novelties, though defended by private
Doctors, never so Holy, or never so Learned, or producing never so many
Scriptures for themselves, if interpreted after a new manner. But says the
same S. Vincent, chap. 2. Here perhaps some body may ask, seeing the Canon of
the Scriptures is perfect, and is it self sufficient, and more than sufficient
for all things; what need is there to add to it the Authority of the
Ecclesiastical or Churches understanding of it? Because the holy Scripture, by
reason of its depth, is not by all taken in one and the same sense; for
Photinus expounds it one way, Sabellius another, Donatus another, Arrius
another. And chap. 41. He tells us how the third General Council held in his
days at Ephesus, proceeding according to this rule, Condemned Nestorius. For
the Fathers of that Christian Synod, in number about 200. having consulted the
sentiment of their Predecessors, the eminent Doctors of the Oriental and
Western Church, S. Peter of Alexandria, S. Athanasius, S. Theophilus, S.
Gregory Nazianzen, S. Basil, S. Gregory Nyssen, S. Felix, S. Julius, S.
Cyprian, S. Ambrose, concerning their Controversy in debate, they resolved to
hold their Doctrine, to follow their Counsel to believe their Testimony, to obey
their Judgment. Quae tandem, etc. What were at length (says S. Vincent) the
Voices and Votes of them all, but that what was anciently delivered should be
kept; what was of late invented should be exploded? After which we admired and
proclaimed the great Humility and Sanctity of that Council: In which so many
Priests, in a manner also the greater part were so many Metropolitans, and of
so great Erudition and Learning, as they were almost all able to dispute of
Dogms; to whom, when their gathering together in one, seemed to add a
confidence of daring and decreeing something from themselves; yet
notwithstanding they would presume nothing, arrogate nothing at all to
themselves, but take all possible heed lest they should deliver to their
Posterity what themselves had not received from their Fathers; and not only
well disposed the matter for the present, but also give example to them that
were to come; to wit, that they should reverence the Dogms of Sacred Antiquity,
and condemn (adinventa) the additional inventions of profane Novelty. Had
Abstinence from certain kind of Meats for 40. days before Easter been a
Superstitious Novelty, its manifest no Introducer of it could have persuaded it
to a Christian Church thus principled, as the Doctors of this Age were. They
would all unanimously have reclaimed, nothing must be Innovated, besides what
has been delivered to us by our Ancestors. Or was Lent first taught in the Age
foregoing; and were the present Pastors of this 5th. Age in the actual belief
and practice of it? If so, how possibly could they profess to be such Zelots
for Antiquity, and such Exploders of Novelty, and yet themselves most Religious
Observers of a Superstitious practice, never heard of till it was of late
invented by their immediate Progenitors? And how would their Adversary
Nestorius have upbraided them with it, when they objected to him the Novelty of
his Doctrine? Or perhaps was Lent first introduced in the third Age? But that
could not be neither; the Doctors of that Age being no less Zealous for
delivered doctri^s and practices, nor less Opposers of Novelties, than the 5th.
Age, as is manifest by the contest betwixt the Bishop of Carthage and the
Bishop of Rome, and his Colleagues, where the Assertors of Re-baptization wanted
neither Wit nor Eloquence, nor number, nor verisimilitude of truth, nor Oracles
of the Divine Law, but understood after a bad and a new manner, as S. Vincent
says, chap. 9, and 10. How then came they to lose their cause? S. Stephen and
his Colleagues reclaimed, Nihil novandum nisi quod traditum est. Nothing is to
be innovated besides what has been delivered to us. Agrippinus, Bishop of
Carthage, holding Rebaptization against the Divine Canon, against the rule of
the Universal Church, against the sense of all his fellow-Priests, against the
Custom and Institutions of his Ancestors; and hereby (as S. Vincent observes)
giving a form of Sacrilege to all Heretics, this overthrew him. This then was
not an Age wherein to Introduce either Novel practices or Doctrins into the
Church, nor any other before S. Vincent. For he tells us, chap. 9. Mos iste,
etc. That Custom has always flourished in the Church, and by how much any one
has been more Religious, the more readily has he opposed new Inventions. We
have hereof plenty of examples every where. And this manner of discoursing
proves a Priori, that had Lent been a Superstitious Novelty, it could not
possibly have been brought into the Christian Church for the first 500. years;
and yet its manifest by all the Christian Writes of the 4th. and 5th. Age, that
it was then Universally practiced both in the Eastern and Western Church;
whence it follows, that it is no Superstitious practice, but true Christian
Piety, and was taught the World by the first planters of Christianity.

Although our Learned Adversaries deny not, but that the prime Doctors, and
chief Champions of Christianity, of the 4th. and 5th. Age, were Zealous
Observers and Preachers of the Quadragesimal Fast of Lent, and for this cause
appeal to the first 300. years; yet for the satisfaction of others less
Learned, I have thought fit to Transcribe their Testimonies as they are cited
by Bishop Gunning, in his Learned Treatise in defense of the Paschal or
Lent-Fast.

Hear then the Testimonies of the Christian Doctors of the 4th. and 5th.
Century; and if you have the least grain of Christian modesty, dread to call
that Superstition which so many Grave Fathers extol as singular Christian
Piety. S. Basil, in his Sermons, de Iejunio, makes mention of Lent-Fast: For he
makes mention of five days Fasting together, commanded to be observed by all
degrees all over the world, which returned by an orderly course. Now in other
his Contemporaries we find express mention of a Forty-days Fast; nor was there
ever by Christians Fasted five days consequently but in Lent; and the reason he
mentions five days, is, because the Grecians only Fasted five days in every
week in Lent, leaving out Saturday and Sunday. Hear his own words, Hom. 1. Let
us as becomes Saints, receive the days that are at hand, not with a sad Soul,
but with a cheerful affection. -- Be not sad, when thou art Cured. -- Whoever
amidst sumptuous Feasts and continual delights was made partaker of any
Spiritual gift? Moses, that he might a second time receive the Law, needed a
second Fast. -- Do thou not eat Flesh? But thou eatest up thy Brother. Do
thou abstain from Wine? But thou do not forbear to injure thy Neighbor.
Thou expectest the Evening before thou take thy refection, but spends the whole
day in Law-Courts -- Let not Drunkenness introduce thee to the mysteries of
Fasting. -- The Wrestler is exercised before he wrestle for the Prize; the
Faster is prepared to Fast by Temperance. Do not as if thou would Revenge
thy self on the days of Fasting, or mock the Author of the Law, lay up against
these five days the Treasure of Surfeiting -- Our Lord who has brought us to
the recourse of this time, give us as to Combatants, throughout these days, in
which we are called out to Combat, to declare the strength and Nerves of
Continence, Orat. 2. Fasting is at all times profitable to those who
voluntarily undertake it, but much more at this time when the denuntiation of
Fasting is proclaimed all over the World. Nor is there any Island nor
Continent, nor City, nor Nation, nor the farthest corner of the World, where
the Edict of Fasting is not heard. S. Gregory Nazianzen. Orat. 4. Christ Fasted
a little before his Temptation, we before the Paschal feast; And Orat. 41, 42.
Yesterday I was Crucified with Christ, to day I am as it were glorified with
him. S. Epiphanius In expositione fidei Catholicae. The same Church has been
wont to observe Lent, continuing in Fastings: But the 6. days of the week
before Easter; all the people continue in dry diet, using then Bread, Salt, and
Water at the Evening; Yet those that are very devout, pass two, three, and four
days, and some the whole week, until Cock-crowing on Easterday. S. Ambrose in
his book de Helia and Jejunio. A Lent is fasted with us all days, except
Saturday and the Lord's Day. And Sermon. 25. Our Lord, after he had fasted 40.
days, overcame the Devil; not but that he could have overcome him before his
fastings, but that he might show unto us, that then we shall be able to
overcome the Devil, when by 40. days we have been through fasting Victors over
our Carnal desires. -- For neither Brethren is it a little fault to break by
greediness of the Belly, the Lent indicted to Believers, and the Consecrated
Fast. Sermon. de Jejunio and Elia. Behold, through the mercy of God we have past
through the indicted Fasts of Lent, and have fulfilled by the devotion of
Abstinence, the Commands of our Lord. Theophilus, Patriarch of Alexandria, lib.
3. Pasch ad totius Aegypti Episcopos. By no means let us in the days of Lent,
as Luxurious Rich men are wont to do, long after a Cup of Wine. -- They that
keep the Precepts of the Laws, taste not Wine on fasting days, refuse to eat
Flesh, etc.

S. Hierom in his Comment upon Jonah, c. 3. Our Lord himself, the true Jonas,
sent to Preach unto the World, fasted 40. days, and leaving us the Inheritance
of fasting, under this number prepares our souls for the eating of his Body. In
his Comment. on Isaiah 58. Our Lord fasted 40. days in the Wilderness, that he
might leave unto us the solemn days of Fasts. S. Chrysostom in his 11th.
Lent-Sermon upon Genesis. Wherefore, in every thing, due measure and moderation
is best. -- According whereunto, therefore, concerning this season also of the
Holy Lent, we shall now find it to have been ruled out unto us. For as in
public Conveyance of Travelers, there are certain Stages and Inns that the
wearied Passengers may rest themselves, and intermitting their Labors, they
may again set upon their Journey. In like manner here also in Holy Lent, our
Lord has indulged these two weekly days (the Saturday and the Lord's Day) to
such as undertake this course of this fast, like certain Stages or Inns,
Shores, or Havens, that both the body may be a little relaxed from its labors
of fasting, and the mind comforted; that when these two days shall be past
over, they may again with cheerfulness set upon this their good and profitable
Traveling in this way. S. Gregory Nyssen in his zd. Oration of the
Resurrection. Matthew added the time when it began to dawn toward the first
day of the week: The Night, says he, was so far passed, that it was now the
time of Cock-crowing, which gives warning that the light of the approaching
day is at hand. For this cause also at this time, viz. (far in the Night before
Easter Day) and not in the very Evening of the Saturday, dissolving or ending
the Fastings, we begin the Joy, the Custom, that obtains with all men
consenting thereto. This for the fourth Age.

In the 5th. Age S. Augustine in his 119th. Epist to Ianuarius. The Lent truly
of Fastings has Authority both in the old Books, out of the Fast of Moses and
Elias, and out of the Gospel, because our Lord Fasted so many days. -- In what
part therefore of the year more aptly could the Observation of Lent be
Constituted, then in that which is Conterminous and next unto the Passion of
our Lord. -- That those 40. days before Easter should be observed the Custom of
the Church has Corroborated. In his 118. Epist, to the same Januar. But those
things which we keep being not written, but delivered down, which are observed
throughout the whole world, are given us to understand that they are retained,
as commended and appointed, either by the Apostles themselves, or by Plenary
Councils, whose Authority in the Church is most wholesome; as for example, that
the Passion of our Lord, and his Resurrection and Ascension into Heaven, and
the coming of the Holy Ghost, are Celebrated with an Anniversary Solemnity. S.
Leo the Great, Bishop of Rome, in his 6. Sermon of Lent. That the Apostolical
Institution may be fulfilled in the Fast of forty days, not by sparing from our
Diet only, but especially by abstinence from sins. And in his 9th. Sermon of
Lent. In which (days of the Paschal Fast) with good cause severer Fastings were
ordained by the Apostles through the teaching of the Holy Ghost, that by a
common comparticipation of the Cross of Christ, we also should do something in
that which he did for us, as the Apostle says: if we suffer with him, we shall
also be glorified with him. S. Chrysologus. That we Fast Lent, is not a human
Invention, it is of Divine Authority. S. Cyril, Patriarch of Alexandria, is
above cited at large: This for the 5th. Age. In the following Ages the
observation of Lent in all Christian Countries is so manifest, that no body, any
whit Versed in Church History can possibly doubt of it.

Now after the manifest Testimonies of so many and so Learned and so holy
Doctors of Christ's Church the Opposers of the Holy Fast of Lent must give me
leave to bespeak them in the words of the great S. Augustine, by him directed to
Julian the Pelagian, after a like Citation about another matter of these very
Holy Fathers by me now cited, as to a great part of them. Tu qui am crebro,
etc. Thou sadly deluded Zelot, that do so often object to us Catholic
Christians the name of Will-worshippers, the crime of Superstition, for
Religiously observing the Holy Fast of Lent: If thou be awake, see, what,
and what kind of men, and glorious defenders of the Christian Faith thou dare
to bespatter under our names, with so execrable a Crimination. Go now, and
object to us the crime of Superstition, dissemble and feign thy self not to
know what they say in this point; overlook them as it were, and attack us only,
as not knowing that under our name they are reviled; and confidently insult
over so many, and so great Doctors of the Church of Christ; who after a most
Saintly Life; and having beaten down the Errors of their times, most gloriously
went out of this Life before you and your Comrades bubled up. Do thou see
with what kind of Men we sustain thy Reproaches? Do thou see with whom we
have the same common cause, which without any sober consideration thou
calumniates and endeavors to expugn? Do thou see (proud Zelot) how
pernicious it is unto thy self to object so horriable a Crime of Will Worship
to such men as these, and how glorious it is to us to sustain the charge of any
Crime, together with such Doctors as these? Or if thou do see, see, and hold
thy peace, and let so many Catholic tongues silence thy Phanatical tongue.

The Ruffian Polemus, to complete his wild ramble, would needs early in the
morning, half drunk with his Night Revels, go to the School of the grave
Sophist Xenocrates, to affront him and his Scholars. But he was no sooner
entered the School of that sober Platonist, but the very sight of the modest and
grave Comportment of the Philosopher and his Scholars did so strike my young
Gallant, that he was quite out of Countenance; and ashamed of himself; he
pulled off his Drunken Bays and composed himself to modesty, and became his
Convert, whom be came on purpose to deride and scoff at. Such force had the
grave Countenances of a sober Platonist and his School to compose a rude
Ruffian. Finding my presumptious Non. Conformist Drunk with Pride and
Self-conceit, I could think of no better means to reduce him to Sobriety, than
to bring him, not into the School of a sober Ethnic Philosopher, but into a
grave Assembly of the most memorable Bishops and Doctors of the School of
Christ. To whom certainly so much a greater Reverence and respect is due, by
how much their Doctor and Master Christ is greater than Xenocrates's Master and
Doctor, Plato. I desire now, my conceited Non conformist, that thou would
think it worth thy while, to eye, to look upon so many and so grave Prelates of
the Catholic Church: And imagine them to look as it were upon thee, and mildly
and gently to say unto thee, Itane nos fili Iuliane, etc. Is it so indeed, Son
N. N. are we then Will worshippers? What Answer would thou give them? With
what Face would thou look upon them? What Arguments would occur to thee?
Would thou dare, would thou have the Face to produce such wooden Daggers,
as thou art ever and anon drawing upon us? Or rather would not such pitiful
Weapons fall out of thy hand at the presence of so great Doctors, and such
grave Prelates of Gods Church? Would thou have the Forehead to tell the
great S. Hierom; Not that which goes into a Man defiles him, but that which
comes out: Ye observe days and times I am afraid of you, forbidding to abstain
from Meats, which God has ordained to be received with Thanksgiving, etc. As if
that Great Doctor and his Venerable Fellows could be ignorant of such petty
Cavils as these? Tantumne apud se, etc. Can now an S. M. or an E. C. have so
much Authority, with any person of Sobriety, that he should for their regards,
not only forsake so many and so great Doctors and defenders of the Christian
Faith, from the rising of the Sun to the going down thereof, but also dare to
call them Superstitious Will-worshippers? I desire my conceited Nonconformist
would but consider into what an Assembly I have brought him. It Is an Assembly
of Saintly Doctors, not a popular multitude; such as were not only Children,
but Fathers of the Church, famous in their Generations for Learning and
Sanctity; who well furnished with Spiritual Weapons, strenously Warred against
the Heretics of their days, and having happily finished the labors of their
dispensation, Holily went to rest in peace. They are of that number, concerning
whom it was foretold: For Fathers are born unto thee Children, thou shall
constitute them Princes over all the Earth. Nor was the practice we are now
disputing, any new Invention of theirs; but what they learnt in the Church of
Christ, in the time of their Rudiments, that they taught the Church of Christ
in the time of their Honors. But if my Nonconformist will perhaps say, he does
not charge S. Hierom, or S. Chrysostom, etc. with the crime of Superstition; he
must give me leave to tell him, nor then does he justly charge us, whom he sees
in the same Cause to have followed their steps. But if he will only Reproach us
with such a Calumny, not for any other reason, but because we think concerning
the Holy Fast of Lent what they thought, hold what they held, Preach what they
Preached; who does not see that he openly reviles us only, but secretly has the
like judgment of them? For what they believe, we believe; what they teach, we
teach, yield to them, and you yield to us; acquiess in their sentiments, and
you will cease to condemn ours. Moreover, this grave Assembly of Ancient Doctors,
to whom we appeal, then judged concerning this our Cause, when no body could
say they had favor or Ill Will for either party. They had neither Friendship
nor Enmity with you or us. That which they found in the Church, that they held;
that which they learnt, that they taught. That which they received from their
Fathers, they delivered to their Children. We did not as yet appeal with you to
them as Judges, and our Cause was decided by them: Neither you nor we were
known to them, and we recite their Sentences given for us against you. We did
not yet Contest with you, and they pronouncing Sentence for us, we have
overcome you. Or will my Nonconformist have the Impudence to accuse (as some
do) these grave Doctors of blindness. A multitude of Blind men for-sooth avails
nothing to find out the Truth; and these were the Errors and mistakes of those
Learned Doctors. What an Age are we fallen into? Truth must be called Error, and
Error Truth; Light Darkness, and Darkness, Light. S. Ambrose, S. Hierom, S.
Cyril, S. Cryostom are blind, but S. M. C. D. and E. F. see. These Doctors I
have called a Council of, have left such Monuments of their Sanctity and
Learning in their Holy and Learned Writings, that the whole Christian Church
has ever admired and revered them as her prime Champians against Pagans, Jews,
and Heretics; yea, our very Adversaries pretend a Sacred Reverence for them
also. They were Persons of such Learning and Sanctity, that if a Synod of
Bishops were gathered out of the whole World, it would be much if so many, and
such Doctors could be found to sit in it; neither indeed were these all at one
time. But God-Almighty, as pleases Him, and as He judges to be expedient,
scatters a few more excellent and Faithful Dispensers of his Mysteries in
several Ages, and distances of places. By such Planters, Waterers, Builders,
Pastors Nursing-Fathers, after the Apostles, the Holy Church has increased. Now
what an Imprudence, and what an Impudence must it be for any to presume to
accuse of the horrible Crime of Superstition, so many holy, egregious and
memorable Doctors of the Catholic Verity; and moreover, together with them the
whole Church of Christ, to which Divine Family they Faithfully Ministering
Spiritual Food, flourished with great glory in our Lord? Nay further, they who
dare to oppose the manifest Sentiment, not of so many Platonical,
Aristotelical, or Zenonical Doctors, but of so many Saints and Illustrious
Prelates in the Church of God; and these, some of them singularly endowed with
human Literature, and all of them eminently Learned in the Sacred Letters, have
reason not so much to fear them, as him who made them profitable Vessels to
himself. These Judges, by how much the more desirable they ought to be unto
thee, if thou did hold the Catholic Faith, by so much thou have more reason
to fear them, because thou opposest the Catholic Faith, which they sucked in
in Milk, and took in in solid Meat, which Milk and Meat they Ministered to
Little and Great, and which Faith they manifestly and stoutly defended against
his Enemies; yea, against you, then not as yet born. For, not only when they
lived did they by their words, but also by their Writings, which they left to
Posterity, did they strenuously defend the Catholic Faith, that they might
break in pieces your Arguments. Hitherto S. Augustine. l. 1. and 2. contra
Iulianum.

I thought fit to adjoyn this Reflection of S. Austen, though superabundant to
the force of my Argument, it being sufficient for my purpose to prove that
Lent-Fast was generally practiced in the 4th. and 5th. Century, both by the
Eastern and Western Churches, and so much evidently follows from the
Authorities above cited. For, though some may be so self-conceited, as to
confess that S. Hierom, S. Ambrose, S. Basil, S. Crysostom, and the rest of the
Holy Fathers Greek and Latin, deemed the observation of Lent to be a pious
Christian practice, but they with humble submission, judged it to be
Superstition, Will Worship, and the Doctrine of Devils: Yet few, I think, but
have so much regard for these Primitive Doctors, as to allow them so much
judgment as to know what was the practice of their several Churches in their
days, and so much fidelity as to write the Truth as to that particular, which
is sufficient for the purport of my discourse; unless you can think that these
Holy Fathers were of one Faith, and their Flocks which Reverence them as Sts.
of another. For the 4th. and 5th. Age practicing Fasting in Lent, not as a
piece of Piety begun by themselves, but commended to them by Tradition from the
Apostles, it not only follows that it could not be first begun by their
immediate Progenitos, which had it been, they could not possibly have been
ignorant of it; but also, that it must necessarily have been first taught the
world by the Apostles. For if the first Converts of the Apostles all over the
World had not only been taught no such observation, but also had been
positively instructed to look upon Abstinence from certain kind of Meats as
Superstition, and the Doctrine of Devils; and with all, had been charged not to
receive any other Doctrine, though Preached to them by an Angel sent from
Heaven, and they in like manner teaching their Children the same they had
learnt, as none can doubt but they did. How is it possible that the Christians
in the 4th. Century should most tenaciously adhere to this principle of
admitting no new Doctrine or Practice, but to hold fast to what was delivered
them by their Ancestors from the Apostles, and yet should themselves
Superstitiously Abstain from Meats, and not pretend Scripture for it neither,
but Apostolical Tradition? But had the Pastors of the 4th. Century Abstained
from certain Meats on pretext of Scripture in such a manner understood by them,
or upon account of some Decree of a General Council or Law of some Emperor,
made in the second or third Century, or pretending to follow some person or
persons raised up by God in the third Age, to teach the Christian world a more
strict observance, it might well be conceived how the 4th. Age might abstain
from Meats upon a Religious account, though no such thing had been taught the
world by the Apostles, but the quite contrary. And from what has been said, all
well put together, I think it is efficaciously concluded against all Opposers
of Lent-Fast, that it was taught the world by the Apostles.

But it is not a Tippet, or a Surplice I am Arguing for, but a practice; which
if rightly observed, is sufficient to make all the world Saints; and therefore
for the more abundant satisfaction of my Reader, I shall now adjoyn positive
Evidences out of the Writers of the first 300. years, that the Holy Fast of
Lent was practiced in those most pure and Primitive Times. S. Denis, B. of
Alexandria, who lived in the middle of the third Age, in his Epistle to
Basilides the Bishop, Records the Fast before Easter, as Universal as the joy
and Feast of Easter. It will be confessed, says he, of all agreeably that we
ought to begin the Feast, (viz. of Easter) and Joy, until that time, humbling
our souls in Fastings -- they truly which make too much have, and before well
toward midnight, break their Fast, we blame as regardless, and not Masters of
their Appetite, giving over the Race a little before the Goal. -- Such indeed
as are much worn by the Fasts, and toward the end, as it were faint, we easily
pardon if they eat sooner. And in the same Epistle he mentions in special
manner the six days of Fasts, to wit, those of the last week not alike observed
of all. Origin, in the beginning of the same Age. Hom. 10. In Leviticum.
Habemus Quadragesimae dies, etc. We have the days of Lent Consecrated to
Fasting; we have the fourth and sixth day of the week, on which we solemnly
Fast. And certainly a Christian has liberty to Fast at all* times, but not out
of a Superstitious Observation, but by the Virtue of Continency. The first
General Council of Nice, held a little after the year 300. did not first ordain
the keeping of Lent, but in the sixth Canon, makes mention of it as a time
known to all the Christian world; for in that Canon, the Fathers ordain that
two Provincial-Councils should be celebrated by the Bishops of every Province
every year; one of them ante dies Quadragesimae, etc. before the days of Lent,
to the end that all Contests, if any such be, being made up, a pure and solemn
gift may be offered to God. Now how should Lent be observed all over the
Christian world so early, before any General Council? What other Universal
cause could there be of so Universal an Observation, but the first teaching of
the Apostles? Or if such a practice had been Superstitious, and the Doctrine of
Devils, how came so Venerable and holy a Council not to take notice of it? As
if they could be ignorant of such Scriptures as falsely understood are alleged
against it by Non-Conformists.

In the second Age, Tertullian in his Book de Iejunio, c. 1, 2. tells us that
it was not the Sentiment of some one particular Man, but of all Catholic
Christians, who are by him contumeliously called Psychici, that the Pascal Fast
was Constituted by God, and observed by the Apostles. His words are, Nam quod,
etc. For as to what appertains to Fasts, they oppose, that there are certain
days Constituted by God They surely think that in the Gospel, those days are
determined for Fasts, in which the Bridegroom was taken away, and those days
only are now the legitimate days of Christian Fasts, etc. And that thus the
Apostles observed the rule of Fasting, imposing no other Yoke of certain or
Set-Fasts to be kept of all in common. And c. 13. Ye prescribe against us that
the solemn times for this matter, are to be believed already constituted in the
Scriptures, or in the Tradition of our Elders, and that no further observance
is to be superadded for the unlawfulness of Innovation. Maintain this your
ground, if you can; for lo I convince you, even your selves Fasting, besides
the Paschal Fast, those days in which the Bridegroom was taken away,
interposing also your selves the half-fasts of the Stations, and your selves
other whiles also as each pleases, living on mere Bread and Water.

The same, Tertullian, before he was a Montanist, testifies in his Book of
Prayer, c. ult. Sic and die Paschae, etc. So also on the day of Christ's
suffering whereon is observed the common, and as it were public Religion of
Fasting. In the same Age S. Telesphorus, Bishop of Rome, did not first
institute Lent-Fast as Zanchy observes, l 1. m 4m. Praeceptum, Cited by B.
Gunning in his Appendix; but only added certain days to be observed over and
above by the Clergy. His words are* Certe Telesphorus etc. Assuredly
Telesphorus, who was the seventh Bishop of the Roman Church, and a Martyr,
about the year of Christ 139. makes mention of this (the Quadragesimal time
above mentioned) as observed before him in the Church. For he added certain
days, which he would have observed by Clerks and Priests, over and above what
were observed by the Laity. -- We ordain, says he, that all Clergymen, i. e.
such as are called into the Lot of our Lord, fast from flesh seven whole weeks
before Easter; because as the life of Clergymen ought to be distinguished from
the Conversation of the Laity, so ought there to be a difference in their
Fasting also. Now the Church of Rome professing in her self a power to
Institute Holy Days, or Fasting-days, had any of her Bishops first ordained
Lent-Fast, she would have made no more difficulty of Registring who it was,
then She does of telling us when, and by whom was first Constituted the Feast
of Corpus-Christi, and diverse other Ritual Observances. Moreover, in the same
Age, there was a difference betwixt S. Polycarp, Disciple of S. John, and by
him ordained Bishop of Smyrna, together with Thraseas, Bishop of Eumenia, and
S. Anicetus, Bishop of Rome, with other Western Bishops on the other side,
about which difference Polycarp came to Rome: Anicetus professing to follow the
Rule received from S. Peter and S. Paul, by the Instruction of his
Predecessors, Xystus, Telesphorus, Hyginus and Pius: and Polycarp, professing
to follow what S. John and other of the Apostles had practiced. The words of
Irenaeus concerning Polycarp, whom he had seen and heard, are these. That
Anicetus could not persuade Polycarp to vary from what he had observed ever
with John the Disciple of our Lord, and the rest of the Apostles, with whom he
had Conversed, or spent his time. Iren. ap. Eusebius. l 5 c. 24. The same
difference revived again about the 97th. year after S. John, betwixt Polycrates
Bishop of Ephesus, with other Asian Bishops, and Victor, Bishop of Rome, with
others of the West. Polycrates pleading the Authority of S. John, and S.
Philip; and Victor pleading the Authority of the Tradition of S. Peter and S.
Paul. Sozom. 1. 7. c. 19. Polycrates, and they of Asia contending: That from
ancient Tradition they deemed that they ought to observe the Feast of the
Salutary Pasch on the 14th. day of the month, as being of duty altogether on
that day, upon what soever day of the week it fell, to put an end to, or
dissolve their fastings. On the other side (which was Victors) it was alleged,
No such Custom to observe on that mauner in the rest of the Churches throughout
the whole World, they observing from Apostolical Tradition, which come down to
that time, that only on that day, which should be also the weekly day of the
Resurreci: on of our Lord, they ought to dissolve or end their Fastings. You
see both parties had a Tradition, that the Feast of Easter was to conclude
certain Fasting days, and all this is witnessed in Eusebius, l. 5. c. 23, 24.
About Easter Day it self, they had indeed different Traditions. S. John and S.
Philip finding it useful in those parts of Asia, where many Jews Inhabited, by
condescension to observe the Christ an Easter on the same day with the Jewish
Easter. But S. Peter and S. Paul, where no such cause was, prescribed as meet,
not to disjoyn their Anniversary from their weekly memorial day of Christ's
Resurrection, as B. Gunning reflects. We have then S. John taught S. Polycarp
to Fast before Easter, as testifies Irenaeus, who saw and heard S. Polycarp.
Moreover, in this Age the same Irenaeus, tells Victor, in an Epistle to him,
that there was Controversy, not only concerning the day it self of Easter, but
also touching 'the manner it self of the Fast; but none disputed whether there
was to be a Fast or no before Easter. His words are, Neither is the
Controversy only about the day (of Easier) but also concerning the 'form it
self of the Fast; for some think they ought to fast one day, some two, others
also more, and some by forty hours of Daytime, and of Night, commensurate
their day. And such variety of those that keep (this Fast) has not been made
or begun now in our Age, but very long before with our Ancestors, who, as it is
meet to believe, not accurately retaining (the manner of the Fast
abovementioned) have changed the Custom which was simple and plain into that
which was afterward. Now what uniform Custom could there precede in the
Christian Church, and not be from the Apostles; Irenaeus writing thus about the
97th. year, after S. John's death. Though he seems not to speak of the whole
Lent-Fast, but only of the Fasts of the Paschal week.

In the very Age of the Apostles we have the Testimony of S. Ignatius, their
Contemporary in an Epistle to the Philippians. His words are, Do not Contemn
Lent, for it contains an imitation of the Conversation of God. Neither do you
despise Passion-week: Fast upon Wednesday and Friday, giving what you leave to
the Poor. Philo the Jew, in his Book of the Religious, says Eusebius, l. 2. c.
16, 17. describes the Religious Life of certain Apostolical persons of the
Hebrew Nation at Alexandria, having not only seen them, but accurately taken
knowledge of them, describing there such their Conversation, as is to be found
in the Christian Religion only; and he adds, according to the Gospel, and such
Religious fastings (says he) which have descended down accurately the same even
unto our times, which more eminently* were exercised in Fastings and whole
Nights Watchings, and attentions unto the Word of God, at the Solemnity of the
Passion of our Savior. It is manifest to every one that Philo comprised in
that Writing, Customs delivered in the beginning from the Apostles. Hitherto
Eusebius. Now let us hear Philo's own words. These Assemble themselves
especially by the space of seven weeks -- Wine in those days is not brought in
unto their Tables. -- And their Table has not any thing of that which had
Blood, but Bread for their Food, and Salt for that which they eat with their
Bread -- Some for the space of three days receive no Food; and scarce by the
space of six days did they refresh themselves with their natural Food -- A week
they observed by a pure and holy Virgiral observance which was preparatory to
the greatest Feast which was followed with the 50. days Solemnity. Thus Philo,
contemporary of the Apostles concerning the Hebrew Christians in and about
Alexandria, where S. Mark was set Bishop by S. Peter. I omit the Testimony of
the 68. Canon of the Apostles, for that Ecclesiastical Writers do not
unanimously agree that those Canons, at least all of them were made by the
Apostles; although the sixth General Council Celebrated above a 1000. years
ago received and approved 85. of them. There can be no doubt but they are very
ancient; Bishop Gunning thinks they were made in the second Century by the
Successors of the Apostles, who in that Age were commonly (as he says) called
Apostles. The 68^h. Canon runs thus If any Bishop or Priest, or Deacon, or
Lector, or Cantor shall not Fast the sacred Lent (Quadragesimam) before Easter,
or Wednesday or Friday, let him be deposed, unless he be hindered by weakness of
body. But if he be a Laick, let him be deprived of the Communion. Indeed the
Canon does not seem first to institute Lent, but rather supposes it, and urges
its observance by inflicting a penalty upon Non-observers: All which makes for
my designed purpose; for who could so early, except the Apostles, be the first
Authors of such an Institution, when as yet there had been no General Council,
except that of the Apostles at Jerusalem.

But have we no Scripture for the Observation of Lent Fast? We have Scripture
that our B. Savior Fasted 40. days; and we have also in Scripture, that if any
man says he is in Christ, he ought to walk as he walked. Moreover, we have yet
more express Scriptures as interpreted not by some one or two Fathers, but by
the whole body of Catholic Christians, as Bishop Gunning well observes out of
Tertullian cited above. They (that is the Catholic Christians who are called
by him Psychici) surely think that in the Gospel, those days are determined for
Fasts, in which the Bridegroom was taken away -- and a little after, the
Paschal Fast, those days in which the Bridegroom was taken away. Those words
then of our B. Lord, in excuse of his Disciples not Fasting whilst he was with
them; Can you make the Children of the Bridegroom fast while the Bridegroom is
with them? But the days will come when the Bridegroom shall be taken away from
them, then shall they fast in those days. Those words, I say, in the sense of
the Primitive Church in the second Century, were intended by our B. Savior to
signify that Christians after his departure should Fast yearly upon
Good Friday, the day of his death, and the rest of the Pascal, or Lent-Fast,
those days in which the Bridegroom was taken away. I add, whether those words
in those days did in the intention of our Savior signify Lent-Fast or no;
it is evident, had not the Primitive Christians Fasted Lent, they would never
have interpreted our Lords words as they did, which is sufficient for my
purpose; to wit, to evince, that the most Primitive pure Church did Fast Lent.
And besides, according to common sense, who are more likely to understand
aright our B. Saviors, or his Apostles words, they who lived in the next Age
to them, or we who live sixteen hundred years after? Do we, or any other Nation
in the world understand our written Laws, according to the sense a crafty witty
Lawyer can wrest them to signify; or accordingly as they have been
immemorially understood since the first making of them, and as cases and
disputes have by our Learned Judges been decided by them. More-over, suppose
but only the Primitive Christians, for whose sake the Holy Scriptures were
written, rightly understood them; and let after Generations interpret the same
Scriptures in the sense they were interpreted by their Ancestors; and let this
be their great enquiry, how their Fore-elders understood them, and its
impossible they should ever be mis-understood, but leave their Interpretation
to every private man's sentiment, and you open a gap to all Innovations and
Heresies, as Bishop Gunning judiciously observes.

Reason (says he, page 23.) and experience, and the direction of all Wise men
in the Church of God (Ancient and Modern) the House of Wisdom, Councels,
Reverend Fathers and Writers, and our Church in particular, have directed and
commanded us not to interpret the Scripture in things of public concernment to
the Churches rule of believing and doing, but as we find it interpreted by the
Holy Fathers and Doctors of the Church, as they had received it from those
before them. For that the leaving of every man to make any thing of any Text,
upon any device out of his own head, to the founding of any new and strange
Doctrine or Practice as necessary there from, or to the opposing any constantly
received Doctrine or Practice of the Church-Vniversal (for in other matters they
may happily with leave quietly abound in their own sense) leaves all bold
Innovators (which can draw any disciples after them) to be as much Lawgivers
to the Church; by their uncontrolable Law interpreting, as any Pope or
Enthusiast can or need pretend to be; and has been, and ever will be to the
end of the World, the ground of most H^resies and Schisms brought into the
Church by Men, who departing from the teaching and stable Interpretation of the
Church in their own Instability and Science falsely so called, pervert the
Scriptures to their own and others (their obstinate followers) destruction. And
indeed, he, who has so much Pride and Self-conceit as to prefer his own seeming
sense of holy Scriptures before the sense which Holy Fathers and Christian.
Doctors unanimously attest to have received from their Fore-elders, is nextly
disposed to vilify and reject the whole Letter of Sacred Scriptures, upon
pretext of being uncertain, whether the Letter now commonly owned and approved
by the unanimous consent of Christian Doctors, be indeed that Letter which was
left the World by the Apostles.

But if a yearly Religious Observation of the Holy Fast of Lent be of such
singular benefit and Spiritual advantage to all Christians; and if also the
Apostles of our Lord Jesus did recommend such an Observation to the several
Countries by them Converted to the Christian Faith, how comes it to pass that
none of all their Writings which have come to our hands, makes express mention
of it? Hear Bishop Gunning, p. 138. Ritual Observances being Visible, and as it
were legible in the Universal Churches constant practice, needed not to be set
down in her written rule. Or those which are therein set down, not necessarily,
so evidently, but that they might need the Interp^etation of such the Churches
practice. And indeed whoever will impartially consider the nature of the Books
of the New Testament, will be so far from wondering, that all the Rituals of
Christianity are not expressly declared in them, that he will rather wonder
there is so much in them of the exterior Rites of Christian Religion as there
is. Had any of the Sacred Christian Penmen written a Book on purpose to
declare the whole manner of Christian worship, like Moses his Exodus or
Leviticus, we might reasonably have expected an account what days Christians
were to set apart for Fasting or Religious Feasting, what Garments they were to
use in time of Divine Worship, etc. Bu^ they only, as is manifest, writing
Books for other intents and purposes by way of History for example, or moral
Exhortations, and making mention only by the by of some of our Christian Rites,
as they occurred; nothing can be more unreasonable then to expect in their said
Writings an express clear mention of every Christian Ceremonial Observance. The
four Gospels are a History of our Blessed Saviors Life and Death, who lived as
to the external Rites of Religion, according to the Jewish Law, and so we
cannot reasonably in any of them expect what Fasting or Festival days we
Christians are to observe. Indeed had the Act* of the Apostles been intended as
an exact Narration, how the Apostles lived as to the whole course of their
Life, what days they kept Holy, and what they Fasted, etc. We might reasonably
have expected some mention there of Lent and Easter: But that holy Book making
mention only of some few particular passages of two or three of the Apostles
lives, the Apostles might well keep Lent and Easter too, and teach them also to
their first Converts, and yet there be a profound silence of them in the Book
of their Acts: As for S. John's Prophetical Book, it were no ways proper in it
to speak of Easter or Lent. The rest of the New Testament are certain Epistles
or Letters of Spiritual Counsels written by S. Paul, or some other Apostle to
particular persons or whole Cities, already instructed in the Christian way of
worship: But why they should needs make mention therein of Lent, I understand
not, unless perchance the persons they wrote unto, had been deficient in
observing of it.

But does not S. Paul expressly decry the keeping of Lent in one of his
Epistles, and tell the Christians he wrote to, he was afraid he had labored in
vain amongst them, by reason of their superstitious Observations of Days and
Times, Gal. 4. v. 9, 10. How are ye Converted again to weak and beggarly
Elements, which you will serve again? Ye observe Days, and Months, and Times,
and Years. I am afraid of you, lest I should have labored amongst you in vain.
Was then the Holy Apostle afraid lest the Galatians should leave Christianity
and return to Judaism or Pagaism, because of their observing Lent in memory of
our Blessed Saviors Fasting 40. days, or Easter in memory of his Resurrection?
Is this a likely Story? Or is it not evident from the Context of their
returning again to weak and poor Elements, that because of their returning to
the Observation of Jewish days, commanded by Moses, or Pagan days in honor of
Jupiter, Mars etc. he was afraid they would relinquish the Gospel by them
received* and become Jews again or Pagans? But does not the same Apostle 1 Timothy
4. tell us expressly that Abstinence from certain M(...) the Doctrine of Devils,
and that nothing which God has made (...) be rejected by us, but eaten with
thankfulness? Now the Spi(...)eth expressly that in the later times some shall
depart from the (...) heed to Seducing Spirits and Doctrins of Devils; speaking
(...) Hypocrisy, having their Consciences scared with a hot Iron; for (...) to
Marry, and commanding to abstain from Meats, which God (...) to be received
with Thanksgiving of them which believe and know the Truth. For every Creature
of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be received with Thanksgiving.
That we may rightly understand these words of S. Paul, we must reflect that
upon a double account we may abstain from certain Meats or Drinks. First, we
may abstain from certain Meats, as thinking them, out of Error and
Superstition, naturally unclean and unholy: And to teach Abstinence from
certain Creatures upon such an account, is deservedly called the Doctrine of
Devils. And with this Heresy the Manicheans are charged by S. Austin and other
Fathers. And that the Apostle meant such like Abstainers from certain
Creatures, is manifest by the reason he gives why Christians should not Abstain
upon such an account; to wit, because every Creature of God is good, and
consequently we ought not to reject any as in themselves evil and unclean.
Secondly, we may abstain from certain Meats or Drinks as less suitable to a
time of Humiliation, or appeasing of Almighty God for our sins by Penitential
works of Fasting, Weeping, and Mourning, or for some other Spiritual end. And
such an Abstinence as this is so far from being prohibited by S. Paul or any
other of the Apostles, that it is commended not only by the light of Nature,
but also by the Holy Scriptures, and the examples of the Holiest Men that ever
lived upon Earth. Thus S. Tymothy Abstained from Wine continually for
Mortification, so that S. Paul thought fit to exhort him not always to drink
water, but to make use of a little Wine for his Stomack-sake and frequent
infirmities. Whereas, had it been Superstition to ab^^ain from certain
Creatures of God upon a Religious account, he ought to have dissuaded him from
his Abstinence, by telling him such an Abstinence from the good Creatures of
God was the Doctrine of Devils, Wilworship, etc. Eating Flesh, and drinking Wine
are very Lawful and Laudable, when done in their due and proper season; but are
no ways suitable to days or times when I am called upon by my lawful Superiors
to appease God Almightys Anger for my own and others sins, by Fasting, Weeping,
and Mourning. Hear not me, but the Holy Prophet, Isa. chapter 22. v. 12, 13, 14.
And in that way did the Lord God of Hosts call to Weeping and to mourning, and
to Baldness, and to Girding with Sackcloth. And behold Joy and Gladness,
slaying Oxen and killing Sheep, eating Flesh and drinking Wine: Let us eat and
drink, for tomorrow we shall dye. And it was revealed in mine Ears by the Lord
of Hoasts; surely this Iniquity shall not be purged from you till ye dye, says
the Lord God of Hosts. Now they seem not so much to be a-sleep as dead, who
hear not God. Almighty crying out unto them, and calling them to Fasting,
Weeping, and Mourning this Holy and Penitential time of Lent, after all the
Authorities abovecited, for its Apostolical Institution. To say nothing of the
abounding of all sorts of wickedness amongst us, and the heavy Spiritual
Plagues of blindness of mind, and insensibility of Divine things which has
seized upon us, and no doubt call aloud for Penitential Humiliations.

But if Abstinence from certain Meats upon a Religious account be true
Christian Piety, what shall we say to S. Paul? Romans 14. v. 2. One believes
that he may eat all things; another who is weak eats Herbs; and v. 6. He that
eats, eats to the Lord, for he gives God thanks; and he that eats not,
to the Lord he eats not, and gives God thanks, and v. 17. The Kingdom of God
is not Meat and Drink, but Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost.
So that it seems by the H. Apostle, that it matters not whether I eat Flesh, or
I abstain from Flesh in Lent, so I give God thanks: I am every whit as good a
Christian, though I eat, as if I abstained. Read the 14 v. and that will help
you to correct your mistake. I know and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that
there is nothing unclean of it self; but to him that esteems any thing to be
unclean, to him it is unclean* By which words, it is manifest the Romans case
and ours is quite different. The scrupulous Romans seem to have had a
difficulty to eat Flesh or drink Wine, as imagining them to be in themselves
unclean, either for that they had been offered up to Idols, or prohibited by
the abolished Law of Moses, or as naturally unclean, and necessarily enclining
them to sin; but we abstain from them upon none of all these accounts, but
judge them as clean in themselves as any other Creatures of God; only we deem
them less suitable to a Penitential time then drier and less savory Viands, and
smaller sorts of drink. But moreover, you must give me leave to tell you, that
according to the doctrine of S. Paul in this very Chapter, you ought if you will
walk Christianly, to abstain from Flesh in Lent, at least upon the account of
not scandalizing your weak Brethren* who think themselves obliged to abstain
from Flesh those days of Christian Penance. Hear the Apostles own words, v.
15. If thy Brother be grieved with thy meat, now walk thou not Charitably,
and v 21. It is good neither to eat Flesh nor to drink Wine, nor any thing
whereby thy Brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak Though, as I was
telling you, our case is quite different from the Christians at Rome, to whom
S. Paul writes. We abstain from flesh in Lent, not as deeming it in it self
unclean, as some scrupulous weaklings amongst them did; but having Testimonies
from all Christian Countries, and from the undoubted writings of the prime
Pillars of Christianity, in the most Primitive Times, that the Apostles so
ordained; and being besides commanded so to do by our Civil and Ecclesiastical
Superiors, who are ordained of God to countenance Well doers, and to watch for
our souls good, as they who must give an account, whom we think our selves
obliged in Conscience to obey in all their Lawful commands; but especially in
such commands, which when sincerely and undeceitfully observed, tend to the
great Spiritual advantage of our souls. There are other places commonly urged
by mis-understanders of Holy Scriptures, against Abstinence from Meats upon a
Religious account; but to any one that considers the whole context, and all
circumstances, they evidently appear nothing to the purpose: For they are all
intended against Superstitious Abstinence from Meats, either as unclean by
Creation, or as unclean, because prohibited by the Antiquated Law of Moses, or
as having been offered up to Idols, or as because eaten with unwashen hands
against frivolous and useless Traditions of men. Thus when our B. Savior, S.
Mat. 15. 11. tells us, Not that which goes into the mouth, defiles a man; but
that which comes out of the mouth, this defiles a man. Its manifest by the
occasion of his saying those words, v. 2. The Scribes and Pharisees quarrelling
with his Disciples for not washing their hands before they did eat Bread; and
by what follows, v. 20. To eat with unwashen hands, defiles not a man; that he
never intended by those words to signify that we might upon a day or time of
public Humiliation, recommended to us by our Superiors, without defiling our
selves, eat what we please, when we please, or as often as we please.

But at least is it not against the Laws of the Land to abstain from certain
Meats upon a Religious account? Here you must distinguish. To abstain from
certain Meats upon a pretendedly Religious, but indeed Superstitious account,
as if some Meats were less Holy, or more unclean than others, is both against
God's Laws and Man's Laws; but to obstain from certain Meats, upon a truly
Religious, and indeed pious account, as judging some Meats more suitable to
Penitential days and seasons than others, is according both to the Laws of God
and our Nation. Hear our Laws themselves, and be your own judges of the meaning
of them. Statute 2. and 3. Edward 6. c. 19. The Kings Subjects having a more
clear light, and thereby perceiving that one Meat is not more holy, more pure,
or more clean than another, and that no Meats can defile Christian Men, so that
they be* not used in Disobedience or Vice; yet for as much as diverse of the
Kings Subjects have of late time, more than in times past, broken and contemned
such Abstinence, which has been used in this Realm upon the Friday and
Saturday, the Embring days, and other days commonly called Vigils, and in the
time commonly called Lent, and other accustomed times, the Kings Majesty
considering that due and Godly Abstinence is a means to Virtue, and to subdue
men's Bodies to their Soul and Spirit; and considering also that Fishers, etc.
does Ordain and Enact with the Assent of the Lords Temporal and Spiritual, etc.
That no person or persons, of what Estate, Degree, or Condition he or they be
shall at any time after the first day of May, 1549. willingly or unwittingly
eat any manner of Flesh upon any Friday or Saturday, or the Ember days, or in
any day in the time commonly called Lent. Take Bishop Gunnings Reflection
hereupon. The scope and reason, and motive of which Law, if it be considered
according to the principal end of it, subduing the Flesh to the Soul and Spirit
(for there is added another end also which was political) may well admonish us
(though it was hard to contain the particulars in a Law) to abstain also at
such times of Mortification from what soever Food else is more delicate,
costly, of hotter nature, and of higher nourishment. The formers of that Law
(which is now the Law of our Land) had no doubt, before their eyes, the
approbation of God, and his gracious answer to Daniel so Chastening himself, as
in the holy Scripture is described, Dan. 10. 2, 3. 12. In those days, I Daniel,
was Mourning three full weeks; I ate no pleasant Bread, neither came Flesh nor
Wine in my mouth; neither did I anoint my self at all, till three whole weeks
were fulfilled. -- Then said he unto me, Fear-not Daniel, for from the first
day that thou did s^t thine heart to understand, and to chasten thy self
before thy God, thy words were heard, and I am come for thy words. Which that
Ministers of Gods Word should not as well have before their eyes, as our civil
Magistrates, is a great shame. Reflect also with him upon the Prayer for the
first Sunday or Lent: O Lord, who for our sake did Fast 40. days and 40.
nights, give us Grace to use such Abstinence, that our Flesh being subdued to
the Spirit, we may ever obey thy Godly motions in Righteousness and true
Holiness, etc. How unworthy it would be to make that Holy Prayer to bear such a
sense as this, O Lord, who for our sakes did Fast forcy days and forty
nights, give us Grace to use such Abstinence, that our Seafaring Men and
Mariners, and young Cattle, and the like, may be mainta^ned.

In fine, Abstinence from certain Meats upon certain days, is against no Law
that I know of, but the Law of sin in our own sinful bodies, our corrupt greedy
desire of eating what we will, when we will, and as much as we will* But still
you say you are afraid of Will Worship and Superstition, by observing a time
which you fear God has never commanded you. But you have more reason to be
afraid of Profaneness in taking no notice of a time, which you have all reason
to think God has commanded you Religiously to observe, if you reflect well upon
what has been said. But you cannot persuade your self its any ways acceptable
to God to Fast in Lent. For that you must know that the power of Education is
upon you, and our proud corrupt Nature has a great deal of d^fficulty to
condemn it self of so gross ignorance and mistake, that notwithstanding we have
made Religion our business for perhaps twenty or thirty years, or more; yet we
have looked upon a Practice as an useless, vain Superstition, which was indeed
true Christian Piety. But its better to come into Gods Vineyard at the Eleventh
hour than not at all. Better late than not at all come to the knowledge of any
part of true Christian Piety. Learn to be Wise from your own damage, and
reflect seriously with your self how seldom you have Fasted in the whole course
of your life, and yet you cannot but acknowledge the singular benefit of
Religious Fasting; and if you believe Jesus Christ, when it is rightly
performed, it shall have a singular reward in the other Life: And consider
moreover, whether you shall in all likelihood Fast more days in this next year,
if you Fast only when the Spirit of God shall move you to Fast, or if you
should engage your self to Fast all Fridays, Ember-days, Lent, etc. God knows
our private good purposes are easily broken by us, and the best of us stand in
need of the extrinsecal help of a common Law to call upon us to do our duty,
especially in such things as are troublesome to Flesh and Blood, as Fasting and
Abstinence are. You are resolved for example, to Fast to morrow; a Friend comes
in, and either invites himself to Dine with you, or you to Dine with him; and
now its ten to one, but either out of modesty or human respect* you break your
purpose of Fasting. But when a day is set apart for Fasting or Abstinence by a
common Law, every one presumes his Neighbor observes it, and does not expect
that for his sake he should Violate it. Fasting and Prayer are strangely useful
to save our souls, and it concerns Superiors to secure some times for them in
their Subjects, let them super-add what they please by their own private
Devotions. And we find it but too true by too sad experience in too many, what
the German Lutheran confessed to his Son. His Son refusing to eat upon a
Fasting-day, he told him he was not to Fast upon Fridays or Saturdays, or any
other Set-days, that was Superstition, but when the Spirit moved him: His Son
demanding, I pray Father when did the Spirit move you to Fast, these thirty
years you have been a Lutheran: He ingenuously confessed, By Goat niet even mael;
By God not once. And indeed it is a sad thing to consider in our poor Country
how many Zelots there are amongst us for Religion, and yet how seldom or never
at all they Fast. Nay, many of them, because they are loath to condemn their own
practices, because the holy Scripture sometimes Allegorically calls Abstinence
from sin Fasting, look upon Abstinence from Meat and Drink as no true Fast: As
if they should say there were no such thing prohibited by God as Carnal
Adultery and Fornication, because in a Spiritual and Allegorical sense Idolatry
or a Worshipping of false Gods, is often called in Holy Writ Fornication and
Adultery. But this is the just punishment of Pride and Self-conceit, God ever
resisting the Proud, but giving Grace to the Humble; and deservedly do they
fall into a thousand Spiritual Phrensies and Madnesses, who prefer their own
private seeming sense of H. Scriptures, not only before the judgment of their
present Guides and Teachers, but also before the unanimous interpretation of
the prime Christian Saints and Doctors of all Ages, whom God has appointed to
preserve us, whilst we adhere to their solid Sentiments, from being carried
away with every wind of Doctrine of our own private Opinions.

Whom all that has been said cannot persuade to a Religious Observation of the
Penitential time of Lent, I have one reasonable request to them, that they
would but for one year Fast as many days out of private Devotion, as they do
who Fast at Set-times and days commanded by an extrinsecal Authority; and I
persuade my self, they would find so great spiritual benefit thereby, that they
would clearly see, Fasting being good in it self, its being commanded by our
Superiors, can never make it Superstition. I deny not but the change of the
Primitive Christian way of Fasting into a mere mock-abstinence from certain
kind of Meats, by Set-Fasters, gave but too great occasion to many simple
well-meaning people, to look upon all Fasting as a mere Superstition: It being
hard to conceive that ever the Apostles could appoint such a manner of Fasting
as is too too commonly practiced by Pretenders to follow Apostolical
Institutions in their Set-Fasts. For what say Non-Conformists, if we must upon
the Authority of Primitive Fathers Fast Lent, why then ought we not to follow
the manner of Fasting prescribed by the same Fathers? Now they recommend to us
as well Abstinence from Wine as flesh, and only one temperate Refection toward
the Evening. As for Answer to this Objection, we all acknowledge our fault, and
are resolved seriously to endeavor amendment, and according to our Corporal and
Spiritual strength piously to emulate the Primitive Christians Fasting: And
would you join with us in so holy an exercise, we hope what our own simple
knowledge is not able to prevail with our sensual Nature to do, your good
example would shame us into the effectual performance of, at least in some good
measure. And now I hope your Objection is Answered. And a happy solution this
indeed God grant it. But its time to add a word concerning the Practical manner
of Religious Fasting.

The Conclusion by way of a Practical direction how to Fast.
BUt now we are resolved to keep Lent, how may we keep it so as to do our bodies
no hurt, and our souls a great deal of good? We must remember God-Almighty
loves a cheerful giver, and therefore whether we do more or less Mortification,
this Sacred Penitential time, let us do it with a cheerful Heart and
Countenance. And although there can be no doubt, but the more strictly we can
prevail with our selves to Fast, we may hope for the more abundant benefit from
our Fasting; yet we must consider the proportion not only of our Corporal, but
also of our Spiritual forces; we must Mortify our bodies but not Kill them; we
must humble soul and body for our sins, but yet with such regard to our measure
of Divine Grace and Spiritual strength, that we do not make our lives tedious
and intolerably irksome. It was not want of Corporal but Spiritual strength
which made our B. Lord excuse his weak Apostles from the rigorous Fasts of the
Disciples of S. John Baptist and the Pharisees. The strong new Wine of Fasting
put into such crazed Bottles as they were, before they were strengthened with
the Infusion of the H. Ghost upon the day of Pentecost, would have broken them
all in pieces. We must indeed humble our selves this Penitential time for our
unfaithful Service of the Divine Majesty, but yet so as we do not make our
selves wholly weary of his Service. And when Penitential works seem grievous to
our delicate frail bodies, we must encourage our selves to go on by reflecting,
Aut Panitendum aut ardendum* we must either gently Chastise our selves for our
sins in this world, or else severely be for ever Chastized by God-Almighty for
them in the other. And this will make us cry out amidst our most rigorous
Fasts, with the Devout S. Bernard. O bonum judicium quod me divino subducit
Iudicio. O good, O welcome self-judgment which frees me from the severe
Judgment of my God. Pro eo quod, etc. Because we abstain even from lawful
things, the unlawful things which we formerly have committed, are pardoned us*
etc. Idem. Ser. 4* de Quadrag. If we judge our selves, we may be sure we shall
not be judged of our Lord. The Justice of the All good God will not permit the
same faults to be twice punished, by us in this Life, and by himself in the
other.

But how must we Fast this Holy Time? In the first place we must have a special
care to Fast from Sin. Illa est in Quadragesimae diebus, etc. This (says S.
Austin) is* no small* benefit of the Lenten-Fast, that whilst at that time we
even abstain from lawful things, we are vehemently admonished much more to
avoid such things as are unlawful: For we, who abstain from flesh, which we may
lawfully eat upon other days: We, who abstain from Wine, which we may lawfully
drink moderately: We, who abstain from those things which sometimes are lawful,
especially ought to abstain from Sin, which never is lawful. If therefore we
desire well to Fast from Meat, in the first place let us Fast also from Vices,
etc. otherwise we may justly fear that severe Reproach of Almighty-God, Isa. 1.
to his own People the Jews, concerning days and observances of his own
appointment, because Celebrated by persons living habitually in grievous sins:
Who has required this at your hand, to tread my Courts? -- Incense is an
Abomination to me -- Your New Mons, and your appointed Feasts; your Embers,
Vigils, and Lent-Fasts my soul hates, they are a trouble to me, I am weary to
bear them. When you make many prayers, I will not hear, your hands are full of
blood. Had not the Penitent Ninevites joined with their Fasting and Sackcloth
amendment of their wicked lives* they had not escaped the Destruction threatened
them from God Almighty, by his Prophet Jonah. Chap. 3. ver. 10. And God saw
their Works, that they turned from their evil Way, and God repented of the Evil
that he had said that he would do unto them, and he did it not. And indeed,
what can be more absurd, and impiously profane, than when we are professing to
endeavor to appease God Almighties Anger for our Sins, by Fasting and other
Humiliations; then actually to incense him to Wrath and Indignation against us,
by deliberately offending of him.

Secondly, Have a special care you so Fast, as your Fasting be a real
Mortification unto you, and not a mere Mock-Fast; A pure Abstinence from Flesh,
and a real Feasting upon other Viands. Let us not deceive our selves; the God
before whom we pretend to humble our selves is not mocked: He is the
dangerousest Person in the World to go about to cheat, and impose upon. And
think seriously, what is the true End of our Superiors, in commanding us
Fasting and Abstinence; and then order our Eating and Drinking, as we miss not
of That. If it be to dispose us for Prayer and other Spiritual Exercises, to
appease Gods Anger toward us for onr Sins past, to weaken the Strength of
Concupiscence enclining us to sin for the time to come, etc. be sure we do
nothing on a Fasting-Day destructive of those Ends. We must look upon Fasting
as the Physic of our Souls, prescribed to us by our Spiritual Doctors and
Physicians, not purely to show their Authority, and exercise our Obedience; but
as absolutely necessary for the recovery of our Spiritual Health, which we
have lost by Sin: And therefore, if any one should go about to dispense with
you, as to the taking of this bitter Potion; before you admit of his
Dispensation, ask him what Security he can give you, it shall go equally well
with your Souls Health, whether you take the unsavory Potion of Fasting or no?
We fell sick (says S. Basil. Ho. 1. de Jeju.) by Sin, we are cured by
Repentance. But Rep^ntance without Fasting is vain and unprofitable. And to
Fast from one sort of Viands, and Feast upon another; or to Fast from Meat, and
what we want in Meat to make it up with strong Drink, is as good never a whit
as never the better. And in such a manner to pretend to atone your offended
God by Fasting, is as if you should make show of humbling your self by wearing
Sackcloth, and secretly line your Sackcloth with Plush. And he who will
regulate his Fasting by what Latitudinarian Guides and Directors tell him he
may lawfully do upon a Fasting-day, without breach of his Fast, whereas his
Blessed Savior, whom he pretends to imitate, Fasting 40. Days and 40. Nights,
was afterward a hungry, he may Fast 40. Days and 40. Nights without e're being
hungry, either in the time of his Mock-fast, or afterward. And this I take to
be the true reason, why many complain they have kept many Lents with little or
no profit to their souls, and with good reason, because they seldom or never
really and indeed Fasted; but instead of endeavoring according to their
strength to humble themselves by more and more rigorous Abstinence, they have
sought by all means possible to cheat those Penitential days. Hear not me, but
S. Basil above, concerning those, who because a five-days Fast was at hand,
would make themselves drunk the day before. Si cras venias vinum obolens, etc.
If thou come to morrow smelling of Wine and its putrid and corrupted
Crudities, how shall I impute to thee thy drunken Surfeit for a Fast. In which
order shall I place th^e? Amongst Drunkards, or amongst Fasters? But in what
order think you would the Holy Father have placed those, who not barely smell
of Wine drunk to excess the day before, but upon the very Fasting-day it self,
drink their skins full of Wine? Had we a deep sense how much the health of the
soul is to be preferred before the pleasure of the body, and a strong Faith,
how exceedingly Fasting conduces to the souls health, all the World would be in
love with Fasting; and though our Constitutions would not permit us to abstain
from flesh, this Love would wake us so ingenious to Mortify our selves in a
temperate use of flesh, that we should no less reap the fruit of Fasting, than
those who lived upon Fish or Herbs. Let us by no means (says S. Basil) receive
the days that are approaching with a sad heart, but as becomes Saints with a
cheerful affection. -- Be not sad when thou art Cured. It would be very absurd
if we should grieve for the substraction of our Victuals, and not rather
rejoice for the health of our soul; and so seem to value more the pleasure of
our belly than the cure of our mind. For fullness causes delight unto the belly,
but fasting is gainful to the soul. Rejoice, for that is given thee an
efficacious Medicine to abolish sin. For as Worms which breed in the bowels of
Children are expelled by certain sharp and bitter Medicines, so Sin that abides
in the inmost recesses of the soul, is instantly killed and extinguished by
fasting, which purges the bowels of the mind. -- Do not imitate the
disobedience of Eve; do not again make the Serpent thy Counselor, who under
pretext of sustaining thy body, persuades thee to eat. Do not excuse thy self
for thy infirm Constitution; do not say thou art not able to endure fasting.
For thou do not make those excuses to me, but according to the Proverb, thou
speak to one who knows the Truth, to wit, to God, who is ignorant of
nothing. Go to then, tell m^, can thou not Fast, and can thou fill thy self
with variety of Meats, can thou surcharge thy body with the weight of
Victuals? But we know Physicians are wont to prescribe to such as are infirm
not abundance of Food, but a spare Diet and Abstinence. How comes it to pass
then that you can feast, But pretend you can not fast? Whether is it more easy
to the belly to pass over the Night with a slender Refection, or to lie oppressed
with abundance of Meats? Yea, indeed not to lie, but stretching and groaning
continually to turn, now to this side, and now to that? But what mod^ration in
eating and drinking should we do well to use upon Fasting-days? Consult God and
your own Conscience, and such as understand the right exercise and great
benefit of true Fasting. In three words. Be contented with one temperate Meal
taken as late as your health and other circumstances will permit. Drink no*
strong drink, or very sparingly, and this only at your Meal; and though you
should take some small matter at night, Even such an abstinence would not want
its singular Spiritual advantages, so you exercised it not merely in a
Customary manner, but for good Christian ends, with sincerity as in the sight
of God, according to the measure of your health and strength.

Thirdly: Be sure to join with the exterior Mortification of your body, the
interior Humiliation of your soul by a hearty sorrow and contrition for your
sins. Though you give your whole Estate to the Poor, if you want Charity, it
will avail you nothing: And though you make your body a mere Skeleton, by
rigorous Fasting and Abstinence, if your heart be not truly Penitent and sorry
for your sins, all is to no purpose. A broken and an humble heart is a Sacrifice
which God-Almighty will by no means despise: But if contrition of heart be
wanting, all exterior Mortifications will be rejected. And it is want of this
which makes Fasting and other voluntary Austerities and Involuntary Crosses
seem hard and intolerable unto us. A soul deeply humbled with an intimate sense
of its deserts for its manifold sins and wickednesses, thinks all Meats, all
Clothes, all Lodging, and whatsoever Accommodations too good for it. But as
exterior acts of Charity beget and increase true Charity in our hearts, so
exterior Penitential works are apt to beget and increase interior Penitential
sorrow in our souls. And though the interior of Charity, Repentance, and other
Virtues be the chief and main thing we are to aim at, yet all interior
pretenses to any Virtue, which show not themselves in exterior acts, are to be
suspected as Counterfeit. What St. Austin says of Charity, is no less true of
Repentance, or any other Virtue. Amor si est, etc. Love, if it be in us, it
will be working; if it do not work, it is not in us; if it be great, it will
work great things. Repentance, if it be in us, it will be working by Fasting,
and other Penitential works; if it works not, it is not in us; if it be great,
it will work great things. Christian Virtues with their exterior acts, are not
unfitly compared to some rich Wine in a Cask or Vessel. A rich Wine without a
Cask or Vessel to contain it, cannot be presented; a bare Cask presented
without the rich Liquor in it, would not be accepted, Joel 2. 12. Therefore
also now says the Lord, Turn ye even to me with all your heart, with Fasting,
and with Weeping, and with Mourning.

Fourthly: Take heed of corrupting the Mortification of your Fasting by excess
in other joyances. Holy Daniel in his three weeks Fast, abstained not only from
pleasant Food, but also from Anointing of himself, Chapter 10. v. 3. I ate no
pleasant Bread, neither came Flesh nor Wine in my mouth; neither did I Anoint
my self at all, till three weeks were fulfilled.

Vtamur ergo parcius,
Verbis, cibis, and potibus,
Somnio, jocis, and arctius
Perstemus in Custodia.
Let us be more sparing, not only in our Meat and Drink, but also in our Words,
Sleep, and Recreations, and keep a more Vigilant Watch over our selves, that in
nothing we exceed. And the reason is manifest, for one great end of Fasting
being by that exterior Mortification to beget or increase interior Contrition
and Sorrow of heart for sin, it manifestly follows, if we seriously design the
end of Fasting, we ought carefully to moderate all other Joyances, however in
themselves Lawful, and at another time laudable, which manifestly impede our
designed end, least we pull down with one hand, what we go about to build up
with the other, and make our Spirits as vain and light by frothy Conversations
and other Divertisements, as we make them grave and sober by Fasting and
Abstinence, Hear the 4th. Council of Toledo, c. 5. In omnibus, etc. In all the
foresaid days of Lent we ought to insist on Fasting and Mourning, to cover the
body with Hair-cloath and Ashes, to humble our mind with Mournings, to change
our Joy into Heaviness, until the time of the Resurrection of Christ, when we
are with joy to sing Allelujah, and turn our heaviness into gladness. For this
the consent of the Universal Church in all parts of the Earth has confirmed.

Fifthly: Spend more time in Prayer, Meditation of Divine things, and Spiritual
reading and hearing of Sermons; for one great end of Fasting is the better to
dispose us for these Spiritual exercises. Venture non habet aures The pampered
paunch is to nothing deafer than to Divine Inspirations. Impletus venture non
vult studere libenter. The full belly has no great mind to study, but much less
to speak to God-Almighty by devout Prayer, or to hear him speak to it by
spiritual reading and hearing of Sermons. Thus the Ancient people of God, the
Jews, spent the fourth part of their days of public Fasting and Atonement, in
reading and hearing the Law of Almighty God, and another fourth part in
worshipping the same God with devout prayers. Nehem. 9. v. 1, 2, 3. Now in the
twenty and fourth day of this month, the Children of Israel were Assembled
with Fasting, and with Sack-cloathes and Earth upon them. And the Seed of
Israel separated themselves from all Strangers, and stood and confessed their
Sins, and the Iniquities of their Fathers: And they stood up in their place,
and read in the Book of the Law of the Lord their God, one fourth part of the
day, and another fourth part they confessed and worshipped the Lord their God.
And the Church of Christ has ever in Lent, to Prayers and Fastings, annexed
more frequent hearing and Preaching God's Word; and many of S. Crysostoms
Golden Homilies, as likewise of others of the Ancient Fathers, were Sermons
Preached day by day, in Lent, to the people. Hear S. Crysostom, upon those
words of our Blessed Savior, This kind goes not out, but by Prayer and
Fasting: Qui orat, etc. He that prays with Fasting, has two Wings, and those
lighter than the Winds themselves; for such an one does not stretch himself, or
yawn, or is drowsy in his Prayer -- He that fasteth is light and winged, and
prays with Vigilance, and extinguishes his own evil Lusts, and renders God
propitious to himself, and humbles his own soul that was lift up. For this
cause also the Apostles in a manner continually Fasted -- Fasting with Faith,
brings into the soul a great force, and much Philosophy, and makes of a man an
Angel, and helps him to fight with incorporeal powers.

Sixthly: What we defraud our own Appetite of by Fasting, let our Lord Jesus
eat by the mouth of his Poor. And this indeed is another end and fruit of
Fasting, to make us more able and more willing to relieve those in necessity.
To feel some hunger our selves sometimes, makes us more tenderly compassionate
of those who in a manner are continually hungry; and its manifest, the less we
expend on our selves, the more we have to bestow on the Needy and Indigents and
daily experience teaches us that none are more liberally Chari(...)ble to
others, then those who are most Christianly severe to themselves. And no
wonder, their frequent Abstinences demonstratively convincing them that the
best use of wealth is, to spend as little as they can upon themselves, and as
much as they can upon their necessitous Neighbors. And hence also follows
another admirable fruit of Religious Fasting; to wit* an absolute indifferency
to worldly riches and abundance. For who will break his Sleep, or weary his
Limbs to get that, which he believes when he has gotten, the best use he can
make of it, is to give it away to others. Hear the Ancient and Learned Origin.
Hom. 10. in Levit. 16. Habemus, etc. We have the days of Lent Consecrated to
Fastings; we have the 4th, and 6th. days of the week, whereon we solemnly Fast
-- There is also yet another Religious way of Fasting, whose praise is set
forth in writing from certain of the Apostles; for we find in a certain Book,
that it was said by the Apostles, Blessed is he who fasts also for that end,
that he may relieve the Poor. This Man's Fast is much accepted with God. Hear S.
Chrysolog. Sermon. 8. de Jejun. Eleemosynae, etc: Alms and Prayers are the wings
of Fasting, by which it is carried up to Heaven, without which it lies dead and
spiritless upon the Earth. -- Let us therefore, O my Brethren, when we Fast,
deposit our Dinner in the hand of the Poor, that their hand may preserve for us
what our belly would have lost us. -- The hand of the Poor is the Treasury of
Christ -- He that Fasts not to the Poor, does but feign a Fast to God --
Fasting without works of mercy, is but an empty Image of Hunger. Without pity
to others, it is but an occasion taken of Covetousness. Because by such sparing,
what is taken down in the flesh, swells in the bag. In fine, hear God-Almighty
himself, Isa. 58. Is not this the Fast that I have chosen -- Is it not to deal
thy Bread to the Hungry, and that thou bring the Poor that are cast out into
thy house? When thou see the Naked, that thou cover him, and that thou hide
not thy self from thine own flesh? And now would all Pretenders to fast in
Lent, and upon other Set-days, Fast in some tolerable manner, according to what
right reason, Holy Scriptures, and Ancient Fathers direct us, as has been
showen; the Devil himself would be ashamed to call such Fasting the Doctrine of
Demons, Will Worship, or Superstition.

But to Fast truly and Christianly, is troublesome to flesh and blood. It
cannot be denied. And this is indeed the true cause we have so (...)s of
Lent-Fast amongst us. The want of express Scrip^^^ (...) of Superstition is
pretended; but the true reason in(...)om Fast, is, the difficulty flesh and
blood finds in Fasting. But as to this, we must help our selvas sometimes, by
calling to mind the bitter eternal torments we have deserved for our sins; and
this will make us ashamed to complain of the gentle Penance of the most
rigorous Lent-Fast. Had God-Almighty, upon the account of our manifold sins and
wickednesses, required of us some great matter; for example, To have Fasted our
whole Lives with Bread and Water, ought we not gladly to have done it? How much
rather then ought we to comply most willingly with his most equitable and
gentle command of Fasting moderately sometimes? How gladly would a Damned Soul
accept of a Methusalem's Age of rigorous Fasting, and whatsoever most severe
Mortifications in exchange for its intolerable eternal torments? And no less
gladly and willingly ought we to do or suffer any thing never so troublesome to
flesh and blood, to prevent our falling into the same state of immutable
unsufferable misery. Often and seriously to think of this; to wit, that except
we Repent with Fasting, Weeping and Mourning, we must Perish, and that
eternally, would make the most rigorous severity seem gentle and easy.
Otherwhiles let us call to mind the eternal joyful Easter a Religious devout
Lent-Fast will end in. And this will make us cry out with the great S. Paul,
The sufferings of this time are not worthy to be compared with the future glory
which shall be revealed in us. Whatsoever we can suffer by Fasting, or
whatsoever other Christian severity in this our time, upon this Earth, is light
and easy, if compared with the immense weight of eternal glory, which expects
us in the other Life. Courage therefore, O my soul. Sigh, Pray, and Fast;
Heaven will make amends for all. Si credis omnia patere, si non pateris non
credis, etc. O Christian Man (says the Divine S. Crysostom) If thou believe,
be willing to suffer all things; if thou art not willing to suffer, thou do
not believe; for such and so great things are promised us, that rather than
fall short of them, we ought to suffer a thousand deaths; undoubtedly a few
Lent-Fasts. Immortality, Glory, a Kingdom, an eternal Kingdom is proposed unto
us. To which Kingdom, He, who to teach us the way to it, Fasted 40. days and
40. nights, bring all devout Imitators of his Quadragesimal Fast. Amen.

FINIS.
A Postscript.
IF any one be offended at the proving of Lent to be an Apostolical Institution
by the unanimous Tradition of all Christian Countries, they are desired to
Reflect, First, how they would Triumph, had they a like Tradition but even of
one Country for a Non observance of Set-Fasts: And Secondly, how that all
Christian Churches agree, that a Sacred Reverence is to be given to whatsoever
Doctrins or Pract^ces can be proved to be Apostolical, by a truly universal
unanimous Tradition: But the dispute betwixt the Church of Rome and Church of
England, is, whether certain Doctrins or Practices were indeed always, every
where, by all, or in a manner by all Christian Doctors acknowledged as
Apostolical: I say by all, or in a manner by all; for as Bishop Gunning well
observes, p. 132. he would in a dangerous degree disserve our common
Christianity, who would reject some Book of H. Scripture, the Epistles for
example of S. James and S. Jude, or something for being a Tradition Apostolical
for the positive possible Rejection of some one Socrates, or other
Ecclesiastical Writer, or some one or a few Fathers, against the known
generality and consent of the rest of Ancient Writers, and immemorial witness
or practice of whole Christian Countries. And the reason is manifest, especially
in our present particular matter of Practice. Had the H. Apostles for example,
in the several Countries they Converted to Christianity, taught no such thing as
Abstinence from certain Meats on Fasting-days, nor no Set-Fasts on Friday or
Lent, but had positively taught, that to observe Solemn Set-Fasts, was Legal,
as the Heretic Aerius, and that Abstinence from certain Meats was vain and
unprofitable, as the Heretic Jovinian, according to S. Aug. l. de Ser. n. 35.
and 82. That some one or a few pretenders to Christianity should either be
ignorant what was taught them by the Apostles, or would wilfully teach
otherwise than they had been taught, is no wonder, but that all the several
Christian Countries in the World should make a distinction of days and meats,
and this ever since they were Christians, they positively unanimously attesting
as much, and all their most ancient Records partly positively witnessing the
same, partly being silent as to any Innovation; and yet no such thing should be
taught them, but rather the quite contrary by the first Planters of the
Christian Faith amongst them, this is impossible. And whoever goes about to
weaken the force of Universal Tradition rightly understood, invalidates as much
as in him lies all revealed Religion: It being impossible to know assuredly any
Books, as to all that is contained in them, to be Divine Revelations, but by
such a Tradition. Concerning this, see Bishop Gunning above.

Christo Jejunanti Gloria.

