A MODEST PLEA FOR THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.

By Richard Hollingworth, A. M. and Vicar of West-Ham near London.

Confusion in Religion will as certainly follow every man's turning Priest or
Preacher, as it will in the State where every one affects to rule as King.

King Charles the First his Life and Meditations, Octavo. page 275. LONDON,
Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to his most Sacred Majesty, at the Angel in
Amen-corner. 1676.

TO The Right Reverend Father in God HENRY Lord Bishop of LONDON.
My Lord,
IT is observed that the Enemies of our Church notwithstanding in the memory of
many now alive they acted such things as were impious and diabolical, and but
some few years ago were beholden to an act of Pardon to secure to them their
Lives and Estates, yet are so fond of themselves and their Opinions still, that
they lift up their heads with their former confidence, and print and preach
themselves the only People of God in opposition to that great Body of men who
do orderly comply with the Kingdoms Laws; And withal are at this time using all
artifices whatsoever to pull us up both root and branch once again. (So very
thankful are they for all his Majesty's gracious condescensions to them.)

But seeing they are so resolved, and nothing can oblige them, I think every
true Son of the Church ought to use the Talent God has given him, to obviate
their designs, and to discover those wily methods by which they pursue the
Churches ruin; which I am sure is a more justifiable undertaking than theirs,
let their pretenses be never so specious and taking amongst the more rash and
inconsiderate part of Mankind.

And from this Principle of Love and Honor to the Churches peace and safety,
does this little Book make bold to appear abroad; and particularly to fly into
your Lordships Arms, as the most proper Sanctuary for protection and defense
from all those rude assaults which our Adversaries are too well acquainted with
the practice of; which if your Lordship will be pleased to condescend to, it
shall everlastingly be acknowledged as one of the greatest Honors, done to

Your Lordships Faithful and Obedient Servant Richard Hollingworth.

Imprimatur Tho. Tomkyns.

Ex Ed. Lambethan. Jan. 15. 1674.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Reader,
I Am not ignorant by what slights and methods such honest and well designed
Books as this are answered; it is but telling the credulous vulgar that the man
that writ it, is unacquainted with the power of Godliness, that the seed of
Cain will be envying the seed of Seth, and the Children of the bondwoman
insulting over those of the free, and the work is done, and the book laid
aside, as not good enough for waste paper. That I may therefore prevent this,
give me leave to aver thus much in mine own behalf, that the Christian Religion
is a thing so admirably wise in its contrivance, so great an Instance of Divine
Power in its production, and so amply demonstrative of a never to be paralleled
love and goodness; it is so every way fitted to the needs and necessities, nay
to the delight and entertainment of the minds of men, and accommodates, it self
to them so fully in every condition: that should a thought at any time crowd
and thrust it self into my soul, that invites me to any neglect or contempt of
it, I must either forsake my Principles, or else I must throw it out with all
becoming wrath and indignation; And I pray God I may no longer make any abode
in this house of clay, than I may one way or other be instrumental to recommend
it to the choice and liking of all men, within my knowledge and acquaintance.
And though I dare not confidently boast of my self, yet so fully am I satisfied
of the truth and Divinity of its Author, of the excellency of its Doctrines and
Principles, of the advantages that naturally (as well as those by promise) flow
from a severe and honest, from an impartial and universal practice of its Rules
and Methods; that I think I could for its Honor, and its further obtaining in
the World, part with all that is near and dear to me. And therefore should I
think, that any thing in this small Treatise did tend in the least to lessen
its esteem, and to expose so excellent a Systeme, to the scorn and laughter, or
to the contempt and disdain of any person, I would by my own hands revenge my
self upon it, for being guilty of so bainous a piece of wickedness, and out of
a just resentment of its unworthiness to appear in the world, either sacrifice
it to the flames, or bury it among the filth and ordure of an unsavory
dunghill. No, so lovely a thing is this excellent Religion in my eyes (and I
assure you this loveliness does not appear to me from bare sensible impressions
or warm touches upon my fancy, but from rational convictions of mind and
understanding) that I cannot forbear admiring and honoring any person, upon
whose soul I see any strokes or lines of Religion drawn, and who by his
carriage and behavior evidences himself devoted to its Interest and Service.
Yea though these persons differ from me in Judgment, or any particular opinion,
yet if the difference issues merely from the weakness of their minds or the
necessary impositions of their first education, and there appears no mixture of
the stubbornness and obstinacy of a resolved will, (which gives the formality
to sin) I do declare that I can cohabit with them as Brethren, treat them as
Intimates and Familiars, and serve them with the affection of a real and
uninterested Friend. And those men whom God has received (and no otherways can
I judge of such, whom I find in a Zealous pursuit of essential holiness and
goodness, and more cool and careless in promoting remote opinions and needless
theories and speculations) I dare not judge, but hope to meet them at the last
day, and with them to enter into a possession of those Glories, which Christ is
gone to prepare for all his Faithful Followers.

And therefore if any person enquire, how it comes to pass that I have exposed
a Book to public view, wherein so many, whom it may be they greatly esteem for
holiness and strict walking, are so much concerned, and so severely
reprehended? I reply; It Is none of their holiness I reprove, God forbid, but
those ungodly practices, and unseasonable divisions, which many of them
themselves once eagerly complained and petitioned against, and which I am
confident will in the end be bitter to them.

And further I do aver, that it is no particular man I exercise my zeal in the
following discourse against, but formed bodies, and united Factions of men, who
in companies and numbers flock together, and publicly break those Laws, the
preservation of the honor of which is so necessary to us in all our capacities
and circumstances whatsoever. And when the same Authority that has bound and
reined them in, shall think good by Laws to let them loose, I have done, and
shall submit to the Will of my Superiors: but till then I think the ill
influence that this general disobedience has upon the minds of the more
ignorant sort of persons in other particulars, besides that of rending the
Church of England in pieces, is enough to justify and warrant my zeal and
courage in such an undertaking.

And that I may vindicate my self from future aspersions, and satisfy the
unprejudiced part of the World, that it was not bitterness of spirit, but a
true regard for the honor and reputation of the Protestant Religion, that put
me upon such meditations, I will give you the particular Motives prompting me
thereunto; which when done, I hope I shall find a candid acceptance, and
favorable opinion in all worthy and generous, in all dispassionate and
disinterested breasts.

First then, I found the principles from which Nonconformity to the Church does
flow, and by which they seek to countenance the present Separation, not only to
be false in themselves, but withal bad in their impressions and influences; and
that after by them people are unsettled, and forced to a breach with the Church
of England, nothing can be proposed to them, that proves a firm ground to set
their feet upon: But many, I was going to say most of them, run from one
opinion to another, and that with the very same Arguments and Reasons upon the
score of which they parted from us. And he that will not come to the public
Church because the Preacher wears a Surplice, etc. which he can find no express
command for from Scripture, why, within a short space he leaves the Assemblys
of the Presbyterians, because they own several things as to Church Government,
which do no ways correspond with the practice of the Apostles, whose Churches
they say were not subordinate to, but independent upon one another. And when it
may be he has linked himself with those of the Congregational way, as they are
pleased to phrase it, why the same argument assaults him afresh, and drives him
into the tents of Munster, and the man turns Anabaptist, because he finds no
explicit command for the administering that Sacrament to infants in all the new
Testament. And alack! let him but with this principle read his Bible often, and
put such interpretations upon the several texts thereof, as his weak judgment,
and overheated Fancy suggests to him, and it is ten to one but his head turns
round every Moun, and that the man disturbs not only himself, but all the
Neighborhood with his constant dissatisfactions. Especially if he set out, as
usually all these men do, with that other hopeful Principle, that the
Magistrate has nothing to do in matters of Divine Worship, and that his power
is terminated within the compass of civil things; Oh this makes them all Lords
and Princes, and puts a fullness of power into their hands to shape and fashion
what Religion or model of Worship to themselves they please. And by virtue of
these too pernicious Principles we find some have run into all the absurdities
and blasphemies of the Quakers; and others have so tired themselves with
continual seeking, and importunate inquiries after the best way, that at last
from a downright weariness, they have sat down and in great discontent have
thrown off all regard to Religion, and turned profane scoffers at it, as a
thing designed on purpose to puzzle men's brains and disturb the World. And when
I say this, I do not speak without sufficient evidence, there are too many
proofs of it in this Kingdom, and he must be too little conversant either with
men or Books that denies it.

And therefore upon this account I do heartily wish the Subjects of this Realm
reduced to the principles of obedience to our excellent Church, because I am
persuaded, that the time they consume in needless enquiries, would be spent in
fervent devotions, in dutiful attendance upon all those Instruments and Methods
of Instruction, whereby they might learn to govern their lives in those several
conditions they are in. And certainly had not these foolish principles been
started, and thereby the minds of easy, and more illiterate persons been
amused, and pestered with idle scruples, certainly, I say, Religion had met
with a more universal acceptance, and cheerful practice than now it does; and
we might suppose among the Common people, what time they were at liberty from
their necessary callings, would have been spent in heavenly meditations, in
Zealous prayer, or in instructing their Children and Servants in the
Fundamental Doctrines of the Christian Religion, or in reading such good books
as were designed, not to feed the Fancy, but to convince the Judgment, and
proportionably to raise the Affections to God and Christ, to his holy Laws and
excellent directions.

And though I know some men will except against all this I say, and offer in
apposition to it, that many of the Members of their Sepurated Churches, have
continued so from their first admission, without starting, and that therefore
this is no argument against their principles, why, to this I answer, that men's
continuance amongst them, flows not from their Principles themselves which
certainly betray men to all imaginable sickleness and uncertainty, but from
some other considerations, as either from an extreme love and esteem for the
Person, who is their supposed Pastor, or else from prudential considerations of
those reproaches, that such a slitting humor does expose them to, or some
other things of a worse nature, which though I could, yet I list not now to
name.

And therefore I do entreat all those into whose hands this small Treatise
shall come, to consider well with themselves the danger of admitting such
Principles into their belief; for I am confident, did most of those well
meaning People, who by virtue of these very Doctrines are drawn over to them,
understand how destructive they are to all Churches whatsoever, how injurious
to the Rights of Princes, rebbing them of more than half their power, and what
additions they make by them to God's Laws, imposing such things upon the belief
and practice of others, (yea and under the notion of the unalterable Government
of the Lord Christ,) as were not thought of for above fifteen hundred years
together among the Churches of God in any part of the Would; further, did they
consider how these Principles, (that will be content with nothing, but an
absolute determined way of Worship from Scripture,) take away all power of
tolerating or bearing with any man of a contrary Mind, because after a fullness
of persuasion, that such a thing is the only way of Christ, a man cannot think
well of, nor consequently suffer, if he have a power in his hands, any man to
enjoy any opinion contrary thereunto, because it is to give him leave to damn
himself when it is in the others power very much to prevent it; I say, were
these with many other considerations, well understood by the Common people,
they would not, I am persuaded, run in such numbers from our Churches, nor be
so easily beguiled into a belief of things, so every ways wanting a Foundation
in Holy Writ, nor would they make such vile and unworthy reflections upon a
Church whose Foundation is laid, and superstructure built by the Laws of Reason
and rightly understood Religion; in a word, which imposes nothing upon our
practice that is forbidden in Holy Scripture. And I hope there is so much
weight in this one Reason I have given for my zeal against the present
Separation, as may apologize for me and satisfy any modest man, that it is not
from any Principle of despite to God, his Religion or his people that I have
ventured upon such a work as this: But I have yet more to say.

Further then, I took notice that Nonconformity had a very evil aspect upon
Governors, and Government; I found no men so ready to embrace any stories,
whereby their superiors were scornfully reflected upon, or vilely represented,
as these man were, nor any men more hasty in spreading these tales further
abroad: and wondering with my self that men pretending to so extreme a
strictness, and pleading that strictness as a sign of their being the best of
Saints, should fail in so known and obvious a duty as obedience to Authority
is, I looked back into Ages past, and God knows found the same temper and
spirit among those who were the authors and beginners of this desolating
Separation. I found one Goodman an Exile in Queen Maryes days, and one of the
Antesignani of the Nonconformists, vindicating Wyat's rebellion, asserting in
Print that his cause was God's, and that none but Traitors could accuse him of
Treason; and after this I find Queen Elizabeth maligned by White, Rowland and
Hawkins, three of the Brotherhood, and by no means must she be thought any
other ways than an evil Princess, spoiling God's people, and extolling vanity,
and this averred before Grindall then Bishop of London. And if I should quote
what has dropped from these men's pens since, to the slandering of God's
Anointed, this Preface would swell into too great a bulk.

Now I must confess this thing very much troubled me, and stirred my passions,
to see that in which our happiness is so apparently wrapped up, and by virtue of
which we safely possess the fruits of our own labors, made the scorn of boys
and raw servants, and the wise and prudently enacted Laws, brought to the Bar
many times, by a company of silly women, who are led captive, and laden with
many lusts, and according to their deep and profound judgment voted obligatory,
or else nulled and voided. And in good earnest this appears to me the ready way
to the Nations ruin as it naturally prepares men to serve their turn upon the
established Government, when ever opportunity is put into their hands. And no
man need blush in asserting this, when he considers, who they were, that in the
beginning of the late unnatural War, readily took the Alarm, and clothed
themselves with courage and armor too, in order to sight the Lord's battle
against the Mighty, but such persons as had been brought up under, and
disciplined by such Teachers as were known notoriously inclinable to the
Principles of Separation.

And he that considens with what pleasure some men do reflect upon the
Privileges and enjoyments the late War gave them, before his Majesty's return,
and how ready they are to suggest to young and unimpressed minds, that those
were days, wherein men might be as good as they would, and wherein scandalous
Ministers were turned out, with many other things of the like nature, he must
needs infer from thence that many of these people are so far from repenting of
what was then done, that they could willingly wade through the same paths of
blood, to be reinstated in their former privileges again.

Now truly I must needs say that I cannot think the Kingdom safe so long as
such things are propagated; and propagated they will be so long as men believe
their Prince an enemy to the pure Doctrines and Ordinances of Jesus Christ, and
themselves persecuted for compliance with Christ's Laws in opposition to the
superstitious Impositions of their Governors. For considering the weakness of
men, and the slender improvement the education of most give them, how can we
imagine Magistrates should have their due honor and esteem from such persons,
who are made to believe, that they symbolize with Antichrist, and are Friends
to the cause and Interest of the Beast? No alack! such crafty insinuations as
these waste all the Principles of Loyalty in easy and credulous men's breasts,
they imbitter and poison their Spirits so that they spit nothing but fire in
the face of all well regulated Constitutions, and there is nothing but the fear
of imprisonment, or confiscation of Goods, or the loss of life that keeps these
men thus set on fire, from offering violence to the Thrones of Princes. It was
this that made Henry the Third and the Fourth of France fall under the bloody
hands of two Assassinates; and though our modern Enthusiasts and the Papists
widely differ in many things, yet in a mistaken furious zeal, and resolute
enterprises for the mistaken cause of God, and his Church, they have been both
very much to blame, and incurred such a censure as, thanks be to God, the
regular Sons of the Church of England can wash their hands from.

Now this being very plain and notorious, I thought I could not do a better
work, one whereby I might better serve my Prince and Country, than by
endeavoring to reconcile men to a Church, wherein they learn the duties of
humility and meekness, of modesty and candor of spirit, of submission and
obedience, of jealousy and suspicion of their own private opinions, when they
stand in competition with the public Judgment and Wisdom of the Nation. For
these are virtues hugely serviceable to the interest of Government, and
preserve such a peace amongst men, as gives great encouragement to industry and
labor. These are Virtues that render Religion amiable and lovely, and no doubt
the more Professors are possessed of them, the more do they engage standers by
not only to an admiration of, but an hearty compliance with that Religion, that
cancels no worthy Law, that is made in pursuit of the ends of Government, but
on the other side lays obligations upon every man to keep his place, denouncing
severely against those, who either curse their Princes in their hearts, or
speak evil of Dignities with their tongues. And let me speak freely, That I am
very much mistaken, if a return to so good a spirit as this, is going to Egypt
again, is siding with the Beast against God and his Christ, is renouncing the
Kingship of Christ; which words by whom made use of, and to what purposes we
can easily tell.

If this be a forsaking of Christ and giving up his cause, and going into
Babylon, I pray God I may continue in this Babylon all the days of my life: and
then, notwithstanding all those threats denounced against us, for conforming to
the superstitions of the Church, I do not doubt but we shall find as fair and
ready acceptance at the last day, as any of these hot-spurs can promise to
themselves.

But this is not all that I have to plead for my self, and this present
undertaking. I had continued and lived in that famous City of London for many
years, and received very considerable marks of kindness from many of the
inhabitants thereof, and therefore thought my self bound in gratitude to do any
thing that might contribute toward its happiness and welfare. And upon a just
survey of the influence of Fanatical Principles upon the minds of many men, I
could not wind my self out of a persuasion, but that these practices would
sooner or later be the occasions of much mischief to that ancient Metropolis.

It was the custom of the free Denizons of that place formerly to attend those
public Ordinances which were administered in their own Parish Churches, by
their own legally settled Ministers, and gravely, to the admiration of all
strangers, who either out of curiosity or business visited that place, to walk
to those places in the head of their Families, and the subordinate Members
thereof in their several ranks and orders following after, and all of them
using the same decorum in their returning home. Now besides the reputation this
gave to the City, there was a bridle by it put into the mouth of youth, and
whilst in their Masters eye, they were obliged to carry themselves in those
public places of Worship, as became the Solemnity, and with that reverence and
attention, that such approaches to so great a being as God is, called for at
their hands. A custom certainly which was the foundation of great proportions
of virtue and goodness, and very instrumental to season the minds of young
ones, with such principles as might give very great hopes to their Parents as
well as others, of their future well doing in the World, of their being
Ornaments to the City, as well as Comforts to their Relations.

But since every man who could not live in the Country, has had confidence
enough to set up for a public Teacher in the City, and every corner almost of
the Streets, has tempted men with new faces, and new voices, alas! this
excellent custom has been very much laid aside, and what will be the noisome
and pestilent consequence of it I dread to think. For when the Master runs one
way, and Mistress another, and every Servant has the liberty of gratifying his
own humor, and pleasing his own fancy, it is impossible there should be order
kept under that roof, or that an house so divided against it self, should long
stand in peace, and from hence must needs proceed pride and censoriousness,
quarrelling one amongst another about the best man and the best way, and
sometimes contempt of the Master on the Servants side, because he is not so
fully enlightened as to hear and savor such a precious man, as he himself does,
I and it may be making (for Morality is a sorry thing with many of these men)
the next bargain in his Masters shop, pay for his last Sabbaths profiting by
the savory doctrine of such a searching Preacher.

But these are not the only impeachments I design against these courses. We all
know very well, that that part of a man's age in which usually he is a Servant,
is a part wherein the proritations of nature begin to be strong and violent,
and young men's inclinations very eager after such objects as are suitable to
their senses, and depraved desires. And now what if these young men, in their
journeys through those several streets, with purpose to hear this or the other
man, should be invited into a Tavern, or a worse house by idle companions, nay
what if some of them should make it their pretense to their Masters purely to
get opportunities to indulge themselves in such brutish and sensual enjoyments,
would it not be far better to have seen them safely lodged in their Parish
Churches? I surely this is without dispute.

And though it may be some may say this is an uncharitable and irreligious
suggestion of mine own, yet let them not provoke me too much, lest I prove it
by plain instances. And alack when Youth before they have entered into serious
consideration of things, before they have had time to make such observations as
would be helpful to their future carriage and deportment in the World, before
the Notices of Religion, which they received in their first education, be
fetched from the brain, and settled in the Heart, when youth I say by such
carelessness of their Masters have worn off the modesty of their minds, and
contracted habits of sin, what will be the end of it? but dishonesty to their
Masters, grief to their Relations, and ruin to themselves.

I know this thing will be very grievous to many, whose purses as well as
meeting-places are filled by such company, but I will assure them the
reflection upon it has been every way (out of that passionate esteem I have
for that famous City) as burden some to me, and my private complaints of it to
several worthy Citizens has raised in them a fear suitable to mine own of the
inconveniences of such a liberty to youth. And therefore let me conclude this
with this assertion, that I have not published this upon the score of any
spite or malice I have against any particular man, who differs from the
public Constitution, but purely out of pity to those young men, who are
committed to the care and government of such Masters, who by virtue of their
very Principles put their Servants under the temptation of being ruined; for he
that gives leave to such raw persons, to carve what spiritual food they please
for themselves, whose years call for authoritative restraints, and prudent
boundaries, does I am sure lend an helping hand to their destruction.

And further I heartily desire these Masters to consider whether their constant
disobedience to Authority, and violating the known Laws and statutes of the
Realm, be not a greater encouragement to, and plea for the Servants rebelling
against them, than any wise man would put into their hands? and withal whether
the justice of God may not be provoked to chastise this their contempt of his
Vicegerents by wicked and treacherous servants?

But these are not all the Articles I have to draw up against these ways of
separation, and consequently not the whole vindication I can make of this
undertaking. I found by the unworthy reflections of many of the Nonconformists
upon the present establishment of the Church, both in their Prayers and
Preachings, that Sacred and separated Order of men, who by a divine commission
are dedicated to serve at the Altar, brought into a general dislike, nay
contempt among the populacy. And though most of them are men of generous
educations, and admitted to a freedom of converse with men of the best rank and
sort, even from their first entrance into the Universities, yet so heated are
the fancies of many persons by the influence of those bad names that are given
them by the Heads of the Faction, that many times they meet with rude assaults,
and unprovoked accosts as they pass the streets, nay even the Children, who
through the immaturity of their years can discern neither good nor evil, are
taught to point at such persons whose decent garbs declare them to be
Clergymen. Now when I considered with my self, how necessary this Order of men
is not only upon the score of that Divine Authority by which it is established
in Scripture, but upon the account of policy and prudence, without the
influence of whom upon the Minds of men, neither Governors shall keep their
chairs, nor governed their bounds, but all things will be managed by heats and
passions, by pride and ambition, by corrupt inclinations and fond desires, by
ways and methods that are directly opposite to the commands of true Religion
and Reason, to the Interest of States and Kingdoms, why I must tell you, this
reflection did not a little encourage me to any just undertaking, whereby I
might abate the esteem these persons have, and put them out of a capacity of
doing so great a mischief as to settle prejudices in the minds of people
against so necessary an Order of men as the Ministers are. But because I have
given some plain hints of this in the ensuing discourse, I will proceed no
further upon this head, and therefore

Further I considered many Doctrines and darling Notions of this party of men,
which are the common Theams and subjects of their discourse, and which indeed
they vent with such a zeal as if all Religion was concerned and wrapped up in
them, I say I considered them well, and found them really prejudicial to the
progress of Religion in the hearts and lives of men; and upon that account I
could not think myself injurious to religion nor evilly designed against Gods
People, by undertaking a work wherein these men now and then meet with such
just Reproofs and seasonable rebukes as their deserts call for: Why should men
who have mixed their own inventions with Christ's excellent Gospel, and prass
them with an equal necessity upon the belief of their easy hearers, run away
with the credit and reputation of being Gods Flect, who hear his voice, and
keep close to his Ordinances, without blending them with any corrupt mixtures
of their own, when in the mean time no men pester the World with newer notions,
and falser glosses upon the sacred Texts of Scripture than they? give me leave
though I might name many to instance in these two.

First, That darling and serviceable Notion of praying by the Spirit, by which
little else is meant, if their meaning may be gathered from their expressions,
or at least as it is understood, (and they content it should be so) by the
Common people, but a bold and confident uttering of a man's self to God in
variety of words, with a readiness and fluency for some considerable time
together. And he that has got to this perfection, oh how gracious a man is he
presently proclaimed? what an intimate and familiar acquaintance with God? How
dear to Jesus Christ? and it is ten to one but he is sent out by vote and
suffrage to be a pillar to support the Cause, and saluted by the wealthy Dames
as their spiritual Guide and Pastor; for upon him is made good the prophecy of
Zechariah, and the Spirit if Prayer and Supplication is poured out upon him.

Now what a vile and false account is this of the Spirit of Prayer, which if
rightly weighed, consists in nothing else, but in men's addressing to God, with
a deep and profound sense of his Majesty, with a belief of his placability
through the satisfaction that was made by Christ's oblation of himself once for
all upon the Cross, with inward desires suitable to the Nature and Necessity of
the things we want and petition for, with resentment of mind agreeable to the
sins and impieties we have wandered into, and with Principles of gratitude for
what we have enjoyed, expressing and displaying themselves by thankful
acknowledgments and public returns. And whether this be done with words chosen
beforehand or otherways, it is all one to God, for words reach not him at all,
but are only necessary in prayer, when we are embodyed, and one man is the
Mouth of others to him.

Now this being the true Notion of praying by the spirit, or of the spirit of
Prayer, which is the more proper way of expressing it, would not any man wonder
that men pretending to so much Godliness, should thus bring it from the heart
the principal seat thereof, and lay it all as it were upon the tip of the
tongue? would not any man admire these men should put such an advantage into
the hypocrites hands to cheat and impose upon the unwary part of the world? for
let them be never so fond of this Notion, yet they must know, if they be
impartial in their reflections upon the actions of the ages past, that by this
way numbers have been seduced into all manner of Heresies and Blasphemies, and
he that could utter himself as if he were transported, and could talk of God as
if he lay in his Breast, let his opinions or designs be what they would, yet he
has not wanted followers and admirers, and this will be so long, as so great a
part of the World is filly, and caught with shadows instead of substance.

Now when men once come (which makes to my design in hand) to make such things
as these which are merely artificial, and depend very much upon the temperature
of body, and confidence of mind, to be the measure of Religion, and signs of
Grace, alas they often fall off from that just respect and value they owe to
moral goodness and essential righteussness, which is the life and soul of true
Religion, and the whole stress of their zeal is laid out in little else, but
keeping of days of their own appointment, wherein they may gratify the pride
and frothiness of their Spirits, in making long harangues, and thereby gaining
the applanse of illiterate people as men inspired, which faculty if but
attained to by men of design, as we know many times it has been, it is not to
be imagined what tricks and cheats they are empowered thereby to put upon the
Vulgar, and how cheerfully after they have by their melting expressions broken
the peoples hearts, they carry home the Pieces in their pockets, I and laugh at
them too for being se easily gulled and deluded.

But in the mean time I desire any man to tell me, whether this prove not very
destructive to Religion, both as it swells and elevates the minds of those who
are Masters of this ready and as they call it powerful utterance, and then as
the unwary and sometimes blasphemous expressions, which hastily through the
present heat of their Animal Spirits drop from their mouths, render first God
cheap and vile to standers by, and then that important duty of Prayer it self
nauseous and burdensome. And to speak freely, I know nothing has made greater
matter of sport to Atheists, and has more strengthened them in their
Atheistical notions, than such bold and saucy addresses to God, which some of
these men (for God forbid I should accuse all) have been guilty of.

For what conceit can they have of a Being, to whom men pretending so great a
veneration, talk so rudely, as if like the Heathen Gods he were to be
propitiated by fawning words and flattering titles, by unmanlike whynes and
distorted faces? And therefore I do beseech these men who have so unhappily got
such a power over the Common people into their hands, as to persuade them
almost to any thing, to be more worthy and sincere in their instructing of
them, and to remember that when the illiterate and meaner sort of people are
once encouraged by them to such an unlimited exercise of their gifts, that they
grow proud and haughty, and their littleknowledg puffs them up so that within a
short time they grow too wise for their Teachers, and set up for themselves.
And here has begun this Nations ruin, and Religions bane; from hence London
has become another Amsterdam, and every mechanic fellow has assumed the
confidence to be a Teacher of the people. And therefore I am the more Sorry
that men pretending to learning and wisdom should propagate a notion so every
ways new, and withal of so pernicious effect and consequence, and that so
lately experienced too.

But lest by what I have said under this Head I should give any distaste to
truly good and wise men, I shall conclude it with the words of that
incomparable and never to be forgotten person King Charles the First, in which,
Reader, (...)
. thou have the full sense of my mind in this particular. That though I am not
against a grave and modest, discreet and humble use of Ministers gifts, even in
public, the better to fit and excite their own and the peoples affections to
the present occasion, yet I know no necessity why private and single abilities
should quite justle out and deprive the Church of the joint abilities, and
concurrent gifts of many learned and godly men, such as the composers of the
Service Book were.

2. The other Notion which I think very prejudicial to Christianity in the
Hearts and Lives of people, is that of the Spirit of bondage; A very great
doctrine with the Nonconformists, and often in their mouths, though according
to their description of it, I profess I can find no foot steps of it in all the
New Testament, and yet certainly had it been so absolutely a necessary
preparative to true conversion as they make it, we should have had an account
both of the thing it self and withal of some signs and tokens, whereby we might
know when we were in it, and how to get out of it, of all which the Gospel is
silent. For that place of St. Paul wherein he says, we have not received the
spirit of bondage again to fear, relates to the Jewish O economy, and is
miserably perverted and wrested, as many of his other sayings are, when quoted
to justify these men's doctrines of the bondage state. But because I know many
persons will be desirous to know, what this thing is I am now accusing them of,
I will therefore give them this brief account.

Instead of defining Conversion and Regeneration, to be a real change of the
Mind founded upon a sense and fear of God, and a true love to Christ, and upon
a consideration of sin as an enemy to all those glorious Attributes wherewith
the Divine Majesty is clothed, and by which he has manifested himself to the
World, and instead of engaging a man to an utter abhorrence and forsaking of
all sin for the time to come, and to a vigorous pursuit of all those necessary
virtues and graces which make up an holy life; all which words are plain, and
easily derived into the most ordinary understanding; why these men tell you
that before the work of conversion be wrought, and the man thereby entitled to
the favor and love of God, he must be kept in a legal state, and chains and
fetters must be clapped upon his feet, and the Law must hunt him down so, that
in his soul there must be a soul confounding horror, a soul distressing
anguish, and a soul distracting despair, and God must appear to him for some
time together as an angry Judge without one smile in his Countenance, and take
him by the hair of the head, and then throw him into a disconsolate dungeon,
where not the least light must spring through the most minute crevise into his
soul. And when the man has been by this way sufficiently humbled, why then in
time he shall have comfort administered to him, and be brought into the green
and pleasant meadows of the Gospel, and a spirit within him shall enable him to
cry Abba Father. And all this must be preached as absolutely necessary, so that
some good men through such suggestions have been very much troubled at
themselves as Hypocrites, because they were not brought to the obedience of the
Gospel, by such rackings and convulsions of mind as these.

But now as this notion is false, so it is very pernicious, and hugely slackens
the exercise of true godliness.

For how much time has been spent by this means, in grievous complaints, in
fearful apprehensions of God, in posting from one place to another for
satisfaction, in inveighing against themselves, as if they were the veryest
monsters upon the earth, which might to better purpose have been spent in those
Instrumental parts of Religion, to wit, Prayer and Meditation, etc. from any of
which heartily performed there naturally springs into the mind, not disturbed
by troublesome and clouded fancies, joy and comfort; so that this Bondage state
rather casts a man behind-hand, than any ways helps him in his religious
progress.

Further, how many persons wearied with long expectations and waitings for the
comforts they are promised, at last have thrown off all Religion, and looked
upon it, and the Teachers of it to be nothing else but cheats, and that such
melancholy thoughts have been imposed upon them on purpose to keep them in
dependence upon the insolent and pragmatical Priests.

And further, how many people who have been under the disadvantage of a
melancholy complexion, have been so terrified with these unworthy and wrong
thoughts of God, and have been kept so long under the power of them by some
spiritual Empiricks, that to be rid of them, they have laid violent hands upon
themselves. And then lastly this Doctrine is so very mechanical, and the Body
is so much concerned in it, and the Reason and understanding of men so little,
that it makes way for all the Enthusiasm in the World, and becomes the Mother
of all those wild fancies, the World these latter days has been too sadly
acquainted withal. And whether Religion get any ground by such things let any
man judge, or how those men deserve to be cried up as the only spiritual
Preachers, who vent Doctrines so destructive to Religion, I cannot tell.

And now Reader after I have begged thy pardon for this tedious preface,
(though I must confess I did not design it much shorter, when I first entered
upon it,) I must tell thee that I am not alone in my high esteem for the Church
of England; No, there are thousands in the Kingdom, and those men too whose
excellent and Regular lives, and whose universal learning may justly be speak
them a place amongst the most improved men, who are ready to defend this Church
with both their Tongues and Pens, and of such I will only name two, the one is
that incomparable person Dr. Stillingfleet, who in his Sermon upon Matthew.
21.43. Page 158. calls this Church one of the best Churches in the Christian
World; and in the same place complains that it should puzzle the wisest of men
to find out expedients to keep it from ruin. The other is that excellent, and
no less laborious than learned, Dr. Tillotson, in a Sermon before the King,
where he tells us, that he had been according to his opportunities, not a
negligent observer of the Genius and Humor of the several Sects and
Professions in Religion, and upon the whole matter that he does in his
Conscience believe the Church of England to be the best constituted Church this
day in the Christian World, and that as to the main, the Doctrine and
Government and Worship of it are excellently framed to make men soberly
religious, securing men on the one hand from the wild freaks of Enthusiasm, and
on the other hand from the gross follies of superstition. But if thou will
neither believe them nor me for our bare saying so, read the following
discourse without prejudice; and if through the strength of thy former received
apprehensions, thou will not wholly be drawn over to us, yet I hope thou will
be so far convinced, as to believe that neither the Church nor her Officers and
public Dispensers are so had and obnoxious, as some men through weakness and
others through malice have represented them.

Farewell.

POSTSCRIPT.
Reader,
THe two first sheets of this small book were most of them preached before the
Judges of Assize at Chelmsford in Essex, and therefore if thou find any
thing in them as an Appeal to them, I pray impute it to that. Further Reader, I
must desire thee if thou meetest with the word [why] used improperly, as
sometimes I find upon a perusal of the sheets it is, impute it to custom and a
mode of speaking, upon which score it dropped so unwarily from my Pen. Whatsoever
other faults there are, give me but the common allowance the ordinary
miscarriages of a Press require, and I will ask no more.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Design of the Treatise laid down, 1. To prove that we of this Church have
all necessary advantages for gaining eternal life. 2. To enquire how it comes
to pass such a Church is so generally disesteemed. Page 5.


The first of these proved at large by considering what is necessary to eternal
life.

Two things laid down: 1. A sound Belief of all things necessary, and the
Church found guilty of no defect in that particular. p. 6, 7. 2. An Holy
practice is found necessary, and the Church of England found abounding with
every thing necessary to promote that. p. 10, usque 28. 2. An enquiry how it
comes to pass such a Church is despised. p. 28.


Two sorts of men found faulty. p. 29.

1. Professed Enemies; Those considered, 1. As persons disaffected upon a
worldly account. p. 29. 2. Persons disaffected upon a pretense of Conscience
and Religion. p. 31, 32, 33, 34.
2. A consideration of false Friends as Enemies to the Church, and those ranked
into two sorts: 1. As Persons considered in their Political capacity; and two
ways the Church proved to suffer by them. 1. By their vicious lives and
conversations, especially if they be men of Power and Authority. p. 35. 2. By
their neglecting the execution of those Laws that are made for the Churches
Honor and Safety. p. 38.
2. This Church proved to lose its esteem by false Friends considered as
persons dedicated to an Holy Office. p. 42.

Thirteen Reasons more given of the present contempt of the Church of England.

1. The misconstruing of Judgments, and making every calamity the effect of
Gods Anger for the Churches encroachments upon the Rights of Christ. p. 46.
Three useful and seasonable enquiries proposed to those who are so bold and
forward in particularizing the Reasons of Gods Judgments. p. 51, 53, 55.

2. Another Reason of the Churches suffering assigned from the jealousy of
many of the Gentry (especially those who have swallowed down the Principles of
Mr. Hobbs) lest the Clergy should encroach too much upon their power in those
Countries where they live. p. 56. 3. The Churches loss considered by erecting
Schools of Academick studies, and thereby poisoning the youth of the Nation. p.
62. 4. The Churches loss considered by idle tales against the Reverend Bishops
and their regular Clergy. p. 65. 5. Another account of the neglect of this
Church from Simoniacal contracts. p. 70. Two injuries proved and asserted from
hence. p. 71, 72. With an expostulation with the Lay-Patrons in order to a more
conscientious disposal of their livings. p. 73.

6. The Churches damage by the careless and remiss attendance of many of her
professed admirers, upon her public Devotions and Instructions. p. 74, 75. 7.
The Churches Honor proved lost by a careless consideration of those confusions
that followed her dissolution by the pretended Power of the Long Parliament. p.
76. 8. This Church found a great loser by misinterpreting and misapplying of
several Texts of Scripture: Some of those Texts named, and the unworthiness and
falseness of those interpretations reflected upon. p. 78, 79, 80, 81. 9. The
credulity and easiness of the Common people to take in whatsoever is suggested
by men pretending to more than ordinary Sanctity and Holiness, proved another
cause of the Churches present ruin. p. 82, 83, 84. 10. The Church proved a
loser by the Common peoples stiff adherence to whatever they have heedlesly
sucked in. p. 85. 11. The ill success of the Church laid at the door of those
Atheistical Principles that have spread so far and near in the Kingdom. p. 87.
An enquiry made after the Reason of the present growth of Atheism. p. 88.

Four Reasons of it assigned:

1. The changeableness of many men's Principles pretending to more than ordinary
Godliness. p. 88, 89, 90, 91, 92. 2. The wicked and vile actions of many
boasting of extraordinary piety. p. 93, 94. 3. Unworthy Scandals and
Reflections fastened upon Churchmen. p. 96. 4. The Non-execution of such Laws
which are made on purpose to command the People to wait upon those
Institutions, whereby Religion is instilled into their minds. p. 98, 99.
12. The Church proved to suffer inconvenience from the imprudent way of
executing Justice by many of our subordinate Magistrates upon the Offenders of
her Laws. p. 103, 104, 105, 106. Lastly, The Churches loss considered by those
mean and scanty Provisions that are made for her Children in many places,
especially in Corporation Towns. p. 107.
Three Inconveniences arising hence:

1. As thereby Clergymen are dispirited. p. 111. 2. Or else debauched. p. 113.
3. Or else discontented. p. 115.
Conclusion. p. 116.

An address:

1. To the Nobility and Gentry. p. 117, 118, 119, 120. 2. To the
Nonconformists. p. 122, usque finem.
A MODEST PLEA FOR THE CHURCH of ENGLAND.
John VI. 68. Then Simon Peter answered him, Lord, to whom shall we go? thou
have the words of eternal life.


ALL Societies and incorporated Bodies, Religious as well as Civil, are
preserved by Love and Union, by being knit and keeping close together; and
whatsoever Principles they are, that have any tendency to disperse and scatter,
to divide and separate men in their Judgments and Affections, they ought to be
shunned and abandoned, as the underminers not only of men's peace, and
comfortable abode together, but of their real safety and security; and every
man ought to fear the imbibing and sucking of them in, as he does the most
violent Poison; the least dram of which is enough to infect those vital parts,
which keep the body in good heart and plight. For such principles they heat
men's fancies and naturally make them proud and insolent; and nothing can
satisfy those who are commanded by them but Rule and Government, Authority and
Dominion; and to curb and rein them in, as to any thing they have placed their
Passions on, is to make them, like the wild Bull entangled in a fast-knotted
Net, full of rage and fury, overthrowing every thing, with an impetuous
violence, that stands in their way to the enjoyment of their desire object; and
neither the Thrones of Princes, nor the Stalls of Prelates shall escape their
rude Tongues, nor their ruder Hands, but both the one and the other, must be
torn down on purpose to be a sacrifice to their Revenge and Lust, to their
Malice and evil Nature.

He that looks into History, and by the advantage of his standing in the World,
can reflect upon the last thirty years Transactions in this Kingdom, will
quickly satisfy himself in this. He will find by virtue of such Principles,
the best of Princes murdered; and that, which demonstrates the mischievous
influence of these Principles indeed, this horrid and unaccountable Action done
with all the pretenses of Law and Justice, of Piety and Religion. Further, upon
an easy search he will find the best of Churches, framed with all advantages
for the keeping up of the Purity of Religion, and yet preserving that just
honor and Grandeur, that belongs both to its Service, and its Officers; this
very Church, first treated with scorn and reflected upon with the most bitter
Sarcasmes, and then robbed without the least Pity, though I am sure with great
Dishonesty: with abundance of other spreading Evils, which did these men take
no more pleasure to act than I do to name, they would not be so common in the
world. And therefore it being so, it ought to be the care of every one of us to
use our utmost diligence to discountenance, and, if possible, to bury all those
Principles, from which we have experienced, and do withal foresee so dreadful
mischiefs; and if we cannot do it by Arguments and Reason, the force of which
through Prejudice and interest is resisted, why, those with whom the execution
of the Laws is entrusted, the Civil Magistrates, according to their Oaths ought
to punish the Propagators and Spreaders of them. And that they may be
encouraged to so good a work, and so very necessary at this time, without which
we must needs be involved in a certain, if not speedy ruin, these words are
chosen to be treated upon at this time; Lord, to whom shall we go? thou have
the words of eternal life. The Sense of which words, without any reflection
upon the occasion of them, in brief is this: That so long as men can enjoy the
clear Methods of Salvation, and have all those necessary Means and Helps, that
the wants of their Souls require, in order to eternal happiness; so long as
nothing is imposed upon them either in Belief or Practice, that naturally tends
to obstruct and hinder the progress of Holiness and Religion in men's Minds; so
long as men may under that Dispensation in which they were born and bred, as
easily, nay sooner attain those divine Qualifications, those excellent
Dispositions, those needful Graces, and useful Virtues which the Gospel
commands every man's endeavor after, than they can under any other; So long as
the Society to which they are united, is a true Society, in which are all
Administrations according to the injunction of him who is the Master of it,
why, wither should we go from it in order to better, and mend our selves? Let
us run into what Tents we please, let us betake our selves to what numbers of
men we can, that magnify themselves with the most glorious Titles, and profess
themselves the only Favorites and Intimadoes of the Holy Jesus; why, yet we
can but attain to eternal Life, and that I am sure to as good, nay better
purposes, all things considered, we may do where we are already; and therefore,
Lord, to whom shall we go? for in that Church, in which thou have planted us,
and in that Church, which thou have for so many years watered with thy
blessing, we may have eternal Life; and if men can honestly propound any other
End in choosing either their Religion or their Opinions besides gaining this
eternal Life, why, let them follow their own Fancies, and be led by the wild
fire of their own headlong imaginations. And now I suppose by this time you may
easily see into my Design, which consists of these two things.

1. To prove, That we of this Church have all necessary Advantages for gaining
of eternal Life, and therefore have no just occasion to run away, and separate
from it. 2. To inquire, How it comes to pass that a Church in which we have all
the Advantages for getting eternal Life, should meet with such Contempt and
Disregard, should be in so sick and declining a Condition?
But before I enter upon either of these, I must needs make this Protestation,
That, I bless God, I come not here to express mine own private Passions, nor to
act revenge for any particular injury I have received from those who by their
Positions, and their Practices do insinuate into the belief of the credulous
World, that we of this Church do shut men out of eternal Life. No, had it not
been for an hearty zeal I have for the Church my Mother, and for all your
Interests, as they are wrapped up in this Churches Happiness, I could easily have
chose a Subject that would have run more smoothly, as to some men's
apprehensions and affections, and given, it may be, less displeasure. But,
jacta est alea; here I stand; and considering the Circumstances in which you
Noble and Worthy Persons are, the Trust committed to you, and the Oaths that
are upon you to discharge that Trust, I will be plain, and if I must be
censured for it, I will bear it patiently, because it is for my love to the best
constituted Government in the World: Therefore

1. I will prove that we have all necessary Advantages in this Church, of which
we are Members, for eternal Life, and therefore need not go away from it; which
will best appear if we consider what is absolutely necessary to the gaining of
this eternal Life. And upon enquiry we find but two things, in neither of
which, I am sure, the Church of England is wanting or deficient. 1. A sound
Belief of all necessary Articles and Propositions of Faith. 2. An holy Practice
of all Duties that are enjoined us.


1. For a sound belief of all things necessary in order to eternal Life, we
stand upon as good ground as any sort of men in the Christian World. For our
Belief is of nothing but what is plainly laid down, or easily deduced out of
Holy Scripture, and there is not an Article which we can say was framed by a
Pack of Men met together barely to advance an Interest, or serve a Passion. We
hear nothing in all the Thirty Nine, of the necessary belief of a fictitious
Purgatory, or a Sense-contradicting Transubstantiation: We are not commanded
under the pain of Hell and Ruin, to believe the Infallibility of an usurping
Pope, or the Meritoriousness of good Works: We meet with none of those
Trent-doctrines, that were framed by faction, and voted to no other purpose
than to keep up the present Pomp and Grandeur of the Court of Rome, which were
at first started by interest, and have ever since (to the violation of the
Peace of Europe) been kept on foot by Pride. Nor is the Lawfulness of taking up
Arms against our Sovereign, when he, as we fancy, will not promote Religion,
and advance Gods Glory, and secure the Interest of his elect and darling People
in their Civil and Religious Privileges, one of the Articles of our Faith. No,
no, our Belief is of such things as are in Scripture, and were entertained as
Doctrines and determined so (in subordination to the Authority of Scriptures.)
by the four first General Councils. And indeed our Church would have been very
much to blame, if under a pretense of rooting out unnecessary and ungrounded
Articles of Faith, she had invented others as useless, and as dangerous, having
neither face nor footing in the Holy Scriptures. This would have been to have
propagated Division so long as the world had stood, and given others too great
an occasion to believe that it was not Conscience, but some other Principles,
of another Dye, that put them upon a Separation from the Church of Rome. And
therefore she took care that the Terms of her Communion in point of Doctrine
should be few and obvious; such as no man that is not obstinate and resolved
should deny a ready compliance with: and if any man can rise up and prove, that
there is one Doctrine that has any malign or poisonous influence either upon
men's Understandings, or else upon their Manners, I will stand obliged to quit
the power I have of mine own disposal, and surrender my self his Bonds-man.
Nay, so little liable are our declared Doctrines to any Imputation, so
unquestionably agreeable to Holy writ (the Protestant Standard of all
Doctrines,) that our very Adversaries themselves cannot in all their
Declamations against our Church, forbear extolling the exact Care and Wisdom of
our first Reformers in this particular, and most of them testify their
readiness to subscribe to the Truth thereof, as I could prove from their
declared Opinions in several of their printed Treatises. Yea, if need be, I
could make good this following Story, which I think is no small Vindication of
our Churches Doctrines, That one of them who is now the Oracle of their Party,
to whom upon all occasions they apply themselves, and in whose Judgment they
repose no little confidence, though I shall not name him, because he has been
brought so much upon the Stage already; I say, I could make good that this very
Person, when being entrusted, and invited to assist in drawing up something
which might be a band of Union, and enlarge the Pale of this present Church,
did propose that our Articles might be reduced to Thirty Six, (though, but for
his affected singularity, he might as well have said Thirty and nine) and those
made the Conditions of our Communion. And according to the wonted Clemency of
most of those, who call for Toleration, when they cannot rule and govern,
pressed that whoever refused Subscription to them, should undergo the penalty
of being banished his Native Kingdom; an Expression that begot in the breast of
a late Reverend Prelate, that sat by, a resentment agreeable to his known
Candor and Moderation, and extorted from him a smart reproof of the haughty
Separatist for his apparent Cruelty: and All this I think makes good that it is
not our Doctrine from which these men can fetch the Grounds and Reasons of
their going from us.

2. Let us therefore descend to the other thing requisite to Eternal Life,
which is an holy and upright Practice, and well-composed Life, and a regular
Conversation, which are the chiefest things in which Holiness does consist; and
he who esteems himself so upon any other score, he labors under a very foul
mistake. For intance, He that Saints himself upon the account of some sudden
and vehement slashes of indiscreet and sulphurous Zeal, of some imagined
Raptures, and supposed intimacy and correspondence with all the three Persons
in the Trinity; he that strokes his Breast, as the only acquaintance with God
and Christ, purely for his listing himself into such a Party, and entertaining
such Opinions as the good Apostles and Primitive Christians never had any
knowledge or conviction of: further, he that has no other Plea for his
excelling Goodness, than his observing uncommanded Fasts, and slighting Days
appointed by Authority for solemn Commemoration of past Blessings, and hearty
petitions for Mercies wanted; he that has no other way to make out his
internal Graces, than by a solemn Wink and a meager Face, than by a scornful
pity of the ignorance of his Betters, and bewailing with a doleful sigh the
carnal state of his Neighbors, (though indeed they understand Religion in its
Design and end every way better than himself) than by declining these public
Places of Worship and running into the Camps of separation; I say, he is false
in the Measures he takes of himself, and does not weigh himself in a proper and
allowed Balance. For these things we find may be done by men of the most
debauched Minds; by men every way wicked in their Principles: Nay, these things
have been done, and taken up on purpose to carry on the most villainous Designs
that History can Parallel. And now in this Notion of Holiness we will give
other Churches leave to go before our own.

But if we take Holiness in a Gospel sense, in a Conversation suitable to those
several Circumstances in which we are, those several Relations in which we
stand, those several Dependencies that we have; Then I will say, why does any
man go from this Church of ours? For here he has all Advantages for Eternal
Life. Take Man as he is Gods Creature, the Workmanship of his hands, and
therefore bound to pay Homage and Fealty to him, which you know is most
naturally done upon our knees by solemn Prayer; Why, let me seriously beg of
any wise man to inform me, what we want to this end by way of help and aid in
our so much despised Church? We are permitted, nay commanded, to pray to God in
a Tongue that is known; we pray by words apt and significative of the sense
they bear, and with Prayers abounding with that sense, which no man that is
unprejudiced and wise can except against: We pray to God through Jesus Christ,
presuming neither upon our own worth and merit, nor yet upon the Intercession
of any Saint or Angel; and whether this be not as good a way to express all our
thoughts and affections, as by any uncertain extemporary effusion, where we are
not certain of avoiding rude and saucy periods, and of hearing things sometimes
bordering upon Blasphemy, and oftener upon nonsense, I leave you all, who can
make just reflections upon things, to judge. In a word; In our Prayers we have
as great advantages to pray by the Spirit, it being taken in its proper sense,
nay greater than others, who pretend so highly to it, have: And the reason is,
because we engage this Spirit to come in to our help and aid, by our orderly
compliance with those Duties of Submission and Obedience to Authority, which
this Spirit it self has so strictly enjoined in Holy Scripture: And you know
our Savior tells us, Luke 8.18. To him that has shall be given, that is, the
more Graces and Virtues our Souls are adorned withal, the more still will God
bless us in the improvement of them.

2. If we take a view of those Advantages we have for Eternal Life by
Preaching, by wholesome Documents and Instructions; why, I am not afraid to say
that we have no Reason to throw our selves out of our Mothers Arms upon this
account, or to forsake her for the dryness of her Breasts; for so long as we
are told all things necessary to Salvation, and those several pressing Reasons
why we ought to practice them, (and indeed he must be a very ordinary man who
is clothed with sacred Orders, and cannot teach us this:) Why, though it be our
allotment to be under the guidance of a Minister, who cannot deliver himself
with that affection, whose Temper of Body will not allow him such degrees of
becoming Zeal; why, we must make up that want in him, by raising our own
Affections, in our retirements, before we attend the Public, to an higher
pitch, and better strain; and then I am sure every thing that is Divine, and
tends to Holiness, though not pronounced with that advantage others do, yet
will be welcome and delightsome to us: For it is not, commonly, so much the
Dullness of the Man we hear, as the Deadness of our Affections to him, that
makes us complain of the unprofitableness of his Ministry. And I have known
several, who so long as Interest or Acquaintance, or any thing else of equal
influence, has kept up their kindness or affection to any public Preacher,
they have followed him with greediness, heard him with attention, and praised
him to excess; and their Minds never received greater advantage nor their
Affections a more vigorous warmth, than under such a Person's Ministry: And
yet all of a sudden, let but an unseasonable quarrel arise, and their former
correspondence be abated, and a grudge or two spring up, either upon a little
or no Reason, in their minds, and presently the same man becomes a flat and
heavy Preacher, and they sit very uneasily under him, or else join themselves
to some other, who by chance hit their Fancy and Humor, when they were upon
their ramble in order to find out one to profit by. But because this is a
mighty Pretense made by the present Separatists at this day, and a warrant, as
they think, for their Disobedience to the present Laws, I will make a few
reflections upon it. And here 1. I will state the Notion of profiting, and then
consider whether we may not sufficiently profit according to that Notion under
our established Pastors and Teachers, without gadding after other men.

Now profiting can but possibly relate to these things; either to the
Information of our Judgments, as to all things necessary to be believed and
known; or else to the raising of our Affections in a just proportion to the
Nature and Excellency of those things so believed and known; or to a more even
and resolute Practice of them.

First then as to the Information of our Judgments as to things necessary, we
may certainly meet with it amongst the allowed Teachers, especially considering
how few they are, and how they have been drawn up into a sum by the Ancient
Church: I confess my circumstances call upon me to be oftener preaching than
hearing, but yet this I must needs say, and I fear not a blush in saying of it,
That as often as I can get opportunity to enjoy other men's Labors, I usually
meet with such Discourses, as may vie with those men's, whatever they would
persuade the easy world to the contrary; especially, which I have no reason to
doubt, if their Popular Sermons be fraught with no more coherent Sense and
Reason than their printed Discourses are.

I do not love to make Reflections upon any man's Labors, who designs a good to
the World; and whatsoever Books published by these men have done any service to
the Minds of men, I heartily bless God for: But yet this I must needs say, That
we may meet with Sermons from Persons under the Countenance and Encouragement
of our Church, that may equal any, nay, if I had said, for strength of Reason,
for weightiness of Argument, for fit and apposite quotations of Texts of
Scripture, for apt and proper Terms and Expressions, may be judged to excel
any or most that the Brethren of the Separation have set forth, I think I had
not transgressed the Lines of Truth: But my Design being to convince men's
Judgments, and not to heat their Passions, I will forbear such Comparisons.
However, this I am sure, (which serves my present undertaking) that we may from
the authorized Ministry come to the knowledge of all Doctrines that are
necessary; and he that does not preach them, and give such Reasons for them, as
the Natures of such things will bear, neither understands his Bible, nor yet
has well studied those Articles of the Church that he has formally subscribed
unto: to suppose which of any Person dedicated by an Holy Office to God, I
think is very uncharitable.

Well then, cannot you of the Separation, for to you I speak these things, meet
with as good Reasons for the Being of a God, for the Truth of the Messiah, for
the Necessity of Internal Holiness, for the carrying your selves suitably to
that Creature-state in which you are, and so for all other Requisites to be
known, in our Legal places of Worship, and from Men invested with a Legal, as
well as Divine Authority; as from others, who take up this public way of
Preaching without the allowance, nay, against the Command of the Laws of their
Country? I tell you, to deny this, is to be prond and vain, and to arrogate
too much to your selves. A fault too common amongst some men, who would make
others believe they are the most dead and mortified persons in the World, and
yet at the same time, care not whose Reputation they waste and spoil, so they
may advance their own.

2. The other way whereby we profit, is by having our Affections raised,
suitably to the Nature and Excellency of things believed and known. Now, I must
confess, while we are in the Body, and many Notices of things are conveyed into
our Understanding through our Senses, we have need of all agreeable helps to
reconcile us wholly to Religion, and the several Duties of it; and he that has
the advantage of a mellow Voice, of a taking Delivery, of a Gesture not
fantastical but winning upon the truly wise, as well as others, he ought to be
esteemed and loved, and the Church ought to judge her happiness the greater, in
having the aid and assistance of such a Man. But alas! this is not founded in
every man's Temper; and if some men would purchase it with all they do enjoy, it
is not to be bought. And therefore where it is, it is to be prized, and where
it is not; men ought not to be undervalued; for that is to be so unreasonable,
as to despise them for what they cannot help; nay, it is to reflect upon him
that made them.

Well, but be it so, that these things contribute very much to the raising of
our Passions; pray tell me, have the Nonconformists engrossed this kind of
Temperature of body to themselves? can none but they speak with loud voices,
with a becoming Pathos, with a smart Accent? are all the dutiful Sons of the
Church either troubled with Colds, or weakened by Catarrhs, or almost choked as
soon as they begin to speak, with a defluxion of Rheum? and all this a Judgment
upon them for their Conforming? No such matter; let but these men lay aside
their prejudices, and attend our public Churches, and they shall quickly find
out men, whose Countenances are as grave and awful, whose Voices are as
melodious and sweet, whose Expressions are as weighty and well chosen, as any
of the separated Brethrens are; and consequently, who are every way as well
fitted by natural Gifts of Body, to raise men's Affections, as the others are: I
and these men are not sprinkled here and there, but you shall find them in most
Countries and Cities. And therefore no man can have any reason upon this
account to leave our Church. And if this thing was but searched to the bottom,
I believe we should find something else, besides the Information of their
Judgments, and the raising of their Affections, that these men place their
profiting in; but I list not to render any persons, pretending to Religion,
ridiculous. However before I leave this head, I will venture at so much, that
when I consider abundance of these People, that run into these holes and
corners, how peevish and wayward they are, how proud and haughty, disdaining
every person that goes not along with them into the bypath of Separation,
reflecting upon them as poor carnal and ignorant Creature: further, when I
consider how ignorant and illiterate many of them are, not understanding the
common Reasons that may be given for Religion, and those several Truths that
make up the Body of it; and how most of their skill and cunning chiefly
consists in repeating and making use of some broken pieces of Scriptures, and
discoursing of Jesus Christ in a rude and nonsensical way: Further, when I
consider how little they understand the Difference betwixt us and them, and
what slender Reasons they give for their leaving our public Worship, and how
readily they follow any man that separates, purely upon that score, though his
Principles do more widely differ from what they pretend are their own, than
theirs from ours: Further, when I consider the bitterness of their Spirits,
expressed by their very angry looks, when they meet any of us in our accustomed
Garbs; and by those unchristian as well as ungentile and unmannerly Titles with
which they load us: Why, these, with many other things that might be named, do
persuade me, that there is not so much profit reaped by hearing these men, as
they would make the World believe; for I am sure these things argue much of the
Leaven of the Pharisee, but nothing at all of the Temper and Spirit of the
Gospel: and he that has no better Evidences than these, of his Saintship, I am
sure will find no other than the foolish Virgins entertainment at the last Day.

3. Let us take a view of the Advantages we have for Eternal Life, by a Holy
Life, as this Holiness is expressive of it self in those Duties that belong to
man, especially our Governors and Superiors. And here I am sure the Members
of our Church stand upon a better ground than any other sort or profession of
men whatsoever; and for the defense of this Truth, I dare enter the Lists both
with the Conclave and the Classis at the same time together. Let any man,
though prejudiced to the utmost, stand up, and tell me, where and when he has
met a man truly governed by the Principles of the Church of England, that has
taken the Sword into his hands, upon any pretense whatsoever, against his
Lawful Sovereign; or that has made it his trade and business to whisper things
against his Governors and to insinuate Prejudices into the Minds of his
Neighbors against the present management of Affairs.

Where can you find a man amongst us, who, contrary to the Commands of his
Lawful Sovereign has entered into an Oath, framed and drawn up on purpose to
overthrow the Fundamental Rights and Privileges of the people, as well as the
Essential Prerogative of his Prince? much less can you show me a man, managed
by the Doctrine and declared Opinion of this Church, who has shut the door,
and kept close Guards upon the Chief Magistrate of his Country, and after that
has barbarously embrued his hands in his Princes Blood. No, no, you must go
beyond the Alps and the Tweed to find out such as these. The true Members of
our Church are in this Particular untainted; and so far as men are under the
guidance of her Pastors, and the influence of her Discipline, so far they
imitate the first Ages of Christianity; wherein men knew, how to advance the
credit of their Religion, by suffering, but never by resisting: for they knew
that Government was an Ordinance of God.

4. If we proceed further, and take a view of those several Instances of
Holiness, which are expressed by an affable and modest Carriage to our Equals,
by an extensive Bounty to our inferiors, whose straits and wants call for our
relief; certainly we have in this Church as great Advantages for the exercising
of these, as in any whatsoever. We have Bibles in our Houses to read, and are
allowed the reading of them as well as they, and I presume we can read as well
as they; (for though some of them proudly do engross the Spirit, yet sure they
will leave the Letter to us:) and I think without pride, we may say, that we
have Judgments and Understandings, to receive those Notices of things the Word
of God brings unto us; and if so, why may not we be in as good a Capacity to
practice all those Virtues, which these Relations call for, and are so plainly
laid down in the Holy Word? Why may not we, if we exercise our Natural
Abilities, and seriously weigh those pressing Arguments, that are fetched from
Hopes and Fears, those great Foundations of a pious Life; why, I say, may not
we fix and establish in our Minds, those Divine Graces the Gospel recommends
unto us? such as patience and Humility, Charity and Self-denial, Courage and
Resolution, Temperance and Chastity, etc. Especially considering, we have the
Spirit of God ready to help and cooperate with all our honest endeavors. For
when our Adversaries are cool and sober, this they dare not deny; which if they
do, as God knows, in some of their heats they are so unwary as to assert, why
they are at the same time so monstrously uncharitable as to call in Question
the Salvation of all those Worthies of the Church that have been ever since the
first Reformation; and our Judicious Morton, our Devout and Pious Hall, and our
Learned Sanderson, with vast Numbers of others, must (according to these men's
Opinions, that every Member of our Church, barely by being so, has forfeited
his Interest in Gods good Spirit's assistance) be adjudged to be now scorching
in the Flames of Hell. A Censure, enough to stir the choler, and ferment the
Blood of any man, who has but the least spark of Humanity lest within him!

And though I know they plead for themselves, that our Ordinances, which should
be the instruments to convey these Divine Principles and Graces into us, are
stained by impure mixtures, by uncommanded Ceremonies; Why, when they can find
out a Discipline without any Ceremony, purely fetched out of the Word of God,
delivered in as plain and obvious terms as the Mosaic Dispensation was, and
declared by God, that it was his will and pleasure in every Circumstance that
that Government should be maintained and submitted unto; when they can present
us with a Model having nothing of Humane and Prudential Determination in it, we
will answer them; and to do it before, is at once to spend our Time and our
Breath in vain. Only I take leave upon this occasion to make this digression,
which I think is not unsuitable to the design I have in hand:

That I have been a very impartial Considerer of this Objection, and by virtue
of my first Converse in the World, these and such like suggestions from men
whom I was taught to believe were the only Children of God, had a very fair
hearing in my Breast, and I was willing to incline to those Arguments proposed
by them for the Defense of that noise and bustle they made in the World: But
when I came afterward to consider the Authority wherewith Princes both upon
Natural and Revealed Principles and Grounds are invested, and the miserable
confusions that are consequent upon slighting or resisting that Authority; when
I considered the great Reasons for making Laws, and the necessity of keeping up
their reputation, and paying a constant Veneration to them, if we would be
preserved in any tolerable degrees of Peace and Safety: further, when I
considered, that the very Reasons why the Brethren of the Separation declare
their dislike of our Ceremonies, are disowned by our Church; witness their
declared Opinion of the Sign of the Cross, and Kneeling at the Sacrament in the
very Rubric; and that these men are forced to make new and unheard of
distinctions to render them unlawful, witness a Book printed some time since,
by one of the Chiefs of them, against a Member of our Church: Further, when I
considered, that if there was any Reason to scruple the Lawfulness of these
things, yet it was not so great, nor so apparent, as the Reasons against Schism
and Disobedience; and that the complying with the one could not possibly be so
dangerous to all Societies of men as the engaging in the other: These, with
many other considerations, satisfied me, not only in the Convenience, but,
considering the present differences in the Kingdom, in the Necessity of
yielding Obedience to the established Orders of the Church, and I could never
yet get leave of my self to concur in Judgment with one, now at this time much
admired and followed in the City, Mr. Jenkins.
That the laying aside the Ceremonies of the Church was a sufficient
compensation for all that Blood and Treasure that had been spilt in the late
unnatural and bloody War; but wish with all my heart that they had continued
till the general conflagration of the world, rather than such a war should have
commenced; for I am certain that the necessary results and consequences of the
one are a thousand times more prejudicial to the honor and reputation of the
Protestant Cause, than the continuance of the other could have been, had they
been as had, nay many degrees worse than our interested and zealous Adversaries
have made them: And we are able to answer all Arguments raised against a Cross,
or a Surplice, when we cannot without steeled Brows, and seared Consciences
vindicate and defend the late Rebellion. But in short, this, in my apprehension
(and I am sure I am not prejudiced) is so baffled a Cause, that I wonder men of
Parts and Learning are not ashamed to offer at the Vindication of it: and I do
verily believe those men that now make themselves the Heads of these dividing
Parties, would not assume the confidence to fix such odious Names upon the so
well defended Ceremonies of the Church, and upon us for our peaceable and
obedient using of them, did not they meet with so many ignorant and
uninstructed people, who are prepared, (upon the account of those great
pretenses these men make to a more severe Holiness than others,) to believe
whatsoever they confidently bolt out, without a suitable evidence and proof;
and who are pertinaciously resolved to drive on their Secular Interest, by
raising their own heights, upon the spoils and ruins of other men's Godliness
and Reputation. And when things are looked in to the bottom, we shall find,
that this is the Foundation of very much of our Nonconformity, which is now so
bold and daring (for, God forbid I should lay this Imputation at every man's
door;) and if we once could arrive to that happiness, as to make the Common
People wise, and the Leaders of them in these forbidden Tracks silent, we
should quickly find Obedience to our Laws a more general thing, than, God
knows, to the grief of all wise observers, now it is. And though I know this
Opinion of mine is contradicted by many persons (who upon other accounts do not
want my just esteem;) yet so long as the Common People are heedless as to the
several Notions they suck in, and imposed upon in no things sooner, than those
which ought to be esteemed of greatest weight and moment, I mean the Matters of
Religion, which have an immediate relation to the Interest and Happiness of
their Souls; so long as their Ignorance and more slender thoughts of things
expose them to Pride and Self-conceitedness, to such opinions of their own
narrow and straightened Conceptions as for want of more mature considerations of
things, bear down all Arguments derived from the preservation of Humane
Societies, from the Dignity and Sacredness of Princes, founded in being God's
Vicegerents here on Earth; so long as they cannot, by reason of the dullness and
uninstructedness of their Minds see into the ruins and desolations that do
infallibly attend all Disobedience to Authority, but are apt to sancy a better
state of things, were they all managed by the present little Models they have
either framed themselves, or else by the silly suggestions some illiterate and
yet pretended Rabbi, have lodged in their idle and unfurnished heads; why, so
long I must crave any man's excuse if I do not assent to those men's Judgments,
who with no small degrees of confidence, and with great pretensions to a more
intimate acquaintance with State-Maxims, assert an Universal Toleration the
only way to recover the Church, and to wrack Fanaticism and Sedition. And had
the late Author of the Discourse of Humane Reason lest his Books a while, and
walked about the Neighboring Markets and made just Observations of the
improvements of those men who make up those crowds and numbers there, I am apt
to believe he would have considered better, before he had published a Book so
destructive of all the Fundamental Notions of Government and Public
Communities; a Book wherein things of the greatest Importance are lest to
those, who by all the pains we can take with them, can be hardly brought to a
right understanding of common sense, and the most obvious and natural Duties of
Religion. And thus having proved, and I hope to satisfaction, that the Church
of England is wanting in nothing that refers to our Belief or Practice, and so
consequently to the gaining of Eternal Life, I will proceed to the next
enquiry, to wit,

2. How it comes to pass, that a Church thus furnished with all Advantages to
Eternal Life, should meet with such Contempt and Disregard? And here, upon
enquiry, we shall find this principally proceeds these ways; (1.) From
professed Enemies; (2.) From false Friends: both which very much hinder the
Churches progress in the Hearts and Affections of its Members, and spoil its
deserved Reputation.


1. We will consider the Churches professed Enemies, and of them we shall find
two sorts of persons pecking at her.

1. Some upon a Worldly and Secular account. It Is too well known, that in the
late Combustions, many men warmed their fingers at those fires they themselves
had kindled; and though splendid Pretenses for Religion and Pure Worship were
at the top, yet a sordid aim at the Churches Patrimony and Revenue was at the
bottom of their Designs; and no sooner had success crowned their unworthy
undertakings, but they presently fell to sharing other men's Legal Portions, and
Spiritual Allotments: And though they pretended a Spirit of Selfdenial, on
purpose to put the fairer gloss upon their ungodly Quarrels, and to allure the
Common and easily mistaking People into their service; yet we find, no sooner
did they apprehend themselves out of danger, by the Fall and Ruin of the Royal
Party, but presently they forget the so much cried up Ordinance of Selfdenyal,
and fall a voting considerable shares of this Worlds Blessings to one another,
and Church Lands went at as easy a rate then, as they did at the great
Alienation of them; and scarce a Man that had been active, either in City or in
Country for their Cause, but he must have a feeling of those Spoils and
Booties. All which we know by an happy Restoration, in course returned to their
true Proprietaries again. And can we think that those who felt the sweets of
these enjoyments, have lost their former Tastes and Relish? No, No, to fancy
this, is to be guilty of too careless an Observation; for if they had, what
makes them privately among themselves to this day buy and sell those very
Estates? which I think is no hard matter to make out. A thing which if but
looked in to the bottom, would easily convince our Governors, what confidence
ought to be reposed in such men's Pretenses to Loyalty and Obedience, and withal
the safe Condition their. Estates and Liberties are in, while these men have a
full liberty to make their Parties, and strengthen their Interest in the
affections of people of all sorts and ranks whatsoever. Well, and how must
these men's lingrings and desires after these Estates be fulfilled? By what
Methods can they hope to get into the Saddle, and ride upon the High places of
the Earth again? Why, the only way is through the ruin and downfall of the
Church; and how must this be accomplished? why, Slur it all the ways you can;
call it a Limb of Antichrist, an encourager of the Beast that ascends out of
the bottomless Pit, a supporter of Ecclesiastical Tyranny, and insinuate into
the common peoples minds, that she stands betwixt them and their Gospel
privileges, and that there is as direct an opposition betwixt her and the
Church God has instituted, as there was betwixt Dagon and the Ark; with many
other vile reflections of this Nature, and then you have half done your work.
For these men know, let their pretenses be what they will, that when the Church
totters, the State has a fellow feeling with it, that they live and die
together; and therefore they itch after its Ruin, which they think they cannot
better promote than by slandering of her, and when that is done, they fancy, as
well they may, a quick possession of those far Lands they so cheaply bought,
and so deservedly have lost.

2. This excellent Frame and Constitution suffers from men, who are enemies,
upon a pretense of Conscience and Religion. And here I might bring you a
Catalogue of various Sects and Parties of men, who, though they cannot agree
amongst themselves, when they come to divide the Churches spoil, yet all
combine together to make the Church it self their spoil; and in pursuit of
this, by what Names do they describe this excellent Church in their Prayers and
Preachments, but by the Whore of Babylon, the Cruel Dragon, that pours out
floods of poisonous water upon the Woman, the Slayer of the Witnesses, with
many other of this Nature? And her pious Prayers must be scorned under the
Notion of dull and formal things, fit for dark Times, and for none to use but
such, as understand not the impressions of Gods good Spirit. And her Reverend
Prelates, instead of the ancient and Primitive Appellation of Fathers, must be
branded with the Name of Step-Fathers; instead of Pillars, Caterpillars, whose
Houses are haunted, and their Episcopal Chairs poisoned by the Spirit that
bears rule in the Air. And for her Ceremonies, they forsooth, must be reported
to be kept on foot on purpose, to symbolize with, and show our affections to
the Church of Rome; and this must be said with a great deal of confidence,
notwithstanding the men that suggest it, know and are convinced at the same
time, that no men of any Profession whatever, have thrust sharper Darts into
the sides of that pretended Catholic Mother than the Sons of the Church have
done. And though I know this looks very disingenously, and I think I had not
wronged my Charity if I had said Dishonestly; yet nothing is more common
amongst men who study the Interest of a Party, and are resolved to six
themselves if possible, in the Chair of Authority and Government. The most
useful Virtues must be made Vices, and Worthy Actions that serve the Public
and argue a true Generosity of Mind in him that does them, yet must be
misconstrued, and the Principles of the Actions censured, and some Circumstance
or other thrust into them, whereby the Credit of them may be blasted.

Thus when Archbishop Land took care for preventing the subversion of the
Church of England, by the spreading of the Socinian Heresies, in suppressing
books of that nature, Mr. Burton charges it as one of his Crimes upon him,
reproaching him for suppressing those Books for no other Reason, but because
they magnified the Authority of the Holy Scriptures. A Censure as full of
Spite and evil Nature as most I have met withal.

But thus it is, and, as far as I can see into Affairs and Tempers, will be so
long as some Designs are on foot and some sorts of Spirits are permitted.

Let us say what we will, and enter into all manner of serious Protestations
that we are no Papists, neither aim at the Introduction of Popery in the least;
Let the Members of our Church write with never so much strength and weight
against the Innovations of that Church; nay, let the Life of our Church be
begun in the Death of many Worthies, for their resolved and steadfast Opposition
to that Church: why, yet that we are Papists, or else inclinable thereunto
being a pretty way to convey Prejudices into the Common People against us, and
to draw off their Affections to our Persons, that thereby they may the more
easily be allured from our Doctrine and Public Administrations; why, to this
good End, and that the Glory of God may be magnified, and the Power of his pure
Ordinances demonstrated, in the destruction of the Sons of Babylon, we must be
Papists, and we must drink of the same Cup of Fornication that Mother of
Harlots does; and when we write against her, it is but a Copy of our
countenances, for in our hearts we are for Rome.

And after all this can any man wonder, that a Church so battered at by Persons
professing more than ordinary Sanctity and Holiness, and expressing that
Holiness by so many formal and taking ways, by all that their Hands and
Tongues, their Faces and Gestures are capable of; that a Church thus
misrepresented and withal to persons of weak Judgments, and yet strong
conceits, as God knows most of the common people are; can we, I say, wonder
that a Church surrounded and stormed by such Enemies as these, lives not in its
ancient Splendor, in its just and due Esteem? And what will be the end of
permitting all this? (though I must confess I have many sad Reflections about
it) why, that I leave to the Magistrates of the Kingdom, who have great Estates
to preserve, and ancient Families to support and continue, to consider of.

And thus having shown you the Damages this Church sustains by open Enemies, we
will now proceed to and take notice of the Injuries she suffers from false
Friends: And here also we find Two Sorts of Persons whom she has no reason to
be proud of. (1.) Some whom we will consider as Persons in their Political
Capacity, as Members of the Civil Body; and Two ways the Church suffers by
them: 1. By their vicious Lives and Conversations; especially if the men who
lead these Lives be men of Power and Authority. It is observed that among the
Common People, things, though never so excellent in themselves, though never so
conducive to advantageous purposes, yet they lose their esteem, when men of
profligate Lives have the Manage of them. And though I have to assault my
Betters with any rudeness, and both my Function and Education oblige me to
Decency both in my words and carriage; yet give me leave to be a little plain
with you that are our Country Patriots, and to entreat you all who by the good
liking of our great Lord the King sit in higher Places than others, to
vindicate the Honor of our Church, to recommend it to the choice and love of
all within your Neighborhood, by your sober Lives, and worthy Conversations.
It was an excellent Saying of an Honorable Person, some years ago; who, when
lying upon his deathbed, did thus express himself; That he had looked into all
Forms and considered all Models of Discipline and Governmens, and found none so
agreeable both to the Apostolical Example and Primitive Practice as the
Discipline and Government of the Church of England; and that he found but one
unanswerable Argument against it, and that was the Lives of too many who
profess an outward kindness to it. Oh did our Magistrates comport themselves
according to the Rules of the Holy Gospel, did they countenance Godliness and
Sobriety, and punish all those notorious Impieties, which are so obvious to the
Common People, and which, where only the Laws of Nature have their Influence,
come under censure; did they in their several Public Meetings carry themselves
with that Gravity which becomes their Places, and which indeed their places (if
they would keep up the necessary Reputation of them) call for at their hands:
Further, did they encourage the Public Preachers by their constant Attendance,
and a Deportment, whilst they are there, significative of that Veneration they
have for the Ordinance; did they all in general lay restraints upon themselves,
and afterward punish others for their usual and yet horrid Oaths and Curses;
were their Houses Schools of Discipline and good order; did they speak of
Religion as persons having a sense of it upon their Minds, and as persons
abhorring the new odious way of drolling upon it; Oh! methinks then I see
Faction and Sedition dread the Common Streets and Public Houses, and with
shame creeping into holes and corners: methinks I see this Church so fitted to
all the Purposes of Religion, lifting up its head above the Waters, and no more
heard complaining of her coarse and homely usage from those Children that were
brought up under her Wings and Government, And that this may prevail with the
Gentry of the Kingdom to leave off any course of Life, whereby this Church is
prejudiced, I will end this Head with this bold Assertion; That so far as they
have any hand, either by their vicious Examples, or any other way, to the
pulling down of this Church; so far they lend their assistance to the ruin of
their Posterity; especially if their children prove but honest, and
conscientiously obedient to the established Laws. And if any man will offer to
gainsay me in this Particular, I will only refer him to the account of the
Compositions and Sequestrations which the Loyal Gentry of the Kingdom were
forced to submit unto, and the irrecoverable Entanglements of their Estates
thereby, after the sinking of the Royal Cause by the late Wars: and if that
will not convince him, I will trouble myself with no other Methods of
satisfaction, but leave him as a Person pertinaciously resolved against the
clearest Evidence.

2. These men that are entrusted with Places of Authority are false Friends to
the Church, by neglecting the just Execution of those Laws that by the Wisdom
of the Nation are framed on purpose to keep up the Honor and preserve the
Safety of the Church. For if there was a Reason for enacting those Laws, and
they were designed to fence the Church and to keep it from the rude assaults of
every pragmatical and conceited Person, who will be pleased with nothing but
what is shaped and fashioned according to some raw Fancy of his own; why, then
I think they ought not to be laid aside, as Almanacks out of Date.

And if there be no such thing as a Reason for them, why then, in Gods Name,
let them be repealed; though I think it is a sign of a very bold and busy
Spirit to declare them so, before the wise Sages, who upon great advice did
make them, adjudge them so, and signify their Opinion to us by as solemn and
plain a Declaration as the Act it self was by which these things were
commanded. For if Laws and Constitutions, which were made for the Good of the
Body Politic, must submit to every private Man's shallow Understanding, and
the Obligation of them cease or take place according to their Opinion of them,
Government will quickly lose its force, and Princes will be in a worse
Condition, and have less Authority than Masters of the smallest Families. And
from disputes and Questions about the Rights of Princes, in ordering Church
affairs, they will proceed to judge of those Laws, that are made either for the
Preservation of their Persons, or supplying their necessary Charges with
Revenues suitable to that state such a Trust does call for. And though that the
Execution of these Laws seems very grievous and full of cruelty to many men,
especially to those who are settled in their Commands over the Separating
Bands; yet when I consider, that either it must be so, (provided the Laws
continue as they are) or else that a whole order and Body of men must be
destroyed, and brought under the Power of those, whose Mercies we know by sad
experience are Cruelties, and who by a misguided Zeal, fancy they do God good
service, in stripping us of all the Laws give us a Right unto. I would appeal
to any man, whether the whole should suffer, out of a womanish pity to a few,
and solid Constitutions truckle to groundless Passions and resolute
discontents? I am sure, according to those Observations I have made, I have
always found that wise Governors in all Ages have made private Conveniences
or Advantages, submit and lie prostrate before a public good: And accordingly
we find, the Late King, that incomparable Person, in his Letter of Advice to
his present Majesty, gives his sense of this, in these words; That he could not
yet learn that Lesson, nor he hoped ever would his Son, That it is safe for a
King to gratify any Faction with the perturbation of the Laws, in which is
wrapped up the public Interest and the Good of the Community. And therefore it
being so, I would desire the Subordinate Magistrates of the Kingdom, (for to
these only I make this Address) with whom his Majesty has entrusted the
Execution of his Laws, to consider whether they do not give away the Safety, as
well as the Reputation of the Church, by suffering men before their doors, as
it were, openly and with all the seeming Circumstances of a defying Confidence,
to break the Laws and violate these sacred Constitutions. And though I know
what some men put in by way of answer to all this, yet when men can find out a
Plea for Perjury, I will return upon them, and not till then; only I dare
assure them that it would be better for such men to decline the Public
Service, than to take an Oath to do it, and yet neglect it: And though I have
said more now upon this Head, than I know many will con me thanks for, yet let
me conclude with this Protestation; That I have not argued this out of any
desire of other men's suffering, either in their Liberties or Estates; for I
thank God, my Natural Temper, as well as my Religion, obliges me to greater
Moderation; and it is not particular men I advise this against, but mad
Factions and embodyed Numbers, whose Principles stand in a direct opposition to
the present Settlement of the Church; and the grand Reason, why I conceive Laws
ought to be executed, is from a full satisfaction I have, That no Kingdom can
live in Peace and Honor, where solemn Acts, made for the regulating men's
Lives, and restraining their violent passions, give way to private and more
particular Interests. And if all our several Adversaries would not say the
same, were any of the Governments and Disciplines they are so fond of, as well
established as ours is, I will be their Bonds-man. And therefore I hope no man
will impeach me upon this account, of a bitter and persecuting Spirit.

2. As this our Church loses its Reputation and Esteem, by false Friends,
considered in a Civil and Political sense; so it loses very much, and I wish
there were no cause to say it, by false Friends, considered as persons
dedicated to an Holy Office, and sworn to do her faithful service; the Idleness
of some, and the Viciousness of others, who wear the outward Robes of
Innocence, have opened as many, nay more mouths against our Church, than any
thing else I know. Had not our Enemies stood upon this place of defense, and
made it their chiefest Sanctuary, we had muzzled Faction long ago, and
seditious principles had been quite beat out of Countenance; we had chased
Separation into its proper Den, and sent it back to inhabit those lower
Regions, where it was first invented. For when all Arguments have failed our
Adversaries, and we have silenced all their unreasonable Clamours, why yet an
Arrow fetched out of this Quiver has shot us through and through; and we must
never hope to see the Church ascendant, till we recollect our selves, and
return, in some good degree, to the Innocence of Primitive Christianity. Let
but Gravity and Prudence attend us in the Streets, and in our ordinary
Converse; let but Diligence, and a well-proportioned Zeal await us in the Desk
and pulpit; let us fight our Enemies with their own weapons, and be as often
preaching Conformity and Obedience to wholesome Laws, as they are stirring up
their hearers to dissatisfactions and discontents; and then I am sure we shall
not need many more Laws to reduce the Generality of the people to a Submission.
I will not meddle with the Right or the Religion of Preaching often; yet this I
will dare to say, Considering our present Circumstances it is very politic and
would prevent much of that Faction, which otherways will necessarily grow and
enlarge it self. And upon this account I would heartily desire those men, who
are not satisfied in the public Convenience of it themselves, not to laugh at
and deride those who do it; for I am certain this has contributed to the
Churches loss, and has put an Argument into our Adversaries hands, that has
not wanted its force and power amongst the giddy multitude. Well therefore, if
we have any desire to see the Prosperity of this Church; if we have any hearty
good wishes for the unalterable Settlement of it, pray let us be diligent in
our Calling; for Diligence makes the Church rich both in Members and in Graces
too. Let us not grudge any pains, whereby we may draw people into that Fold
Christ himself does keep, and bring them into those direct ways and paths that
lead to Eternal Life.

But there is another false Friend amongst the Clergy too, and that is he that
inveighs privately against what publicly he has sworn to, and in his Visits
sighs and mourns for those Impositions, which under his own hand, he has
declared his full satisfaction in. This is the Man indeed that nurses Faction,
and strengthens the Common People in the belief of their wrong and ungrounded
persuasions of the Discipline of the Church; and truly is fit for nothing else
but to be given up to the utmost Justice and Rigor of the Law, and to be dealt
withal as a perjured person; for what hold can be taken of such a person, and
what security can he give of his good Behavior, whom Oaths and voluntary
Subscriptions will not oblige and tie? This Man ought to be looked upon as an
Enemy in our own Quarters, standing ready upon every Siege, to open the Gates
and to break down the Walls in order to the entrance of our Enemies upon us;
and if such Fellows as these be not taught better Manners and more Honesty,
why, we must expect a return of our former Gonfusions upon us again. For here
it was they begun before, and most of those that cursed Meroz, and invited the
Common People to help the Lord against the Mighty, were persons whose several
Hands, to the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church, might have been found, in
those several Bishops Offices, from whom they received those Instruments
whereby they were empowered to exercise their Public Ministry. And alas! that
which shows there is much of the same Spirit amongst these men still, and that
the Interest of Morality and Honesty must be waved, when their Game is to be
played, is this, that there is scarce any man in Public and Legal Employment,
can have a good word, or be represented under any fair character by the
Brethren of the Separation, but such false Loones as these are: these must be
cried up as having something of the Power of Godliness; (for to allow as much
as themselves pretend to, would spoil the market;) these must be vogued by them
as men having some tolerable acquaintance with the gracious Influences of God's
Spirit, and as men whose Hearts are good, let their outward Practices be what
they will: and if advice be asked, what public Ministers are fittest to be
heard? why, if they will allow it Lawful to hear any (for, I promise you, at
this time, as the price of things go, it is a very great favor) be sure they
be sent to these men's Churches. But, Good God! that men should be so
notoriously wicked on both sides; the one to entertain a good opinion of and
look upon the other as a Saint purely for his Knavery and Dishonesty; and the
other that he should believe himself the better Christian, because he plays
tricks with Government, and solemnly swears to that, which privately he
complains of as his greatest burden, and makes ridiculous reflections upon:
certainly if any thing be an Argument of a wasted Mind and spoiled Conscience,
it is this.

And thus having given an account of those main Engines whereby the Honor and
Safety of this excellent Church is battered down, I thought to have consulted
the Readers as well as mine own ease, and to have gone no further. But upon
fresh and second thoughts, I find other things whereby our Church suffers an
Eclipse, which though not so obvious to every view as the others, yet I am
certain very pernicious, and in their way very much conducing to the Churches
Ruin, and to the increasing of those thick Clouds, that are now so fast
gathering about us; and which, if not laid aside by those who have hitherto
been the evil Instruments to make use of them, will in time lay waste this
Garden, though never so well enclosed: Give me leave to name them.

First, This Church suffers by men's misconstruing of Judgments and making every
Calamity and Desolation that befalls the Kingdom, to be the Effect of Gods
anger for the Churches encroachments upon the Rights of Christ, whose Scepter
they would persuade the World is by us taken out of his hands, and given to the
Civil Magistrate, who has no share nor portion in it. And this is a mighty
prevailing thing amongst the Vulgar, whose sense of Secular losses, such as
they have a present feeling of, is very great, and must needs influence them
accordingly. What can provoke such people more than a persuasion, that upon
such and such accounts their endeared Children are swept away by a spreading
and contagious Plague; or that the Scarcity of Corn which is their every day
necessary Food, proceeds from Gods displeasure against Bishops and other
Clergymen, for keeping Christ out of his Government and Kingdom; and that
those several Fires which tear down their Houses, and give so great
affrightments, are purely kindled upon the score that Gods people (by whom they
mean themselves) are punished, for not yielding to Romish and Superstitions
Impositions? Certainly such suggestions as these, to people who are hugely
governed by Sense, and take their measures of things by Success and Prosperity,
must needs stir up all the Passions that are within them, and confirm in them
the greatest prejudice and displeasure against a Government from which so much
evil has been derived, both to men's Persons and Estates. And further, their
impatient longing after a full enjoyment of all those things that contribute to
their worldly Happiness, must needs put them upon all violent means to throw
down that Interest, which destroys so much at present, and set up the other
whereby they are invited to believe all happiness and outward welfare would
attend them; especially if you do but add to those things a Description of a
glorious State of spiritual things, wherein they shall have a share of
Government, and not be at this rate always under Guardianship and Subjection,
ridden by Priests and other Antichristian Officers: Oh! such an Expectation
makes their Blood boil within them, and to promote these excellent things they
care not what wrong they do either to Church-mens Reputation or Revenues, nor
what Method they make use of to weaken the Forces of such a Babylonish Crew,
who would stand betwixt them and the splendid Manifestation of Christ's Power
and Kingdom. And if any man object and say, I am uncharitable in fixing such an
Imputation upon the Adversaries of the Church, I answer again, it is no breach
of charity to charge men with Truth, and to let the World know, by what base
and sinister means they lessen the deserved Honor of our Church, nay, it is a
piece of Charity and Justice to our selves. And that I have not charged them
falsely I refer any man to those Interpretations they made of the last great
Plague and never-to-be-forgotten Fire, in which though many of these men wanted
not their share, as to loss and damage, yet Good men! such was their Innocence,
they had no hand in the provocation: though one would have thought, had the
Fire been purely to vindicate their cause, the Angel of the Lord should have
marked their Houses, as he did the Israelites in Egypt, and commanded those
furious Flames to have passed them over, and spent their rage upon theirs
alone, who were professed Sons of the Church of England. And let them say what
they please by way of excuse for themselves, yet this is their course still;
and though Judgments are sent as tokens of Divine displeasure against all those
breaches of Gods righteous Laws, all those open and boldfaced Impieties, all
those Enormities that are usual amongst any Party or Division of Men
whatsoever, though we all come short of the Glory of God, and every man from
the highest to the lowest, by some miscarriage or other helps to kindle the
fire in the Divine Breast, yet this Church of England, this cruel Stepmother,
who tears out of Gods Childrens hands the pure Bread that falls down from
Heaven, and would put them off with empty Husks; these proud and domineering
Clergymen who live in ease and idleness, why, for the sake of these does God
suffer the Air to be infected, the Earth to be dry and barren, and the Heavens
to be as Brass over our heads. Oh! were but Antichrist once destroyed, and all
the appendant Limbs thereof, and Christ's own Ordinances and pure Institutions
set up in the World, what a new face of things would be presently! then would
our Floors be full of wheat, and our Fats should overflow with Wine and Oil;
then the Saints should meet with joy, and sing their songs upon Sigi^n^th; yea,
then would Gods people execute vengeance upon the Heathen and punishment upon
the People, and bind their Kings in chains, and their Nobles in fetters of
iron. And oh, how does this good news tickle the vulgar sort of people, and how
pleased are they in their fanciful Reflections upon what brave Times will be,
and what brave things they will do, when they come to have a share in the
Powers of the Earth, and put hooks into the Nostrils of the great Leviathans,
the Temporal and the Spiritual Tyrants, that have eaten up Gods people, as they
eat Bread! And that these good things may be accomplished, and they may leave
the blessing of them to their Posterity; why, good men, many of them care not
by what Spoils and Rapines, by what Untruths and Falsehoods they slurr the
Credit, and ruin the Reputation of such a Church, as is the great bar to these
happy Enjoyments. And because this is so common a thing among all Sectaries
whatever, and they have so partial a kindness for themselves, as to sweep their
own doors, and lay the loads upon other men's shoulders; give me leave to make
an useful Digression, and show the Vanity and Irreligion of such doings, by
proposing to these men a few Questions.

1. Whether they do not, by particularizing the Reason of Gods Judgments,
pretend to a Knowledge, which they cannot, according to Gods ordinary Methods
of proceeding with the World, at this time attain unto? For that Miracles,
since the Settlement of the Gospel Dispensation in those places where its
Profession is become National are ceased, I think is passed all doubt; and that
God now deals with men's Reason and Understanding, and offers them the Evidence
of former Miracles in conjunction with other Arguments in order to their
Conviction of the Truth of what he has delivered, is past all scruple: and
further, that no Man that pretends to have a further Revelation than what is
made in Scripture, is to be believed, unless either I have a Revelation
signifying that his Revelation is true, or else he bring his Letters credential
along with him, and by Workings above the power of Nature, such as Christ, and
his Apostles and their Successors for some continuance of time had, prove his
Mission, I think is beyond all controversy. So that then these men, who, that
they may the better heat the Common People against us, pretend themselves Gods
Familiars, and privy Counselors, and by virtue of their Intimacy with him
boldly lay Judgments at the doors of other men, by what way shall we know they
are right in their Interpretation, and that God grew very angry with this
Nation, as soon as Episcopacy was restored, and the Lands of the Church
returned into the possession of the right owners again; and that the Plague and
the Fire were sent purely to vindicate their cause, and to express Gods
indignation against that cruel and hard usage they met withal? Can they
satisfy us in the truth of this by Raising the Dead, or else speaking those,
as St. Peter did, who this moment are in a complete state of Health, into death
immediately: (God forbid they should be invested with such a power, for I
believe we should have but very few Bishops left alive amongst us then.) Can
they alter the Course of Nature, and change the essential Property of any
thing, and do great cures even by opposite and contrary Means, as our Savior
did? No, alas! when we make a just enquiry into their abilities, we find the
men, maugre all their boastings, are but like unto us, and all this confidence
in particularizing the Grounds and Reasons of Gods Judgments, is founded in
pride and Self-conceit in an overweening value they have for themselves, and an
implacable hatred they have entertained against the Church of England. And
though the Principles of Separation have been the Instruments of as dreadful
Effects to this Nation, and wrought as great Confusions as History almost can
parallel; yet so vain are many of these Men, that there cannot be a Storm or a
Tempest, that there cannot happen the least Ruffle or Disorder upon Nature, but
presently it is to give intimation of the wrongs and oppressions they are
under, and to warn both the King and Bishops to treat them more gently for the
time to come. And by this means the easy people are emboldened to very vile
thoughts of the Government, and to any mischievous undertaking that tends to
its Ruin; for who would not willingly be ridd of a Constitution or of a Number
of such Men as are so great eye-fores to God himself, that the very sight of
them is continually provoking him to work great Desolations in the earth?

2. I ask these men, whether we, as obedient Churchmen, have not as much right
to make use of this Argument against them, as they against us? truly I think it
will be no easy matter to disprove it. Nay considering that earthly Government
is a dim and obscure Representation of that excellent Order and Harmony that is
in Heaven, and that Magistrates are Gods Vicegerents and his immediate Stewards
on Earth, I think that those who live in Obedience to them, upon a satisfaction
the things they command are not unlawful, may pretend to as great, nay greater
kindness from God than these men can do, and consequently be better enabled by
him to expound Judgments than they are. And now upon this account suppose
should tell them, that the Plague and the Fire was for the murdering one King
and Banishing the other; was for laying violent hands upon the Ancient and
Primitive Order of Episcopacy, and turning the Aged and Reverend Prelates out
of their Estates as well as Liberties: suppose further, we should tell them,
that the continuance of Gods anger is for their adherence still to those
Principles, notwithstanding we have in these late years seen issue from them,
such horrid Distractions and Animosities, such unnatural Quarrels betwixt
Neighbors and Neighbors, nay betwixt some Parents and Children; I say,
suppose we should tell them this and much more, why, would they not pronounce
us monstrously uncharitable and presuming upon a greater information from
Heaven, than we have any warrant to do from Scripture? but why the Pride and
Uncharitableness should lie altogether on our side, I profess, I cannot tell,
unless they can demonstrate their Right, as I said before, to comment upon all
the visible Expressions of Gods Anger by working some unquestionable Miracles
before our Eyes.

3. I ask these great pretended Acquaintances of Heaven whether it be not a
Sign of great Hypocrisy and unsoundness of Mind, to prevent and hinder the
influence of any Argument or Consideration, whereby God designs to lay men's
Pride in the dust, and to work them into that state of Humiliation and
Self-abasement, which becomes all men in this frail and imperfect State? For
certainly it is the proper character of a good and an honest Christian, who
takes up his Religion upon Gospel-Motives, that he is one that will make use of
all Ways and Methods, to work his mind up to such a Temper as God requires from
him, and therefore this good Man if at any time God suffer great ruins to
overtake the World, why, he knows, he cannot better and more suitably comport
himself, than by being humbled under his Anger, than by reflecting upon himself
with that severity of mind, that becomes any man, who has had an hand in such
provocations; but now for a Man or a Body of Men to impute these Judgments to
others and to shift them from themselves, it is to abate the force of that
Argument, that may be fetched from Gods present heavy Dispensations, and as
persons unconcerned, to leave all those ways of Humiliation, prescribed in
Scripture, to be undertaken and done by others; for as for themselves they can
wash their hands, they are pure and clean, than which there cannot be a greater
instance of Pride and Vanity of an unsound and a very corrupted Mind. And
therefore if by these Questions I can but bring these great opiniators to a
persuasion, that Gods Judgments are sent forth to punish and terrify men of
all Opinions and Judgments whatsoever from a sinful course of Life, and that
when he appears with his Sword in his hand, every man ought to smite upon his
Breast, and say, What have I done? I think I shall do both Religion, and
themselves a very great Right.

2. This Church suffers very much by the Jealousy of many of the Gentry
(especially those who have swallowed down the Principles of Mr. Hobbs) lest the
Clergy should overtop them, or at least encroach too much upon their Power, and
influence in those Countries where they live. Many of them, I say, for God
forbid I should impeach all or most of them; for certainly there is no spot of
Ground in the Christian world where there are better bred Gentlemen, than in
this famous Island, who understand respect and kindness to all sorts of
Persons, in proportion to those several places and conditions they are fixed
in, and who have a particular esteem for the Clergy, both upon the score of the
Dignity of their Function, and their just opinion of those Degrees the
University for a compensation of those improvements they have made in several
Arts and Sciences have deservedly conferred upon them. And I must needs say
this further, that I have met with very few Branches of the Ancient Gentry,
upon whom Civility and Modesty have been entailed from many preceding
Generations, or in my present Neighborhood, that have not been very
punctualand zealous in keeping up the Reputation of the Ministry, both by
their own personal carriage to them, and their readiness to secure them from
the assaults and rudeness of the untutored Rabble.

But however we cannot expect but in great flocks there should be some diseased
Sheep, and even amongst those who either have, or ought to have had better
Education, we must expect to meet with some, who want that Civility and
Obligingness of Behavior, that would very well become their great Revenues,
and put a gloss upon their Titles of Honor. And usually the frothy Wit and
impertinent Humors of these men are spent upon those, who by virtue of their
Commission are the Ambassadors of God, and out of fear lest they should share
with these Mighty Huffs in Command and Interest among the common people, why,
all ways must be taken to insinuate little opinions of them into the Minds of
the Credulous Vulgar. And to this good end now and then they must be invited to
this Great Man's Table, and be called at every turn by some name or other, that
shall make them cheap in the eyes of Vulgar people, who commonly take their
measures of things from the Practice and Example of their Landlords: and that
their dependence may be the faster, if their Maintenance be but small, all ways
must be stopped, through which they endeavor to obtain a legal and certain
enjoyment of a more comfortable and suitable Livelihood: for whilst their Lives
are precarious, oh they can put them to the frequent use of their knees, which
otherways would grow too stiff; they can keep them at a distance, and make them
know what subjection means. Alas! if they come to make their claims by the
Countenance of Laws, they will be too proud and saucy, unmannerly and rude, and
it may be assume an unaccustomed confidence to reprove these braving Hectors
with too smart and severe an Emphasis. Then they will it may be too boldly
stand their ground, when they are scornfully reprehended, for their ill drawn
Doctrines, or their ill derived inferences; for their busy interrupting his
Worship when he had composed himself to a soft and easy slumber: and though in
ancient times Emperors and other great men submitted conscientiously in many
things to the Power of Spiritual Guides, and took their Correction as well as
Advice and Counsel with all cheerfulness, yet now, forsooth, it is below a
Gentleman to have his frolicks damped by the pragmatical interposal of a busy
Priest; this is a piece of slavery to which their Heroic Spirits scorn to
submit. And therefore to prevent this Inconvenience, all means must be used to
daunt the Spirits of these Worthy persons who are Gods Messengers, and to make
them more modest in their addresses to their Greatnesses for the time to come;
and if by an idle and contemptible Name, or a scandalous Report they can render
these men cheap and little in the Hearts' and Eyes of their Neighborhood, they
fancy a very great victory and conquest.

But how unworthy a thing this is, as it is a contempt brought upon men, whose
Learning and Education commands from all ingenuous Minds esteem and value, and
how pernicious it is in its consequence I leave any man to judge, who
understands the necessity of a separated Order of Men, to instruct all sorts of
people, and thereby teach them the principles of Obedience, first to God and
then to Men, according to their several places in the World, an Order of men
without whose Influence and repeated Counsels, I am certain the World would be
little better than a Wilderness filled with Inhabitants of no better Natures,
nor under any better Discipline than savage Beasts are; whose great employment
is to run up and down and rend and devour one another. And I would therefore
have this great Swaggerer against the Clergy to consider, that without such an
Order of Men, his very Estate would be the parent of his Danger, and his best
title to it, would be the length of his Sword and the Number of his Servants;
for it is our business to teach men upon Principles of Conscience, to keep
themselves within their stated bounds, and to be content with any Condition the
Providence of God shall allot for them. And if you do but lay aside the
Priesthood, and suffer the people to receive no better Notices of things than
what they get from these Great Men's Examples, or the Documents of their
ignorant Neighbors, I will warrant you, Men, though capable of better things,
will be like Beasts of prey, and the several Orders of men must submit to the
fury of the strongest Party, and the greatness of their Estates will expose
them to the greater Envye and the closer conspiracy of other ambitious persons
to betray and work them into ruin. And this was wisely foreseen by several
wise men in the late confusions; and therefore when the freakish Sectaries
started any thing of this Nature in their pretended Parliaments, and offered at
a Vote against the public Ministry, as sometimes they did, why, these men
stepped in and with all their might and strength opposed it, and with this
Argument chiefly, that without the Conduct and Guidance of such an Order of
Men, it was impossible to keep the Nation in any tolerable peace and quietness.
And therefore I dare be bold to acquaint these despisers of the Clergy, that
it is not only their praise to give respect and honor to Persons, whose
Functions and Education challenge it, and who have received it from all wise
and good Men, time out of mind; but that it is their safety and security, and
that the preservation of their Estates in their Families and Successors does
much depend upon it. For without Principles of Conscience, which we know are
chiefly derived into the Minds of people, by the Ministers of the Gospel, and
the sooner according to the strength of their Reputation amongst the people, I
say without Principles of Conscience men can have no other security of their
Possessions, than what they enjoy by outward force and strength: and therefore
if these men will not esteem us for the sake of our Improvements in Learning,
for the sake of those Degrees the Universities have conferred upon us, and
which by the Laws of Heraldry, puts us into the Rank and Number of Gentlemen;
nor for the sake of our holy Office, whereby we are dedicated to the Service of
the Great King of Kings, yet I hope the preservation of their Lands and
Revenues will have some influence upon them, and oblige them, if not from
Principles of Conscience, yet from Principles of policy, to treat us becoming
our Profession, and not deal with us as the Refuse and Scum of the Country, as
some idle atheistical, Gentlemen shall I call them? no Br^^^s, have done of
late.

3. This Church suffers very much by erecting Schools for Academick studies as
they now call them, and thereby infusing Principles of dislike against the
Government into the Youth of the Kingdom. I need not tell the World what a
piece of boldness this is, and what an unsuitable return it is to his Majesty
for his kindness and condescension to these men; who instead of making a modest
use of his Goodness, are forming Factions against him, and instructing Youth in
Principles of a quite different Nature, from the Laws and settled constitutions
of the Kingdom, are preparing their Posterity to stand it out against their
future Governors, as they themselves have done against his present Majesty and
his Father, and by this means are entailing miseries and confusions upon the
Nation. Alas I at this rate the Church of England will never want its Enemies,
and a Generation of Vipers will be at hand upon all occasions to sting her if
possible to death; and if this be suffered, and our Governors lie asleep
whilst the Enemy thus sowes Tares, why, then the Lord have mercy upon us, we
cannot sooner or later escape a ruin, and it is impossible but either Popery or
Enthusiasm, should like a Deluge overflow us, both of which we know make men's
Spirits turbulent and unquiet, and aiming at nothing less than the enthroning
of themselves, though it be by pulling down with the hands of violence and
rudeness any thing that stands in their way. This is a Mine made to blow us up
withal, the very thoughts of which is enough to provoke the Patience, and raise
the Passions of any man, though mortified in never so considerable a degree.
And if the Youth of the Nation must be suffered to suck in with their Mothers
Milk the Fathers Antipathy against the Church of England, we may premise our
selves if we please Halcyon-days when this generation is wrought off, but alas!
we shall find them like the Hydra's Head, one springing up in the room of the
other. And though I know these Reflections upon these new Schools will seem
very grievous, and that I must incur a very severe Ceusure for it, yet I
profess I cannot help it, for my sense of it is so sad, and according to that
foresight I have, it seems to me so very ruinous to the future Peace and
Quietness of the Nation, that I am afraid the Children unborn will rise up and
call them cursed who were the first Promoters and Undertakers of it; and though
I would be charitable, yet methinks it looks too like a Design to entail that
Revenge they cannot act themselves, upon their Children to act for them in
succeeding Times, which is a spirit as directly opposite to the Meekness of an
honest Christian, as Light is to Darkness. Oh if some of the old Puritans, who
heedlesly vented some of those Principles, from which our present Nonconformity
took its Original and Rise, were but alive for some few days, and had a just
Relation of their Successors actings, methinks I see with what indignation they
would declare against these practices, and how easily they would be persuaded,
to quit those Opinions, they now find by sad experience make men so busy and
so restless. What! cannot these men be content to break Laws themselves, and be
winked at? but they must plant Schools of Sedition and dissatisfaction, in the
several parts both of City and Country? Oh, all you that have any regard to
Religion, and zeal for the propagating the Graces of the Gospel, in the hearts
of men, divulge not this in every company, for it is enough to increase that
Atheistical Spirit, that is now too rise amongst us, and to force less
considering men, whether they will or no, to look upon Religion as a politic
Engine, fitted for any Design, men's Lusts and Passions, men's Interest and
Advantage shall suggest unto them. To see men deliberately training up Youth in
a direct opposition to those Laws, in the preservation of which the safety both
of King and Kingdom are concerned, it is an unaccountable piece of confidence;
to see men expressing no other Resentments of his Majesty's Clemency and
Forbearance, than what consists in weakening the hands of Government, and
multiplying parties to withstand and fight against its Laws, it is an
Ingratitude not easily to be paralleled. From this bold Contrivance, we may
justly expect, if not timely discouraged, the inevitable Ruin both of Church
and State; and therefore from the thing it self, and its miserable Effects, let
us all say, Good Lord deliver us.

4. This excellent Church receives very considerable damage from those idle
tales that are carried up and down, against the Reverend Bishops and their
Regular Clergy, whereby they are rendered either impious, or ridiculous: A thing
which has been all along used by our Adversaries, although its being so I am
sure is not for their credit. And if they can but get any thing by the end
whereby the may disparage the prudence, or blot the Temperance and Sobriety of
their Minister, why, presently one hotheaded fellow or other posts from one
company to another, and with all the ridicuculous circumstances in the World,
tells his pleasant story. And Oh how do the zealots hug themselves at such an
advantage to advance their cause again, and with what seeming pleasure do the
tatling Gossips spread this news abroad at the next meeting of the Sisterhood!
where the poor priest one while is laughed at, and another while with deep
fetched sighs pittyed and lamented, as a poor carnal wretch; and where at the
same time from him they presume to take their measures of all the rest of the
same profession: and every one that is canonical, must presently be arraigned
and then condemned as a person wholly ignorant of the Mysteries of the Gospel.

And that such idle Stories may not want their full advantage, the Members of
this Church must at the same time be bewailed as lost men, as persons given
over by God to a vile and reprobate sense; otherwise according to the profound
judgment of these wise ones, it is impossible they should sit so contentedly
under the Ministry of such blind Guides, and submit to such beggarly elements
which are so abhorred by all who are acquainted with those new lights that in
these latter days have sprung up in the World.

And though upon the supposal that any of these idle stories are true, yet if
the same thing befall any of their own gang, who we know are not without their
faults, why, presently shifts and excuses are made, and either God sees no
Fault in Israel, or else the Flesh was weak though the Spirit was strong: but
for a a member of the Church to fall into any error, is presently an argument
of a Reprobate mind, of a soul forsaken by God; and he must not be admitted to
any possibility of Reconciliation with Heaven, unless he renounce his former
obligations to Authority and Laws, and herd himself amongst these refined and
spiritualized persons. And now by this artifice the Church sinks in the esteem
of many unwary persons, and they stand ready upon such sinister representations
of her Members, to do or say any thing, whereby they may soil her beauty, or
eclipse her glory. But is this fair dealing? is it like the Spirit of the
Gospel, which thinks no evil, much less with a tickling pleasure speaks
evil of others? Is this any argument that they are better and more experienced
Christians than their Neighbors: Can they upon this account vindicate and
challenge to themselves the right of being God's Children? and do they entail
their Saintship upon their reviling, and loading with calumny and reproaches
those who are their betters, such as are entrusted with public Offices, and
therefore not to be accused under two or three Witnesses? If this be their
Religion, and one of the evidences of their being the only people of God, truly
as yet I must demur, before I wish my self of their Number: for according to my
present belief of things, which I think is founded upon the plain declaration
of Gods mind in Scripture, the clear contrary to these is what the Gospel
commands, and that Charity which our Savior was an example of, I am sure was
that which the Apostle acquaints us with, namely such a one as is so far from
divulging, and laying open men's infirmities, that it covers a multitude of
faults.

And though I know many of these things are forged, yet upon the admission of
them to be true, let these men if they can, prove either from Scripture or from
Reason, that it is their duty to uncover their Brothers nakedness, and to
render such persons ridiculous, whose very Office in all Ages, has commanded
an esteem and veneration. No, no, this is a sign amongst many other things,
that Conscience is not so much concerned in the quarrel as is pretended; for I
am sure an honest tender conscience rightly understood, is such a one as is
universally disposed to every thing that is made matter of divine command,
among which covering, which I said before, another faults, and restoring a
fallen brother in the Spirit of meekness, are plain and obvious. And therefore I
must desire those, to whose ears such spightful tales are brought, to consider
that the stories told are either true or false: If they be true, and of an
heinous nature, they ought in their retirement to implore God's Grace for such
public persons, that they may do so no more, and according to their Interest
in them, and acquaintance with them, to caution them against putting such
advantages into such uncharitable persons hands for the time to come; and if
the stories be false, as thanks be to God many of them are, though told with
all the degrees of boldness, they ought to vindicate their aspersed brother and
give such rebukes to this busy whisperer as the nature of the crime calls for.
But whether they be true or false, I will say, unless the fact alleged be very
notorious indeed, that he is as great a transgressor who with so great a
delight and forwardness divulges it abroad, as the other is in committing of
it. And if this thing be but considered in its Principle and in its End and
Design, we shall find, such aggravations in it, as will easily induce us to
believe this man, to be never the better Saint for his departure from the
Church of England. For I do say this course is impious and diabolical, a direct
imitation of him who in Scripture is called the Accuser of the Brethren; And
let these men glory in their acquaintance with God and Christ as loudly as they
please, yet I am sure this spirit is from the Devil, and shall never find an
entertainment and acceptance from him who is styled Love it self. And truly
though for many Reasons I have but a very ordinary opinion of the late
Reformers, which I list not now to repeat, yet I will be so open as to tell the
World this is one, to wit their readiness to publish their cursed book of
Centuries, and in it to divulge whatsoever they could invent or find for the
defamation of the Clergy of the Church of England. An action as fully
declarative of an Antichristian spirit, of an Hellish temper as any I have met
withal; and until this spirit be banished, we must not allow them to be the
only Saints, but we must believe that the Gospel Spirit lodges more amongst us
of the Church, than amongst them notwithstanding their vain and confident
boasting.

5. The Church of England suffers very much by Simoniacal Contracts, by entering
upon pastoral charges indirectly, and leaping into preferments over those gates
and walls, which the Church has raised on purpose, that none might enter upon
her sacred employments, and encouragements, but with Consciences as clear as
the Sun at Noon. And amongst many other these two things upon this account
contribute toward the Churches loss.

First, as thereby the Conscience of the Minister is debauched, and he thereby
made very unfit to give those Instructions, and wholesome counsels to his
people, that otherwise he might do. For all wilful sins, especially such a
notorious one as Perjury, hardens a man's mind, and divests him, till repented
of, of all the necessary and useful influences and assistances of Gods good
spirit, and withal makes him careless, as of his own so of the Souls of others;
and a man so easily ensnared by such a sin is easily induced by any temptation
to a neglect of those duties which his office calls for, and a remiss
performance of those Ordinances, which were designed and commanded on purpose
to reform and instruct the people. And where a Minister of the Gospel is idle
and careless in the execution of his duty, there the common people either run
into divisions, and opposite parties to him, or else grow rude and heathenish,
both which are very mischievous to the Church.

2. The Church is injured by that contempt that such a thing brings upon their
Teacher amongst the common people; for though these contracts may be kept from
legal proof, yet there are usually such circumstances in them, as make them
shrewdly suspected, which I could name, if it was convenient. And pray how can
such a man live in any regard and credit, who is believed to get a title to his
living by creeping through the back door of perjury? Certainly the belief of
this, must bar up the way, through which wholesome documents and true
information of necessary things should be conveyed into the peoples minds; and
this is enough to ruin not only the reputation but the labors of any such man
whatsoever. And it is not possible for him to govern with that authority, and to
those good purposes he might do, who is believed a person of no principles nor
Conscience, but will swallow down any thing, and voluntarily incur the censure
of the most perfidious wretch, rather than lose any considerable advantage from
the World.

And therefore I do heartily beg of the Lay Patrons (for thanks be to God in
this particular we have no reason to complain of the Bishops and the other
Clergy, as to those shares of Church preferment that are in their disposal) I
say I must beg the Lay Patrons to consider seriously that that excellent Church
in which their happiness and safety is involved, suffers by their private gain,
and that they set their own advantage against that of the Church their Mother,
and that they do betray the Souls of those, to whom they send men of such
corrupted principles and forfeited minds as these are. And further I entreat
them to consider, that when they come to take a view of what they have done,
they will find the money they received is the price of blood, and that they
sell those for whom Christ died, and must be accountable at the Last day, not
only for their own Sin, but for that very Sin of Perjury the vicious Priest is
guilty of; for he that invites a man to a sin, is reckoned as if he had
committed the sin himself.

And further I offer to these men's considerations that unspeakable
discouragement, which by so doing they give to learning, and those worthy
improvements which render men really and indeed useful to the Church, and the
Interest of immortal Souls, when Dunces who have more Money than Honesty or
Learning, shall climb into the best Preferments, and men of Parts, and
Principles, who by pains and study have run through and well digested all
necessary Arts and Sciences, must be forced to sit down contented, with
allowances every way disproportioned to, and below their manifest deserts and
worth.

And if there be not some further remedy found out against this distemper, we
may well expect in a short time, to see the Church in a more forlorn and
despicable condition than now it is, which God of his goodness prevent. For I
cannot forbear reasserting this, that the Church and State are so necessarily
helpful to one another, that they will live and die together.

6. This Church receives no small injury from the careless and remiss
attendance of many of her professed admirers, upon her public Devotions and
Instructions. And though I do not think that Religion lays any obligation upon
her Children to hear a Sermon every day of the week, nor to esteem that time
lost and vainly spent in which we are not upon our knees in prayer; yet this I
am sure of, that we are obliged to attend, if not reasonably prevented, upon
all those Ordinances, which the Church has enjoined us; and to omit them, is
to violate our obligations to that Authority, to which we have vowed and
professed subjection.

And if we consider well, we shall find that not only the necessity of our
Souls (which by often and dutiful approaches to God in public prayer, are
preserved in a warm and vigorous sense of God, and so consequently made more
fearful of running into any course whereby he is offended,) requires this at
our hands; but the being useful to others by our good examples, especially if
we be men of power and authority; for Examples with the common people are more
prevalent, usually, than Arguments and Demonstrations. And therefore he that
either out of a vain notion, that one Sermon a day is more than he can
practice, or from a lazy and slothful temper, which too many are guilty of, or
because it is the best time he can spare from his other business, to indulge
himself and his Neighbors in excessive and intemperate drinking, neglects not
only the preaching but the public prayers of the Church which he is bound to
be present at Evening as well as Morning, why, I must tell him that he is an
enemy to that Church of which he is a member, and puts an argument into her
Adversaries mouth, whereby he renders her contemptible.

And is it not a shame, tell me you who are the persons guilty of this crime I
am now accusing, to see men more zealous in breaking than you are in preserving
the reputation of public Laws? and to behold Faction more eagerly supported
and upheld than Loyalty and obedience? And therefore I do in the name and
behalf of the Church your Mother, beg and entreat you all to render her and her
public Devotions more venerable in the eyes of the common people, by your
constant waiting upon all her Offices, upon all those public Ministeries,
wherein she dispenses wholesome food to all her Children; for this will evidence
that which many people are unwilling to believe, to wit, that Essential
Righteousness and Goodness are as visible and conspicuous in the Members of our
Church as in any other, and that if her Counsels be but followed, there are
none that make nearer approaches to the Zeal and fervor, to the Innocence and
simplicity of the Primitive Christians, than the Sons of the Church of England
do.

7. This Churches honor and due regard is lessened by a perfunctory and
careless consideration of the confusions and disorders, that followed her
dissolution by the pretended power of a Parliament. For he that truly weighs
what monstrous Opinions presently brake in upon us, such as were destructive of
all our Civil as well as Religious Rights and Liberty; he that reflects upon
the impudence and boldness, wherewith every private fancy was vented and spread
abroad, and how servants became our Masters, and the Meanest of the people
presumed to handle sacred things: further, he that considers the blood was
spilt and the treasure was exhausted, and all this for a thing they could never
agree what it was; why, certainly he cannot but maintain a value and just
esteem for a Church, which by her Doctrines and Canons puts every thing into
its proper place, and settles every person in his own office, and prescribes
him duties suitable to the sphere in which he moves, giving a just power to
Magistrates to enact, and punishing Subjects for any wilful disobedience to
those Laws so enacted; enjoining the Pastor of every flock to teach the people
all necessary duties, and commanding the people to such a submission to those.
Instructions, as is neither prejudicial to their Judgment of discretion, nor
yet allows them pragmatically to scorn and censure whatsoever pleases not their
own itching ears and overcurious palats.

And therefore let me here advise all men who are not perniciously resolved, to
take notice well of this one thing, and I am confident it will go very far
toward their cure. Let them consider the violence after this Church was down,
offered to men's Estates for their conscientious adherence to their Prince, the
taking away the Lives of many of the good Subjects of the Kingdom purely for
not siding with them against the known Fundamental Laws, the divesting of many
of the Nobility of their birthright, because they pursued his Interest from
whom their Titles of Honor were immediately derived: Let them consider further
the strange Maxims of Policy by which they acted, after the taking down the
Churches Fences, and every man's doing what was good in his own eyes, let them
consider the horrid and intolerable abuses put upon the Providence of God, and
at last the murder of the best of Kings; and I will warrant them, if they be
cool and in their proper senses, and not sworn to the Interest of a Faction,
they will keep alive in their breasts a greater veneration for the Church of
England than they had before. And though I am sorry we have any occasion to
mention these things, and rubb up these old sores, yet so long as men stand
ready with their former principles and prejudices to act over the same part
again, I think every honest man ought to let the unwary Vulgar know, what was
the effect of these men's former undertakings, that so they may be armed against
all temptations thereunto for the time to come, if ever opportunity, which God
forbid, should serve them.

8. The Church of England receives very considerable prejudice by
misinterpreting and misapplying of several Texts of Scripture, which are
forcibly pressed contrary to their very grammatical sense, to serve the ends
and designs of her Adversaries, and to draw off the common people from any good
opinion of her. The common people, I say, whose size of understanding is so
little, as to live wholly upon other men's Judgments, and to believe what these
busy Encroachers upon the Rights of Government say, without any serious
reflections or considerations at all: and such sort of people making up the
greatest body, and upon that account being most useful for any wicked
enterprise when opportunity shall serve, they are those whom these men
principally court, and whom they make proud by insinuating into them a belief
of their excellency above all the rest of the World, and the peculiar esteem
God has had for them from all eternity, without any consideration of their
good or evil deeds.

And if any man shall urge me with a false accusation in this particular, I
only refer him to the several printed Sermons of these men in the Long
Parliaments time; and if he do not there find very wretched and dishonest
perverting of Scripture in this particular, I will acknowledge my self
deserving the severest punishment so great a scandal calls for. I list not to
bring men's names upon the stage, though I could swell this Treatise by such
quotations if I pleased. Only I will ask these men what agreement there is,
betwixt Egypt with her garlic and onyons, and the Church of England and her
Ceremonies? For my part I can find none, and I suppose all wise men are of my
mind; and therefore there can be nothing else designed by this comparison, but
an ugly insinuation into the Vulgar people, that our King and Bishops are as
great enemies to Gods people, as Pharaoh was to the Seed of Abraham; and that
the Laws made for the preservation and honor of our Church, are as great
burdens, as those the Israelites underwent by the cruelty of the Egyptian
taskmasters.

Further I would fain know, what affinity there is betwixt us and that Babylon
that is made mention of in the Revelations, and threatened with so great a
ruin? Yet Babylon being a word used to a very bad sense, and to represent such
a great Degeneracy, why presently this poor innocent Church that imposes
nothing upon the minds of men either in point of Belief or Practice but what is
admirably serviceable to the ends and designs of Religion, she must hand over
head be called Babylon, and upon this score the common people must be taught to
run away from her, because she is under that denomination the Mother of
Harlots, though many of those that upon such suggestions have forsaken her
Discipline and Government, God knows have run themselves out of breath, and
have settled no where, till they have sunk either into Atheism or Popery.

Further, when the Separatists invite the ignorant rabble to increase their
Numbers in order to affright Governors from interrupting them in their
Spiritual enjoyments, as they call them, by such places of Scripture as that 2
Corinthians 6.17. Come out from among them, and be you separate, touch no
unclean thing, are they not very unworthy, or else very ignorant in the
application of it to our Church? for upon a true consideration, that place
refers to nothing but the Idolatry of the Heathens, and has no Argument in it,
if they cannot prove us as truly Idolatrous as the Heathens were; until the
doing of which they ought, by all the obligations of honesty, to let our people
live peaceably and quietly amongst us, serving God according to the
appointments and Institutions of our Church: and if they will but give us rest
and peace so long, we need not fear their vying Numbers with us.

Again, when they engage the credulous Multitude to withdraw from our public
Devotions, by citing that place of the Apostle, 2 Colos. 20, 21. Touch not,
taste not, handle not. which refers (upon an impartial enquiry into the
Apostles meaning) so certain Impositions, such as abstaining from Marriage, and
some sorts of meats as utterly unlawful, which were not so, and so became real
encroachments and usurpations upon the Christian liberty, why, though this
strikes at the Church of Rome, which imposes upon the minds of men things as
absolutely necessary, which have no such necessity, neither in their own
nature, nor by virtue of any command from God, yet it reaches not at all any
legal injunction of our Church, which is recommended as indifferent, and
declared not to change its nature by being commanded by Authority, and that it
is alterable when it seems good to the same Authority, which is all we say of
our Ceremonies.

And now so long as the people by such slight artifices as these, are to be
deceived, and that there are certain busy and needy persons, who make a trade
of imposing thus upon them, so long we cannot expect to keep our Church in a
flourishing state. And to speak my mind freely, when I take notice of the
education of the greatest part of men, and their natural jealousy of their
superiors, I rather wonder, considering all things, that we have so many
continue in our Communion still. Though I hope a time will come when the people
will be better informed and warned against such evil designers, as too many of
these men are. And these reflections necessarily inform me of another head
under which I may bring the present misery of our Church, and that is.

9. The credulity and easiness of the common people to take in whatsoever is
suggested to them, by men pretetending more than ordinary sanctity and
holiness. Alas their Judgments being but weak and crazy, and their improvements
very small (for which they stand engaged chiefly to a careless education) and
their affections being the chief Ringleaders of them into Belief as well as
Action, why let but a crafty fellow come, and utter himself with a loud and
Stentor-like voice, let him open his throat till he be hoarse again and make
several sorts of faces, let him but pretend a more than ordinary pity and
compassion for their Souls, telling them God has sent him on purpose to rescue
them out of the jaws of misery and destruction, and alas let it be what it will
he utters, though never so nonsensical and rude, though never so heretical and
blasphemous, yet it is swallowed down as glib as a gilded pill, and the subtle
designer is taken into their Houses as an Angel newly dropped down from Heaven;
And Oh whas running and riding to hear this excellent and inspired person, and
with what power and demonstration of the Spirit does he preach! And the easy
Multitude presently enroll themselves in God's eternal Register, and cry up
themselves as his elect and peculiar Vessels, because God has taken such care
of them, as to send so powerful a Messenger amongst them.

And though I could produce sufficient evidence of the truth of this from the
Histories and Accounts of the late bad times, yet I will be sparing; and only
for the confirmation of what I have here asserted, refer the Reader to the
story of Mrs. Hutchinson in New England.

We know very well that the people that first went over thither, were such as
had notoriously forsaken the Church of England, and were therefore amongst one
another cried up as the most Godly and tender conscienced people in the world,
such as longed after nothing more than to bathe themselves in the pure streams,
and to breath in the clear air of Gospel Ordinances; people, who were inwardly
acquainted with Gods will, being his secret and hidden ones, and manifesting
themselves so by exposing their lives and fortunes in crossing the Seas, and
taking up their habitations in an howling desert, and all this out of
principles of Conscience, and an earnest desire to worship God according to the
pattern in the Mount.

And yet these very people, who if you will believe the brags they made of
themselves, had an Unction from the holy one, and were thereby empowered to
know all things, who were cried up as wise sober and well-grounded Christians,
why no sooner did they hear the charming voice of this bold and daring woman,
(though the things delivered by her had by their own confession the whole
current of Scripture against them) but they presently cried her up as one
raised up of God for some great work; and amongst many other things, the
calling of the Jews was at hand, and she was to be the Instrument of it. And as
the story says, (writ by themselves,) she had more resort to her for counsel
and clearing up men's spiritual estates, than any Minister, nay than all the
Elders in the Country.

And if this be not a sufficient evidence of the easiness and weakness of the
common people, I cannot tell what is. And how far such people are to be trusted
with liberty to hear any Deceiver that sets up for a Guide and Director of the
people, I leave the Governors of the Kingdom, whose concernments are of
greater weight and moment than mine own, to judge. Only this I will assert,
that had the Common people been wiser, or the Deceivers of them fewer, I am
sure the Church had been in a better state than now it is.

10. Again, the stiffness of the common people, and their pertinacious
adherence to whatsoever they have heedlesly sucked in against the present
Government under which they live, is another ground of our Churches decay.

For let these men be but once prejudiced against any thing upon the least
account, and they become next to unalterable, and it must be a great deal of
time and a considerable addition of knowledge and understanding that can bring
them off. This is obvious to every observing man whatsoever. And therefore we
ought to take especial care, that nothing be insinuated into them, but what is
wholesome and savoury, but what tends to peace and quietness, and to the
preservation of those several societies they help to make up; for you may as
soon hope to remove a Mountain, as to bring such people, whose Reason is
subjected to the Impressions of passion and fancy, to a right understanding
and a modest and hearty retractation of their formerly imbibed errors. For
though they can give no tolerable account of the grounds of their Opinions, yet
they have learned confidence enough to laugh at and despise all that can be
offered for the conviction of their judgments; and they will be in the Right,
though all the rest of the World, and many of those much wiser than themselves,
be in the wrong. And though they cannot argue, yet they are taught to throw
dirt in the face of him that attempts their reduction, and to load him with all
those Names, by which both Idols and Idolaters are called and represented in
Holy Scripture.

And therefore upon this very consideration, I heartily recommend it, both to
Parents and Masters, that they keep their Children, and their Servants from
resorting to such places, where they are in danger of having their Judgments
thus poisoned and infected, for they cannot imagine the great trouble that may
redound from thence, as well to themselves as to their Governors: for
assuredly there is nothing makes men more proud and insolent, more busy and
headstrong, more obstinate and stubborn, than Principles of Schism and
Separation; and if any man shall judge me harsh and censorious for saying so, I
dare undertake to give such plain and late Instances of the truth of what I
have said, as I am certain will convince any person, who does not resolvedly
shut his eyes against the Light.

11. We may further lay this present ill success of our Church at the door of
those Atheistical principles that have spread so far and near in the Kingdom.

For the Church being made up of a number of persons linked together in the
belief of such and such Articles of Faith, and in Covenant and promise to
worship God according to his will and pleasure, why it is impossible when that
which is the Foundation of all this is taken away, but the superstructure
should fall immediately. And further, the Censures of this Church being
designed to punish men in this world, in order to free them from the plagues of
another, why alas these Censures must needs be mocked at by those who have got
up to the belief, that there is no such thing at all as another world. And that
a man must by necessary consequence believe, if he think there is no God; for
these great Fundamentals stand and fall together. And upon this score where
Atheism has got any interest or credit, you will find no men more loose to
Government, more severe in their reflections upon the Canons and Constitutions
of the Church, and who indeed make nothing else but a laughter at the whole
Systeme of Religion.

And therefore Atheism and its principles being so vastly pernicious to all
Churches whatsoever, it will not be amiss to inquire into its Original, that so
the root from whence these poisonous branches grow may be stubb'd up; and I am
afraid we shall find many of those persons concerned in the present growth of
this bad weed, who would very willingly be looked upon as the chiefest dressers
in Gods Vineyard.

1. The Atheism that is at present so rife among us, ows its growth to the
changeableness of many men's principles who pretend to more than ordinary
Godliness.

He that measures Religion, (as God knows the greatest part of Mankind do) not
by its intrinsic worth, and that full and rational evidence that it brings
along with it, nor by its genuine and proper influences upon the minds of men
where it is heartily received, but by the actions of a great number of men in
the World, he must needs enter his protest against it, and judge it as an
Engine framed and made for nothing else but to serve turns and cheat the World:
and upon serious and impartial reflections upon things, we shall find from
hence have proceeded many men's odd conceits of this excellent thing called
Religion. For casting their eyes abroad, and observing how common a thing it is
for men to shift their Principles, when their Interest lies at stake, and those
too such men as are in vogue among the people for the most precious Saints, why
alas prompted by their lusts and seduced by Satan, they have first questioned
whether there be any such thing in reality and truth as Religion yea or no, and
then by degrees have laughed at it as the product either of knavery or
melancholy. And I wish our Brethren of the separation could wash their hands of
the ruin that has befaln Religion upon this account. It Is true, no men more
ready to complain of the present degeneracy of the age than they; and so far as
those complaints are the effects of sorrow for sin, and not of design to
misrepresent the Government, so far they do well and are to be commended: but I
do heartily advise them to look from whence this degeneracy proceeds. Was sin
so bold-faced, and notorious impieties so confident and open, before these
complainants invaded the Churches Rites, and slackned the Reins of Government,
by which the heady multitude were kept in some good awe and order? I desire
them heartily to read the History of the times from the Reformation to the
beginning of the late dreadful War, and to tell me whether from the highest to
the lowest there were such numbers of men that scoffed at Religion, and lived
in a neglect of all those Offices which are appointed for men to keep an
intercourse with Heaven, and a sense of a Divine Being upon their Souls? No, if
they will be impartial, they must needs confess that Religion met with better
entertainment both in Churches and in Families than now it does.

And therefore whence must we fetch this strange Apostasy, this horrid
contempt of things that were handled with more reverence even among the
Heathens, who are only conducted by the glimmering Light of Nature? Why in
short, one great Reason of it has been these men's inconsistency with
themselves, and changing their principles upon every change of affairs.

At first many of them were modest, and a regulation of some things in the
Government as it then stood established, was a blessing that would make the
Nation happy: but afterward, when a little success put a greater power into
their hands, why then the ancient Government of the Church must be stubb'd up
both root and branch, and forsooth we must have another Model founded in a
Divine Right, and nothing less than Scripture and Apostolical Example must
patronize it, and then the Kingdom of God was come down amongst us, and Babylon
was fallen, and the Beast smitten through the fifth rib. But alas within a few
years, (I had almost said months) many of those who had cried up the new
Discipline and Covenant as the pattern in the Mount, as the greatest bulwark
against Romish incursions, went away from it, and by the help of a sorry
distinction, were found very busy in overthrowing all National Churches, and
now nothing must be Gospel Worship, but what was after the Independent cut. And
it is very well known, what skirmishes there were betwixt the Presbiterians and
Independents for their several Platforms, what petitioning on one side for
liberty of Conscience, and what on the other against it; with I know not how
many Reasons tendered to the High Court of Parliament: and yet after all this
no sooner was the King come in, and the Ecclesiastical Laws revived, and many
persons formerly unjustly thrown out, restored to their properties and
freehold again, but those very men who had with full cry and open mouth
pursued the Congregational men, proclaimed them Schismatics, and great enemies
to the work of Reformation that was then upon the wheel: I say, those men
contrary to their formerly avowed principles, Declarations, Remonstrances and
Petitions, Prayers and Preachments, fall in with the same practices, and gather
Churches out of Churches. And nothing is more frequent now than to meet with
Books dedicated to the Flock of such a man, and to the Congregation over whom
such a man is overseer; when God knows, it may be those people that make up the
body of these Flocks live in all the quarters and corners of the town and
country. Now whether this be adherence to principles, or bespeak a man fixed
and well grounded, I leave any man to judge. No no, it looks like a design, and
as far as actions can speak it tells the world that it is not Religion about
which all this stir is made, but Pride and Interest.

And now pray let us consider what judgment can some men make of Religion, if
they have no better conveyance of its worth into them, than such Examples and
Instances as these are? Alas it makes them throw dirt in its face, and to cry
it down, as a thing not worthy of that care that it has met withal from
several Laws; and they are apt to conclude, that were it grounded in any
Reason, or had any Demonstration on its side, certainly men of education and
generous breeding would not be so long before they understand it, and after
they seem to understand it, so fickle and uncertain in their Notions of it.

And truly I think this is no small cause of our present Atheism, and I wish
with all my heart our Brethren would lay it close to heart; and when they
complain of the Iniquities of the times either publicly or privately, amend at
the same time that which has been so great an occasion of it.

2. Atheism makes room for it self by those unjust and wicked actions committed
by men who pretend to more than ordinary sanctity.

What must some men think of Religion, especially such as have met with a
careless education, who have not had their natural notions of Religion
strengthened by wholesome documents and good Examples; what, I say, must these
men think of Religion, when they behold a violent stickler for the Rights of
the Lord Jesus as he pretends, lift up his eyes to heaven, and then thrust his
hand into his Neighbors pocket? when they hear him profess himself ready to
deny himself of any thing though never so profitable or pleasurable, provided
the cause of God may flourish, and at the same time busy in signing Orders for
sequestring other men's Estates, and turning their Wives and Children out of
doors, without any consideration of sex or age? when they see him riding from
place to place to help to settle Religion, and at the same time plotting how to
rob his natural Prince of his throne and life together? Alas such observations
as these are enough to turn any heedless man's stomach against Religion, and to
beget in him an aversness to all its Laws and Institutions.

And here lies a great part of the present misery as well as wickedness of our
Nation; We had never beheld wickedness stalking in the streets at noon day
without a blush, and unnatural villainies committed in the face of the Sun it
self, if men had not defaced and wasted the Principles of Religion by such
observations and reflections as these are. It Is this from whence those drolls
and sarcastical reflections upon Scripture have sprung and issued, and upon the
score of which our great Lord and Master has been pierced afresh by
blasphemies and profane witticisms upon his Person and his Doctrine. And to
give proof of this, let but any man mark, and he shall find, it is not Argument
he shall meet withal from these lewd persons, (when they are called to a just
account for these gross and scandalous reflections upon things Venerable and
Sacred) whereby they defend themselves from the blows that at any time are
given them by wise and pious men, but presently references to such and such
pretended Saints and Zealots, with a recounting their many good and Godly Deeds
they have committed, and presently Religion must be in fault, and answer for
all the miscarriages of her pretended Votaries; which though it be not
reasonable, yet if it be judged so by these half-witted and licentious men,
it is all one, and has the same influence upon them as if it were.

And I wish with all my heart that this bad effect had been limited to the late
bad times; but alas we find it still amongst us, and no sooner does any of
these great pretenders break (upon which score I could wish fewer of these
Great Bigots were public undertakers) but presently Religion is called to a
severe account, and presently our ears are filled with no other noise than such
as this: I, I, this it is to be Godly, do not you see? no men more ready to
cheat and undermine all sorts of persons, yea their very dear Brethren
themselves: I, these are your Saints that are ready to cry Stand off unto their
Fellow Christians, and to proclaim them unfit for their communion. Do not you
see what they are? by what loose and uncertain principles they are governed?
and how under a pretense of a more intimate acquaintance with things that are
spiritual, they are wanting to such duties as are moral and eternal, such
wherein Religion rightly understood does or ought to consist?

And in conclusion, the observers of these things from such obvious and
apparent Notices, suffer Religion to lose its esteem in their Breasts, and when
that is gone, it is no wonder (considering the many spiritual enemies that
stand ready to take part with them against it) that they are by degrees wrought
into a downright contempt and scorn of it.

3. Atheism makes its way amongst us in this Age by those unworthy scandals and
aspersions that are fastened upon Churchmen, by whom Religion in all Ages has
been chiefly derived into the minds of men, and upon whose reputation with all
sorts of people, depends very much either the enlargement of Religions Kingdom,
or else its confinement to more particular and narrow quarters. And therefore
all men who wish it good speed ought to be very tender how they load any person
consecrated to such an office with any indignity or reproach whatsoever.

But however though the Honor of Religion is so much concerned in this, yet we
find a company of Men, (I and those too, apt enough to make great boasts of
their zeal for God) very willing to pick up any story whereby they may
misrepresent and disparage any man obedient to the Laws, and rather than fail,
because words cannot spread themselves far enough though spoke to considerable
numbers, they will spit their venom from the Press, and expose a whole order
of Men to the contempt and scorn of the people, by laying such loads at their
doors, as indeed must needs render them odious to any person, that has any
sense of things yet left upon his mind: witness that late Funeral Sermon for a
great Doctor by one whose words we know (more is the pity) go far and near
amongst too many of those who separate from the Church of England; which if it
had not been so handsomely and withal so modestly chastised already, I would
(...) ^ave bestowed some of that correction upon it, that was its due.

But now in the mean time when men of any loose inclinations, as God knows the
world swarms with them, men who are very willing in compliance with the
commands and persuasions of their lusts, to throw off all the restraining
Notices of Religion; when these men I say shall meet with such violent
passions, with such vehement invectives, with such odious appellations, with
such wicked characters and Representations of so great a Number of men, and
those too such as have enjoyed all opportunities for improving their minds, and
bettering their manners, why how easily may they from hence draw conclusions
against Religion, and weaken its Government in their Hearts and Consciences?
which we know seconded by some other helps and advantages dispose the Soul for
a total rooting up all kindness and affection for it: And when the Devil has
so far prevailed, I am sure he wants not many Leagues to a total conquest of
the Man, and to an absolute submission to his jurisdiction; which I think is a
sufficient argument of an Atheistical spirit, and that God is not in all the
man's thoughts.

4. Atheism gains ground by the non-execution of those Laws which command the
People to wai(...) (...) those institutions whereby Religion is in^^^^ed into
their minds.

It is not to be expected, considering the different education of Persons,
founded in the different conditions and providential allotments of their
parents, but that there must needs be a vast disproportion in their parts and
apprehensions; and though some men are trained up with all the care and
diligence, by persons of great Prudence as well as Learning, and thereby are
enabled to understand their Duties from those Considerations of things, which
by virtue of that education they either can or have made; yet others again
there are, whose acquaintance with things through a more careless breeding,
reaches no further than the bare objects of sense, and whose Judgments are so
weak, as to be constantly imposed upon by strong Fancy and headlong
Imagination, and therefore understand little but what is forced into them, and
comply with few Laws, but what the fear of the penalties of those Laws compel
them to.

They are first taught to follow the ox and the ass that have no
understanding, and unless they be affrighted into an attendance upon those
Ordinances, where they may have some further knowledge derived into them, they
are very willingly contented with that employment still, and their heavy
thoughts ascend no higher.

And therefore to relax those Laws which enjoin these leaden people under a
penalty, and such a one of which they are most sensible (to wit that of the
purse) is at the same time to give them a commission to live in the neglect of
all those public Duties, whereby the natural Notions of Religion are raised
into some degree of life, and kept so after they are raised; and pray then what
becomes of these people? why they sink into all manner of Brutishness, God is
not in their thoughts at all, and to talk to them of any thing that is
Religious, is to discourse perfectly out of their ken and knowledge; they
savor nothing but what belongs to the Cart and the Plow, and God knows their
Children are brought up in the same way, and hear not a word of God nor of
their Duties to him, from one year to another, and so are trained up as very
Atheists as themselves, and thereby prepared for little else but picking and
stealing, for every thing that is vile and wicked.

And this is a thing upon the score of which I cannot reflect upon the careless
and indifferent execution of those Laws that are made purposely for the
Churches peace and safety, without some considerable proportions of grief and
sorrow. I find the inconvenience of it so sad in the Parish over which God has
set me, that I wonder our Brethren of the separation should desire their
liberty at so dear a rate, and inveigh against those, who desire the Laws might
take place, and serve the purposes for which they were intended. For if things
continue as they have done, and Magistrates for the fake of some few pretending
Religion and Conscience, shall suffer so many hundreds in many Parishes to live
in a neglect of all public Worship whatsoever, it is an easy matter to foresee
what will become of Religion and civil Government together.

And thus I have given an account of that present, and God knows too bold
Atheism that is so common in the Nation; and though I believe from my heart
that these forementioned things have been the root from whence it has sprung,
and to which it ows its principal original and rise, yet I wish there be not
something amongst us who profess our selves true friends to the Churches
Discipline, that gives further growth and nourishment to this poisonous plant.

I do therefore earnestly desire my Brethren to consider with themselves,
whether they do nothing that contributes to this unhappy alienation of men's
Minds from the belief and sense of a Divine Majesty.

I am not willing to quarrel any man for what he does by the allowance of the
Laws; yet I must needs say thus much (and I hope I shall offend no wise man in
it) that did our Churchmen reside more in those places, where the Churches
provisions for them and their Families are plentiful and encouraging, it would
conduce very much to the honor of the Church of which they are Members, and
take away one main plea for some men's profaneness and irreligion.

For as I have said before, the Religion of the Common people depends very much
upon the credit and esteem of their Spiritual Guides and Teachers, and wherever
that has sink, Religion has accordingly been in the waine: and therefore when
Churchmen, instead of feeding their people with constant and wholesome
Documents, neglect them themselves, or commit them to the charge of such whose
neither piety nor learning commend them to their value, why this is a sure way
to insinuate little thoughts of their Ministers into them, and they quickly cry
them down, as men who mind not them but theirs; who provided they can but grow
fat by Temporal accrewments, care not how lean the Souls of their people are.
The truth is, I have often heard such severe reflections made against such
persons, and those not by discontented schismatics, but by men heartily
devoted to the Interest of the Church, and many of those, persons that have, by
their Princes favor, the execution of Laws and public Justice committed to
them, that I could not but wish all places, especially those more populous, or
more rich than ordinary, in such men's hands as would take care to prevent such
scandals for the time to come. For Fanaticism is so routed and baffled a cause,
that when we come to persuade any man to return to obedience to our Church, he
usually lets fall the old thredbare arguments, upon which Disobedience and
Separation at first were founded, and recurs to the carelessness of many of our
Preachers, and by this would make the easy World believe, that our Church that
countenances such Droans, is not of God. And if I have offended any one by this
plain dealing, I do beg their pardon, and I think it is nothing but what is my
due, because I am certain it is nothing but zeal for the Church my Mother that
has forced me to it.

Again if any thing to the prejudice of God and his Religion as it stands
established by Law amongst us, arises from the corruption of those Officers
that belong to the Ecclesiastical Courts, if Church Censures, especially that
of Excommunication, be bought and sold, and men sit there as in a Common
Market, not to punish evil Doers, but to make merchandise, and to enlarge their
Fortunes, though it be to the Churches ruin, I hope our Reverend Prelates, the
Fathers of this poor despised Church, will use all care and diligence to
prevent the destruction both of Religion, and the Church which is threatened by
such vile and ungodly practices as these are.

12. Further we are very much inconvenienced, and our Church receives very
considerable disadvantages from the imprudent way of executing Justice, by many
of our subordinate Magistrates, upon the offenders of those Laws whereby the
Churches Rights and Privileges are secured.

The common people who usually take their measures of things falsely, and judge
them not by their essential properties, or by their necessary habitude and
relation to one another, but by the practices of those who pretend a kindness
to, and veneration for them, when they see Magistrates, those to whom the sword
of Justice is committed, fall into bitter rage, and expressing that rage by
unsavory words, by countenances darting forth nothing but flames and
fireballs, when they hear them rattling forth their horrid oaths, and wishing
such curses as carry with them the greatest ruin and desolation as well to
soul as body; further, when they observe any of them to make unwary reflections
upon Religion in general, by reason of these men's miscarriages in the defense
of any thing that looks like a particular limb or member of it why alas these
bitter passions, these ill timed and violent words presently beget in these
people a great opinion of themselves, and that because such persons are their
Judges: and they make no scruple to plead their Cause to be of God, because
such ungodly men are so ready to punish them for their defense and propagation
of it. And upon this very account they clap one the other upon the back, and
resolve unanimously to go on with what they have begun, notwithstanding all the
opposition they shall meet withal: for who would not suffer the loss of Estate,
Liberty or Life itself in a cause against which such ungodly men are severe and
bitter? and who would not expect Heaven for a reward hereafter, who meet with
such harsh and cruel dealings from men, who do too much by their oaths and
curses betray themselves to be the Agents and Instruments of Hell?

And though this is but a popular plea, and will not hold water when it comes
to be thoroughly searched and tried, though laws are never the worse for the
wickedness of those to whom the execution of them is committed, and though
Justice is the same thing, when done by a wicked as a Godly Magistrate; yet for
our Sions sake I could wish with all mine Heart, that our Magistrates, when
such Malefactors are brought before them, would execute public Justice like
men who do not appear to sacrifice to their own revenge, but who design a
public good, to wit the reducing people to those Principles of subjection and
obedience, without which we must needs be exposed to continual dangers and
hazards.

It is not to be imagined how these refractory persons are silenced, when they
appear before Magistrates of Prudence and Discretion, such as treat them with
all tenderness and pity, representing to them the evil of their doing, and
gravely admonishing them against such doings for the time to come, executing
the Laws upon them with all the symptoms of grief and trouble, with all the
demonstrations of a Spirit that carries in it true compassion for those who
ignorantly err, and a readiness heartily to pray for those who are obstinate
and wilful; this is to follow the Apostles advice, to restore our sain Brethren
with the spirit of meekness, and this is the only way to beget in them a
belief, that as truly pious, tender and gracious spirits may lodge in the
Breasts of men every ways obedient to those Laws (they by their wily Preachers
are made to believe, are destructive of the Rights of the Lord Jesus) as in any
men of any other, yea of their own particular persuasion. Nay for ought I know,
this prudent and compassionate carriage may be the occasion of their recovery
from their present separation. For certainly nothing more pacifies Wrath and
Anger (from which we all know Nonconformity receives no inconsiderable strength
and addition) than a word in season, a soit word, a wise carriage even to
Delinquents themselves, especially when all this is done by men of Authority
and Reputation in their Neighborhood.

And therefore I do here put up my hearty Prayers to Almighty God, for all our
Chiefs and Worthies, in whose hands the defense and safety of our excellent and
yet despised Church is lodged, that as Judgment may run down like water and
Righteousness like a mighty stream, so That Righteousness may meet with Peace
and love, and they may kiss each other: and as I do not wish the suspension of
any Laws, wherein the welfare of Societies is wrapped, so I do wish, that
whenever they are put in execution, it may be in such a way as may convince
gainsayers, and stop the mouths of all those, who lie at catch to take
advantage from the haltings either of Magistrates or Ministers.

Lastly, This Church loses very much of its deserved reputation by those mean
and seamy provisions and supplies that are made for many of her Children, whose
educations and improvements entitle them to greater encouragements than most of
the Vicaridges in England are endowed withal; and till this be remedied, as I
hinted somewhat before, we must never have things so prosperous and successful
on the Churches side as she does indeed deserve: For it is impossible
(considering how things go, and are apprehended by the major part of the World)
for Clergymen to conciliate a just respect to themselves, and thereby to
recommend the Government to the love and liking of the Vulgar, without such
Incomes as are agreeable to their Function, and will enable them to be of the
giving as well as receiving hand.

And truly when I have sat down sometimes, and considered with my self the
several reasons and occasions of the late cruel and blondy War, I could not but
resolve both it, and the dreadful consequences of it, amongst some other
things, into this of which I am now complaining: and I have often thought, that
it had not been possible for the people of England to have been drawn into such
a combination and confederacy against so excellent a Prince, had they not been
strangely perverted and abused by some discontented and self-seeking knaves.
And who they were it is no hard matter to conjecture; for if you had gone before
the War into Cities and incorporated Towns, where usually the spiritual Livings
are made up of few and petty Tithes, there you should have found a
Malecontented Gentleman had fixed his habitation, making some tolerable snow of
Hospitality especially to the Mayor or Aldermen and their Brethren, and by his
advice and means a factious Preacher brought in, depending upon voluntary
subscriptions for his livelihood; who by tones and gestures, by shrugs and
winks, by all popular artifices was continually suggesting suspicions of the
Government to the people, (the Dames especially, who they say in those places
and in those times governed the Right Worshipful themselves,) and the great
Themes of their Discourses were the Wickedness of the times, the encroachments
of the Bishops upon the Rights of the Lord Jesus, the stinting of the spirit by
Forms of Prayer, the severe dealing with the people of God, (that was
themselves) but withal (which was a great cordial to their oppressed spirits,)
the great Reasons of the Saints joyful expectation of better times, fetched out
of Daniel or Revelations, places admirably fitted to the Dames apprehensions
and understandings, with an hundred such like popular insinuations as these;
and by this means the people were taught to suspect their Governors as Enemies
to the cause of God, and from thence brought to an hatred of them, and so by
degrees fitted for any undertaking these cunning Leaders should in the name of
God and the Lord Jesus animate them unto. And by these ways were the people of
England seduced into the most unnatural rebellion, which ended in the most
horrid Murder that History can parallel. Whereas had these Great Towns been
furnished with such Encouragements as might have invited men of integrity and
learning to have sat down amongst them, the People had been better taught, and
consequently disposed to nothing but what was expressive of Loyalty and
Obedience, of their hearty affection and esteem for him, to whose care and
Government the providence of God had committed them. For let but the common
people hear nothing but what is agreeable to the Laws of Societies and Bodies
Politic, let the Doctrines they are made acquainted with be such as make for
peace and order, and you shall find no men more tractable, nor yet more
zealous. And upon this very score I have often wished, that all those persons
who are suffered to discourse to Multitudes, were men of prudence, and orderly
compliance with the Laws under which we live; we might I am sure then hope for
a longer continuance of happiness and prosperity in the Nation, than we can (if
some men enjoy the liberty which contrary to so many Statute Laws they have
usurped) expect.

And now that which I infer from this reflection is this, That if such short
provision, for men of worth and education has been the occasion of the State
and Churches ruin once already; who can tell but it may be of as evil
consequence again? And therefore I think the whole Nation ows thanks to our
present Parliament for their late readiness to remedy this evil by considering
some further kindness to the Clergy than was shown at the first alienation of
Church Revenues. And I will once be so bold as to say, that it had been never
the worse for the Crown of England (considering what Spirits have rose up since
that great purge Henry the Eighth gave the Church) had all those Impropriations
that were found annexed to Monasteries and Abbyes, been given to the
countenancing and supporting a learned and orthodox Clergy in all the corners
of the Kingdom. Nay I will venture further and assert, Had this been done, the
late unparalled Prince, if the golden Sands of his life in their natural
course, would have run so long as to this time, as in all probability they
would, if conjectures may be made from the strength, and soundness of all his
vital parts, (which was apparent after his cruel Murder) I say that he might
still have lived happily amongst us, untouched by the rude hands of violence;
and this I think may be made out by such a necessary train of consequences as
cannot easily be denied.

But this is not all I have to say under this Head; Upon enquiry we shall find
further mischiefs ensuing from the poor and contemptible Incomes of men by
sacred Office dedicated to the immediate Worship of God.

1. A man is thereby dispirited. There is, we all know, a certain frame and
temper, a certain spirit and humor, that is very necessary as well as
commendable and praise worthy for all those several places and conditions men
are fixed in; and for any one to carry himself otherways than is becoming his
present circumstances, especially such as suppose him clothed with any Office
or separated Function, why, that very thing proves amongst the greatest part of
Mandkind a lessening of his personal esteem, and withal a reflection upon and
diminution of the very office it self, among those whose Judgments are
altogether governed by outward representations and resemblances.

Now this very Humor which is better and more easily discerned in a man who is
perfect Master of it, than it is expressed by words, is very much lost, where
men are forcibly married to narrow Fortunes, where their Incomes are no ways
suitable to the real as well as apprehended Dignity of those offices they are
vested with; and it is impossible for a man to lift up his Head with that
befitting Majesty, with that necessary and withal humble greatness of spirit,
that has never a penny in his purse, as another of a plentiful accession of
outward blessings can do to very good advantage both to his person and his
Function.

Alas when a man's spirit is gone, besides the loss he sustains in himself, by
neglecting all those Improvements, which further hopes and expectations put him
upon, he sinks into disesteem amongst his Neighbors, and consequently his
person is despised, and his Ministry neglected, and people hear him with as
little reverence in the Church as they admire him in his forlorn and thredbare
habit in the streets.

And if the Church suffer by her Church officers, as without dispute by their
miscarriages she does, then I leave the World to judge whether it be policy to
let her continue stripped so naked of those necessary clothes, which if not adorn
her, yet would keep her warm.

2. As this does dispirit, so many times God knows it does debauch a man,
which is a thing of a very pernicious consequence to our excellent Church, and
can only prove her ruin. For as I hinted in the former part of this Discourse,
when we have answered all our Adversaries Arguments, drawn from misinterpreted
and abused places of Scripture, they presently fall upon us with this
reflection, which though God be thanked is not so generally true, as they would
make the World believe, yet we must not wholly deny it, it is too apparent in
many public concourses, that there are some indiscreet and unwary Clergymen.

And now upon inquiry we shall find the mean provisions of the Clergy have been
one great reason of their declension from the exact and necessary Rules of
life. For these men not having wherewithal to furnish themselves with Books to
enlarge their thoughts and meditations in order to allure them to solitude and
retirement, and it may be having a charge, and not wherewithal to satisfy the
cravings and necessary importunities of their distressed Families, why they
have first fled from their discontented selves, and then it may be into
company, to avoid the din and clamor of their Children, and when they are once
engaged in evil Company, they are heartily to be pityed, for they are in the
High way to ruin, especially when thorough a little use, and a few months
custom their Fancies are taken with it; alas they then like other depraved
men, are unsatisfied so long as they are at home, and their Studies are the
only rooms in the house they do not see from one week to another: and so by
degrees after they have worn out all those Characters of Religion which were
engraven upon their minds, and wasted the modesty of their Souls, and forgot
the Dignity of their Function, alas they enter into these houses of good
Fellowship, with as much boldness and unconcernedness, as the veryest
plow-jobbers can do, and so become fit for nothing but the Churches severest
Censures.

But in the mean time does the Church thrive by this? I trow not, no no, she
presently amongst a great many heedless or malicious people, must bear the
burden of it all, and the crafty Sectary takes all opportunities to hand this
from one place to another, joyfully raising his own and his parties credit,
upon the ruins of other men's reputation; but then

3. If Poverty does neither the one nor the other, yet it commonly discontents
them, and so makes them Firebrands in the Government. For such men as are of
tolerable Learning, and resolved temperance, when they observe themselves
neglected, whilst others, whom they cannot esteem equal to themselves, get into
fat preferments, why they grow vexed and impatient, and straightways their
thoughts are fixed upon revenge, and from a quarrel with those who sit at the
Helm, they fall out with the Government it self, and all their parts are bent
upon finding out plausible Arguments and pretenses to sink its reputation
amongst the people, and no stone is left unturned to carry on this wicked
purpose and resolution.

It is an easy matter to make this assertion out, from the accounts of every
age of Christianity. Heresies, Schisms, seditions and public disturbances,
have most of them crept in at this back door; and whosoever will give himself
the leave to take a just account of the Apostasy of many from our Church some
few years after the Reformation, and ever since, he will not be long before he
find this its original and spring; which thing though not altogether, yet very
much had been prevented, if all the Spiritual allotments for Ministers had been
comfortable, and such as would have afforded wise men, (for I undertake not to
be an advocate for Fools and Prodigals) a convenient and creditable maintenance.

AND now having said thus much in the vindication of this excellent Church, and
withal given the Reasons of those many disparagements she has in these late
years met withal, I cannot draw off my pen from paper, till by it I have made
my humble address to the Nobility and Gentry, and all others who are concerned,
by virtue either of their Principles or Estates, in the preservation of the
Kingdoms peace, and Nations welfare, and are very unwilling to be sad
spectators of those ruins and desolations, that not many years ago, many of
them to their own as well as the Nations sorrow, were too sadly acquainted
withal; till, I say, I have made my humble address to them, and implored them
by all that is near and dear to them, to use that power God and the King has
entrusted them withal, in stifling those Opinions, in suppressing those
dangerous Principles and Maxims, in preventing those practices, which have had
so bad an influence upon the Body Politic, and in using all methods by which
they may be kept from the Common People, whom we find by sad experience easily
leavened, and as easily afterward wrought upon, to enter into any Evil action,
whereby the peace and happiness of the Kingdom may be endangered.

And though it may be, this address may be looked upon as the product of a
malicions and revengeful spirit, yet God that knows the hearts of men, knows it
flows from no such bitter Fountain; but so far as I am in a capacity to serve
any of these persons, against whom I now complain in their personal capacity,
no man can I am sure be more ready and more forward. Let them but live
agreeable to the Laws under which they live, and that but as far as their own
avowed Principles will give them leave, which I think is a very reasonable
request, and they shall not want that just esteem from my self, and so I am
sure from all men of my Principles, that they do deserve. Which if they will
not do, but continue resolute in widening our differences, making our breaches
greater, forming men into parties and numbers in opposition to the injunction
of all those prudent Laws that are enacted by the great Authority of the
Nation, and thereby strengthening and encouraging that deplorable Schism that is
amongst us, why truly I think he wants the Spirit and Courage of a Man who
holds his tongue, and by his silence gives the least spirit to such
undertakings.

For alas, what can we imagine all this will center and bottom in? and who will
be the chief gainers by these divisions? That certainly is no hard matter to
determine. And truly in my apprehension it is very sad, that the revenge of our
Nonconforming Brethren should be so great against the Church of England, that
rather than she shall continue in any glory, and be vested with any Authority,
they will use their utmost endeavors to pull her down though it be to the
destruction of the Protestant Cause, both at home and abroad, and to the
Introduction of Popery it self. A good sign indeed of a Gospel Spirit, and of
that tenderness of Conscience these men profess upon all occasions, when
pressed to any necessary compliance with the Laws of the Kingdom!

And therefore seeing it is so, that these men will play any game, rather than
that in which the safety of the Church as well as State is concerned, truly I
think all the true Patriots of the Country, ought to look upon them
accordingly, and give them such fare, (as by those Oaths they take when they
are admitted to their office,) they are obliged to. And seeing they are
resolved we shall fall, though they know it must needs be accompanied with so
great a ruin to that Cause and Interest, which was purchased with the blood of
the Martyrs, which has been a Sanctuary to distressed and banished Foreigners,
and which indeed, as it is here maintained by so many prudent Laws, is the only
stay and support of all the Protestant Churches abroad; seeing, I say, they are
resolved to have their wills of this Church, notwithstanding these sad and too
much to be feared effects and consequences of it, I do declare, I think all
true hearted Magistrates, in whose hands the execution of the Laws does lie,
ought to let them know, that they owe more Regard to the present Government of
the Kingdom; and that if they will continue fixed in their Resolves to bear down
all that stands in their way to the undermining the Churches safety and
reputation, so on the other hand they the Magistrates are as well resolved to
hinder by all legal and worthy means so great and so unseasonable a violence to
those Laws, wherein men's Estates and Liberties, men's Religion, and consequently
their Souls are so much concerned.

And I am certain nothing is a greater argument among the present Magistrates,
either of Cowardice, or else of Ignorance and Non-observation, than to suffer
such assaults upon Government, without a suitable resentment of them, and to
connive at such practices, as are apparently tending to shuffle in a Religion
once again amongst us, by which the Prince loses half his Government, and the
people all their Reason and Sense together.

And therefore, Worthy Sirs, I beg of you to consider what is incumbent upon
you at present; do not you let Justice sleep, while covetousness and ambition,
while Faction and discontent is devouring and eating up all those sober
principles, whereby your Estates as well as any thing else is secured to you
and your Posterity after you. Let not a Church that teaches all her Members to
live contentedly in all those subordinations the Providence of God has placed
them, and up to all those Duties, which belong to those several places; I say,
let not this Church be scorned and trampled under feet, by rude and revengeful
persons. And if you think them people of meek and peaceable spirits, in whose
public Liberty there is no danger, pray enquire after the treatments, those
Worthies whose Consciences obliged them to follow the Fortunes of that late
incomparable King of blessed memory met withal from them, and that will save me
the labor of giving an account of the temper of a great part of them. It Is
true, were they all of that nature and disposition, of that Learning and
wisdom, some of them are, there might be some apology made for them: but alas,
the common Followers, I and many of their Teachers too, are violent and
headstrong, quickly enflamed and overheated, and then for want of knowledge
and due consideration of things, with great difficulty managed, and kept within
any proper and allowed bounds, a thing which some of their very Preachers have
complained of to my self and others.

And therefore, why you who are the Instruments of Justice, out of pity to some
few, whose parts and piety may possibly recommend them to the esteem and love
of all good men, should suffer herds of men, whose zeal outstrips their
knowledge, whose Passions surmount their Prudence, whose Religion many times is
more the result of the temper of the Body than the rational conviction of the
soul; why you, I say, should suffer the Laws to be violated, when no other end
can be proposed than showing a compassion to some few, who deserve a name among
the wise and truly learned, I profess I cannot tell: Especially when at the
same time the Honor of the Laws, by a neglect of Justice, is exposed to the
contempt and scorn of such Numbers, who must (if we would follow those Maxims
of Policy, which all wise Governors ever since Communities of men were agreed
upon, have observed) who must I say be kept in with bit and bridle.

And having thus addressed my self to the Ministers of Public Justice, I
cannot obtain a Writ of Ease from my self, until I have said something to those
very persons, whose designs I have in the foregoing Treatise exposed, and whose
Methods of ruin to the Church and Kingdom I have discovered. And here I am not
afraid to tell them, that many of them are my Acquaintance, in whose civil
conversation I have and do take pleasure, and to whom upon some scores I have
stood engaged; the piety and strictness of many of their Lives I admire and
love; these with some other things would reconcile me to them, did not my zeal
for the Nations happiness, my duty to a Church, by whom I and all the World may
be sufficiently instructed in all things necessary to be believed and
practiced: Further, did not my Fears (and God knows those too well grounded) of
the return of a Religion amongst us (and that caused chiefly by these men's
stubbornness) the agreement with which must at the same time, be to fall out
with all those Faculties, whereby we are in capacities to discern things that
differ; Did not these things with many others thus dispose of and command me, I
say I could wish these men all the happiness in this World, that upon good
Grounds they could desires.

And therefore pray Sirs, let me entreat you to consider what you are a doing
whilst so resolvedly you continue to separate from our Church; why truly,
pardon me if I err, I think I do not, I cannot say you are doing the business
of Religion, for that I am sure may be as well, nay all things considered,
better done by those under the Discipline and Government of our Church, as I
have showed in the beginning of this Treatise. In which I am the more satisfied
from the observations I have made of many of your admired Followers, whose
Lives as far as I can discern are spent most upon pitying Public Magistrates
and Ministers, and shaking their heads at the times, with many other popular
and usual artifices of misrepresenting things or persons not just according to
their Minds.

Again, I cannot say you are doing the Business of your Governors, settling the
People in the notions of obedience and submission, begetting in them venerable
thoughts of those who are Gods Trustees on Earth; no, for we find, no sooner do
men wheel off from our Church, and list themselves under your Banners, but
presently they grow jealous of the Powers of the Nation, and are always
furnished with idle tales and groundless whispers, to lessen their Reputation
among the Common People.

Nay further I cannot say, you are doing your own business, for alas throw us
but once down, and you know by old experience, that you are all together by the
ears, and scarce ten of you can agree together, upon any thing that may be the
Foundation of a future settlement, but all are striving to be the Greatest, and
every man has such a fond opinion of his own way, as to think, nay to proclaim
it, deserving to be the Nations Standard, yea and to pronounce bitter Curses
against all those who will not concur in Judgment with him.

And truly for the satisfaction of a great many well meaning persons, who at
present are imposed upon, I could wish, were it but lawful to permit it, and
consistent with the Kingdoms and Churches safety, that the Ball might lie at
your feet for a few days; methinks I see what animosities and heats, what
strifes and contentions would presently be in the midst of you, and how quickly
all you, who now combine together against our poor despised Church, would fall
into a thousand parties, and what variety of Churches we presently should have
formed, and the best of it is, every one of them vogued to be according to the
pattern in the Mount.

And therefore Brethren, for Gods sake recollect your selves and do not
sacrifice the Protestant Religion to your own lusts and passions, comply with
the Laws in imitation of the old Puritans, as far as you can, and then I do not
doubt, but our Governors will find out some way or other, to let you
understand their Resentments of your orderly compliance; and certainly it is
better to build our hopes of future kindness from our Prince upon public
manifestations of peaceableness of Spirit, than upon threats and menaces, than
upon bold and daring actions, whereby we intimate unto him that if he will not
give us according to our Wills and Pleasure, we will snatch it from him, and
that by force too, whether he will or no.

One word more and I have done; I beseech you do not say that this intimation
of Popery in and through your disobedience to the Churches Laws is a popular
plea, invented on purpose to make you odious among the People. I profess as it
is mentioned here by me, it is no such thing; but the result of a full
satisfaction I have, that nothing can make way for that Religion, but the ruin
of the Church of England. And truly I am so far from rendering you odious, that
if you could agree among your selves, upon any thing consistent with the
Churches Peace and Safety, I would give my Prayers and all honest endeavors
whatsoever to contribute toward your contentment. But till then pray give us
leave to secure our selves from such desolations (as will end in your
destruction as well as ours) by all agreeable ways and means whatsoever.

And now after all this, if you will suffer your selves to be so provoked, as
one while to pity me and then again revile me, I have no more to say, but that
I am fully satisfied in my own Conscience in what I have done; and that for a
requital, I am resolved to make you the objects of my hearty pity, and the
subjects of my Prayers, but not mine anger and revenge, for that is not to
follow our Masters command, To love our enemies, to bless them that curse, to
to do good to them that hate us, to pray for them which despitefully use us,
and persecute us, which may be done with Tongues as well as Hands: which good
and excellent advice I am resolved through the assistance of Gods Gracious
Spirit to pursue and follow; and therefore let those against whom this little
Treatise is chiefly levelled, deal with my person or good name as they please,
I am prepared for it.

THE END.
Lately Printed for Richard Royston at the Angel in Amen-Corner.
THE Estate of the EMPIRE: or, an Abridgment of the Laws and Government of
Germany; farther showing what Condition the EMPIRE was in, when the Peace was
concluded at Munster: Also the several Fights, Battles, and Desolation of
Cities during the War in that EMPIRE: And also of the GOLDEN BVLL. In Octavo.

The Sycillian Tyrant: Or, The Life and Death of AGATHOCLES: With some
Reflections on our Modern Usurpers. Octavo.

The ROYAL MARTYR, and the Dutiful Subject, In two Sermons: By Gilbert Burnet.
In Quarto.

The Generosity of Christian Love; Delivered in a Sermon, by William Gould.
Quarto.

The Witnesses to Christanity: By Sy. Patrick, D. D. Octavo.

Ductor Dubitantium: Or, Bishop Tailors Cases of Conscience. The Fourth
Edition. Folio.

The Life and Death of K. CHARLES the First: By R. Perenchief, D. D. Octavo.


