THE CHARACTER OF King Charles I. From the Declaration of MR. ALEXANDER
HENDERSON, (Principal Minister of the Word of God at Edinburgh, and Chief
Commissioner from the Kirk of Scotland, to the Parliament and Synod of England)
Upon his DEATHBED: WITH A Further DEFENSE of the KING's Holy Book.

To which is Annexed Some Short Remarks upon a Vile Book, called, Ludlow no
Lyan: With A Defense of the KING from the Irish Rebellion.

By Rich. Hollingworth, D. D.

London Printed, and are to be Sold by R. Tailor by Amen-Corner, 1692.

LICENSED, July, 28th. 1692. Rob. Midgley.

To the Right Honorable, THE MARCHIONESS of Carmarthen.
Madam,
THE Defense of Good and Innocent Men, and the Vindicating of their Memories,
from those base and barbarous Aspersions they are many times laden withal, (by
men under whose tongues is the poison of Asps) are Employments every way
becoming those who are Disciples of the HOLY JESUS, and have solemnly promised
to follow His Example, and which I am certain will speak Peace and Comfort to
them, when others who give themselves the liberty to detract and defame, to
scandalize and ill-report the Best of Men, will sink at last under the Load of
their own Guilt, and the Terrors of their angry and discontented Minds.

The sense of which has been a very great support to my self, ever since I have
undertaken the Vindication of the Name and Memory of King CHARLES I. and has
enabled me in some good sort, to scorn and live above all those Reproaches,
that by a certain Faction, have been without Truth or Modesty so freely fastened
upon me, and I am so far from being weary of the Task I have engaged in, that I
thank God, every fresh Provocation gives me the Pleasure, as well as Advantage
of knowing and understanding the incomparable Merits of that Great Man better,
and the Courage to communicate them to others: And amongst many other things
that have come to my hand, since I began the Defense of this Great PRINCE,
This, for the sake of which I make bold to give Your Ladyship this Trouble at
present, is one of the greatest and fullest that I ever saw, and no doubt will
be satisfactory to all sorts of Men, because of the Person who was the Author
of it; Namely, The chief Person of the Presbyterian Party in Scotland, and the
most employed by them for setting up and Vindicating their Kirk-Discipline. I
have shown it, since I had it, to several Persons of great Names, and at great
Posts in our Church, who were all, as mightily taken with it, so desirous it
should be Reprinted, that the World might see how unjustly this Great Persons
Name is dealt withal, by too great a Number of many Bad Men of this Age; which,
as soon as I resolved to Reprint, I at the same time resolved, it should, with
Your Ladyships Leave, come out under Your Honors Umbrage and Protection, which
You have a Right to, not only upon the score of Your own Zeal for that Great
Prince's Memory and Virtues, but also upon the Account of the Faithfulness and
Integrity, the Loyalty and Steadiness of Your Ancestors to the CROWN and
Dignity thereof; for it is well known, That Your Noble Grandfather lost his
Life, as General of His Majesty's Forces at the first Fight against the Rebels
at Edgelvill, for his Great Master's Just and Righteous Cause, and that Your as
Noble Father, was at the same time imprisoned, for his steady Adherence to the
Royal Interest, and that both of them, as they ventured their Lives, so they
greatly impaired a vast Estate.

But however that in the mean time, they Acted becoming Good Men, Good
Christians, and True Lavers of the Religion and Laws of their Country, which
includes their being Good Subjects, and consequently took the better and more
Justifiable Part; this ensuing Narrative, I am sure, will make good and clear,
to all Men who are not resolved (let what will be said) to continue their base
and ill designed Prejudices.

The Declaration is this.

The Character of King CHARLES I.
Whereas the greatest part of the distempered People of these miserable
distracted Kingdoms, have been and are; woefully abused and misled with
malicious misinformations against his sacred Majesty, especially in point of
Religion and moral-Wisdom; whereof, I confess with great grief of heart, my
self to have been (amongst many more of my coat) none of the least; who out of
Imaginary fears and jealousies, were made real Instruments to advance this
un-natural War, wherein so much Innocent Protestant Blood has been shed, and
so much downright Robbery committed, without fear, or shame of sin; to the
scandal of the true Reformed Religion, as cannot but draw down heavy Judgments
from Heaven upon these infatuated Nations, and more particularly upon Us who
should have instructed them in the way of Truth, Peace, and Obedience.

I conceived it the duty of a good Christian, especially one of my profession,
and in the condition that I lie, expecting God Almighty's Call, not only to
acknowledge to the All-merciful God, with a humble sincere remorse of
Conscience, the greatness of this offense; which being done in simplicity of
Spirit, I hope with the Apostle Paul to obtain Mercy, because I did it through
Ignorance: But also, for the better satisfaction of all others, to publish this
Declaration to the view of the World; to the intent, that all those (especially
of the Ministry) who have been deluded with me, may by God's Grace, and my
example (though a weak and mean Instrument) not only be undeceived themselves,
but also stirred up to undeceive others, with more alacrity and facility;
that the scandal may be removed from our Religion and Profession, and the good
King restored to his just Rights, and truly honored and obeyed as God's
Anointed and Vicegerent upon Earth; and the poor distressed Subjects freed from
those intolerable Burdens and Oppressions which they lie groaning under,
piercing Heaven with their Tears and Cries; and a solid Peace settled both in
Kirk and Commonwealth, throughout all His Majesty's Dominions, to the Glory of
God, and of our blessed Mediator and Savior the Lord Christ.

I do therefore Declare before God and the World, That since I had the Honor
and Happiness to Converse and Confer with His Majesty, with all sort of
freedom; especially in Matters of Religion, whether in relation to the Kirk or
State, (which like Hypocrates Twins are lynked together) that I found him the
most intelligent Man that ever I spoke with; as far beyond my Epression, as
Expectation, grounded upon the Information that was given me (before I knew
him) by such as I thought should have known him. I profess that I was oft-times
astonished with the solidity and quickness of his Reasons and Replies; wondered
how he, spending his Time so much in Sports and Recreations, could have
attained to so great Knowledge, and must confess ingenuously, that I was
convinced in Conscience, and knew not how to give him any reasonable
Satisfaction; yet, the sweetness of his Disposition is such, that whatsoever I
said was well taken; I must say, that I never met with any Disputant (let be a
King, and in Matters of so high Concernment) of that mild and calm Temper,
which convinced me the more, and made me think that such Wisdom and Moderation,
could not be without an extraordinary measure of divine grace: I had heard much
of his carriage toward the Priests in Spain, and that King James told the Duke
of Buckingham upon his going thither, that he durst venture his Son Charles
with all the Jesuits in the World, he knew him to be so well grounded in the
Protestant Religion, but could never believe it before.

I observed all his actions, more particularly those of devotion, which I must
truly say, are more than ordinary; I informed my self of others who had served
him from his Infancy, and they all assured me that there was nothing new or
much enlarged in regard of his troubles, either in his private, or public way
of exercise; twice a day constantly, morning and evening for an hours space in
private; twice a day before dinner and supper in public, besides preachings
upon Sundays, Tuesdays, and other extraordinary times; and no business though
never so weighty and urgent can make him forget, or neglect this his tribute
and duty to Almighty God. O that those who sit now at the helm of these weather
beaten Kingdoms had but one half of his true piety and wisdom I dare say that
the poor oppressed Subject should not be plunged into so deep Gulfs of impiety,
and misery without compassion or pity; I dare say, if his advice had been
followed, all the blood that is shed, and all the repair that is committed,
should have been prevented.

If I should speak of his Justice, Magnanimity, Charity, Sobriety, Chastity,
Patience; Humility, and of all his both Christian and Moral Virtues, I should
run my self into a Panegy rick, and seem to flatter him to such as do not know
him, if the present condition that I lie in did not exeem me from any such
suspicion of worldly ends, when I expect every hour to be called from all
transitory vanities to Eternal Felicity; and the discharging of my conscience
before God and men; did not oblige me to declare the truth simply and nakedly,
in satisfaction of that which I have done ignorantly, though not altogether
innocently.

If I should relate what I have received from good hands, and partly can
witness of my own knowledge since these unhappy troubles began, I should
enlarge my self into a History: Let these brief Characters suffice. No man can
say, that there is conspicuously any predominant vice in him, a rare thing in a
Man, but far rarer in a King: Never man saw him passionately angry, or
extraordinarily moved, either with prosperity, or adversity, having had as
great Trials as ever any King had: Never man heard him curse, or given to
swearing; Never man heard him complain, or bemoan his condiction, in the
greatest durance of War and confinement; When he was separated from his dearest
Consort, and deprived of the comfort of his Innocent Children, the hopefullest
Princes that ever were in these ingrate Kingdoms; when he was denuded of this
Counselors and domestic Servants; No man can complain of the Violation of his
Wife or Daughters, though he has had too many temptations in the prime of his
age, by the enforced absence of his Wife, which would be hardly taken by the
meanest of his Subjects: and (which is beyond all admiration) being stripped of
all counsel and help of man, and used so harshly as would have stupefied any
other man, then did his undaunted courage, and transcendent Wisdom show it self
more clearly, and vindicate him from the obloquy of former times, to the
astonishment of his greatest Enemies: I confess this did so take me, that I
could not but see the hand of God in it, and which will render His name
glorious, and (I greatly fear) ours ignominious to all posterity; he stands
fast to his grounds, and does not rise and fall with success, the brittle
square of humane actions, and is ever ready to forgive all bypast injuries to
settle a present solid Peace, and future tranquillity, for the good of his
Subjects; nay, for their cause he is content to forgo so many of his own
known, undoubted Just Rights; as may stand with their safety as Salus populi
est Spurema Lex, so, and si parendum est patri in eo tamen non parendum quo
efficitur ut non sit Pater. [Seneca.]

I confess that I could have wished an establishment of our Presbyterial
Government, in the Kirk of England, for the better Union between them and us,
but I find the constitution of that Kingdom, and disposition of that Nation so
generally opposite, that it is not to be expected: They are a people naturally
inclined to freedom, and so bred in Riches and Plenty, that they can hardly be
induced to embrace any Discipline that may any ways abridge their Liberty and
Pleasures. That which we esteem a Godly Kirk policy, instituted by the Lord
Christ, and his Apostles, is no better to them than a kind of slavery, and some
do not stick to call it worse than the Spanish Inquisition: Nay, even the
greatest part of those who invited us to assist them in it, and sent hither
their Commissioners to induce us to enter into a solemn national covenant for
that effect, having served their turn of us, to throw down the King and the
Prelatical Party, and to possess themselves with the supreme Government both
of Kirk and State; are now Inventing evasions to be rid of us, and to delude
it, some of them publishing openly, in Pulpits and Print: That the sacred
Covenant was never intended for the godly, but only as a trap to ensnare the
Malignants, which cannot but bring heavy Judgments from Heaven, and I am
afraid, make a greater disunion between these Nations, than ever was before:
Like unto that bellum Gallicum, quod sexcentis foederibus compositum, semper
renovabatur [ Canon. lib. 3. Chron in here. 5. an. dom. 1118.] with a deluge of
Christian blood, and almost ruin of both Parties; or like unto that bellum
Rusticanum in Germania, in quo supra centena millia Rasticorum occubuerunt. [
idem an. dom. 1524.] Or most of all, both in manner and Subject, resembling
that of John of Leydon, Munser and Knoperduling, [ idem an. 1534.] which took
its rise from the former; so many different Sects spring up daily more and more
amongst them, which all like Ephraim and Manasses, Herod and Pilate, conspire
against the Lord's-Anoynted, and the true Protestant Religion.

The City of London that was so forward in the beginning of this glorious
Reformation, surpasses now Amsterdam in number of Sects, and may be compared to
old Rome, quae cum omnibus pene gentibus dommaretur omnium gentium erroribus
serviebat, and magnam sibi videbatur assumpsisse Religionem quia nullam
respuebat falsitatem. [Leo in Sermon. de Petro and Paulo. app.] their
transgressions are like to bring them to that confusion of the Israelites when
they had no King, [ Judge. 21.] every one did what seemed good in his own eyes,
because they feared not the Lord; [ Jhos. 10.] they said, What should a King do
to us? The young men presumed to be wiser than the elder, [ Isai. 3.] the viler
sort despised the honorable, [Lament, ult.] and the very serving men ruled
over them.

I profess, when I saw these things so clearly, I could not blame the King to
be so backward in giving his assent to the settling of our Presbyterial
discipline in that Kirk, for the great inconveniences that might follow
thereupon, to Him and his Posterity, there being so many strong Corporations in
that Kingdom to lead on a Popular government, such a number of people that have
either no, or broken estates, who are ready to drive on any alteration, and so
weak and powerless a Nobility to hinder it. Multos dulcedo proedarum, plures
Res angustoe veb ambiguoe domi alios scelerum Conscientia stimulabat. [C.
Tacit.]

And now, Madam, I hope those Men, who have, of late, so boldly ventured to
throw the most Sticking Dirt in the Face of this Great Prince, and Patient
Martyr, will, by Repentance, give glory to God, and do so no more; in hopes of
which, I, after my Prayers, and Earnest Wishes, for the Preservation of your
Ladyship, and whole Family, and particularly for the long life, and health, of
your Noble Lord; to whose good Counsels, and indefatigable Labors we of the
Church of England owe so much, do take leave of your Ladyship, and subscribe my
self,

MADAM, Your Ladyship most Humble and Faithful Servant, Richard Hollingworth.

A Further Defense OF THE KINGS Book, etc.
Reader;
THis Declaration of Mr. Henderson's was communicated to me some Weeks ago by
the Reverend Mr. Lamplugh, Son to the late Archbishop of York, and it had been
Reprinted before now, but that I understood there was an Answer coming out
against my Second Defense of King Charles I. and therefore I was resolved to
stay a little longer, that so if there was any thing in it worth Answering, I
might make but one Trouble of it; and at last out it came, with a Title as
false as the greatest part of the Book it self; Namely, Ludlow no Liar, which I
do not doubt, but thou will be convinced of, by that time thou have read a
little further. The Truth of it is, the whole Book is so full of Rancour and
Malice, of Unmannerliness and Railing, of bald and false Assertions, of Slander
and base Reflections, that it is a Shame to, and a Confutation of it self, and
every Leaf of it stinks in the Nostrils of all the good and sober, of all the
wise and unprejudiced Readers, that I have either met with or can hear of; and
it is a Dishonor to the Cause of the Enemies of King Charles I. to have no
better a Champion to throw down the Gauntlet in its behalf, and there are no
men about the City cry it up, but the great Enemies of Monarchy and Episcopacy,
let their Hypocritical Professions be what they will.

The Book is Dedicated to a Reverend Kinsman of mine, under the Name of Wilson
from Yarmouth, and what can we expect but Falsehood, when he begins at this
rate? For my Kinsman assures me, there is no man of that Name in Yarmouth but
an ordinary Saylor, and I hope the World will believe the Talent of such a Man
lies otherways, than to write such Letters: The short is, the whole Book, as
appears by the Style, the Air and Scurrility of it all, is writ by one and the
same Pen, and as so I shall Answer him.

The Party now so hotly engaged against Monarchy and Episcopacy, which they
strike at through the sides of King Charles I. I know are very much enraged at my
Defense of King Charles's Holy and Divine Book, and therefore take all Courses
to buoy up Dr. Walkers Credit, and to lessen, or else to attempt to prove false
the Authorities I have named, and to how good purposes this Answerer has done
it, I now come to show.

I tell the World page 7. of my Defense, the Intercourse betwixt Sir John
Brattle and my self about that Book, and that he assured me that he helped his
Father in 47, to Methodize the Papers, that so far as they were then drawn up
by the King, that made up the greatest part of that Book, all writ with the
Kings own hand; and I also assert, That Sir John has owned the same since, not
only to my self, but many others of my Friends. To which he Replies, That Sir
John who he agrees with me, is a very worthy Person, never told me nor any
other Person, that the Papers he spoke of were writ with the King's own hand;
and though the stress of the Evidence does not lie in that, for if they were
writ in 47, Dr. Gauden's Claim is out of doors; for Dr. Walker acknowledges
they were not sent to the King till the Treaty in 48, and that Treaty too, upon
which the Troubles came so fast upon the King, which was about a year after;
yet for all that I do venture to tell him, that what he asserts of Sir John
Brattle is false, and Sir John sent me word that he was a Damnable Liar, and is
pleased with great Resentment and Indignation, to declare he never told any man
any such thing, and that what he told me and my Friends as to the Kings hand is
all true, and therefore he must be a Knight of the Post, that will venture to
give his Oath for such a thing; which indeed I shall not wonder at, considering
what sort of Men there are in the world, and what designs are carrying on by
that sort of Men at this time.

The next thing I assert is the Account of Mrs. Simmonds, whom he owns to
appear a good and discreet Woman, and in earnest, he says he is assured her
Reverend Husband was so too, which I am glad to hear from him, for then I am
sure he would not dye with a Lie in his mouth, and if he did not, I know what
Dr. Walker did.

I say Mrs. Simmonds told me her Husband declared to the last, the Book to be
the Kings, Did she deny this to his Friend that waited upon her? Not a word of
it in his Letter, only I concealed the whole Truth, because I did not say he
dyed of the Smallpox, which I never asked her, nor she never told me, and
whether he did or no, it was not material to my business in hand, nor casts any
Reflection upon what I say, unless a Man cannot confess a Truth when he lies a
dying of the Smallpox, Risum teneatis.

I, but Mrs. Simmonds says, she never heard of her Husbands being in a
Shepherds Habit, and therefore Mr. Clifford's Evidence is quite ruined
certainly; now Reader take Notice, This is but a Circumstance in Mr. Clifford's
Account, and no doubt is true, notwithstanding Mrs. Simmonds Ignorance of it,
for we all know all Men do not think fit in Undertakings of such danger and
difficulties, as this was of Printing and Correcting a Book of this nature, to
make their Wives acquainted with every thing they do in order to save
themselves; but what is this to Mr. Clifford's Evidence? As to Mr. Odert's
Transcribing of it, and they printing it by his Copy and no other, which as Mr.
Milbourn the Printer has since assured me, came all at once to them, which
wholly spoils that Assertion of Dr. Walker's, of bringing some of the last
sheets to the Press by Dr. Gauden's Order. Further, What is this to Dr. Jerem.
Tayler's getting leave by Letter of the King, to change the Title from the
Royal Plea, (with which they printed the first sheet) into (...)? For the
Reasons Mr. Clifford in this Narrative asserts, which wholly routs Dr. Gauden's
Excuse to Dr. Walker, when he thought he could not with a good Conscience write
such a Book in the KING's Name; and he Answered, Look upon the Title, who draws
his own Picture: These Accounts of Mr. Clifford ought to have been disproved by
this Answerer, or else the Evidence is as clear as the Sun at Noon, and so I do
not doubt will continue, notwithstanding all this foolish barking at it; but it
is common, when Men want Reason, they fall to little and contemptible Cavils,
as our Author has here done.

Another thing I name for the weaking Dr. Walker's Assertion, that Dr. Gauden
was the Author of that Excellent Book of the King's, is what passed betwixt Dr.
Meriton, and Dr. Walker, at the late Lord Mayors Sir Tho. Pilkington's: I say
Dr. Meriton told me that he put Dr. Walker to silence, with the Story of Mr.
Simmonds lending Dr. Gauden the Book, and Dr. Gauden's transcribing it, and so
returning it to Mr. Simmonds again, and that Mr. Marryot stood by, heard the
debate, and did justify Dr. Meriton's Conquest of Dr. Walker. And what says my
Adversary to this? Why here he claps his Wings and Crows, and says, I have
committed two Mistakes, that the Discourse was not at dinner but after dinner,
and that Dr. Meriton began the discourse with Dr. Walker, and not Dr. Walker
with Dr. Meriton, and by these two things he vainly fancies he has invalidated
the whole Testimony: Now suppose I did mistake as to these two petty
Circumstances, which I am pretty well assured I did not, for Dr. Meriton told
the story as occasioned by meeting together at my Lord Mayors dinner, and did
not as far as I can remember descend to such Minute particulars. Pray good
Reader, What is this to the story it self; namely, The affirming he did so
silence Dr. Walker, that he had not a Word to say for himself? Which is so
true, and will be upon just occasion attested by others as well as my self,
that I do here in the face of the World, challenge Dr. Meriton, or Mr. Marryot,
to deny one syllable of the substance of it, either as to the one his telling
his success in the dispute, and the other justifying of it as really true.

The next thing I produce against Dr. Walker, is Mr. Long's Evidence, and his
attesting in two Letters to Dr. Goodall, that Dr. Gauden did affirm to him,
that he was fully convinced that the Book was entirely the King's own Work, and
what says my Answerer to this stabbing Evidence? For for truly it is, and I am
sure gives the Faction a great deal of Vexation and foaming Rage; why truly the
Reply to this is very diverting, Mr. Long writ the Vox Cleri, and Mr. Long is
against Free Prayer and Comprehension, etc. and what then, is Mr. Long not to
be believed because of his Opinion as to these things? Has Mr. Long by any art
of Immorality, Sedition or Rebellion, wholly forfeited his Credit or
Reputation, so that his Word is not to be taken? No Reader, upon a just
Enquiry, I find him to be a grave, learned, serious, and pious Divine, in that
esteem amongst his Brethren, that I will venture again to say, That it is no
disparagement to Dr. walker's Memory, to assert, that his Testimony is to be
heeded and believed before Dr. Walker's, and I am not willing to be provoked
(because the one of them is dead) to give my Reasons for it.

There are two things more I give the World an Account of in my Defense of this
Great Man's being the Author of that Book, which were too hot for my Adversaries
fingers, and therefore he durst not touch them; The one is Major Huntington's
Story, told from his own mouth by a Non-conformist-Minister to my self; Namely,
That some of those Papers, that were part of that Book, were taken at Nazeby,
kept by General Fairfax, and obtained from him by the Major, and afterward by
him presented to the King, and here I challenge him or any Man, to deny the
Truth of this Story, and that because that Non-conformist-Minister is of such
esteem and credit in London, that I am sure they will blush to deny what he
asserts, if I should name him, which I am ready to do when called by Authority.

The other Story is about Dr. Dillingham's asserting, That he saw and read part
of this Book of the King's, and that long before Dr. Gauden pretended to send
it to the King. Now know Reader, that this Account was given me by a Reverend
and Learned Minister in London, as well as he could remember it, and therefore
that we might have a more full and satisfactory Relation of it, I got him to
write to Dr. Dillingham's Son a Minister, and to desire him to let us know what
Communications his Father had made to him about this Matter, who civilly
returned this ensuing Answer, which I am sure will not be unpleasing to all
those who are Friends to Truth and Justice.

I Have heard of that Controversy you mention, and have now in my hands Dr.
Hollingworth's Book, wherein there is something said concerning my Fathers
bearing Witness to the Truth of King Charles being the Author of (...), though
there might be something added to that Relation as to the time and place when
and where he was a Eyewitness of it: An Account whereof, as near as I can
remember, from what I have had from his own mouth, is as follows. While the
King was at Holmeby my Father went from Cambridge to wait upon this Earl of
Montague's Father, who was then with the King there; while the King was at
Dinner, one of the Bedchamber showed my Father the King's Closet, wherein was
his Library and Papers, while he was there, he that came with him was
accidentally called away, when my Father seeing a Black Box on the Table, that
was locked but not very close, spyed a corner of a Paper hanging out, and took
the boldness to draw it so far out, as that he could read several Sentences; it
was newly written in a fair hand, which he judged to be the King's own, and he
told me when he real the King's Book in print, he found in one Chapter the very
same things word for word (as far as he could remember) with that Manuscript
Paper. What Chapter the King was then writing of I cannot tell, neither did I
ever ask my Father, but if I may conjecture of it at this distance, I should
guess it might be that wherein he Complains of being deprived of his Chaplains;
for while my Father was there, the Parliament sent down some Chaplains of their
own to attend upon Him. Thus Sir you have what I can recollect concerning this
Matter: Be pleased, not only in this, but in whatsoever else I can serve you,
to Command.

Your ready Servant and Faithful Friend, Tho, Dillingham.


A little before this Letter came to my hands, I had another from a Learned
Fellow of Trinity College in Oxford, with an enclosed Paper in it, taken by his
own hands from the Original, now in the possession of the Gentleman's own Son,
Fellow of Exeter College, which enclosed was this:

IF any one has a desire to know the True Author of a Book Entitled (...), I,
one of the Servants of King Charles I. in his Bedchamber, do declare, when his
said Majesty was Prisoner in the Isle of Wight, That I read over the
abovementioned Book (which was long before the said Book was printed) in his
Bedchamber writ with his Majesty's own hand, with several Interlinings.
Moreover his Majesty King Charles I. told me, Sure Levet, you do design to get
this Book by heart, having often seen me reading of it. I can Testify also,
That Royston the Printer told me, that he was imprisoned by Oliver Cromwell the
Protector, because he would not declare that King Charles I. was not the Author
of the said Book.

Signed and Sealed October. 16th 1690. Will. Levet.


And again understanding that one Mr. Hearne now Schoolmaster of Amesbury, and
formerly Amanuensis to Sr. Phillip Warwick, who waited upon the King at the
Isle of Wight, as a Clark and Writer, as did also Mr. Odert and Mr. Whitaker,
could give me some Account from Sr. Phillip as to this Book; I went to him when
he was last in London, and desired to know what Assistance he could give me, as
to the proving the Truth of the Books being the Kings, who presently with his
own hand gave me this following Testimony.

I Robert Hearne, formerly Servant to Sir Phillip Warwick, do Attest, That I
have often heard my said Master Sir Phil. Warwick, as likewise Mr. Odert and
Mr. Whitaker declare, That they had Transcribed Copies of the late King Charles
the First's own Copy of his Book Entitled (...) written with His said
Majesty's own hand.

Witness my hand, In the Presence of, Robert Hearne.

I have but one thing more to take notice of as to this Matter, and that is a
Story of this Authors concerning Mrs. Gaudens declaring to Bish. Nicholson of
Gloucester upon receiving the Sacrament, that her Husband wrote the Book, how
far this man is to be credited, as to any Story he tells, I leave the Reader,
who has looked his Book over impartially, to judge; but however, seeing he is
so fond of, and so apt to pick up any thing that he thinks will serve his
wicked design, even to the very Mistakes of the Press, as is apparent in the
Words Barking and Recalled, with which he makes such ridiculous Work; I will
give him a Rowland for his Oliver, and will Answer this Story with another
quite contrary to his, from the same Gentlewoman; There is a Reverend and
Learned Minister now of London, who does assure me, that a Lady of good Quality
told him sixteen Years ago, That being in discourse with Mrs. Gauden, she told
her that she had a great Concern for the Eternal State of her Husband, because
he pretended to be the Author of that Book, when to her knowledge he never writ
it; the Reverend Person tells me he has forgot the Ladies Name, or else he
would freely have had his own mentioned, but the Story it self he very well
remembers, and I am sure he is to be credited as much as any man that wears a
Gown.

And thus good Reader, thou have here Sir John Brattle's Testimony for the Book
in 47, Mrs. Simmondses, that her Husband dyed, asserting the Book to be the
Kings own; Dr. Meriton's declaring his putting Dr. Walker to silence, with his
Story of Mr. Simmonds; Mr. Cliffords Account of Mr. Simmonds committing it to
the Press by the King's Command, together with Alteration of the Title by Dr.
Jerem. Tailor, and his Composing and Correcting it not from Dr. Gauden's, but
Mr. Odert's own Copy; Mr. Long's Letters positively declaring Dr. Gauden's
confessing it to be the King's own Book, Major Huntington assuring a
Nonconformist Minister, that he presented some of the same Papers that made up
part of the Book taken at Nazeby Fight, which was three years before Dr. Walker
pretends Dr. Gauden sent it to the King; Dr. Dillingham's reading some of the
Book presently after the King came from Newcastle; Mr. Levet's seeing and
reading the Book in the Isle of Wight a great while before it was printed, and
Mr. Hearne's Testimony from Sir Phil. Warwick, Mr. Odert and Mr. Whitaker, who
all attended the King in his Imprisonment as Clerks and Writers; and if all
these will not weigh down the vain Tattle and confident Say-so of single Dr.
Walker from single Dr. Gauden, then the Lord have Mercy upon us; for we must
needs be got to an almost Jewish State of Incredulity; From which good Lord
deliver us.

Good Reader, there is one thing more to take Notice of, which had almost slipped
my Memory, and that is this bold man's triumphing over King Charles I. upon the
score of a Prayer taken out of Sir Phillip Sidney's Arcadia, made to an Heathen
God; and as he impudently assert, made use of by him in the time of his
Captivity. Now I must desire thee to observe, the Spite as well as Falsity of
this Reflection; for if Dr. Gauden made this whole Book, as Dr. Walker asserts,
and the Copy he sent to the King was never returned, nor made use of in any of
the Impressions, then the Prayer was put in by Dr. Gauden, and the King no ways
concerned in it, and consequently it is a Scandal founded in the greatest
Malice and ill Will to the Reputation and Virtue of this Great Man; but as I
deny, and have fully proved that Dr. Gauden was not the Author of this Book, so
I must acquaint thee, that this Prayer, which this man makes himself and his
Party so profanely merry withal, was not printed in the first Edition, by that
Copy sent by Mr. Simmonds to the Press, but was foisted in afterward by some
crafty and designing Person, on purpose to expose the Book, and to lessen that
deserved Credit and Influence that they found it had amongst, and upon all the
wise and considering men of the Kingdom, and therefore I expect to hear no more
of this base Story for the time to come, or if they will take the boldness to
raise it again, I hope Reader, I have furnished thee with a sufficient Answer
to it.

Some short Remarks upon a Lewd Book, called, Ludlow no Liar.
Reader;
AFter a certain bold Libeller had sent into the World a Second Arraignment of
King Charles the First, by way of Letter to my self, I being touched with the
Sense of the ill Effects that Book might have upon the credulous and unthinking
part of the Nation, did think it convenient to let the world know, the false
Imputations he had laid at the King's door, and therefore in order to it, did
consult and make use of such Authorities, as I thought unquestionable, and I am
sure are for the most part so (except one) which I have been but lately
Convinced of, and which is one of their own, and which they make no little use
of; but let the Authorities be what they will, this Wicked Man is resolved to
be in the right, as long as there is any rude Vote or scandalous Libel,
Remonstrance, or false Story to be found in print, and to be communicated to
this present Age, and neither Friend nor Enemy, if they write any thing in
behalf of the great King ought to be believed, if he may have his Will, and let
what Acts of Parliament be quoted for the Justification of that Prince, yet he
still was a Tyrant, and a Man neither of Honor nor Religion: But to my main
design, in which I promise to be very short.

First Reader, I must desire thee to take Notice, That I have Dedicated my
Second Defense to the Arch Bishops, Bishops, Nobility, Gentry, Clergy and
Commons of the Nation, in which I tell them of the Books that have been Printed
since this last Revolution, against the Constitution both of Church and State,
which did sufficiently show the Design on Foot, to which not one Word of Answer
is this Libel: I further tell them what Destruction this Spirit once backed
with power will make of them and all they have, of which no Notice taken, for
which indeed I do not blame him; for he knows in his Conscience all I say is
true, and I hope the Body of the Nation for the time to come, will be so wise
and provident, as not to let things run so far, as to make a Second Trial of
that Spirit, by which they have suffered, and that so smartly already.

In the beginning of my Defense, I do honestly upbraid him for taking upon him
the Name of that Traitor Ludlow, and tell him that he ought to suffer in his
stead, being so forward to Represent him, and Vindicate those Actions for which
he stands Condemned; and this he is pleased to pass by too, no doubt being
convinced if he had his due, he would quickly be put out of Capacity of
poisoning the Nation with such Infamous Pamphlets.

The next thing I shall make a few Remarks upon, is the Letter of the Prince of
Wales to the Pope; I tell him in my Defense, that as the Letter is in
Rushworth, his Accusations of that Great Prince from that Letter, are false and
made up of Lies, upon which he grows great in his own eyes, and triumphs over
me as if he had got a complete Victory, leaving me dead upon the spot; for he
produces another Letter, in which is contained all he Charges upon the Prince.

The Truth is, I had heard a little before his Libel came out, from a Reverend
Neighbor of mine, that Mr. Rushworth in his First Edition Dedicated to Rich.
Cromewel then called Protector, had put in this Letter of his, but afterward
in those Editions after the Restoration, not being able to justify the Letter,
put this in the room of it, both which I have good Reason to believe are alike
true; that is, they are both of them spurious, and I Challenge this bold
Writer, or any of his Party, to name a man that ever saw or took either of
these Letters out of any Archive or Public Record at Rome, Madrid, or London;
that there was a Letter sent to the Pope, I grant, but that it was pleasing to
the Pope, I deny, and that for this very Reason, because the Pope did so
greatly delay the Dispensation for the Marriage, which I dare say he would not
have done if he had had such hopes of making England Catholic, as they call it
again, as such a Letter as this from such a Person that was next to the Crown,
did give him. The Pope of Rome knew England so well, and the Advantages of it
to the Papal Chair, that I am sure he would have granted an hundred
Dispensations at first asking, for such an opportunity as this: But good
Reader, I must entreat thee to observe, that this Libeller, though he makes
such a Noise about a Letter, which could not (all Circumstances considered) be
avoided, yet he takes no Notice of what I assert, as to the Princes answering
the Spanish Favorite, that he came for a Wife and not for a Religion, nor of
Mr. Rushworths Attestation of his steadiness to his Religion, nor of Mr.
Johnsons Account, of his fixedness to his Principles, notwithstanding all the
Applications of the Priests to him; No, no, these things do not answer the ends
of this man and his Party, which, in short, are to destroy Church and State,
and therefore not one Word of them, or any other Virtues of this Prince I will
warrant you; and therefore the Old Cry of one of his Judges, is still among
them, Blacken him, blacken him, as this man has done to purpose with his Lies
and false Accusations.

As for the Story of Prynne, Bastwicke and Burton, with whose Sufferings he
endeavors to bespatter the Reign and Spirit of King Charles I. I will only
answer him over and above what I said in my Answer to his lewd Libel, with this
true Account, which I promise to make good when ever called to it by my
Superiors; Namely, That Mr. Prynne being in discourse with a Friend of mine,
after the Happy Restoration, told him to this purpose, That the Crimes of
himself and his Fellow Sufferers were so great, that if the Justice of the
Nation had cut off their Heads instead of their Ears, they had had nothing but
what was due to them; by which Mr. Prynne, who knew his and their Deserts
better than this Defender of them, either does or will, showed himself a true
Penitent, and one that would have scorned as well as grieved for such an
Advocate, as this wicked man is.

The next thing he falls foul upon me, is for speaking favorably of
Archbishop Laud, whom he treats with all the scurrility imaginable; now I must
confess, though I believe that great and learned Man was mistaken in the temper
of the Nation, and did somethings with too great an Heat and Zeal, yet upon
reading his Story, I do believe, that as he was a great Scholar, so he was a
very pious Man, and a thousand times more abused by a Generation of men, than
he did deserve, he lived strictly, and dyed with a Courage, Comfort, and
Satisfaction of Mind suitable to his holy and severe Life; and for the Proof of
this I desire thee, Reader, to read over his Speech he made in defense of
himself, upon his Trial, before the few Lords that took upon them to be his
Judges, and that holy Discourse he made upon the Scaffold, just before that
fatal Blow that severed his Head from his Body.

And whereas he stands in his Assertion, That Bishop Laud sent the
Common Prayer Book to the Pope and Cardinals for their Approbation, and quotes
one Gage a Friar for the Truth of it, I must beg thy leave, Reader, to tell
thee that I do not believe the Story, and that because such a man as Gage
reports it, and especially at that time when Usurpers were in the Chair, and
with whom, as other Popish Converts were wont to do, he was resolved to curry
favor, and I believe this man the less, because he was so silly and so
spiteful, as to vindicate Bishop Lauds Death as just, when he could not but
know, if he understood any thing of our Legal Constitution, that Bishop Laud
was cut off by a Warrant that no Law of England justifies; for it was done
without the Kings Consent or Hand, and consequently in plain terms, that he was
murdered, and he that Vindicates the Breach of the Sixth Commandment, his
Testimony shall have no Credit with me, nor will, I am sure, with any good and
undesigning man throughout the Kingdom. Another thing I Answer his former vile
Paper withal, is what is said by Mr. Whitelock, concerning the Scotch
Rebellion, who tells us, (though a Friend to the Party) what Condescentions the
King made, how He kept his Word, and the Rebels broke theirs, after a solemn
Agreement betwixt them both, who tells us of their Signing a Letter to the
French King to come in to their Aid against their lawful Sovereign, And what
says my Adversary to these things? Why he quotes several Defenses they made,
nothing to the purpose as to what Mr. Whitelock asserts, and indeed such things
as any Rebels may say for themselves, and he knows there never yet was so bad a
Cause, but Wit and Malice could invent and draw up something that dazzled the
eyes of the Vulgar, and served to keep ignorant, or designing men in a Body
together: But good Reader, I pray take Notice, That whereas I give an Account
from Mr. Whitelock, how far Cardinal Richelieu interested himself in this
Rebellion of the Scots, and how he sent Chamberlain his Chaplain, and Hepburn
his Page, to blow up the Coals both in England and Scotland amongst the
Puritans, yet my Adversary is pleased here to be utterly silent and to pass it
by, no doubt because it was so notorious and villainous a Correspondence, as
would admit of no manner of Justification.

The next thing I Advocate for this Great King for, are his many and gracious
Favors and Condescentions in passing so many Bills for the first Year of the
Parliaments sitting down, which he would make the World believe, were no
Favors, but what he was bound to do, and consequently, for which, no Thanks
were due to him, by which he takes off all Obligations to Their Present
Majesty's and their Successors from the People, as to any future Acts of Grace
they grant, for which I am sure he deserve no Thanks from the Crown, and indeed
for which he ought to be looked upon as a downright Enemy to the future
Intercourse and good Understanding betwixt Their Majesty's and their People,
and I doubt not but this saucy Assertion will be so thought of both by King and
People, and the Loyalty of him and his pretending Party will be looked upon
accordingly.

I further in my Defense, vindicate the King's Scruple of Conscience, as to the
Execution of the Earl of Strafford, and to show the reasonableness of the
Scruple, (which he basely makes sport withal) recite and print the Preamble of
the Act of Parliament, by which the Attainder of that Great Man, and White
Soul, as Bishop Usher who attended him upon the Scaffold, calls him, was taken
off, in which they acquit him of Treason, And what says this Pamphleteer to
this? Not a Word, but according to his usual Modesty calls him Traitor; and
consequently Arraigns the Wisdom and Justice of the Nation, which indeed to me
is no wonder, considering the Venomous Spirit of the man throughout his whole
Book.

Further I Vindicate the King, and that from his own Declaration (which I have
printed in words at length) from any design of bringing up the Army to plunder
the City of London, which Declaration he says little or nothing to, but flies
presently to a Committee, and their Examinations of the thing, which truly
considering how at that time some men were allured with hopes, others
affrighted with Frown and Threats, I can give but little heed to, and I will be
so hardy as to tell the World, that I will believe the Assertions of King
Charles I. before Twenty Committees of those days, considering the designs then
on foot, and the resolutions to carry them on; and I must confess, ever since I
read Whites Centuries, the Witnesses received, and the ruin of so many
Families upon such Testimonies, I have had but a very slender Value for what
was printed from those Committees; let this man answer what the King says upon
this Account in his own Defense, and what the Officers of the Army say in their
Petition in their behalf, and then he will act like a clear Answerer, and
deserve a further Consideration.

Another thing I Charge this modest and mannerly Gentleman withal, is his false
Account he gives in his former Libel of the Rabble running down to Westminster
in a riotous and tumultuous manner, who he says went only armed with Petitions
in their hands in a peaceable way, as to which I tell him, and that truly, that
he contradicts all the Historians of that Age, and that they were so far from
such a decent Carriage as he asserts, that they with Clubs and Staves in their
hands, cried out they would have no Groom-Porters-Lodge at Whitehall, but would
speak with the King himself when they pleased, that they beset the House of
Lords door, and cried Justice, Justice, that they broke the Organ, and tore the
Vestments of the Church of Westminster in pieces, threw stones at the Bishops,
and endangered the Bishop of Durham's Life: And what says he to these things in
his Reply? Why truly not one Word, but still sillily and against all Truth,
would make the World believe the King was not at all affronted, and had no
Reason to leave Whitehall, which he must be a great Stranger to Matters of
Fact, that gives any Credit to such bold Assertions; and I am sure this man, in
this particular, if any man believe him, must be beholden to his blind
Credulity, and not to his Skill in History.

Another thing I call this man to Account for, is his bold asserting the Kings
burning by the Hangman, his own Pacification with the Scots when he came to
London, which I refute by a Passage out of Bishop Burnets Memoirs of the two
Hamiltons; it is true, the Figures are mistaken, but the Story is truly,
related as it is in that Bishops Book, but to convince the World of the Malice,
as well as Falseness of this Reflection, I shall present them with a greater
Authority than the Bishops, and that is an Act of State against the Scots
concerning a scandalous Paper dispersed by them, which the Reader may find at
large in the Council Table Book.

On Sunday the Fourth of August 1639. His Majesty being in Council, was pleased
to acquaint the Lords with a Paper he had seen at Barwicke, Entitled, Some
Conditions of His Majesty's Treaty with his Subjects of Scotland, which Paper
being in most parts full of falsehood, dishonor and scandal, to His Majesty's
Proceedings in the late Pacification; All which Considered, the whole Board
unanimously became humble Petitioners to His Majesty, that this false and
scandalous Paper might be burnt by the Hangman, to which Petition the Earl of
Pembrooke, Salisbury and Holland, afterward known Enemies to the King's Cause,
Consented. And now I hope this will stop this man's, and his Friends mouths as
to this particular for the time to come, though considering the Malice of the
man to the Memory of King Charles, I am apt to question it.

As to what he and I both say concerning the Proclamations about the Irish
Rebellion, I shall pass it by at present, and refer thee Reader, to the
Vindication I make by two undoubted Papers of the King's Innocence as to that
horrid Rebellion, at the latter end of this Paper.

The last thing I assert in the behalf of this Great and Virtuous Prince, is
what he says himself upon the Scaffold, as to the first beginning of that
unhappy, and indeed needless War on the Parliaments side, where he Clears
himself, by calling GOD to Witness, unto whom he was shortly to give an
Account, that they began the War with him, for the Truth of which he refers to
the Dates of both their Commissions, to which I have not one Word of Answer
from this bold Libeller, but in a shuffling way talking of pawning Crown
Jewels, which for what ends it was done, or designed to be done, it is not fit
for him and I to judge, for the Actions of Princes are above our Reach, and
ought not to be so narrowly pryed into, yet I dare say it was not to begin a
War, because the Good Man so often protests against any Intention of War,
because so small a Sum of Money in comparison, would so little have answered an
Undertaking against so great and powerful an Enemy, as the Parliament then was,
and though the King afterward made that use of the Money, after the War was
actually commenced against him, yet that is no Argument, That that was the
Primary Design.

And now Reader, having given thee these short Remarks upon this filthy and
scurrilous Book, I have little more to entertain thee withal, than to tell
thee, That this Author, has with a great deal of Boldness and Falsehood,
declared, notwithstanding the honest Account I have given of my self from the
Age of Twenty One, and of my being Ordained by the hands of Bishop Saunderson,
as soon as by Law I was capable, namely at the Age of Twenty Three, that I was
a Presbyterian; but to Answer this in short, I do here declare in the Presence
of God, that I never was a Presbyterian in my Life, and further, by God's
Grace, that I never will be one, for I neither like the Principles of that
Government, nor the Spirit of too many of that Party, for I abhor all
Bitterness and Cruelty.

As for what he repeats out of Manvel, which were made against Dr. Parker, I
pray God forgive him, it is a Description that belongs not at all to me, as all
those know, who have been acquainted with the course of my Life, nor yet do Dr.
Wilds Verses against Dr. Lee reach me at all; for I bless God, ever since I
came to a competent Understanding, I have loved the Constitution of the Church
of England, and done what in me lay, to promote its true Interest, and which I
will never cease to do, as long as I have Tongue to speak, and a Pen to write.

I shall conclude this part of my Discourse with hearty Prayers to God for my
Adversary, that God would open his Eyes, and change his Heart before he dies,
that so this Iniquity may not be for his Eternal Ruin.

The Irish Rebellion falsely and scandalously imputed to King CHARLES the First,
TO make good which, I only desire thee Reader, carefully to peruse the Two
following Accounts: The one is a Letter by that Kings own Order, by the Hands
of Secretary Vane to the Lords Justices of Ireland, Borelase and Parsons, above
half a year before the Rebellion, giving them to understand the Intelligence
the King had from abroad, of some dangerous Designs by the Popish Party against
the Peace of that Kingdom, that so they might be awakened to take all possible
care to prevent them: The other is an unfolding the whole Mystery of the
pretended Commission with the King's Broad Seal to it, which the Enemies of
that King have, and do still charge that gracious Prince withal, and by Virtue
of which they do lay all the innocent Blood then so barbarously spilt, at his
door, and consequently do endeavor thereby to render his Name odious to all
succeeding Generations, the Account is by Dr. Ker Dean of Ardagh, and as I am
assured by a considerable Dignitary of that Kingdom, yet alive.

Sir Henry Vane's Letter to the Lords Justices concerning some Informations of
Danger in Ireland.
Right Honorable,
HIS Majesty has Commanded me to acquaint your Lordships with an Advice given
him from abroad, and confirmed by his Ministers in Spain and elsewhere, which
in this Distempered Time, and Conjuncture of Affairs, deserves to be seriously
considered, and an especial care and watchfulness to be had therein: which is,
That of late there have passed from Spain (and the like may well have been from
other Parts) an unspeakable number of Irish Churchmen for England and Ireland,
and some good old Soldiers under pretext of asking leave to raise Men for the
King of Spain; whereas it is observed, among the Irish Friars there, a whisper
runs, as if they expected a Rebellion in Ireland, and particularly in Connaght.
Wherefore His Majesty thought fit to give your Lordships this notice, that in
your Wisdoms, you might manage the same with that Dexterity and Secrecy, as to
Discover and Prevent so pernicious a Design, if any such there should be, and
to have a watchful Eye on the Proceedings and Actions of those who come thither
from abroad, on what pretext soever, and so herewith I rest,

White Hall, March the 16th 1640. Your Lordships most Humble Servant, Henry
Vane.


Dr. Ker Dean of Ardagh his Deposition concerning the Calumny thrown upon King
Charles the Martyr, for giving a Commission to the Rebels in Ireland.
I John Ker Dean of Ardagh, having occasionally discoursed with the Right
Honorable George Lord Viscount Lanesborrough, concerning the late Rebellion of
Ireland, and his Lordship at that time having desired to certify the said
Discourse under my Hand and Seal, do declare as follows.

That I was present in Court when the Rebel Sir Phelim Oneal was brought to his
Trial in Dublin, and that he was Tried in that Court which is now the High
Court of Chancery, and that his Judges were Judge Donelan, afterward Sir James
Donelan, Sir Edward Bolton Knight, sometimes Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer;
Dungan, then called Judge Dungan, and another Judge whose name I do not now
remember. And that amongst other Witnesses then brought in against him, there
was one Joseph Travers Clerk, and one Mr. Michael Harrison, if I mistake not
his Christian name; and that I heard several Robberies and Murders proved
against him, the said Sir Phelim, he having nothing material to plead in his
own defense: And that the said Judge, whose name I remember not as abovesaid,
Examined the said Sir Phelim, about a Commission, that the said Sir Phelim,
should have had from Charles Stuart, as the said Judge then called the late
King, for levying the said War: That the said Sir Phelim made Answer, That he
never had any such Commission; and that it was proved then in Court, by the
Testimony of the said Joseph Travers and others; that the said Sir Phelim had
such a Commission, and did in the beginning of the said Irish Rebellion s^ the
same unto the said Joseph, and several others then in Courts. Upon which the
said Sir Phelim confessed, that when he surprised the Castle of Charle-mount,
and the Lord Caulfield, that he Ordered the said Mr. Harrison and another
Gentleman, whose name I now do not remember, to cut off the King's broad Seal
from a Patent of the said Lord's, they then found in Charle-mount, and to affix
it to a Commission, which he the said Sir Phelim had ordered to be drawn up.
And that the said Mr. Harrison did in the face of the whole Court confess, that
by the said Sir Phelim's order he did stitch the Silk Cord or Label of that
Seal, with Silk of the Colors of the said Label, and so fixed the Label and
Seal to the said Commission, and that the said Sir Edward Bolton, and Judge
Donelan, urging the said Sir Phelim, to declare why he did so deceive the
People? He did Answer, That no Man could blame him, to use all means whatsoever
to promote that Cause he had so far engaged in. And that upon the second day of
his Trial some of the said Judges told him, that if he could produce any
material proof, that he had such a Commission from the said Charles Stuart, to
declare and prove it before Sentence should pass against him, and that he the
said Sir Phelim should be restored to his Estate and Liberty: But he answered;
That he could prove no such thing; nevertheless they gave him time to consider
of it till the next day, which was the third and last day of his Trial! Upon
which day the said Sir Phelim being brought into the Court, and urged again; he
declared again, that he never could prove any such thing as a Commission from
the King: And added, that there were several Outrages committed by Officers and
others his aiders and abettors in the management of that War, contrary to his
Intention, and which now pressed his Conscience very much; and that he could
not in Conscience had to them the unjust Calmniating the King, though he had
been frequently solie^ted thereunto by fair Promises and great Rewards while he
was in Prison. And proceeding further in this discourse, that immediately he
was stopped, before he had ended what he had further to say, the sentence of
death was pronounced against him.

And I do further declare, That I was present, and very near to the said Sir
Phelim when he was upon the Ladder at his Execution; and that one Marshal
Peake, and another Marshal, before the said Sir Phelim was cast, came riding
toward the place in great haste, and called aloud, stop a little, and having
passed through the throng of the spectators and guards, one of them whispered a
pretty while with the said Sir Phelim, and that the said Sir Phelim answered in
the hearing of several hundreds of People, of whom my self was one, I thank the
Lieutenant General for his intended mercy, but I declare, good People, before
God and his Holy Angels, and all of you that hear me, that I never had any
Commission from the King for what I have done, in Levying or Prosecution of
this War, and do heartily beg your Prayers all good Catholics and Christians,
that God may be merciful unto me, and forgive me my sins. More of his Speech I
could not hear, which continued not long, the Guards beating off those that
stood near the place of Execution.

All that I have written as above, I declare to be true, and am ready if
thereunto required, upon my Corporal Oath to attest the truth of every
particular of it. And in Testimony thereof do hereunto Subscribe my Hand, and
affix my Seal, this 28th day of February, 1681.

John Ker, Locus Sigilli.

And now Reader, having vindicated the Honor, Piety, and all other Virtues of
this Great Prince, from the Deathbed Declaration of one that was once his
greatest Enemy, having cleared the Truth of his Book, beyond Contradiction,
having proved the Counterfeit Ludlow a great Liar, and also defended the King
from the base and false Imputation of the Irish Rebellion, I have no more to
say, than only to tell thee, That if the present Faction cannot employ a more
modest and mannerly Champion, than this man is, I have done; for I do not love
to be put to the trouble so often, of raking in sinks and stinking dunghils,
and if he wants employment, and will be Scribbling again, I desire him gravely
and seriously, without railing and buffooning, to Answer these following
Quaeries,

I. Whether King Charles I. dyed by the hands of Justice, or was actually
Murdered? II. Whether those that abet his Death now, are not vertually as
guilty of it, as his Judges were? III. Whether they that vindicate that Death,
can be true and steady Subjects to King William and Queen Mary? IV. Whether
this man's and others asserting the Justice of the War against the King, and
crying up his Death, be not to prepare the People to do the same thing against
and upon others, when Time and Opportunity shall serve? V. Whether he is to be
believed in any thing he says, and does not deserve a Pillory, that tells so
horrid a Lie, as that the King sent to Sir William Balfour to cut off the Lord
Lowdens Head by Nine of the Clock next Morning, without any Process of Law? VI.
Whether he does not deserve a severe Censure, that belyes my Lord Strafford,
with Words spoke at the Cabinet-Council, notwithstanding the Marquess Hamilton,
Earl of Northumberland, Lord Treasurer, and Lord Cottingten, upon their Honors
declared, being present at the same Council, they heard no such Words? VII.
Whether they are not great Fools, or designing K -- that believe any thing this
Libeller writes against King Charles the First? VIII. Whether he has not done
me a greater Honor than ever I could expect, or can deserve, to belie, defame,
and abuse me, with the same Pen he has abused King Charles the First, and that
purely for His sake? Lastly, Whether that Holy and Renowned Martyr, Archbishop
Cranmer, and that stout Reformer Martin Luther, would not appear worse Men,
than this Scribler has made King Charles I. if we should believe nothing of
them, but what their grand Enemies the Priests and Jesuits have writ against
them.
After I had finished the Defense of the King's Book, I received this Letter
from a Reverend Minister of Ipswich in Suffolk, which deserves to be taken
Notice of.

SIR,
SOME years after the Kings Trial, Major Huntington at Ipswich assured me, That
so much of the said Book as contained His Majesty's Meditations before Naseby
Fight, was taken in the Kings Cabinet, and that Sir Thomas Fairfax delivered
the said Papers unto him, and ordered him to carry them to the King; and the
Major affirmed, that he read them over before he delivered them, and that they
were the same for Matter and Form, with those Meditations in the Printed Book,
and that he was much affected with them, and from that time became a Proselyte
to the Royal Cause: He also told me, That when he delivered them to the King,
His Majesty appeared very joyful at the receiving of them, and said he esteemed
them more than all the Jewels he had lost in the Cabinet. Also I remember, when
I waited upon my Lord Vicount Hereford into Holland, (who was sent by the
Parliament with other Lords, to bring home King Charles II.) my Lord sent me to
Dr. Earl then at the Hague, to request his Knowledge; whether the King was
Author of the said Book, the Dr. told me, as sure as he knew himself to be the
Translator of it into Latin; so certain he was King Charles was the Author of
the Original in English.

For my part, I am apt to believe no Person was able to frame that Book, but a
Suffering King, and no Suffering King, but King Charles the Martyr.

Your Humble Servant, Cave Beck.


FINIS.

