A Brief Relation Of some part of the SUFFERINGS Of the True Christians, The
People of God (in Scorn called Quakers) in IRELAND, For these last Eleaven
Years, viz. from 1660. until 1671.

With an Occasional Treatise of their Principles and Practices briefly stated,
whereby the Innocence of their Cause, for which they so suffer, is not only
plainly Demonstrated; but also, from all false Aspersions and causless
Pretenses sufficiently Vindicated.

Collected by T. H. and A. F.

Heb. 10. 23, 25. Not forsaking the Assembling of our selves together, as the
manner of some is -- Heb. 7. 12. The Priesthood being changed, there is made of
necessity a Change also of the Law -- Acts 13. 15, If ye have any Word of
Exhortation for the People, say on -- Mat. 5. 34. But I say unto you, Swear not
at all -- Jam. 2. 9. If ye have Respect to Persons, ye commit Sin -- Exodus 20
9. Six days shall thou labor. -- Printed in the Year, 1673.

THE PREFACE.
READER,
THere having been a great Defection from true Christianity in the long Night
of Apostasy, whereby gross Darkness has overspread the Nations, foretold by
the Apostles, That Antichrist, Deceivers, grievous Wolves, false Teachers,
Core-like, false Worshippers should ensue; these ushered in the Apostasy (which
began in the Apostles days) and grew so great that they became Persecutors of
the True Christians, as indeed false Worship and Persecution are inseparable
Companions: For John, by the Revelation of God to him, saw the Beast (which the
Dragon had given his Power unto, after he had persecuted the Woman which fled
into, and was fed in the Wilderness 1260. days, and the Man-Child caught up to
God) set up his Worship, and compelling thereto* and the false Prophet
deceiving them that had worshipped the Image of the Beast: And he also saw the
great Whore sitting upon the Beast, which was to be worshipped forty two
Months, having a Golden Cup in her hand, wherewith she deceived, and by her
Sorceries enticed the Nations to commit Fornication with her; and so corrupted
the Earth, and made her self drunk with the Blood of the Saints, and Martyrs of
Jesus, etc. Hereby John saw in the Spirit the great and long Sufferings of the
true Christians, the Church and People of God in the time of the Apostasy, by
the false Christians the false Worshippers, who having lost the Power and
Spirit, by which the Apostles and primitive Christians were led and guided how
to worship God in Spirit and in Truth, set up fair and gilded Forms of Worship
( Jeroboam-like) of their own making and inventing; and at length, lost not
only the Power, but the very Form of Truth and true worship; and then (being in
the Enmity) did compel to their Worship, and ( Cain-like) persecuted to Death
the true Worshippers, the true Church and people of God; witness several
Histories of the Papal Persecution of the true Christians in all Kingdoms and
Countries where the Power of Rome extended it self, and so continues in many
places to this Day. And how can we do less then charge the rise of Christians
(so called) persecuting for Religion to proceed thence; For they were the first
Authors Dr. Tailor late Bishop of Down and Derry.
of Force and Vioience in matters of Faith and Opinion in Religion amongst
Christians; the Inquisition being chiefly entrusted to the Order of Dominick
who first preached this Force, and by whose means many true Christians were put
to Death, for not abjuring their Principles and true Faith in Religion: and
this was the first Example of putting Erring Persons to Death in the Church of
Rome; for Christianity does not punish Corporally, people for erring
Spiritually, but indeed Popery does. And of the same mind were diverse ancient
and modern Writes, who said, That people must be informed to embrace Religion
Chrysostom. Tertul. Haywardus. K. James.
with Reason, and not compelled by Violence; for nothing violent or injurious
can be Religious, because Reason, and not Force, ought to convince. That God
never loves to plant his Church by Violence and Blood; the Condition of
Christians being rather to be persecuted, then to persecute. What Cruelty among
Christians is acted under the color K. Car. 1.
of Religion, as if we could not be Christians unless we crucify one another?
And by Compulsion no man can make a a Hypocrite to be a true Believer; but on
the contrary, many may be made Hypocrites: For people in the Matters of
Religion and Worship of God, should rather be drawn by the Spirit of the Lord
in God's Authority, then driven by the Terrors of Magistrates, or forced by the
Penalties and Punishments of outward Laws of Men: And how can that Service and
Worship be acceptable to God, which for its Authority has only the Force and
Fear of Man, without the Faith and Fear of God?

John also saw the Whore, the Mother of Harlots, judged, and the downfall of
her Pride, and the Merchants of the Earth (that were enriched by Trading and
Trafficking with her) lamenting her Fall, and the Man-Child come to rule the
Nations with a Rod of Iron, smiting them with the Sword of his Mouth; and the
holy City, new Jerusalem (the Mother of us all) discending out of Heaven from
God, prepared as a Bride for her Husband* and in this Holy City there was no
Temple, the Lord God and the Lamb being the Temple of it, and the Lamb the
Light thereof, and the Nations of them that are saved shall walk in the Light
of it, etc. Here John the Divine had a Sight of the restoring of the true
Church to its primitive Purity and Institution, in Faith, Worship, Discipline
and all Gospel Order.

And now the Day of God's great Love and rich Mercy to Mankind is dawned again,
after the long Night of Apostasy, since the Apostles days, and the Everlasting
Gospel is preached again, and he that made Heaven and Earth is to be Worshipped
again in Spirit and in Truth; and many are turned from Darkness to Light, and
from the Power of Satan and the Dragon's worship unto God; and the Church is
returning out of the Wilderness, and making her self ready for the Marriage of
the Lamb; an Invitation to the Supper is proclaimed, and the Way to the Holy
City discovered: And it having pleased God to bring us forth in this Blessed
Day and Happy Age, wherein the true Light has appeared, in which we have
believed, and are turned thereto, by which we are come to see the first day's
Work of God's new Creation, Light separated from Darkness, and to see over and
beyond this long and thick dark Night, to God's Day, the Light that manifests
Sin, the Deeds of Darkness, the Works of the Devil; and hereby we are come to
the Foundation Principle again of many Generations, and to the true Religion,
to see and know the true Worship of the primitive Christians again, and so to
be led out of all By-ways, Will Worship, Rudiments, Traditions and
Presciptions of men, to Worship God aright, which is in the Spirit and in the
Truth, which Christ Jesus set up above 1600 years ago; for we are of and for
the same Faith, Worship, Church and Gospel Order of the ancient true
Christians, for which we are now persecuted, as they were in former days: And
indeed it has been our Portion to suffer (ever since the Lord God first raised
us up to bear Testimony to his Everlasting Truth, the Light, Christ Jesus, that
lights every Man that comes into the World, that through it they might
believe, and to own his true and living Worship, which is in Spirit and in
Truth) and to endure not only Reproaches, bitter Taunts, Mockings and
Revilings; but also, Cruel and Vnchristian-like Vsages, by Halings, Tearings,
Beatings, Whippings, Woundings, long Imprisonments great Fines, excessive Loss
and Havoc of our Goods, and sometimes Loss of Life, occasioned (mostly) by the
Priests, (whose Merchandise we can no longer buy) and their incensing the
Magistrates against us, falsely accusing us, as the Jews did Paul to Faelix, to
be Movers of Sedition, and raising new Sects: so that as it was accounted a
Crime then with the Jews, to be called a Christian, a Follower of Jesus of
Nazareth; even so now is made matter enough against us (by some sometimes) to
be called a Quaker, (a term given us in Derision, first by an Independent
Justice at Derby about 20 years ago) and for no other cause have several
suffered. Neither have we in this Realm suffered for these last 11 Years only,
but before, even in the former Powers time, the which has been already
published; and we have found that the most and worst of our Sufferings since
the King's Restoration, have bin by such of the Professing Priests and
Magistrates, that were in Favor, or at leastwise made use of in Oliver and his
Son Richard's days, and are now wheeled about, and for Profit or Honor have
cringed and conformed to these Times; though we cannot but own and acknowledge,
that upon Applications and Addresses, made by us to the chief Rulers of this
Land, in behalf of our suffering Friends, they have diverse times been pleased
to grant us Remedy and Redress. And seeing we hold or maintain no Principle of
Religion, or Practice of Worship, or Doctrine of the Gospel, but what is
according to the Scriptures of Truth, why will any professing Christianity
persecute us? And we can truly appeal to God the Searcher of all Hearts, that
according to our Principles, so our Practices have always been, even to seek
Peace, and ensue it, and to follow after the Knowledge of God, and to desire
the Good and Welfare of all: Where have we wronged any man's Person or
Possession? or been found in Plots, or guilty of Sedition? or, Have we made
Resistance when men (yea, unreasonable men) with Clubs, Swords and Staves, and
other illegal ways, have wronged, beat, cut and abused us, which was no Honor
to Manhood, to exercise such severity and Cruelty upon such an Innocent and
Harmless People, that will not lift up a hand against them; and wherein we
could not (actively) obey for Conscience sake in matters relating to Religion
and our Principles, there we have (passively) suffered, and patiently born it?
Have we not all along been a Suffering People, and yet not for any Cause of
Evil doing, that could justly be laid to our charge; but for things pertaining
to our Principles, and the Worship of God, and in Obedience to his Requirings
of us; for which Cause we can more freely give up our Bodies a Sacrifice, then
to disobey the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, who having kept us Innocent* will
plead for us against our Causless Persecutors, who have no more against us,
then was against Daniel? Has not long Experience of us under several
Governments and distinct Powers (since we were a People to God) fully and (to
any moderate man) sufficiently evidenced our Innocence, and that our Deportment
(notwithstanding the many and great Provocations) have been peaceable and
harmless in the exercise of our Consciences in Religion and the Worship of God
(touching which we our selves, and none else for us, must give an account to
God) let our Neighbors and the whole Nation bare testimony, and the just
Witness of God in men judge, and Conscience speak* whether our Principles have
produced any other Practice then as aforesaid, or our Practices any other
Effects in our Conversation, then such as become an in-offensive and
well-minded People, professing Truth and Honesty: Well then, What man, as a
man, much more as a good man, professing Christianity, will have a hand in
persecuting the Innocent People of God? or who will join with cursed Cain (the
first Persecutor on Earth) to persecute his Righteous Brother Abel about
Worship? Is it not contrary to the Character of a good Christian, and against
the Royal Law of God, to impose upon another in the things of Religion and
worship of God, contrary to the Faith of the Imposed? or would the Imposer be
imposed upon contrary to his own Understanding and Conscience in the spiritual
concernments of his soul, seeing that every man must answer for himself, and
that none can give to God a Ransom for his Brothers soul: therefore we warn all
in love, to take heed what they do herein* for its a tender Cause, and its the
Jurisdiction of the Lord, his Sovereignty and proper Dominion, and alone
belongs to him to rule in the Consciences of people, in order to be served and
worshipped acceptably.

And to the end Reader thou may be informed of the manner of our Sufferings,
and the cause thereof, we have collected some part of what we have suffered for
these last 11 years, that thou may see how, where, and for what (sometimes
without and contrary to Law, and sometimes under color of Law) much Havoc
has bin made of our Goods; which we here put to public view in a plain way
and manner, for we are a plain people; we have no need to use Arguments to
persuade thee to credit the truth of this ensuing Relation, it being so obvious
and generally known in Cities, Towns and Countries, where we are conversant.
And though some of them may seem small in thine eyes, yet we would not have
thee too slightly disesteem thereof, in regard the least of them is for matter
of Conscience, and therefore ought to be tendered by all professing Christianity
in Truth and Sincerity; of which number we wish thee no worse then to be one,
and then thou can not but reckon us two thy Friends,

Thomas Holme,
Abraham Fuller.

THE CONTENTS.
I. FOr Meeting together to wait upon God in his Fear, Service and Worship. II.
For not paying Tithes and Maintenance to the Priests and their Clarks. III. For
not paying to the building and repair of the Parish Worship-Houses, called
Churches. IV. For not going to the public Worship at the Church, so called,
and for Exhorting and Reproving people in the Fear of the Lord in the said
public Houses of Worship, Markets and Streets. V. For not Swearing, not taking
off the Hat, and working on Holy Days, so called. VI. An Occasional Treatise,
relating to the aforesaid Sufferings.
First, These following have suffered for meeting and assembling themselves
together (in their own Houses) in the Fear of the Lord, and in his Worship and
Service, and for exhorting one another, and praying together, to build up one
another in the Holy Faith, according to the Command of the Apostles, and the
Example and practice of the Saints, and Prophets, and the true Christians in
the primitive Times; and for the same have been much abused, endicted, greatly
fined, long imprisoned, cruelly used, and much of their Goods taken from them.

Ulster Province.
Ardmagh County.
1661. WIlliam Bowston, Simon Harrison, and Roger Webb (with several other
Friends) being met together at Roger Webb's House, to wait upon god in his holy
Fear and Worship, in a peaceable way, as their manner is; were (for the same)
taken thereout, and by the Lord Conway, Bishop Taylour, and Arthur Hill,
committed to Ardmagh Goal, and there kept close Prisoners five Weeks; and then
the said William Bowston dyed in Prison (whose Death must be given account of
by those that caused it) and the other two Friends were kept there six Weeks
longer.

1662. Francis Robson, for being at the like Peaceable Meeting to worship God,
was fined by Judge Kenedy in 20 s. for which Fine the Sheriffs Bailiffs took
from him a Horse worth 5 l.

Henry Furnace, for the like cause, was fined by the said Judge 5 s. for which
the Sheriffs Bailiffs took from him a Horse worth 2 l. 10 s.

Roger Webb, for the like cause, was by the said Judge fined 5 s. and had a
Horse taken from him worth 1 l. 10 s.

Hugh Stamper, for the like cause, was fined (by the said Judge) 5 s. and
imprisoned about eight Weeks, and had a Kettle taken from him worth 14 s.

Peter Boss, for the like cause, was fined (by the said Judge) 5 s. and
imprisoned about ten Weeks, and had three Pewter Dishes taken from him worth 15
s.

William Williamson jun. for the like cause, was fined (by the said Judge) 20
s. and had a Mare and Foal taken from him worth 2 l. 10 s.

Edward Towle, for the like cause, was fined (by the said Judge) 20 s. and had
a Horse taken from him worth 3 l.

William Nicholson, for the like cause, was fined (by the said Judge) 10 s. and
had a Mare taken from him worth 1 l. 15 s.

Cavan County.
1660. Richard Fail, William Parker, Miles Gray, John Hutton, Thomas Lunn and
Isabel Outon, (with several other Friends) for meeting in Cavan, to wait upon
the Lord, and to worship him, were imprisoned by John Holland, Deputy
Sovereign, and some of them kept Prisoners eleaven days.

William Parker, Rich. Fail, Miles Gray, Robert Wardell, Thomas Lunn and
Thomas Moore, (with several other Friends) being met together (for the end
aforefaid) in Belturbet, were haled out, and committed to Prison four days
without Examination (by Order of Richard West Provost) and because they could
not pay Fees (having not broken any Law) some of them were stripped of their
Clothes, and then turned out.

1661. William Edmonson, Tho. Lunn, rich. Fail, Will. Parker, and Thomas
Hutchison (with others) having been at a Meeting near Cavan to worship God,
were much abused on the Road by George Spicer Sub-Sheriff, attended with a
company of rude men, who beat, and cut, and abused Friends; one Friend set upon
a Horse, and tied his Feet under the Horse Belly; and another his Hands behind
his Back, like Fellons; and so had them to Cavan Prison; and at the following
Assize brought before Judge Povey, who having nothing against them, but on the
account of their meeting to serve and worship the Lord, left them Prisoners.
And at the next Assizes Judge Alexander fined them 20 l. a man for the said
Meeting, and 7 l. a man, for not taking off their Hats, though he then
confessed* there was no Law for it; but he called them Rogues, Dogs, etc. and
so left them Prisoners till the next Assizes: And then came he himself Judge
again, and fined them 5 l. a man more for their Hats; and denied them the
benefit of an Order or Proclamation from the chief Ruler of the Nation, by
which they ought to have been set at Liberty; and he further said, That they
should not have the benefit of the Law. And whilst they were thus kept
Prisoners, the said Geo. Spicer sued them for Fees, notwithstanding he had
their Bodies in Prison, and (by virtue or pretense of an Order from the said
Judge) took from Will. Parker, Tho. Lunn, Tho Hutchison and Rich. Fail, as much
Goods as were worth 30 l. And at the next Assizes after, Judge Booth caused the
said Prisoners to be proclaimed at Liberty, for which the said Geo. Spicer
claimed 15 s. a piece Fees, and for the same kept them in close Prison: And at
the next Assizes, Judge Alexander being there Judge, the said Geo. Spicer
caused Walter Brady his Servant to swear, serving the Prisoners with Processes,
(which thing, as Brady since acknowledged, was false) upon which the said Judge
granted him an Order against the Prisoners, which caused to be taken,

From Richard Fail, two Horses worth -- 4l. 10s. 0d. From Thomas Lunn, one Cow
and two Heifers worth -- 3l. 10s. 0d. From William Parker, two Cows worth --
2l. 12s. 0d. From Tho. Hutchison, two Cows worth -- 3l. 10s. 0d. From Jo. Jay,
one Horse, and Household goods worth -- 4l. 17s. 6d. From Robert Wardel, one Cow
and Goods worth. -- 4l. 09s. 0d. worth in all -- 23l. 08s. 6d. supra -- 30l.
00s. 0d. So that this Geo. Spicer, for the Fees of these six Persons, has
taken away from them Goods worth, -- 53l. 8s. 6d.


1665. Ricchard Fail, Will. Parker, Robert Robinson, Tho. Lunn and Tho.
Hutchison, with several other Friends, being at a Meeting of the Lord's People,
at Nicholas Starkey's House, to wait upon God, were haled thereout, and
thirteen of them had before Matthew French, Provost of Belturbet, who caused
some of them to be set in the Stocks, and other some to be put in the Cage for
several Hours; and the next day sent and committed them to Cavan Goal, (without
Examination) where several of them were Prisoners above a Year.

Leinster Province.
Dublin City.
1660 EDward Cook, Robert Lodge, John Burnyate (with several others) being met
together in their usual Meeting Place, to worship the Lord, had their Meeting
broken up by James Boy, -- -- -- -- and a rude company of people and Soldiers,
who took away John Burnyate, Robert Lodge, and about twenty Friends more, and
imprisoned them in Newgate, where they were kept five days, and then brought
before Robert Dee Mayor, who after Examination returned Fifteen of them back to
Prison, where they were kept five days longer.

Samuel Clarridge, Robert Turner, William Main, and several other Friends,
being assembled in their usual Meeting Place to worship God, were haled
thereout by a rude company of Soldiers; and eight of them Imprisoned in
Newgate for five Weeks, by order of the said Robert Dee Mayor,

Thomas Holme, Robert Wastfield, Joseph Cadle, Rebecca Rich, Elizabeth Gardner,
and diverse other Friends, being assembled in their usual Meeting Place, for the
End aforesaid, were violently taken thereout by a Guard of Soldiers, and
seventeen Men and six Women of them were put into the main Guard, and from
thence committed to Newgate Prison, where they were kept several days by Order
of the said Mayor.

1661. Robert Turner, Tho. Holme, James Fade, and eighteen more of their
Friends, were taken out of their said usual Meeting place (being then and there
met to worship God) by a Guard of-Souldiers, and committed to Newgate, where
they were kept several days by order of Hyberd Adrian Mayor.

1662. Edward Cook, Robert Turner, Samuel Clarridge, and four more Friends,
were taken out of their said usual Meetingplace by some Soldiers, and had
before John Cranwell Mayor, and (by the means of Will. Davis Recorder) sent to
Bridewel; and after several days imprisonment there, were released by the said
Mayor.

1669. Mathias Foster, John Savage, Will. Steel. Will. Cleaton, John Windor,
Dennis Rochford, Joseph Sleigh, Will. Main, and Samuel Clarridge, being with
others of the Lord's People assembled in their Meeting place in Bride-street,
to wait upon God in his Fear and Worship, were taken thereout, and had before
the said Will. Davis Recorder, who committed them to Prison, where they were
kept five Weeks; in which time they were indicted at the King's Bench, for being
at an Unlawful Assembly; but the Bill not found by the Grand Jury, they were
discharged by the Court.

West-Meath County.
1660. John Tailor, William Slade, and several others being met together in the
Fear of the Lord at the said Will. Slade's House in Athlone, had their Meeting
broken up by order of Cap. St. George, who committed Five of them to Prison for
one day, and the next day released three of them, but kept the said John Tailor
and W. Slade in Prison seven Week, and then they were released by order from
the chief Rulers: and the Marshal, for the 13 s. 4 d. demanded by him for Fees,
kept and detained as much Clothes as were worth 2 l.

Nicholas Starkey, for speaking to the said Capt. St. George, then Sovereign of
Athlone, in behalf of his Friends, that were then Prisoners for meeting as
aforesaid, was drove and forced out of Town by the Bell-man, by order of the
said Sovereign.

1661. Will. Slade, Jone Burton, and several others being met together to
worship God in Athlone, had their Meeting violently and rudely broken up, and
the said W. Slade and six Friends committed to Prison, and the said Jone Burton
was put in the Stocks, and afterward they were turned out of the Town by the
Beadle, by order of the said Sovereign.

Henry Fuller, Abraham Fuller, John Ball, John Cleburne, Nicholas Starkey,
James Wasely, Anth. Robinson, John English, John Wilson, Tho. Beale, and Giles
Harrison, as they were ready to go, and going to their usual Meeting Place, to
wait upon and worship God, were taken up the 22th day of the 10th Month by
several Troopers; some of the Friends being taken out of their Houses, some out
of the Fields, others out of the Highways, as the Troopers met them, and
brought to Kilbeggan, and committed to Patrick Henry the Marshal, for that
Night; the next day (by a Mittimus from Walter Lambert) they were sent from
Constable to Constable to the County Goal at Mullengar (but before the Marshal
delivered them to the Constable, he demanded 2 s. 6 d. Fees of the said Hen.
Fuller, which being not paid, he took his Hat, and toar John Ball's Coat in
striving to strip him; he also stripped off a Coat from another of the
Prisoners, and thrust him out of Doors to the Constable; and with the help of
some wicked people (Men and Women) he had with him, he threw John Wilson,
another of the Prisoners, upon the Floor, griped him by the Throat, took his
Coat, searched his Pockets for Money, and finding none, took away some Linen
and his Hat; and after he had much hurt and cruelly used him, threw him out of
the Doors into the Mire) and after the said Prisoners had been kept six Weeks
in Prison at Mullengar, they were released by Order from the chief Rulers of
the Nation.

Henry Fuller being at the High Sheriffs House, to speak for his Friends in
Prison at Mullengar, was very much abused by Walter Lambert (called a Justice)
who threw a Cup with Beer in it at the said Henry's Face, which brake his Nose,
and spilt his Blood, for saying, That when people met quietly together to
worship God, they are Haled, Abused, and sent to Prison; but if as many meet in
an Alehouse, and Sing, Drink, Swear and Roar, there is little or no notice
taken of them.

Abraham Fuller, Hen. Fuller, John Cleburne, John Ball, George Castleton,
Philip England, Hugh Smith, Eliza. Hunter, Edward and Lucretia Cook, and four
Friends more, were taken out of their usual Meetings, at three sundry times, by
several Constables, and had to Mullengar Prison; and after several days being
there, the said Abraham and Henry Fuller, John Cleburne, John Ball, Gee.
Castleton, and Edward Cook, were sent by Troopers (by order of the said Walter
Lambert) to Dublin, as Ringleaders of the Quakers, where after a few days
they were released by John Cranwel Mayor: And shortly after, at the
Quarter Sessions at Mullengar, the rest of the Prisoners were set at Liberty,
after four Weeks Imprisonment.

Queens County.
1660. William Edmonson, John Edmonson, Will. Capton, Richard Jackson, Will.
Archer, and several others, being met together at Mountmelick to worship the
Lord, were taken up, and made to appear at the following Assizes by Walter
Warnford, at which Assizes Judge Booth fined six of them 2 l. a man, for which
they were kept in Prison about fourteen Weeks.

1661. Tobias Pledwel, Godfry Cantrel, John Gee, Will. Capton, Will. Archer,
Richard Scot, Thomas Stalker, being (with several others) met together at
Mountmelick to worship God, had their Meeting broken up, and committed to
Prison by the said Walter Warnford; and at the next Assizes Judge Alexander
fined eleaven of them 40 l. a man, for meeting as aforesaid; and they were kept
in Prison about five Months.

Caterlough County.
1660. Thomas Weston, Thomas Chauuders, Henry Rose, and nine more Friends, for
meeting together in the Fear of the Lord in Caterlough, were apprehended by
order of John Masters, then Portriff, and (without Examination or Mittimus)
committed to Prison till the next Sessions, and then indicted, and by the Jury
found Not Guilty; yet on pretense of Fees were kept Prisoners several Months;
and an Order was obtained from the chief Rulers (called Lord Justices) of the
Nation, for their Enlargement, and showed to the County Justices, who refused
to release Friends: And at the following Assizes Friends were brought before
Judge Alexander, who reviled them, calling them, Rogues, Rascals, Villains,
etc. (which is well known to their Neighbors that they are no such Persons,
being Honest and Industrious Men) and caused a Bill of Indictment to be drawn
up against them, and (for Meeting together, as aforesaid, to worship God) were
by the said Judge fined 320 l.

Wexford County.
1660. Francis Randal, with several Friends, being met at James Becket's House
in New Ross to wait upon the Lord, had their Meeting broken up by a Guard of
Soldiers, who much abused the said Francis, knocked him with a Musket, tore his
Clothes, and thrust him violently out of the Town, by order of Lt. Col. Jones,
who bad his Soldiers do any thing to Quakers, saying, They are worse then
Dogs, use them as you will.

1662. James Becket, Thomas West, and others, for meeting together for the End
aforesaid in New-Ross, were sent and committed to Wexford Goal, and there kept
several Weeks.

Thomas Lo, Mary Lo, and Sarah Holme* for visiting their Friends in Wexford
Prison, were there detained in Restraint, and the said Thomas Lo kept in
Prison until the next Sessions.

1670. Robbert Cuppage, Nathaniel Ruby, James Taylour, Francis Randal, Samuel
Grundy, Daniel Fossey, William Brown, John Sottenham, Jonas Chamberlin, John
Haydock, and John Edwards, being (with several other Friends and People)
peaceably assembled (as their manner is, no Disturbance nor Breach of the Peace
being ever known on their parts at any of their Meetings) to wait upon and
worship the Lord God, at Nathaniel Ruby's house in Wexford, the 14th of the 7th
Month, were disturbed by Wil-liam Russel Sub-Sheriff, attended with
Constables, Wardens, and a rude Multitude, and violently haled out of their
Meeting, and brought before John Bond Mayor, Richard Clifton Governor, Fran.
Harvey, Tho. Heart, and Edward Withers (called) Justices, who committed the
aforesaid eleaven Persons to the County Goal, till delivered by due course of
Law, where they continued until the 13th of the 11th Month following, and then
released by Order from the King's Lieutenant General and Council of Ireland.

Anne Chamberlin, Wife to the aforenamed Jonas Chamberlin, was apprehended and
committed to Goal by the said Will. Russell Sub-Sheriff, for being at the
aforesaid Meeting, and continued Prisoner about two Weeks without any Mittimus,
and then discharged by the Justices, who censured her committal to be Illegal.

Leonard Kerley was by the aforesaid Will. Russell taken upon a Capias, and
committed to Goal, for being at the said Meeting, and there kept about four
Weeks, and then discharged, the Capias being issued against the Order of the
Sessions.

Munster Province.
Cork City and County.
1660. WIlliam Morris, William Brimsby, Walter Castle and John Exham, being
(with others) met at Edward Cook's House in Bandon-Bridge, to wait upon God in
his holy Name and Fear, were haled thereout, and committed to Goal by John
Laundon Provost, who was so cruel that he was offended with the* Goalers Wife,
for suffering Straw to be brought to the Prisoners, that were put in a Nasty
Dungeon, where they were kept two Weeks, during which time they were cruelly
used by Robert Stowers the Jailer, who did not admit Friends to bring the
Prisoners any Food, but what was given them through the Grate.

Some of the Lord's People being met together at Daniel Mossey's House in
Bandon-Bridge, had their Meeting broken up, and committed to Prison by the said
Provost, who caused Susanna, the Wife of Bishop Worth, to be haled out of the
said Meeting, and dragged her to Prison in such a brutish manner, that many
cried Shame upon such barbarous Usage to such an Aged and Sober Woman; insomuch
that some of the Officers said, They could raher go to Prison themselves, then
be Actors of such Cruelty.

Philip Dymond, Alexander Atkins, Stephen Harris, George Neno, Christopher
Pennock, Geo. White, Ananias Kello, Will. Steel, Will. Thorn, James Puckridge,
John Edwards, David Williams, Richard Jordan, and George Pett, for meeting
together (with some other Friends) in the City of Cork to worship God, were
committed to Goal, and there detained till the next Assizes by order of
Christopher Oliver then Mayor.

Thomas Cook, Richard Br^cklsby, Tobias Wear, and Francis Rogers, etc. being
met together in the City of Cork for the End aforesaid, were committed to
Prison by William Hodder Deputy Mayor, and kept Prisoners until the following
Assizes.

1661. Alexander Atkins, Philip Dymond, Tho. Cook, Philip Godfrey, and several
other Friends, for meeting together in their usual Place in Cork City to wait
upon God, were committed to Prison; and at the following Assizes Twenty Five of
them were fined by Judge Alexander in 1190 l. for their said Meeting, and for
wearing their Hats before the Judge, and so remanded to Prison.

Christo. Pennock, Tho. Lo, Phil. Dymond, John Workman, Edward Cook, and
twelve Friends more, for meeting in Cork City, as aforesaid, were committed to
Prison by Walter Cooper Mayor, where they were kept several Weeks.

1662. Geo. Gamble, Phil. Dymond, James Adamson, Alexander Atkins, and about
sixteen Friends more, for their meeting in Cork City for the End aforesaid,
were committed to Prison by the said Mayor till the following Assizes, and then
indicted, and though not found by the Jury, yet by the rule of Court they were
to remain in Prison till each of them paid 10 s. a piece to the Judge for
Traverse; and to the Crier, and other Fees, some 14 s. and some 20 s. apiece
more: And at the same Assize, most of the Friends were indicted again for not
going to the Church (so called) and such as said, they did not go, were
presently fined; and some that stood silent, were re-committed without Bail or
Mainprize till the next Assizes; and all in general were returned back to
Prison, where they were kept several Months.

1667. George Webber, Will. Penn, Fran. Rogers, John Tailor, Philip Dymond, Will.
Hawkins, Geo. Gamble, John Gossage, Christo. Pennock, Thomas Mitchel, James
Knolls, Stephen Harris, Henry Bennet, James Dennis, William Steel, James
Toghill, Richard Pike, John Moor, and Thomas Robins, for meeting together the
3d of the 9th Month to worship the Lord God, were committed to Prison by
Christopher Rye Mayor of Cork.

Geo. Gamble, James Dennis, John Smith, Arthur Johnson, Christopher Pennock,
Geo. Neno, and Philip Godfrey, for meeting together the 24th of the 9th Month
for the End aforesaid, were taken out of their Meeting Place, and sent to
Prison by the said Christopher Rye Mayor.

Francis Rogers, Geo Gamble, Philip Dymond, William Fletcher, Stephen Harris,
Alexander Atkins, Richard Pike, Rob. Whetstone, and Tho. Godfrey, for meeting
the 8th of the 10th Month, were committed to Prison by the said Christo. Rye
Mayor.

1668. Tho. Cook, Geo. Webber, John Tailor, James Knolls, Rich. Pike, Geo.
Neno, Tho. Mitchell, Tho. Wight, Christopher Pennock, Arthur Johnson, James
Dennis, Will. Bigley, and Will. Burchfield, being met together at their usual
Meeting Place in Cork, City to wait upon and worship the Lord, were taken
thereout, and committed to Goal by the said Christo. Rye; and the Jailer told
the Prisoners, That he was forbid to give them a Copy of the Mittimus.

Thomas Cook, and several other Friends, being met together to worship God the
13th of the 10th Month, had their Meeting broken up, and committed to Prison
by the said Christopher Rye; and the said Tho. Cook was then much abused by
William Sexton Constable, who struck the said Thomas with the Staff of his
Office (with his full strength, as he himself has since said) on the side of
his Head, which for a time deprived him of his Senses.

Thomas Wight, George Gamble, Alexander Atkins, Geo. Webber, Thomas Cook, John
Gossage, and Geo. Neno, for meeting together as aforesaid, were haled thereout,
and committed to Prison by order of the said Christo. Rye Mayor.

Geo. Webber, Geo. Gamble, Fran. Rogers, Alex, Atkins, Thomas Cook, Jo.
Gossage, Christo. Pennock, James Dennis, John Workman, Thomas Wight, Tho.
Ridge, Charles Sinderby and James Toghil, for meeting together to worship the
Lord at their usual Place in Cork City, on the 28th of the 12th Month, were
sent to Prison by order of the said Christo. Rye; eleaven Seats or Forms
carried then away, and still detained, worth about 50 s. by the said Mayor's
Order.

1669. Philip Dymond, John Stubbs, George Gamble, etc. for meeting together the
15th of the 4th Month, in Cork City, to wait upon God, were committed to Goal
by the said Christo. Rye Mayor.

Geo. Gamble, Alexander Atkins, Thomas Cook, Christo. Pennock, James Dennis,
Steph. Harris, Jo. Gossage, Rich. Brocklsby, William Steel, Phil. Godfrey,
Martha Webber, Susanna Michel, Lucretia Cook, Jone Cook, Thomasin Gossage,
Elizabeth Erbery, Hannah Wear, and Jane Morris, for meeting together in the
Fear of the Lord, and to worship him, were committed to Goal (by the said
Christo. Rye Mayor) where some of them were kept a long season, in which time
Susanna falling exceeding sick in the Prison, Eliz. Erbery went to the said
Mayor, and desired his leave to remove her said sick Friend (if her strength
would bear it) and he not only refused, but much abused her, calling her, The
Old Witch of Endor, with other opprobrious words, much unbeseeming a
Magistrate: He also caused some of the Friends Children that were at the said
Meeting to be carried to the Stocks, and there kept a while by the
Whipping-Beadle.

About this time Richard Pike (through Cold and Distemper got in his
Imprisonment) Dyed a Prisoner.

James Tailor and James Knolls, for being at a Meeting of the Lord's People in
Cork City, were committed to Prison by the said Christopher Rye Mayor, and kept
several days before their Mittimus was made, and afterward detained long in
Prison; and almost every First Day, toward the end of his Mayorality (having
been Mayor two years) he caused such of the men Friends as were at the Meetings
to be imprisoned.

Samuel Thornton being visited by several Friends at his Lodging, at Elizabeth
Erbery's in Cork City (being newly come thither on a Journey) and after Supper
he spent some time in Prayer, for which he was taken thence by the Constable,
and had before Matthew Dean then Mayor, who committed him to Goal, where he was
kept close Prisoner about Eight Weeks.

Geo. Webber, Steph. Harris, and several other Friends, being at their usual
Meeting Place to wait on the Lord, were taken thereout, and committed to Prison
by the said Matthew Dean Mayor, who would not suffer Meat, Drink, or Bedding to
be brought them, causing a Maid Servant of Stephen Harris (that was carrying a
Bed to her sickly Master in the Prison) to be set in the Stocks, and the Bed to
be taken away from her, and Geo. Webber's Maidservant carrying Food to her
said Master in Prison, the said Mayor commanded his Sergeants to take away the
Food, and to set her in the Stocks; but got to the Prison before the Sergeant
over-took her.

While Samuel Thornton was Prisoner in Cork, diverse Men and Women Friends, and
others of the City, went one First Day to sit together with him to wait upon
the Lord, who is worthy to be feared and worshipped at all times, and in all
places; and -- Quinnall the Jailer shut the Doors, and locked them all in, being
about Eighty Persons, and carried away the Key (as it was said) to Matthew Dean
Mayor (a suitable Successor to Christopher Rye for Persecution) who gave
Command, That the said Prisoners should not be admitted to have Meat or Drink
(as the Jailer alleged) neither had they any in at the Door, being forced to
draw it up with Ropes, and take it through the Grate, and some thrown in to
them at a Hole: And that Night the Soldiers, who kept Guard under the said
Prisoners, made so great a Smoke, that it was like to have smoothered the
Prisoners: And notwithstanding that Application was made to the Mayor, in
behalf of the Prisoners, and their Conditions; yet as a man without Pity and
Mercy (forgetting Humanity, or the Bounds of common Civility) and without any
regard to Age or Sick, (as to Women with Child, and Women Nurses, not suffering
the one to come at the other) with Scoffing Language, ill-becoming him, said,
They are all Brethren and Sisters, let them lie one upon another; and if they
are choked, its their own Faults: and thus were they kept together about
Twenty Four Hours.

John Hull, William Bigley, and some others, going on a Firstday to visit
Friends in Prison, and to spend some time with them in waiting upon God, the
said Matthew Dean Mayor charged the Jailer not to suffer them to go out again;
and so they were kept Prisoners several Weeks, and then released by an Order
from the King's Lieutenant General, and Council of Ireland.

1670. Thomas Wight, for being at a Meeting with the People of God, was
committed to Prison by Order of the said Matthew Dean Mayor, and there kept
close Prisoner Fifteen Weeks, until the next Assizes; and then, for Fees
claimed by Robert Fletcher, as Clark of the Crown, etc. was sued, and Execution
got against his Body, being then a Prisoner, by means whereof he was kept in
close Restraint about Six Months.

And the said Matthew Dean Mayor of Cork (generally) every First Day broke up
Friends Meetings, and imprisoned most of the Men Friends in the City; and would
not suffer poor Men (that were Tradesmen) to work in Prison, that had no other
way to get Bread for themselves, Wives, and Children, but by their daily
Labor; giving Order to the Jailer, to take away their Tools from them: And to
add to his Cruelty, as one that would outdo his Predecessor in Persecution,
and to make Havoc, as it were, as much as in him lay, he took account of
Friends Names, how often they were at Meetings, and thereby made occasion of
multiplying Indictments against Friends at the Assizes, where some had two,
others three, six, or more Indictments drawn up and framed against them; the
effects whereof, through Fines and Fees, etc. proved very prejudicial to them.

These following Distresses were taken for Fees claimed by Rob. Fletcher, as
Clark of the Crown, and Town-Clark, occasioned (originally) for Meetings,
besides what he got by the many Indictments last before mentioned. Alexander
Atkins, for Fifteen shillings demanded, had taken from him a piece of Stuff
worth 1 l. 12 s.

Christopher Pennock, for the like, had forty nine yards of Stuff taken from
him worth 2 l. 3 s.

Thomas Cook, for thirteen Shillings six Pence, had Iron taken from him worth 1
l. 16 s.

Limerick City.
1661. Thomas Phelps, Richard Pearce, John Cobb, James Craven, (with other
Friends) being met together in Limerick to worship the Lord God, were haled
thereout by Bartholomew Garnet Constable, and others with him, and committed to
Prison by Thomas Miller Mayor, and there kept till the next Assizes, and then
ten of them were fined by Judge Alexander in 40 l. a man, and remanded to
Prison, where they were kept about four Months, and then released by order from
the chief Rulers (called, Lord Justices.)

Waterford City,
1661. William Blanch, William Wright, Samuel Mason, and Eight Friends more,
for meeting together in the Fear and Worship of God, were imprisoned, and at
the following Assizes fined by Judge Alexander in 580 l.

Secondly, These following have suffered (who (for Conscience sake) cannot pay
Tithes, bearing Testimony to the Everlasting Priesthood, which ends the
First, that took Tithes) by having their Goods spoiled, and excessively taken
away sometimes Three, Six, Ten or Twenty times the value (besides, sometimes
their Bodies imprisoned for the same) after being sued in temporal Courts,
contrary to the Law of the Land; and though the Statute has been produced to
the Court and Jury, yet have the Priests and Court given under their hands to
secure the Jury, and thereupon near Twenty times the value has been taken
away. Also they have suffered for not paying to the Maintenance of the Priests,
and their Clarks, whom they have no need to hear, or hire, having Jesus Christ
for their High Priest, who said to his Ministers, Freely ye have received,
Freely give.

Ulster Province.
Ardmagh County.
1660. MAtthew Horner being sued for Tithes, in the Primates Temporal Court at
Ardmagh, by Thomas Burrell and Henry Wilkinson (employed by James Threlfall
Priest of Kilmore) for the value of about 16 s. 8 d. had taken from him (by the
Bailiffs) two Horses worth 4 l.

Margery Atkinson being sued for Tithe to the value of about 8 s. 4 d. by the
aforesaid Persons, and in the same Court, had taken from her by the Bailiffs)
two Cows worth 3 l. 10 s.

Edward Towle being sued by the aforesaid Persons, and in the same Court, for
Tithe, to the value of about 8 s. had taken from him (by the Bailiffs) a Mare
and two Colts worth 3 l. 5 s.

William Williamson sen. and William Williamson jun. being sued for Tithes, as
aforesaid, to the value of about 18 s. 9 d. the Bailiffs took from Will.
Williamson, jun. four Cowes worth 7 l. 10 s.

Thomas Brown, for 5 s. demanded for Tithes, had taken from him (by the
Bailiffs) Bed-clothes worth 2 l. 10 s. notwithstanding that he was a poor man,
and had five small children; and that all the Bed-clothes that they left him
were not worth 1 s.

Will. Brownloe, being sued, as aforesaid, for Tithes, to the value of 1 l. 5 s.
had taken from him (by the Bailiffs) six Cows, and a webb of Cloth worth 13 l.
5 s.

Francis Robson being sued, as aforesaid, for 2 l. demanded for Tithe, had
taken from him (by the Bailiffs) two Horses worth 8 l. 10 s.

1664. Roger Webb for Tithe, to the value of 7 s. had taken from him (by
Patrick o Hagan) a Horse worth 3 l.

1665. Will. Souldon, being sued for Tithe, to the value of about 2 l. 10 s. in
two Actions, in the Manor Court of Legacory, by George Walker Priest, had
taken from him four Cows worth 5 l.

Francis Hobson being sued for Tithe in the Primates temporal Court at Ardmagh,
by the said Priest, had five Cows and a Bull taken from him worth 9 l.

John Winter being sued for Tithe, in the said Court, by the said Priest, had
taken from him two Cows worth 3 l.

1666. Francis Robson, for Milk-money of ten Cows, had taken from him (by
Patrick o Hagan) a Horse worth 3 l.

Archiball Bell, for 4 s. demanded for Tithe, had taken from him (by M.
Murrough) seven Sheep worth 14 s.

Francis Hobson being sued for Tithe in the Primates Temporal Court at Ardmagh
(by George Walker Priest) had as many Cattle taken from him as were worth 7 l.
10 s.

John Marsh being sued for Milch-money, and Offerings, to the value of about 3
l. at the Manor Court of Loughall (by Humphry Pettard Priest) had taken from
him so many of his Cattle as were worth 18 l.

The said John Marsh being sued again, in the said Court, for five years Tithe
of sixty two Sheep (by the said Priest) had the very whole number of sixty two
Sheep taken from him (being all he had) worth 12 l.

John Fletcher being sued for Tithe, to the value of 7 s. in the said Court (by
the said Priest) had a Horse and Cow taken from him worth 2 l. 10 s.

1667. Will. Steer being sued for Tithe, to the value of 1 l. 10 s. at the
Sheriffs Court, by George Walker Priest, had as much broad Cloth taken from
him as was worth 3 l. 19 s.

John Blackburn being sued for Tithe to the value of 2 s. 1 d. 2 q. in the
Manor Court of Laughall, by Humphry Pettard Priest, the said John produced the
Statute against all proceedings in Temporal Courts for Tithe; notwithstanding
the Jury said to the Seneschal of the Court, and the said Priest Pettard, that
if they would give it under their hands, to be Endemnified and saved harmless,
they would proceed (here is like Priest like People, both contriving and
consenting against the Law, and how to make Spoil and havoc of the Innocent)
and accordingly the Seneschal and Priest gave under their hands as follows.

June 14th, 1667.
We do hereby promise to Secure the Jury from what Damage they shall incur,
for proceeding in the Action of John Blackburne, as witness or hands*

William Heart,
Humphrey Pettard.

Upon this the Jury proceeded, and cast the said John in 2 s. 1 d. 2 q. for
which the Bailiffs took from him a Horse. worth 2 l.

1668. William Kenningham being sued for Tithe and Clark's Wages, in the
Primates Temporal Court at Ardmagh, by Robert Smyth, Farmer of the small
Tithes, had taken from him (by the Bailiffs) a Horse out of the Plough, worth 3
l.

George Hall being sued in the said Court for Tithe and Clark's Wages to the
value of 4 s. 2 d. by the aforesaid Smyth, had taken from him, his Wife's Gown,
and other Good's worth 1 l. 16 s. 6 d.

John Blackburne being sued for Tithe and Clark's Wages, in the Sheriffs Court,
for the value of about 6 s. by the said Smyth, had taken from him (by the
Sub-Sheriffs and Bailiffs) as much Yarn as was worth 2 l.

John Fletcher being sued for Tithe and Offerings, to the value of 2 s. 1 d. at
the Manner Court of Loughall, by Humphey Pettard Priest, and had a Cow taken
from him worth 1 l. 10 s.

Patrick Robinson being sued at the said Court for Tithes, by the said Priest,
had taken from him, a Tub, a Pot, a Drying Pan, and a parcel of Yarn (being
most of what was in the House) worth 1 l. 6 s.

1669. John Marsh being sued for Priests and Clarks Dues (so called) and other
such like things, to the value of 8 s. 3 d. in a Temporal Court at Ardmagh, by
Thomas Blevin Clark, had taken from him by the Bailiffs, a Brass Pot, and four
Pewter Dishes, worth 1 l. 17 s.

1670. Widow Bartrim had taken from her by Hugh Belton, Clark of the parish of
Killmore, and John More, one Pot worth 3 s. for Burying her Husband, and
Sprinkling her Child, as they said, though they did neither: And for 1 l. 4 s.
which the said Belton and Moor demanded for Tithe, alleging it was due before
her Husband dyed, had taken from her one Cow worth 1 l. 15 s. she being a very
poor Woman, and had a Charge of Seven Children: Thus that which was first
instituted as a Maintenance for the Widows and Fatherless is now made use of
for their Ruin and depriving them of a Livelihood.

William Steer had taken from him by the said John Moor Constable, for two
years Clark's Wages, for the said Hugh Belton, one piece of Broad-Cloth, worth
15 s.

Roger Webb, John Garvin, Mark Wright, James Bradshaw, Francis Robson,
Archeball Bell, Elizabeth Riggs, Thomas Calvert, Elinor Kenningham, Jonathan
Woods, William Souldon, William Brounloe, Francis Hobson, William Williamson,
John Williamson, Edw. Towle, Alexander Rigg and John Marsh, have had (amongst
them) much Wheat, Barley, Oats, Hay and Lambs, taken from them by the Priests
and Tythemongers, on pretense of Tithes.

Cavan County.
1660. Richard Fail being sued for Tithe to the value of 16 s. 6 d. in the
Town-Court of Cavan, by John Walwood Priest, had taken from him (by the
Sergeants) several Goods worth 3 l.

1661. The said Richard Fail was sued by the said Priest in the same Court for
7 s. value of Tithe, for which the Sergeants took several Goods from him worth
3 l. 10 s.

1662. Thomas Lunn being sued for 7 s. value of Tithes, in the same Court by
the said Priest, had several Goods taken from him worth 2 l. 10 s.

1670. Robert Vnthank, Anthony Jackson, Thomas Lunn, Richard Fail, Will. Parker
and Tho. Hutchison, had taken from them by the Priests and Tythemongers much
Barley, Hay, Oats and Hemp, upon pretense of Tithe.

Thomas Lun and Anthony Jackson were taken up and carried to Prison, by the
appointment of Ambrose Barecrost Priest, upon a difinitive Sentence for Tithe,
and remain now in Prison.

William Parker and Thomas Hutchison were also taken up and made Prisoners for
the like things, by the means of the said Priest, and are now Prisoners.

Antrim County.
1668. Thomas Cooper of Maghermisk, not setting forth Tythe-Corn, Lemuel
Mathews Priest went into his Field, threw much of his Corn abroad; and after he
had taken the Tenth part, continued taking away more, until a Neighbor hindered
him.

Tyrone County.
1670. Thomas Francis had Eleaven Stoaks of Wheat and Rye, and Two Cart-load of
Hay taken from him worth 14 s.

Leinster Province.
East-Meath County.
1666. WIlliam Chanley of Killnacross, for not paying Tithe to Priest
Crookshank, was (upon a Writ of Excommunicato Capiendo) committed to the Goal
at Trim, where he remained Prisoner two years and five Months.

1668. The said Will. Chandley, for Tithe to the value of 15 s. had taken from
him 8. Carr-load of Hay worth 30 s. by the said Priest, notwithstanding the
said Will. Chandley was then in Prison.

Dublin City.
1661. Elizabeth Gardner Widow, for not paying 6 s. 4 d. demanded for Priest
Chamber's Maintenance, had taken from her three pewter Dishes worth 11 s.

1662. The said Elizabeth, for not paying 3 s. 6 d. for the like use, had three
pewter Dishes more taken from her worth 9 s.

1663. Samuel Clarridge has had, for several years, diverse Goods taken from
him for Priest Goburne, by four times in the year, and usually there was taken
three or four times the value of the sum demanded; and one time for 3 s.
demanded for the said Priest, there was taken from him a Cloak worth 2 l.

1667. William Maine, for not paying 5 s. 4 d. demanded for Priest Goburne, had
a pewter Dish taken from him worth 14 s.

1668. Mathias Foster, for not paying 5 s. demanded for Priest Rigby of
Kathern's Parish, had a pewter Flaggon taken from him worth 12 s.

1669. The said Mathias for not paying 2 s. 6 s. demanded for the Priest, had
taken from him (by Daniel Gaken and Samuel Knott) a pair of Tongues, a Brass
Skillet and Iron Bar, worth 12 s.

William Main, for not paying 28 s. demanded for Priest Yarner of Brides
Parish, had taken from him (by the Wardens) two Silver Spoons, a Brass
Chafing Dish, and four Brass Candlesticks, worth 2 l. 4 s. 6.

Samuel Clarridge, for not paying 4 s. demanded for Priest Goburn, had taken
from him a pair of Iron Racks worth 8 s.

Robert Turner and James Fade have had also several Goods taken from them for
the like use.

West-Meath County.
John Cleburne being sued in the Sheriffs Court for Tithe, and cast in 1 s. 6
d. had taken from him (by order of Richard Smyth Sub-Sheriff) a Kettle worth 10
s.

John Ball in the Barony of Clonlonnan, being sued for Tithe in the said Court
to the value of 14 s. had taken from him (by Order of the Sub-Sheriff) a Horse
worth 40 s.

1661. Nicholas Starkry, for 10 s. value of Tithe, was sued in the said Court,
and had a Horse taken from him (by Order of the Sub-Sheriff) worth 40 s.

John Cleburne had much Corn taken from him for Tithe, by Charles Laughlin, who
for all that, sued John for the same years Tithe of Corn in the Sheriffs Court,
from one Court-day to another, for above a Year; where at last (contrary to the
Law) he was sentenced to pay 20 s. for which James Garret Sub-Sheriff took from
him a Mare worth 4 l. 10 s.

William Elliston, for not paying 9 d. to the Priest's Clark, had a pewter Dish
taken from him, by Edward Carton, worth 4 s.

1669. Antho. Robinson, for not paying 10 d. demanded for Tithe, had taken from
him by Robert Fox (Priest Clampton's Proctor) a pewter Tankard worth 3 s. 4 d.

Kings County
1662. John Wilson, for not paying 12 d. demanded for Milch-Money (by Edward
Careton) had a Cloak taken from him worth 30 s.

Queens County.
1661, Godfrey Cantrel, for not paying 9 s. demanded for Tithe, had taken from
him (by Edmund Dunn) a Horse worth 40 s.

1662. Rayns White, for not paying 15 s. demanded for Tithe, had a Horse taken
from her worth 3 l. and besides, her Son John White was imprisoned, for the
same thing, a Year and six Months.

Thomas Chanders, for not paying Tithe to Bishop Price, was Excommunicated, and
(by a Writ Excom. Cap.) imprisoned in the County Goal at Caterlough, amongst
the Fellons, where he remained Prisoner near the space of four years.

William Edmonson, for not paying 6 s. demanded for Tithe, had a Heifer taken
from him worth 40 s.

The said William for not paying 6 s. at another time, demanded for Tithe, had
taken from him (by Edmand Dunn) wearing Apparel worth 20 s.

1663. Godfrey Cantrel, for not paying 9 s. demanded for Tithe, by Edmand Dunn,
had taken from him two Heifers worth 2 l. 10 s.

John Edmonson, Rich. Jackson, Godfrey Cantrel, Will. Capton, Tobias Pledwell,
John Gee, John Thompson, John Pym and Will. Archer, for not paying Moneys for
Church-Dues (so called) Priests Maintenance, and the like, were Excommunicated
and Imprisoned at Mary-Borough, by Bishop Price of Kildare, by the means of
Goo. Clapham Priest of Mount-Melick, who published their Excommunication in the
place of Worship and Market; and to show his Malice, charged the people, That
they should neither buy nor sell with them; and when any did, he summoned them
to the Bishop's Court; and to excite the people to Cruelty, he told them,
Whatsoever they did to those Excommunicated, they could have no Remedy by Law;
also he forbad the Miller to grind Corn for their Families; besides several
other Acts of Envy and Cruelty he did toward them, which would be too tedious
here to insert.

1664. Godfrey Cantrel and William Edmonson, for not paying 12 s. claimed for
Tithe by Priest Clapham, had Goods taken from him worth 6 l.

1665. The said Godfrey and William, for the like sum demanded for Tithe, had
taken from them (by the said Priest's means) so many Cheeses as were worth 3 l.
2 s. 6 d.

1666. William Archer, for not paying 2 s. Garden Tithe, Offering Money, and
the like, had taken from him (by means of the said Priest) Serge and Pewter
worth 17 s.

Richard Jackson, for not paying 15 s. for such like uses, had taken from him
(by the said Priest's means) Goods worth 16 s.

1670. John White's Sheep were drove into a Pen by six men, in the name of the
Bishop of the Diocese; and the said John and his Wife were held by some of the
said men, whilst the rest robbed and took away six Lambs, and shore six Sheep,
and took away their Fleeces, on pretense of Tithe.

Daniel White had by the same Persons, and in the like manner taken from him,
twelve Fleeces of Wool and nine Lambs, on the like pretense of Tithe.

Kildare County.
John Bennet, for not paying Tithe to Dean Moson, was Excommunicated, and by a
Writ Excom. Cap. imprisoned in the common Goal at Naas, where he was put in a
nasty close Dungeon, and there kept Prisoner above four years, under -- Leason,
a cruel and inhumane Jailer; and whilst thus a Prisoner, Priest Wilkinson of
Athy (with his Clark and Proctors) went unto the said John Bennet's House, and
kicked, beat and abused Man and Women there, calling them unseemly names, laying
hands on the Goods in the House, etc. but the Clark and Proctors being ashamed
of the Priest's carriage, refused to assist him in carrying away any Goods.
This Priest lived in the County of Wexford, at and after the time the King was
restored, and then and there said, He would burn before he would read the
Common Prayer, and wear the Surplice; but now this greedy Priest has turned
his Coat, and for his Belly is become a seeming Conformist.

Wexford County.
1662 Israel Davis, for not paying Moneys to Priest Edwards of Einscorthy,
demanded for Christening his Children and Churching his Wife (though he did
neither of them) was Excommunicated, and by a Writ Excom. Cap. imprisoned in
Wexford Goal above a Year.

Richard Pool, for not paying Tithe to the parish of Taghmon, where he lived,
was cited to the Bishop's Court, and by the means of Priest Wilkinson and
Priest Humphrey Good, he was Excommunicated, and cast into Prison at Wexford,
where he was kept Prisoner above two years, even until his Death, finishing his
Testimony with his Life against the payment of Tithes, which were commanded to
be paid by the Eleaven Tribes of Israel only, and made null by the coming and
offering up of Jesus Christ, and so never did concern the Gentiles (of whose
race we are) much less any true Christians.

Francis Randal, for not paying Money for Christening (so called) his Children,
and not going to the public Worship, was Excommunicated, and upon a Writ
Excom. Cap. imprisoned in the Goal of Wexford for above two years.

1669. Israel Davis, for not paying 3 s. demanded for Priest Gilliflower of
Wexford, had taken from him by Richard Ridgate Warden, a new pair of Boots
worth 16 s.

Munster Province.
Cork County and City.
1664. JOhn Smyth near Iniskean, for not paying 22 s. demanded for Tithes, by
John Adis and Peter Tailor, was Excommunicated and Imprisoned in Cork Goal
above two years.

Thomas Cook, for not paying 6 s. demanded for Tithe Hay, was sued by Samuel
Alford Priest of Mitchell's Town, in the Bishop's Court, and Imprisoned in the
Goal of Cork.

1667. Henry Faggetter was sued for Tithe by John Boil of Castle-Lyons, and by
a Writ Excom. Capiend. taken up, and cast into Prison; where he is still kept
Prisoner on that Account.

1669. Thomas Mitchel of Cork City had taken from him, for the Priest's
Maintenance, a piece of Linen Cloth worth double the value demanded; and for
12 s. more, for the like use demanded, had a piece of Linsey-Wolsey taken from
him worth 25 s.

George Gamble, for not paying 2 l. 10 s. demanded for Priest Cross his
Maintenance, had 26 Else of Holland taken from him worth 4 l. 16.

Limerick County.
John Barnes had taken from him a Cow worth 2 l. 10 s. for Priest Bartlet of
Ballinenagh, and for 17 pence demanded for Tithe, had a Skillet taken from him
worth 6 s.

Edward Taverner, for not paying 20 s, demanded for Tithe, for Priest Hugh
Goffe of Rakeal, had a Cow taken from him (by John Holpin) worth 3 l.

Thirdly, These following have suffered (for Conscience sake) for not paying
toward the repairing or building up of Places of public Worship, (called
Churches) by Indictments, Fines, Imprisonments and excessive taking away their
Goods; which is worse then we read of the Jews, or Heathenish Gentiles, that
ever they forced the Christians (converted from them) to repair the Jewish
Synagogues, or Diana's Temple, or that they fined them, or took away their
Goods.

Ulster Province.
Ardmagh County.
1663. ROger Webb, for not paying 4 s. demanded for the Church-leavy (so
called) had two pewter Dishes taken from him worth 7 s. 4 d.

Peter Boss, for 4 d. 2 q. demanded for the like use, had a pewter Dish taken
from him worth 2 s.

Francis Robson, for the like use, had Yarn, Brass and Pewter taken from him
worth 9 s. 6 d.

1664. Roger Webb, for 4 s. 6 d. demanded for the like use, had a Bible, Pot
and Pot-hooks taken from him worth 11 s. 3 d.

1665. Francis Robson, for 3 s. for the like use, had five pair of Weaver's
Gears taken from him worth 12 s.

Mark Wright, for 10 d. 1 q. for the like use, had a Pan taken from him worth 6
s.

John Garvin, for 4 d. 1 q. had a Wimble-brace taken from him worth 1 s. 6 d.

Jam. Bradshaw, for 3 d. 2 q. had Yarn taken from him worth 1 s.

1666. John Eliner, for 6 d. had a pillion taken from him worth 3 s.

William Matthews, for 6 d. had a Saddle and Furniture taken from him worth 9 s.

Peter Boss, for 4 d. 2 q. had Women's wearing Linen taken from him worth 3 s.
6 d

James Bradshaw, for 3 d. 2 q. had a pewter Dish taken from him worth 4 s.

1667. Peter Boss, for 4 d. 1 q. had a Chamber Pot taken from him worth 2 s.

James Bradshaw, for 3 d. 1 q. had a Tankard taken from him worth 1 s. 8 d.

Henry Furnace, for 2 s. 2 d. demanded toward a Cushion for the Priest (to
lean on) had a Churn and two Axes taken from him worth 4 s. 6 d.

Besides much other Good taken from other Friends for such like uses.

In the Years 1665, 1666, 1667, 1668, 1669. the following Persons had Goods
(excessively) taken from them, for the Repair of Kilmore Parish Worship-House.

William Williamson sen. and William jun. had Yarn taken from them worth 15 s.
and for 1 l. 3 s. demanded, had two Bullocks, Yarn and Cloth taken from them
worth 43 s.

Edward Towle, for 1 l. 5 s. 2 d. demanded at several times, had a Cow, Cloth,
Corn, Pewter, Shoes and Plough-Irons taken from him worth 2 l. 5 s. 10 d.

Richard Fletcher, for 1 l. 3 s. had a Cow, two Bullocks and a Cadow taken from
him worth 3 l. 7 s.

William Souldon had Cheese taken from him worth 7 s. 4 d. and for 8 s. 7 d.
more demanded, had Pewter, Yarn and Cheese taken from him worth 15 s. 2 d.

William Steer had Money taken out of his Shop-Box, also a Hat, and other
things worth 7 s. 2 d. and for 2 s. 2 d. more demanded, had Cloth and Pewter
taken from him worth 11 s.

Christo. Anderson, for 2 l, 12 s. 6 ^. had a Horse and Cheese taken from him
worth 3 l. 8 s.

Francis Hobson had Yarn, Bed-clothes, etc. taken from him worth 3 l. 5 s.

John Winter had Cheese taken from him worth 6 s. 4 d. and for 11 d. demanded
more, had Cloth taken from him worth 3 s.

Will. Brownloe having 2 l. 8 s. owing him from Geo. Walker Priest of Kilmore
Parish, the said Priest refuses to pay it to him, but detains it for the
aforesaid use; and for 7 s. demanded more for that use, had Cheese taken from
him worth 10 s.

William Kenningham had Cloth, Wheat, Pewter, Cheese, Cadow and a Cow taken
from him worth 2 l. 12 s. 4 d.

John Marsh had two Sheep, three Heifers, and two Calves taken from him worth 3
l. 7 s.

Widow Bartrim, for 2 d. had a pewter Dish taken from her worth 2 s. 6 d.

Thomas Calvert, for 10 d. had Yarn taken from him worth 2 s. besides Goods to
the value of near 40 s. taken from diverse of them; so that there has been
about 30 l. taken from Friends for the repair of the said Parish place.

1670. And they have taken from Will. Brownloe, Will. Williamson sen. and jun.
John Williamson, Elinor Kenningham, Fran. Hobson and Christopher Anderson,
Pewter, Yarn, and other Goods, to the value of 1 l. 14 s. 6 d. on pretense for
the repair, sweeping, and other uses, for the Parish Worship-house of Kilmore.

Antrim County.
1666. John Erwin, for not Paying 7 s. 5 d. demanded for the like use, had
pewter Dishes taken from him worth 11 s. 6 d.

1669. Arthur Hair, for 5 s. 2 d. had an Iron Pot taken from him worth 8 s.

John Greer, for 3 s. had an Iron Pot taken from him worth 5 s.

John Erwin, for 7 d. had a pewter Dish taken from him worth ^ s. 6 d.

Cavan County.
Richard Fail, for 1 s. demanded for the like use had Goods taken from him
worth 3 s.

Tyrone County.
1670. Thomas Sawyeer for not paying to the repair of the Seats and
Glass-windows of Benburb Parish Worship-house, had taken from him (by Joseph
Smith Warden) a pewter dish worth 2 s.

Will. Storkdale, for not paying 2 d. for the like use, had taken from him a
pair of Pot-hooks (by the said Warden) worth 5 d.

Thomas Baker, for 8 d. demanded, had taken from him by the said Warden a Pan
worth 1 s. 6 d.

John Whiteside, for not paying 7 d had a Bridle taken from him worth 2 s.

Thomas Francis, for not paying 2 s. for the repair of Ardmagh Parish place of
Worship, had a Mare taked from him (by Thomas Tate Constable) worth 10 s.

John Sheppard, for not paying 4 d. had taken from him by the said Constable, a
Spit and Cheese-fat worth 2 s. 4 d.

Leinster Province.
Dublin City.
1660. SAmuel Clarridge, for not paying 2 s. for the repair of Nicholas Parish
Worship-house, without the Walls, had taken out of his house a pewter Dish
worth 4 s. 6 d.

Elizabeth Gardner, for not paying 6 s. 4 d. for the like use, had three pewter
Dishes taken from her worth 18 s.

1668. James Fade, for such a like use had Goods taken from him worth 1 l. 8 s.

West-Meath County.
1660. Will. Slade of Athlone, for not paying 11 s. demanded for the like use,
had a Brewing pan taken from him worth 40 s.

1662. John Miller, for not paying 2 s. 6 d. had a Rug took from him worth 10 s.

Kings County
1662. Henry Fuller, for not paying about 15 s. demanded for such a use had a
Mare taken from him worth 3 l.

Abraham Fuller for not paying about 8 s. had a horse taken from him worth 20 s.

Samuel Strongman for not paying about 18 s. for the like use, had a Mare taken
from him worth 40 s.

Here note that these 6 l. worth of goods was taken away, by an order of James
Wire, and Walter Lambert (called Justice of the peace) toward repair of the
Parish Worship house of Kilmanaghan in the Barony of Kilcorsey, and its about
Nine years since, and not yet repaired; let the Parish enquire for the Monys.

Queens County.
1660. Thomas Chanders for not paying 11 s. for the like use, had a Horse taken
from him worth 40 s.

1669. William Edmonson, for not paying 5 s. 7 d. 3 q. demanded for the repair
of the old Mass-house, (called the Church) at Rosanellis, had taken from him,
by the Wardens and Constable, by Warrant from Geo. Clapham Priest of that
Parish, and two other Justices (so called) Goods worth 18 s. 6 d.

Thomas Beale for not paying 1 s. 10 d. for the said use had two Cobb-Irons
taken from him, worth 8 s.

Godfrey Cantrel for 5 s. 7 d. 3 q. had a Rugg taken from him worth 16 s.

Richard Jackson for 3 s. 8 d. had Goods taken from him worth 8 s. 6 d.

Tobias Pledwel for 1 s. 10 d. had a Pewter Dish taken from him worth 4 s.

Will. Capton for 2 s. 6d. had Goods taken from him worth 5 s. 6d.

Roger Bosewell for 1 s. 10 d. had Goods taken from him worth 3 s. 6 d.

Evan Bevon for 1 s. had Goods taken from him worth 2 s. 8 d.

Richard Scott for 7 s. 3 d. had a Whip-saw taken from him worth 11 s.

Thomas Stevenson for 4 s. 6 d. had a Saw-taken from him worth 7 s. 6 d.

William Edmondson, for not paying 3 s. more demanded for the said use, had a
Mare taken from him, worth 3 l. (here is twenty times the value, Horrible
Oppression?) whereby his Plough was hindered, and part of his seed time lost.

William Edmondson, Godfry Cantell, John Cantrell, Richard Jackson, Tobias
Pledwell, William Capton, Roger Boswell, Evan Bevon, John Thompson, William
Barecroft, John Hugg, Thomas Stalker, Richard Scott, and Thomas Stevenson, were
presented or indicted at the Sessions or Assizes (by means of the said Priest
Clapham) for not paying to the repair of the said worship-house at Rosanellis;
whereupon they were served with Capia's and brought to next Assizes, and most
of them then Committed to Prison by Judge Aston; notwithstanding their Goods to
much more value then the sum leavied and demanded, had before that time been
taken away from them (for the repair of the said place as aforesaid

And the said George Clapham Priest caused 17 of our Friends (called Quakers)
to be endicted at the same Assizes, for not being at his public Parish worship
for a year by past, especially the 6th March last past, although some of them
so endicted, had been (by his means as aforesaid) excommunicated and been
prisoners above five years on that account, and not yet acquitted.

Mark how Envy and Persecution engages this Priest Clapham beyond Law, Reason,
Honesty or Equity: Who will not be satisfied with excessive taking away Friends
Goods for the repair of his worship-house, but causes them to be endicted for
not paying to the repair thereof, also to endict excommunicated men for not
joining with him in his worship, when before he had warned the people not to
converse or commerce with them; if he be not both envious and blind* l^^wise
men judge; much more might be writ concerning his Cruelty toward Friends, but
it would be 100 tedious to mention.

Munster Province.
Cork City and County.
1661. ALexander Atknis for not paying 24. s demanded for the repair of Pa
arish worship-house, had Goods taken from him, worth 2 l. 18 s. 4 d. (...) had
Goods taken from him for the like use, worth 16 s.

Thomas Michel, for 30 s. demanded for the like-use, had a piece of Tammy taken
from him worth 4 l. 10 s.

George Webber, for the like use, had two pieces of Callico taken from him
worth 40 s.

1669. John Gessage had Goods taken from him, for the like use worth 6 s. 8 d.

Robert Sandham of Youghall for not paying 3 s. 6 d. demanded for a like use,
had three pewter Dishes taken from him worth 8 s.

Limerick City and County.
1661. John Barnes had taken from him, by Bishop Sings Order, for the like use,
two pair of Shoes worth 7 s.

1663. Edward Kemp, for not paying 10 s. demanded for the like use, was
Excommunicated by James Stern Arch Deacon, and a Writ taken out to apprehend
the said Edward, who being then at work about Forty Miles from Limerick City,
had his House there (the Interest whereof a little before cost him 20 l.) taken
away from him, by the procurement of Bishop Sing (not to his Praise is it
spoken) and the House set and let to John Hunt, the said Bishop's Clark, and
possession thereof given by Henry Saltfield, who threw and thrust the said
Edward Kemp's Wife, Children and Goods out of the said House.

Waterford City.
1669. William Wright, for not paying ^0 s. demanded for great Bells ( that
keep a needless Noise) had Working-Tools taken from him worth 30 s.

John Chamberlin, for not paying 4 s. 6 d. for the like use, had Leather taken
from him worth 22 s.

Fourthly, These following, for exhorting the People to the Fear of the Lord,
and Warning them in public Places of Worship, Streets and Markets, to Repent,
etc. as also for not going to the Church (so called) have suffered much by
Fines, long Imprisonments, Cruel Beatings and loss of Goods; which is worse
then in Turkey, where people paying their Taxes are not compelled to the Alcoron
Worship.

Ulster Province.
Antrim County.
1663. MIles Gray, for exhorting the people to Repentance, and declaring the
Day of God's Love unto them through the Streets of Carrick-fergus, was put into
the Goal there, by Coronel Charles Meredith, and the next day expelled the
Town, being drove out by Geo. Spring the Jailer, who beat him as he turned him
out.

The said Miles for declaring in like manner unto the people through the
Streets of Colrain, was (by Order of Major Durham) very ill used, and bolted in
the Guard-house*

And the said Miles Gray, for the like exhorting the people upon a Market day
in the Street of Down Patrick, was cruelly beaten by Cap: Winyard with a
Staff, until it brake in pieces, and so drove unto the Constables House, where
he also violently puncht him on the Breast with the end of the broken Staff;
and from thence he was brought before Vere-Essex Cromwell, who committed him to
the County Goal, amongst Thieves and Murderers, where he was kept above a year.

Fermanagh County.
John Edwards, for exhorting the people to Repentance and Amendment of Life, in
the public Place of Worship at Newtown, after the Worship was ended, was
haled and sent away to Prison, with his hands tied behind his back, by order of
one Justice Creaton, and bolted by the Jailer, who demanded 1 s. for the same,
and was put among the Fellons, and the Jailer took away his Coat from him for
that they call the Penny-pot; and at the next Assizes he was brought before
Judge Alexander, who fined him 5 l. for keeping his Hat on, caused his Mouth to
be stopped with a Cloak, and sentenced him to remain six Months in Goal, and
to pay 100 l.

Cavan County.
1670. Richard Fail, John Jay, and Rob. Vnthank, for not going to the Parish
Worship-house (called the Church) was taken up by a Capias, and by Judge Kenedy
fined 1 s. and left in Prison, where they remained about eighteen Weeks, and
then were released by an Order from the King's Lt. General and Council of
Ireland.

Leinster Province
Kings County.
1665. SAmuel Strongman, Abraham Fuller, Richard Hunter and John Wilson were
endicted at the Quarter Sessions at Birr, for not hearing Divine Service (as
they call it) and fined 1 s. a piece, which Fine, with Fees claimed, came to 11
s. a piece, as Geo. Sanky the High Sheriff did compute it; for which the said
Sheriff (by his Bailiffs) distrained and took,

From Samuel Strongman, Goods worth 18s. From Abraham Fuller, Pewter and Yarn
worth 15s. From Rich. Hunter, a Horse, Bridle, etc. worth 17s. From John
Wilson, a Cow worth 28s.


Queens County.
1669. John Edwards, for warning the people unto Repentance in the Parish
Worship-house at Ballinekill, was cruelly beaten by Jam. Dunn Sovereign with a
Staff, until it brake in pieces, and with the remaining part in his hand,
struck him on the bare head, and then haled him to the Stocks, and there set
him for Two Hours, in a cold Winter day.

Wexford County.
Tho. Murford, for speaking in the Fear of the Lord to the People in a public
Place of Worship in Wexford, was cruelly beaten, and his Body sorely bruised,
and so committed to Prison.

1662. James Tailor and John Blair, for not going to the public Worship-house
(called the Church) were taken up by a Capias, and imprisoned in Wexford Goal
about twelve Weeks.

1670. Jonas Chamberlin and Will. Chamberlin, for speaking a few words of
Soberness and Truth to Edw. Withers (called a Justice) as he was passing to his
Worship, on the 25th of the 10th Month, were committed to Prison.

Munster Province.
Cork County and City.
1660. LVcretia Cook, for exhorting the people in Bandonbridge, to take heed
and beware of false Prophets, etc. was committed to the Marshals, and thence to
Bridewel, by John Laundon Provost, and there kept twenty days.

And another Friend, only for looking on Priest Nycholets in the public
Worship-house at Bandon, was violently pulled and haled, the Priest calling to
the Magistrate, saying, Take him away, take him away (though the Friend spoke
not one word) and it made such an uproar, that the Friend had like to have bin
smothered in the worship-house.

1669. Susanna Mitchell, for bearing Testimony against Priest Cross's false
Doctrine, in the public House of Worship in Cork City, he being then teaching
the Lawfulness of Swearing, which is contrary to the Command of Christ and the
Apostle, was committed to Goal, and there kept Prisoner a long time.

1670. Solomon Eccles, for going to the Cathedral at Cork the 16th of the 8th
Month, (in Obedience to the Lord's Requiring) and for saying these words
(after Ben. Cross, the Priest, had ended his Sermon and Prayer) That the
Prayer of the Wicked was Abomination to the Lord; whereupon the said Priest
said, Let me Crave a Blessing; so when he had done, the said Friend was about
to speak, and the Soldiers began to pull and hale him; but the Priest said,
Let him alone; then the said Friend spoke and said, What shall be done to the
man that makes Shiprack of a good Conscience? (though then it was not known to
him, that the said Priest Cross had formerly been a Presbyterian Priest in
Dorsetshire, and had said (ut ferunt) That he had rather go to a Stake and be
Burned, then to put on a Surplice; yet now preached with a Surplice on) So the
Friend was laid hold on, and had before the Mayor, who committed him to Prison,
where he was kept ten days; and then the Bishop, and Peter Colthrop the
Governor (like Ananias and Pilate) accused the said Solomon Eccles to the Earl
of Orrery, President of the Province of Munster; for a Vagabond Quaker, etc.
and so without any Examination of the said Person, who by Law could not be
proved a Vagabond) obtained Order to whip him through Cork City, which was
accordingly executed with great severity, the said Solomon being whipped all
along the Streets of the City of Cork, from North-Gate to South-Gate, and in
that time received at least Eighty Seven Lashes or Stripes, and so expelled.

Waterford City.
1660. Elinor Tatlock, for going to the public Worshiphouse in Waterford, and
there bearing Testimony against their Will Worship, was put into Bridewel by
John Horton Recorder; and after several days, she and her Husband were turned
out of the City from their Children and Family.

Margret Blanch, for exhorting the people to the Fear of the Lord, etc. at a
time when she was at a Burial of one of her Relations, was imprisoned six
Months, and in that time Excommunicated by Bishop Gore of Waterford, and
thereupon kept close Prisoner a long time; and though often very sick and Weak
of Body, whilst in Prison, and diverse Entreaties made to the said Bishop, for
her Enlargement, or going Home a while for Refreshment, yet was (generally)
refused by the said Hard-hearted Bishop: And during her said long Imprisonment
at Waterford, the same Bishop Excommunicated her Husband, William Blanch; and
as the said William Blanch was riding upon his lawful Occasions in Tiperary
(another County) was there followed and watched, and by Clonmell Town seized
upon, and committed to the Prison there, where he was kept above a Year, being
there twenty Miles distant from his Wife in Prison at Waterford, and his Family
there; so that neither the Husband and Wife could come to one another (as being
Prisoners) nor yet either of them to their Family.

Conaught Province.
Galoway City.
1669. SOlomon Eccles being moved of the Lord to go a Sign, on the 14th of the
7th Month, and that Naked, with Fire and Brimstone burning on his Head,
without the Gates of the City, unto a Papists Mass-Meeting, and the Friar and
People being upon their Knees, he (in the Spirit of the Lord) said, Woe to these
Idolatrous Worshippers; God has sent me this day to warn you, and to let you
see, that if you Repent not, what shall be your Reward: and so he went over the
Bridge into the City, warning them also to Repentance; and when done, he was
had to Prison, with his three Friends, Randal Consins, Nicho. Grible, and Henry
Bloodworth, who accompanied him in his Service; and Eliza. Harper visiting them
in Prison, was also there detained, and after several days Imprisonment were
all released.

Fifthly and Lastly, And these following, for not Swearing (for Conscience
sake) keeping to Yea and Nay, according to Christ's Command, who said, Swear
not at all; for not taking off their Hats, and giving men the Honor below; for
opening Shops and Working on days (by the World called Holy Days) which the
Pope set up; and for owning the Truth, Christ Jesus, the Light that lights
every man that comes into the World, have been Fined, Imprisoned, Abused, and
their Goods taken from them.

Ulster Province.
Ardmagh County.
1662. ROger Webb, being Constable, was called at the Sessions at Ardmagh, to
give in Presentiments, and because (for Conscience sake) he could not Swear, was
fined by (Sir) George Atkinson in 40 s. for which the Sheriffs Bailiffs took
from him a Horse worth 45 s.

1665. Henry Furnace sen. because (for Conscience sake) he could not Swear, was
fined 20 s. in the Manner Court, for which the Bailiffs took from his Son a
Horse worth 30 s.

1669. James Bradshaw being summoned to the Manner Court of Lurgan, was fined 5
s. (by John Relly Seneschal) for not taking off his Hat, and the Bailiffs took
Goods from him worth 7 s.

1670. Christopher Hillary of Shankill Parish, being one of the Militia, under
Captain Draper; and afterward convinced of Truth, which leads out of all
outward Wars, and Killing Men's Persons, teaching the Royal Law of God, To do to
others as one would be done unto, which is not to kill or be killed, and so for
Conscience sake could no longer bear Carnal Weapons; for which he was put on a
thing called a Wooden-Horse, in Charliamount, with three Muskets at each Leg,
and ordered so to sit till four inches of Match was burned, and afterward
committed* to Goal (but, quo jure, qua lege, all or any of this was done -- --)
and at the following Assizes he was cleared by Proclamation, but kept in Prison
for Fees; and for the same he is still detained Prisoner.

Cavan County.
1660. Thomas Lunn being at his honest Labor near his own house, was taken
thence by two Troopers, belonging to Major Moor, and dragged between their
Horses about two Miles, and cruelly used and beaten, to the astonishment of the
Beholders, for no other cause, but being called a Quaker.

Leinster Province.
Dublin City.
1669. ROger Roberts being summoned to a Court L^et, in Brabson's Liberties, to
serve as a Jury-man, and because he durst not (for Conscience sake) Swear, and
break the Command of Christ, he was (by the Seneschal) fined 5 l. and committed
to Prison, where he was kept several days.

Wexford County.
1662. Robert Cuppage, for refusing to take the Oath of a Grand Jury-man, was
committed to Prison by Judge Griffith.

John Tottenham, for refusing to take the Oath of High Constable at Wexford
Sessions, was fined 5* l. and committed to Goal, where he was kept a Prisoner a
long time.

Munster Province.
Cork County and City.
1660 DAniel Massey opening his Shop in Bandon-bridge on a certain day of the
Week (called a Holy Day) one John Braley, with a party of Armed Townsmen, went
into the said Daniel's Shop, and by Words and Actions much abused him and his
Goods, taking an Iron Pot, and with his own hands brake it to pieces against
the Stones, threatening not to leave him worth a Groat (which he might have
effected in the Shop, had the rest of his party followed his wicked Example)
commanding his Men, To throw Dirt and Stones into the Shop (and to spare
neither Man, Woman or Child) which spoiled much of his Goods, and himself
endangered by Stones, one (of about a pound weight) hitting him on the Breast.
And the same day one James Burrel, with another party of Armed men, went into
the said Daniel's Shop, and pulled down much of his goods, trampled them on the
ground, and throwed them out into the Street, and smote him on the face, plucked
the Hair off his Head, and much abused him. And the said Burrell abused another
Friend one John Exham, meeting him in the Street, pulled him down to the
Ground, kneeled upon him, and beat him so cruelly, that the bystanders cried
out, he will kill the man, he would kill the man.

1661. Susanna Mitchell, for opening her Shop on the day called the twelfth
day, was put into the Cage, and there kept several Hours by order of Walter
Cooper Mayor of Cork.

1667. George Webber, for the like cause, was hailed out of his Shop, and
called Dog, and other scurrilous names, by Christopher Rye Mayor of Cork, who
sent the said George to the Marshals: and several other Friends, have been much
abused often times, and had their Shops and Goods spoiled by the rude multitude
of Boys, throwing Dirt, etc. encouraged thereto by the said Mayor, being
sometimes personally amongst them.

Hugh Scramp, as he was passing along the Streets of Cork City was also much
abused by the said Christopher Rye, who fell violently upon him, beat him,
calling him, Quaking Dog, and Son of a Priest, etc. also saying, He could Cut
the Throat of him, and a Hundred such

1669. Philip Dymond of Cork City, being chosen Constable, and because for
(Conscience sake) he could not Swear, was fined 5 l. and committed to Prison
although he proffered to serve and perform the Place as Faithfully and Honestly
as those that did Swear.

Limerick City and County.
1661. Richard Pearce, James Craven, John Cobb, and six Friends more being
called into the Court, at the Assizes in Limerick, before Judge Alexander, for
meeting together (as their manner is) to worship God, were fined 5 l. a piece
for wearing their Hats on their heads (which is the proper place to wear a Hat)
and so committed to Prison

Waterford City.
1666. William Wright, for working and following his lawful Labor on a Week
day (by some called a Holy Day) was Excommunicated, and after a Harsh and Cruel
manner taken up, and had to Goal (by the Bishop's means) and there kept a close
Prisoner a long time, and not suffered to go to his Family (it being a great
prejudice to him and his Trade, being a Joyner) and the subsistence of his
Wife, Children and Family depended on him.

And it is to be Noted, That the said Bishop Gore caused one Jer. Hankes, for
the very same cause, to be Excommunicated, and likewise committed to Goal,
where he was also kept close Prisoner a long time, and at last falling sick,
the Bp. was desired to grant him leave to go home, in order to his recovery,
but the cruel Bishop refused, and so the Prisoner died in Goal, leaving his
Body there, as a Testimony against the observation of days (set up at first by
the Pope, and since commanded to be kept) without Scripture Authority, which
allow 6. days in the week to work on) also leaving his Wife and poor Children
to the Charity of well-minded people; for the man was but (outwardly) poor, and
by Trade a Shoe maker: The reason why we mention this man's Sufferings, is
because (though he was not one of us, yet he was so much of our Principle, as
to bear his Testimony (with the loss of Liberty and Life it self) against the
(originally Papal) Institution of observing Holy Days (so called) and also, to
manifest the cruelty of the said Bp. who would not admit the poor Prisoner to
go out of Goal, to endeavor the preservation of his Life; an account of his
Death, or loss of Life, in that manner must assuredly be rendered to God: Let
the Party concerned deeply consider this and lay it to heart, and repent, and
beware of being any occasion* or guilty of the like for the future: and will
not all sober people judge it just and equal, that the said Party do take care
for his poor Wife and Children, that if it be possible this Blood may be
expiated, which otherwise cannot but ascend to the Lord God that created him,
and the Cry of the Widow and Fatherless reach unto his Ear.

AN Occasional Treatise.
READER, BY the foregoing Relation, the Fruits of the Persecuting Priests and
Magistrates appear, how, when, where, for what, and by whom we have thus
suffered; its now requisite a little to show the Grounds and Reasons of our
Principles and Practices, for which occasion is thus taken against us, and then
it will be the more easy to discern the Innocence of our Cause, and the
Unchristian-like spirit of our Persecutors.

And forasmuch as there is not only a great Difference betwixt us and the
literal Professors of Christianity, touching the Worship and Service of the
True and Living God, but that the greatest part of all our Sufferings is
(generally) for, and on the account of our Worship to God (for that God was and
is to be worshipped, is owned by all called Christians; but how, and by what,
few do understand; and that God had a People that truly worshipped him in all
Ages, is recorded in the holy Scriptures of Truth, and though they differed in
Manner and Place, yet however, all that worshipped acceptably, 'twas by Faith
in the Seed) therefore we shall begin with that Branch, of our meeting together
to wait upon and worship the Lord.

First, As for our meeting frequently together, to seek the Lord, by waiting
upon him in his holy Fear, and to Worship him in the Spirit and in the Truth,
which is the only acceptable Worship with God; we have (amongst many more)
these brief ensuing Grounds and Reasons.

First, BEcause the Lord has thus prrswaded our Hearts, by his good Spirit, to
meet often together, to have our minds exercised in his Fear and Worship, to
wait upon him for more Light, to know and understand more of his Heavenly Will
(which is revealed Isa. 42. 4. Phil. 3. 15. Gal. 1. 15. 1 Cor. 2. 10. Mat. 11.
25. Luke 4. 23.
by his holy Spirit) as well what is our Duty toward him, and all men, as to
know his Will toward us; and by the Light, or Manifestation of himself by his
Spirit, we come to know and believe that he is a Spirit, and is to be
worshipped (in his own Nature) in the Spirit and in the Truth, it being man's
Duty to wait upon God in and by that of himself, made manifest in man, which
only and truly shows him how, when, where, and after what manner God will be
worshipped: For if God (who is invisible) be a Spirit, and therein to be
worshipped, then nothing less then of the same Nature will reveal God to man,
and show him how to serve and worship God aright; and therefore of necessity
for all that intend either to know the Mind of God, or their Duty to him, to be
very serious and weighty in their approachings to worship God, in order to
conduct the mind of man to seek after, and know the Will of God, it being a
weighty Work to worship the Lord God aright; and to the end we may perform a
Worship which may be acceptable in his sight, therefore it is we thus meet
together, to seek his Face (with our Mat. 5. 16. Joh. 15. 8. 1 Cor. 6. 20.
minds waiting and stayed in his Light, and measure of his Spirit) to open our
Understandings in the Mysteries of his Heavenly Kingdom, that we may know how
to live and walk in this Life, as becomes true Christians, to answer the End
for which we were created, that is, To glorify God, and to keep our selves
unspotted of the Word, which is pure Religion, Ja. 1. 27. And thus by Faith was
God worshipped before the Law, from Adam till Moses; for God having made man in
his own Image, capable to serve and obey him, and to enjoy his blessed
Presence; but man by Transgression lost his Place and happy Estate, and so was
drove out from God, yet not without a Promise of the Seed (Christ) to bruise
the Serpent's head; and though thus expelled, yet was it his Duty to Serve,
Fear and Worship the Lord God his Creator, as apppears by the practice of
Adam's first Sons, who worshipped God by offering Sacrifices each of them
according to the persuasion of their Hearts and Understandings; Genesis 3. 3, 4,
5. Cain (the first Birth) offered the Fruit of the Ground; Abel (the second
Birth) offered the Firstlings of his Flock, and the Fat thereof, and he, and
his Offering, or Worship was accepted; but unto Cain God had no respect, as
offering from that which was cursed; and he not finding Acceptance with God in
his said Service, then Envy and Wrath arose in him, and he Murdered his
Innocent Brother. [Mark] Here is the first Persecution about Religion, here are
the two Seeds and the two Births, of which, and from whence springs all the
Natures, and Lines, and Worships of all Men in the World ever since, and from
hence its easy to know of what Race every Worship is of; Persecutors are of
and from envious Cain; And is it not below a man, or at least as a good man, to
be ranked of the Race of cursed Cain? for shame then let all men forbear to
persecute about Religion; for you see who is the Father; and whosoever
persecutes, its a manifest token that he finds no Acceptance with God in his
own Worship, and so seeks to be revenged on his Brother, on him that finds
Peace with God in his Offering or Worshipping, even on Righteous Abel. And by
Faith in the promised Seed, Christ, not only Abel, but even all the rest of the
holy Patriarchs, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, etc. performed their
acceptable Services and Worships to God, offering and worshipping in diverse
Places and Manners, and yet without* Scripture or written Rules; and though
they had not a written Law, or outward Rule, to direct them how to worship God,
yet had they the Everlasting Rule, God's Spirit (which was before Writings
were, by which they were surely acted and truly guided how to live and walk
toward God and toward man, and how to perform a Worship to God, that might be
acceptable in his sight, as the Scriptures testify: And thus by Faith, through
all these Types, Figures and Sacrifices under the Law was God truly worshipped,
a contrite Heart being more esteemed by God, then Burnt-Offerings and
Sacrifices, Psalm. 51. 16, 17. 1 Samuel 15. 22.

Secondly, Because its our Duty so to meet to seek and worship God, who is
worthy to be sought unto, and waited on, by all that make Profession of him, as
tending to the Honor of his holy Name, and Advancement of his Blessed Truth,
and to the Benefit and Comfort of our own Souls, as appears by the Practice of
the Saints of old, who feared the Lord, and spoke often one to another, and the
Lord hearkened, and heard, and a Book of Remembrance was written before him,
for them that feared the Lord, and thought upon his Name; And they shall be
mine in that day (says the Lord) when I make up my Jewels, Mal. 3. 16, 17. So
that in consideration of the Omnipotency of God, who (as we are his Creatures,
much more his People that fear him, and his Children that believe in him) does
expect our continual dependence on him, as being ready to hear and answer our
breathing Desires, and to supply us with every Good Thing needful for us, Lam.
3. 25, 26. We have good Grounds thus to wait and meet, 1st, From the Promise of
Christ Jesus, who said, Mat. 18. 20. Where two or three are gathered together
in my Name, there will I be in the midst of them; and we have found him
faithful that has promised, read Mat. 7. 7. to 12. 2dly, From the Command of
Christ to his Apostles, Acts 1. 4. whose Duty it was to wait upon God for
further Manifestation of his Mind and Will; for though they had heard Christ's
Divine Doctrine, seen his Mavelous Miracles, and been long conversant with
him in the Flesh; yet mark what he said unto them, when he was to leave them, (
Mat. 26. 11. for he (as in the Flesh) was not always to stay with them, which
they were ignorant of) Its expedient for you that I go away; for if I go not
away, the Comforter will not come unto you; and when the Comforter (the Spirit
of Truth) is come, he will guide you into all Truth, and will dwell with you,
and shall be in you, and shall teach you all things, and abide with you
forever, Joh. 14. 2, 3, 16, to 27. (Mark here, the Spirit was to be their Rule
or Guide, and their Teacher in all things) Yet after his Resurrection, they
being assembled and met together, were commanded not to depart from Jerusalem,
but to wait there for the Promise of the Father, or (as Luke writes, Luke 24.
32, 45, 49.) until they were endued with Power from on High, which should open
their Understandings, to understand the Scriptures, and the Mysteries of God's
Kingdom, which Promise of Christ was fulfilled, Acts 2. for the Comforter, the
holy Spirit, did come upon them at their Meeting at Jerusalem, to lead them
into all Truth, according to Christ's Promise: Here thou may see that the
very Apostles, who had the Scriptures before (as we have) and had been so long
with Christ, yet they had not learned all things, nor understood they the
Scriptures then (no more then they are now) till the Spirit enlightened and
endued them. Well then, Have not we great need now to meet together, and wait
for Christ's fulfilling this Promise to us, to be taught all things, that we
may understand the Scriptures, which are as a Book sealed from all those that
are not led by the Measure of God's Spirit (which we do Witness) which only can
open them (they being not of any private Interpretation) 2 Pet. 1. 20, 21. And
therefore the Apostle enjoins the converted Hebrews, To hold fast the
Profession of their Faith without wavering, and not to forsake the Assembling
of themselves together, as the manner of some was; but exhort one another, and
so much the more as the day approaches, Heb. 10. 23, 24, 25. And we are of the
same Faith and Principle, and therefore we cannot but meet together, and exhort
one another, as an Expression of our Duty, and thereby we make Confession to
the Truth, by holding fast our Profession thereof; and we dare not forsake our
thus assembling in the Service and Worship of God, as the manner of some then
was, and now is who for fear lose the Testimony of their Profession, creeping
into Corners, and sheltring from the Storms; pleading Policy to forbear, and
not give Offense, etc. But our Profession being grounded on the Foundation
Principle of true Religion, the Light, Christ Jesus, we are made willing (by
the good and comfortable Effects we have received by our said Meetings and
Waitings upon God (having often in our Assemblies felt and enjoyed God's
heavenly Life and blessed Presence, to the great Refreshment of our Souls) and
encouraged to continue constant in this Practice without being afraid or
ashamed, Luke 1. 74, 75. (having such Divine Authority for our so doing) though
Sufferings (even to the loss of all outwardly) should attend us. And our Duty
herein is confirmed from the Practice of Christ Jesus, and his blessed Apostles
and Disciples, and also the primitive Christians, (Acts 2. 41, 42, to the end)
who, as fast as they were convinced and gathered out of all other Worships
(whether National or particular Sects) did thus assemble, or meet together, in
Houses, Fields, etc. though the Laws of the Lands, or Power of the chief
Rulers, did neither tolerate nor encourage them, but rather edict to the
contrary; yet they did neither desist or decline Meetings, knowing it be their
Duties, and having found the virtue thereof by Christ's Promise fulfilled to
them in and at their Waitings upon God, Acts 4. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. And our
Persecutors may as well say, That Christ, his Apostles, Disciples and primitive
Christians were dissobedient to the then chief Authority, in not desisting or
declining preaching the Truth, or meeting together in the Name of Jesus, as
Persecute us for the like now? Acts 5. 28, 29, 42.

Thirdly, As the Spirit of God, Scripture Authority, and the Practice of the
Saints, Christ, his Disciples and primitive Christians, do justify our thus
meeting; so now let us a little reason with men, who (if guided by Reason)
cannot but witness for us, to the Innocence of our Sufferings, for this Duty
and Practice of our thus meeting to wait upon and worship God: And can any one
called a Christian (if moderate) say, That its a Crime to meet to worship God?
if not, then our meeting for that end is just and lawful; neither are our
Assemblies prejuditial to any: What Evil Act was ever found amongst us at our
said Meetings? What Conspiracies can there be in a Silent Meeting? or, what
Design can be contrived in a mixed Multitude, where the Doors are open for any
to come in, to hear or see what is said or done? or What ill Effects or bad
Consequences to the Government in general (either in the former, or this
present Powers time) or to any Person in particular have our said Meetings
produced? have not both our Principles and Practices sufficiently evidenced our
Innocence herein? let our Neighbors, and all that know us give their Testimony
in this case. And indeed, if Reason rule men (as it ought) then (upon a strict
scrutiny into this thing) there will be no Ground or Foundation ( in rerum
natura) for any Jealousy of us, who are but a few, mean, innocent People, that
fear the Living God, and are not seeking a Kingdom or Power below; but a City,
whose Maker and Builder is God; and Power against our inward and spiritual
Enemies, Heb. 11. 10, 14, 15, 16. Luke 22. 29, 30. Or can any ingenious or
unbyased men truly say, That they are (re vera) in any Terror of our said
Meetings, or really in fear that any thing (in such an open and mixed Multitude)
can be designed to the prejudice of the present Powers, or Peace of the
Country; but rather, all this disturbing our peaceable Meetings, and
persecuting us for the same, proceeds (mostly) from such professing Priests and
Magistrates (without the Possession) who (that they may appear to run parallel
with the high Tides of the Times, and to swim swiftly with the Streams of the
Seasons, thereby to ingratiate themselves) are forward to persecute us, because
we cannot change and conform (as they do) contrary to our Consciences? And
besides, seeing every man must render an account to God for himself, how then
will it serve, or, who will stand betwixt God and a man's Soul, if the man has
acted contrary to his own Understanding and Conscience? Can Priest or
Magistrate then plead for, or be heard against Conscience it self (which is
more then a Thousand Witnesses) to excuse the Guilty Soul before God? or, Would
our Persecutors be compelled to a Worship contrary to their own Consciences? So
that let our Persecutors pretend what they will or can, it is evidently matter
of Conscience, rightly informed and surely grounded, even God's Spirit,
Scripture Authority, and the Practice of the Saints and primitive Christians,
that makes us thus meet, and wait upon, and worship God, and suffer thus for
the same.

Secondly, Touching our not paying Tithes and Maintenance to the Priests and
their Clarks, we have good Ground for the same. For,

First, BEfore the Law Abraham was the first (we read of) who having rescued
his Brother Lot, by force of Arms, from the four vanquished Kings, gave the
Tenth of the Spoil unto Milchizedeck, Priest of the most High God, Genesis 14. 20.
Here the Original of Tithes was a free Gift, and not a general Command; for
then all Princes should have paid the Tenth of their Spoils. And Jacob also
vowed the giving of the Tenths unto God, Genesis 28. 22.

Secondly, Under the Law, Tithes were ordained of God, Deuteronomy. 14. 29. for the
Levite, Strangers, Widows and Fatherless; and they were to be brought into
God's Storehouse, to be dispensed to the Levite, (who had no Inheritance with
his Brethren) and Priesthood) for their continual attendance about the Alter,
Sacrifices, Offerings, etc. Number. 18. 24. And the withholding of Tithes, or the
not duly paying of them, on this account, was no less then a Robbery done to
God, Mal. 3, 8, 9, 10. (and incurred a Curse, and not Imprisonment to Death, as
they do now, who set them up without Command from Christ) who ordained them
(amongst other things) holy, and were to continue in force as long as the
Levitical Priesthood, Law, and the Ordinances thereof lasted.

Thirdly, But when the fullness of time was, that the Messiah Christ Jesus, Gal.
4. 4.) came, of whom Moses Prophesied, saying, Him shall you hear in all
things; and whom the Priests and Jews (by the Scriptures) professed should
come, yet when he came, they believed not in his then appearance in the Flesh,
no more then the literal Professors of this Age can believe in his now
Spiritual Appearance, ( Rom 10. 16. 21.) And Christ Jesus did choose Apostles
out of the Disciples that believed in him, who were of several Tribes, and not
out of the Priests, or Tribe of Levi only, and he ordained them and more
Disciples, and gave them Power and Authority, and sent them forth to preach the
Gospel, Luke 6. 13. and chap. 9. from 1. to 8. and chap. 10. from 1. to 10.
Here was neither Paper nor Parchment Commission, nor their Authority to preach
derived from the Jewish Rulers or Roman Power: and for this their Gospel
Mission and Preaching he instituted and appointed them a Gospel Maintenance,
suitable to their Gospel Dispensation Ministry, read Mat. 10. Mark 6. 8. Luke
9. and 10. where Christ (giving the verbal Commission to the Gospel Preachers)
says, Freely ye have received, freely give; provide neither Silver, Gold,
Brass, Scrip nor Bread for your Journey; salute no man by the way; the Workman
is worthy of his Meat; and into what Town or City soever ye enter, enquire who
is worthy, etc. And after they had performed their Service, and returned to
Christ, they rejoiced, they complained not of a hard Master, or hard
Commission, or of want in their Gospel Service of Preaching and Journeys,
neither asked they for any Augmentation; for they lacked nothing, Luke 22. 35.
This was the first Call and Ordination of Gospel Preachers, as also, the
Allowance and Maintenance for them, and here is Scripture for it. Come now ye
that say, You are the Minister^ of the Gospel; and say, (for you do but say)
That the Scripture is the standing Rule; let us try you by that Rule; for we
dearly own and love the Scriptures of Truth. which were given forth by the
Inspiration of God; for they are profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, 2 Timothy 3. 16. and we wish in our
Hearts you would come so far as to the Rule of the Scriptures; for then must
you deny your Mat. 20. 26. and 23. 10. 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3. Luke 22. 24, 25, 26. 2
Cor. 4. 5. Da. 5 27
Call, Ordination, Commission, and manner of Maintenance; yea, your Doctrine,
Discipline, Worship, Manner and Places of Worship, and Compulsion to your
Worship, with all your Height, Pomp, Mastership, Lordliness and Court-Powers,
as being expressly contrary to the Scriptures: so that in the true Balance you
are found wanting, and (by the very Scales and Waights, which you have chosen
to be weighed in and by) you cannot hold out Weight and Measure by that which
ye your selves say is the Rule (viz.) the Scriptures. And so Christ in his
Gospel Institution of Ministry never ordained Tithes, or any other compulsive
way or means for his Ministers Means and Maintenance; but ordered a Maintenance
(as before said) suitable to the Gospel, Afree Gospel, and a free Maintenance:
and Christ being offered up, ended the Law, and first Priesthood, and the
Commandment that gave them Tithes, with all its Ordinances, Offerings,
Sacrifices, Tithes, etc. he remaining a Priest forever, Heb. 7. 12. and chap.
9. verse. 10, 11, 14.

Fourthly, In the primitive Church's time, when there were many Disciples and
Gospel Ministers, that preached to the Jews, and other Nations, at great
distances, the Management whereof must needs be supported with a suitable
Charge and Maintenance; yet no mention of Tithes, nor petitioning the Rulers,
either for Authority to preach, or Maintenance for their Preaching and Service
in their Ministry; for they that were sent forth by Christ, were content with
his Allowance; and the Churches made provision for all such necessary Supplies,
and also for the Poor, by their Free Collections and Voluntary Contributions,
and there was no Lack or Complaint, Romans 15. 26. So that as under the Law God
ordained Tithes for the Priests and Levites (that were employed about the
Temple-worship, Sacrifices, etc. and for the Widow and Fatherless, etc. so
under the Gospel, Christ Jesus (the Saints and true Christians Lawgiver) has
allotted and provided for his Ministers, that he calls, and sends forth to
preach the Gospel; and his Church takes care of their Poor, who appointed men
to see that nothing was lacking, Acts 6* 3. 1 Cor. 16. 12. Is not this good
Gospel Order? and this we are for. And the Apostle to the Hebrews (in a great
part of his Epistle to them) strives to bring them off from under the Law, the
first Priesthood, and all the Ordinances pertaining thereunto, unto Christ
Jesus (the Everlasting High Priest) Heb. chap. 3. to chap. 11. showing them the
invaliditity of the Law and its Ordinances, in comparison of Christ; as also,
how that they are ended and fulfilled in Christ, saying, The Priesthood being
changed, there is made of necessity a change also of the Law, and a change of
the Command concerning their Maintenance; the first Priesthood terminating in
and by Jesus Christ, the perpetual High Priest: So here is an end of the
Levitical Priesthood, Off rings, Tithes, etc. But if all this will not
satisfy, and that any will yet plead for Tithes, jure divino, and so deny
Christ to be come, and the Law, and Priesthood, and the Command to be changed,
then we answer and say, 1st, Be sure that he that claims Tithes be a Levite, of
the Tribe (natural) of Levi, that has no Inheritance with the rest of the
Tribes; and that he wholly gives himself to the Service of the Alter, Temple,
Offerings, Sacrifices; and he himself to offer his Heave Offerings: 2dly, Let
him that pays the Tithes be an Israelite, of one of the other 11 Tribes,
naturally descended of the other 11 Sons of Jacob (afterward called Israel)
Jews or Israelites: 3dly, Let the very Tithes be brought into a public
Storehouse, and part given to the Levite, part to the Widow, part to the
Stranger, and part to the Fatherless; and look that the Levite has no more
then his due, a part, that the rest may have their parts (for they have as much
Right as the Levite) lest the Levite get all (as the Priests do in our days
that take Tithes) and let the Law (that was in force before Christ came in the
Flesh) be fulfilled; which if done, yet such do not acknowledge Christ come in
the Flesh: But we are of the Gentiles Stock, of another Race or Line natural,
and therefore are not in the least concerned in any respect about Tithes, the
Law and its Ordinances; for Sacrifices, Tithes, Priest-Maintenance, etc. being
given and delivered to the Israelites, and not to the Gentiles.

Objection, If Christ, by his coming, ended the Law, Priesthood, Tithes, etc.
and ordained another way of Maintenance for Gospel Ministers, as is before
showed; and that the Churches, in the primitive Times of Christianity,
practiced so; how comes it to pass, that the Ministers of our Nations, and
perochial Congregations, in these Gospel times, do now not only demand, but
force us to pay them Tithes, or other Maintenance, compulsively?

Answer, The Apostles in their days foretold and prophesied of the great
Apostasy that would ensue them (1 John 4. 1, 3. 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3. 2 John 7.
Jude 11, 18.) for in their times, and whilst the primitive Church kept the good
Gospel Order, there was no such thing as Tithes amongst them, nor yet any other
compelling way, either of Maintenance for the Ministry, or foreing to worship;
but as the Apostasy crept in, and spread it self over Nations, in and by which
the Apostates lost the true Power of God, and thereby the good Gospel Order;
and then they framed and set up Worship, Orders and Maintenance in their own
Imaginations (for their self-interest, and to maintain themselves in Pride) yet
not without some likely Imitations, to cover themselves, and delude the people
into a belief, that their Ways and Worships were all right, and for a while
kept up some part of the primitive Form; and so they (being erred from the
Power and Guidance of God's Spirit, that should call and send forth Ministers,
as at the first, that would be content with Christ's Allowance; at last, lost
the very Form it self, and so invented Forms, Ways, Worships and ordaining
Ministers, and then durst not trust to the Charity and free Benevolence of the
People or Churches, nor yet to Christ's Allowance; and then (amongst other
things) set up Tithes again (that had been ever discontinued among the true
Christians) pretending Scripture Plea, viz. That it was the way of the Priests
Maintenance under the Law; and the People being (with their Teachers) in the
Apostasy, and so their Understandings darkened, could not tell but that both
their Teachers, and their way of Maintenance, together with the Worship, and
the Form of Worship, was all well (so great was the Apostasy) Rev. 18. 3. and
thus the Whore (Mystery Babylon) with her enticing Cup of Fornication, made
Nations and People drink of, and be drunk with her Abominations. And as History
relates (Seldom) there was in these Nations no mention of Tithes in the first
Three Hundred Years after Christ, Free Benevolence being the Maintenance; and
then the Pagans much crushed the Christians in England; and after that Popery
increased, and by degrees brought not only the Pagans, but the Christians in
England (generally) to Popery, and then Tithes (that had neither by the true
Christians, nor yet by the Pagans, been ever paid) were set up, yet but as a
Gift, and for a while given and dispensed to the Priests and the Poor; but in
tract of Time, Prescription was pleaded for payment of them, till at last
Ecclesiastical Act. and Mon.
Courts were set up to demand and recover them, for the use only of the Clergy,
the Poor being then excluded, though the Poor was the Cloak, under which
pretense they got so much interest at first, as to set them up; against Thorp*
Huss.
the payment whereof several Martyrs bore Testimony. Then King Henry the Eighth
and his Parliament (being Papists) made a Law for the payment of Tithes to the
Clergy (then Popish) which was the first Establishment of Tithes by Civil Law;
but when the said King fell out with the Pope, and denied his Supremacy, and
pulled down many Abbeys and Monasteries, he then appropriated the Title of
Supreme Head of the Church (instead of the Pope) and most of the Tithes to
himself; and some of the Tithes he kept, other some he gave and sold to
Laymen, and so came Laymen first to be entitled unto Tithes; and the rest of
the Tithes (not so appropriated) he, and King Edward his Son, confirmed to the
Clergy, yet left the Trial of them unto Ecclesiastical Courts.

And thus the Maintenance that Christ appointed for true Christian
Gospel Ministers, which was Food and Raiment, came to be slighted and lost,
and Tithes set up (as aforesaid) instead thereof; and this is a manifest Token
that the Priests now adays (called Ministers, nay, they would be called and
esteemed as Gospel Ministers) are not the true Ministers of the Gospel, or true
Gospel Ministers, because they will not be content with a Gospel-Maintenance,
Christ's Allowance; but flee for Refuge and Power to the old Laws of the Land
(made by Papists, for the Popish Clergy) for their Maintenance; and thus the
Plea for Tithes jure divino, is turned unto jure humano.

And if now Laymen plead Inheritance and Law for Tithes, yet in the ground the
derivation of them is from their being paid at first in right to the Jewish
Priesthood, and since the Apostasy unto the (Popish) Priesthood: for since the
Apostasy, tke Clergy were invested in them, in right of the Priesthood, so the
Priesthood is the Original; and the first Pristhood being ended and changed (by
the coming of Christ) the Law for Tithes, Sacrifices, etc. is also changed and
dissannulled; therefore this Plea, of the Transmutation of the property of
Tithes from jus divinum to jus humanum, will not serve in sound reason, nor by
Scripture, to exact Tithes from true Christians, nor yet for them to pay Tithes
either to the Clergy or Laymen. And the Apostles continued in Christ's
Doctrine, and preached the Gospel freely, coveting no man's Silver, Gold or
Apparel; but labored with their hands, that neither they nor their Gospel
might be chargeable, 1 Cor. 9. 18.

And Paul lays down in his Epistle, 1 Timothy 3. the Quallification of Ministers
and Bishops, That they must not be Strikers, nor Covetous, nor greedy of filthy
Lucre, nor Proud, etc. and against such as preach for Lucre, and make
Merchandise of the Word, both he and several of the Apostles bore Testimony, as
may be seen in the Scriptures.

And there having been so many Volumns published of late by several of our
Friends against Tithes (enough to satisfy a moderate and rational man) against
the use of them (whether by payment or reception) in these our Gospel days,
that we need not enlarge hereon; and besides, the Understandings of people in
our Nations are so enlightened, that very few do pay Tithes on the account of
Conscience or Scripture Authority, but as being constrained thereunto against
their Wills; for as peoples eyes are opened, by believing in, and embracing the
true Light, Christ Jesus, they will easily see over the Apostasy, unto the
primitive true Christians times, and so to discern the true Gospel Ministers,
and their Allowances by Christ, from the now (National) parochal hired Priests,
and their Maintenance by Tithes and forced ways, set up by men; and that by
the Scriptures of Truth Tithes and forced means is not a Maintenance for Gospel
Ministers and that he that takes, and he that pays Tithes now, do both deny
Christ come in the Flesh.

Thirdly, Touching our not paying to the repair of the Parish or public Houses
of Worship (called Churches) we have good Ground.

First, BEcause there is no Example for this from the Ancient People of God,
the Jews, either in building, or re-edifying and repairing of the Temple of
Jerusalem (a Place Appointed and expressly Commanded of God to be built) For,
neither did David, that prepaired abundance for the Building of it; nor yet
Solomen his Son, that built it; nor yet Zerubbabel and the Jews that Rebuilt
and repaired it, would admit of any of the Gentiles, or strange Nations to help
or assist them therein; for when their Adversaries proffered help, they refused
acceptance, saying, You have nothing to do with us to build a House unto our
God; we our selves together will build it unto the Lord God of Israel, Ezra 4.
1, 2, 3. So that the Jews, for the love and zeal they bore to God, and his
Worship, denied those that were not of their Religion (that joined not with
them in their Worship) to help them to rebuild or repair the Temple, which was
the Place for the Jews to worship at; and this is contrary to you that call
your selves Christians, that compel others (not of you) to build and mend your
Places of worship.

Secondly, Because there is no Example from the Primitive true Christians; for
after Christ came (who ended the Temple Worship, etc.) there were many
thousands both of the Jews and Gentiles converted to the Faith, and met in
several Places and Houses to worship God, ( Acts 11. 26. and 20. 20. and 28.
30.) yet we do not read that they either imposed upon one another, or compelled
the Jews or Gentiles (from whom they were turned) to build up Places of
Worship; nor yet that the unconverted Jews and Gentiles compelled the
Christians either to build or repair the Jews Synagogues, or Diana's Temple.

Thirdly, There is no equity or reason for us to pay to the building or
repairing of those now Places of Worship (called Churches) for God has so
persuaded our hearts, that we cannot join with them that go to worship there,
we having good Scripture ground, both against the Worship it self, the manner
of worshipping, and the Worshippers; and therefore we refuse to go to the
Place. And can we do less then appeal to the equal Principle of God in men,
Whether it is not repugnant to right Reason and Equity, for the Priests, and
others to ask, much more to assess and compel (by taking G. Clapham Priest of
Mountmelick, and Geo. Walker Priest of Kilmore.
away our Goods, excessively) to pay to the building or repair of their Places
of Worship, (called Churches) which they themselves (and not we) make use of?
for we disown them in their Will Worship, (2 Timothy 3. 5.) where is taught for
Doctrine the Commandments of men, Mat. 15. and 9. and where Prescriptions and
Traditions of men form out a (compuisive) way of worship, for Time, Place,
Manner and Matter, as being contrary to Christ's Speech to the Woman of
Samaria, Neither in this Mountain (where the Patriachs worshipped) nor yet at
Jerusalem (the place commanded by God to be built for him (once) to be
worshipped in) but the Hour comes, and now is (said he) that the true
Worshippers shall worship God in Spirit, and in Truth; for such the Father
seeks to Worship him: and he is a Spirit, and they that worship him must
worship in the Spirit, Joh. 4. 21, 22, 23, 24. And further, does not this
manifest, that the litteral Professors of Christianity in this Age are grown
very cold, much below God's ancient People, the Jews, who, for all they had
been banished out of their own Country, and been Captives in a strange Land, in
Caldea and Persia 77 Years, yet at their return to Judea, would not suffer any
that were not of their Religion and came not to their Worship, to help them to
re-edifie and repair the Temple, commanded of God to be built? is not this much
unlike this Generation of men, that by force make havoc of us and out Goods,
for not helping them to build and repair their now places of Parish-Worship
(called Churches) for which they have no Command from God to build or repair?
So now this may serve to inform people how innocently, and that for Conscience
sake we suffer in this thing; and that our Persecutors have neither Example of
God's Ancient People, nor of the primitive true Christians, nor yet Reason or
Equity on their sides for what they have done against us herein.

Fourthly, For not going to the public Worship, and not joining with them in
their Worship at their said places (called Churches) and for Reproving and
Exhorting them to fear God in the said Places, and in Streets and Markets, as
we are commanded of the Lord, we have good Ground, though we have or may suffer
for the same.

First, For it appears by the Scriptures of Truth* that in the Infancy of the
World, even before there was any written Law* or outward Rule commanded or
prescribed by God, that People then offered or worshipped God each of them
according to the persuasion of their own hearts and minds (as is hinted at in
the first Branch) For Abel did not join with Cain in offering Sacrifices, nor
did either of them seek to compel the other to worship or offer after his way
or manner; but each of them (and so of the succeeding People and Generations
until the Law) offered and worshipped in diverse Places and Manners, according
as they were led and guided in their respective Understandings; and such of
them as offered in the true Faith of the promised Seed (Christ) were accepted
in their performances; and those that did not so offer were rejected: Thus Abel
offered, where, what, and when he pleased, offering of the Firstlings of Genesis
4. 4. Heb. 11. 4. Genesis 4. 3, 5, 6, 7, 8. Genesis 5. 24. Genesis 6. 9, 18.
his Flock, and the Fat thereof, unto which (being in the true Faith) the Lord
had respect. And Cain he likewise offered how, when, and what he pleased, viz.
Of the Fruit of the Ground, which was not accepted with God; and so he
persecuted and killed his innocent Brother, Righteous Abel. And Enoch walked
with God, and not after the manner of men's Wickedness then, and thereby pleased
God, and was translated. Noah a just man, a Preacher of Righteousness, who also
walked with God, and not after the manner of, or with the wicked World then,
found Grace with the Lord, and he and his Family were saved from the Deluge of
the World; and he built an Altar unto the Lord, and thereon Genesis 8. 20, 21.
offered Burnt-Offerings of every clean Fowl, and every clean Beast, which was
a sweet Savor unto the Lord. Abraham, God's Friend, believing in God that
appeared unto him, obtained Favor, and was called, Genesis 12. 1, 5, 6, 7, 8.
The Father of the Faithful; the Lord called him out of his own Country, and
from his Kindred and Father's House, and he obeyed, and went with his Family
into Canaan, a Land Promised to his Seed, where he dwelt; Genesis 13. 18. Genesis 15.
1. Genesis 17. 1. and 18. 1.
and built an Alter unto the Lord at Sichem and Bethel; thence he sojourned
into Egypt, and returned into Canaan, and built an Alter at Mamre, and the Word
of the Lord came unto him, and God appeared unto him, and made himself known
(by his Name, The Almighty God) unto Abraham, and said, Walk before me (walk in
my Ways, and not as the Nations walk* amongst whom thou live) and be thou
perfect: he also dwelt in the Land of Ge. 20. 1, 2. and 21. 33, 34. and 22. 9,
13, 14.
the Philistines, but walked not after their ways, for he planted a Grove in
Beersheba, and there worshipped the Lord; and in Moriah he offered a Ram
instead of his Son; and as he could not walk as the Nations did, who walked not
in the Fear of God, nor join with them in their Worship, so neither could he so
much as join with them in the burying of the dead Body of Sarah; but purchased
the Cave of Machpelah of Ephron the Hittite for a Burying place. And Isaac, in
whom the Seed was Genesis 23. 19, 20. Genesis 24. 3, 4. Genesis 26. 25. Genesis
28. 1. 2 Genesis 32. 28. Genesis 33 18, 19, 20. Genesis 35. 7, 14, 15.
called, dwelt under Abimelech amongst the Philistines, and joined not with
them in their Worship, nor yet in Marrying with them; but obeyed his Father
Abraham, who had streighly charged him not to Marry any of the Daughters of the
Cananites; and also charged his Son Jacob, not to mingle in Marriage with the
Cananites, which he also observed; and the Lord appeared unto him at Beersheba,
and he there built an Alter to the Lord, and called on his Name. And Jacob, or
Israel, the prevailing Prince with God, in his sojourning in Padan-Aran, and in
Canaan also he dwelt, and followed not the Worships of the Nations, amongst
whom he lived, neither in their Worship (as we read of) nor in Marriage; but
erected an Alter at Shalem in Sichem, and he built an Alter at Bethel, and set
up a Pillar of Stone, and poured Drink Offerings and Oil thereon; and he and
his twelve Sons, and their Families, dwelt in Egypt, under King Pharaoh; and
after he had been there seventeen Years, he dyed, but charged his Son Joseph,
To bury Genesis 47. 28, 29, 30, 31. Genesis 50. 24, 25, 26.
him in Machpelah, with Abraham and Sarah, Isaac and Rebecca, and Leah: And we
do not find, that although he lived in several Countries, that he worshipped
with the National People, nor could he give his dead Body to be buried amongst
them: And the like did Joseph his Son. So as they could not join with the
strange Nations, or Nations that worship or serve strange godds, that walked
not in the Fear of God in their Life time, so they could not give their dead
Bodies to lay amongst them.

Secondly, Moses, the meek and great Prophet of God, worshipped the Lord on an
Altar in Rephidem; and at Mount Sinai was the Law given forth, then the Altar
of the Tabernacle Ex. 17. 15. and 19. and 20. and 27. 1. and 30. 1.
was prescribed in the Mount, which was a moveable Altar, to go along with
Israel in their Travels; and in the Law is mention made of several Altars, for
several uses; an Altar of Earth, for Burnt-Offerings and Peace Offerings; an
Altar of Shittim Wood, for Burnt-Offerings; an Altar of Incense, etc. And after
the Lord had brought the Children of Israel out of Egypt, into the Land of
Canaan, which he promised to Abraham and his Seed; they were not to join with
the National Worshippers, or serve other Godds; but worship and serve the
Living God only, whom they knew: and whilst they continued obedient unto the
Lord, in the separation from the false Worshippers, and kept the Laws, Statutes
and Ordinances, given by Moses, the Lord was with them and amongst them, in
Moses, Josua, and the Elders time, Judge. 2. 7, 8, 9, to the end: And when there
arose a new Generation, that turned from the Lord, and so lost the knowledge of
him, and turned to the false Worships of the Nations, and took them Wives of
their Daughters, and followed other Godds; then the Anger of the Lord waxed hot
against them, and he gave them into the hands of their Enemies oftentimes,
Judge. 3. and when they cried unto the Lord, he heard, and answered, and sent a
Prophet to reprove them for their Backslidings, Judge. 6. 8. and afterward
Solomon built the Temple at Jerusalem, for the People to worship in (1 King. 6*
38.) and (because of the great Idolatry of other Nations, about and amongst
them, whereby Israel were often drawn away to serve their Godds) they were
confined to the Temple-Worship, and there the Lord promised his Presence, if
they continued in his Statutes; but Solomon went after other Godds, and took
Wives of the Idolatrous Nations, and turned to their Godds and Worships; and
then the Lord stirred up Adversaries against him, and was angry with him, and
he rent the Kingdom from him, and gave Ten parts thereof to his Servant
Jeroboam, and the rest to his Son Rehoboam, 1 King. 11. thus was Israel
divided, and it was then the Duty of all Israel to worship at Jerusalem. But
Jeroboam, after he was King, would not observe what the Lord said to him by the
Prophet Ahijah, 1 King. 12. 38. but disobeyed, and set up his false National
Worship at Samaria, for his own ends, in order to draw the Peoples minds from
the Temple Worship at Jerusalem, and to fortify himself in his new acquired,
or rather given Kingdom; for he, for fear the People should worship there (as
indeed they (and he too) ought) he made two Calves of Gold, and set up one at
Betbel, the other at Dan, and falsely called them the Godds which brought Israel
out of Egypt, and it became a great Sin; for the people worshipped them, and
went not to the Temple, as they were commanded of God: And he made an House of
High Places, and Priests of the lowest of the people (such as he knew being
raised so by him would serve his Ends, and call the dead Images Godds, and his
invented ways and worships the True Worship) that were not of the Sons of Levi,
and therefore false Priests, and not of God's appointing or making: And he
ordained Feasts, Offerings, Sacrifices, Altars, etc. in some resemblance of the
Worship at Jerusalem, thereby to please the People, and feed their Fancies with
a doing something in imitation of the Worship at Jerusalem, and by offering
upon the Altar there Burnt-incense, etc. and feasting the people, that it
became a great Snare, and Sin of Idolatry, and turned away their Hearts from
serving the Living God, to serve Godds (or rather more properly no Gods) of
Gold, and the Works of men's hands; and this very much provoked the Lord,
insomuch that whilst Jeroboam the King and the People were at their invented
Worship, at the Altar at Bethel, there came a Man of God, a Prophet out of
Judah, and cried against the Altar (the false Worship) and the King put forth
his Hand, and said, Lay hold on him (as many do in our days) and his Hand
withered or dried, which by the Prayer of the Man of God was healed and
restored again, 1 King. 13. 1, to 10. Neither did Jeroboam set up this his
Worship, as judging it in his Conscience to be the true Worship of God; for he
knew it was his own invented Worship, and devised Way, as is plain in 1 King.
12. 27, 33. but rather politickly prescribing a Way and Worship (like in some
things to that at Jerusalem) to keep the People from the true Worship, and to
busy their minds in an active way of Worship, by Priests of his own making,
who would say or do any thing he would have them, their Places and Maintenance
depending on him, and also, to strengthen himself in his Kingdom; rather
seeking his own Greatness and Preservation, then the Honor and Glory of God,
that had bestowed such a Kingdom and Dignity unexpectedly on him, and as the
Author^ of so fair and gilded a Way of Worship, thereby wholly to allure and
engage them to him, and his Idolatrous Worship; who having so sinned against
God, knew no other safety or strength then the good will and number of the
People: and several of the Kings of Judah and Israel were false Worshippers,
and against them and their said false Worships several Prophets of the Lord
bore Testimony, and reproved them; as did Zechariah, Michaiah, Isaiah,
Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Malachi, and several other Servants of the Lord, which kept
the Law of God then, as we do now the Gospel, and served the Lord in their
Generations, and knew him whom they served, and could not forsake him and his
Laws, to join with the Idolaters and false Worshippers, that knew not the
Living God; and for bearing Testimony against the false Worshippers, and
reproving them for their Will Worship, Idolatry, Sin and Wickedness, were
Persecuted, imprisoned, and some of them put to Death. And it is to be well
observed, That not in all the time under the Law, when Sacrifices, Offerings,
Temple-worship, etc. (as Types and Figures) were set up by the Command of God,
none were liable, or compelled (as we read of) to worship there but the Jews,
and them that were of their Religion: So that the true Worshippers were never
Persecutors in any Age, but false Worshippers have ever persecuted them that
truly serve and worship God in sincerity of Heart; therefore let not
Persecutors think, or look on themselves to be true Worshippers, true
Christians, whilst they are in that Nature; and let them but seriously examine
their Hearts in the Light and Spirit of Christ Jesus, and they will know, that
they find not acceptance with God in their own Services, nor Peace of
Conscience, and true Satisfaction of Soul in their Worshippings, and that is the
very Cause why they malign others, and ( Caiu like) envy and persecute
(sometimes to Death) them that are more Innocent, and that find Peace with God,
and Acceptance in their worshipping.

Thirdly, The Lord having been thus worshipped before and under the Law, and
having a further and another Way of Worship, in and by manifesting of the
promised Seed to be clothed with Flesh, John 1. 17. (For the Law was given by
Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ, who was the Substance of the
Law, of all the Offerings, Sacrifices, Altar and Temple-Worship (which could
not make perfect as pertaining to the Conscience) all which he ended by his
Coming, and being offered up) a Body being prepared him to do the Will of the
Father; and then Sacrifices of Righteousness, and worshipping God in Spirit and
in Truth, ordained of God and declared by Christ; for when Christ came, he did
not join with the public Worship, but reproved them that drew nigh with their
Tongues, and honored God with their Lips, and their Hearts far from him, Mat.
15. 8, 9. (as many do now adays) and told them, In vain they worshipped, that
taught for Doctrine the Commandments of Men; and called them, Blind Leaders (
John 7. 28. and 4. 23.) and he often went into the Temple (the public Place of
Worship for the Jews) and reproved them, and set up the true Worship of God
(over all false worships) in the Spirit and in the Truth, which differed from
the National Worships; and as many as came to the Gospel Worship, to worship
God in Spirit, were separated from the Jews and Gentiles Public and National
Worships, and did often testify against them in their public Places, and
reproved them in the Streets, and other Places, for which they were persecuted
by Unbelievers and false Worshippers, that knew not God. And Christ Jesus being
come (of whom Moses prophesied, and said, Acts 3. 22.) He must be heard in all
things; and he being Head of his Church, its his Prerogative alone to establish
the Worship and Order thereof, and he only has Power in all Spiritual Matters,
over his Body, his Church and People, who are obliged in point of Duty to obey
and observe his Commands and Institutions, and not the Prescriptions of any
other; for God never was, is, or will be worshipped acceptably any otherwise
then in his own Will and Way. And Christ Jesus, for publishing the Everlasting
Gospel, and setting up his Father's Worship, in Spirit and in Truth, by ending
the Law, with its Ordinances, and Temple-worship, etc. and for testifying
against Sin and Wickedness, the works of the Devil, and for all other his good
Words and Works he was persecuted, and put to Death by the chief Priests,
Elders, Scribes and Pharisees, John 8. 59. (a great professing people) even by
such as professed the Messiah to come: Thus was the Just and Holy One, the
Messiah, Christ Jesus, the Seed, the Son of God, and Savior of the World put
to Death by Wicked and Ungodly Men, who are of the Line of Cain's spirit, the
seed of the Serpent, the Devil.

Peter and John went into the Temple, Acts 3. and 4. 1. (the place of Worship)
at the time of Prayer, and preached Christ, which the Temple-Worshippers could
not bear, but laid hands on them, whipped them, and put them in Prison (strictly
charging them, To Preach no more in the Name of Jesus) the Priests being the
chief Instruments, as also at the killing of Christ. Stephen a true Worshipper
of God, ( Acts 6.) was accused of many Falsehoods, by men subborned, and false
Witnesses, and brought before the Council of the Jews, false Worshippers; and
he being full of Faith and Power preached Christ unto them; and withal told
them, Acts 7. That God dwelled not in Temples made with hands; further charging
them and their Fathers with persecuting the Prophets, and murdering of Jesus,
for which he was stoned, and put to Death by the National Worshippers. Paul
preached Christ in the Synagogues, Acts 9. 20, 23. for which the Jews took
Counsel against him, waiting and watching at the Gate day and night (so great
was their Envy) to kill him: And he and Barnabas preached in the Jews
Synagogues at Cyprus, Antioch, etc. and the Jews persecuted them, and Banished
them their Coasts, Acts 13. (as many of God's Servants are served in these
days) And at Iconium they were also persecuted, and Paul stoned (near unto
Death) by the professing Jews, and false Worshippers, for going into their
Synagogues, and preaching Christ, Acts 14. And at Thessalonica, Paul (as his
manner was) went into the Synagogues on the Sabbath days, and reasoned with
them out of the Scriptures, that Jesus is the Christ, etc. Acts 17. and the
Unbelievers and base people set the City on an Uproar against them (as such do
now against God's Servants for preaching the same Christ) accusing them with
turning the World upside down, and doing contrary to the Decrees of Caesar, and
troubled the City, and the Rulers (even as the Priests and worst of People in
our Age do concerning us, whom the Lord has redeemed from their Mouths) And
when Paul came to Athens, he did not join to the public Worship, but his
Spirit was stirred in him, seeing them given to Idolatry, he disputed in the
Synagogues with the Jews, and in the Market daily with them that met with him;
there certain Philosophers of the Epicureans and Stoics encountered him, some
calling him a Babbler, others a Setter forth of strange Godds (because he
preached Jesus, and the Resurrection) and yet they themselves knew not the
Living God. Thus Peter and several of the Apostles and Disciples, the true
Worshippers, for bearing the like Testimony, were also persecuted, and some to
Death.

Many more Examples might be mentioned of the true Worshippers of the Lord,
even through Ages and Generations, recorded in the Scriptures, who knew God
whom they worshipped, and could not join with the false Worshippers (yea, if
National Worshippers) in their day, that knew not the Lord; but reasoned with
them, and testified against them in their public places, and elsewhere, as
the Lord required them; and they were always persecuted by the false birth of
Religion, the false Worshippers and seed of Evildoers, that knew not God,
according to the Saying of the Apostle, Gal. 4. 29. He that is born of the
Flesh persecutes him that is born of the Spirit.

And also, It may be seen in Histories and Books of Martyrs, that many have
suffered Martyrdom because they could not join to and with the National and
established Worships, then set up by men, and so forsake the Spiritual Worship,
set up by Jesus Christ.

And as in former times, so in these days, the true Worshippers, who
worshipped God in Spirit and in Truth, Jo. 4. 23, 24. (which is the
Gospel Worship, set up by Christ Jesus) cannot join (contrary to their
Consciences and Understandings) with the National public Worship, for which
there is neither Command nor Example in the Scriptures of Truth for their
Practice. Discipline, Manner of Worship and Worship it self.

And seeing it is of necessity to know God before he can be worshipped aright,
and that none know the Father, but the Son, and him to whom the Son will reveal
him, Mat. 11. 27. if none then know God but by the Revelation of Christ Jesus,
and that the national Worshippers say, Revelation (which it seems is the only
way to know God) is ceased; then by their Doctrine it follows, That the
Knowledge of God is ceased; and then in vain do men worship, for they worship
they know not what: How then can we join with them in such a Worship, whilst
they deny Revelation, and so worship an Unknown Godd? But we come to know God
by the Revelation of Jesus Christ (1 John 4. 13, 14, 15, 16.) and therefore we
worship him, and fear his holy Name; and for thus worshipping we ought not to
be persecuted, especially, not by those that profess Christianity.

Fifthly, Concerning our not Swearing, not taking off our Hats, and for Working
on days (by some called Holy Days) we have also good Ground and Scripture
Authority.

First, AND first, for our refusing to Swear, we have plain and undeniable
Scripture Proofs; 1st, from Christ Jesus, the Son of God, in whom we believe,
Joh. 14. 1. who in his Sermon to his Disciples, preached and opened the
glorious Work and Worth of the Gospel above the Law (though he came not to
destroy the Law, but to fulfill it) You have heard, said he, that it has been
said by them of old time, Thou shall not Forswear thy self, but shall perform
unto the Lord thine Oaths; but I say unto you, Swear not at all, neither by
Heaven, etc. but let your Communication be Yea, yea, Nay, nay; for whatsoever
is more then these comes of Evil, Mat. 5. 17, 33, 35, 36, 37. And if men were
not wilfully bind, and hardened against Truth, how could a Mouth be opened, much
less a Hand lifted up against us (by the Professors of Christianity) for our
Principles herein, seeing Christ (the Gospel-Law giver) bids us not Swear at
all, and him we are to hear and obey: And as they under the Law were to Swear
truly, so we under the Gospel are to speak truly; for true Christians are as
far to exceed the Jews, as the Gospel does the Law, because of that Noble and
Just Principle in them, which is to lead them and guide them into all Truth, (
John 16. 13.) to speak and act truly altogether at all times and in all places;
and then a Testimony to speak the Truth answers unto, and is (in the Ground)
as valid as Swearing truly; and that which might be sworn unto in the time of
the Law, is now only to be confirmed by Confession, Yea, yea; or Negation, Nay,
nay: And as the Jews under the Law confirmed their Testimony to end Strife,
Controversy, etc. by Swearing, and bound themselves by an Oath, sometimes by
Vows and Curses; so the Christians in the Gospel and New Covenant, are bound in
Conscience by the Power and Law of Christ in them (which is a far greater Bond
then Swearing) To do to all Men as they would be done unto, and to perform
Equity and Righteousness (in that Love which is the fulfilling of the Law) in
the Sight of God and Man, without Swearing Oaths, which were but Figures of
this inward Bond or Covenant, confirmed by the Oath of God to the Seed of
Abraham, which the True Christians are of, who witness the Substance and End of
all Oaths without, and of Strife, Doubts and Variances that occasioned the
Oaths; for the requiring of an Oath supposes Doubt or Unbelief in the one
Party, which is no more to be pleaded for, then it is to be practiced in a true
Christian.

And we do affirm further for our Principle in this matter, That to Swear at
all is against the Law of the Spirit of Truth that dwells in us, and is against
the positive Command of Christ Jesus herein, who said, Swear not at all; and
this fully and plainly excludes all the Glosses and Pretenses of all men
whatsoever, who would take upon them to interpret Christ's Words and Meanings
(as they say) in this, as if he meant not to bar taking an Oath before a
Magistrate, or to end a Controversy in a Suit of Law betwixt two Parties, etc.
but as if he meant only forbidding Vain, Accustomary, and Unlawful Oaths, or
Swearing; and such like imagined Stuff many have writ about and pleaded for,
which (if well considered) is no great marvel; For if they cannot believe in
the Light that lights them, the Son of God, and his Covenant, how can they
own his Doctrine and Principle in this or other things published by him, or by
his Spirit and Authority. 2dly, From the positive Precept of the Apostle, Jam.
5. 12. who preached his Lord and Master Christ Jesus, his fame Doctrine against
Swearing, when he wrote to the Twelve scattered Tribes of the Jews, who by the
old Law were allowed or commanded to Swear truly; but when they were converted
to the Faith, and come to own and believe in Christ and his Doctrine, then they
were obliged and commanded not to Swear at all, no not to Swear truly it self,
but to speak the Truth, their word Yea to be Yea, their word Nay to be Nay; for
the Apostle seeing (may be finding) and foreseeing, that these converted Jews
and Israelites, because of former Precepts and Customs in the Law (which they
had been under) might use or plead for some sort of Swearing (like People now,
who argue for Swearing before a Magistrate) contrary to Christ's Command,
therefore he puts a greater weight then ordinary upon this Doctrine, as if the
concernment thereby had exceeded his other Doctrine, in saying, But above all
things, Swear not -- by any Oath -- Neither do we read that any of the other
Apostles used the like Doctrine to the converted Gentiles at Rome, Corinth,
Ephesus, Galatia, etc. against Swearing, there being no such need to them that
were not obliged by the Law to Swear in any respect. So here are two plain
Scripture Proofs for our Principle and Practice herein; and when any can
produce Scripture in the New Testament, to prove (so plainly) their Practice of
Swearing* in Gospel-dayes, before a Magistrate (which they call a lawful Oath)
or yet before any other, or upon any occasion whatsoever, to be lawful, and
allowed of, or commanded by Christ or his Apostles, who are the Authors of the
Book called the New Testament, then we may give further Answer, or write more
about it; but till then, they (especially they that profess Christ, and ought
to obey his Command) ought not to blame us, much less to persecute, fine, or
imprison us for obeying the Command of Christ, and observing the Doctrine of
his blessed Apostle James.

3dly, As Swearing was thus forbidden by Christ and his Apostle, so the
primitive Christians observed the same accordingly: For the Bishop of Smyrna (a
Martyr for the Truth) refused to Swear, saying, That he was a CHRISTIAN; so it
seems the Primitive True Christians did not Swear; and as his Answer imports,
when they urged him to Swear, he used no other Argument to respond or show his
refusal, but to say, He was a Christian, that thereby his Persecutors might
know, That he would not Swear because he was a Christian, as by that
Profession, bearing Jerome, Chrysoft. Ambr. Origin. Act. and Mon.
Testimony against Swearing, or breaking the Command of Christ: Hereto agree
several old and eminent Writers; as also, the Testimony of diverse Martyrs and
Sufferers under the Papal Power in Peiedmond, England, etc. who bore witness to
our (and the true old) Christian-Principle herein. Bishop Gawden bore the like
Testimony, and said, Bish. Gawden.
Amongst false Christians Oaths are not to be regarded, and amongst true
Christians there was no need of them. William Thorp, his Testimony Will. Thorp,
herein was, said he, It is a Sin to Swear well. W. Brute also testified and
affirmed, That no Christian Will. Brute.
ought to Swear. And so descend to our Times, since the Lord has called us to
be his People, our Principle in this (as in all other things) agrees with the
primitive Christians, being like-minded with them; for if we should Swear, and
break Christ's Command, his Light would condemn us, as the Apostle James said,
lest ye fall into Condemnation. Hereby it appears, That our refusing to Swear
proceeds from sufficient Ground, Christ's Command, the Apostle's Doctrine,
and the Primitive Christians Practices; so that it is Matter of Conscience to
us, not to Swear at all. And because it is urged against us, That hereby we are
incapable to serve the King and our Country. To which we say, we make not our
selves incapable, but we are made incapable by the Law of the Land, that
requires that of us which Christ has forbid us to give; and seeing we live
under such Rulers and Magistrates as profess Christianity, and the Scriptures
to be their Rule to believe in, and to walk by, we desire them to excuse us in
this matter, and well to mind Peter, and the Apostles Answer to the Persecuting
High Priest and his Council at Jerusalem (who had imprisoned the Apostles, and
straightly Acts 5. 29.
charged them, to Preach no more in the Name of Jesus We o^ght to obey God,
rather then men, said they; and not seek to compel or persecute us because we
cannot, we dare not Swear, nor take an Oath, either to serve in Offices, or
upon Juries, or giving Evidence; though we are willing and ready to serve in
any Office or Place meet for us, and which we are capable of, and faithfully to
perform the same, as also, to give in Evidence by speaking truly, so as that we
may not break Christ's Command, or stain our Consciences through Disobedience.
And for a further Testimony of our Sincerity herein, we further say and
declare, That we are content to suffer as much for not Serving truly, and for
not Speaking and Evidencing truly, as those that are Perjured or Forsworn; for
we hold our selves as much (yes more) obliged by affirming or speaking Truth
by our word Yea, and Nay, as others do by Swearing truly, or performing their
Places by an Oath. And if this suffices not, then we must needs say, Its hard
to persuade men of a contrary mind to us herein (until they come to own and
believe in the Truth, Christ the Light, and then they will (with us) be
like-minded with us) that what we say, affirm and witness is really Truth, or
truly said and done; seeing they themselves are often doubtful of the verity of
what is sworn or testified upon Oath, by such, as worship with them, and are of
the same Opinion with them, and hold it (as they do) lawful to Swear; for
several times, neither the Swearers, nor the Matter sworn, is believed by the
Magistrate; for men of good Fame are called and depended on for the truest
Evidence: So that it appears, That its not the taking of a bare Oath (simply
considered as an Oath) which oblieges to perform or evidence and swear truly,
but rather the Honesty and good Conscience of the Party; which proves the
Performance from a Principle within, and not from a formal Oath: and then we
say, Why should not a man as well be believed in speaking truly, as swearing
truly; seeing all that swear cannot be believed, there being so many Perjured
and False-sworn?

Secondly, For not taking off our Hats (which are part of our Bodily Garments,
and put and placed upon our Heads, to keep them warm and dry, as the rest of
our Garments are for the other parts of our Bodies) and so not Honoring men's
Persons, with pulling them off, which (it seems) troubles and distasteth the
minds of some men, that seek the Honor below, in order to content and satisfy
the Pride and Ambition; for curreous and good-natured men contemn and disregard
it, looking upon it (at best) but an Alamode Complement of a late Edition, and
rather become a Fashion in our Country, a National or general Custom, then any
absolute matter of Duty or Necessity: And besides, it would be no hard thing to
prove the use of National or general Customs to be incongtuous with and
dissonant unto the Life of a true Christian, who is not to be fashionedunto the
World: 1 Pet. 1. 14. so that the not putting them off (to answer the Will, a
lofty part in man) is also Matter of Conscience to us; for God knows our
hearts, that its done in the Cross of Christ Jesus, and not in Contempt of
Authority, or men's Persons bearing Rule; For we dare not Respect Persons, and
act contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, who said, Jam. 2. 1, to 11. If ye have
Respect to Persons, ye commit Sin, and are convinced of the Law as
Transgressors: to this agrees Christ's Saying to his Hearers, John 5. 41, 44.
How can ye believe which receive Honor one of another, and seek not the Honor
that comes down from God only? and we do not read in the Scriptures, that of
all that were brought, or voluntarily went before Kings, Dukes Governors and
Magistrates, that any were commanded to put off their Hats or Bonnets; nay,
Nebuchadnezar was not offended (as we read) with the three Children for their
Hats, Dan. 3. 21. for they were cast into the Fire with their Hosen and Hats --
Does not the Turk mock it Christians for putting off their Hats, and showing
their bare Heads? Is not this a Reproof to Christians, that Persecute, Fine and
Imprison for not putting off the Hat to them, because they have not the
Hat-Honour, and Hat-Respect, which they cannot say is the Honor from above,
which Christ commends to seek?

Thirdly, For Working or Opening our Shops on the Weekdayes, called Holy Days,
we have this to say, which, though little, yet may suffice a moderate man, and
will a true Christian; We find ( Exodus 20. 6.) the Law allowed Six Days in the
Week to Work or Labor on, and neither Christ nor his Apostles did ever forbid
it, nor yet ordained any such days as Holy Days to be kept and observed, by
the Churches in the Primitive Times. And the Apostle Paul in his Epistle to the
Romans, says, Romans 41. 5, 6. One Man esteems one Day above another, another
esteems every Day alike; let every man be fully persuaded in his own Mind: he
that regards a Day, regards it unto the Lord; and he that regards not the Day
to the Lord, he does not regard it. And he also said, They should not judge one
another about such things. And seeing that neither the Apostles, nor the
Councils, in their days, made any such Decree or Law, for observing such
days; have not therefore these Decrees and Laws been made by the Pope and his
Councils since the Apostles days? And who shall be observed, the Apostles, or
the Pope, judge ye? So that there being no Institution of such days by Christ,
his Apostles, or Primitive Councils; why should we suffer or be persecuted, for
following our lawful Labors and Callings thereon, especially by such as are
called Christians.

AND thus Reader, in this foregoing occasioned Treatise of the several Branches
of our beforementioned Sufferings, we have used brevity, in regard diverse of
our Friends have published much already to the same purpuse, yet we cannot be
altogether silent at this time, Prudence prompting us to put thus much to
public view, for no other Cause and End, then (so far) to vindicate our
Principles and Practices by the holy Scriptures of Truth, Practice of Primitive
true Christians, and other good Grounds and Reasons, as that thereby it may
plainly appear to any Sober and Moderate Man, that we suffer Innocently, not
for Evil-doing, and that our Persecutors are the more culpable, and so much the
more for that they profess the Scriptures: And notwithstanding their thus
Unjust, Vnchristian-like Usage and Persecuting of us, we purpose and resolve in
the Lord God, That the Powers and chief Rulers of the Nations (as hitherto, so
hereafter also) shall never have more against us, then Nebuchadnezar had
against Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, Dan. 3. and Darius against Daniel, Dan.
6. 4, to the end; for Daniel and the Three Children were Faithful to the Kings
of Babylon and Medea, as their Accusers acknowledged, who sought Occasion
against Daniel, but confessed they could find none, except concerning the Law
of his God, which was his Worship and Religion.

THE END.

