Densell Hollis Esquire, His worthy and learned SPEECH in Parliament, on
Thurfeday the thirtieth of December 1641.

Upon the Reading of the Petition and Protestation of the twelve Bishops.

For which they were accused of High Treason, and committed to the Tower.

Wherein is discovered the danger of this Protestation, that it is both against
the King and his Royal Prerogatives, the Privileges of Parliaments, the
Liberties of the Subject, and the subvertion of the fundamtall Laws of this
Kingdom.

London, Printed for John Thomas, and Thomas ^ankes. 1641.

A SPEECH MADE BY Master HOLLIS in Parliament, upon the reading of the Petition
and protestation of the 12. Bishops since Committed to the Tower on Thurseday
the 30th. of December. 1641.
Master Speaker,
THis Petition and Protestation of the Biships presented to his Majesty, is
the chief subject of our present debate, I desire under the favor of this
Honorable House, to speak somewhat concerning the same, and in speaking
thereof I shall observe the persons that deluded it, the subject and matter
contained in the same; the dangerous effects that are likely to follow
thereupon if it be not suddently prevented; And lastly their crime in making
and deluding thereof.

First Master Speaker, concerning the persons Actors of this tragedy, Bishops
of a holy function, the dedomination of their style prescribes them in
Scripture to be men of God, Fathers of the Church, Stars, (not blazing
Commets or Meteors (as it is to apparent, many of them have bne;) lights, the
salt of the Earth. (That should seasons the hearts lives and conversation of
the people of God, with piety and godliness, for these Men.

Master Speaker, the hinderers of the peace and quiet of the Kingdom, is
extreme vileness, for Bishops Governors (as well as teachers of the people of
God) to instruct, admonish, rebuke, reprove, and correct evil doers in the
Clergy, for these I say not only to convey, and wink at superstition,
Innovations, and ceremonies introduced into the Church, by the inferior and
scandalous Ministers, but to Amnimate and encourage them in their evil
practices, nay not contented therewith, but themselves to Innovate Religion,
corrupt the true and Orthodox doctrine of the Church, to attempt, to entice and
draw the minds of Peers, Nobles and great officers of State; nay his most
sacred Majesty, to favor their endeavors and designs, show them plainly to
be the Instruments of the devil, striving to increase and build his Kingdom,
to the decay of the propagation of the Gospel; and the Kingdom of Christ, to
whom they would seem to be devoted, these corrupt officers and Ministers
Master Speaker, both in Church and State, have, produced these corrupt and
dangerous times, this it is that makes religion seem vile, and hateful to
most men, this it is Master Speaker that stains their function, of it self
uncorrupted (sacred) this changes their names of being called men of God, to be
men serving only the devil, if Fathers and nurses of the Church, prove the
betrayers of the Church, woe to that flock of whom Christ is the sheapheard;
If stars fall to the earth, we notify thereby great change and alterations
in a state to ensue; if the lights of the Church be put out, or put out
themselves, or be hid and appear not, how is it likely the Children of God
should, see to walk in the right way, If salt be corrupt and putrified and
thereby loses its savor, what profitteth it for the use of man, you know the
Phrase well enough. Then Master Speaker to conclude these persons (that have
had all these titles) that have (as we have proved by woeful experience,
shamed themselves, complyable to all the defects that are thus dishonorable to
their denominations) are as I under fav^ur conceive altogether unfit, and
unworthy to bear them any longer.

2 Now Master Speaker I come in the Second place to the subject of their
Petition and Protestation, which is of most dangerous Consequence, being
altogether treacherous, both against his most sacred Majesty his Royal Queen
and Princly Progeny, his rightful Throane seated over all his Majesty's
Kingdoms, against the Fun^amentall laws of this Kingdom and all other
statuts and laws made for the good Government thereof by the wisdom of his
Majesty and his great and wise Council of state, against the Privileges of
Parliament and the free proeeedings thereof, And against all his Majesty's
Loyal subjects that are true and good Protestants.

3 Thirdly the dangerous effects of this their Malicious and traitorous actions
are easy to be guessed at.

1 By this means the division between the two houses may be increased, the
Lords most of them favoring rheir cause, thereby keeping them from coming to
trial upon our accusations of them for their heinous Crimes Committed by them.

2 If ihey proceed in their intentions, it may prove the Maine cause of setting
an Irreconcilable division between the King and his Leig people who desire
there grevance may be redrest and all Malefactors delinquents receive Condign
punishment for their misdeeds both in Church and state, And especially the
Bishops accused whom they Conceive to have bine the principell incendaries
between Scotland and us, Great favorers of the dangerous Rebellion in Ireland,
chief Actors in Innovating our Religion, and the greatest oppressors of
Parliamentarie proseedings.

3 By this attempt the Romish faction will be much imbouldened to put in
practice their wicked plotts privately now in Agitation amongst them.

4 It may cause great uproares and tumults in the City, and about Westminster,
of the Citizens who are altogether set against Bishops.

5. It will be a great encouragement to foreign Princes that are disaffected,
and private enemies to this State, (seeing our devisions between our selves)
to put in practice some dangerous design against the whole Kingdom.

6. Lastly, It will disable us for continual supply of aid into Ireland to
app^^se the rebellion there.

4. I come now (Master Speaker) to the fourth and last thing I intimate to you
concerning this Petition, and that is what fault they have committed,
in-framing and delivering the same, my oppinion is Master Speaker, that they
are guilty of high treason; I will give you a few reasons and grounds of this
my opinion, and then humbly lean it to the further Consideration of this
Honorable house.

To protect against the proseedings of a free Parliament is adjudged high
treason in the tenth year of Edw: the second, by the Parliament holden then at
Westminster where the Bishop of York the Duke of Suffolk, and others of that
conspiracy, protesting against the proceedings of the parliament for their
Appointing and placeing the Commicinors about the King for the Government of
the Kingdom for one year, were adjudged Guilty of high treason and some of
them Executed, some banished and the rest fleed.

2. To endeavor to subvert the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, was
adjudged high treason in the Earl of Straffords case, my example of Strafford
take this present Parliament, and to protest or incense the King by petition,
or otherwise against the proceedings of Parliament, (which is a constitution of
Government, found to be the anninentest of this Nation, and the only means to
preserve and defend the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom; the powerful
council of indicacature, to punish all delinquents in the government thereof,
and the breakers, and infringers of the laws of this land,) is to subvert the
fundamental laws.

3. To endeavor to bring into this state an Arbitrary way of government was
likewise by this Parliament adjudged high treason in the Earl of Straffords
case, to protest against Parliamentary proseedings, is to change that form of
government and to introduce an Arbitrary and tiranicall form of Government,
for these reasons I conceive Master Speaker these Bishop that have signed this
petition and protestation are guilty of high treason.

And my humble motion, is we may send up to the Lords to accuse them
Perticularly and with all Convenient speed make ready a Charge or Impeachment
of high treason against them.

FINIS.

