THE Letter and Postscript to which this refers, are to be see ^ in Mr.
Oldenburg's Philosophical Transactions for the Month (...) July, 1670. which if
the Reader please to peruse, he will see ho ^ little it defer (...) to be so
complained of by Dr. Holder.

ERRATA.
REad page 2. l. ult. not being so, p. 10. l. 32. impose on, p. 11. l. ant ^p.
precedent to th ^ p. 15* ^^ ^. ingeniously, p. 16. l. 13. Labra, p. 17. l. 2.
in different, l. 3. Dalgar ^ l. 37. (...) me t ^ p, ^, p. 19. l. penult. or a
^, p. 22. l. 3. prevailed with, p. 23. l. ^* knew, p. 25. l. (...) ght not be,
p. 26. l. 25. renew, p. 27. l. 36. years or more, p. 3 ^ l. 23. so too* (at
lest of his supervising) p. 31. l. 39. owe no more, p. 32. l. 26. has sin ^
Points and Parenthesis omitted or mis-placed, and some literal faults, the Read
^^ is desired to correct or excuse.

A DESCRIPTION OF HELIOSCOPES, And some other INSTRUMENTS MADE BY ROBERT HOOK,
Fellow of the Royal Society.

Hos ego, etc. Sic vos non vobis -- --.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for John Martyn Printer to the Royal Society, at the
Bell in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1676.



A DESCRIPTION OF HELIOSCOPES, And some other INSTRUMENTS.
THE necessary avocations of business, and the urgent importunity of some, for
the speedy publication of my Animadversions, made me conclude them in the
Eleventh sheet, without staying to Explicate several things which I designed to
go along with them. But having now retrieved a little more of leisure, both for
Delineation and Description* for a further elucidation of what I have said, I
shall make it my third Attempt, to explain;

First, A Helloscope to look upon the body of the Sun, without any offense to
the Observers eye.

Secondly, A way of shortning reflective and refractive Telescopes.

Thirdly, A way for using a Glass of any length, without moving the Tube.

Fourthly, An Instrument for taking the Diameters of the Sun, Moon and Planets,
or for taking any other Distances, to five or ten Degrees, to the certainty of
a Second. Two of these I promised in the 78th. or last page of my
Animadversions, and the other fall in as analogous to them.

Fifthly, An Instrument for describing all manner of Dials, by the tangent
projection.

Sixthly, The uses thereof;
1. For adjusting the Hand of a Clock, so as to make it move in the shadow of a
Dial, whose style is parallel to the Axis: Or, 2. In the Azimuth of any
Celestial Body, that is, in the shadow of an upright, or any other way
inclining Style, upon any plain. 3. For making a Hand move according to the
true aquation of Time. 4. For making all manner of Elliptical Dials, in Mr.
Foster's way, etc. 5. For communicating a circular motion in a Curve Line,
without any shaking: And for diverse other excellent purposes.
And first, For a HELIOSCOPE which shall so take off the brightness of the Sun,
as that the weakest eye may look upon it, at any time, without the least
offense. My contrivance is, By often reflecting the Rays from the surfaces of
black Glasses, which are grownd very exactly, fla ^, and very well polished, so
to diminish the Radiations, that at length they become as weak and faint as
those of the Moon in the twilight, so that one may with ease, and very much
pleasure, view, examine and describe the phase of the Sun, and the maculae and
faculae thereof, if any such happen to appear when the Observation is made, and
it gives a good opportunity of discovering them, before we have any
advertisement thereof from others. The reason of which will be sufficiently
plain to such as consider, how great a quantity of the rays of Light is lost by
every reflection, and that every reflection does duplicate, triplicate,
quadruplicate, quintuplicate, etc. the first proportion of loss. For Instance:

Suppose I have a Helioscope made of an Object Glass, an Eye Glass, and four
Reflecting Glasses, and that, by the first reflection, I lose of the Direct
light, I affirm there will remain but 1/256 part of the Direct rays of the Sun,
which can fall upon the eye at the last, for if every reflection does lose of
its Rays, and reflect but, and that quarter loses, and reflects only of its
received Light, there will remain but 1 / 16 part of the whole, and if this
sixteenth part loses three quarters of its Rays, and reflects only a fourth,
it will follow, the remainder will only be 1 / 64 part of the whole, and if
that be once more reflected, the Ray will return but with 1 / 256 part of its
first light.

This, although it be obvious, and easy enough now it is known, yet I do not
find that any Person has yet had thoughts of applying it to this use. The
generality of Observers have hitherto made use of, either some very opacous and
thick Glasses next the Eye, whether of red, green, blew, or purple Glass;
others have diminished the Radiation, by covering the Glasses with a very thick
and close coat of the soot of a Lamp; others, by casting the figure upon a
piece of white Paper, whence it is reflected to the eye; Others have contracted
the Aperture into a less circle, and thereby let in less Light, and so make use
of one single Ray instead of a pencil of Rays; Others have expanded the figure
of the Sun, by the help of Eye Glasses, into a circle of ten, twenty, or an
hundred times its Diameter. But none of all these ways do come near this which
I now describe by the help of three, four, or more Reflections, as any one upon
trial will very plainly discover.

First, As to the colored Glasses, I cannot at all approve of them, because
they tinge the Rays into the same color, and consequently take off the truth
of the appearance, as to Color; besides, it superinduces a haziness and
dimness upon the Figure, so that it does not appear sharp and distinct. The
same inconvenience is also produced by Monsieur Hugenius's way, of covering the
Glass with the soot of a Lamp, though not to so great a degree. The Figure on
paper, or a smooth white surface is not magnified enough, nor the difference of
shadows so very distinct, though that does very well, if the surface be very
smooth, and the Object be magnified by a Hand Glass. That by the contracted
Aperture is the worst of all, by reason of a certain propriety of Light not
taken notice of yet by Optic Writers, the edges of Objects seeming ragged, of
which I have hinted somewhat in my Animadversions, page 35, and shall shortly
say much more, the whole ground of Optics depending thereon.

The way of expanding the figure of the Sun by the Eye Glass, to me seems the
best of all the rest, but that is apt to vitiate the Figure, to super-induce
somewhat of Color, and does not give the smallest distinctions of lights and
shadows, without somewhat of color, and somewhat of haziness and dimness.

The Glasses of this HELIOSCOPE may be made either by refracting or reflecting
Spherical Glasses. The best way for taking in a large Angle, is, the using
refracting Glasses, both for the Object and Eye Glasses; but the best way for
taking in a small part, and for avoiding haziness, dimness, and colors, is, by
Reflection, either in part, or in whole; that is, either to make the Object
Glass only by way of Reflection, and the Eye Glass by that of Refraction, or,
both the Object-glass and Eye Glass also by reflection, and to have no
refraction at all. The several ways of doing which I have represented in the
adjoining Table, wherein I have expressed ten several ways of placing the
several Glasses, so as to be fit for the use designed.

The first way represented in the first Figure, is, a sixty foot Object-Glass,
contracted into a twelve foot Tube, by the help of four several
Reflecting-plates placed between the Object-Glass and Eye-Glass. The Experiment
of doing which, I produced and showed before the Royal Society, at diverse of
their public Meetings at Arundel house, in the year 1668, and it remains upon
their Register.

This (as I then showed) would be of exceeding great use in all manner of
Perspectives and Telescopes, if we could find a good material that would make
the Reflections very strong and full. And that would not be subject to lose its
Figure, which all our specular Metals are very apt to do; for; by it, 'twould
be possible to contract the Tubes for long Glasses into very short lengths, and
so make them of easy use and manage.

This I attempted with several sorts of Metal, made with,,, Antimony and
Arsenick, but most of these compound Metals I found to be very spongy, and
consequently in the last polish to receive, though a very glaring polish, yet
such as did much confound the Object by a kind of haziness, especially if Putty
be used to glase it, and; for this purpose, Putty must not in any wise, that I
yet know of, be used, it being so very apt to round off the edges of pores or
scratches, which does much contribute to the haziness and confusion of the
Object.

If I made use of Glasses foiled with Quicksilver, which I found to give much
the best reflection, yet I found this inconvenience, that a considerable part
of the Ray was lost, by the double reflection at the unfoil'd superficies of
the Glass. The first from the surface of the Glass before it entered; this, as
it weakened the Ray, so mingling with the other reflection that came from the
bottom, it created some kind of haziness and confusion, if the two superficies
of the Glass were parallel, but if they* were not parallel, it superinduced
somewhat of Color, unless it were helped by a contrary refraction in a second
Reflecting-glass, after the manner of that which is delineated in the Fifth,
Figure, where let a b represent the Object-Glass, ^g the first
Reflecting-plate, whose thinnest side is to c and d ^ the second
Reflecting-plate, whose thinnest part is toward th, which does thereby take
off the first Refraction of c g, and destroy the Colors superinduced by the
first. The Ray also was weakened much more from the second reflection it
suffered at the unfoil'd superficies of the Glass, from the reflection of the
Air, or ^ther, which is much stronger than that of Glass, at its re-entring
into the Air. Besides this, I find that the substance of most Glass is so
imperfectly mixed, that there is in the very best much of veinyness and
inequality of Refraction in the parts thereof, and thence, though there were no
visible vein appearing in the body of the Glass, and though both the surfaces
thereof were very truly figured and polished, yet there was some kind of
dimness superinduced upon the Objects, by the rays passing through those
Glasses. But this was not in all, for I found some that did very well answer my
expectation, and I am very apt to believe, that if a pot of Glass were made on
purpose, by a way I know, the body thereof might be made perfectly clear,
uniform, and transparent, without blebs, veins, or sands, which, when I have
leisure and opportunity I design to experience farther* But this only by the
by, in relation to the shortning the Tubes of Telescopes for the Moon, Planets,
and other Objects, because it is not at all to our present purpose of making a
Helioscope, where we make use only of the reflection of the first superficies
of the Glass, and where our main aim and design, is, the loss of the strength
and brightness of the Rays, and not for preserving the strength and briskness
of the Rays, or augmenting them. And therefore for this use, the best material
I have yet met with, is, black Glass, black Marble, and Glass of Antimony. For
these substances being very dark and opaque, do reflect but a very small part
of the Rays that fall upon it, and none of those that penetrate into it,
especially if they be thick; and being of a very hard and permanent substance,
are capable of receiving a very curious and exact polish, and qualified
sufficiently to retain and keep it, without receiving injury from the Air, or
ordinary wiping.

But in the making of these Glasses for Long Telescopes, very great care and
diligence must be used to make them of a true flat, and so much the more, by
how much the nearer they are placed to the Object-Glass, and the further from
the Eye-Glass; a little error at a great distance from the eye being vastly
magnified to the eye at that distance, whereas a greater becomes insensible, if
it be near the eye. Let a b, in the first, represent a sixty foot Glass, whose
focus is at o; let a c d e f o, and b g h i k o, represent the two side Rays
of the pencil of light, this Pencil, by the four Reflecting surfaces (g ^, d
th, ^ ^, e ^) is broken into five shorter lengths (^ d answering to c d, g th
to g h, d ^ to d e, th ^ to h ^, ^ e to e f, and ^ ^ to i k, and lastly, e ^
and ^ ^, to f ^ and k o) as will be sufficiently plain to any one that will but
consider the Scheme.

By this way four fifths of the length of the Tube is taken away, which is the
most that can be taken away by four Reflections, every reflection running the
whole length of the Tube, a lesser part of the length may be taken away in any
proportion assigned, as in the second contrivance, described in the second
Figure, two thirds are taken off, when the same Letters answer to the
Object-Glass, Eye-Glass, the flexures of the side Rays of the Pencil, and the
Reflecting-plates that make those flexures. The third and fourteenth Figures
represent the Tube shortened by two or three reflections, and so serves to
shorten the Tube by two thirds only. These are of use for a very strong Eye and
with a small aperture of the Object-Glass, and when the Sun is near the
Horizon, or its light is a little diminished, by a Fogg, thin Clouds, or the
like.

If it be thought more convenient to have this long Tube to lie always
Horizontal, and consequently, that there should be no need of having a Pole or
Engine to raise the Tube: It may be framed somewhat like that in the fourth
Figure, where the same Letters answer to all the parts abovementioned, or else
like that in the sixth Figure, the Letters of both which being the same with
the former, will easily explain them.

Now in all these, and 20 other contrivances of this nature, with one, two,
three, or four Reflecting-plates which may be presently thought of, the sight
is directed exactly at the Sun, so that there will be little difficulty of
finding it after the Glasses are fixed to their due lengths and positions.

I explained also at the same time to the Royal Society, at their public
Meeting at Arundel-house, several other ways of facilitating the use of very
long Glasses, for other Objects in the heaven, by the help of one Reflecting
plate only, and that was by a Tube fixed, either perpendicularly, horizontally,
or obliquely, for it mattered not whether as to the seeing the Object in any
part of the Heaven, supposing other circumstances hindered not, and the object
could be as easily found as by the common Telescopes of the same length. But of
these elsewhere.

These contrivances with four Reflections, may be made use of by such whose
sight is weak, but such as can endure it somewhat brighter, and would see the
parts more strong, may make use of one of three Reflections only, like that of
Fig. 14. which does best suit my eye.

Next, this Helioscope may be made by Reflection only, without any Refraction,
and that may be done either in the manner of that in the seventh Figure, when a
b represents a concave surface of a black Glass, whose focus is o, which, for
Instance, we will suppose at the distance of forty foot, c d represents a clear
plate of Glass of two flat surfaces, which are made not parallel but a little
inclining, so as the reflection from that side which is furthest from the
concave may be cast another way, and not fall at all upon the third
Reflecting-plate ^ e, and because the wedg-like form of this transparent plate
of Glass, c d, will cause a refraction, and consequently a coloration of the
Ray; therefore there must be another wedg-like Plate exactly as may be like the
former, which at some distance, as at m p, where the reflection will not come
to fall upon the Plate, ^ e must be so fixed that the thinnest part of this may
lie just upon the thickest part of c d, and the thickest of this over the
thinnest of that, by which means both the false reflections and refractions
will be removed. From ^ e the Rays are reflected to g th, and from g th to o
the focus, and so through the lens, z, to the eye x. This I take to be the best
by Reflection; but it may be twenty other ways contrived, which I shall not
now spend more time in describing, it being so easy a matter from the
consideration of these I have mentioned, to make an hundred other variations of
the principle.

To this Helioscope may be fitted Instruments for measuring the Maculae,
faculae, and Nebulae, visible in the body of the Sun, as also the spaces passed
by them in a day, two, three, ten, etc. together with the variation of their
Figures and Magnitudes; but the diameter of the body of the Sun will be better
taken by the following Instrument. And by reason that it will be often
necessary to draw their figures more exactly, the Engine that I have described
in my Animadversions, in the 67, 68, and 69 pages, may be made use of to keep
the Helioscope always directed at the body of the Sun, which will be no small
^ase to an Observer, that is to delineate the figures on Paper. When the
brightness and radiation of the Moon, Venus or Jupiter, do somewhat offend the
eye, they will presently lose their beards and look very distinct, if one
reflection from glass be made use of in the Telescope.

Another Instrument I promised to describe, is, for taking any such Diameters
transits, or distance to the certainty of a second Minute, by which more may be
done for the finding the Parallax of the superior Planets, and the Longitude
on the Earth, then has been ever yet done by all the Instruments that have
been used in the World.

1. This is made exactly, in all particulars like the Quadrant, as to its
hollow center, Screwd-limb, Screw-frame, and long Rod to turn the Screw from
the Center; and that the Screw-frame may be kept down the truer, upon the edge
of the Limb, there should be made a small Arm to clasp behind the inward limb
of the Instrument, after the manner represented in the 8th. Figure by w, by
which means the Screw will be kept close, steady, and eaven to the outward edge
of the Limb. The Letters in this 8th. Figure being the same with those of the 1
and 11th. Figures of the Animadversions, and representing the same parts, need
no further explanation.

2. Instead of this Screw upon a circular Limb, a Screw may be made to move
upon a straight Limb, or Ruler; the end of which must move upon Centres or
Rowlers, the centres or axes of which Rowlers must be exactly in the same line,
when both the Perspective-sights are adjusted to the same Object, and the
divisions began. The same thing may be done by a straight Screw, in the manner
of a pair of dividing Compasses, where the same care must also be had, that the
axes of the Rowlers must be exactly in the same line, and the sides of the
Incompassing-screw, being made of steel, must be made to spring about the long
Straight-screw; this long Screw must be made of steel of half an inch of
diameter at least, if it be made 18 inches long, and 'twill be best to screw it
with a small thread, otherwise it will be apt to be moved out of a straight by
screwing a large thread; and the thread, whether greater or less, must be made by
degrees with a pair of cutting-stocks, that may be set closer every time of
screwing.

The manner of contriving the Centres and Sockets may be seen in the 12 and 13
Figures, where the 13 represents it in an end-way Prospect, and the 12 in a
lateral or side-Prospect; 1 is the Rowler of the upper Tube, and 2 of the
under, 33 the Screws to fasten them in the holes, 44 the incompassing or
Socket-screw which springs close to the Cylinder 5, 6 the Cylinderical smooth
Socket which guides the Cylindricalscrew, so as to make its Axis pass exactly
over the center of the Rowler 22, and which, by means of a Ring 7 on the screw,
keeps the pointed-end thereof 8 against the stay or portance 9; it is not
difficult how to make a Dividing-plate, and an Hand or Index thereunto, nor how
it may be turned from the center of the two Tubes by a long Rod, as in the 8th.
Figure; nor will it be difficult, after it is known by Observation, how many
Revolutions, and what part of a Revolution answers to five whole degrees, to
calculate a Table of Subtenses, which shall show what part thereof goes to
make the subtense of every Minute and Second of the said angle.

3. The same thing in the year 1665, I performed by a Rowler, rolling upon the
limb of the Quadrant, by the help of two Wires which were coyled about those
Rowlers, and the ends thereof were fastened upon the limb of the Quadrant; for,
by a large index on the end of this Rowler, I was able to move the arm of the
Instrument to any fifth Second of the Quadrant, with great ease and certainty.

I also at the same time made another Frame with a straight Screw, which
opened to five degrees only, with Tumbrels or Rowlers like a pair of dividing
Compasses (after the same manner with this I have newly described, for taking
Diameters or Distances to five degrees) and by the help of very curious Lines
drawn upon a smooth Glass-plate, and Points very curiously made at every five
degrees on the limb of the Quadrant, or Instrument on which it was fixed, and
the help of a very deep Plano unequal lens, whose plain side was turned
downwards toward the Plate, and the unequal side toward the eye, the said
Frame was moveable from five degrees to five degrees, upon the whole limb of
the Quadrant or Instrument, by which* Instrument I could with great ease
actually and accurate divide an angle into every five Seconds, and consequently
take any angle to the accurateness of five Seconds; for, removing the Frame to
the next division, less than the Angle desired, and then by the Glass, fixing
one of the Arms that had the plate, exactly over the hole or point of division,
by the Screw the remaining part of the Angle could be exactly measured.

As to the method of dividing any of these, the best way will be to measure
upon some Plain 1000, 1500, or 2000 foot in length, by two Rods of twenty foot
long a piece, or else by Wires strained with weights, the way of which I
shall shortly describe: Beginning from the very center of the Instrument, and ^
the end thereof, to set up so many Dealboards joined to the end of each other
in a straight line, or else to strain a pretty big Line, which shall cut the
measured line of distance from the center of the Instrument at Rightangles, and
then by a Table of natural tangents, according to the distance from the center
of the Quadrant, put as Radius, to set and mark off upon those Boards or Lines
the divisions of Degrees and Minutes, by Compasses or Rules, as exactly as may
be, and mark them accordingly, that the Degrees may be distinguished very
plainly from the Minutes: Then having adjusted the Instrument, so as to see the
beginning of those Divisions through both the Tubes at once, to set both the
Indices to o, or the beginning of the divisions, then keeping the undermost of
the two Tubes fixed to the same place, so as still to respect the same point or
beginning of the Divisions upon the Boards or Line, by the help of the Rod to
turn the Screw or Roll, till you find the upper Tube to respect the first
minute, and then the first degree, and so till you see the last minute of the
five whole degrees, or whatever Angle else you design it to take in; then
(for the first and third way) reckon how many whole Revolutions, and what
part of a Revolution goes to make up that whole Angle, and subdivide the same
by a small Table into Minutes and Seconds, and you will presently find by the
Trial, that you will be able to divide to a strange accurateness upon those
Boards, by the help of your Tubes and Screw, even at the distance of 1000,
1500, or 2000 foot, and even almost to equalize the Divisions by your
Compasses, when at the very Boards. And by this you may easily examine, whether
your Instrument does make the sub-divisions exactly or not, which will be a
great confirmation of the certainty and truth of your Instrument. But for the
second way, by straight Screws, the Table of Sub-division into degrees,
minutes, and seconds, must be proportioned according to the length of Subtenses
answering to the Radius, which is the distance of the center of the Rowlers
from the center of the Instrument.

Now, because in an Instrument of this bigness it will be somewhat troublesome
to turn the whole Angle by the help of the Screw upon the Limb, which I find
also is somewhat troublesome in the Instrument of three foo ^ Radius, when the
Angle is large, therefore for preventing of that trouble, and to be able
immediately to open the Instrument to the Angle desired, or very near it. The
Screw l (in the first Figure of my Animadv.) at the end of the moveable Arm, is
made, by unscrewing, to draw off the long Screw from touching the threads on the
Limb, which being done, the Arm is at liberty to be moved to any part of the
Quadrant, when by returning the Screw l, the Screw-frame and Screw is brought
down again to take hold of the Threads of the Limb of the Instrument. The only
care to be taken in this action, is, that neither the Index e e be at all moved
out of its posture to the Index-frame h h, nor the Index 8 be moved at all
about the rod of the Screw 999. It matters not at all though the Screw-rod 999
be turned round or moved, so as it be done by the Rod 000, and the handle
thereof p p, or by the small handle x at the end of the Screw-rod, and that the
Index 8 being very stiffly fix ^ to the said Rod, be moved round with it by the
same motion, without varying its position to the Rod; for being again brought
down by the return of the Screw l, to take hold of the Threads of the Limb, into
which it must be steadily guided by hand, the Index e e will show upon the Limb
the number of Threads or Revolutions from the beginning, and the Index 8 will
show what part of a Revolution there is to be joined to it.

I hope I shall not need to spend time to explicate, how the Center of these
Tubes are to be made, nor how the Glasses and Thred-sights are to be fixed, nor
need I much to show, how the Tubes may be stiffned to keep them from warping
very much; A small matter of warping not creating any sensible error, I am not
much conderned to prevent.

If it be desired to make the Screw less, and only long enough to subtend one
whole degree, which is enough in Instruments of fifty or sixty foot Radius, it
may be done by a straight Screw very well, if care be used, which will very
exactly take Diameters and Transits to a single Second.

Another thing I promised further to explain, was, the contrivance of the Arms
and Joint, mentioned in page 73, as a Universal Instrument for describing all
manner of Dials. For adjusting the Hand of a Clock, so as to make it move in
the shadow of the Style of a Dial, that is, in the Plain of the right ascension
of any Point, of the Ecliptic, or of the Heaven; or secondly, in the shadow of
a perpendicular, or inclined Style: For dividing and describing all manner of
Ellipses in any Analematical projection; and also, For making all manner of
Elliptical Dials in Mr. Foster' s way. For communicating a round motion through
any irregularly bent way, without shaking or variation, and the like.

First, The Instrument for describing all manner of Dials by the Tangent
projection, must be made in this manner, described in the 11th. Figure, in
which there are two Axes or rods of Wire that are joined together by a Joint,
which from the applicability of it to, and fitness for all kinds of motions and
flexures, I call a Universal Joint. One of these Rods b b, is, by the help of a
Frame a a, placed perpendicularly over the center of the Dial, the sharp or
pointed end thereof ^ being sunk into the Center, about which it is to be moved
according as it shall be guided by the motion of the second Rod or Axis d d.
This second Rod or Axis, is, by its Frame, to be moved and set so as to be
parallel to the Axis of the World; then the Hand e e of this last being turned
to the hour of Twelve on the Plate f f, the Hand of the first g g will point
out upon the Dial-plain, the Meridian or Twelve of Clock Line.

And so for describing any manner* of Dial, you have nothing to do but to find
the Substile, and the altitude of the Style above the Plain, and to put the
Axis in its due situation accordingly, that is, parallel to the Axis of the
Earth, and then by the Plumbet at the end thereof to rectify the Meridian or
Twelve of clock point: For then, by turning round the Axis or Rod d d by the
handle, till you see the Index e e on the Axis to point at those Hours, halfs,
quarters, or minutes you have a mind to take notice of in your Dial; by the
second Index g g, you are directed to the true corresponding point in the Plain
of the Dial it self. But in such Dials as are in or near a Polar-plain, it will
be convenient to make use of a small Thread to extend from the Cross, till it
touch the Plain in the several hours, halfs, quarters, minutes, etc. The Arms
of the Joint in this Operation are to be so fixed, that the axis of the Plate
may cross the axis of the Rod at right Angles.

The Universal Joint for all these manner of Operations, having not had time to
describe the last Exercise, I shall now more particularly explain. It
consists then of five several parts, each of which I shall describe in the 9
and 10 Fig.

The two first parts are, the Rods and Axes A and B, on which the Semicircular
Arms are fastened, which are to be joined together so, as that the motion of the
one may communicate a motion to the other according to a proportion, which, for
distinctions sake, I call Elliptical or Oblique.

The two next parts are, the two Semicircular Arms C C and D D, which are
fastened to the ends of those Rods, which serve to take hold of the four Points
of the Ball, Circle, Medium, or Cross in the middle, X; each of these pair of
Arms have two Centre-holes into which the sharp ends of the Medium are put, and
by which the Elliptical or oblique proportion of Motion, is steadily, exactly,
and most easily communicated from the one Rod or Axis to the other. These
Centre-holes I call the Hands.

The fifth and last thing, is, the Ball, Round-plate, Cross, or Medium X in the
middle, taken hold of by the hands both of one and the other pair of
Semicircular Arms, which, for distinctions sake, I henceforth call the Medium,
and the two Points 11, taken hold of by the Hands of the Axis, I call the
Points, and the other two Points 22, taken hold of by the second pair of Arms,
I call the Pivots.

First, for the Rods, they may be made of what bigness you think fit, according
to the use for which you design the Instrument. The only care to be taken in
the making of them, is, first that they may be exactly Cylindrical in those
parts that move in Collers, and secondly, that the Axis or middle line of them
do cut each other exactly in one point, which point must not vary upon any
alteration or change of the Joint by bending the angle they make with each
other, more or less, nor with the inclination of the Semicircular-arms to any
desired obliquity, nor with the rotation or turning round of the whole
Instrument. They require therefore a very dexterous, and a very knowing Artist,
to make them as they ought to be, to perform their motion with exactness. Let a
b then represent one of those Rods, and c d a second, which are turned exactly
cylindrical within the Collers e f g and h, and these Collers are so disposed
and fixed on some frame, that the middle line or axis of both these Cylinders
may cut each other in the point e; if then both their necks and collers be
wrought true and exact, the Axis or middle lines of them will always cut each
other in the same point, howsoever they be turned round within their Collers;
nor must this point i be varied, howsoever those two Axes are inclined to each
other, so that though c d be inflected to l m, or n o, and so make either an
obtuser or acuter Angle, yet the point i must be the center of the Medium,
where both the Axes concur and cut each other.

Secondly, The Semicircular-arms may be made of what bigness, thickness, or
strength, the occasion for which they are designed shall require; that is, if
they are only to carry the Hand of a Clock in the shadow of a Common Dial,
whether made after the Orthographical, Stereographical, or Horological
projection; or if they are by an Annual motion to show the motion of the Sun in
the Ecliptic, or the aequation of Time, a very small strength is sufficient;
but if they are for carrying round a great Quadrant, such as that I have
heretofore described, there they must be made stronger and more substantial.
Care also must be had, that the inclining the Arms to any angle may not vary
the center of the Ball or Cross out of the point, where the two Axes cut each
other. Both these Arms are to be made so as to be inclined to any angle; that
is, that the Axis of the Medium, taken hold of by the Arms of Iron, may be made
to incline to the axis of the Rod, on which they are in any angle desired, and
being set to that Angle, to be steadily fixed, which may be done by a pin,
screw or wedge; the way I make use of for the Azimuth-Instrument, described in
the 73 p. of my Animadversions, is this which is delineated and explained in
the 9th. Fig., where G represents a socket of Brass, movable cylindrically
round about the end or neck B, of the Axis or Rod B B, the same with a b, in
the 22 Fig. of my Animadversions, and fixable in any posture desired, by help
of a side Screw h, such as is very commonly made use of for most Instruments
that are fixed upon the end of a three legged Staff, and is commonly called a
Cylinder and Socket; this Socket of Brass has a small Rod of Iron, k, fixed
into it at k, which is near the middle of its concave part, through this Rod
there is made a small eye or hole, and through that hole a wedge-like pin m
being thrust, serves to keep the Semicircular Iron-arms C C, steady and fixed
in any posture they shall be rectified to. The Semicircular-arms C C, are to be
made of very good Iron, or rather Steel, and to have a channel or grove quite
through the middle of one of them, and extending the whole length of a quadrant
of a Circle, namely from n to o, because, according to the variety of
occasions, it may be varied to any point between n and o; and it is to be
observed, that the Iron-rod k must be so far fixed out of the axis of the
Socket g, as n is distant from i, or o from p the middle of the Iron-arms
between i and i, that so when there is occasion, the Centre-hole or hands i may
be moved to p and fastened. At q must be made a Joint in the Semicircular-arms,
so that when the end n of the Arms is fixed in or near k, the other arm C may
fall back from the point i, otherwise the circular motion, in many cases,
cannot be continued quite round, and communicated from one Rod to the other, by
help of the Medium or Plate x. The several pieces of this Joint, as they are
apart and distinct, you may see in the 9th. Figure, and as they are joined all
together ^it for motion you may see in the tenth Figure, to which also the
description of every part is adjoined in words referred to by the help of
Literal marks, which, I hope, will make it sufficiently plain to any Artist to
understand.

Thirdly, The medium Ball or Cross X, must be made of a bigness suitable to the
Arms and Cylinders, and great care must be had that all the ends, points, or
handles, lie exactly in the same plain, and that they be all equally distant
from their Center, at least, that any two opposite ones be so made, because it
is not absolutely necessary that they should be so all four, though in most
cases it be best; and farther, the Handles or Pivots ought to be exactly round,
conical, or cylindrical, and the middle lines of them to cut each other at
right angles, or upon a square; and in general, that all things about the said
Joint be so contrived and wrought that the Axis of the two Rods may always cut
each other in the center of the medium Cross or Plate, and that the said
Center, whatever change happens to the Joint, may always keep exactly in the
same very point, without any alteration.

The shape of this Medium may be either, a Cross whose four ends has each of
them a Cylinder, which is the weakest way, it is described in the 9 and 10th.
Figures by the Cross X; or secondly, it may be made of a thick plate of Brass,
upon the edge of which are fixed four Pivots, which serve for the handles of
the Iron-arms to take hold of; this is much better than the former, but has
not that strength and steadiness that a large Ball has, which is the way I
most approve of, as being strong, steady, and handsome; these are delineated in
the aforesaid Figures, by X x, and X x x.

If it be an Elliptical Dial to be described by the Orthographical projection,
the former way for describing Tangent Dials, gives the lines that divide the
Ellipsis of the Equinox in its true proportions: and if you would have the
Lines that divide the Ellipsis of either Tropic, or of any other parallel
Circle, you must rectify the Semicircular Arms C C of the Axis B B, to the
degree of the declination of that Parallel, and them proceeding as before, you
have the Lines which from the aforesaid Circle divide the Ellipsis of that
Parallel accordingly. Perpendiculars also, let fall from the ends of the Cross
11, give the true Ellipsis in the Orthographical projection answering to that
Parallel.

These Lines thus found, are the true azimuth Lines of the points or divisions
of that Parallel, and are this way traced out exactly, without any trouble of
Calculation, which for some purposes, in Surveying, Navigation, etc. are of
very great use, as I shall afterward show.

The Universality of this Contrivance, for resolving almost all Spherical
Questions, makes it of very great use in Navigation, if it be adapted as it
ought to be, especially for the Common Sea-mans use, who, with a very few
Rules, will be able immediately to find the hour, and azimuth of any point in
the Heaven, sufficiently accurate for most Observations that can be made at
Sea; of which more hereafter.

For making the Hand or Index of a Clock move in the shadow of the Style, made
upon the Face of the Dial, and exposed to the Sun, this Joint, being made to
join the arbor of the Wheel that goes round in twenty four hours, with the
arbor of the hand, performs it without any other Wheel or Pinion in the Dial
or Face part of the Clock; if the Arbor of the Clock that should have carried
the Hand round in twenty four hours, be made to have the same inclination to
the plain of the Dial that the Axis has, whether parallel to the Axis or not,
it matters not at all, so that the Hand be rectified accordingly as it ought to
be, and that the Style of the Dial arises from the center of the Dial,
out-through which the Arbor is produced for carrying the Hand, and placed in
its Parallel respect to the Axis, as it ought to be for a Tangent Dial. For the
shadow-Line of the Axis upon the plain of the Dial, being always carried round
the center of a Dial in a plain, which passes through the Axis or Style, and
makes equal progressions about it in equal spaces of Time, and unequal
progressions upon the Dial-plain, according to the proportion of Inclination,
and the whole Revolution being performed in twenty four hours, and the Hand of
the Clock upon the Face of the Dial being always moved in a plain which
passes through the Arbor of the Clock, and makes equal progressions in equal
spaces about the said Arbor, but unequal progression about the Center of the
Dial, according to the differing Inclinations: And those Inclinations being
both in the Sun-Dial and Clock-Dial the same, it will follow, that ^he Hand of
the Clock must always move in the shadow of the Style, if the Hand be once
rectified to the true Plain, and the Axis or Arbor make its Revolution as it
ought to do in twenty four hours.

If it be further desired, for the ease of taking Azimuths and Altitudes, that
the Arm of the Azimuth quadrant that is once adjusted to the Celestial Object,
should, by the aforesaid Joint or Instrument, be kept always respecting and
following the said Object in its Diurnal motion, it may be very easily
performed by the help of a small perpendicular Ruler, whose lower end is
Joynted into either of the Arms 11, of the circular Plate X, in the 22 and 23d.
Figure of my Animadversions, and the upper end joynted into the movable Arm, at
the same distance from the Center of the Quadrant that the lower end is from
the center of the Plate X, and that the center of the Quadrant be set exactly
perpendicular over the center of X; but then the divisions by the help of the
Screw cannot be made use of, because the Clock-work it self is to turn and move
the Arm: But it may be done by any Quadrant, where the minute Divisions are
performed by the help of Diagonals. For the Arms of the Circular-plate 11 being
always moved in the superficies of the Cone described, by the radiation from
the Celestial Object to the center of the Plate X, that is to say, the Line
that passes through the Center of the said Plate, and through the two Points 1
1, being always directed to the Celestial Object, if the Arm of the Quadrant
be moved perpendicular over it, and parallel to it, that also must be always
directed to it. And hence it may very easily be conceived, how the aforesaid
Semicircular Arms may be readily and certainly rectified to any Celestial
Object; that is, by fixing Telescopes or Common-sights upon the Circular-plate,
so as the Axis of them may be parallel to the Line through 1 1, and loosing the
Screw h to rectify it to the Object by the sight, and then immediately to fix
it in the said posture by the aforesaid Screw; the Clock-work of the said
Instrument having been before that put into motion. The reason of all which
will easily appear to any one that thoroughly considers, that all Celestial
Objects seem, by the diurnal motion of the Earth, to move equally from East to
West about the Axis of it, and would all do exactly so, were they not somewhat
varied by their own proper periodical revolutions, which though it does indeed
make a real difference between their velocities about the Axis of the Earth,
yet that difference is but small; and the same circular Pendulum will serve
both for the Sun, Moon, Planets, and Stars, if at least the Pendulum p, in the
fifteenth Figure, be a little lengthened or shortened, by lifting up or letting
down the Rod q q, in proportion as the Body k moves swifter or slower. And
'twill not be difficult to mark upon the Rod q q, the appropriated length of
the Pendulum for the Sun, Moon, or Stars; but this only by the by.

If in the next place it be desired, that the Hand of the Clock should be
always carried round upon the face of the Clock, in the shadow of a Style
perpendicular to that plain, by reason that the declination of the Sun daily
varieth, the angles of the shadow about that Style varieth also, and
consequently the inclination of the plate of the Joint to the Axis or Arbor
must vary also, and that variation must always be the same with the variation
of the declination of the Sun, which is twenty ways mechanically performable
in Clock-work, so that the motion shall be performed by the Clock-work alone,
without touching it with the hand. All the other directions that are requisite
to adjust the Clockwork to such a Dial, is, only to make the Arbor of the
Clock-work to have the same inclination to the plain of the Dial, that the Axis
of the Earth, or a line parallel to it has; and rectifying the Hand into the
true plain of the Axis, or Inclined arbor, the equality of the motion of the
Clockwork, according to the diurnal and annual motion of the Sun, we suppose
also to be provided for.

If the Hand of the Clock be desired to be moved in the shadow of any other
straight Style, howsoever inclined to the plain of the Dial, then must there be
another Joint like the former, added to the end of that Axis which was
perpendicular to the plain of the Dial, and all the three Axes must be situate
in respect of the Plain, in which the Hand on the end of the last is to move,
that the inclination of the said Axes to each other, may represent the
inclination of the Axis to the perpendicular axis of the Plain, and of that
perpendicular Axis to the axis of the Style. Or, which is somewhat shorter, and
may be made handsome enough, Let the two ends of the Hand represent the two
points of the second circular Plate or Globe, extended long enough to reach to
the hour Circle, then let the axis of this second Arm be placed in the axis of
the inclined Style, and let the axis of equal motion, representing the axis of
the diurnal motion of the Earth, be placed with such inclination to it, as the
axis of the Earth has to the oblique Axis or Style of the Dial, and the motion
will be most exactly performed mechanically, and according to the truth of
Geometry and Calculation.

Now, in all these motions, care must be taken, to provide that the inclination
of the declination of the Sun from the Equinoctial, be expressed by the ends 11,
in the 22 and 23 Figures of the second Plate of my Animadversions, of the
Cross, taken hold of by the semicircular arms c d, upon the end of the first
Axis; that is, that the said arms may, by their revolution, make the line of
the Cross describe such a cone about the first Axis, as the motion of the Sun
does about the axis of the Earth, making the center of the Earth the apex of
that Cone; which will be done, if the said semicircular Arms be moved, and set
to the declination of the Sun for that day. Or, that an additional motion be
added to the first Axis, that the Clock it self may perform it. This may be
done twenty ways easily enough, which I suppose will be sufficiently obvious
to any knowing Mechanic, and that without the help of Tooth-wheels or Pinions,
which in works of this nature are in no wise to be made use of, by reason of
their shaking and uncertainty, which I shall elsewhere describe.

There is one only difficulty in this motion, and that is only in such Objects
as pass over, or very near the Zenith or Nadir of the place, for in those
cases, when the Object comes very near the Zenith, the obliquity of the motion
of the one to the other is so very great, that the first Axis does not move the
second without some difficulty: But to remedy this, the expedient is as easy,
and that is, by having a little barrel about the perpendicular Arm, to carry it
forward as far and as fast as the first Inclined axis will permit it; which
weight may be removed as soon as the Object is a little way past the Zenith.

The next use that may be made of this, is, for carrying the Hand of a Clock
so, as always to move over that point of the Ecliptic in which the Sun is, in
a Stereographical projection of the Sphere upon the Plain of the Equinoctial,
or in an Orthographical projection of the said Sphere upon the same Plain, so
as to express thereby not only the differing right ascensions, but the anomaly
also of the Suns motion in the excentrick of the Ecliptic. And by this means
the Face of the Clock may be made by a Planispherical projection, to represent
the motion of all the Stars appearing in any Horizon that is not too near the
Equinoctial, their Risings, settings, culminatings, azimuths, and almicauters;
Risings and settings of the Sun, the lengths of the Days and Nights, and of the
Twilights and Dawnings, and many other Problems of the Sphere. And, which is a
consequent of this, it may be made to show the equation of Time, which is
necessary to be made use of for setting a pendulum Clock by the Sun, the manner
of doing which I must refer to another opportunity, as I must also the use of
this Joint, for drawing Ellipses, drilling and boring of bending Holes, for
turning Elliptical and Swash-work, till I publish my description of a Turning
Engine, capable to turn all manner of Conical Lines, and Conoeidical; all
manner of Foliage and Flower-work, all variety of Basket or Breaded-work, all
variety of Spiral and Helical-work, serving for the imitation of the various
forms and carvings of all sorts of Shells* for cylindrical and conical Screws;
all variety of Embossments and Statues; all variety of edged and Wheel-like
work; all variety of Regularly shaped Bodies, whether the five Regular bodies
of Plato, or produced from those by various sections or additions, of which the
variety is infinite; all variety of bended Cylinders or Cones, and those
whether round, in the manner of an Oxes-horn, or compressed and angular, like
those of a Ram or Goat; for all manner of Swasht-work, Comprest-work, etc.
every of which principal parts has a vast variety, and the compound and
decompound principles have a variety almost infinite.

Appendix. Concerning the Eclipse of the Moon, observed in London.
JAnuary the first, 1674/5;, being at Sr. Jonas Mores in the Tower of London,
and making use of a Telescope of eight foot, and my pocket-Watch, whose
balance was regulated with springs, I observed the Eclipse of the Moon, which
began at about twenty minutes after five, the penumbra very much cheating the
naked eye; for the Penumbra had darkened that side of the Moon, next the spot
Grimaldi, about half an hour before, and grew darker and darker toward the
edge where the Umbra entered, so that if the light of the Moon were diminished
either by reflection upon dark Glass, or looking through a small hole, between
a quarter and a third part of the Moon seemed eclipsed before the Umbra entered;
but the Telescope discovered it plainly to be no true umbra, but penumbra.

This I note, because such Persons as do not make use of a Telescope, but only
of their naked eye, are very apt to be much deceived in their estimation of the
beginning and end of the Eclipse.

At 5. 48. we judged by the Telescope that the Moon was eclipsed six digits, or
half; at 6. 19. the total Eclipse began, when the Moon appeared of a very red
color, especially toward that part of the Limb where the direct Rays left
it, which was at the Mare Crisium, which is opposite to Grimaldi. Now the Sky
being somewhat clearer, it being before hazy, with the Telescope I began to
discover a great number of small Stars about the Moon, which appeared yet much
more conspicuous, after I had taken off the apperture from the Object-glass,
and amongst the rest, one seemed very conspicuous, and lay in the way of the
Moon, which I diligently watched and observed, that it was just covered by the
Moon at 6h. 47. 30. the Moon first covering it with that part of it which was
almost perpendicularly under the center of the Moon.

About three quarters of an hour after the total immersion, the body of the
Moon was exceeding dark, and almost unperceivable, being then near the center
of the Umbra, and afterward the Eastermost or foremost part of the Limb of the
Moon began to be enlightened, whereas before the Weste ^most Limb had been the
brightest. This was also very notable, that that part of the Moon that was
toward the North Pole, a pretty while before the emersion of the Moon out of
the total Eclipse, and even till the very emersion, and somewhat after too,
appeared enlightened with a much brisker light than any other part of the body,
except that which was next the Limb where the light again entered. From what
cause this should happen, I know not; possibly it might be caused by a greater
refraction of the Air near the North Pole of the Earth, and I am much troubled,
that I had not taken notice whether the like phenomenon had not happened to the
body of the Moon before it had past the center of the Umbra. It was very
manifest, that there was a considerable quantity of light that kept that Limb
of the Moon which was next the light, conspicuous by the Telescope all the time
of the total Eclipse; and it is very rational to ascribe it to the Rays of the
Sun, refracted by the Air, or atmosphere of the Earth.

I was very well pleased to observe the Moon to cover several small Stars that
lay in its way, but I kept no account of them, but only watched diligently when
the Star that entered behind the Moon at 6. 47. 30. would come out again, which
I found it to do at 7. 30. seeing it at the very moment of time that it began
to appear again. And it was also at the same instant discovered by Sr. Jonas
More, who was expecting it with another Tube.

At 7. 58. the body of the Moon first emerged out of the Umbra at the spot
Grimaldi, and soon after all those small Stars that were conspicuous before
about the body of the Moon, vanished. However I had, before its first emersion
out of the shadow, taken a little draught of the small Stars, according to
their several positures and magnitudes, only by guess, that I might a week
after, when the Moon was gone farther off, inquire what that Star was that had
suffered so conspicuous an Eclipse, and that thereby I might the more certainly
determine the true place of the Sun and Moon at that instant, which I found to
be that in Bayer, touching the Ecliptic, in about 21. 40. of Cancer. The Umbra
ceased wholly at eight of the Clock and five minutes, though the Penumbra then
possessed almost a third of the Moons Diameter, and lasted near half an hour
after, before that side of the Moon was perfectly enlightened like the other.

There was one Phenomenon very remarkable, which I took more especial notice
of, as seeming to me very considerable for the determining that controversy,
whether the Moon have an atmosphere or not, like that of the Earth? And that
was, that after the Moon was entered wholly into the Umbra of the Earth, that
part of the Limb of the Moon which was last enlightened, continued for a
considerable while to have a very great brightness upon it, which extended on
each side that part of the Limb, both northwards and southwards, to about a
quadrant of the Moons Limb, making a representation almost of a New Moon about
a day or two old, and as the body of the Moon was immerged deeper into the
shadow, so this brightness or light grew fainter and fainter, but still seemed
to spread it self very far upon the Limb of the Moon only, and not upon the
body thereof. That which was spread into the body being much fainter and
weaker, and seeming (as I before noted) to proceed from the refraction of the
Atmospheres of the Earth. Nor was this only conspicuous at the Moons entering
into the total darkness, but as remarkable also at the exitus thereof out of
the same, insomuch that some of those Persons, who at the same time viewed the
same with me, verily believed the Moon was not wholly eclipsed so soon as
really it was, nor continued so long in that obscurity, as very visibly it did
by the space of two or three minutes. For I took especial notice when this
inlightning of the Limb began again to appear, and I observed its increase, and
spreading about the Limb, till the very instant that the immediate light of the
Sun touched the very extremity of the Limb it self, which was indeed so very
briskly bright and strong, that it did not only soon make the other light
disappear, but also all the Telescopical Stars that were near to it, and
toward the end also many of the more conspicuous Stars, especially such as
were not far from the body of the Moon.

Postscript.
I Should have here taken leave of my Reader for this time, but that finding in
the Transactions a passage inserted out of the French Journal de Scavans, about
the invention of applying a Spring to the Balance of a Watch, for the
regulating the motion thereof, without at all taking notice that this Invention
was first found out by an Englishman, and long since published to the World: I
must beg the Readers patience, whilst I, in vindication of my own right against
some unhandsome proceedings, do acquaint him with the state of this matter.

About seventeen years since, being very inquisitive about the regulating the
measure of Time, in order to find the Longitude, I did from an Art of
Invention, or mechanical Algebra (which I was then Master of) find out and
perfect this contrivance, both as to the Theory and Experimental verification
thereof, of which I then discoursed to diverse of my Friends, but concealed the
modus.

About fifteen years since, to wit, in the year 1660, presently after his
Majesty's happy Restoration, I was in treaty with several Persons of Honor
(some of which are yet living, though one of them is since dead, but I have
sufficient evidence to produce in his own writing that he was one) for the
discovery thereof, upon proposed Articles of encouragement. This I can prove by
undeniable Witnesses yet living, and I have still all the Papers, Articles, and
Transactions of this matter by me, in their own handwriting.

In order to bring this Treaty to pass, I was necessitated to discover
something of Invention about measuring Time, which was, this way of applying
Springs to the arbor of the Balance of a Watch, for the regulating the
vibrations thereof in all postures. And this I did, to the end that I might
gain somewhat of belief in those Noble Persons (with whom I was to treat) That
I had somewhat more than ordinary, and was not one of the heard-of Pretenders
to that Invention: which effect it had, and their Treaty with me had finally
been concluded for several Thousand pounds, had not the inserting one Clause
broke it off, which was, That if after I had discovered my Inventions about the
finding the Longitude by Watches, or otherwise (though in themselves
sufficient) They, or any other Person should find a way of improving my
Principles, he or they should have the benefit thereof, during the term of the
Pattent, and not I. To which Clause I could no ways agree, knowing 'twas easy
to vary my Principles an hundred ways, and 'twas not improbable but that there
might be made some addition of convenience to what I should at first discover,
it being facile Inventis addere. And judging it most unreasonable to be
deprived of the benefit of my Inventions, in themselves sufficient, because
others might vary them, or any other ways improve them, of which it was very
probable they would have no thought, if they had not the advantage of being
instructed by my discovery, it having lain hid some thousands of years already,
as indeed the effect has made evident and certain, there having been nothing
done by any body else upon that matter for these fifteen years.

Upon this point our Treaty was broken off, and I concealed the farther
discovery of any of the other more considerable parts of my Inventions, for the
regulating of Timekeepers, as hoping I might find some better opportunity of
publishing them together with my way of finding the Longitude of Places, for
which I hoped to have had some benefit for all the labor, study, and charge I
had been at for the perfecting thereof. Upon this I was told, That I had better
have then discovered all, since there were others that would find it out within
six months; to which I answered, that I would try them one seven years; and it
is now above twice seven, and I do not find it yet found out. Indeed Mr. Hugens
has made use of that part I discovered, and somewhat Mr. Leibnitz has hit
upon, but both of them are imperfect as I shall hereafter show.

It Is true, I was alarmed by one of those Persons about two years after that,
who told me, That he had news that the Longitude was found out by a Person of
Honor, by a way of carrying Mr. Hugens' s Pendulum-Clock, at Sea, by the help
of a Ball and Socket, hung to the underside of the Deck of a Ship. But having a
description of it, I presently told that Person, That that Invention would do
mine no harm; and indeed we experimentally found it useless to that effect not
long after, upon a trial made of carrying the said Clocks off to Sea in one of
His Majesty's Pleasure-Boats, in the year 1662.

The Invention indeed in it self was ingenious, and did much more than what Mr.
Hugens did expect, as I was then informed by the Right Honorable the Earl of
Kincardine, the Author and perfecter of that part of the Invention. But wanting
a little addition (which I concealed, and Mr. Hugens has not got yet that I
hear of) it failed of the effect that was expected. Notwithstanding this, it
was not long after published in Low Dutch, and presently after in English;
wherein what made for it was related, but what made against it was concealed,
though they were both equally known.

But on the otherside, all that I could obtain was a Catalogue of Difficulties,
first, in the doing of it, secondly, in the bringing it into public use,
thirdly, in making advantage of it. Difficulties were propounded from the
alteration of Climates, Airs, heats and colds, temperature of Springs, the
nature of Vibrations, the wearing of Materials, the motion of the Ship, and
diverse others. Next, it would be difficult to bring it to use, for Seamen knew
their way already to any Port, and Men would not be at the unnecessary charge
of the Apparatus, and observations of the Time could not be well made at Sea,
and they would no where be of use but in East and West India Voyages, which
were so perfectly understood that every Common Seaman almost knew how to Pilot
a Ship thither. And as for making benefit, all People lost by such
undertakings; much had been talked about the Praemiums for the Longitude, but
there was never any such thing, no King or State would ever give a farthing for
it, and the like; All which I let pass.

At the earnest importunity of a Dear Friend of mine, since deceased, I did, in
the year 1664, read several of my first Cutlerian Lectures upon that Subject,
in the open Hall at Gresham College, at which were present, besides a great
number of the Royal Society, many Strangers unknown to me. I there showed the
ground and reason of that application of Springs to the Balance of a Watch,
for regulating its motion, and explained briefly the true nature and principle
of Springs, to show the Physical and Geometrical ground of them. And I
explained above twenty several ways by which Springs might be applied to do the
same thing, and how the Vibrations might be so regulated, as to make their
Durations either all equal, or the greater slower or quicker than the less, and
that in any proportion assigned. Some of these ways were applicable to lesser
Vibrations, others to greater, as of 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. or what number of
Revolutions were desired; the models of which I there produced, and I did at
the same time show wherein the aforesaid Sea-Clocks were defective.

All these particulars also were at several other times, at the Public
meetings of the Royal Society, discoursed, experimented, and several Models
produced. I did also, at the earnest desire of some Friends, in the year 1664
and 1665, cause some of the said Watches to be made, though I was unwilling to
add any of the better applications of the Spring to them, as waiting a better
opportunity for my advantage.

Of all these things the Publisher of the Transactions was not ignorant, and I
doubt not but Mr. Hugens has had an account, at least he might have read so
much of it in the History of the Royal Society as was enough to have given him
notice of it, for page 247 of that History, amongst other Experimented
Inventions, there are recounted several new ways of Pendulum Watches for the
Pocket, wherein the motion is regulated by Springs, etc. The account of the
several ways was given somewhat larger to the Learned Author of that excellent
History, though he, as judging it more proper to his design, was pleased to
give only this summary account. Mr. Hugens might therefore, if he had pleased,
have mentioned the first Inventer, Nam ingenuum est fateri; as he might also
that of the Circular Pendulum, which is mentioned in the same page of the
aforesaid History.

But though he would not please to confess he knew my published Invention, yet
I am sure he has manifested, that he knows no more than what I had formerly
discovered, he having not in least mentioned the oath Contrivance, which is the
principal, and without which the first part of the Invention is but lame and
imperfect, and does but limp on one leg, and will some time hobble, and
stumble, and stand still. And the said Watches will not be tres Just, nor show
the Longitude at Sea or Land, but, on the contrary, they will be subject to
most Inequalities of motion and carriage, and with many of those motions will
be apt to stand still, whatever to the contrary is affirmed in the French
Journal, or in the English Transactions.

I forbear now to mention any further the carriage of the Writer of the
Transactions in this Affair, and begging my Readers excuse for this digression,
I shall conclude this Tract with a short communication of the general ground of
my Invention for Pocket-Watches, the number of particular ways being very
great, which (that the true Lovers of Art, and they only may have the benefit
of) I have set down in the Universal and Real Character of the late Reverend
Prelate, my Honored Friend Dr. John Wilkins, Lord Bishop of Chester, deceased.
In which I could wish, that all things of this nature were communicated, it
being a Character and Language so truly Philosophical, and so perfectly and
thoroughly Methodical, that there seems to be nothing wanting to make it have
the utmost perfection, and highest Idea of any Character or Language
imaginable, as well for Philosophical as for common and constant use. And I
have this further to desire of my Reader, who will be at the pains to decipher
and understand this description, that he would only make use of it for his own
information, and not communicate the explication thereof to any that has not
had the same curiosity with himself.

This I do, not so much to hinder the spreading of this Description here
delivered, as to revive, and, if possible, bring into use and practice that
excellent Design: It being a Character and Language perfectly free from all
manner of ambiguity, and yet the most copions, expressive and significative of
any thing or Notion imaginable, and, which recommends it most to common use,
the most easy to be understood and learnt in the World. See Table the third.

To fill the vacancy of the ensuing page, I have here added a decimate of the
centesme of the Inventions I intend to publish, though possibly not in the same
order, but as I can get opportunity and leisure; most of which, I hope, will be
as useful to Mankind, as they are yet unknown and new.

1. A way of Regulating all sorts of Watches or Timekeepers, so as to make any
way to equalize, if not exceed the Pendulum-Clocks now used. 2. The true
Mathematical and Mechanichal form of all manner of Arches for Building, with
the true butment necessary to each of them. A Problem which no Architectonick
Writer has ever yet attempted, much les ^ performed. abccc ddeeeee f gg
iiiiiiii llmmmmnnnnnooprr ssstttttuuuuuuuux. 3. The true Theory of Elasticity
or Springiness, and a particular Explication thereof in several Subjects in
which it is to be found: And the way of computing the velocity of Bodies moved
by them. c e i i i n o s s s t t u u. 4. A very plain and practical way of
counterpoising Liquors, of great use in H ^d ^aulicks Discovered. 5. A new sort
of Object-Glasses for Telescopes and Microscopes, much outdoing any yet used.
Discovered. 6. A new Selenoscope, easy enough to be made and used, whereby the
smallest inequality of the Moons surface and limb may be most plainly
distinguished. Discovered. 7. A new sort of Horizontal Sayls for a Mill,
performing the most that any Horizontal Sayls of that bigness are capable of*
and the various use of that principle on diverse other occasions. Discovered. 8.
A new way of Post-Charriot for traveling far, without much wearying Horse or
Rider. Discovered. 9. A new sort of Philosophical-Scales, of great use in
Experimental Philosophy. c d e i i n n o o p s s s t t u u. 10. A new invention
in Mechanics of prodigious use, exceeding the chimera's of perpetual motions
for several uses. a a a ae b c c d d e e e e e e g i i i l m m m n n o o p p q
r r r r s t t t u u u u u.

a a e f f h i i i i l l n r r s s t u u.


FINIS.


