JUDICIOUS HOOKER'S ILLUSTRATIONS OF Holy Scripture In His Ecclesiastical
Policy.

(...). LONDON, Printed for the Collector. MDCLXXV.

Mr. Hooker said: The Scripture was not writ to beget pride and disputations
and opposition to Government, but humility and obedience and peace and piety in
mankind.

To the Reverend Dr. FRAMTON Dean of Gloucester.
Good Mr. Dean,
ACcording to my promise I have now sent you these Sheets, and have taken leave
to adorn them with your name to gain them Recommendation to the Readers,
especially to the loving and beloved Citizens. Perchance this taste of Hooker
will invite the more ingenious ^ort to study that incomparable Book of his in
defense of our church-laws and Liturgy, which (after all the more eager
writings of our time) might serve to compose dissentions and make up our
breaches. This little piece will be able, by Gods Grace, to make some
impression (besides other good effects) of Meekness and Obedience upon every
serious and impartial peruser. Which ^o do is the end of this little adventure,
and ^ithal to show my self,

Honored Sir, Your true Servant, Cl. Barksdale

JVDICIOVS HOOKER'S ILLUSTRATIONS OF Holy Scripture.
In the PREFACE.
i, Jam. 2. 1. LEt not the Faith which ye have in our Lord Jesus Christ be
blemished with partiality, regard not who it is which speaks, but weigh only
what is spoken. Think not that ye read the words of one who bends himself as
an Adversary against the truth which ye have already embraced; but the words of
one, who desires even to embrace together with you the self same truth, if it
be the truth. S. I.

ii. Romans 14. 5. Whatsoever we do, if our own secret Judgment consent not unto
it as fit and good to be done, the doing of it to us is sin, although the thing
it self be allowable. St. Paul's rule therefore generally is, Let every man in
his own mind be fully persuaded of that thing which he either allows or does.
S. 3.

iii. Mat. 2. 7. If the understanding power or faculty of the soul be, like
unto bodily sight, not of equal sharpness in all, what can be more convenient
than that even as the dark-sighted man is directed by the clear about thing
Visible; so likewise in matters of deeper discourse, the wise in heart do show
the simple where his way lies? In our doubtful cases of Law, what man is there
who sees not how requisite it is, that professors of skill in that faculty be
our directors? so it is in all other kinds of knowledge. And even in Divine
likewise, the Lord has himself appointed, that the Priests lips should
preserve knowledge, and that other men should seek the truth at his mouth,
because he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts. S. 3.

iv. 1 Ioh. 4. 1. Dearly beloved, Give not credit unto every Spirit. There are
but two ways whereby the Spirit leads men into all truth: the one
extraordinary, the other common: the one belonging but unto some few, the other
extending it self unto all that are of God: the one that which we call by
special Divine excellency Revelation, the other Reason. S. 3.

v. Phil. 4. 12. Were it for the Glory of God, and the good of his Church
indeed that the Clergy should be left even as bare as the Apostles when they
had neither staff nor scrip; that God, which should lay upon them the condition
of his Apostles, would I hope endue them with the self same affection which was
in that Holy Apostle, whose words concerning his own right virtuous contentment
of heart, As well how to want, as how to abound, are a most fit Episcopal
Empress.

vi. Rom 3. 17. The way of peace they have not known. Ways of peaceable
conclusion there are but these two certain* the one, a Sentence of judicial
division, given by Authority thereto appointed within our selves; the other,
the like kind of Sentence given by a more universal Authority. The former of
which two ways God himself in the Law prescribes ( Deuteronomy. 17. 8.) and his
Spirit it was which directed the very first Christian Churches in the World to
use the latter, Act. 15. S. 6.

vii. Job 39. 37. Amongst so many, so huge volums as the infinite pains of St.
Augustine has brought forth, what one has gotten him greater love,
commendation, and honor, than the Book wherein he carefully collecteth his own
oversights, and sincerely condemns them? Many Speeches there are of Job's,
whereby his Wisdom and other virtues may appear; but the glory of an ingenuous
mind he has purchased by these words only. Behold I will lay mine hand on my
mouth: I have spoken once, yet will I not therefore maintain an argument, yea
twice, howbeit for that cause farther I will not proceed. S. 9.

In Book I.
i. Genesis 2. 18. God works nothing without cause. All those things which are
done by him, have some end for which they are done: and the end for which they
are done, is a reason of his will to do them. His will had not inclined to
create woman, but that he saw it could not be well if she were not created. Non
est bonum, it is not good, man should be alone. Therefore let us make an Helper
for him. That, and nothing else is done by God, which to leave undone were not
good. S. 2.

ii. Prove. 16. 4. The Lord has made all things for his own sake. Not that any
thing is made to be beneficial unto him, but all things for him to show
Beneficence and Grace in them. S. 2.

iii. Ephesians. 1. 11. They are, who think, that of the Will of God to do this or
that, there is no reason besides his Will. Many times no reason known to us,
but that there is no reason thereof, I judge it most unreasonable to imagine, in
as much as he works all things (...). Not only according to his own Will, but
the counsel of his own will. And whatsoever is done with Counsel, or wise
Resolution, has of necessity some reason why it should be done; Albeit that
reason be to us in some things so secret, that it forces the Wit of man to
stand, as the blessed Apostle himself does, amazed thereat: Romans 11. 33. O the
depth of the riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How unsearchable
are his judgments, etc. ib.

iv. Heb. 6. 17. Concerning the Counsel of God, (the same with that Law of God,
whereby he works all things, whereof he is the Cause and Author) the Apostle
terms it a thing unchangeable. Nor is the freedom of the Will of God any whit
abated, let, or hindered by means of this; because the imposition of this Law
upon himself, is his own free and voluntary act. ib.

v. Genesis 1. Moses in describing the Work of Creation, attributes speech unto
God: God said, Let there be light: Let there be a Firmament, etc. It was not
only the intent of Moses to signify the infinite greatness of Gods power, by
the easieness of his accomplishing such effects, without Travel, Pain, or
Labor: But his commanding those things to be which are, and to be in such sort
as they are, to keep that tenure and course which they do, imports the
establishment of Natures Law. S. 3.

vi. Mat. 6. 10. Touching Angels, which are Spirits immaterial and
intellectual, the glorious Inhabitants of those sacred palaces, where nothing
but Light and blessed Immortality for ever dwell; as in number and order they
are huge, mighty, and royal Armies, so likewise in perfection of Obedience to
that Law which the Highest, whom they adore, love, and imitate, has imposed
upon them; such Observants they are thereof, that our Savior himself being to
set down the perfect Idea of that which we are to pray, and wish for on earth,
did not teach to pray or wish for more, than only, that here it might be with
us, as with them it is in Heaven.

vii. Deuteronomy 13. 19 Goodness is seen with the Eye of the Understanding, and the
light of that Eye is Reason. So that two principal Fountains there are of
humane Action, Knowledge, and Will: Which will in things tending toward any
end, is termed Choice. Concern^ng Knowledge, behold, says Moses, I have set
before you this day, Good and Evil, Life and Death. Concerning Will, he adds
immediately, choose Life; that is to say, the things that tend unto Life, them
choose. S. 7.

viii. Romans 2. 14. The Apostle St. Paul having speech concerning the Heathens,
says of them, They are a Law unto themselves. His meaning is, that by force of
the light of reason, wherewith God illuminateth every one which comes into the
World, men being enabled to know Truth from Falsehood, and Good from Evil, do
thereby learn in many things what the Will of God is: Which Will himself not
revealing by any extraordinary means unto them, but they by Natural Discourse
attaining the knowledge thereof, seem the Makers of those Laws which indeed
are his, and they but only the Finders of them out. S. 8.

ix. 2 Cor. 4. 17. Small difficulties, when exceeding great good is sure to
ensue; and on the other side momentany benefits, when the hurt which they draw
after them is unspeakable, are not at all to be respected. Upon this infallible
ground the Apostle enjoyneth patience to himself: The present lightness of our
Affliction works unto us even with abundance upon abundance an eternal weight
of Glory, while we look not, etc. Therefore Christianity to be embraced,
whatsoever Calamities in those times it was accompanied withal. ib.

x. Mat 22. 38. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, etc. This
is the first and great Commandment, says our Savior, and the next is like
unto it. He means in amplitude and largeness, in as much as it is the Root,
out of which all Laws of Duty to Men-ward have grown; as out of the former, all
Offices of Religion toward God. ib.

xi. 2 Pet. 2. 5. We all make complaint of the iniquity of our times, not
unjustly, for the days are evil. But compare them with those times, wherein
there were no civil Societies; with those times, wherein there was as yet no
manner of public Regiment established; with those times, wherein there were
not above eight persons righteous living upon the face of the earth: and we
have surely good cause to think, that God has blessed us exceedingly, and has
made us behold most happy days. S. 10.

xii. Joh. 6: 29. The way of supernatural Duty which God has prescribed to us,
our Savior in the Gospel of St. John does note, terming it by an excellency,
the Work of God: This is the Work of God, that ye believe in him whom he has
sent: Not that God does require nothing unto Happiness at the hands of men,
saving only a naked belief (for Hope and Charity we may not exclude) but that
without belief all other things are as nothing. S. 11.

xiii. Ioh. 20. 31. The main drift of the whole New Testament, is that which
St. John sets down as the purpose of his own History: These things are
written, that ye might believe, that Jesus is Christ, the Son of God; and that
in believing, ye might have life through his Nam^. The drift of the old, that
which the Apostle mentions to Timothy, 2 Timothy 3. 15. The holy Scripturees are
able to make thee Wise unto Salvation. So that the general end both of old and
new, is one: The difference between them consisting in this, that the old did
make wise by teaching Salvation through Christ that should come; the New, by
teaching that Christ the Savior is come, and that Jesus whom the Jews did
crucify, and whom God did raise again from the dead, is He. When the Apostle
therefore affirmed unto Timothy, that the Old was able to make him Wise unto
Salvation; it was not his meaning, that the Old alone can do this unto us,
which live since the publication of the New: For he speaks with presupposal
of the Doctrine of Christ, known also unto Timothy: And he adds, Through the
Faith which is in Christ. 14.

xiv. Apoc. 14, 6. St. John peculiarly terms the Doctrine that teaches
Salvation by Jesus Christ, Evangelium aeternum, an eternal Gospel; because
there can be no reason wherefore the publishing thereof should be taken away,
and any other instead of it proclaimed, as long as the World does continue.
Whereas the whole Law of Rites and Ceremonies, although delivered with so great
solemnity, is notwithstanding clean abrogated; in as much as it had but
temporary cause of God's ordaining of it. 15.

xv. Romans 13. 1. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers. The public
power of all Societies is above ever Soul contained in the same Societies: And
the principal use of that power, is to give Laws unto all that are under it.
Which Laws in such case we must obey, unless there be reason showed, which may
necessarily enforce, that the Law of Reason, or of God, does enjoin the
contrary. Because except our own private, and but probable Resolutions be by
the Law of public Determinations overruled, we take away all possibility of
sociable Life in the World. 16.

xvi. Act. 15 20. As men's private fancies must give place to the higher
Judgment of that Church, which is in Authority a Mother over them: So the very
actions of whole Churches have, in regard of Commerce, and Fellowship with
other Churches, been subject to Law, the contrary unto which, had else been
thought more convenient for them to observe; as by that order ( Act. 15.) of
abstinence from strangled, and blood, may appear; an order grounded upon that
Fellowship, which the Churches of the Gentiles had with the Jews. ib.

In Book II.
i. 2 Timothy 3. 16. The whole Scripture is given-that the man of God may be
absolute, being made perfect unto all good works. He means all, and only
those good Works, which belong unto us, as we are men of God, and which unto
Salvation are necessary. Or, if we understand by men of God, Gods Ministers;
there is not required in them an universal skill of every good Work or Way, but
an Ability to teach whatsoever men are bound to do, that they may be saved.
And with this kind of knowledge the Scripture suffices to furnish them, as
touching matter. S. 1.

ii. 1 Timothy 4. Every creature of God is good, and nothing to berefused, if it
be received with thanksgiving, because it is sanctified by the word of God and
Prayer. The Gospel, by not making many things unclean, as the Law did, has
sanctified those things generally to all, which particularly each man unto
himself must sanctify by a reverent and Holy use. Which will not serve their
purpose, who have imagined the word in such sort to sanctify all things, that
neither food can be tasted, nor raiment put on, nor in the World any thing
done, but this deed must needs be sin in them, which do not first know it
appointed unto them by Scripture before they do it. S. 3.

iii. Romans 14. 23. Whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin. So Paul does mean
nothing else by Faith here, but only a full persuasion that that which we do is
well done: against which kind of Faith or persuasion, as St. Paul does count it
sin to enterprise any thing, so likewise some of the very Heathen have taught,
as Tully, that nothing ought to be done, whereof thou doubtest whether it be
right or wrong.

iv. 1 Cor. 6. 12. What things God does neither command nor forbid, the same he
permits with approbation either to be done or left undone. All things are
lawful unto me, says the Apostle, speaking, as it seems, in the person of
the Christian Gentile for maintenance of liberty in things indifferent,
whereunto his answer is, that nevertheless All things are not expedient, in
things indifferent there is a choice, they are not always equally expedient.
What light shall show us the convenience which one has above another, but the
Judgment of discretion? ib.

v. 1 Chronicles. 17. 4. Thou shall not build me an House to dwell in. To think that
David did evil in determining to build God a Temple, because there was in
Scripture no commandment that he should build it, were very injuri^us: the
purpose of his heart was Religious and Godly, the act most worthy of honor and
renovvn, neither could Nathan choose but admire his virtuous intent, exhort him
to go forvvard, and beseech God to prosper him therein, But God savv the
endless troubles which David should be subject unto, during the whole time of
his Regiment, and therefore gave charge to defer so good a work till the days
of tranquillity and peace, wherein it might without interruption be
performed. David supposed it could not stand with the duty which he ovved to
God, to set himself in an House of Cedar Trees, and to behold the Ark of the
Lords Covenant unsettled. This opinion the Lord abateth, by causing Nathan to
show him plainly, that it should be no more imputed unto him for a fault, than
it had been unto the Judges of Israel before him, his case being the same which
theirs was, their times not more unquiet than his, not more unfit for such an
action. S. 6.

In Book III.
i. Ephesians. 2. 16. All Christians make but one body. The unity of which visible
body and Church of Christ consists in that uniformity, which all several
persons thereunto belonging, have by reason of that one Lord whose Servants
they all profess themselves, that one Faith which they all acknowledge, that
one baptism wherewith they are all initiated. Christians by external
profession they are all, whose Mark of Recognisance has in it those things
which we have mentioned, yea, although they be impious Idolaters, wicked
Heretics, persons Excommunicable, yea, and cast out for notorious improbity.
S. 1.

ii. 1 Cor. 7. 8. To be commanded in the Word, and grounded upon the Word, are
not all one. If when a man may live in the state of Matrimon, seeking that good
thereby which Nature principally desires, he make rather choice of a contrary
life, in regard of St. Paul's judgment; that which he does is manifestly
grounded upon the Word of God, yet not commanded in his Word, because without
breach of any Commandment he might do otherwise. S. 8.

iii 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural man perceives not the things of the Spirit of
God. Those properties of God, and those Duties of men toward him, which may be
conceived by attentive consideration of Heaven and Earth, we know that of mere
Natural men the Apostle testifies, how they know both God, and the Law of God,
Romans 1. Other things of God there be (as the suffering, and rising of Christ
from the dead) which are neither so found, nor though they be showed, can ever
be approved without the special operation of Gods good Grace and Spirit. As
Grace has use of Nature, so we hold that Nature has need of Grace. ib.

iv. Col. 2. 8. Philosophy we are warned to take heed of: Not that Philosophy,
which is true and sound knowledge attained by natural Discourse of Reason; but
that Philosophy, which to bolster Heresy or Error, casts a fraudulent show
of Reason upon things which are indeed unreasonable; and by that means, as by a
stratagem, spoileth the simple, which are not able to vvithstand such cunning.
The way not to be inveagled by them that are so guileful through skill, is
thoroughly to be instructed in that which makes skilful against guile, and to
be armed with that true and sincere Philosophy, which does teach against that
Deceitful and Vain, which spoileth. ib.

v. 1 Cor. 1. 19. I will destroy the Wisdom of the Wise, etc. There are that
bear tho Title of wise men and Scribes, and great Disputers of the World, and
are nothing indeed less than what in show they most appear. These being wholly
addicted unto their own Wills, use their Wit, their Learning, and all the
Wisdom they have, to maintain that which their obstinate Hearts are delighted
with, esteeming, in the phran^ique Error of their minds, the greatest madness
in the World to be Wisdom, and the highest Wisdom, Foolishness. Such were both
Jews and Grecians, which professed the one sort a Legal, and the other Secular
skill, neither enduring to be taught the Mystery of Christ; unto the Glory of
whose most blessed Name, whosoever study to use both their Reason, and all other
Gifts, as well which Nature as which Grace has endued them with, let them
never doubt but that the same God, who is to destroy, and confound utterly that
Wisdom falsely so named in others, does make reckoning of them, as of true
Scribes, Scribes by Wisdom instructed to the Kingdom of Heaven. ib.

vi. 1 Cor. 2. 4. My preaching has not been in the persuasive speeches of
humane Wisdom. As, Calling from men may authorize us to teach, although it
could not authorize St. Paul to teach as other Apostles did; so, although the
Wisdom of man had not been sufficient to enable him such a Teacher as the rest
of the Apostles were, unless Gods miracles had strengthened both the one and the
others Doctrine: yet unto our ability both of teaching and learning the truth
of Christ, as we are but mere Christian men, it is not a little which the
wisdom of man may add. ib.

vii. 1 Cor. 10. 15. The whole drift of the Scripture of God, what is it but
only to teach Theolgy? Theology, what is it but the science of things Divine?
What science can be attained unto without the help of Natural Discourse and
Reason? Judge you of that which I speak, says the Apostle. In vain it were to
speak an^ thing of God, but that by reason men are able somewhat to judge of
that they hear, and by Discourse, to discern how consonant it is to Truth.
Scripture indeed teaches things above Nature, things which our reason by it it
self could not reach unto; yet those things also we believe, knowing by reason
that the Scripture is the word of God. ib.

viii. Acts 26. 22. King Agrippa believe thou the Prophets? I know thou do.
The question is, how the Books of the Prophets came to be credited of King
Agrippa. For, what with him did authorize the Prophets, the like with us does
cause the rest of the Scripture of God to be of credit. And by experience, we
all know, that the first outward Motive leading men so to esteem of the
Scripture, is the Authority of Gods Church. For when we know the whole Church
of God has that Opinion of the Scripture, we judge it even at the first an
impudent thing, for any man bred, and brought up in the Church, to be of a
contrary mind without cause. Afterward, the more we bestow our Labor in
Reading or Hearing the Mysteries thereof, the more we find that the thing it
self does answer our received Opinion concerning it. So that the former
inducement prevailing somewhat with us before, does now much more prevail, when
the very thing has ministered further reason. ib.

ix. Acts 15. 28. To the Holy Ghost, and to us it has seemed good. Which style
they did not use, as matching themselves in power with the Holy Ghost, but as
testifying the Holy Ghost to be the Author, and themselves but only utterers of
that Decree. S. 10. Notwithstanding, as the Law of Ceremonies delivered unto
the Jews, so this very Law which the Gentiles received from the Mouth of the
Holy Ghost, is in like respect, abrogated by decease of the end for which it
was given. ib.

x. 1 Timothy 6 14. The Apostle St. Paul does fearfully charge Timothy, to keep
what was commanded him safe and sound. In Scripture we grant every one man's
Lesson to be the common instruction of all men, so far forth as their Cases are
alike, and that religiously to keep the Apostles Commandments in whatsoever
they may concern us, we all stand bound. But touching that Commandment which
Timothy was charged with, we swarve undoubtedly from the Apostles precise
meaning, if we extend it so largely, that the Arms thereof shall reach unto all
things which were commanded him by the Apostle. The very words themselves do
restrain themselves unto some on especial Commandment among many; even that
which by the same Apostle in the same manner is urged, 2 Timothy 4. 1. I charge
thee -- preach the Word. S. 11.

xi. Romans 11. 33. In matters which concern the actions of God, the most dutiful
way on our part, is to search what God has done, and with Meekness to admire
that, rather than to dispute what he in congruity of reason ought to do.
Otherwise, we exceed our bounds, who, and where we are we forget, and therefore
needful it is that our Pride in such cases be controlled, and our Disputes
beaten back with those demands of the blessed Apostle, How unsearchable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out? Who has known the mind of the Lord,
or who was his Counselor? ib.

In Book IV.
i. 2 Chr. 1. 5. THe House which I build is great and wonderful, for great is
our God above all Gods. Whereby it clearly appears, that the Orders of the
Church of God may be acceptable unto him, as well being framed suitable to the
greatness, and dignity of later, as when they keep the reverend simplicity of
ancienter times. S. 2.

ii. Acts 15. 28. And from Fornication. We cannot with reason think, that as
the former two are positive, so like wise this, being meant as the Apostle does
otherwise usually understand it. But very Marriage within a number of degrees,
being not only by the Law of Moses, but also by the Law of the Sons of Noah
(for so they took it) an unlawful Discovery of Nakedness; by unlawful
Marriages, such as Moses in the Law reckons up, I think i^ for mine own part
more probable to have been meant in the words of that Canon, than Fornication
according to the course of the Law of Nature. St. Paul himself does term
incestuous Marriage, Fornication. If any do rather think that the Christian
Gentiles themselves, through the loose and corrupt custom of these times, took
simple fornication for no sin, and were in that respect offensive unto
believing Jews which by the Law had been better taught, our proposing of
another conjecture is unto theirs no prejudice. S. 11.

iii. The common conceit of the vulgar sort is, whenever they see any thing
they mislike and are angry at, to think that every such thing is scandalous,
and that themselves in this case are the men, concerning whom our Savior spoke
in so fearful a manner, saying, Mat. 18. 6. Whosoever shall scandalize or
offend any one of those little ones which believe in me [that is, as they
construe it, whosoever shall anger the meanest and simplest Artizan which
carries a good mind, by not removing out of the Church such rites and
ceremonies as displease him] better he were drowned in the bottom of the Sea.
But hard were the case of the Church of Christ if this were to scandalize. Men
are scandalized, when they are moved, led and provoked unto sin. At good things
evil men may take occasion to do evil; and so Christ himself was a rock of
offense in Israel, they taking occasion at his poor estate and at the ignominy
of his Cross, to think him unworthy the name of that great and glorious
Messiah, whom the prophe^s describe in such ample and stately terms. S. 12.

iv. Romans 14. 20. All things are clean, all meats are lawful; but evil unto
that man that eats off^nsively. But, their use of meats was not like unto
ours of ceremonies, that being a matter of private action in common life, where
every man was free to order that which himself did; but this a public
constitution for the ordering of the Church: and we are not to look that the
Church should change her public Laws and ordinances, made according to that
which is judged ordinarily and commonly fittest for the whole, although it
chance that for some particular men the same be found inconvenient; especially
when there may be other remedy also against the sores of particular in
conveniences. ib.

v. 1 Cor. 14. 36. Haih the word of God gone out from you, or has it lighted
on you alone? Wherein he teaches the Church of Corinth to know, that there was
no such great odds between them and the rest of their brethren, that they
should think themselves to be gold and the rest to be bu^ copper. Men
instructed in the knowledge of Jesus Christ there both were before you, and are
besides you in the world; ye neither are the fountain from which first, nor yet
the river into which alone the word has flowed. S. 13.

In Book V.
i. Ps 1. 3. IT has been set down as an axiom of good experience, that all
things religiously taken in hand, are prosperously end^d; because whether men
in the end have that which religion did allow them to desire, or that which it
teaches them contentedly to suffer, they are, in neither event unfortunate. S.
1.

ii. 1. Chr. 29. 17. David was a man after Gods own heart, so termed, because
his affection was hearty toward God. Beholding the like disposition in them
which lived under him, it was his prayer to Amighty God, O keep this for ever
in the purpose and thoughts of this people. For, to forsake the true God of
heaven, is to fall into all such evils upon the face of the earth, as men
either destitute of grace divine may commit, or unprotected from above, endure.
ib.

iii. Dan. 3. 29. In zeal to the glory of God Babylon has excelled Sion. We
want that Decree of Nebuchodonosor: the fury of this wicked brood has the
reins too much at liberty, their tongues walk at large, they spitvenome of
their poisoned Hearts breaks ou^ to the annoyance of others; what their
untamed Lust suggesteth, the same their licentious Mouths do every where set
abroach. With our contentions their irreligious humor also is much
strengthened. S. 2.

iv. 2 Chronicles. 2. 5. Signs must resemble the things they signify. If Religion
bear the greatest sway in our hearts, our outward religious Duties must show it
as far as the Church has outward hability. Duties of Religion performed by
whole Societies of men, ought to have in them according to our power a sensible
excellency correspondent to the Majesty of him whom we worship. S. 6.

v. Job 10. 12. Because Wisdom and Youth are seldom joined in one, and the
ordinary course of this World is according to Jobs Observation, who gives men
Advice to seek wisdom among the Ancient, and in the length of days
Understanding; therefore if the comparison do stand between man and man, which
shall hearken unto other, since the Aged for the most part are best experienced,
least subject unto rash and unadvised passions, it has been ever judged
reasonable, that their Sentence in matter of Counsel, should be better trusted,
and more relied upon than other men's. S. 7.

vi. Eccles. 4. 9. That which the Church by her Ecclesiastical Authority shall
probably think, and define to be true and good, must in congruity of reason
overruled all other inferior Judgments whatsoever. To them which ask why we
thus hang our Judgments on the Churches Sleeves, I answer with Solomon, because
two are better than one. The bare consent of the whole Church should it self in
these things stop their Mouths, who living under it, dare presume to bark
against it. S. 8.

vii. Act. 27. 38. The casting away of things profitable for the sustinence of
man's Life, is an unthankful Abuse of the Fruits of Gods good providence toward
Mankind. Which Consideration for all that did not hinder St. Paul from throwing
Corn into the Sea, when care of saving men's lives made it necessary, to lose
that which else had been better saved. Neither was this to do Evil, to the end
that Good might come of it. For of two such Evils, being both not evitable, the
choice of the less is not evil. And Evils must be in our construction judged
ineviable, if there be no apparent ordinary way to avoid them; because where
Counsel and Advice bear rule, of Gods extraordinary power, without
extraordinary Warrant, we cannot presume.

viii. Mat. 21 13. The Argument which our Savior uses against Profaners of
the Temple, he takes from the use whereunto it was with Solemnity consecrated.
And as the Prophet Jeremy forbids the carrying of Burdens on the Sabbath,
because that was a sanctified day: So because the Temple was a place
sanctified, our Lord would not suffer, no not the carriage of a Vessel through
the Temple, ( Mar. 11.) These two Commandments therefore are in the Law
conjoined, Ye shall keep my Sabbath, and reverence my Sanctuary. (Lev. 26.) S.
12.

ix. 1 Cor. 11. 22. Out of those the Apostles Words, Have ye not Houses to eat
and to drink in: albeit, Temples such as now, were not then erected for the
Exercise of Christian Religion, it has been nevertheless not absurdly
conceived, that he teaches what difference should be made between House and
House; that what is fit for the dwelling place of God, and what for man's
Habitation he shows; he requires that Christian men at their own home take
common Food, and in the house of the Lord none but that Food which is Heavenly;
he instructs them, that as in the one place they use to refresh their Bodies,
so they may in the other learn to seek the Nourishment of their Souls; and as
there they sustain temporal Life, so here they would learn to make provision
for Eternal. Christ could not suffer that ^he Temple should serve for a place
of Mart, ^or the Apostle of Christ, that the Church should be made an Inn. ib.

x. Act. 28. 11. In the use of those Names whereby we distinguish both days
and months, are we culpable of Superstition, because they were who first
invented them? The sign of Castor and Pollux superstitiously given unto that
Ship wherein the Apostle sailed, polluteth not the Evangelist's Pen, who
thereby does but distinguish that Ship form others. S. 13.

xi. 1 Chronicles. 29. 14. In our bounteous Expenses on Gods house, we give unto God
a Testimony of our cheerful ^ffection, which thinks nothing too dear to be
bestowed about the Furniture of his Service; and it serves to the World for a
Witness of his Almightiness, whom we outwardly honor with the chiefest of
outvvard things, as being of all things himself incomparably the greatest. S.
15.

xii. Act. 15. 21. The Church as a Witness, preaches Gods mere revealed Truth,
by reading publicly the sacred Scripture. Thus we man the more boldlier
speak, being strengthened with the Example of so Reverend a Prelate as says,
that Moses from the time of ancient Generations, and Ages long since past, had
amongst the Cities of the very Genti(...) them that preached him, in that he
was (...) every Sabbath way. For so of necessity must be meant, in as much as
we kn^^ that the Jews have always had their we(...) readings of the Law of
Moses; but that t(...) always had in like manner their weekly Sermo(...) upon
some part of the Law of Moses, we (...) where find. S. 19.

xii. Ps. 105. 28. Whereas the Prop^^^ David says concerning Moses and Aar^^
that they were obedient to the word of Go^ and in the self-same place our
allowed trans^^tion says, they were not obedient; what co^^tradiction is
there, if he understanding M^^ses and Aaron, do say, they were not
disobe^^^ent, we applying our speech to Pharaoh, a^^ the Egyptians do say of
them, they were n^^ obedient? Or (which the matter itself w^^ easily enough
likewise suffer) if the Egypti^ans being meant by both, it be said, th^^ they
in regard of their offer to let g(...) the people, when they saw the fearful
darkness, disobeyed not the word of the Lord and yet that they did not obey his
word, i^ as much as the Sheep and the Cattle, at the self-same time they
withheld? ib.

xiii. Io. 20. 31. The end of all scripture is the same which St. John
proposes in the ^riting of that most divine Gospel, namely ^ith, and through
faith salvation, Yea all ^cripture is to this effect in it self available, ^s
they which wrote it were persuaded; ^nless we suppose that the Evangelist or
others in speaking of their own intent to in^truct and to save by writing, had
a secret conceit which they never opened unto any, conceit that no man in the
World should ^ver be that way the better for any sentence by them written, till
such time as the same might chance to be preached upon, or al^edged at the
least in a Sermon. S. 22.

xiv. 1 Cor. 1. 21. That which must save believers, is the knowledge of the
Cross of Christ, the only subject of all our preaching; and in the Gentiles
eyes what does this seem as yet but folly? It pleases God by the foolishness
of preaching to save. These words declare how admirable force those mysteries
have which the World does deride as follies; they show that the foolishness of
the Cross of Christ, is the Wisdom of true believers; they concern the object
of our Faith, the matter preached of, and believed in by Christian men. This we
know that the Grecians or Gentiles did account foolishness; but that they ever
did think it a fond or unlikely way to seek men's Salvation by Sermons, we have
not heard. ib.

xv. 1. These. 5. 17. When as every other dut^ besides is but to show it self as
time and opportunity require, for prayer all tim^s ar^ convenient: when we are
not able to do any other thing for men's behoof, when through maliciousness or
unkindness they vouch safe not to accept any other good at our hands prayer is
that which we always have in our power to bestow, and they never in theirs to
refuse. S. 23.

xvi. Mat. 21. 13. The place of assembly, although it serve for other uses as
well as pra^er, yet seeing that our Lord himself has to this as to the
chiefest of all other plainly sanctified his own Temple, by entituling it the
house of prayer, what pre-eminence of dignity soever has been either by the
ordinance, or through the special favor and providence of God annexed unto his
Sanctuary, the principal cause thereof must needs be in regard of Common
Prayer. S. 23.

xvi. 1 Cor. 11. 10. If (as the gravest of the ancient Fathers teach) that the
house of prayer is a Court beautified with the presence of celestial powers,
that there we stand, we pray, we sound forth hymns unto God, having his Angels
intermingled as our associates, and that with reference hereunto the Apostle
does require so great care to be had of decency for the Angels sake; how can we
come to the house of prayer, and not be moved with the very glory of the place
it self, so to frame our affections praying as does best beseem them whose
suits the Almighty does there sit to hear, and his Angels attend to further?
When this was engrafted in the mind of men, there needed no penal statutes to
draw them unto public prayer; the warning sound was no sooner heard but the
Churches were presently filled, the pavements covered with bodies prostrate,
and washed with their tears of devout joy.

xvii. Lu. 11. 1. That our Savior did but set men a bare example how to
contrive or devise prayers of their own, and no way bind them to use this, is
no doubt an error. John the Baptists disciples which had been always brought
up in the bosom of Gods Church from the time of their first infancy till they
came to the school of John, were not so brutish that they could be ignorant
how to call upon the name of God, but of their master they had received a form
of prayer amongst themselves, which form none did use saving his disciples, so
that by it as by a mark of special difference they were known from others. And
of this the Apostles having taken notice, they request that as John had taught
his, so Christ would likewise teach them to pray. S. 35.

xviii. Ephesians. 5 9. The greatest part of our daily service consists, according
to the blessed Apostles own precise rule, in much variety of Psalms and Hymns,
for no other purpose, but only that out of so plentiful a treasure t^ere might
be for every man's heart to choose out his own sacrifice, and to offer unto God
by particular secret instinct what fitteth best the often occasions which any
several either party or congregation may seem to have. S. 43.

xix. Ps. 39. 5. In reference to other creatures of this inferior world man's
worth and excellency is admired: compared with God, the truest inscription
wherewith we can circle so base a coin is that of David, Vniversa vanitas est
omnis homo: whosoever has the name of a mortal man, there is in him whatsoever
the name of vanity does comprehend. S. 47.

xx. 1 Timothy 2. 3. By entreating for mercy toward all, we discharge that duty
which the Apostle himself does impose on the Church of Christ as a commendable
office, a sacrifice acceptable in Gods sight, a service according to his heart,
whose desire is to have all men saved, a Work most suitable with his purpose,
who gave himself to be the price of Redemption for all, and a forcible mean to
procure the conversion of all such, as are not yet acquainted with the
Mysteries of that Truth, which must save their souls. S. 49.

xxi. 1 Cor. 13. 7. Concerning the state of all men with whom we live, the
safest axioms for Charity to rest it self upon, are these, He which believes
already is, and He which believes not as yet, may be the Child of God. It
becomes not us during life altogether to condemn any man, seeing that (for any
thing we know) there is hope of every man's Forgiveness, the possibility of
whose Repentance is not yet cut off by Death. And therefore Charity which
hops all things, prays also for all men. ib.

xxii. Romans 9. 3. Our prayers for all men's good, no less than for our own, the
Apostle with very sit terms commends, as being (...), a Work commendable for
the largeness of the affection from whence it springs; even as theirs, which
have requested at Gods hands the Salvation of many, with the loss of their own
souls, drowning as it were, and over -whelming themselves in the abundance of
their Love toward others, is proposed as being in regard of the Rareness of
such affections, (...), more than excellent. ib.

xxiii. 1 Timothy 2. 1. Our Prayers for all men God accepts, in that they are
conformable unto his general Inclination, which is, that all men might be
saved; yet always he grants them not, for as much as there is in God
sometimes a more private occasioned Will, which determines the contrary. So
that the other being the rule of our actions, and not this, our Requests for
things opposite to this Will of God, are not therefore the less gracious in his
sight. ib.

xxiv. Ioh. 1. 14. The Word, says St. John, was made flesh, and dwelt in us.
The Evangelist uses the plural Number, Men for Manhood, us for the Nature
whereof we consist; even as the Apostle denying the Assumption of Angelical
Nature, says likewise in the plural number, he took not Angels, but the seed
of Abraham, Heb. 2. S. 52.

xxv. Psalm. 139. 7. Impossible it is that God should withdraw his presence from
any thing, because the very substance of God is infinite. He fills Heaven and
Earth ( Ier. 23. 24.) although he take up no room in either, because his
substance is immaterial, pure, and of us in this World so incomprehensible,
that albeit, no part of us be ever absent form him, who is present whole unto
every particular thing, yet his presence with us we no way discern, further
than only that God is present, which partly by Reason, and more perfectly by
Faith, we know to be firm and certain. S. 55.

xxvi. Phil. 2. 9. The Son of God which did first humble himself, by taking our
flesh upon him, descended afterward much lower, and became according to the
flesh obedient, so far as to suffer Death, even the Death of the Cross for all
men, because such was his Fathers Will. The former was an Humiliation of Deity,
the latter, an Humiliation of Manhood; for which cause there follovved upon
the latter an Exaltation of that which was humbled; for with Power he created
the World, but restored it by Obedience. In which Obedience, as according to
his Manhood, he had glorified God on Earth, so God has glorified in Heaven
that Nature which yielded him Obedience, and has given unto Christ even in
that he is man such fullness of power, etc. S. 55.

xxvii. 1 Cor. 15. 24. The Scepter of Christ 's spiritual Regiment over us in
this present world, is at the length to be yielded up into the hands of the
Father which gave it; that is to say, the use and exercise thereof shall cease,
there being no longer any Militant Church to govern. This Government he now
exercises both as God and as Man; as God by essential presence with all
things, as man by cooperation with that which especially is present. S. 55.

xxviii. Act. 17. 28. All things which God has made, are in that respect the
Offspring of God, they are in him as effects in their highest cause; he like
wise actually is in them, the assistance and influence of the Deity in their
life. Let hereunto saving efficacy be added, and it brings forth a special
Offspring amongst men, containing them to whom God has himself given the
gracious and amiable Name of Sons. S. 56.

xxix. 1 Cor: 15. 47. We are by Nature the Sons of Adam. When God created Adam,
he created us, and as many as are descended from Adam have in themselves the
Root out of which they spring. The Sons of God we neither are all, not any one
of us, otherwise than only by Grace and Favor. The Sons of God have Gods own
natural Son, as a second Adam from Heaven, whose Race and Pro^eny they are by
Spiritual and Heavenly Birth, ib.

xxx. Ephesians. 1. 4. God therefore loving Eternally his Son, he must needs
eternally in him have loved and preferred before all others them which are
spiritually sithence descended and sprung out of him. These were in God as in
their Savior, and not as in their Creator only. It was the purpose of his
saving goodness, his saving wisdom, and his saving power, which inclined it
self toward them. They which thus were in God eternally by their intended
admission to life, have by vocation or adoption God actually now in them, as
the artificer is in the work which his hand does presently frame. ib.

xxxi. 1 Cor. 12. 27. They which belong to the mystical body of our savior
Christ, and be in number as the stars of heaven, divided successively by reason
of their mortal condition into many generations, are notwithstanding coupled
every one to Christ their head, and all unto every particular person amongst
themselves; in as much as the same spirit, which anointed the blessed soul of
our Savior Christ, does so formalize, unite and actuate his whole race, as if
both he and they were so many limbs compacted into one body, by being quickened
all with one and the same soul. ib.

xxxii. Ex. 4. 24. God which did not afflict that innocent, whose circumcision
Moses had ere-long deferred, took revenge upon Moses himself for the injury
which was done through so great neglect, giving us thereby to understand, that
they whom Gods own mercy saves without us, are on our parts notwithstanding
and as much as in us lies even destroyed, when under unsufficient pretenses we
defraud them of such ordinary outward helps, as we should exhibit. S. 59.

xxxiii. Mat. 9. 13. He which requires both mercy and sacrifice, rejects his
own institution of sacrifice, where the offering of sacrifice would hinder
mercy from being showed. S. 61.

xxxiv. 1 Timothy 2. 12. The Apostles ordinance was necessary against women's
public admission to teach, because those extraordinary gifts of speaking with
tongues and prophesying, with God at that time did not only bestow upon men but
on women also, made it the harder to hold them confined with private bounds. S.
62.

xxxv. Ephesians. 4. 5. Iteration of baptism once given has been always thought a
manifest contempt of that ancient Apostolik Aphorism, one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism, baptism not only one in as much as it has every where the same
substance and offers unto all then the same grace, but one also for that it
ought not to be received by any one man above once. We serve the Lord which is
but one, because no other can be joined with him: we embrace that faith which is
but one, because it admits no innovation: that baptism we receive which is
but one, because it cannot be received often. S. 62.

xxxvi. 1 Pet. 3. 21. The declaration of Justin Martyr concerning baptism
shows, how such as the Church in those days did baptize made profession of
Christian belief, and undertook to live accordingly. Neither do I think it a
matter easy for any man to prove that ever baptism did use to be administered
without interrogatories of these two kinds. Whereunto S. Peter (as it may be
thought) alluding, has said, that the baptism which saves us is(not as legal
purfications were) a cleansing of the flesh from outward impurity, but (...),
an interrogative trial of a good conscience toward God. S. 63.

xvxvii. Apoc. 7. 3. In the forehead nothing more plain to be seen than the
fear of contumely and disgrace. For which cause the scripture (as with great
probability it may be thought) describes them marked of God in the forehead,
whom his mercy has undertaken to keep from final confusion and shame. Not that
God does set any corporal mark on his chosen, but to note that he gives his
elect security of preservation from reproach, the fear whereof does use to show
it self in that part. S. 65.

xxxviii. Mar. 14. 22. Let our Lords Apostle be his interpreter, my body, the
communion of my body, my blood, the communion of my blood, 1 Cor. 10. 16. Is
there any thing more expedite, clear and easy than that as Christ is termed our
life because through him we obtain life, so the parts of this sacrament are his
body and blood, for that they are so to us, who receiving them receive that by
them which they are termed? S. 67.

xxxix. Io. 6. 63. When some did conceive amiss of eating his flesh, our
Savior to abate that error in them gave them directly to understand, how his
flesh so eaten would profit them nothing, because the words which he spoke were
spirit, that is to say, they had a reference to a mystical participation, which
mystical participation gives life. Ib.

xl. Phil. 3. 11. Our general consolation departing this life is the hope of
that glorious and blessed resurrection which the Apostle St. Paul names (...),
to note that as all men shall have their (...), and be raised again from the
dead; so the just shall be taken up and exalted above the rest, whom the power
of God does but raise and not exalt. S. 68.

xli. Exodus 3. 5. If all either places or times were in respect of God alike,
wherefore was it said unto Moses by particular designation, This very place
wherein thou stand is holy ground? Why does the prophet David choose out of
all the days of the year but one whereof he speaks by way of principal
admiration, This is the day which the Lord has made? Psalm 118. 24. No doubt as
Gods extraordinary presence has hallowed and sanctified certain places, so
they are his extraordinary works that have truly and worthily advanced certain
times, for which cause they ought to be with all men that honor God more holy
than other days. S. 69.

xlii. Esa. 1. 13. For as much as the Jews, who alone knew the way how to
magnify God aright, did commonly (as appeared by their wicked lives) more of
custom and for fashions sake execute the services of their religion, than with
hearty and true devotion (which God especially requires) he therefore
protests against their Sabbaths and solemn days as being therewith much
offended. S. 70.

xliii. Gal. 4. 10. St. Paul, although it were not his purpose to favor
invectives against the special sanctification of days and times to the service
of God and the honor of Jesus Christ, does notwithstanding bend his forces
against that opinion which imposed on the Gentiles the yoke of Jewish legal
observations, as if the whole world ought for ever and that upon pain of
condemnation to keep and observe the same; such as in this persuasion hallowed
those Jewish Sabbaths, the Apostle sharply reproves saying, Ye observe days
and months, and times and years, I am in fear of you lest I have bestowed upon
you labor in vain. ib.

xliv. Romans 14. 17. Albeit concerning Jewish abstinence from certain kinds of
meats as beng unclean, the Apostle does teach that the kingdom of heaven is not
meat nor drink; he derogates not from that abstinence, whereby we either
interrupt or otherwise abridge the care of our bodily sustenance, to show by
this kind of outward exercise the serious intention of our minds fixed on
heavenlier and better desires, the earnest hunger and thirst whereof depriveth
the body of those usual contentments, which otherwise are not denied unto it.
S. 72.

xlv. Dan. 10. 2, 3. When men fasted it was not always after one and the same
sort, but either by depriving themselves wholly of all food during the time
that their fasts continued, or by abating both the quantity and kind of diet.
We have of the one a plain example in the Ninivites fasting, and as plain a
precedent for the other in the prophet Daniel, I was (says he) in heaviness
for three weeks of days, I ate no pleasant bread neither tasted flesh nor wine.
ib.

xlvi. Mat. 6. 4. Our corrupt inclination well considered, there is cause why
our Savior should account them happiest that do most mourn; and why Solomon
might judge it better to frequent mourning than feasting houses, Eccles. 7. 4.
not better simply and in it self (for then would nature that way incline) but
in regard of us and our common weakness better. ib.

xlvii. Pro. 30. 8. By reason of man's imbecility and proneness to elation of
mind, too high a flow of prosperity is dangerous; too low an ebb again as
dangerous; for that the virtue of patience is rare, and the hand of necessity
stronger than ordinary virtue is able to withstand. Salomons discreet and
moderate desire we all know, give me O Lord neither riches nor poverty.

xlviii. Io. 20. 22. The Holy Ghost may be used to signify not the person
alone, but the gifts of the holy Ghost; and we know that spiritual gifts are
not only habilities to do things miraculous, as to speak with tongues which
never were taught us, to cure diseases without art, and such like; but also
that the very authority and power which is given men in the Church to be
Ministers of holy things, this is contained within the number of those gifts
whereof the Holy Ghost is author: and therefore he which gives this power may
say without absurdity or folly, receive the Holy Ghost, such power as the
Spirit of Christ has endued his Church withal, such power as neither prince
nor potentate, King nor Caesar on earth can give. S. 77.

xlix. Esa. 8. 6. The Prophet Isaiah receiving his message at the hands of God
and his charge by heavenly vision, heard the voice of the Lord saying, whom
shall I send? Who shall go for us? whereunto he records his own answer, then
I said, here Lord I am, send me. Which in effect is the Rule and Canon whereby
touching this point the very order of the Church is framed. The appointment of
times for solemn ordination is but the public demand of the Church in the name
of the Lord himself, whom shall I send, who shall go for us? The confluence of
men whose inclinations are bent that way is but the answer thereunto; whereby
the labors of sundry being offered, the Church has freedom to take whom her
Agents in such case think meet and requisite. S. 77.

l. Toward the ministry, what does the blessed Apostle else but encourage
saying, he which desires it is desirous of a good work? What does he else by
such sentences but stir; kindle and inflame ambition, if I may term that desire
ambition, which coveteth more to testify love by painfulness in Gods service,
than to reap any other benefit? although of the very honor it self, and of
other emoluments annexed to such labors, for more encouragement of man's
industry, we are not so to conceive neither, as if no affection could be cast
toward them without offense. Ib.

li. Revel. 4. 4. A Presbyter, according to the proper meaning of the new
testament, is he unto whom our Savior Christ has communicated the power of
spiritual procreation. Out of twelve patriarchs issued the whole multitude of
Israel according to the flesh. And according to the mystery of heavenly birth
our Lords Apostles we all acknowledge to be the patriarchs of his whole Church.
St. John therefore beheld sitting ab^ut the throne of God in heaven four and
twenty presbyters, the one half Fathers of the old, the other of the new
Testament. S. 78.

lii. Act. 5. 4. It seems in these days a question altogether vain and
superfluous, whether Tithes be a matter of divine right: because howsoever at
the first it might have been thought doubtful, our case is clearly the same now
with theirs unto whom St. Peter sometimes spoke saying, While it was whole it
was whole thine. When our Tithes might have probably seemed our own, we had
color of liberty to use them as we our selves saw good: but having made them
his whose they are, let us be warned by other men's example what it is (...), to
wash or clip that coin which has on it the mark of God. S. 79.

The style of ancient Graunts and Chartersis, We have given unto God both for
us and our heirs for ever. ib.

liii. Tit. 1. 5. Act. 14. 23. Other distinction of Churches there does not
appear any in the Apostles writings, save only according to those Cities
wherein they planted the Gospel of Christ and erected Ecclesiastical Colleges.
Wherefore to ordain (...) throughout every City, and (...) throughout every
Church, do in them signify the same thing. S. 80.

live. 2 Timothy 2. 15. (...) to divide aright does no^e in the Apostles writings
soundness of doctrine only, and in meaning stands opposite to (...) the
broaching of new opinions against that which is received. For questionless the
first things delivered to the Church of Christ were pure and sincere truth.
Which whosoever did afterward oppugn could not choose but divide the Church
into two moieties; in which division, such as taught what was first believed
held the truer part, the contrary side in that they were teachers of novelty
erred. S. 81.

FINIS.

