Due Order of Law and Justice PLEADED AGAINST Irregular and Arbitrary
PROCEEDINGS: In the Case and late Imprisonment of George Whitehead and Thomas
Burr in the City and County Goal of Norwich, from the 21st day of the 1st
Month, called March, 1679. to the 12th day of the 5th Month, called July,
1680. Being an Impartial Account of the most Material Passages (and Letters to
the Magistrates) relating to the said Proceedings with the Prisoners abovesaid.
Wherein the People called Quakers are Vindicated and Cleared from POPERY.

Published for Information and Caution, on the behalf of True Protestants and
English-mens Birthrights.

Jer. 5.26. For among my People are found Wicked men, they lay wait as he that
sets Snares; they set a Trap, they catch men.

London, Printed by Andrew Soul, and sold at his Shop in Devonshire
New-buildings, without Bishops-Gate, 1680.

TO THE READER
Serious Reader;
ALthough the Publication of this noted Case of our Friends George Whitehead
and Thomas Burr has been for some time delayed, through other occasions of
Truth's concern intervening, yet it is not meet that such matters should be
buried in Oblivion, or be laid by in Obscurity; wherefore at the desire of many
Judicious and Well-meaning Persons (with respect to the good of our Nation and
English Birthrights) is this following Treatise exposed to public view, not
in Revenge to the Persecutor of our Friends, but for Instruction and Warning
for time to come, especially of men in Commission for the Peace. The late
Irregular and Unjust Proceedings against these our Friends concerned, and how
well the Lord enabled them to acquit themselves, both as Englishmen and
Christians in defense of their Christian cause, many have understood; and their
Christian and Gentle Behavior toward the Magistrates, their Language in the
following account bespeaks, wherein they do as well confess the civility of
those Magistrates of Norwich, as impartially detect the Irregularities and
Injustice of their Persecutor. I am not ignorant what the Judgment of able
Counsel was in their case, I being one that made Inquiry therein, as to matter
of Law, and 'twas concluded that it was False Imprisonment, being Against Law;
and knowing our Friends Innocence and good Repute among their Neighbors, etc.
as real Protestant Christians, this following Account is the more freely
recommended to thy most Serious and Imparial perusal and consideration.

E. Hooks.

A Short TABLE Directing to the Matters treated on in the following Case.
AN account of the Imprisonment, page 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. The Prisoners Letter
before the Quarter Sessions for the City and County of Norwich, p. 6, 7, 8. The
substance of the Proceedings at Quarter Sessions, from p. 10, to p. 35. in
which are contained certain debates about the reading the Mittimus. The
severity and unfair dealing of Francis Bacon Recorder, from p. 10, to p. 19.
The Mittimus and Warrant, p. 19, 21. Eight Exceptions against the second
Warrant for the strict detention of the Prisoners, p. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. The
Prisoners Protestation against Popery read in Court, p. 28, 29. About the Oath,
Praemunire, Conscienee, Law, Controversy about their Discharge, the Recorder's
unfair proceeding, p. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35. The Commitment from Sessions, and
Certificates on the Prisoners behalf, p. 36, 37. Certain Letters and
Applications of Moment sent from the Prisoners to the Mayor, Justices,
Aldermen, New Recorder and Steward of Norwich, p. 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44,
45. A Narration of the Prisoners Case, directed to the Mayor and Justices, p.
46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53. To the Recorder and Steward; a Comprehensive
State of the Case, p. 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61. A Copy of Francis Bacon's
Warrant for leavying the Fines, p. 62, 63. Exceptions against his requiring the
Oath of Allegiance, and his Commitment from Sessions, p 63, 64. Of Praemunire;
the said Exceptions about the tender of the Oath de Novo further argued, from
p. 65, to p. 74. A more general Plea in the Prisoners case about the Reasons of
the Oath, and of the Penalty of Praemunire, from p. 75, to p. 86. Exceptions
which the Prisoners had in readiness in Court against the manner of their
Imprisonment, p. 86, 87, 88, 89. Notes out of Dalton and others, concerning the
breach of the Peace, and Assemblies; what are unlawful, and what lawful, p. 89,
90, 91. A Copy of the Discharge of the aforesaid Prisoners, p. 91, 92.
Assemblies of the People called Quakers vindicated, from the charge of their
being in Disturbance of the public Peace, p. 93, 94, 95, 96, 97. Norwich; An
account of the People called Quakers sent to Prison by Francis Bacon when he
was Steward, and also since he was Recorder, p. 97, 98, 99. Norwich; A brief
account of what Goods have been taken from some of the People called Quakers in
Norwich, since the Year 1670. to the 30th day of the 1st Month, 1680. by
Warrants from Francis Bacon, p. 99, 100. A Copy of an Address from our
Suffering Friends in Norwich, in the Year 1679. directed to the Knights and
Burgesses for the County of Norfolk and City of Norwich. p. 101, 102, 103.
A Brief Account of the late Proceedings in the City of NORWICH, against George
Whitehead and Thomas Burr, by Francis Bacon, Recorder, about their late
Imprisonment in the said City, the 21st Day of the 1st Month, called March,
1679/80.
WE, the said George Whitehead and Thomas Burr, providentially and unexpectedly
meeting together, about 10 or 12 Miles from the City of Norwich, the 19th day
of the 1st Month, and Year abovesaid, we were both determined (from a
Necessity upon our Spirits, in true Friendship and Christian-Charity) to visit
our Friends at their public Meeting in the said City, on the first day of the
Week next following, which was the 21st day of the same Month, 1680. which we
could not well omit, as with clearness in the sight of God, or with inward
Satisfaction to our Consciences, although we understood beforehand what Evil
Agents, Persecuting Informers and Disturbers were apt to be busy against our
Friends Meeting in that City; we freely submitted to the Will of God, and with
our Eye to him resigned to divine Providence, as to what might be suffered to
come to pass for the holy Truth's sake and service. The account of that day's
Transaction with us follows.

Upon the 21st day of the 1st Month, 1680. being the first day of the Week,
the Meeting of the People called Quakers, of the said City, continued peaceable
in the Forenoon, and likewise in the Afternoon, for about half of the usual
Time of the Meeting, in which time, Thomas Burr had an opportunity peaceably to
declare the Truth, and after him George Whitehead for a little space; in the
enterim came in a rude Company, chiefly Informers, Tumultuously and Violently
crowding into the Meeting, to pull G.W. down: He diverse times required them to
show some Legal Authority: They used several abusive words, and endeavored to
insinuate to the People, That he might be a Jesuit; and demanded our Names and
Places of Abode. G.W. detected their Abuse and false defaming Insinuation to
the People, and discovered his Name and Habitation, to prevent Suspicion in the
People. Again, he demanded by what Authority they came thus to disturb our
Meeting, and call us in Question? bidding them produce their Warrant; but they
refused to give Account, or show any Warrant. So after some Tumultuous Bustie,
and Hiddious Noise that they made in the Meeting (being prevented by the great
Crowd, from coming at us to hale us away) the chief of them withdrew; and in a
little time after, one of the Sheriff, i.e. Tho. Seamans.
of the City came in, calling for us, and came to us (the People making way for
him) he required us to go along with him, taking G.W. fast hold by the hand,
and led him along out of the Meeting, near about half way to the Prison, with
other Persons with him, that were the Disturbers and Informers, to guard us
along to the Prison; the Sheriff turned us in at the Goal Door, and left us
there, where we were detained about two Hours, and then were sent for, and by
the Jailer were had before Justice Bacon, the then Recorder of the City, who
after some time called us into a Room (many other Persons coming in) where the
Priest i.e. Priest Whitefoot.
of the Parish was also with him, who at first seemed offended, and began to
Question with us about our Hats, and afterward about Sacraments, etc. often
interrupting and interposing between us and the Justice, as one seeking
occasion against us, but was plainly answered and reprehended by us, the
Prisoners, for his Incivility, though the Recorder showed no dislike of his
Carriage; who having his Law Books and Bible before him, first begun with us
about our Names, Habitations and Trades; and enquired, If we were in Orders, or
had Orders from Rome. To all which we gave him a plain Account, denying any
such Orders; and solemnly (in the Presence of God) declared our Abhorrance of
Popery. Then he Questioned us about our Preaching that day in the Meeting. To
which we also gave him a Plain and Christian Answer. After some Discourse, he
read part of the Act against Conventicles, 22 Car. 2. Cap. 1. and insisted upon
it, That we were Offenders of it; and threatened, that he would Fine us 20 l. a
man; and then demanded of us to Deposit the Money: But we told him, we had not
Freedom to do that, although we have Estate^ Responsible (that lie open to the
Law) where our Habitations are: This we told him, and did somewhat insist upon
it, that he might not F^ne others on our account: And partly to prevent him
from imposing the Oath of Allegiance upon us, to circumvent and entrap us, he
being about it, questioned us, Whether we would take it or not? We answered in
General, That we could take no Oath for Conscience sake; and therefore desired
him to take that as a Caution, not to go about to ensnare us therewith, since
he had begun with us upon another Statute, touching our Meeting. He said, If we
would neither pay the Fines, nor take the Oath, he would commit us to Goal: And
finding none ready to deposit the Fines, the Informer whispered him in the Ear
(as he suffered him several times to do, though requested by the Prisoners to
the contrary,) Then he enquired, When we came into the City? and where we
lodged? and where we set up our Horses? To all which we gave him account;
whereupon one or more of the Informers (after some whispering with the
Recorder) went from him to the Inn where our Horses stood, but in the very
enterim some Friends took them away unknown to us the Prisoners, (though some
have wrongfully upbraided us in that matter, as craftily designing and knowing
of it.) So he told us, He would commit us to Prison, till next Sessions, and
there the Oath of Allegiance should be again tendered us; and we should be
Praemunired if we refused to take it: But if we would pay our Fines, he should
not send us to Prison: Which we not doing (having told him where our
Habitations and Estates were, which were Responsible) he concluded with these
Words, viz. De non aparentibus et non existentibus eadem est ratio; Of things
not appearing, and things not in being, there is the same Reason, i.e. Our
Estates that are at London and Ware appear not at Norwich; therefore they are
not in Rerum Natura, or not in being. -- Strange kind of Logic, or Reason in
this Case! After a little space he told us, That if we would give in Security
to appear at (...) Quarter Sessions, he would not send (...) to Goal: Which we
not having Freedom to give, we requested of him, That he would but let us lodge
out of Prison that Night, that convenient Lodging might be made ready in Prison
for us (it being then somewhat late in the Evening) we promising (God willing)
to appear at Prison next Morning; and some others present, proffering to Engage
for our forthcoming then: No, by no means would he grant us that small
Civility, unless we would Engage in 40 l. Bond or Security for our appearance
next Morning at Prison; which Kindness of his, not being worth farther
Discourse, we accepted not of it. So he sent us that Night to the Goal, where
we remain satisfied in the Will of the Lord, to wait upon him in Patience and
Submission to his good Pleasure.

Many material things passed between us, which cannot well be Collected in due
Order, others are omitted for brevitys sake.

G.W. and T.B. Prisoners,
Norwich-Goal, the 22d day of the 1st Month, 1680.

POSTSCRIPT.
Note,
THat among other Reflections, the Recorder (rendering the said Prisoners
Seducers, Seditious, etc.) he told them of a Statute yet in Force, that was
made in Q. Elizabeth's days 35 Eliz. cap. 1.
To Hang such Persons as they were. Being asked by the Prisoners, If he could
prosecute them upon that Law, or execute it upon them? He answered, Yes, if the
King should give Order to have it put in Execution, he would do it; he would
prosecute them, and have them Hanged, if they would not abjure the Realm, etc.
or to that effect.

After the Substance of the Account given before was writ, these following
Testimonies were by some Friends delivered to the Prisoners, wherein are the
Names of some of the Tumultuous Disturbers and Informers beforementioned, some
whereof refused to tell their own Names, when asked in the said Meeting.

This was observed in the late Disturbance of our Meeting in Norwich, the 21st
day of the 1st Month, 1680. That Paul Hartly, one of the chief of them, was
seen to snatch off John Sharpings Hat and threw it a great way over the Peoples
Heads in his Wrath.

Certified by Ambrose Ansell and John Sharping.

THe 21st day of the 1st Month, 1680. one Christopher Nobs, Clerk of Gregory's
Parish, came into the Meeting at Norwich, Pushing on each side with his Elboes,
and smote Rose Gogny such a hard blow on her Breast, that her Breast was sore
several days. Also Charles Alden, the Vintner, at the Sign of the
Chairing-Gross, came calling out, Here Is Sons of Whores! Here Is five Hundred
Sons and Daughters of Whores! The Church Doors stand open, but they will be
Hanged before they will come there. And whilst a Friend was speaking, the said
Alden said, Pull down that Puppy-dogg; why suffer you him to stand there
Prating?

Robert Robinson, Rose Gogny.

It plainly then appeared, that the said C. Alden, and the rest of those Rude
and Tumultuous Persons behaved themselves more like Atheists and Bruit Beasts,
than Persons of any Seriousness, Regard to Religion or Christianity: Nay, let
Humanity and Common Civility condemn their Deportment. What Ornament such Sons
of the Church can be to her, let their Priests, and all serious Persons judge
(though the said Alden be accounted a great Singer at the Cathedral, i.e. one
of their Singing-men) how Immoral and Brutish was his Behavior? How busy was
he also with the Recorder against the Prisoners, informing, muttering and
whispering against them? greatly inconsistent with so much as the pretense of
common Justice to suffer, much more to countenance such work. Surely the
Righteous Judge of all will plead with all such Malicious Agents, and such
Injustice will not go Unrebuked.

Here follows a Copy of the Prisoners Letter, delivered to the Mayor before the
Quarter Sessions, containing a twofold Request, etc.
To the Mayor, Justices and Aldermen of the City of Norwich.
WE whose Names are hereunto subscribed, being Prisoners in your City Goal for
our Conscience toward God, do heartily wish Health, Happiness, and Prosperity
in the Way of Righteousness, unto you all; and desire of the All-seeing and
Heart-searching God, that you may be preserved from all Injustice,
Prejudication and Arbitrary Proceedings, both in our Case (which we understand
is to come before you) and in all other Cases proper to your Cognizance, as
Civil Magistrates, wherein you are required to discharge a good Conscience,
both in the sight of God and Men, as that which will greatly tend to your Peace
with God, and your Reputation among good Men.

For as much as we have for some Weeks been detained Prisoners in your City
Goal, and you have had no hand therein (saving that one Person, by whom we were
committed) we are the more encouraged to make this brief Application to you,
upon a twofold Request, on this wise:

1st, We Request your Moderation and Indifferency so far toward us, as that
when we are called before you, as a Court of Judicature in your
Quarter Sessions (to hear and determine Matters, that come Judicially before
you) you will please to hear us with Patience, and suffer us to open our Case
and to Plead and Argue, whether it be in point of Law, Conscience, Reason or
Fact, as our Case shall require. First, Hear before you Determine, that we may
not be over born, nor run down, nor any such Precipitation used toward us in
Court, to divert or prevent us from making our Defense, in referance to the
Prosecution and Charge we suffer under.

2dly, We further Request, That if upon a deliberate hearing, and due enquiry
into those Proceedings which we suffer under, we make it appear, that we are
Illegally and Unduely proceeded withal, besides and contrary to due process and
order of Law, that then you will not countenance, abet, nor confirm such
Proceedings against us, but stand clear thereof, and show your Dissent; for
whoever be deputed Judge in your Court, as the King's Minister and Mouth of the
Court, it is no otherwise so legally intended, than as he shall appear to be the
Minister and Mouth of the Law and Justice, or Lex Loquens; and therefore cannot
be reasonable or safe, nor yet for your Reputation, or the Honor of your
Court, to espouse or confirm any Prosecution or Proceedure that is Injurious or
contrary to due course of Law, and so tending to the 37 Ed. 3. c. 18.
Grief and Dishonor of the King, or Destruction of any of his peaceable People.

Now we hope you will not deny, but assent to these two foregoing Propositions,
as Just and Reasonable: And therefore, that we shall not need now to urge upon
you, but only Re-mind you of these material Points of Law following.

1 st, It is the Kings Will (in point of Law) That all his Justices, Sheriffs,
Mayors and other his Ministers, which under him have the Laws of the Land to
guide. shall allow the great Charter of the Liberties of England, pleaded in
all its Points. 25 Ed. 1. c. 1. Cook Inst. 2 part sol. 527.
2 dly, That if any Judgment given, or any thing done contrary to the Points of
the said Charter by the Justices, or any other the Kings Ministers, that hold
Plea before them against the Points of the Charters, it shall be undone,
redressed and holden for naught. 25 Ed. 1. c. 2. 5 Ed. 3.9.28 Ed. 3.3. etc.
3 dly, The Court ought to be of Counsel with the Prisoner, to see that nothing
be urged against him, contrary to Law and Right. Cook Inst. 3 part fol. 29. 4
thly, That the Court ought to be so far from over-awing, or forcibly diverting
the Prisoner from his Plea or Answer, That the Judge ought to Exhort the
Prisoner to Answer without fear; and that Justice shall be duly administered
unto him. Cook Inst. 2 part fol. 316. 5 thly, That any learned man that is
present, may inform the Court, for the Benefit of the Prisoner, or any thing
that may make the Proceedings Erroneous: As also (even in Cases highly
Criminal) it is lawful for any man that is in the Court, to inform the Court,
lest the Court shoulderr, and the Prisoner be Unjustly proceeded with. See Cook
3 part fol. 137. Cook Inst. 3 part fol. 29.

Now Friends, these things are recommended, and left to your serious
Considerations; we not designing hereby (as you may easily understand) to enter
into the Merits or Justification of our Cause; but fairly to introduce the
Right and Legal Cognizance thereof, in order to have Justice and Right done us,
as ENGLISH MEN, and as we are your Well-wishers.

George Whitehead, Thomas Burr.
^orwich-Goa^, the 17th of the 2d Month, 1680. We desire this may be
Communicated.

An Account of the substance or principal Parts of the Proceedure at the
Quarter Sessions at Norwich, holden for the City and County of the same, the
18th Day of the Month, called April, 1680. In the Case of George Whitehead and
Thomas Burr, Prisoners for the Testimony of their Conscience. Francis Bacon,
the late Recorder of Norwich, being Prosecutor, Accuser and Judge: But the
Mayor and other Justices more indifferent and Judicious toward the Prisoners.
Collected and compared by several Hands, and digested into as much Order, as
the Capacity the Sufferers, and the Circumstances of Proceedings would admit.
THe Quarter Sessions for the City and County of Norwich begun the 19th Day of
April, (so called) 1680. Adjourned until the 26th, and continued the 27th and
28th of the same. And again, Adjourned until the 17th of May, 1680. The
aforesaid Prisoners, G.W. and T.B. were called into Court the 27th of April, in
the Year above said; nothing said to them then by the Court: but they returned
back immediately to Prison, upon pretense of a mistake about their being called
forth.

At the Quarter Sessions for the City and County of Norwich, the 28th Day of
April, (so called) 1680.
1. THe Prisoners were brought to the Bar.

2. Their Hats ordered to be taken off.

3. Their Hats taken off.

4. G.W. standing up to the Bar, begun thus, viz.

The Law of England requires two things of the Court, with respect to the
Prisoners, viz. 1 st, The patience of the Court; And 2 dly, The Indifferency of
the Court
toward the Prisoners.

That their Case may be patiently heard and considered, (without Prejudication)
before any Judgment pass against them. This we expect from the Court.

We have been five Weeks in Prison: It Is meet the Court should know for what.
Pray let our Mittimus be produced, and read in Court; that it may be understood
what Charge we suffer under.

Our Suffering is two fold: 1 st, Above five Weeks confinement: 2 dly, The
Charge that is against us in the Mittimus. We request that the Mittimus may be
produced, and read in Court.


Recorder. There Is no need of your Mittimus to be read here; I Will give Account
of the Cause: I Will inform the Court. These Persons had been two An Untruth.
Months from home, and had been up and down the Country in Suffolk Not true of
T.B. 'twas only G.W.
at a Burial, etc. And then they came hither, and here they gathered a company
together of about two Hundred; and the Officers went from me to dissipate them,
but could not; whereupon I sent the Sheriff, and he took them away, and put
them in Prison. The Prisoners had not opportunity to speak to all this Account.
-- And then they were brought before me; and after Conviction made, I
proffered them, That if they would pay their Fines -- I would not commit them
to Prison; but when they would not, I tendered the Oath of Allegiance to them:
And after they would not take it, I sent them to Goal; as I think, I very well
might.


G.W. We are Englishmen, and have right to Travel in any part of the Nation,
etc.


T.B. I am a Person that have been concerned in Trading in Corn, as well in
this County as in others; and by the Law of England a Man may Travel from place
to place about his Concerns, and ought not to be molested, while he walks
peaceably, etc.


R. Had not you better been turning your Molt at home, then to come here to
Preach? -- The Apostle Paul exhorts to follow the Vocation whereunto ye are
called. -- The Scripture says, God added to the Church such as should be saved:
But ye draw from the Church.


Prisoners Note.
The Prisoner heard not these Words, but some others affirmed they did: However,
had the Prisoner heard this Reflection before, upon a fair debate upon the
Point, he might have answered the Recorder; That to be a Tradesman, or Laymen
(so called) is not inconsistant with being a Preacher of the Gospel. When God
added to the Church, it was through Laymens preaching, such as Fishermen,
Handicraftsmen, and such like. It Is Popery, and the Popish Spirit, that would
hinder Laymen and laboring men (being endued with the holy Spirit) from being
Preachers of the Gospel; and not the Spirit of Moses, who wished, that all the
Lords People were Prophets; nor the Spirit of the holy Prophets, Christ or his
Apostles, who did not go about to exclude Laymen, or Mechanics (so called)
from preaching the Gospel; for the best Preachers were generally such in the
Prophets and Primitive Christians days.

R. There is a Law -- And the Church of England will never be at quiet, till
some of you be Hanged by that Law (or till such fellows as you are Hanged.)


G.W. The Court may see the frame of the Recorders Spirit toward us, and that
he stands not as a Person Indifferent, but a party against us. Thou ought
not to inveigh against the Prisoners, nor threaten us. That stands not with the
indifferency of the Court, nor yet thy determining or resolving aforehand
against us, as thou have done. Judges ought not to declare their Opinions
aforehand against the Prisoner: Hussy, the Chief Justice would not do it to
the King, in the Case of Humphry Stafford, the Arch Traitor, but begged of the
King, He would not desire him to declare his Opinion aforehand, that the
Prisoner might come Judicially before him, and have Justice done him. See Cook,
3 part Inst. fol. 29.
And the King accepted his Request in the Case -- Interrupted.


R. What King's Reign was that in?


G.W. In King Henry the sevenths.


R. I perceive you have read (or are read.)


G.W. Seeing that none of the Court have as yet had any Hand against us, except
the Recorder; we may charitably hope, that the Court will stand indifferent
toward us, and let us have a fair hearing before any Determination. For as the
Laws of our Nation require a due process, a due course of proceeding, before
men be Sentenced or Condemned. So there ought to be a due hearing: As where a
process or proceeding consists of several parts; each part ought to be enquired
into, and answered in due order, without confounding one thing with another, or
putting that first, which in course is last. Let us have a fair hearing and
Trial. Let Us be tried before we be Hanged. Let Us not be Hanged first, and then
Tried: 'Twill be too late to try us after we are Hanged, etc.


R. You were sent to Prison for refusing the Oath of Allegiance.


G.W. That Is a mistake: We were sent to Prison for being at a Meeting, charged
to be against the Peace, which is the Premises in our Mittimus, to which we
are here to Answer. And therefore that all may know what is laid to our Charge,
we desire our Mittimus may be read, that so, if there be any Persons, that will
undertake to prove the matter in Charge, let us see them, and have liberty to
answer the Premises contained in the Mittimus.


R. I will show you, that when a Person is committed to Prison, he may have
several Actions laid upon him; if new Charges be brought against him, etc.


Prisoner, I grant that: But that is not our case; for we presume the Recorder
had no new matter brought against us, after he committed us to Prison; and
therefore could not lay any new charge upon us.


T.B. There could not be any new Charge against us, to render us suspicious of
being Jesuits or Papists; but instead of that we have Certificates to take off
any Jealousies of that kind, that might be in any concerning us, which are
subscribed by Credible Persons of our Neighbourhoo^d


G.W. The Premises which we are to answer to, is matter of charge, contained
in the Mittimus: Let it be read in Court we request you.


R. It shall not -- I Will give account. These Persons were taken at an unlawful
Meeting. There Is also a second Mittimus, which signifies my requiring them to
take the Oath of Obedience; and their Refusal, etc.


G.W. The second is a Warrant to detain us without Bail or Mainprize, till
Sessions: It Is not the Mittimus, it is of another Date, etc.


R. It Is the Mittimus; and you are to Answer to it, whether you will take the
Oath of Allegiance to the King. These Persons have refused to show their
Obedience to the King, etc.


T.B. Pray forbear to accuse us: We have showed our Obedience by our peaceable
Conversations, etc.


G.W. The second Warrant is not the Mittimus. The Mittimus is that by which we
were sent to Prison, bearing date the 21st day of March. The second Warrant
bears date the 23d day of March.


R. The second is the Mittimus; you are to Answer to it. We Will put the Oath to
you.


G.W. The second is not the Mittimus; we were not sent to Prison by it: We were
sent to Prison the 21st of March. The second Warrant bears date the 23d of
March: We were in Prison (near two days) before the date of the last Warrant:
There needed not be a Mittimus to send us to Goal, when we were sent by one
already so long before. I pray let our Mittimus be read in Court.


R. Put the Oath to them, that is in the second Mittimus, etc.


G.W. I beg of this Court, for God's sake and the King's sake, to be heard
fairly, without thus being run upon: For God's sake, because he is a God of
Justice and Truth: And for the King's sake, because the King's will toward us
(as Subjects) is what the Law and Justice wills. As his Will is the will of the
Law; he wills that none of his Subjects be injured, or unduly prosecuted
contrary to Law. I appeal to the Mayor as chief Magistrate of this City, and
the rest of the Justices here present, Whether ye ought not to see us have that
Right done us, as to have our Mittimus produced and read in Court, that you may
understand the cause of our Commitment: We were not committed for refusing the
Oath. We entreat that the Court may hear our Mittimus, that we may not have
other Premises put upon us, than what is contained therein.


R. It shall not be read; there is no need of that: I am present that committed
you --


G.W. I appeal to the Mayor and the rest of the Justices, who are more
indifferent toward us for Justice in this case, viz. That we may have our
Mittimus read, and answer to the Premises contained in it; and not thus be run
upon and diverted with that which is none of the Premises, etc.


Mayor, You have appealed to me: Truly we are Tradesmen, and no Lawyers. We
leave matters of Law to the Recorder; He knows the Law, and we must acquiess in
his Judgment.


T.B. Thou understandest we ought to have our Mittimus read, and be heard: And
thou art the chief Magistrate in this Court, etc.


G.W. You all have a Conscience toward God, and an equal and just Law therein;
And you are under a severe Obligation, to wit, your Oath, to see Justice and
Right done us. We appeal to the Mayor and Justices here for Justice, in
relation to our Mittimus, that it may not be thus evaded. We are at this
Sessions to answer to the Premises, or matter of charge therein contained; you
are concerned in Conscience to do us ^ight herein. The Honor of this Court is
also concerned not to see us precipitated no^ run down, upon other Premises.
The Mittimus was given under the Hand and Seal of your Recorder; his Reputation
and Honor is also concerned, etc.


R. My Honor concerned; Wherein?


G.W. Thy Reputation and Honor is concerned, in that thou art bound to stand
by our Mittimus; it is under thy Hand and Seal: Now thou go about to evade
it, by imposing other Premises upon us (or to the same effect.)


R. They sent their Mittimus to the Attorney General, and solicited him for
advice, to know whether they were according to Law, or not -- And moved for a
Habeas Corpus: But it would not be granted.


G.W. We neither sent to the Attorney General, nor have we yet moved for a
Habeas Corpus.


R. The second Mittimus or Warrant is about their refusing the Oath of
Allegiance: as for the first, I did not make it by Book. This the Prisoners did
not hear, but others nearer.



G.W. It Is not a reasonable thing to bring a Prisoner, and not withal to
signify the Crimes laid against him: It was contrary to the very Law of the
Romans. -- Interrupted (being about to add) as Festus said in the case of Paul.
It seemed to me a thing unreasonable to send a Prisoner, and not withal to
signify the Crimes laid against him; Acts 25.16,27.
which always ought to be in Warrants of Commitment.


R. What tell you us of the Law of the Romans, we have Laws of our own to act
by, etc. (or to that effect.)


G.W. It Is according to the Law of Reason and Nations, that the Crimes and
Offenses should be known, for which Prisoners are committed and detained in
Prison; else why should they suffer?


R. The Court must tender you the Oath.


G.W. Wherefore then were we committed and detained in Prison above these five
Weeks? If we be Offenders, let us know our Offense, for which we were committed:
If not, do not go about to ensnare us; do not seek occasion against us: It Is
enough to punish us, if found Guilty of what charged against us, in our
Mittimus. We entreat the Mayor and Court to do us right in this matter, that
our Mittimus may be read.


Mayor and some others. Well, you shall have it read.


G.W. Keeper, Where Is our Mittimus, produce it, that it may be read, as the
Mayor and other Justice here present have engaged.


R. Tender them the Oath. Put the Oath to them; If you will take it, that shall
serve, etc. If not, you incur a Praemunire, etc.


A hiddious noise in the Court among some under Clerks and Officers about the
Oath, viz.

Some under Clerks, etc. What say you? Answer. Will you take the Oath? Will you
Kiss the Book?


Clerk reads. I Thomas Whitehead do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess,
testify and declare in my Conscience, etc. Here an Interruption, upon his
mistake of Thomas for George.


G.W. The Oath is none of the Premises contained in our Mittimus, which we are
to Answer to at this Sessions, and to be tried upon.


T.B. Our all is at stake. We perceive the Recorder is determined concerning
us. We must have liberty to speak: We are Freeborn English Men. This on the
Interruption.]


R. We have power here to tender you the Oath, without taking notice of any
other Cause.


G.W. It Is Preposterous to run us upon the Oath in the first place; we being
not committed for that, but for other Causes.


R. You affront the Court. Is that a fit Word to give the Court, to charge the
Court with Preposterous proceedings (or to that effect.)


G.W. I do not charge the Court, I do distinguish between the Recorder in this
point, and the Court: He seeks to run us upon that first, which in course is
last, according to his own Mittimus and Warrant [And is not that Preposterous?]
Let our Mittimus be read, and that will show we were not committed upon the
Oath.


G.W. We ought to have due process or proceeding in due course of Law;
therefore the Court should know, how we were first Arrested, and turned into
Goal by the Sheriff, without Examination, Mittimus or Warrant; and how
afterward had out and committed; and what the Mittimus is; What are the
Premises contained in it, that we are to answer unto.

The Law of England is tender of men's Liberties, Properties, Estates and Lives,
all which are concerned in our Imprisonment; Lex Anglia' is said to be Lex
Misericordiae, i.e. the Law of England is a Law of Mercy; one Reason whereof
is, that the Innocent may not be worn or wasted through long Imprisonment, but
be brought forth speedily to his Trial, according to Magna Charta, etc.


R. Look what an Argument or Consequence you would draw from hence, The Law of
England is a Law of Mercy; it is Lex Misericordiae, therefore Thieves or
Malefactors, etc. must not be brought to condign Punishment, etc. or to that
effect.


G.W. That Is none of my Consequence; mine is the same that Judge Cook does
instance, wherein the Law of England is Lex Misericordiae, in that it is tender
of men's Liberties, and prescribes a due course of Proceedure -- Interrupted --
as it may be applied to our Case. Either we are Innocent or Nocent; if
Innocent, we ought to be heard, and not delayed in Prison; if Nocent or
Criminal, we ought to have due and orderly proceeding, according to the Law of
the Land, that our Offense may the more plainly appear, that others may take
warning thereby, and not incur the like Penalty or Suffering. However, let us
have fair dealing; let us not be unduely run upon, diverted from our Plea, and
our Mouths stopped, so that the Court and People here cannot know what we suffer
for. --

No Freeman shall be taken or imprisoned, or disseized of his Freehold, or
otherwise destroyed, etc. but by due process and order of Law. --

This Magna Charta enjoins, where in the 29th Chapter it is said, No Freeman
shall be taken or imprisoned, etc. but by the Law of the Land; that is, by due
order of Law, by due process, according to Law. The Law of England requires due
process or proceeding, from the very first Arrest, taking and imprisoning to
the very end and execution of the same. Therefore the first Arrest, Imprisoning
and Committing us, ought to be known and understood, whether it was in due
Manner and course of Law, Yea or Nay.

Let us have our Mittimus read, we expect it; it is granted and promised us by
the Mayor and others indifferent. A little respit in expectation of the
Mittimus.


But the R.
Recorder seemed greatly offended at the Prisoners urging this, and at the Mayor
and Justices assenting to it.

G.W. Seeing, that the Law is tender of English men's Liberties, as that no
Freeman shall be taken or imprisoned, etc. without due proceeding in Law, etc.
It Is but meet and reasonable, that the Court and People here should understand
what capacity and repute we are under among our Neighbors, that is, whether as
Freemen of England, and of any Repute among our Neighbors, or as Bondslaves,
Rogues, or Vagrants, Renegado's, etc. Hear what our Neighbors say of us; we
desire their Certificates may be read.


R. What have we to do with your Certificates? will any Swear to them that they
are true ones?


G.W. They are real Certificates; pray let them be read; here they are.


R. We do not know, but that you might make them your selves in Prison.


G.W. They are no Fictions: Pray read them, or let them be read; they are from
Persons of Credit and Repute, as Common Council men, Deputy Constables,
Churchwardens, and others.


R. They shall not be read.


G.W. We beg they may be read: Look upon this Certificate, here is the Persons
own (Different) Hands to it; it may tend to inform the Court, and to remove
Suspicion and Jealousies concerning us [But this would not be granted the
Prisoners.] --


G.W. Seeing our Certificates may not be read, nor suffered to be read (which
is but hard measure) now let our Mittimus be produced [several expecting the
Keeper had sent for it] Pray let us have our Mittimus produced and read.


R. We have it not, the Jailer has it.


G.W. Where is it? Keeper, produce it; thou had it.


R. to the Prisoner, No doubt you have a Copy.


G.W. Yes, we have; May I read it?

I crave Liberty of the Court to read it, that the Court may understand what we
are committed for, and to answer to that, this Court is to take Judicial
Cognizance of, etc.


Court, The Justices asked the Question from one to another to have it read,
generally assenting thereunto, as being of the Mind it ought to be read.


Justice Briggs, I am of the Mind it should be read; What say you Mr. Bendich?


J. Bendich, Yes, truly I am of the mind it should be read.


J. Briggs, Pray speak to Mr. Mayor (which was done.)


Mayor to the Recorder, Sir, the Justices are agreed it should be read.


R. Turning himself toward them, as one greatly offended that the Mittimus
should be read.

G.W. It concerns the Court to let us have our Mittimus read. I am ready to
read the Copy (seeing it may not be otherwise produced and read.) Shall I read?
We expect that Justice from the Court, that it should be read.


R. Let them read it then, I am not ashamed of it; then read the other also,
for you have them both.


Court, You may read it.


G.W. Now we have the leave of the Court; I hope you will keep to it: Observe it,
it is a true Copy. The Mittimus read which follows.


The Mittimus, viz.
City and County of Norwich.
WHereas George Whitehead of the Parish of St Buttolph in London, Grocer, and
Thomas Burr of Ware in the County of Hartford, Maulster, have this day
assembled together, with several other Persons, in Disturbance of the public
Peace, and against the Laws of this Realm; and being required to find Sureties
for their respective appearance at the next General-Sessions of the Peace, Fra.
Bacon.
to be holden for the said City and County, to answer the Premises, which they
refused so to do: These are therefore to will and require you, to receive and
keep the said George Whitehead and Thomas Burr in the common Goal, for the City
and County aforesaid, until they shall be from thence discharged by due order
of Law; And hereof fail not.

Given under my Hand and Seal, the 21st day of March, Anno Dom. 1679.
To the Constables of the Ward of West-Wymor, and to either of them, to convey,
and to your Keeper of the Common Goal aforesaid, to receive and keep the said
George Whitehead and Thomas Burr, according to this Warrant.

G.W. Does the Recorder own this to be a true Copy, Yea or Nay?


R. I care not whether it be true or false; there is another Mittimus against
you, etc.


G.W. Let this Mittimus be considered first: Doft thou own it to be a true
Copy, or no? We have it attested.


R. It may be it is, what then? It may be true for ought I know, etc. [or to
that effect.]


G.W. Then pray observe this Mittimus, the Tenor of it, what it contains.

1 st, As to the Cause of our Commitment.

2 dly, That is the Premises which we are to answer to, and to be tried and
delivered upon.

3 dly, And that according to Law, or according to due course of Law, etc.

1 st, Then the Charge concerns matter of Fact, i.e. being at a Meeting. And

2 dly, What such a Meeting, or how qualified, i.e. A Meeting in Disturbance of
the public Peace, etc.

These are the matters in Charge against us, which the Court ought to take
Judicial Cognizance of; either to acquit us, if Clear, or to condemn us, if
Guilty of any such Meeting.


R. Read the other Mutimus; you have a Copy doubtless.


G.W. We have a Copy of the second Warrant. But this is not to be evaded; this
is the Mittimus; this contains the Cause of our Commitment, and the Charge that
lies against us, etc. which the Court is bound only to take Cognizance of; for
we are thereby referred to the Quarter Sessions.


R. Read the second Warrant, that contains the Cause, to wit, my tendering you
the Oath, etc. By taking whereof you ought to show your Allegiance (or
Obedience) to the King.


G.W. Either the Mittimus is a Legal Mittimus, or it is Illegal; If Legal, then
let us answer to the Premises, etc. If the Oath be insisted upon, to evade the
Mittimus, that will bespeak either want of other matter against us, or else
that the Mittimus or Commitment is Illegal.


R. Read the second Warrant, etc.


G.W. We have Exceptions against the second Warrant: If I read that, the
Exceptions ought also to be read. Shall read them when I have read the Warrant?


Court, Well you may read both.


G.W. Now the Court is engaged and concerned to make good the Liberty granted
me, to read our Exceptions, when the Warrant is read.


The second Warrant read, which follows.
City and County of Norwich.
WHereas George Whitehead and Thomas Burr were lately sent by my Warrant unto
the common Goal for the City and County aforesaid, Francis Bacon.
for being Seditiously assembled with some hundreds of other disloyal Persons
against the public Peace, and in contempt of the Laws and Government of this
Realm. Now for that the said George Whitehead and Thomas Burr are suspicious
Persons and Strangers to this City aforesaid, and being unwilling to declare
that Duty, which they and every true and well affected Subject ought to bear,
by Bond of Allegiance to our Gracious King, they did severally refuse to take
and pronounce the Oath of Obedience to the King's Majesty, duly tendered unto
them; and after, they were severally required to do the same by me. These are
therefore in his Majesty's Name, to will and command you to keep the said
George Whitehead and Thomas Burr in the common Goal for the said City and
County, without Bail or Mainprise, until the next General Quarter Sessions of
the Peace, to be holden for the City and County aforesaid; and hereof fail not.
Given under my Hand and Seal, the 23d day of March, Anno Dom. 1679.

To the Keeper of the Common Goal for the City and County of Norwich.

G.W. I hope the Recorder cannot deny the Copy to be true.


R. I will vindicate it by Law in any Court in England, etc. (or to that
effect.)


G.W. Hear the Exceptions against this Second Warrant: I Will read them
deliberately. If the Court has any thing to object against any particular, that
may be read over again, after the first reading.


Court, Read them. Go on, etc.


The Exceptions against the second Warrant, for detention of the Prisoners in
the Common Goal, without Bail or Mainprise, bearing date the 23d day of March,
Anno Dom. 1679.
Exception I.
First, The Prisoners being committed till Sessions, there to answer to the
Premises contained in their Mittimus: Therefore the Court ought to take
Judicial Cognizance thereof (that is, of the Charge contained in the said
Mittimus) for their Trial and Discharge thereupon, by due order of Law, and not
to suffer the second Warrant to be insisted upon, nor the Mittimus to be evaded.

Exception 2.
Secondly, Because that after the Command given to the Keeper to keep them in
the Common Goal, until the next General Quarter Sessions, etc. The Lawful
Conclusion is wanting, viz. [Until they shall be delivered by due Course of
Law] See Cook in the 2d part of his Institutes, fol. 52. concerning a
Commitment by Lawful Warrant Note, that the Prisoners foreseeing, that the
Recorder would insist upon the second Warrant, as the Mittimus, did therefore
prepare this second Exception.
The Warrant or Mittimus (faith he) containing a Lawful Cause, ought to have a
Lawful Conclusion, viz. And him safely to keep until he be delivered by Law,
etc. And not until the party committing does give further Order. And this does
evidently appear by the Writs of Habeus Corpus, both in the Kings Bench and
Common Pleas, Exchequer and Chancery.

Again, he says, Secondly, The Mittimus ought to be (as has been said) till
he be delivered by Law. Ibid. Cook 2 part Inst fol. 53.

Again, now as the Mittimus must contain the Cause, so the Conclusion must be
according to Law, viz. The Prisoner safely to keep, until he be delivered by
due order of Law; and not until he that made it shall give other Order, or the
like, Ibid. fol. 591, 592.

Exception 3.
The third Exception is deduced by way of inference from the second.
Thirdly, Therefore the Justice had no Legal Power to give other Order or
Warrant, which interposeth between his Commitment of the Prisoners, and their
Delieverance by due course of Law, which is mentioned in the Warrant of
Commitment; but not in this pretended Warrant for detention. The Justice, who
committed the Prisoners, had no legal Jurisdiction over them, thus by himself
to interpose to fasten them. They were thrust out of his hands by their
Commitment, and thereby referred to the Quarter Sessions, for their Discharge
thereupon, by due Order of Law.


[Interruption on the reading the third Exception, in this Objection] viz.

R. If a man owe twenty men Money, the first that Arrests him lays him into
Goal, but the other may lay their Actions upon him, for all that: Or if a man
Robs in several places, and is laid into Goal for one Robbery, and there comes
a Hue-and-Cry after him for another, shall be go free of that, because he is
Arrested already?


G.W. That Is not our Case; there is no parity between them: We were not
committed to Goal on any such account, as upon any Action of Debt, Robbery,
etc. Nor were we Chargeable with any new Matter or Crime, when the second
Warrant was writ, more than when our Mittimus was writ, and we first committed
to Prison. Pray let me read on; the Matter's further cleared.


Exception 4
Fourthly, The second Warrant is contradictory to the first, in that it admits
of no Bail nor Mainprise for the Prisoners, which the first admits of in these
words, viz. Being required to find Sureties for their respective Appearances at
the next General Sessions. Whereas the Prisoners were no more Criminal, when
the second Warrant was made, than when the first was made, being then in Hold
upon their Commitment.

Exception 5.
Fifthly, The Prisoners were not Convented, nor had in Examination before the
Justice, when the second Warrant was made, to answer for themselves, as they
ought Judicially to have been, if he had any new Matter unbailable against
them, or any matter of such High and Criminable Nature, when he made the
second, which he had not, when he made the first, as to render them incapable
of Bail. Therefore his second Warrant is Illegal and Extrajudicial, and the
Court is Bound to take notice of it.


[After the fifth Exception, the Recorder again Interrupted] viz.

R. While I have to do here, I will not suffer my self to be thus reflected
upon. It is a Dishonor to the Court.


Court, How many more have you to read?


G.W. But a very few; I shall quickly have done. You may call for any of them
to be read over again, when I have done.


Court, You may go on. Go on.


Exception 6.
Sixthly, If it be objected, That the Prisoners refused to take and pronounce
the Oath of Obedience to the King, being duly required by Justice Bacon. That
is an apparent Mistake. If the Warrant of their Commitment be of Credit, it
shall be Evidence, in that it admits of Bail, as before: Which the refusal of
the said Oath, being so required admits not of: But the Prisoners were not
committed on that Account. And therefore the second (or Collateral) Warrant,
which is of another date, and no Commitment, is grounded on a mistake in that
point, and is an extrajudicial thing: And therefore not to be taken notice of,
but rejected by the Court, and holden for none.

Exception 7.
Seventhly, Justice Bacon could not legally not duly require the Prisoners
aforesaid to take the said Oath, according to the Tenor and plain express Words
of the Statutes, provided in that case: They not being under those
Circumstances and Causes, which the Law provides and limits, as precedent to
one Justice, his being Authorized to require it. See 3 Jac. c. 4. and 7 Jac. c.
6. and Dalton Just. pac. fol. 94, and 95.


Upon the seventh Exception, when read, the Recorder alleged thus, viz.

R. If I find you under any one of those Circumstances or Causes, I might
tender you it.


Observation added.
1 st, But he did not assign or show any one Circumstance that the Prisoners
were under to Warrant his alone tender of the Oath. However, he hereby granted,
That he had no Power alone to require the said Oath, without limitation of such
precedent Circumstances.

2 dly, The Circumstances and Causes precedent, and prescribed by the Statute,
7 Jac. c. 6, are;

The Persons standing Indicted or Convicted for not coming to Church, etc. or
complained of by the Minister, Petty-Constable and Churchwardens (or any two
of them) to any Justice of Peace near adjoining to the place, where any Person
complained of shall dwell, etc. ('It Is only in such case, that one Justice has
Power to require the said Oath: His Power is apparently limited by the Law to
certain precedent Circumstances) under which Circumstances and Capacity neither
the Prisoners nor the Justice stood; and therefore were not in statu quo, for
the Oath to be legally required of them by one Justice.

Exception 8.
Eighthly, The Oath of Obedience could not be legally tendered on the 21st of
March, 1679. being the Lord's day; Because that no Writ, Process, Warrant,
Order, Judgment or Decree are to be served on that Day, except in cases of
Treason, Felony, or breach of the Peace (which the Case of the said Oath is
none of: It is a case of it self distinct.) See the Act for the better
observation of the Lord's Day, commonly called Sunday, Anno vicesimo nono
Caroli secundi, 1677.


[After the eighth Exception being read.]

R. Now you have prepared a Knife to cut your own Throat withal by that
Exception [In case of Treason, Felony or breach of the Peace] your Meetings
are against the Peace, etc. (or to that effect.)


Observation 1. That the Recorder did not deny the tender of the Oath to be
process, or a proceeding in Law: Nay, we presume he could not deny it.

G.W. That our Meetings are against the public Peace, remains to be proved
upon the Premises of our Mittimus -- [prevented and interrupted, when these
Words should have been added, being clearly intended for Argument in relation
to the Exception.]


Observation 2. viz That the tender of the Oath of Allegiance is a case of it
self distinct from the Cases of Treason, Felony and breach of the Peace. For
it cannot be Justice to excuse or acquit Traitors, Fellons, or Breakers and
Violaters of the Peace, by tendering them the Oath of Allegiance, or by their
taking it. (That were an easy way for Traitors and Fellons, etc. to escape the
condign punishment of the Law) There Is other process or proceeding in Law, more
properly limited and assigned against them. For how many Oaths would not
Traitors and Fellons take! if Swearing would free them from the Judgment or
condign punishment of the Law? What Oaths would not such take to save
themselves?

Observation 3. That seeing the Recorder seemed not to deny the tender of the
Oath to be a process in Law: His Answer, i.e. That your Meetings are against
the public Peace, was besides the point. His requiring the Oath is neither the
Process nor the Penalty of the Law, for the breach of the public Peace: They
are distinct Cases and Processes.

R. Have you any thing against the Oath of Allegiance? Or do you except against
any thing contained in it?


G.W. We have nothing to except against the Declaration of Allegiance contained
in it, as to the Substance thereof.


T.B. We show our Allegiance by our Conversations; That is, by our living
peaceably under the King and Government.


R. Do you scruple any Word (or thing) contained in the Oath? If you do, tell
us what it is.


G.W. We both own and can sign the Declaration of Allegiance, in opposition to
the Pope and Popery: And to those Seditious or Treasonable Practices and
Positions abjured and renounced by that Oath.


R. Do you hold it unlawful to take an Oath in any case?


G.W. We are not committed to Prison to answer to Questions at Sessions; but to
Answer to the Premises contained in our Mittimus.


R. Do you not hold it lawful to tell a Lie? i.e. an Officious Lie, to prevent
an eminent danger, etc. [or to that effect.]


G.W. No, by no means; that is not a true Protestant Principle, to tell or
maintain an Officious Lie, so called.


R. Will you take the Oath, etc. If you will, hold up your Hand as a Testimony
that you do take the Oath, or Swear, that shall serve, etc.


G.W. We have a Protestation or Declaration against the Pope and Popery, which
was delivered to the Committee of Parliament, and thereby judged sufficient to
distinguish us from Popish Recusants: We crave leave of the Court to read it.


R. What difference is there between a Protestation and an Oath?


G.W. It may be a Protestation or Testimony against Popery; yet not an Oath. I
pray you, let us read our Protestation, that we may not lie under Suspicion,
without cause.


Court, You may. -- Read it.


The Protestation read in Court, which follows.

A Protestation or Declaration, to distinguish Protestant Dissenters from
Popish Recusants.
I A.B. do in the presence of Almighty God, solemnly profess, and in good
Conscience declare, It is my real Judgment, that the Church of Rome is not the
Church of Christ; nor the Pope or Bishop of Rome Christ's Vicar: And his or
their Doctrines of deposing Heretical Princes, and of absolving their Subjects
of their Obedience: Of Purgatory, and Prayers for the Dead: Of Indulgences, and
worshipping of Images: Of adorning and praying to the Virgin Mary, and other
Saints deceased: And of Transubstantiation, or changing the Elements of Bread
and Wine into the Body and Blood of Christ, at, or after the Consecration
thereof by any Person whatsoever, are False, Erroneous, and contrary to the
Truth of God declared in the holy Scriptures. And therefore that the Communion
of the said Church is Superstitious and Idolatrous.

And I do likewise sincerely testify and declare, That I do from the bottom of
my Heart, detest and abhor all Plots and Conspiracies, that are, or may be
contrived against the King or Parliament, or People of this Realm, or the true
Protestant Religion therein professed And I do hereby faithfully Promise, by
God's help, to live a peaceable and sober Life, as becomes a good Christian
and Protestant to do.

And all this I do acknowledge, intend, declare and subscribe, without any
Equivocation or Mental Reservation; according to the true Plainness, Simplicity
and Usual signification of the Words.

Witness my Hand


G.W. This was excepted by a great Committee (and entered the Journal of
Parliament) in order to distinguish us from Popish Recusants, etc.


R. We have not a Law to except it: It Is not enacted or made a Law. We must
proceed according to Law, etc. You seem to declare for the true Protestant
Religion, etc. When you dissent from the Church of England. This renders
Protestancy but in a narrow compass; as if all Dissenters were no Protestants.
-- I am not in that Point satisfied with your Declaration [or to that effect.]


G.W. We have no Mental Reservation in the case: We are willing and ready to
sign this Declaration -- [Interrupted] when about adding these Words, viz. The
true Protestant Religion is wholly opposite to Popery; It stands in Protestation
or Testimony against Popery; It Is a Negative Testimony thereof. So far as any
Protestants (in the Church of England, or elsewhere) do really protest against,
and sincerely disown Popery, so far are we of the same Judgment with them. But
there are Protestants of several degrees; some are more refined (and more clear
of Popery) than others.


G.W. Is there any Evidence against us to prove the Premises contained in our
Mittimus? Where are our Accusers?


R. The Premises; what are they?


G.W. The being at an unlawful Assembly, in disturbance of the public Peace
(as is pretended against us) Let Us be tried, and either condemned or acquitted
hereupon.


R. I was more favorable to you, than you deserved; For I could have drawn an
Indictment against you at Common Law, and brought you to a Trial upon it: Which
being found against you, I must have fined you.


R. We who are in Commission for the Peace are Lex loquens, and to give the
true meaning of the Law. We are not to make Laws, but to Interpret the Law. We
are to punish or amerce Offenders, secundum Qualitatem and secundum qualitatem
delicti, etc.


G.W. We are not at present about to justify our selves, as to matter of Fact.
We are willing to hear Evidence what any can prove against us, in relation to
our Assemblies. Let Us have due Process.


R. If the Court will agree to it, we will Adjourn: And I will provide an
Indictment, and give order that the Witnesses shall be here, and will give it
to the Grand ^nquest: And if they find it against you, you shall be fined Forty
Pound, and Imprisonment till paid, etc.


Prisoner, It seems the Witnesses are yet to procure. Is there any here, that
can give Evidence against our Meeting, of the breach of the Peace, etc.


R. That Is a Lie. I did not say, I would procure Witnesses: that is Scandalous.


T.B. We desire that no advantage may be taken against us for a Word. You ought
not to take advantage, etc.


G.W. I intended no offense in the word Procure; I intended it not in the worst
Sense ( i e. as by way of Subornation) for I intended no other than according
to the Recorders own Words, That Witnesses should be here (or the like) which
doubtless, many present heard.


Prisoner, Well we refuse not to be Tried upon the Charge in our Mittimus,
touching our Meeting, etc.


R. You shall have the Oath put to you. And I Will tell you what danger you
incur: If you refuse to take it, you are to be put out of the King's
protection, your Lands and Estates forfeit to the King, and your Bodies
Imprisoned during the King's pleasure, etc.


G.W. We understand what a Praemunire means, according to the Statute of
Praemunire, made in the sixteenth Year of King Richard the second: Though
there is no Equity, that should be brought upon us, whilst we Practice our
Allegiance. Suppose we cannot for Conscience sake Swear: It Is but hard measure
to bring us under the penalty of Praemunire, for that cause only. What Equity
can there be in it? Seeing we utterly deny the Pope and Popery, etc. (To which
we may justly add) and abhor those Treasonable Practices and Positions, which
are abjured by that Oath.


G.W. Suppose we have such a scruple of Conscience, as that we cannot Swear
Allegiance, whilst we both practice it, and are willing to declare it; and to
sign the Declaration (or substance) of our Allegiance. Can it be equal or just
to run us to a Praemunire, to forfeit our Estates, Liberties, etc. only for
want of Swearing? How can that be either secundum qualitatem, or secundum
qualitatem delicti (as it is supposed.)


R. You talk of Conscience. Friend, Friend, let me ask you one Question. Pray
what is Conscience?


G.W. It Is that Knowledge that God has placed in man: it is a knowing together
between God and our own Souls, by Virtue of the Law of God in man, whereby he
knows what is Good, and what is Evil; and whereby he is taught to embrace the
Good, and shun the Evil. It Is called, The Law of Truth, the Law of Equity, the
Law of Reason, etc. Against which Law (says the Law-Book, Doctor and Student)
no Law nor Custom ought to be brought, but it is void.


R. Although I asked you a Question, I did not bid you Preach upon it -- But
Conscience may be seared; as when men will not be reclaimed, but have their own
Wills, be they never so contrary.


G.W. It Is true; some men's Consciences become hardened and seared, through
sinning, and for want of being exercised by that Law of God in them: Yet
there is an Universal Law of Truth in mankind, whereby even the Wicked, and
those of seared and hardened Consciences, shall finally be convicted and
awakened in Torment, etc.


R. You must have the Oath put to you. The Court must tender you the Oath of
Allegiance: Will you take it? etc.


G.W. We lie under a Charge in our Mittimus: Let Us be discharged of that first:
That contains the Premises, which we are to Answer to. Let Us not be
Hood-winked. Are we discharged of the two Warrants that are against us, yea or
no? The rest of the Court ought to know, that one thing may not confound
another.


R. You talk Law as you talk Gospel. Here you talk a little; and there you talk
a little: It is pity you have the benefit of the Law. You put your selves from
the Protection of the Law.


G.W. The Recorder is a party against us: He Is our Accuser, Prosecutor and
Judge: He inveighs against us: He Is determined against us: He has told his
Resolution aforehand, etc.


One Justice, You offer Contempt against the King, in what you say against his
Minister. The Recorder is his Minister (or to the same effect.)


G.W. No such matter: I only oppose an undue and irregular Proceedure -- which
is not the King's Will, etc.


R. Your Words tend to stir up the People here to Sedition --


G.W. We have no such design. We only plead our own Rights as English men. The
Loosers must have leave to speak: Our Liberties, and Estates, and Families are
concerned: Our Wives and Families suffer by our restraint, etc.


R. Clerk, tender him the Oath, offer him the Book.


Clerk reads. I George Whitehead do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess,
testify and declare in my Conscience, etc.


G.W. Forbear: We have matter of Plea, which ought to be heard first, etc.


Note, Here a great Noise was made by some present.

Crier. O Yes! Silence in the Court, etc.


G.W. We beg of the Court, that we may not be thus run upon, but duly heard
upon the Process we suffer under.


R. Will you take the Oath? Answer; and then you shall know the pleasure of the
Court.


G.W. We ought to be at some certainty, whether we are discharged of the
Premises laid against us in the two Warrants. The Recorder was even now for
Indicting us at Common Law: Now he is all in haste to put the Oath upon us. Thus
he appears inconsistant with himself. He Is not now lex loquens, to be sure; for
the Law speaking does not contradict it self. He Is not the Mouth of the Law, in
running thus unduely and abruptly upon us with the Oath, to evade the
Premises, which we were to Answer to. Are we discharged of the two Warrants,
Yea or No? Let Us have the plain Advice, or Sense of the Court.


R. It may be you may suppose you be discharged. What Is the Consequence you will
infer thence?


G.W. We desire a plain Answer; We are not to be answered by Supposition, nor
thence to draw Consequences now. We are not called hither to dispute upon an
Hypothetical Argument. We expect a positive plain Answer, and the sense of the
Court concerning our Mittimus and Warrant; Are we discharged of them, or not?


Some of the Court to the Recorder, Let them be discharged of them.


Some of the Court, You are discharged of them.


G.W. Does the Recorder say so? Does he assent to it? Let Proclamation be made
of it then, that we may be set at Liberty, in the same Capacity we were in
before we were first Arrested.


R. No, no; seeing you will take your way, I Will take my way: You shall have the
Oath first, and then your Discharge -- Will you take the Oath, and then you
shall be discharged? What say you to it? Read the Oath, etc.


T.B. It is a force put upon us: It Is very hard dealing we may not be duly
heard, etc.


G.W. Are the rest of the Justices of the same Mind, that we should be thus run
upon? We hope you are not all of the same Mind with the Recorder, in this
Proceeding. He is engaged against us: He Is resolved to make something of it,
and to make us Exemplary in Suffering.


R. Stop his Mouth; ta^ him ^ay -- They had not only need to have their Ha^s
pu^d off, but their Mouth stopped also. This the Prisoner did not fully hear,
others affirm they heard it.



G.W. Pray hear us; we have more to offer, as about this tender of the Oath, to
show how undue it is, if you will but suffer the Law to be read, which we desire.
[Hut we ought first to have had Proclamation made for our Discharge from the
two Warrants.]


R. If we should wake Proclamation, and let you go, we should be Laughed at; No,
no. I see you lay upon the catch: We will not discharge you. Now we have you
hear, we shall not let you go, for to send a Warrant after you, to fetch you
again. Will you take the Oath, or not?


G.W. Is this intended for a first tender, or a second? We desire an Answer.


R. We'll tender it you, de Novo; It shall be for a first tender; and if you
will not take it, you shall be committed till next Sessions, etc.


[Clerk reads the Oath.]

Clerk, Thomas Burr, do truly and sincerely Acknowledge, Profess, Testify and
Declare in my Conscience, etc.


G.W. We appeal to the Mayor, and the rest of the Justices. The Recorder is a
Party against us; he has determined against us aforehand: I Will prove, that he
is no competent Judge in our Case, if I may be heard -- Interruption -- Are we
discharged of the two Warrants? Pray let us have fair and plain Dealing: Do not
thus force upon us, it is unfair and undue Proceeding. Let Us be discharged of
the two Warrants first, before we be put upon an Answer: We ought not to be put
to our Answer, but upon due process, etc.


Some of the Court, You are discharged from those two Mittimusses. Clerk, read
their Discharge. [The Clerk reads what the Recorder had caused him to enter
into the Book, to this purpose]


Clerk, George Whitehead and Thomas Burr are discharged of the Matters
contained in their two Mittimusses. And the Oath of Allegiance, and the
Testament, to Swear in open Court -- at this present Sessions was severally
tendered to them; and the said George Whitehead and Thomas Burr having
severally refused to take the said Oath of Allegiance, it is therefore ordered,
That the said George Whitehead and Thomas Burr be committed to the Common Goal
of the said City, there to remain without Bailor Mainprise, until the next
Quarter Sessions, etc. [or to the same effect. The Copy of Order being more
fully transcribed hereafter, according to the Goalers Copy.]


G.W. The latter part is not true; we have not yet refused the Oath; we were
not duly nor regularly brought upon that point, as to give a positive Answer,
because of the other precedent Charges, which we were to answer to. We have yet
matter of Plea about the Tender of the Oath, de Novo, in Court. We request
further time to be heard upon an Adjournment (before we give our positive
Answer) -- We desire to know upon what Law or Statute it is tendered. [No Answer
was given to this Question.]


R. You have stronger Lungs than I. I understand you had a Feast last Night,
etc. -- Adjourn the Court. Take them away Jailer.


G.W. Prisoner, Pray let us have more time to consider, and speak to this point.
I entreat that I may have leave to read the Clause in the Statute, that
concerns the tender of the Oath.


Note, These Endeavors of the Prisoners, to be heard, after the pretended
Order was entered, was, because the Prisoners did not believe, that the
Justices, or greater Number of them, did concur with the Recorders proceeding
against them; but that they had more, both of Moderation and Justice in them;
and that he carried things on, too much over their Heads, and all to run down
and ensnare the Prisoners, to Oppress them, and continue them under Suffering.

Officers, The Court Adjourned.


Prisoner, G.W. Held by the Bar, pressing to be further heard (after the
Adjournment) when the Court met again, and for the Statute to be read about the
Oath (Neither whereof would be granted the Prisoners) but two of the Keepers
pulled the Prisoner away.

Prisoner, Take notice, that we have not yet refused the Oath, being not duly
nor regularly brought upon that point: but we have owned the Declaration of
Allegiance, contained in it; These last words are since added, the Prisoner
being hurried away that he could not then speak them out
and do still freely assent to it, in Oppos^tion to, and Abhorrance of all
those Treasonable Practices, Positions and Principles, abjured and renounced by
that Oath; though we are Conscientiously afraid to Sweat it, only with respect
to Christ, Prohibition, in the case of Swearing.


Note, That on the 3 d day of the Month called May, 1680. being about five
days after the Prisoners were the proceeded against in Court, the Recorder,
Francis Bacon was voted out of Place by the Common Council, etc.

Also note, That diverse of the said Recorders Reflections and hard Speeches
against the Prisoners, are purposely emitted in the foregoing Account for
brevity sake, and with respect to the moderate Reader, by whom we would not be
thought to Over charge any Person, though he was an Adversary, therefore we
have in some particulars been more sparing, than we might have been.

Here follows a Copy of the Commitment from the said Sessions.
The City of Norwich, and County of the same, at the Sessions, holden the 19th
day of April, 1680.
GEorge Whitehead and Thomas Burr are discharged of the Matters contained in
their Mittimus and Warrant. And the Oath of Allegiance, and the Testament to
Swear upon in open Court, by order of his Majesty's Justices of Peace, at this
present Sessions, was tendered severally to them; and the said George Whitehead
and Thomas Burr having severally refused to take the said Oath of Allegiance.
It is therefore ordered, That the said George Whitehead and Thomas Burr be
committed to the common Prison of the said City, there to remain without Bail
or Mainprise until the next Quarter Sessions to be holden for the City,
according to the Law.

This is a true Copy, by me Thomas Gaywood, Jailer.

Per Curiam Corie.
Here follows a Copy of the Prisoners Certificates, which the Recorder, Francis
Bacon, would not permit to be read in Court.
THese are to Certify all, whom it may concern, That George Whitehead of the
Parish of St Buttolph Bishops-Gate, London, has lived in the same Parish for
about Ten Years last past in good Repute, and is esteemed a man of a Competent
Estate, and has fined for all Offices in the Parish, save Churchwarden, and
has demeaned himself Peaceably in his Conversation; and he has never been
accounted nor reputed to be Jesuit or Papist, nor any way Popishly affected.
All which we Certify, under our Hands.

John Freeman Thomas Fyge
Common-Councilmen. John Russen, Deputy. Gilbert East John Osburu
Churchwardens. John Sumner, Constable. Charles Bathurst Thomas Dawson Nicholas
Harding

London, April the 22d day, 1680.
THese are to Certify any Person or Persons, whom it may concern, That Thomas
Burr of Ware, in the County of Hartford, Maulster, has lived and been a Trader
in Malt for about Fourteen Years past; and is a man whom we judge of a good
competent Estate, and of good Credit and Reputation among his Neighbors in
this place, and has never been accounted a Jesuit or Papist. All which we
Certify under our Hands.

Giles Roe Henry Heart
Churchwardens. John Lark William Moakes
Constables. John Perrot Henry Peach Thomas Johnson Richard Dickinson Rivers
Dickinson Edmund Peast Isaas Hadsley.

Ware in Hartfordshire, this 14th day of April, 1680.
A Copy of the next Letter, after the foregoing Proceeding in Court, delivered
to the Mayor, etc.
Friends The Mayor, Justices etc. Aldermen
of this City Norwich.
WE do acknowledge and kindly resent that Indifferency and Moderation toward
us, which we beheld among you, when before you in your Court of Sessions, as
also the Justice you did us, in making way for the reading our Mittimus, our
Exceptions, our Declaration against Popery, and the fixing of our discharge in
Court, from the matters contained in our Mittimus and Warrant: whereby we are
the more encouraged to make this one small Request to you, which is, That you
will please but to afford us the Liberty, to come before you in your
Council Chamger, (though it be with a Keeper) that we may show you one material
Point of Law in the Statute Book, relating to this De novo (or New) tender of
the Oath, (in your Quarter Sessions) which we now suffer under, it being the
same Point that we were car^est to have shown you out of the Statute Book, but
were foreinly prevented.

In granting us this small Request, you may happily be capable of doing your
selves and us more Justice and Right, than you may at present be aware of. It Is
not too late to reverse an Error, and embrace Truth, when made appear in any
Case, not will any sincer. Mind soon the Discovery of either. It Is in Real Love
and Good Will to you, this Proposition (by way of Request) is made for your own
sakes, as well as ours. We design no Tediousness to you (...) Case is now
contract into a arrow Compass: What we have to show you is both very brief and
cast to understand, it is directly ^tu^e-Law. Out Confinement before Sessions
was but One Man's Act, but now others of you are concerned. Howbeit, we may
Reansonably (as well as Charitably) think and believe that both the forcible
tender of the Oath (whilst not actually discharged and freed from our
Imprisonment) and the Conclusion against us, for our detention, were rather the
hasty and indiscreet Acts of one Person (carried on over your Hands) than of
the whole Court or Major part thereof, and hope, that as you calmly come (in
Gods sight) to the Righteous Test of Conscience and Truth, and upon better
deliberation consult the Law in our Case; 'twill so appear to your
Understandings. We are yet willing Charitably to think and hope the best
concerning you in this weighty Concern of our Liberties, Estates, Families, and
consequently our Lives, which are exposed to Jeopardy and Ruin, through our
present Suffering among you. Nevertheless our Case is not desperate in the Eye
of the Law. They who are appointed Ministers of equal Law and Justice ought to
understand both before they pass Judgment, or inflict Punishment. As Michael
Dalton puts the Commissioners of the Peace in mind, how that justice may be
perverted many ways, if they shall not Arm themselves with the Fear of God,
the Love of Truth and Justice, and with the Authority and Knowledge of the Laws
of this Realm, etc. Among which Causes of Pervertion, he mentions these, viz.

I. FEAR. When fearing the Power or Countenance of another, they do not
Justice; quoting Deuteronomy. 1.17. II. PERTURBATION of Mind, as Anger, or such like
Passion; quoting James 1.20. III. IGNORANCE, or Want of True Understanding what
is to be done. Ignorantia matter erroris. IV. PRICIPITATION, or too much
Rashness, as when they proceed hastily without due Examination and
Consideration of the Fact, and all material Circumstances, etc. [Thus far M.D.]
We design no Personal Reflection, but only tender Information and Caution in
these Passages. The thing we aim at is but the leave of a few Minutes before
you, to show you the Point of Law mentioned, which we forbear to relate in
Writing to you, as not being so proper or seasonable for us to do at present,
considering the Cercumstances, which we are under. We are

Your Real Friends and Well-wishers, George Whitehead Thomas Burr.

Norwich-Prison, the 8th of the 3 Mon. called May, 1680. POSTSCRIPT.
THis Provision we would further add, That if so be our Proposal of coming
before you in your Council-Chamer may not be accepted, or be not thought
seizable, we then desire you would please to transmit our Request to your
Quarter Sessions, yet in being upon Adjournment, that we may have the Liberty
at your next meeting in your Court of Sessions, briefly to offer what we have
to Plead in point of Law, to your serious (and more deliberate) considerations
about the late tender of the Oath, de Novo, according as we desired farther
time for the same purpose, when last in Sessions.




Here follows the substance of a farther Application, made by the Prisoners
aforesaid, to the Mayor, Recorder, Justices and Aldermen of the City of
Norwich, delivered to them the 17th day of the 3d Month, 1680. being the last
day of the Quarter Sessions.
THe first part relates to the Mediation of certain Persons of Note and
Eminency, Whose Names are not thought meet to insert in this place. Some
Magistrates of Norwich understood who they were.
on the Prisoners behalf, and particularly by a Letter from London from a
Person of Quality, on some Application made by some of their Friends there,
unto which the Prisoners refer the Magistrates, in these words, viz.

We therefore request, that you would please to call for the said Letter, and
know the Contents thereof, that if such Mediation may take effect with you, for
our Enlargment, we may not put you nor our selves to trouble, upon any further
Motion. Otherwise, if you be not pleased to accept thereof, so as to grant us
our Enlargment, we have another Proposition to make, on this wise, viz.

Whereas we the Prisoners, whose Names are hereunto subscribed, do find our
selves oppressed and grieved, not only by the Illegal Proceedings (as we
conceive) of the late Recorder, in our Commitment and detention in Prison by
two Erroneous Warrants, which were reverst in Court, but also by his late
Commitment from Sessions, which not only we do conceive to be illegal and
contrary to the Form and Order of Law prescribed in the Statutes, but also we
have the Advice and Judgment of able Counsel in the Case, averring, This last
Commitment Not Good, BUT AGAINST LAW, etc.

Upon which Premises (if you please not to allow us Remedy on the Mediation
aforesaid) we do in Humility request, That you will please to call us into
Court, before this Sessions be ended, and grant us the Liberty but briefly to
offer our Exception in point of Law, unto your serious and deliberate
Considerations, in order to afford us so much Relief and Right, as may either
by apparent Law, Equity or good Conscience be allowed us.

Your Friends and Prisoners, George Whitehead Thomas Burr.

Dated, Norwich-Goal, the 12th of the 3d Month, 1680.

ON the aforesaid 17th day of the 3d Month, 1680. our Friends, Mary Duncon and
Mary de France of Norwich attended the Court of Mayor and Justices in their
Council Chamger, and delivered the aforesaid Application and Certificates to
them, where they were read, as the Prisoners were informed.

After the Mayor and Justices came down into the Hall, our Friends abovesaid
attended the Court of Sessions, and moved for the Liberty of the Prisoners (as
some of the Justices had before directed) To which, others of them said, That
could not be, for they were committed by Order of Sessions; which the Steward
(being then Judge of the Court, in the Recorders absence) caused to be read.
Mary Duncon then requested, the Prisoners might be called into Court, and
heard, the new Recorder having promised her (as she affirmed immediately after
she came from him) That they should be called into Court; and that if it
appeared they were committed contrary to Law, they should be Discharged. But he
being then absent, they were not called into Court.

Samuel Boulton of London being present, got leave of the Court (upon his
request) to tell them, That he did suppose it was contrary to Law, to make the
First Tender of the Oath in Court; and that 'twas done on purpose to Ensnare
the Prisoners. Whereupon the Steward called to bring the Statute-Book, to see
whether it was so or not; but in the interim (after a little Consultation) the
Court was dismissed on a sudden, before the Book came. So the Prisoners were
detained until the next Quarter Sessions. Whereof an Account is hereafter
given, as to their Discharge.

Here follow the Copies of certain Letters of Importance, from the said
Prisoners, which were sent and delivered to the Magistrates of the City of
Norwich, after the aforesaid Quarter Sessions.

To the New Recorder.
FRIEND;
WE having met with a Disappointment, by reason of thy absence from Session^,
has occasioned these few Lines, whereby we acquaint thee, That we apprehending
our selves wrongfully Imprisoned and Detained, by the means of the late
Recorder; having also Advice of Counsel, concurring with our Apprehensions in
the Case, did expect, according to thy Expressions to our Friend Mary Duncon,
to have been called into the Court of Sessions this day week. Some of our
Friends having had encouragment by several of the Magistrates, to request our
Liberty in Court, they accordingly attended and moved on our behalf; but our
being called was opposed by the Clerk. Afterward we sent to the Steward about
it, who expressed himself willing to do us any good he could, but seemed to blame
us, that we had not sent to thee about it, and advised us so to do, he being
unwilling to act without thy Concurrence; wherefore we have sent this Bearer on
purpose, and Request That thou would please to signify thy Mind to the
Steward, Whether or no our Suffering Case may be taken any further Notice of
among you, in order to our Relief. We are hardly dealt by, and think we should
not be delayed, nor slighted under a wrongful Imprisonment. We hope our Case
will be better inspected, than as yet it has been. The Magistrates willingness
here, for our Relief, now depends upon thy Counsel. We desire to know your
Minds in it, with as much Expedition as conveniently may be. We rest

Thy Friends and Well-wishers, George Whitehead Thomas Burr.

Norwich-Prison, the 24th of the 3d Month, 1680.

This was delivered to the New Recorder of Norwich at his Country House near
North-walson, by John Fedemand and Thomas Haward of Norwich.

To the Recorder and Steward of Norwich.
FRIENDS;
SEeing we have made diverse motions to be heard by the Magistrates of this
City, before the Sessions was ended, concerning our last Commitment, but were
prevented, although we have intimated our Apprehensions of our wrongful
Imprisonment and Detention, by the means of the late Recorder's severity
against us. And you being the Persons, upon whose Advice the Magistrates of
this City have Dependence, We do entreat you tenderly to consider us and our
suffering Condition, so far as to admit us but a little gentle Discourse with
you, or either of you (though it be before any of the Magistrates of this City,
whom you shall think fit) in order to give you an Understanding of our Case,
whether any Relief thereby may be afforded us or not, we leave that, but hope
you may be justly Inst^mental for our Relief: 'Twill be no disparagement to
you, to be sure, we being oppressed and restrained thus far from our Families,
etc. as we think (at least) contrary both to equal Law and good Conscience; And
we are not willing to lie under any M^st^ke or Prejudice against any Person
whatsoever, No; though it was one that has dealt most Prejudicially with us,
we are sure we mean well. However, pray now take a little opportunity to
consider our suffering Case, so as we may not be slighted in this Condition. We
can assure you, That the late Recorder's Proceedings against us are not well
resented by certain Persons of Quality and Power (and it will be no honor to
this City to detain us under this Restraint, upon the Foundation that he has
prejudicially laid against us) but here we must at present be spa^ing; time may
possibly evince more of that. We remain,

Your Friends, George Whitehead Thomas Burr,
Prisoners for our Conscience toward God.
Norwich-Goal, the 29th of the 3d Mon. 1680.

AFter these two last Letters were sent to the Recorder, upon the Prisoners
request, for a little Discourse with him and the Steward about their Case, they
were called over into the Council Chamger (and the Keeper with them) before
him, and the Steward, and Thomas Corys, etc. and there admitted to open their
Case, and to enter into some Discourse about the Proceedings against them. They
did not seem to vindicate the other Recorders P^oceedings, only some little
Controversy was about the late tender of the Oath, de Novo, in Court, for
which the Recorder insisted on the Words [ Or any Other Person, etc. 3 Jac. c.
4.] which are farther opened hereafter, according to what the Prisoners then
alleged. However, the Prisoners kindly acknowledged their Civility in giving
them that Opportunity of Discourse, etc.

A few Lines to the Mayor, Court of Aldermen and Justices, on some other
Considerations more particular.
FRIENDS;
WE being enjured and hurt in several respects, by this our Confinement, for
above this three Months past, by means of the late Recorders Prejudicial and
undue Proceedings against us, both before and at your last Quarter Sessions,
together with your then Passiveness therein, That was about the Oath, and his
last Commitment from Sessions.
and all this under a wrong Suspicion or Pretense of being Papists or Popish
Recusants, secretly suggested against us; which being int^m^ted to some Persons
of Quality and Credit at London (who have better knowledge of us) and by them,
the Earl of Yarmouth being moved on our behalf, he was pleased to mediate for
us by Letters, to be communicated to some of the Magistrates in this City, in
which we understand he has lately signified what Testimony he has of our
being NO PAPISTS, and therefore desires, That you would show us all the favor
the Law will allow us, (or to the same effect, as we have been informed) which
cannot reasonably intend, The Rigor of the Law, muchless to be detained in
Prison, contrary to Law, as we still conceive we are.

We therefore entreat you, First, to consider what favor the Law allows us as
No Papists, nor Persons so reputed, as indeed we are altogether averse to
Popery.

Secondly, As Persons injuriously Imprisoned, and detained under a wrong
Suspicion of what we really are not. We Request our Liberties; which Request we
think our selves both obliged in Conscience and warranted by Law, to make unto
you, as Justices of the Peace, according to the Statute made in the 4th Year of
K. Henry the 7th, Cap. 12. which is worth your while to read over, and
seriously to consider the tenor and purport thereof.

Your Friends and Prisoners, G.W, T.B.
From your City-Goal, the 19th of the 4 Mon. 1680.

For the Mayor and Justices of the City of Norwich.
Friends, you are entreated to peruse the following Narration.
THe great pretense for this our strict detention in your Goal, being the late
order from Sessions, we think our selves obliged for your sakes (as well as our
own) to re-mind you, (as hoping you will give the Oppressed leave to offer
their Complaints) That we esteem our selves injured, in that we were not
suffered to be called into Court the last Day of your Quarter Sessions, for an
opportunity to have made our Exception, which we conceive we had good ground
for both in Law and good Conscience; especially, since we had Promise of such
an opportunity, and that if it appeared our Commitment were contrary to Law, we
should be discharged: This we understand was made to one of our Friends, who
(upon encouragement by some of the Justices) moved for our Liberty in Court;
which not being granted then, that we might be called into Court; but being
prevented of both, we are detained to our, and our Families, great prejudice in
diverse respects; our present restraint being also a depriving us of our Rights
in the Creation, and to the impairing of our Healths. The late Order from
Sessions, for this our restraint without Bail or Mainprise, was of Francis
B^con's ordering, and we know no other Law than that to detain us so severely
until next Sessions; and no doubt you had Power to Reverse it before the
Termination of the last, when the Illegality thereof had been made appear
(which we endeavored an opportunity for) as well as an Error in process may
the same Term be reformed in the same Court. Wing. Body of the Common^ Law, p.
88.
But that Sessions is over, the opportunity is slipped: whose Omission was that?
Not ours we sought and earnestly requested for it in real Love and Good Will,
as charitably thinking to find so much of Humanity, Tenderness, equal Law and
Right among you toward us, as not thus to delay us in Prison upon the said
Order, which we are really persuaded will not redound to the Honor of your
City or Court, considering our Innocence, and the Circumstances of the Person,
which was the cause of it. And we cannot reasonaby suppose, that such an order
should bind your Consciences from answering the Law of Christ, To do to others
as you would be done by; and the Law of our Nation, Not to deny, defer or delay
Justice or Right, especially to any Freeborn English man; Mag. Charta cap. 29.
J. Cook Inst. 4 part, fol. 182.
Illegal or unjust Imprisonment, more especially where prolonged, being
accounted odious in the Eye of the Law; and that you may more directly and
clearly perceive, that to detain us in persuance of Francis Bacon's Procedure
and Order against us, will not redound to your Reputation and Honor, either as
Civil Magistrates or Christians. Pray consider how irregularly and arbitrarily
he has acted toward us in his whole Procedure.

1 st, In his sending the Sheriff to apprehend and imprison us for being at the
Meeting the 21st of March (so called) 1679. (as he confessed in Sessions he did,
as ye may remember) by which means we were turned into the Goal by the Sheriff,
like Cattle into Pinfold, and their detained for some Hours, without
Examination or Mittimus, other than Francis Bacon's verbal Commission: How
arbitrary and Illegal was this! Ye that are Wise men, Judge what absolute
Monarch could have shown more Dominion in such a Case? Consider the Consequence
of such proceedings.

We hope your Design in choosing Recorders, is for a Just and Legal end, to
assist you as the King's Ministers of equal Law and Justice, and not to be as
Kings and Emperors over your City, nor that any one should assume such
Prerogative or Pre-eminence, so contrary to Law and the King's Interest.

The King has a Prerogative in all things that are not injurious to the
Subject: Wing. p. 2.
but the late Recorder did assume a Prerogative or Dominion injurious in this
his Proceedings: Also --

2 dly, In his inflicting a two fold punishment for one supposed Offense, i. c.
Fining and Imprisoning for being at a Meeting, contrary to that very Act
against Conventicles, 22 Car. 2. which was not made to commit the Persons to
Goal, but only to fine them; al^e^t our Meetings are no otherwise designed by
us, than for God's Worship and Service. When he first e^amined and committed
us, he told ^s thus, viz. If you will neither pay your Fines, nor take the Oath
of A^g^ance, I must commit you to Prison; you may choose, whether you ^ill pay
your Fines, take the Oath, or go to Prison.

To excuse these before mentioned proceedings against us, being all on the 2^st
of March, 1679. which was the Lord's day, when we excepted against them, as
contrary to a late Act of Parliament, for the better observat^on of the Lord's
day, 29 Car. 2. he alleged, That our Meeting was against the Peace. And what
fellows? Therefore he might first send the Sheriff to apprehend and imprison us
without Mittimus, and after that Fine us, and tender us the Oath the same Day;
and if we would neither pay our Fines, nor take the Oath, then commit us to
Prison.

Note, That the said Act for the better observation of the Lord's day,
prohibits the serving or executing any Writ, Process, Warrant, Order, Judgment
or Decree, excepting in Cases of Treason, Felony or breach of the Peace.

If in these, or any of these Cases, the requiring Persons to take the said
Oath, and their taking of it will serve the turn to excuse them of such Crimes;
than that Oath may be a Cure for all Diseases or Enormities against Law of what
different species or kinds soever. The Justices need but require Treasonable,
Fellonious fighting and quarrelsom Persons to take the Oath of Allegiance, and
their taking of it shall quit them of all Pains and Penalties: But we hope you
are so rati^nal as to understand, that legally to require the said Oath is a
distinct Case or Process from the cases of Treason, Felony, or breach of the
Peace; and that there is no more reason to require the said Oath in any one of
these Cases, then in all of them.

3 thly, In his laying our Fines upon other persons, and imprisoning us for
being at the said Meeting, and giving out Warrants to break open their Doors,
and distrain their Goods, upon a false pretense of our Poverty, after we had
plainly signified the contrary to him, both as to the competency of our Estates
and known Habitations, so as he could have no reason to judge or think us
unable.

But besides the Illegality hereof, pray what Justice or Consistance could
there be between his Fining others because of our Poverty, and committing us to
Goal because of our Non-payment thereof? He imprisons us because we do not pay
our Fines; and lays our Fines upon others because we cannot pay them.

But this is not the least inconsistance in his perplexed Proceedings: He
demands 20 l of each of us for Preaching; and because we did not deposit the
Money, he commits us to the common Goal, upon pretense of being assembled in
disturbance of the public Peace (by a Warrant made in his own, and not in the
King's Name) and then lays our Fines upon others, which was all for one and
the same Meeting. And these proceeding are as reconciable, as if he had Fined
us for Praying, and committed us to Goal for Fighting whilst at Prayer; But we
are more Serious in our Devotion, and Innocent in our Deportment, blessed be
the Lord our God.

We further entreat you to view the said Francis Bacon's proceedings against us
at your Quarter Sessions, the 28th of April, 1680. and seriously to consider,
whether he did therein proceed either legally or justly with us; As,

First, In his appearing a Party, an open Adversary, an Accuser a Villifier of
us (the Prisoners) in the open Court of Sessions, telling us, that there is a
Law to Hang such; and that the Church would never be at quiet, till such
Fellows were Hanged; (as you may well remember) to the same effect he also told
us, when he first committed us. Secondly, In his denying and opposing the
reading of our Mittimus in open Court, contrary to all Reason, and to the mind
and declared Judgment of the Mayor and other Justices upon the Bench (as you
may also well remember) how imperiously did he behave himself in this? Thirdly,
In his not suffering our Certificates to be read in Court, which we earnestly
then and there requested, (as you also may remember) which were from certain
Officers, and other credible Persons of our Neighboured, to remove the
Calumnious Aspersion and Suspicion of our being Jesuits or Papists,
prejudicially insinuated against us. Fourthly, In his frequently and abruptly
causing the Oath of Allegiance to be offered, or put to us, on purpose to
ensnare and circumvent us, before the Process or Charge of our Commitment were
determined in Court, notwithstanding our Mittimus signified, that we were then
to answer to the Premises therein contained, and also begged, that for God's
sake and the King's sake (as you may remember, with our reason thereof) we
might be heard in our Plea and Answer to the Premises, upon which we were
committed, before any other Process were entered upon against us. Fifthly, In
his not suffering the Law to be read in Court, (which we earnestly begged) upon
which he forced and required the said Oath of us, as he had determined
aforehand, in order to run us to a Proemunire at the same Quarter Sessions, as
he threatened when we were first before him, understanding that we did fear an
Oath, or to Swear in any case. Sixthly, In that when our Mittimus, and his
Erroneous Warrant, and his first pretended tender of the Oath (by himself
alone) were reverst by our being discharged in Court from the matters contained
in them, he would not suffer us to be actually freed of our Imprisonment; but
in persuance of his premeditated Design forced a tender of the Oath, de novo
(as his Words were) and an order immediately to be entered for our Commitment to
Goal without Bail or Mainprize, until the next Quarter Sessions, without
allowing us any further time for Consideration or Answer, as we desired.
Seventhly, His precipitancy and rashness toward us, was such therein, that the
rest of the Justices, doubtless, could not take so much time and deliberation,
as to consider of these his Proceedings, before he concluded the said order of
Commitment, wherein they might very well, and but justly, have given him a
Check, and put a stop to his swift and furious Motion, for a more general and
serious consideration of the Case among them, and not have suffered him to make
such a sudden Conclusion against us, as pro Curiam, or by their Authority (for
Justices ought to see with their own Eyes, and be sure their Judgment is Just
before they give their Judgment, or assent in any Judicial case) seeing they
had such fair Warning also in our publicly desiring to know, If you were all
of a mind, or agreed against us, as to that severe Commitment, charitably
hoping (as we do still) that you were not; but no Answer could we have in that
Case: The Recorder was in such haste for that Conclusion against us, and the
Courts Adjournment, and to have the Jailer to take away the Prisoners; He would
have you to understand, he wanted his Dinner, upbraiding us (the Prisoners)
with an idle Story of our being at a Feast the Night before. Eighthly, Besides,
his de novo, tender of the Oath to us, the Prisoners, in Sessions appeared
neither Legal nor Formal, according to the form of Statute 3 Jac. Cap. 4. which
intends Popish Recusants (as appears plainly by the Title and Preamble thereof)
which we the said Prisoners were not (nor are we Papists at all) but it was
also against the Form and Course of procedure, both of the Statute 3 Jac. 4.
(allowed even to Papish Recusants Convict) and that also of the 7 Jac. Cap. 6.
for a first tender of the Oath, to be made out of Court or Quarter Sessions,
and a Commitment of the party refusing, and the second tender in the open
Assize or Quarter Sessions, in such manner and on such precedent Causes as the
Law directs, and wherein we were unconcerned.
And moreover, neither of these Statutes of King James do warrant any such
order for Commitment of Persons to Goal from one Quarter Sessions to another,
without Bail or Mainprize, as is the late order of our Commitment. Pray see
what Council says in relation thereunto, Viz.

1 st, I conceive the third Warrant is not good in the Commitment. For as it is
true, that Act says, The Offenders shall incur a Praemunire; yet it does not in
the least give them any Power to commit the Person, and therefore, and for that
its without Bailor Mainprize, and to a certain time, and not leaving it to the
Law. I conceive its against Law, and will be remedied, etc.

2 dly, He further says, By the Statute of 3 Jac 4. The party that is to take
the Oath, is to be one that is Convicted or Indicted for Recusancy, or not
taking the Sacrament twice in the Year past; and the Parties to tender it, are
either the Bishop or two Justices of the Peace, whereof one of the Quorum, and
upon refusal, they may commit without Bail or Mainprize, until next Assize or
Sessions, where it may be again tendered. By the Statute 7 Jac. 6. any one
Justice may tender the Oath to one that is presented, Indicted or Convicted for
not coming to Church, or receiving the Sacrament, according to Law; or if the
Minister, Petty-Constable and Churchwardens, or any two of them, shall
complain to any Justice of Peace near where the Party dwell^, and the Justice
shall find Cause of Suspicion, then he may tender and proceed as above. But all
this I conceive with clearness, to be meant and intended Popish Recusants. But
admitting it otherwise, I conceive as this Fact is now put, the Proceedings are
not warrantable by the abovesaid Laws, nor any other; for here is no such
Presentment, Conviction or Indictment, as the Law require^, to warrant either
the first or second tender of the Oath, and therefor I conceive the Parties
grieved may be relieved, etc. Thus far truly transscribed out of Councillor
Smith's Advice, under his own Hand.

The Premises considered, we really think it had been your Best, your Clearest
and Wisest way to have manifested your Dissent (as we gave caution at first)
from Francis Bacons's precipitant irregular dealing with us about the Oath, and
his illegal Commitment from Sessions, which is entered for protect of Authority,
with the Title pro Curiam; and therefore our strict Confinement thereby as your
Act, howbeit it is not subscribed by any of you: Wherefore we yet in Love and
Good Will to you, both for your own inward Peace, and outward Reputations, as
well as our own Rights, request our Liberty, we being wronged, hurt and grieved
in diverse respects by the said Proceedings of your late Recorder; whereof we do
once more make our Complaint to you for Relief, according as we think our
selves obliged in Conscience, and directed also by Law; Pray view the Statute
of the 4 Hen. 7. c. 12. for it is a good one, it is worth your reading: Judge
Cook cites it, See his Instit. 4 part. fol. 170.
and insists upon it as a necessary Caveat to all Justices of Peace: For that
by the said Statute Provision is made for any Subject that is hurt or grieved
in any thing, that remedy may not be delayed or deferred, being directed to
make complaint to the Justice or Justices, and to desire Remedy; and if he have
no Remedy, to show his Complaint to the Justices of Assize, if it be nigh the
time of their coming, but if it be too long before their coming, then the
grieved to come to the King's Highness, or his Chancellor, and show his Grief:
Whereupon the King shall send for the said Justice, to know the Cause, why his
said Subjects be not eased? And if he find any of them in default in these
Premises, he shall do to him so offending to be put out of Commission, etc.

And now as we can in good Conscience say, we are Persons that refuse not to
Swear in favor to any Principles of Disloyalty or Rebellion Thus much in
relation to the Declaration of Allegiance contained in the Oath of Obedience,
we do comprehensively and sincerely propose and offer, viz.

That Fidelity and true Allegiance to the King we do bear, (which in good
Conscience we believe is our Duty) in opposition to and utter abhorrence of all
those Horrid, Seditious and Treasonable Practices, Principles and Positions,
which are abjured and renounced in the said Oath. This Declaration (in the
sight of him who searches all Hearts) we do really assent to and own, and
(through his gracious Assistance) hope ever to be found in the practice of that
Fidelity and Innocence toward the King (whom God preserve) that become true
Protestant Subjects and peaceable-minded Christians, desiring only to enjoy the
Liberty of the Peaceable and Inoffensive Exercise of our tender Consciences
toward our Lord Jesus Christ, in his Worship and Service; That he may direct
you in Righteousness, and bless and preserve you and yours, is our Prayer also.

Your Friends and Prisoners for Conscience sake toward our Lord Jesus Christ.
G.W. T.B.
Norwich Goal, the 21st of the 4th Month, 1680.

To the Recorder and Steward of Norwich. The account of the Prisoners Case,
more comprehensively stated.
Loving Friends;
WE desire you would take no Exception or Offense at our late request for our
Liberties: for we design none toward you, or any other of the Magistrates,
being unwilling to disobliege any Person that has shown Civility to us in any
kind, as we acknowledge you have, in admitting us some discourse with you. One
reason of our said Request was, because the other Justices lately gave consent
to our enlargement: If the Recorder would consent or advise thereto (as the
Messenger told us.) We still really apprehending our selves unduly proceeded
with, and wrongfully detained, by the late Recorder's means, both in regard of
our own Innocence, and of the Injury and Hurt we have diverse ways sustained by
this our Confinement for near four Months past, to the impairing our Healths,
afflicting our Families, and detriment to our Concerns; And not being wholly
ignorant in point of Law, how unwarrantable the procedure is against us from
first to last, being also confirmed in our weak Apprehensions therein by
Persons learned in the Laws; as Council has lately given it under Hand, That
indeed, its an irregular proceeding throughout. And that the late Commitment by
which we are detained is not good, but against Law: And therefore its being
given or pleaded as an Order of, Sessions, or as pro Curiam cannot rationally
argue it to be an indispensible Law; you know better in Law and Logic
doubtless. These things considered, we did think our selves in Conscience
obliged and concerned, as English men, with respect to our Birthrights to
request our en^argement of the Justices of this City: Howbeit we charitably
hope, That right is intended us, when you are in Statu quo, i.e. at next
Sessions; which is the most (as we can rationally suppose) can be alleged for
our detention in the mean time by the said Order; and according to your Advice,
we have been, and intend to be patient till your Quarter Sessions; seeing that
before it is not thought Regular to discharge us; so that then we hope no
further occasion will be sought to prolong us in Prison: But that as prudent
men you will better consider our Right, and your own Reputions. We cannot but
remember how little care of due method and regularity Francis Bacon had in
getting us into Prison, considering how much there seems to be now for our
Discharge.

1 st, We were apprehended, put in Prison, and detained for some Hours upon his
verbal Order, without any Examination or Mittimus (be sent the Sheriff to do
it.) 2 dly, Then we were had before him, and Fined on the account of the
Meeting. 3 dly, Then because we did not deposit the Fines, he committed us to
Goal for the same Meeting, by a Warrant only in his own, and not in the King's
Name. 4 thly, Then he laid our Fines upon others, upon a false and groundless
pretense of our Poverty: So he awarded two Punishments for one supposed
Offense, i.e. Imprisonment and Fines, c^ntrary to the Act in that case, 22 Car.
2. which intends not Imprisonment. [Then observe his contradiction in his
Warrant.] 5 thly, The Warrant of our Commitment till the Quarter Sessions
granted us Bailable. 6 thly, But several days after he interposed with another
Warrant, which he sent to the Jailer, to detain us without Bail or Mainprize
till Sessions, when he had no new matter against us. 7 thly, By his first
Warrant we were referred to the Quarter Sessions, to Answer to the Premises
contained therein, and to be delivered by due order of Law. 8 thly, By his
second Warrant he put other Premises upon us, to answer to at Sessions about
his alone requiring the Oath of Allegiance of us, which he could not warrant by
the Law. 9 thly, At Sessions he would not suffer our Mittimus to be read, till
overpowered by the rest of the Justices. 10 thly, He appeared a Party and open
Adversay against us, telling us, there is a Law to Hang such Fellows, etc. 11
thly He would not suffer our Certificates to be read in Court, as we earnestly
requested, being from certain Officers of Note, and other Credible Per^s of our
Neighborhood, to remove the unjust Aspersion and Suspicion of our being
Jesuits or Papists prejudicially insinuated against us. By the Informers and
himself.
12 thly, He would not suffer the Law to be read in Court, as we requested;
upon which he then required the Oath de Novo.
We must confess, That as to the late Commitment, we have not understood that
you have undertaken to justify it; We are persuaded you are more ingenious and
wiser men: Only for the tender of the Oath de Novo in Sessions by Francis
Bacon, the words [ Or any other Person whatsoever, 3 Jac. 4.] were alleged;
although we cannot reasonably understand, that any other Person whatsoever in
Court should be more severely dealt withal then the Popish Recusant under
prosecution, so as to be run to a Praemunire for once refusal upon a surprizal
in Court; when as the method prescribed for the Popish Recusant, is a first
Tender out of Court, and a Commitment for refusal; and a second in Court, and
refusal again, before Praemunire; see what Council further says in the case,
viz. touching the Sessions Justices tendering the Oath -- as it follows that of
a first tendering, I did mean and did intend a second tendering; and that must be
to a Person under such Circumstances, as in my latter Paper, and in this
Letter, etc. [according to that of 7 Jac. 4.] I know the Words [or any other
Person] in 3 Jac. 4. have in these late times been Construed generally; but
certainly it is not within the meaning of that Law, which is truly and only
extensive to Popish Recusants. About the Offenders incurring a Praemunire; that
must be a tender of the Oath at the Sessions, according to that Law, which must
be a second Tender, as above, i.e. after a first tender of the Oath out of
Court, upon which the party refusing is committed to the common Goal,
(according to his other Paper) on the 3 Jac. 4. and 7 Jac. 6. And M. Dalton
plainly expresses the same sense of the Law in the Case under the Title
Recusants. Dalt. Inst. pac. fol. 94, 95.


But Friends, Pray take it not amiss, if we do a little further reason in our
own case, we being the Sufferers and Loosers: If an order of Session, (be it
right or wrong) cannot be reversed or dispensed withal out in Sessions; Then we
may conclude we have suffered wrong, in not being admitted a hearing the last
day of the Sessions (as was before granted, if not promised, and as we
earnestly desired, and our Friends moved for it in Court) to have made our
exception, against the late Recorder's irregular Proceedings, and his said
Order, whereby we are detained, we having matter against both: ^o that the same
Sessions (upon a further discovery) had Power as well to have reversed the
Order, or discharged us, as an Error in process may the same Term be reformed
in the same Court.

And further, If a Person committed to Goal by the Justices, with these Words
in the Mittimus, Scil. [without Bail or Mainprize] W^ere the Prisoner is
bailable by Law, may be let out upon Ban by other Justices, which we suppose is
not to be denied, Da^t. fol. 280. Then by the same reason Persons illegally
committed at Quarter-Session may be discharged before next Sessions: For such
order is no otherwise in force, then it is according to Law, and not because the
Justices made it. And none ought to be wrongfully detained or delayed in
Prison, any more then wrongful^y or fa^sly Imprisoned. Also, for two or three
Justices within their Power and Commission, to reverse a wrong Commitment, or
Erroneous Process (especially where they might have the consent of the rest, as
you might in our case) is but to make void that which in it self is void in
Law, and to be holden for None. To be sure Magna Charta, the Petition of right,
and the common Law or Reason of the Land, with many ancient and good Laws,
(wherein the Liberty and Property of English men are concerned) strictly
prohibiting illegal Imprisonment, denying or delaying Justice, etc. These will
out Balance the circumstance of any Order or Warrant not self unwarrantable.

The most that can be charged against us, as to matter of Fact, (since we were
Recti incuria, by being discharged from the matters contained in our Mittimus
and Warrant) is our not Swearing Allegiance. We were no Offenders, till a Trap
was laid to make us such. by Francis Bacon, in his Abruptly surprising us with
that Oath, to run us to a Praemunire (a he had threatened us aforehand) whereas
the Law was never intended to ensnare and entrap Men. And God knows our not
Swearing, is not for any the least favor to those seditious and treasonable
Practices, Principles and Positions abjured and renounced by that Oath, for
they are an Abhorrence to us. For if we were so Unnatural and Perfidious, as to
reserve any such wicked Principles, we might as casily equivocally swallow that
or any other Oath, for our own Interests: But let such Collusion and Fallacy be
forever far from us: It Is only for fear of offending our Lord and Master Christ
Jesus, as in all other cases. For we your Prisoners never took an Oath in our
Lives; we dare not Swear in any case, because of Christ's and his Apostles
universal Prohibition (in that case) as we understand it; and many of the
Primitive Christians and Martyrs, even Protestant Martyrs were of the same
mind. We freely and publicly ^ss^nted to the Declaration and Promise of
Allegiance contained in the Oath, and hope ever to be found in the Practice
thereof; only we are under a Conscientious restraint not to Swear it. We are no
Papists, nor in the least Popishly affected, but w^olly averse to Popery, as is
well known to many: What Is then wanting on our parts in this case? Is it not
only in that we Swear not to that which we profess and practice? Pray then have
so much Charity, Humanity and good Nature toward us, as not to think so hardly
of us for our Conscientious persuasion, as if we justly demerited any such
severe Penalty, a the Judgment of a Praemunire, to be put off the Kings
protection. etc. next to the punishment of Traitors, when we bear no ill will
to the King; we have not^ing but Love and good Will to the King and his People.
Surely that Severity cannot in Reason or Equity be adjudged secundum Qualitatem
and quantitatem delicts supposed in our case, if due measures be taken,
according to Equity and the Law of God in the Conscience; which as the Learned
conclude, admits not in all cases of taking all that the Words of the Law give,
for that were sometimes to do against the Law. To follow the Words of the Law
(says Doctor and Student) were in some cases both against Justice and the
Commonwealth. Wherefore ^n some cases it is necessary to leave the Words of
the Law, and to ^ollow that which Reason and Justice requires (as it is
asserted, D^ct. and Stud. page 27.) Every man ought to have a due recourse and
rega^d unto thi^ inward Law of Reason and Equity in his Actions; for which all
a^e accountable to him, whose Eyes are upon all the ways of the Sons of Men.

If we be questioned, why we did not procure a Writ of Habeas Corpus before, or
at first? We Answer, We were not willing, nor advised to do that, because we
did not despair to have Justice done us among you here, (nor do we yet) which
we really reckon more Honorable for this City, than to delay us under a
wronful Imprisonment.

And now as praecipitatio and morosa cunctatio, i.e. Too much rashness, casting
men down Headlong, and Froward delay, are accounted two great Adversaries to
the due Execution of Law and Justice; and we really apprehend our selves
injured by the first, (especially through Francis Bacon's precipitant
procedure) We desire that none in Authority in this City may be concerned in
the last toward us, to the prolonging us under this restraint, (so far remote
from our Families and Concern,) to the injuring of their own Consciences, as to
their inward Peace, and our further Oppression and Grievance.

Moreover, being sensible of a divine Hand of Providence in permitting our
suffering in this place, as also that our Religious cause should lose nothing
by our Imprisonment, as we told Francis Bacon at first; we have been the more
Armed with Patience and clearness of Spirit (in Love and Good Will) toward the
Magistrates of this City: Also, our tenderness and respect to them has been
some stop to us hitherto, from presenting our Grievance ^as a Formal case) to
the King Though we suppose he had heard by others of it.
and Council, which we really intended by way of Complaint, if the late
Recorder had continued in place, seeing him so much bent against us; and if the
Justices would have been swayed by him, as that we could not have found Relief
from them, after Application made to them: And then (from so little Converse
and Solicitation as I i.e. G.W.
have been concerned in at Court) I could easily presuppose how the Irregular
and Arbitrary proceedings of Francis Baco^ (and the others Omission) apparently
repugnant to the Interest of both King and People would have been resented, and
what Reflection it would have procured: Which method we find advisable and
warranted for any Subject that is ^u^t^r grieved in any thing, that Remedy may
not be delayed; as it is very plain in the Stature, 4 Hen. 7. cap. 12. which
Judge Cook insists upon as a necessary Caveat to all Justices of Peace; See his
Institutes 4 part, fol. 170. The Party grieved being directed to make complaint
to the Justice or Justices, and to cesire Remedy; and if he have no Remedy, to
show his Complaint to the Justices of Assize, if it be nigh the time of their
coming; but if it be too long before their coming, then the Grieved to come to
the King's Highness, or his Chancellor, to show his Grief: Whereupon the King
shall send for the said Justice to know the cause why his said Subjects be not
cased: And if he find any of them in default in these Pr^misses, he shall do to
him ^o offending, to be put out of the Commission, etc. It Is true, we have
intelligent Friends at London, and that some of them understanding how hardly
and wrongfully we have been dealt withal, have used some Solicitation on our
behalf to some Persons of Quality; though we have not as yet given any
direction, for a formal Complaint to the King. (upon our case) And what
Interest has already been sought or p^o^ured for us, was never intended to
interier with the Law, or Invalidate the due course of it, (because they knew
we had it hot) nor to set up Prerogative above, or in opposition to Law and
Justice: Though we must needs assent, that the King has a Prerogative in all
things that are not injurious to the Subject, and Four to disable such
subordinate Ministers, as do injure any of his Subjects by the undue er Male.
Admimstration of Law. The Earl of Yarmouth (to whose kindness we are much
obliged) has been pleased to mediate on our behalf by Letters, desiring that
all the Favor the Law will allow us, may be shown us, (as having received
sufficient Testimony concerning our Reputation) as being no Papists, in order
to remove that suspicion pretended to the contrary, to render us Obnoxious. And
we hope he will be of so much Credit and Repute with you, as neither to expose
us to the Severity of the Law, for our Conscientiously fearing to Swear, nor
yet to prolong us under restraint upon any such Infamous or Causeless suspicion
of what we really are not, prejudicially insinnuated 1 st, By the Informers. 2
dly By Francis Bacon.
by such Questions as the late Recorder put to us. As, First, Are you not in
Orders from Rome? or have you not Orders from thence? Will you take the Oath of
Allegiance, to distinguish your selves? etc. Secondly, Do you not hold it
lawful to Lie, or to tell an officious Lie in some Cases? Thirdly, It might be,
you might make your Certificate your selves in Prison. With such like perverse
Insinuations before and at Sessions, to render us Obnoxious and Odious, and to
cover his Erroneous and Arbitrary proceedings. God preserve and direct you and
us.

Norwich Goal, the 3d of the 5th Month, 1680. This Account is given you in
real Love and Good Will, which we can assure you we bear toward you, as we are
your Friends, who truly wish you well G.W. T.B.

Delivered to the Recorder by M. Defrance, the 10th of the 5th Month; His
absence from the City caused the delay of the Letter so long.

For proof of matter of Fact in charge, that it may plainly appear the said
Francis Bacon, when Recorder, awarded two kinds of Punishments, viz.
Imprisonment and Fines, for one pretended Offense: Let the following Ci^ation
(being a Copy of one of his Warrants for leavying the Fines) be compared with
his Warrant of Commitment before cited, both which relates to the said Meeting,
he^d the 21st day of March (so called) 1679.
City and County of Norwich.
FOrasmuch as Thomas Haward of the Parish of St Peter's Promountergate in
Norwich aforesaid, Worstead Weaver, does stand lawfully Convicted before me
Francis Bacon Esquire, Justice of Peace for the City and County aforesaid, for
being present with diverse other Persons at a Conventicle, holden upon Sunday
the One and Twentieth day of March last past, in the House of John Defrance, in
the Parish of St Gregory in Norwich aforesaid, School-Mas^er, under color or
pretense of the Exercise of Religion, in other manner than according to the
Lyturgy and Practice of the Church of England, and against the Statute made in
the Two and Twentieth Year of our present King's Reign, to prevent and suppress
Seditious Convent^cles; Fr. Bacon.
for which he the said Thomas Haward, is fined by me the said Francis Bacon,
for his second Offense ten Shillings, according to the said Statute. And
whereas George Whitehead of Hounditch in London, Grocer, and Thomas Burr of
Ware in Hartfordshire, Manlster, do also stand severally Convicted before me
the said Francis Bacon, for taking upon themselves severally to teach in the
said Conventicle, whereby they have severally forfeited by the said Act for
this their first Offense Twenty Pounds a piece. Now for that I the said Fran is
Bacon, ^o in my Judgment think the said George W^tehead and Thoma Burr unable
to pay their res^ective Forf^itures; These are therefore to Authorize you, and
in the King's Ma^sties Name to require you, forthwith to go to the dwelling
House of the said Thomas Haward, and demand the sum of ten Shillings for his
said second Offense; and ten Pounds being the Moiety of twenty Founds of the
said George Whiteheads Forfeiture, and charged upon him, by reason of the said
George Whiteheads Poverty: And if the said Thomas Haward shall refuse to pa^
the saeme, or deny, upon your demand, to open his Doors for the Execution of
this Warrant, then to break them open and enter into his House, and leavy the
said sum of ten Pounds and ten Sh^ings, by distress and sale of the Goods and
Chattels of the said Thomas Haward, and the Moneys so leavied deliver and ^ay
unto me, the said Francis Bacon, to be by me distributed according to the said
Statute; and for your so doing, this shall be your Warrant; and therefore in
the diligent Execution hereof fasl not at your Peril,

Given under my Hand and Seal the first day of April, Anno Dom. 1680.
To the Constables of the Ward of North Coniesford in Norwich aforesaid, and to
either of them, and to his and their Assistant and Assistants.

Exceptions against the late Recorder's requiring the Oath of Allegiance of
George Whitehead and Thomas Burr, Prisoners, both when first committed, and in
Court, and his late Commitment from Sessions.
1 st, AS to the late Recorder's pretended tender of the Oath of Allegiance to
the said Prisoners, before their first Commitment, the Law did not give him
Power thereunto; they not being under those precedent Causes and Circumstances
prescribed in the Statute in that case, 7 Jac. c. 6. Dalt. fol. 94, 95
that is as standing Indicted, or Convicted, or complained of by the respective
Officers of their Ne^ghbourhood (as therein mentioned) nor was he any such
J^stice o^ Peace near a joyn^ng to the places of the said Prisoners dwellings
(as the Law also directeth^ but on the contrary, the P^isoners N^ighbours both,
certain Officers and other Credible Persons have g^ven Certificates and
Testimony on their behalf, that they have never been accounted nor reputed
Jesuits nor Papists, nor Popishly affected.

2 dly, His first requiring the Oath of the said Prisoners being made void, and
reverst by the late Order of Sessions, discharging the Prisoners of the matters
contained in their Mittimus and Warrant, is thereby made no tender, being one
of those matters contained in the said Warrant, whereof the Prisoners are
discharged.

3 dly, His putting the said Oath De Novo (that is for a first tender) in the
Q^arter-Session, to the said Prisoners appears Contra sormam Statuti, against
the form of the Statute, and order of Law prescribed and limited, both in the
3 Jac. 4. (even in Relation to Popish Recusants) and 7 Jac. 6. more general,
whereby the first tender of the said Oath is not directed to be made in one
Quarter Sessions, and the second in another; but contrariwise, the first tender
out of Sessions, and a Commitment of the Persons refusing to Goal, until the
next Assize or general Quarter Sessions, where the said Oath shall be again
required, which [again] relates to the second tender in open Assize or
Sessions, after the first out of Sessions; see 3 Jac. 4. to which agrees the
Statute of the 7 Jac. 6. in relation to the first tender being made out of
Sessions, Dalt. fol. 77. and fol. 209.
and the second in Sessions, in these Words (viz) Where the said Oath shall be
again in the said open Sessions required, etc.

Which [again] likewise follows the Commitment of the party for refusing, on
the first tender made out of Sessions as the Law directs.

4 thly, Also his ordering the said Prisoners to be committed from Sessions to
the common Goal, there to remain till next Quarter Sessions (for not accepting
his De Novo tender in Sessions) appears Illegal, and contrary to the form of
the Statutes beforementioned, and course of proceeding thereby prescribed and
limited; See the Judgment of Council i.e. M. Smith.
in that case; also concerning the third Warrant (which is that from Sessions)
in these Words (viz.)

I conceive the third Warrant is not good in the Commitment; for as it is true,
that Act says, The Offender shall incur a Praemunire; yet it does not in the
least give them any Power to commit the Person, and therefore, and for that its
without Bail or Mainprize, and to a certain time, and not leaving it to the
Law: I conceive it is against Law, etc. I believe the Lawmakers intended only
Romish Recusants. 5 thly, The Statute of the 3 Jac. 4. Entitled, An Act for
the discovering and repressing of Popish Recusants. Upon which that of the 7
Jac. 6. is grounded, as also the penalty of Praemunire mentioned in the 16 of
R. 2. appears to be made, and only intended against Popish Recusants, and such
Agents as were Enemies to the King, his Crown and Regalty (which the said
Prisoners are not.)

1. From the Preamble concerning the Powder Plot. 2. From the Nature of the
Oath, and those Treasonable Practices and Principles thereby renounced and
abjured. 3. From the Statute of Praemunire in the 16 R. 2. Entitled,
Praemunire for purchasing Bulls from Rome.
and the Penalty thereof being made against those Agents, that did procure
Sentences of Excommunication and Bulls, Instruments, etc. from Rome against the
King, which touched the King, his Crown and Regalty. 16. R. 2. c. 5.

Of Praemunire.
Judge Cook Instit. 3 part fol. 126. The greatness of these Punishments do show
the Greatness of the Offense.

It is to be observed that the Statute of 16 R. 2. is strictly Penned against
Offenders, etc.

Observe, The Prisoners have to plead that they are no such Offenders nor
justly chargeable with any such Offense against the King, his Crown or Regalty,
as is mentioned in the 16 R. 2. c. 5.

The Exceptions against the De Novo tender of the Oath, argued.
IT being a Maxim in Law, that the Penalty ought not to exceed the Offense, but
to be secundum Qualitatem and Quantitatem delicti: Therefore to punish Innocent
Persons with the penalty of Praemunire (for not taking the Oath, only upon a
Principle of Conscience, because they are afraid to Swear in any case, and not
upon any Principles of Disloyalty) equally with them whom the Law concludes
Disloyal and Treasonable in their Principles at least, (if not actually such)
and upon no other account can reasonably be supposed to refuse the said Oath of
Allegiance: This appears very unjust, and neither secundum qualitatem, nor
secundum quantitatem delecti, supposed.

[The Case further argued and illustrated.]

It Is evident, that the Penalty of Praemunire was intended, by the Law, for
Persons guilty, either of Treasonable and Seditious Practices or Principles
against the King and Government, tending to the Subversion thereof, as appears
by the intent of the Law: It Is presumed, they are at least such Inhaerent
Traitors by disloyal and perfidious Principles, as that they are prepared and
ready to be actually such, as appears by the Preamble of the 3 Jac. 4.

1 st, By the Statute of 16 R. 2. cap. 5. Praemunire for procuring Bulls,
sentences of Excommunication, etc. from Rome against the King, his Crown and
Regalty.

2 dly, By the Statute of 5 Eliz. cap. 1. Praemunire for holding with,
extolling, setting forth, maintaining or defending the Authority, Jurisdiction
or Power of the Bishop or See of Rome, by Writing, Cyphering, Printing,
Preaching, Deed or Act, Advisedly and Wittingly, etc.

3 dly, By the Statute of 13 Car. 2. cap. 1. Entitled, For his Majesty's
Person and Government against Treasonable and Seditious Practices. Wherein
Praemunire is for Maliciously and Advisedly, by Writing, Printing, Preaching,
or other Speaking, etc. declare or affirm, that the Parliament begun at
Westminster, November 3. Anno 1640. is not yet dissolved, or endeavoring a
change of Government, etc. [All which are deemed by Law matters of Fact,
Seditious and Treasonable, to which the Penalty of Praemunire is sutably
prepared.]

4 thly, By the Title and Preamble of the Statute of the 3d of King James,
chap. 4. [being an Act for the discovering and repressing of Popish Recusants.]
Its evident that,

1 st, Praemunire was intended by the Lawmakers, for such Persons as were
Popish Recusants, and infected by the Wicked and Devilish Counsel of Jesuits,
Seminaries, etc. 2 dly, And so far perverted in the point of their Loyalties
and due Allegiance, as that they were ready to entertain and execute any
Treasonable Practices, instancing that Barbarous and Horrible attempt of the
Gunpowder Plot. 3 dly, And for diverse Persons Popishly affected, who to cover
and hide their false Hearts, and to attend the opportunity to execute their
Mischievous Designs, repair sometimes to Church to escape the Penalty of the
Laws, etc.
Which parts of the Preamble duly considered, two things are Naturally
deducible to render the Penalty of Praemunire suitable to the Offense (as all
Penalties of Laws ought to be.)

1 st, That the Law looks upon them to be Inherently Traitors, or Traitors in
Principle, and thereby prepared for Treasonable Practices, who justly demerit
that Penalty. 2 dly, That the Lawmakers could intend or suppose the Penalty
justly due to no other Persons, than such as would refuse the Oath of
Obedience, with respect to such Principles of Disloyalty tending to Rebellion
and Treason, as were secretly reserved in their false Hearts, according to the
Preamble of the said Act, 3 Jac. cap. 4.
That these Words in the 3d of K. James, cap. 4. viz. [ Or any other Person
whatsoever, etc. shall refuse to take the said Oath, being tendered unto him or
her by the Justices of Assize, etc. shall incur the danger and penalty of
Praemunire] cannot rationally be so largely construed and urged, as for their
making a first tender thereof in the Court of Sessions to any Person
whatsoever, standing accidentally in Court without any precedent and just cause
of notorious Evidence against them, or Conviction of being Popish-Recusants,
etc. for these Reasons.

1 st, Because some Persons in Court, who are real Protestants, may
Conscientiously scruple to Swear, or take any Oath upon the same Principle of
Christ's Doctrine, Matthew. 5. and James 5. upon which many Primitive Christians
and Martyrs (even Protestant Martyrs) refused to take an Oath in any case; and
not from any Principles of Disloyalty and Rebellion, which the Oath of
Allegiance was provided against.

2 dly, Because the Words as construed, vary from the Order and Course of
proceeding, prescribed and allowed even unto Popish Recusants, i.e. for a first
tender to be made out of Court, and a second in Court, before a Praemunire for
refusal; Therefore it must intend Any other Person whatsoever being a Popish
Recusant convict. It would be very unequal and unreasonable to Praemunire a
Protestant for once Refusal in Court, upon a surprisal by a sudden tender, and
allow a Popish Recusant so much order of proceeding and deliberation as a first
Tender out of Sessions, and a second in Sessions (and a refusal upon each)
before a Praemunire; howbeit Women covert are exempted from Praemunire.

3 dly, The Words [Or any other Person whatsoever] are left out in the 7 Jac.
cap. 6. in the recital of the same Clause, relating to the tender of the Oath
in the Assize or general Quarter Sessions; there must needs be some cause for
the leaving out these Words in the same clause: And the latter Act being in the
same case more gentle in this Point, supposes the former too severe, and
therefore the Words are left out: For if the first had been without Fault, what
need of a second?

And its apparent, that in the 7 Jac. c. 6. the first tender of the Oath (by
the Justices) is made out of Sessions, and the second in Sessions, and a
Refusal upon both, before the Judgment of Praemunire.

Observation, The Commission of the Peace stood over-burthen'd with diverse
Statutes; Some whereof, (says Chief Justice Cook) Instit. 4. part. fol. 171.
are stust with many vain and unnecessary Repetitions, and many other
Corruptions crept into it by mistaking of Clerks, etc. Diverse Statutes have
been repealed, and diverse have expired, etc. He hereupon cautions thus]

It is a good Rule therefore for all Judges and Justices whatsoever, that have
Jurisdiction by any Statute, which at the first was Temporary, or for a time,
to consider well, before they give Judgment; Whether that Statute has been
continued or made perpetual? whether it be not repealed or altered by any
latter Statute: Erudimini, qui judicatis terram. See 2 part Instit. 22 H. 8. c.
4.
The Exposition upon the Statute of 22 H. 8. c. 5.

4 thly, Query? But how well do they consider before they give Judgment? If
they will pick up these two or three Words out of one Statute, which are after
left out in another to warrant a first tender of the Oath in Sessions, to any
other Person whatsoever (though he be a peaceable Protestant) and for once
refusal to run him to a Praemunire. Here they take no notice of the alteration
before they give Judgment; but such Protestants must be more hardly dealt
withal than the Papists.

5 thly, If any other Person whatsoever (besides the Popish Recusant under
Prosecution in Court) may be run to the Judgment and Penalty of a Praemunire
for once refusing of the Oath, being surprised with a first tender thereof in
Court, then that any other Person whatsoever may be dealt more severely with
than Popish Recusants; for they may have time, deliberation and the course of
Law for a first tender out of Court, and a second in Court before Judgment: But
any other Person whatsoever, upon a surprizal by a first tender in Court, and
refusal, does presently incur Judgment: This Interpretation and procedure the
Lawmakers could never intend with the least color of Equity or Reason.

6 thly, It cannot rationally be granted, that the Law in the Reason and Equity
of it will bear out the Justices, not only in requiring the said Oath at their
Discretions of any Person whatsoever present in Court, but also to give
Judgment of Praemunire for once refusal; that cannot be the mind or intention
of the Lawmakers; for that were accidentally, and upon a surprizal to punish
any other Persons more suddenly and severely than those Popish Recusants who
are under Prosecution, according to the order of procedure therein prescribed
and limited for a first tender out of Sessions, and a second in Sessions
before a Praemunire: Let the Maxim or General Rule be minded in the Case, viz.
Quod si vox aliqua plures habet significationes proprias and usitatas, illa
cligenda est quae menti and intentioni Legislatoris est Magis accommodata; i.e.
That if any Word have more Significations, proper and usual; that is, to be
chosen which is most accommodated to the Mind and Intention of the Lawmakers.

7 thly, The Dis-junctive words insisted on are, [Or any other Person
whatsoever shall refuse to take the said Oath, being tendered unto him or her by
the Justices of Assize, etc.] And not that the said Oath shall, or may, be
required of any other Person standing by in Court: And therefore if the
Justices say, That he is known to be a Popish Recusant, being convicted, etc.
(for such that Law intends) that is easily made appear, if such; or else that he
is notoriously suspected; which are the most colorable Allegations for a first
tender of the Oath in Court, to any other Person than him that is under
Prosecution: Then it follows, that they cannot legally so tender it to any
Person whatsoever, without exception or limitation, but to a Popish Recusant
convict, or to one notoriously suspected. If this last be pretended, then it is
to be enquired. 1 st, What he is suspected for? What heinous Offense, Crime or
Principle that renders him so very Obnoxious in the Eye of this Law, that he
must be more hardly dealt withal upon a surprizal of a first tender in Court,
than a Popish Recusant under Prosecution? 2 dly, What occasion is there really
against him to render him such a notorious suspected Person? and who are his
Accusers? It Is no small thing in such a case to bring a Persons Reputation and
Credit so publicly into Question in Court, especially if he be of good Repute
among his Neighbors, as no Papish, nor Popishly affected, which is the said
Prisoners case.


Observation. Therefore the real Causes and Reasons of suspicion in this and
all Criminal cases ought to be considered, as for Instance:

Judge Cook; One or more Justice or Justices of Peace, cannot make a Warrant
upon a bare Surmize, to break any man's House to search for a Fellon, or stolen
Goods, etc. Vid. E. Cook, Instit. 4 part fol. 176, 177.
And it should be full of Inconvenience, that it should be in the Power of any
Justice of Peace, being a Judge of Record, upon a bare suggestion to break the
House of any Person, of what State, Quality or Degree soever, and at what time
soever, either in the Day or Night upon such Surmises.

For Justices of Peace to make Warrants upon Surmises, for breaking the Houses
of any Subjects, to search for Fellons or stolen Goods, is against Magna
Charta: M.C. cap. 29.
Neo super eum ibimus, neo super eum mittemus, nisi perlegale Judicium parium
suorum, vel perlegem terrae. And against the Statute of 42 Edward 3. c. 3. etc.
Justices of Feace are Judges of Record, and ought to proceed upon Record, and
not upon Surmises: Sed distinguenda sunt tempora and concordabunt leges, i.e.
Times are to be distinguished, and Laws will agree, As to a sufficient cause of
suspicion, see likewise Michael Dalton, etc. See also M. Dalton's Justice of
Peace, fol. 276, of Excommunication of Fellons.
Communis vox and fama, that he did the Offense, is sufficient cause of
suspicion, viz, where such a Felony is done, otherwise not: But yet for the
better conceiving what may breed or give just cause of Suspicion, mark some of
Mr. Bracton's Rules; Ocitur suspitis ex fama fama vero quae suspicionem
inducit, oriri debet apud bonos and graves, (non quidem Malevotes, sed providas
and fide dignas Personas) idque non semel sed saepius. Vanae autem voces Populi
non sunt andiendae.

And therefore where the common Proverb is Vox Populi est vox Dei, it should be
Vox Populi Dei est vox Dei.

8 thly, The Words [ or any either Person whatsoever, etc.] in the 3 Jac. 4.
being left out of the same Clause in 7 Jac. c. 6. and inconsistent with the
course of procedure therein (for a first tender of the Oath out of Court, and a
second tender in Court, even to Pepish Recusants) are therefore not to be
insisted upon contrary to the latter Statute: As also that passage in the 3
Jac. 4. impowering the Bishop of the Diocese, or two Justices, to examine
Persons upon Oath about Recusancy, is also left out of the 7 Jac. 6. Where
there is any inconsistency between two Acts in any clause in the same case,
(especially where the first is more severe tan the second) it is not reasonable
the first should be insisted on, in opposition to the latter, considering that
Axiom or Principle, i.e. Benigna and favorabilis Interpretatio semper
praeferenda est praesertim simateria legis sit poenalis and ediosa; i.e. A
gentle and favorable Interpretation ought always to be preferred, especially
if the matter of the Law be penal or grievous.

To conclude on some Questions and Considerations instead of an Argument more
absolute; though the Statute beforementioned, i.e. 3 Jac. c. 4. and 7 Jac. c.
6. be not actually repealed, yet the Question is, Whether they do give the
Justices power to require the said Oath universally of the Subjects of the
present King, and to prosecute them to a Praemunire thereupon for not taking it?

1 st, Consider that the form of the said Oath is limited and prescribed by
the said Statutes, to be taken respectively in King James his Name, and by his
Subjects, for the Trial how they stand affected in point of their Loyalty and
due Obedience, and not (mutatis mutandis) in the Name of King Charles the
second, and by his Subjects in general, or without exception: 'Twas King James
his Subjects, and not those of King Charles the second after his decease, that
were by those Laws required to take it, and thereby were bound to him and his
Heirs. The Allegiance was to him and his Heirs; but how do these empower the
administering of that Oath of King James to the Subjects of his Heirs? That
these Laws seem not to warrant; therefore how can the said Oath be legally
required (by the same Laws) of the Subjects of King Charles the second; or any
of them run to a Praemunire thereupon, without being reinforced or renewed by
Act of Parliament? And can that be without mutatis mutandis, King Charles the
second, in the Oath, instead of King James? But it may be hoped, that after
these many Years experience, more safe Expedients may be found out for securing
the King and Government, than this or other Oaths; for those that are
Perfidious can easily break over such Hedges: And those that are known to be of
peaceable Conversations need them not; nor is it for the Honor of Princes to be
rendered jealous or suspicious of their peaceable Subjects, by such ties and
shakles which produce not a true natural Allegiance. For even the present King
in his Declaration, Dec. 26, 1662. has declared His Royal dignity and
greatness much more happily and securely founded on his Clemency and his
subjects Loves, than in their Fears and his Power. Further adding these Words,
The sole strength and security we shall ever confide in, shall be the Hearts
and Affections of our Subjects indeared and confirmed to us, etc.


Observation. For as Judge Cook says, Neither can any Oath, allowed by the
Common Law, or by Act of Parliament, be altered but by Act of Parliament, etc.
Cook Instit. 3 part fol. 165.
As the Oath of the Kings Privy Council, the Justices, the Sheriffs, etc. was
thought fit to be altered and enlarged; but that was done by Authority of
Parliament. For further proof whereof, (says he) see the Statutes here quoted,
and it shall evidently appear, that no old Oath can be altered, or new Oath
raised without an Act of Parliament, or any Oath ministered by any that have not
allowance by the common Law, or by Act of Parliament; Vide 5 R. 2. c. 12. 6 R.
2. c. 12. 4 H. 4. c. 18. 2 H. 5. c. 7. 8 E. 4. cap. 2. 1 R. 3. c. 6, and 15. 19
H. 7. c. 14. 14 H. 8. c. 2. 23 H. 8. c. 5. 3 H. 8. c. 5. 23 H. 8. c. 46. 2 E.
6. c. 13. 27 Eliz. c. 12. 3 Jac. 4. Mag. Char. c. 6. Stanf. pr. 17. F. N. B.
264. W. 1. 3 E. 3. c. 40. 18 E. 3.

To conclude this point, it was resolved in Parliament holden Anno 43 Eliz.
that the Commissions concerning Polices of Assurances could not examine upon
Oath, because they had no Warrant either by the common Law or by Act of
Parliament; and therefore it was Enacted at that Parliament. That it should be
lawful for the said Commissioners to examine Witnesses upon Oath, etc. Oaths
that have no Warrant by Law, are rather Nova tormenta quam Sacramenta. And it
is an high Contempt to minister an Oath without Warrant of Law to be punished
by Fine and Imprisonment.

Observe another Instance.

2 dly, In the 12th Year of the present King, it is enacted by the Parliament,
12 Car. 2. c. 23, 24.
that no Persons should be employed in any Office relating to the Excise,
until they shall take the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy before two, or
more, Justices of Peace, together with the Oath therein inserted, mutatis
mutandis. And likewise it is Enacted 14 Car. 2. c. 3. That no Person being
under the degree of a Peer in this Realm, shall be capable of acting as
Lieutenant, Deputy-Lievtenant, Officer, etc. unless he or they shall first take
the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, etc. Consider hence, whether the making
these new Laws in Car. 2. does not argue the old Laws cited insufficient in the
same case of requiring the said Oath now?

By an Act in the thirtieth Year of the present King, Entitled, An Act for the
more effectual preserving the King's Person and Government; 30 Car. 2.
It is Enacted, That no Person should Vote or sit in the House of Peers, or
House of Commons, until he first take the several Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy.

And observe, that the refusal by these Acts does not incur a Proemunire, but
only the forfeiture of their Places or Offices.

And what necessity could there be of these Acts in King Charles the second, if
these in King James were sufficient or not expired, especially as to that
severe Penalty of Paemunire, meetly for refusing of that Oath, as it is required
in terminis, by those Laws of King James: For in the 7 Jac. cap. 6. The Members
of Parliament are required to take the said Oath, as it was to King James and
in his Name -- If that were still in force and sufficient, what need were there
of any new Laws, as before, to require it of Subjects under the same
Circumstances now, as then? To conclude, the Penalty of Praemunire is so
severe, that it is more suitable for Rebels, or Persons breaking their
Allegiance to the King, than for Persons only refusing to Swear it merely for
Conscience sake, whilst they faithfully perform their Allegiance, and intend no
other but to demean themselves as peaceable minded Christians and true
Protestant Subjects.

A more general Plea in the Prisoners case and behalf, relating both to
Conscience, Reason and Equity; First, In reference to the Grounds and Reasons
of the Oath of Allegiance; Secondly, In reference to the Reason of the Penalty
of a Praemunire, according as both are clearly specified in the Titles,
Preamble and Purport of the Statutes (and in the nature of the Oath it self) in
that case made and provided, i.e. 3 Jac. c. 4. and 7 Jac. c. 6. and 16 R. 2. c.
5.
Anno tertio Jacobi Regis, cap. 4. The Title; "An Act for discovering and
repressing of Popish Recusants."
FOr as much as it is found by daily experience, that many his Majesty's
Subjects, that adhere in their Hearts to the Popish Religion, by Infection
drawn from thence, and by the Wicked and Devilish Counsels of Jesuits,
Seminaries, etc. are so far perverted in the point of their Loyalties and due
Allegiance unto the King's Majesty, and the Crown of England, as they are ready
to entertain and execute any Treasonable Conspiracies and Practices, as
evidently appears by that more than Barbarous and Horrible Attempt to have
blown up with Gunpowder the King, Queen, Prince, Lords and Commons in the
House of Parliament assembled, tending to the utter Subvertion of the whole
State, lately undertaken by the Instigation of Jesuits and Seminaries, and in
advancement of their Religion, by their Scholars taught and instructed by them
to that purpose; and diverse Persons Popishly affected, the better to cover and
hide their false Hearts, and with the more safety to attend the Opportunity, to
execute their mischievous Designs, repair sometimes to Church, to escape the
Pena^ties of the Laws in that behalf provided.

From all which observe: First, Who are intended, appears by the Title, i.e.
Popish Recusants. Secondly, That by the Preamable here is more than a bare
suspicion of many the Kings Subjects, being by the Devilish Counsel of Jesuits
thus far perverted in those days, that it was found by daily Experience.
Thirdly, That the effect and influence that such Perversion had on them was,
That they were ready to execute any Treasonable Conspiracies and Practices.
Fourthly, The Discovery and Experience of such Treasonable Conspiracy,
proceeding from such Perversion, scil. That Horrible Attempt to have blown up
with Gunpowder the King, Queen, Prince, Lords and Commons in the House of
Parliament Assembled.


By all which it is apparent, that this was a manifest and most grevious
occasion, as it is specified, and that of a very high nature in it self, most
Barbarous, Criminal and Treasonable, which being chargeable upon the Counsel of
the Jesuits and Seminaries, did so far render their Followers suspicious, that
Provision by this Act and Oath of Obedienee was made and intended for their
Discovery and Suppression.

Now let Honesty, Truth, Conscience and common Reason judge in the Case, what
Equity and Justice can there be to pursue the peaceable and innocent People
called Quakers, upon this or any other Act grounded thereon, and to run them to
a Praemunire, to the utter forfeiture and loss of their Estates and Liberties,
or to make the said Oath a mere Snare to them, for their scrupling to take it,
purely upon a Conscientious account, and not upon any such wicked Principles of
Disloyalty, as are either Treasonable or tending to the Subvertion of the
Government or State of the Kingdom? But being clear and innocent in the sight
of God and Men, from all such wicked Principles, Attempts and Practices, and
never chargeable in the least therewith since we were a People, what great
Injustice, both in the sight of God, Angels and Men, is it, for any that are
appointed Ministers of Justice and Right, to make the said Oath a mere Trap and
a Snare, to run us out of our Liberties, Properties and Estates on this
occasion? If King James was accounted a merciful Prince, not willing the
innocent should share of the Severity due to the guilty, in signifying that his
intent in publishing this Oath was to make a separation between Catholics of a
peaceable Disposition, and in all other things good Subjects (as has been
reported) and such Catholics as maintained the Rebellious Principles of the
Powder Trators (according as he himself signifi^d) How much more ought there to
be a distinction made between the peaceable Protestants, and such seditious and
evil Principled Papists, for whom the Oath and Penalty of Praemunire was first
intended, so as not to run them upon such Protestants, who are both of a
peaceable Disposition and Conversation? Their dissenting from the Persecutors,
in point of Worship being purely conscientious and tender toward the Lord
Jesus Christ, and with respect to a real Reformation from Popery, both as to
the Root, Branches and Relics thereof, which is clearly our case. If King
James was not willing that p^aceable Papists should be run to a Praemunire, Why
should peaceable Protestants be more severely dealt withal, or run to a
Praemunire for their Conscientiously scrupling only to Swear Allegiance? King
James's Apology for the Oath of Fide^i^y, f^l. I. Quod non tam eo f^ebat, etc.
i.e. which was done or made, not so much that Subjects of better note might be
distinguished from Rebels, [a perduellibus] which deny just obedience to the
King, but especially that I might discern or sever [secernerem] them who
addicted to the Opinions of Popery, yet have not abjured fidelity from such who
carried awa^ with the Whimsie or Phanaticism [vertigine] of the same zeal with
the Gunpowder Traitors, would not be held within the Limits of natural
Obedienc^, and believed that all P^ots and Treasonable Crimes were excused by
the only disparity of Religion.
And what proportion or equality can there be between our supposed Offense, and
the Penalty? There Is no more reason to suspect that our refusing to swear
allegiance is out of disaffection to the King, than that our refusing to swear
in our own concerns (to preserve our just Rights) is out of disaffection to our
selves. The King loses nothing by our not Swearing Allegiance to him, whilst
we perform it; but we sometimes suffer loss and detriment by not swearing in
our private con^erns. Therefore our scrupling an Oath and refusing to Swear
Allegiance is purely matter of Conscience, and not from any Principles of
Disloyalty to the King, no more than it is from any disrespect to our selves,
or our own Interests. It Is not unknown, but generally believed, that Jesuits
and Popes Agents in these days can equivocally take the said The History of the
Church of Great Britain, by G G. on that year 1605. p 272. Upon the making
this Act the Pope dispatched two Breves into England, prohibiting all
Catholics to take this Oath, so destru^tive to their own Souls and the Sea of
Rome, exhorting them to suffer Persecution, and manfully to endure Martyrdom.
Notwithstanding all which, this Oath being tendered was generally taken by
Catholics without any scruple, and particularly Genesis Black-well, Archpriest
of the English, being apprehended and cast into Prison, by taking this Oath
wrought his own enlargement. This Oath was ministered immediately after the
putting forth of a Proclamation which commanded all Seminaries and Jesuits to
depart the Land. ^bid. King James wrote an Apology for the Oath of Allegiance,
together with a Premonition to all Monarchs, Kings, Free Princes and States of
Christendom, effectually confu^ing the Popes Breves. [This Apology I have seen]
So that it was intended against the Papists is known by all Christendom.
Suarez, Eudaemon, Becanus, Coftetus, Peleterius and other Papi^s wrote against
it. R.R.
Oath, and thereby obscure their destructive Designs, and escape the Penalty of
the Law, upon the confidence they have in the Popes pardons, for all their
equivocal reserves in taking the Oath, going to Church, etc. And why may not
all this be as easily dispensed withal by such Agent, of Rome, to carry on
their evil Designs, as their repairing to Church in King James's days (as is
signified) to cover their false hearts, and with the more safety to attend the
opportunity, to execute their mischievous Designs. And therefore whilst such
can escape by Equivocation, and the Innocent suffer for Conscientiously
scrupling to Swear (not only in this, but all other cases) that which was at
first intended for the discovering and suppressing such Persons as were
infected with destructive and treasonable Principles and Practices, is now
contrariwise by subtilty and envy, so far perverted as to be made a Subterfuge,
for persons obnoxtious and treasonable in their Designs (or disguised and
wicked Agents) against the Government, as they are counted of the worst sort,
and a s^are and gin to catch and destroy the innocent and peaceable Subjects
with, both as to their just Liberties, Properties and Livelihoods in this
World. Thus the said Oath is made use of against the Interest of both King and
People; they that thus use the Oath use it against the Government; and thus it
never attained its end.

Thus Justice and true Judgment is turned backward, and the Justice intended by
the Law perverted, and the real end thereof made void, and that under pretense
of Justice, where subtilty, envy, persecution and partiality blinds the mind.

Anno Septimo Jacobi, cap. 6. The Preamble.
Whereas by a Statute made the third year of your Majesty's reign, Entitled,
An Act for the better discovering and repressing of Popish Recusants. The form
of an Oath to be ministered and given to certain Persons in the same Act
mentioned, is limited and prescribed, tending only to the Declaration of such
Duty as every true and well-affected Subject, not only by Bond of Allegiance,
but also by the Commandment of Almighty God, ought to bear to your Majesty,
your Heirs and Successors, which Oath such as are infected with Popish
Superstition, do oppugn with many false and unsound Arguments, etc.

Hence observe still. 1 st, That the very first and chief intent of the said
Statute and Oath (made in the third year of King James) on which this in his
seventh year is grounded, was for the discovering and repressing Popish
Recusants, and not for the repressing Pretestant Subjects. 2 dly, That 'twas
such as were infected with Popish Superstition in those days, that (as the
Lawmakers concluded) did oppose the said Oath, with many false and unsound
Arguments: And what was or could be then supposed to be their reason for their
so oppugning it, is to be considered.


It could not be simply and only because it was an Oath, for that they infected
generally, or for the most part, could Swear in other cases, to serve their own
turns. What then?

1 st, No doubt, it was because of the Declaration contained in it, of such
Duty as every true and well-affected Subject ought to bear to the King. 2 dly,
Because of the severe renunciation of the Pope, his having Power and Authority
over the King, or to dispose of his Dominions, and against the Popes Sentence
of Excommunication, Absolutions, and that damnable Positions of deposing
Princes, Excommunicated by the Pope, absolving Subjects of their due obedience
to their Princes, etc.
It appears plainly, that they who were infected with such Principles of
Disloyalty, did not oppose the said Oath, simply and only because it is an
Oath, but because of the Declaration of such Duty and Allegiance to the King,
as is therein contained. If it should be objected, That there were some that
thought it not to belong to their Degree or Profession to Swear. If only on
that account they refused it, and not in favor to those seditious and
treasonable Practices and Principles therein abjured, then as Persons of a more
peaceable disposition, they ought to be distinguished from Rebels, according to
King James's mind. Otherwise, if they could take it in dissimulation, then it was
an unsufficient Trial Those that did not so think, but in other cas^s could
Swear, either took it, as Blackwell, etc or declared the unlawfulness of it in
respect of Allegiance, etc. Therefore 'twas only against such that so declared
or opposed the Allegiance it self, that both the Oath and the Penalty were
intended. See T^ Dialogue, God and the King, page 18. Latin.


Now our case vastly differs from theirs, for whom the Oath was intended;
there is no parity between our case and theirs: We conscientiously scruple or
fear to take that Oath, as we do all Oaths, viz. because it is an Oath, not
because of the Declaration therein contained, of such Duty and Allegiance as
every true and well affected Subject ought to bear to the King, nor yet because
of the Testimony or Declaration therein against the Pope, his pretended Power,
Excommunications, Absolutions, etc. damnable Position^, etc. therein mentioned,
for that Declaration and Testimony therein contained for Fidelity to the King,
and against the Pope, etc. we can freely sign, as we have delivered a
Declaration to that purpose to the late long Parliament, and in some points
containing a more full Protestation against Popery, in the most Erroneous,
Idolatrous and Superstitious Doctrines thereof; which Declaration was accepted
by a large Committee of Parliament, as sufficient to distinguish us from
Papists, and entered into the Journal of the House of Commons. And therefore the
Substance of the Declaration of Allegiance, contained in the Oath of
Allegiance, we cannot oppugn, but own, as it is or may be transferred or
intended on behalf of the present King, (in opposition to those Treasonable
Practices and Principles thereby renounced and abjured) as being persuaded in
Conscience, that he was eminently preserved, and restored by a Hand of divine
Providence, to have actual Power and Dominion in this Realm, and all other his
Contries, knowing that the most High rules over the Kingdoms of men, and that
they are at his Disposal.

And we also believe, that in good Conscience we are bound to demean our selves
honestly, and to live as peaceable minded Christians, and true Protestant
Subjects under the King and his Government, giving to Caesar the things that
are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's. And then our solemn and
serious Protestation is against the Pope as Antichristian, and against those
Popish Principles, Wicked Positions and Practices, viz. Of deposing or
murdering Kings and Princes Excommunicated by the Pope. Of disposing of their
Kingdoms, Dominions and Countries. Of authorizing Foreign Princes to invade
and annoy them. Of absolving Subjects from their Allegiance and Obedience. Of
licensing any of them to bear Arms, raise Tumults, or offer Violence or Hurt to
their Lawful Kings, Princes, Governments or Subjects. Of Treasons, Traitorous
Conspiracies and Hellish Plots against King, Government, Parliament or People.
Of that damnable Position, that Princes that be excommunicated or deprived by
the Pope, may be deposed by their Subjects, or any other.


All which destructive Principles and abominable Practices, together with that
Antichristian Spirit, from whence they proceed, we do in good Conscience (and
in the sight and presence of God, who knows our Hearts) utterly abhor, protest
and testify against them; and therefore do neither refuse nor scruple the said
Oath in favor to these or any such Principles.

What Is now awanting, why we must be run to Praemunire, to lose our Estates and
Liberties? I^ a peaceable Conversation awanting on our parts? No. Is the Duty
of Allegiance toward our King awanting? No. Are we infect^d with Popish
Treacherous, Treasonable or Destructive Principles against our King, or his
Government or People? No; God knows the Innocence of our Hearts and Intention^,
and men know our peaceably Conversations. What then is the matter, that we must
be so severely dealt withal, to the uttermost rigor of the Law, to be deprived
of all our outward Liberties, Properties, Estates, Livelihoods, and all our
outward Comforts in this World? Are we guilty of any such essential Offense or
capital Crime (in our not coming under the circumstance of an Oath) as may
justly and naturally merit such severity? No sure. The case is brought to a
near point, and resumed to a very narrow compass. Aninnocent, honest, quiet and
well meaning man, both toward the King, his Government and People; he is truly
principled in his Duty; he is real and hon^st in his Heart toward his
Protestant Prince; he is a real Protestant against the Pope and all Popish
Antichristian Positions and Destructive Practices; he not only performs his
Duty of Allegiance in his peaceable Conversation, but also declares it in the
sight of God and Men, and is willing to sign and subscribe such Declaration of
his Duty of Allegiance, if he may not otherwise be believed, only he
conscientiously scruples to say, I Swear, and to kiss the Book, to make his
Declaration an Oath; for want only of which circumstance and ceremony this poor
innocent man and sincere Protestant must be run to a Praemunire, his Liberty
lost, and the little Estate or Substance he has must be forfeited, and all
taken from him; his poor Wife and small Children left desolate, wholly
Impoverished and want Bread; his Wife must go Mourning and wringing her Hands,
and shedding of Tears night and day, for the hard measure she has met withal,
and her Children dolefully Crying and Mourning for want of Bread! Where Is now
either Conscience, Equity, Reason, Justice or Mercy? Were it not very Inhumane
thus to destroy innocent and harmeless Protestants (and thereby to gratify the
Popish Spirit and Party) merely because such Protestants are afraid of an Oath?
They dare not Swear. And how is the real intent and end of the Law answered by
such severe and inhumane dealing with innocent Protestants, who never were
impeached nor just'y chargeable either with treasonable Attempts, Principles or
Practices? They cannot be detected either with actual Treason, or being
infected with any Treasonable Principles by any of their Teachers or others.
And therefore, no such Persons or People as those Laws of Praemunire were
really intended against, though such can escape them. We can appeal to God,
Angels, and all just impartial Men, this is our Case; We are not the People,
which in point of Equity or Justice, the Law could ever be intended against; We
are of no such destructive Principles or Practices, as either the nature of the
Oath points at and intends, or the Statute of Praemunire, 16 R. 2. c. 5. was
provided against, unto which Statute, both that of the 3d of K. James c. 4. and
7th of K. Ja. c. 6. do refer, for the Penalty of a Pramunire upon Persons
refusing to Swear to the Dealaration of their Allegiance. Let that of 16 R. 2.
c. 5. be considered, as to the nature and intent thereof.

Anno deccimo Sexto Ricardi 2. c. 5. The Title; "Praemunire for purchasing of
Bulls from Rome; The Crown of England subject to none."
The conclusive Clause of the Offense and the Penalty, viz.
VVhereupon our said Lord the King, by the assent aforesaid, and at the request
of his said Commons, has ordained and established, That if any purchase or
pursue, or cause to be purchased or pursued in the Court of Rome, or elsewhere,
any such Translations, Processes and Sentences of Excommunication, Bulls,
Instruments, or any other things whatsoever, which touch the King, against him,
his Crown and his Regalty, or his Realm -- And they which bring within the
Realm, or them receive, or make thereof notification, or any other Execution
whatsoever within the same Realm or without, that they, their Notaries,
Procurators, Maintainers, Abettors, Fautors and Counselors shall be put out of
the King's protection, and their Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chattels
forfeit to our Lord the King; and that they be attached by their Bodies, if
they may be found, and brought before the King and his Council, there to answer
to the causes aforesaid, or that process be made against them by Praemunire
Facias, etc.

Animadversion.
Now it being unto this Statute, cited 16 R. 2. and the penalty of Praemunire
therein mentioned, that those of King James about refusing the Oath, do refer
the Justices, as to the Penalty: Hence these two things are observable: 1. The
Nature of the Offense or Fact incurring such severe Sentence and Penalty, as
that of Praemunire. 2. The Nature of the Penalty if self.


First, The Nature of the Offense or Fact is very criminal; it is Treacherous
and Treasonable, as that of purchasing, pursuing or precuring in the Court of
Rome, etc. Sentences of Excommunication, Eulls, Instruments, etc. which touch
the King, his Crown and Regality.

Secondly, The nature of the penalty of Pramunire is suitable to the Fact, it
bears a proportion, and is adopted thereto, as that the Persons so highly
offending, and such perfidious Enemies against the King, his Regality or
Government (by purchasing Sentences of Excommunication and Bulls from Rome
against the King, tending to destroy him, and subvert his Government) should
incur the penalty of being put out of the King's protection, their Lands,
Tenements, Goods and Chattels forfeit to the King, and their Bodies attached,
and they brought before the King and Council to answer, etc. For how should
they desire the King's protection, and to enjoy their Privileges under him,
who purchase Bulls from Rome, in order to destroy him? which is still an
Offense of the same nature and hind, that the Oath of Allegiance, and the Acts
requiring it (in King James his days) were intended and provided against.

All which Offenses, Crimes, and treacherous Actions against the King, his
Government and People, we are so far clear and Innocent of, as that our very
Soul abhors them; And who can charge or justly Impeach us therewith, or with
any of them? We can Challenge the whole World, yea, the worst of our
Adversaries to detect or impeach us, who are the People called Quakers of any
of these things; As, 1 st, Who justly can charge us, or any of us with any such
Correspondency either with the Pope, Church or Court of Rome, as there to
purchase or procure any Sentences of Excommunication or Bulls against the King?
etc. 2 dly, Or that can charge or impeach us, or any of us with any Treasons,
Conspiracies or Plots against the King, his Government, State, Parliament or
People? or that can charge or impeach us, or any of us, with any such Hellish
Design, Attempt or Conspiracy, as either that of the Gun-Powder-Plot, or the
subversion of the Government, or with seeking to introduce Popery, to destroy
the real Protestant Religion (or any part thereof) professed in this or other
Nation? or that can justly charge us, or any of us, with any such pernicious
destructive, Popish and Antichristian Principles, Positions or Practices, as
the Oath of Allegiance was intended and provided against?
As we are sure that no man can justly Detect or Impeach us in any of these,
how then can we either in point of Conscience, Justice, common Equity or
Reason, be run to such extreme Penalties and Sufferings, as to be put out of
the King's protection, or to forfeit our Estates and Liberties, meetly because
we (in point of Conscience) scruple or fear to Swear to the Declaration of our
Allegiance, whilst we sincerely perform the Duty thereof, by our harmless and
peaceable Conversation among men, (as our Neighbors are Eye Witnesses) both as
Christians and true Protestant Subjects, which truly answers the Intent and End
of the Law. Our dissent (in point of Conscience and Worship) being out of no
respect to Popery, but the contrary: For we really believe, we are more clearly
Reformed Protestants, than those are from whom we dissent: Where Is then the
proportion or equality between our supposed Offense (which is but
Circumstantial at most) and the Penalty? There Is no parity at all between them.
Let the Law of Truth, Justice, Equity and Conscience in all moderate
Magistrates and impartial Men judge in this our Case; for to that we appeal,
and not to the Spirit of Persecution, Envy, Revenge and Partiality, which
(without any due measure of things, and without all Compassion) seeks occasion
against us to destroy us, which the Righteous God and just Judge of Heaven and
Earth will plead with and judge. Let due measures be taken of Offenses and
Penalties, which ought to be suitable: Penalties ought not to exceed the
Offenses (but to be secundum qualitatem and quantitatem delicti) nor those
things to be made Offenses which really are none. Let Justice and Right take
place, and equal Law and execution of Right be followed, according to the
Fundamental Laws and Rights of English men, and that which all the Kings
Justices and Ministers (who under him are appointed for that end) are obliged
unto both in the sight of God and men, as being under a severe Obligation to
minister justice and right to all his Subjects, Rich and Poor, without
partiality.

Norwich Prison, the 23d of the 2d Month, 1680.
Here follow some Exceptions, which the said G.W. and T.B. Prisoners, had in
readiness in Court against the manner of their Imprisonment by the Sheriff
without a Warrant, on the 21st of the Month called March, 1679.
Arrest explained, Dalt. fol. 706.
AN Arrest being the apprehending and first restraining of a man's Person,
depriving it of his own Will and Liberty; and may be called the beginning of
Imprisonment. See Dalton fol. 306.

Exception 1.
Dalt. fol. 304. of Warrants. Dyer 244. (...) Bar. 248. Lamb. 93.
If any Officer do Arrest a man for the Peace, or the like, before that he has
a Warrant, and then after does procure a Warrant; or a Warrant comes after him
to Arrest the party for the same cause: yet the first Arrest was wongful; and
the Officer is subject to an Action of false Imprisonment. See the Statute 43
Eliz. c. 6. See also Dalt. fol. 307.

Exception 2.
From the Act made to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles, 22 Car. 2.
fol. 10, 11. These passages are to be observed: viz.

23 Car. 2. fol. 10, and 11.
Also the Sheriffs, and other Magistrates and Ministers of Justice, or any of
them jointly or severally, etc. are to have Certificate made to them
respectively, under the Hand Seal of a Justice of Peace or chief Magistrate, of
his particular Information or Knowledge of such unlawful Meeting or Conventicle
held, or to be held in their respective Counties or Places; and that he with
such assistance as he can get together, is not able to dissolve the same, shall
and may repair unto the Place, etc. and take into their Custody such, and so
many of the said Persons, so unlawfully assembled, as they shall think fit, to
the intent that they may be proceeded against according to this Act. fol. 11.


And the respective Constables, Head-Burroughs, etc. are to have Warrant from
the Justice, Justices or chief Magistrate respectively, etc. to take into their
Custody Persons unlawfully assembled, as they shall think fit, to the intent
that they may be proceeded against according to this Act.

Whence two things are observable. 1. That Persons so met, as aforesaid, are
not to be taken into Custody by Sheriffs or other Officers, without Warrant or
Certificate under the Hand and Seal of a Justice of Peace, or chief Magistrate.
2. That where Persons are so taken into Custody, it is to the intent that they
may be proceeded against according to this Act, which Intends not their
Commitment to Goal, but to fine them upon Conviction. Therefore the Prisoners,
if they were Offenders against this said Act; yet their being taken and thrust
into Goal without such Warrant or Certificate under Hand and Seal, etc. and
after being committed and detained in Goal for not paying their Fines, is
besides and contrary to the provision made in this very Act.


What due Process in Law is.

Due Process explained.
A Commitment by lawful Warrant, is accounted in Law due Process or Proceeding
in Law, and by the Law of the Land, as well as by Process by force of the Kings
Writ. Cook 2 part Institut. fol. 52.

Exceptions against the Warrant of Commitment, dated the 21st of March, Anno
Dom. 1679.
Exception.
It appears illegal for these two Reasons. 1 st, Because it is made not in the
King's Name, but in Francis Bacon's own Name. 2 dly, Because it was made and
served on the 21st Day of March, in the Year abovesaid, being the Lord's Day,
commonly called Sunday.


Reason for Exception first.
For the first Ecxeption observe:

First, That the Form of Mittimusses, or Warrants of Commitment of Persons to
the common Goal, ought to be in his Majesty's Name, or in the Kings Name, or on
the behalf of our Lord the King, etc. Dalt. Just. pac. fol. 348, 349, 350, 351.
As Dalton shows formal Presidents, His Presidents of Mittimusses.
only such Warrants as are for the Commitment of Rogues, and Whores, and idle
Persons, etc. to the House of Correction, are sometimes made in the Justice's
own Name only. See Daltons Presidents, as to the form of Warrants of
Commitment, fol. 348, 349, 350, 351. printed in the Year 1622.

Reason for Exception 2d 29 Car. 2.1677.
Secondly, That in the Act for the better Observation of the Lords Day,
commonly called Sunday, there is this provision made, Claus. ult. Provided
also, that no Person or Persons upon the Lords Day, shall serve or execute, or
cause to be served or executed any Writ, Process, Warrant, Order, Judgment or
Decree, (except in cases of Treason, Felony, or breach of the Peace) but that
the Service of such a Writ, Process, Warrant, Order, Judgment or Decree, shall
be void to all Intents and Purposes whatsoever. And the Person or Persons so
serving or executing, the same shall be as liable to the Suit of the party
grieved, and to answer Damages to him for so doing thereof, as if he or they
had done the same, without Thus the Sheriff did by the Prisoners.
any Writ, Process, Warrant, Order, Judgment or Decree at all.

Observe, The Case of the said Prisoners, in relation to the Meeting aforesaid,
(where they were apprehended) was neither a case of Treason, Felony, nor
breach of the Peace, (they being peaceably assembled, and in a peaceable habit
and posture, and for no Evil intent whatsoever) Therefore the whole process
against them, on the said 21st day of March, 1679. being the Lords Day, both by
Sheriff and Recorder, were against the Law: First, In apprehending and
Imprisoning them without Mittimus or Examination: And Secondly, In the
Recorder's making a Warrant of Commitment, and sending them to Goal on the same
Day, when neither Treason, Felony, nor breach of the Peace were proved, or
justly chargeable against them.

Observe, These foregoing Exceptions against the said Imprisonment and Warrant
of Commitment were not read in Court, nor the following Notes relating to
matter of Fact (though both had in readiness) because the said Warrant of
Commitment was not insisted on by the Recorder, but let fall, when his Warrant
for detention was detected and made invallid in Court.

And here it may not be amiss to add some Notes out of Dalton and others,
concerning the Breach of the Peace, and Assemblies; what are unlawful, and what
lawful.
Peace in effect (says M. Fitz) is the Amity, Confidence and Quiet that is
between men; And he that breaks this Amity, breaks the Peace. Dalt. fol. 7.

Peace in the common acceptance.
Yet Peace (in our Law) most commonly is taken for an abstinence from Actual and
Injurious force, and offer of Violence; and so is rather a restraining of hands
than an uniting of Minds: And for the Maintenance of this Peace chiefly were
the Justices of Peace first made.

Breach of the Peace, what.
The breach of this Peace seems to be any injurious Force or Violence moved
against the Person of another, his Goods, Lands or other Possessions, whether
it be by threatening Words, or by furious Gesture, or force of Body, or any
other force used, in terrorem Populi.

Of Riots, Routs, unlawful Assemblies.

When three Persons, or more, shall come or assemble themselves together, to
the intent to do any unlawful Act with Force or Violence against the Person of
another, his Possessions or Goods; Dalt. fol. 200. Br. Riot. 5. Crom. 68. P.R.
25.
as to Kill, Beat, or otherwise to hurt, or to Imprison a man; to pull down a
House, Wall, Pale, Hedge or Ditch wrongfully; to cut or take away Corn, Grass,
Wood, or other Goods wrongfully; or to do any other unlawful Act with Force or
Violence against the Peace, or to the manifest terror of the People; 1 Ma. 12.
If they only meet to such a purpose or intent, although they shall after
depart of their own accord, without doing any thing, that this is an unlawful
Assembly. Now in Riots, Routs, or unlawful Assemblies, these four Circumstances
are to be considered: 1. The Number of Persons assembled. 2. The Intent or
Purpose of their Meeting. 3. The Lawfulness or Unlawfulness of the Act. 4. The
Manner or Circumstance of doing it.
See the Statute of 1 Ma. 12. 1 Eliz. 16.

Assemblies Lawful.

Assemblies lawful.
Dalt. fol. ibid. 201.
But an Assembly of an Hundred Persons, or more (yea, though they be in Armor)
yet if it be not in terrorem Populi, and were assembled without any intent to
break the Peace, it is not prohibited by any of these Statutes, nor unlawful.

Crom. 62. P.R. 25.
For the intent, it seems it can be no Riot, etc. except there be an intent,
precedent to do some unlawful Act, and with violence and force.

Dalt. fol. 202.
Also, where there be three, or more gathered together, either to execute the
Justice of the Law, or for the exercise of Valor, and trial of Activity, or
for the increase of Amity or Neighbourly Friendship, and not being met with an
intent to break or disturb the Peace, or to offer Violence or Hurt to the
Person of any; Such Assemblies be not prohibited by these Statutes, NOR
VNLAWFVL.

Observe, But the Meetings of the People called Quakers are for the increase of
Amity and Neighbourly Friendship, and not with any Intent to break or disturb
the Peace, or to offer Violence or Hurt to the Person of any; Therefore the
Assemblies of the said People called Quakers are not unlawful, nor against the
Peace.

Note, That the foregoing Quotations out of M. Dalton, were taken out of an old
Impression, from which the newer Impressions differ, as to the Folioes, and so
may not be so readily found in the new ones, though they be in them all.

Here follows a Copy of the Discharge of the aforesaid Prisoners.
Norwich.
AT the the General Sessions of the Peace holden for the City of Norwich and
County of the same, before Robert Freeman Esquire, Mayor of the City of
Norwich, John Norriss, Esquire, Recorder of the said City, John Mingey squire,
Steward of the said City, and other his Majesty's Justices of Peace of the said
City, the 12th of July, in the two and thirtieth Year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord King Charles the second, etc, Annoque Dom. 1680.

Proclamation being there Publicly made, That if any Person would come into
the Court, and give any Information or Evidence, or prefer any Bill of
Indictment against George Whitehead and Thomas Burr, Prisoners at the Bar, and
they should be heard. And because no Person came into the Court, to prefer any
Indictment, or to give in any Information against them, the said George
Whitehead and Thomas Burr are Ordered to be DISCHARGED, being committed by Order
of the last Sessions, to remain in Prison until this Sessions.

Observe, That although we must needs grant, that after the Sense of the
Prisoners case and suffering had impression upon the Mayor i.e. H.C. whose
Mayralty was out before the Prisoners were released.
and Justices of the said City, the greatest part of them appeared to be
inclined and desirous that they should be discharged before Sessions, if they
could have understood how it might have been regularly done, their Eye being to
the Recorder's advice in the case; but some of them did as good as promise they
should be discharged at Sessions: Howbeit, in order to the more certain
obtaining thereof, the Christian Care and great Industry of some Friends, both
at London and Norwich on the said Prisoners behalf, is not to be forgotten, and
particularly that of our dear Friend William Mead, in his industrious
Endeavors and hard Journey to Norwich, to visit the said Prisoners, and to
Solicit for them, and see their Discharge effected; such Labors of Love and
Christian Charity God is not unmindful of: And blessed are the true Followers
of Christ, that continue in the true Christian Spirit and unfeigned Love one to
another unto the end; for herein is a true Sympathizing with, and
fellow-feeling of one another in all Afflictions and Sufferings, for the
Testimony of Jesus Christ, and of a good Conscience toward God.

The Religions Assemblies of the People called Quakers Vindicated: First, From
the Charge of their being in Disturbance of the public Peace. Secondly, From
the Charge of being Seditious Conventicles, mentioned in the Act of 22 Car. 2.
Thirdly, From the Charge of being under Color of Pretense of an Exercise of
Religious Worship, in other manner th^n is allowed by the Liturgy, or Practice
of the Church of England.
1. TO the first Objection, we may ask our Adversaries, What matter of Record 5
R. 2. c. 7. 15 R. 2. c. 2.
they can justly make against us, the said People, of due Conviction? either
from any notorious evidence of Fact, or Testimony of credible Persons, or
Confession of our own, as the Law provides; of any formidable Posture that we
meet in, as that of Vi et armis, or any menacing Words or Threats made by us,
or of any Contrivance of Insurrection, which in the Eye of Law and Reason might
be deemed or const^ued to be in terrorem Populi, or in disturbance of the
public Peace, or of the nature of a R^ot? If such, should not the matter and
Circumstances of the Fact be specified upon such Record as the Law enjoyn^? But
we utterly deny that we ever meet in any such formidable Posture, as is of the
nature or tendance of what the Law deems in terrorem Populi. We meet peaceably
to wait upon, and really to worship and serve the Almighty God, as our bounden
Duty, according to his Grace, Light and Understanding, which he has given unto
us by his Spirit.

In the second Year of Henry the 5th, Chap. 8. It is provided, that if any
Riot, Assembly or Rout of People, against the Law, be made in any part of the
Realm, H. 5. c. 8.
then the Justices of the Peace, three, or two of them at the least, and the
Sheriff, or Undersheriff of the County, where such Riot, Assembly or Rout
shall be made hereafter, should come with the Powers of the said County (if
need were) to arrest them, and them should arrest; and the same Justices,
Sheriff, or Undersheriff, to have Power to Record, that which they have found
so done in their Presence against the Law: And that by Record of the same
Justices, Sheriff or Undersheriff, such Trespessors or Offenders should be
convicted in manner and form, as is contained in the Statute of Forcibly Entry,
etc. 5 R. 2.7. 1 R. 2.2.
And in the same Statute it is provided, That like Ordinances and Pains should
hold place and take effect in Cities, Buroughs, and other Places and Towns
Infranchized, which have Justices of the Peace within them.

Now let our Adversaries and Persecutors Answer us; Where could any of them
ever justly make any such legal and due Conviction upon Record against us, for
any such Riotous Meeting, or unlawful Assembly on our parts, as has been
really in it self of such a Nature and Tendance a^ aforesaid, in Disturbance of
the public. Peace? We positively deny that our Assemblies are of any such
Nature, however misrepresented by our Adversaries.

II. Objection, If it be alleged, That our Meetings or Assemblies are contrary
to Law, and therefore in Disturbance of the public Peace.

Query: We Question what Law or Statute they are contrary unto?

Obj. If it be answered, They are coutrary to an Act which is both Mandatory
and Paenal, made in the two and twentieth Year of King Charles the second,
Entitled, An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles.

We Answer; 1 st, That our Assemblies are no such, as Seditious Conventicles,
i.e. for Sedition, Strife or Rebellion against the Government. 2dly, It Is a
mere begging the Question, to term our Assemblies Seditious; no such thing has
ever been proved against them as Sedition, that is Sedition explained.
a stirring up to Rebellion or Discord, a Raising a Faction or Mutiny, as
Phillipps in his New World of Words explains it; But our Assemblies are for no
such Design or End, nor could ever any overt Act of that kind or tendance be
proved or justly changed against us, in relation to our Meetings, or otherwise:
Therefore they are no Seditions Conventicles or Assemblies. 3dly, Our
Assemblies are made up of no such Persons or People, as have committed any such
dangerous Practices against the Government, as mentioned in the Preamble of the
said Act, 22 Car. 2. (though rude Informers and Disturbers have come Riotously,
and with Violence against us into our Meetings) Neither are we any such
seditious Sectaries or disloyal Persons, who under pretense of tender
Consciences, have or may at their Meetings contrive Insurrections; as also the
Preamble of the said Act is specified: We use no pretense of tender Conscience
for any such wicked End or Design. The All-seeing and Heart-searching God knows
our Innocence and Clearness herein; as also the Nation's long Experience can
witness for us. And if Titles and Preambles of Laws be the Keys of Laws, and do
evince or show the Nature and respective Intentions thereof, then this said Act
against Seditious Conventicles (where under pretense of tender Consciences,
Insurrections have been or may be Contrived) does not extend to us. We pretend
nothing but what we really intend, viz. The Spiritual Worship and real Service
of Almighty God, who searches our Hearts, and whom we sincerely Reverence and
Fear.

III. Obj. But if it be objected, That the matter of Fact incurring the Fines
and Penalties of the said Act against Conventicles is our Meeting under Color
or Pretense of an Exercise of Religious Worship, in other manner than according
to the Liturgy and Practice of the Church of England, or in other manor than
is allowed thereby.

Answ. We answer; 1 st, That the words [Colour or Pretence] have relation to
the Preamble, as, Who under pretenve of tender Conscience have or may at their
Meetings contrive Insurrections, as late Experience has shown. But such
pretense or color of Religious Exercise, for any such Contrivance, were
Abominable, Deceit and Hypocrifie, and never chargeable upon us, or our
Assemblies: We can challenge the whole World to detect us herein.

2 dly, We are not conscious to our selves of any such matter of Fact committed
in our Assemblies, and on our part which the Liturgy or Practice of the Church
of England allows not. If we be herein charged, let us know what it is that we
have done in our Assemblies, which the Liturgy and Practice of the Church of
England allows not of, seeing the Liturgy allows of the holy Scriptures, which
we are sure allow of and enjoin Christians Assembling together to wait upon and
worship God in Spirit and Truth, and of the manner thereof, as to the places,
whether in Houses, or abroad in Fields or Mountains, which is our case, both as
to the matter and manner of our Assemblies.

Obj. If it be still objected, That our Meetings are under color and pretense
of an Exercise of Religious Worship, in other manner than according to the
Liturgy and Practice of the Church of England.

Answ. We answer; 1 st, What that exercise of Religious worship is, that is in
other manner than according to the Liturgy, should be explained unto us, and
that according to Law, seeing this late Act against Conventicles does not
explain What Manner it is.

But 2 dly, we find in a Statute made in the first year of Queen Elizabeth,
Chap. 2. That that other Manner is thus explained, viz. What other Manner the
Liturgy allows not.
That if any Person or Persons whatsoever shall by open Fact, Deed, or shall by
open Threatenings compel or cause, or otherwise procure or maintain any Parson,
Vicar, or other Minister in any Cathedrial or Parish Church, Chapel or in any
other place, to sing or say any common and open Prayer, or to minister any
Sacrament otherwise, or in any other Manner and Form, than is mentioned in the
said BOOK, etc. This does not at all reach our case, we are not found guilty
hereof, and therefore are not condemnable by the Law in this case; this
concerned the Clergy, not us; and we neither threaten, compel, cause or any
wise procure or maintain any Parson, Vicar, or any else, to sing or say any
common or open Prayer, or to minister any Sacrament in any Cathedrial or
Parish Church, etc. we are so far from, that we compel No Body to any Form of
Singing or Praying in God's Worship, but persuade men to serve and worship God
as he directs, and for that end desire all may come to his divine Grace and
good Spirit in their Hearts, to guide them in his holy Worship, both as to
matter and manner of praying and praising his Name, that they may serve and
worship him, not in the oldness of the Letter, but in the newness of the
Spirit, for such he is (even in our days) seeking to worship him, as must
worship him in Spirit and in Truth; and such both pray with the Spirit, and
sing with the Spirit, and with Understanding, according to the ancient
Apostolical Testimony and Practice of the Primitive Spiritual Christians.

Norwich. An Account of the People called Quakers sent to Prison by Francis
Bacon when he was Steward, and also since he was Recorder, and those Mayors of
the City of Norwich who joined with him since the late Act against
Conventicles, 22 Car. 2. came forth.
1670.
THe 10th of the Month called July, 1670. Thomas Buddery, John Rust, Edward
Monk, William Waymor and Anthony Alexander were sent to Prison (upon pretense
of a Riot, for telling People as they passed to the Mayors House, there were
the Informers, (when people were inquisitive to know which they were) by a
Warrant from the then Mayor and Francis Bacon Steward, signifying no crime in
the War^nt, but till they could find Sureties for the Behavior; where they
were in Prison till the Sessions, and an Indictment brought against them for a
Riot; but the Grand Jury were found better Justices, and would not find the
Bill: They were detained Prisoners about five weeks.

1670.
Samuel Duncon and Anthony Alexander in the year 1670. made their Appeal, where
in stead of having Justice done them, the said Francis Bacon being Judge of the
Sessions, did absolutely surprise them by his Illegal Proceedings, refusing to
give them a Copy of the Records, and made one Witness (being also a party)
serve his turn, and the Act says there must be Two; for which they wrote to the
Mayor, Steward, and Court of Aldermen, telling them of their Injustice, and for
so doing they were committed to Prison by the said Mayor, till they should find
Sureties for their appearance at Sessions (upon pretense of scandalous
Expressions in their said Letter) who was observed to Tremble when he signed
the Mittimus, and for it they were kept Prisoners about A YEAR.

1676.
Thomas Atkins was taken out of a Meeting the 17th of the 5th Month, 1676. by
Constables and Informers; and being had before the Mayor, and Fr. Bacon
Steward, and several Aldermen in their Council Chamger, some of them being very
bitter and cruel, saying, he should pay his 20 l. and they tendered him the
Oath of Allegiance, and he refusing to Swear, they sent him to Prison, where he
was detained about fourteen Weeks.

1678.
Thomas Murford had his doors broke open by a Constable, having a Warrant from
Francis Bacon, Recorder, for 20 l. Thomas being not at home, who made his
Appeal when he came home; but the Recorder being Judge, and having a Jury for
his purpose, carried the Case, and from the Court committed Thomas to Prison,
where he was detained twenty Weeks.

1678.
Simon Gogny was sent to Prison the 16th of the 1st Month, 1678. by Francis
Bacon Recorder, till he should find Sureties for his good Behavior. Because
the said Simon spoke to him (when he came himself to break our Meeting)
something on that occasion, by way of Warning, telling him of Empson and Dudly,
he was detained eight Weeks and odd days.

1679.
Thomas Buddery was sent to Prison by Francis Bacon, Recorder, the 30th day of
the 1st Month, 1679. till he should find Sureties for the Peace, so expressed
in his Mittimus. Because he answered in defense of Truth, in these words, viz.
The Service of God is Perfect Freedom, he was detained in Prison six weeks odd
days.

Norwich. A brief Account of what Goods have been taken from some of the People
called Quakers in Norwich, since the Year 1670. to this 30th day of the 1st
Month, 1680. by Warrants from Francis Bacon (when Steward and Recorder) and
three of the Mayors of Norwich, who assisted him upon the late Act against
Conventicles.
L. S. D. 1670. Five times in the same year. The 15th of the 5th mon. 1676.

TAken from Samuel Duncon at several times, by Warrant from two Mayors, and
Francis Bacon, both when he was Steward, and since he was Recorder, Goods to
the value of 72 15 5 In the Years 1670, 1675; 1676, 1678. Taken from Anthony
Alexander by Warrants from the same Justices, and also by the third Mayor,
Goods valued at 72 16 8 In the Years 1676, 1678, 1679. Taken from Thomas
Murford, by Warrants from Francis Bacon, Recorder, Goods to the value of 60 01
0 In the Years 1670, 1679. Taken from William Waymor by Warrants from the then
Mayor, and F. Bacon, Recorder, Goods to the value of 10 09 0 In the Years 1675,
Taken from John Fiddeman to the value of 00 08 6 1675, From John Sharping,
Junior, 00 05 0 1675, From John de France 00 10 0 1676, From Robert Hutchinson
00 07 2 1670. From Thomas Buddery 01 00 0 Sum Total 218 12 09

Note, That it is not thought fit to expose the Names of the said Mayors of
Norwich in this place, hoping that they or some of them, at least, have seen
better things by this time, than for the future to have any hand in such Horrid
Oppressions (by Imprisonment, Fines and Distresses) upon their Poor Industrious
Neighbors, for their tender Consciences, in their meeting to serve God, as
they are inwardly persuaded. They cannot be ignorant how discouraging and
destructive such Imprisoning, Spoiling and Impoverishing their Neighbors, is
to the Trade of their City, which in the Manufactures much depend upon the
Wooll-Combers and Worsted-Weavers, etc. And when such poor Laboring men are
thus spoiled and harrassed, as to their Livelihoods, how hard it is for their
poor Families to subsist? How can such Severities consist either with
Christianity or Humanity? Let the Principle of Justice in all Consciences
judge; And may th^se guilty of such Oppressions Repent before they dye.

Here follows a Copy of an Address from our suffering Friends in Norwich, in
the Year 1679. directed to the Knights and Burgesses for the County of Norfolk,
and City of Norwich.
The Suffering Case of some of the People called Quakers in the said City.
THe Goods of several have been taken away, without being tried by their
Equals, only by Witnesses in their absence, which was given against them by
such as were Parties; and when some made an Appeal, and desired a Copy of the
Records which were Sworn in their absence before their Trial, they were denied
it, and Francis Bacon, who is Recorder of the said City, and sat for Judge of
the Sessions, would not let the Evidence be viva voce, but made the said
Records (which he would not grant a Copy of before the Trial) the only Evidence
against some Appealants, and put them upon disproving that, and so surprised
them; and for complaining of the Injustice of it, two were sent to Prison and
they were kept Prisoners about twelve Months: And another that made his Appeal
F. Bacon sent to Prison, who asking him, Wherefore he was sent to Prison? told
him, He should know afterward; and he was kept close Prisoner eighteen Weeks.
And John Crow an Attourny upon Warrant from F. Bacon aforesaid, against Samuel
Duncon of Norwich, upon the account of a Meeting, got into the said Samuel's
House (when he was from Home) and shut up hi^ Shop, and he and others kept
Possession of his House night and day, to the terror of the said Samuel's Wife,
who was very big with Child, and took away the said Samuel's Goods; and when
one would have taken account of the Goods, the said John Crow wou^d not suffer
it; but they rather acted like Plunderers than Executors of Justice. And the
said F. Bacon has slandered the People called Quakers, as being Papists and
Jesuits, exciting the Jury at the Sessions in Norwich, to bring in presentiments
against them, upon which some have been Presented and Arrested upon a Sessions
process for 20 l. per Month, for not going to the Parish Church. And the said
F. Bacon has very lately prosecuted the said People for their Meeting to
worship God, and has sent two to Prison that he took at such a Meeting, which
were kept Prisoners near eight weeks in a stinking Hole, one of which he sent
to Prison without a Warrant, and its said, threatened to seize upon their House,
and presses the Constables to execute Warrants from him against some of the
said People called Quakers, to take away their Goods, and tells them, They must
break open their Doors. And upon the 19th of the 3d Month, 1679. came two
Constables to the House of William Waymor with a Warrant from F. Bacon, to
strain for 10 l. 5 s. who unbarr'd his Shop Door, and an inward Door being
locked, broke it in pieces, and took Goods to the value of 10 l. and better, and
praised them at three Pound, and say, They must come for more upon the same
Warrant; which great Spoil, as aforesaid, being made upon us by Mercinary
Witnesses in our Absence, and given against us, and we thus oppessed by such as
are Parties. This kind of proceedure (we conceive with submission) is not more
excusable now, than it was in the case of Empson and Dudly These two Oppressors
Empson and Dudly were impeached before the Court of Parliament for their
Arbitrary Proceedings and Horrid Oppressions which they committed, upon
Information for the King (having many Informers to assist them) without lawful
Presentment, Trial of lawful Peers or Verdict of 12 honest men They acted under
pretense of a Law made in the 11th year of K. Henry 7. c. 3. which being
contrary to Magna Charta, cap. 29. was made void and repeated, 1 Hen. 8. c. 6.
by the Parliament holden then, and the two Oppressors brought to their Trial,
Condemnation and Execution. See C^oks Inst. 2 part, fol. 51. and 4 part, fol.
40, 41.
in King Henry the 7th's time who were impeached and condemned for their
Oppressions and Arbitrary Proceedings, (though they pleaded the prosecution of
an Act of Parliament) and to be of as dangerous a tendency to Arbitrariness.
Thus some to gratif^ their Prejudice, others their Covetousness (under pretense
of prosecuting the late Act against seditious Sectaries) have very much
oppressed the Subjects; and what is charged upon the Prosecutors aforesaid, can
be proved if required. Wherefore we entreat your tender Consideration of this
our suffering Condition, and endeavor for our Relief.

Signed by Samuel Duncon and fifteen more of the Citizens and Inhabitants of
Norwich.
Norwich, the 23d of the 3d Month, 1679.
ERRATA,
Ingenious Reader;
BE pleased to Correct these Faults which have escaped the Press, through the
Printers Inadvertency, and not to impute them to the Authors.

Page 3. Line 24. for enterim read interim. p. 7. l. 22. r. it cannot. p. 8. l.
29. f. causes r. cause. p. 9. l. 4. for 18 read 28. p. 14. l. 35. r.
Mittimusses. p. 15. l. 31. r. Justices. p. 16. l. 31. f. Anglia'r. Angliae. p.
24 l. 17. f. Court is bound r. Court is not bound p. 29. l. 9, and 10. f.
except r. accept. p. 31. l. 8. f. Qualitatem delicti r. Quantitatem delicti. p.
40. l. 21. r. referred. p. 44. l. 15. f. there r. here. p. 47. l. 35. f. this
r. these p. 51. l. 1. f. pro r. per. p. 52 l. 24. f. pretect r. pretext, l. 25.
f. pro r. per. p. 54. l. 25. f. pro r. per. p. 58. l. 4. f. incuria r. in
curia. p. 65. l. 5. dele M in the Margent. p. 71. l. 27. f. ocitur r. oritur.
p. ^2. l. ^1. f. edio^a r. odiosa. p. 79. l. 27. r. the infected. There are
other Fault in Letters and Points, which are to be amended or understood, as
the sense will show in the reading.

THE END

