An ATTEMPT FOR THE EXPLICATION Of the PHENOMENON, Observable in an Experiment
Published by the Honorable ROBERT BOIL, Esquire In the XXXV. Experiment of his
Epistolical Discourse touching the AIR. In Confirmation of a former Conjecture
made by R. H.

Nos cum non semper magna refer possimus, vera tamen sed rara recitamus;
neque enim minori miraculo in parvis Natura ludit quam in magnis, Cardan de
Vari. L. 8. Cap. 43. Tum vero de Scientiarum progressu spes been fundabitur,
quum in historiam naturalem recipientur and aggregabuntur complura experimenta,
quae in se nullius sunt usus, sed ad inventionem causarum and axiomatum tan^um
faciunt, Verulamii Nov. Org. Aph. 99. LONDON, Printed by J. H. for Sam. Thomson
at the Bishops Head in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1661.

To the Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire
Sir,
THe honor you were pleased to do me, in putting me upon this enquiry, did not
a little animate and encourage me to persevere in what I had begun with so
happy an Omen. My good Success therefore herein, if any, is wholly to be
ascribed to your self; as being the first Excitor and chief Abettor of it. And
therefore I hope that may be my excuse, for craving You so great a Patron
thereunto, in that I could not have entitled it to any other without a manifest
Injury to Your Honor; whose Gracious countenancing of it, justly requires my
utmost Gratitude. I must therefore with the Persian offer to you, as he to the
Sun, what he believes himself to have received from it. And therefore I trust
my endeavoring to soar aloft with the Eagle, to enjoy the Influence of the
most Glorious Light of the world, will find a Pardon, and be judged much
better, than a hovering and fluttering with the silly Fly about the dim and
fading Flame of a candle, that at best, will but singe those wings that raised
it so high, and in stead of giving it more Vigor, will wholly disinable it for
the like Future Attempts. I am not a little sensible indeed, that the
Minuteness both of the thing and its Author, may seem to make it a Present very
unfit for so great a Personage. But yet I am in hope, that like the poor man,
that seeing many Noble and Rich, hasting to meet Artaxerxes, with their
Splendid and Sumptuous Gifts, would needs carry something too, and though 'twas
but a little water fetched out of the River in the Palms of his Hands, yet
addressing himself, he presented it with an unexpected acceptance, I also may
be happy in the like success, with this Oblation, which is but a few drops
taken out of the River (as I may so speak) of the Phenomenon of Nature (which
passes by, and is scarce regarded by any, though free for all) that is, some
few observations, which though but mean and obvious, yet I think scarce
diligently taken notice of by any; and though jumbled together in a careless,
if any Method, yet the best I had leisure to throw it into. And though
delivered in a Style nothing elegant, yet I hope (which was my greatest aim) it
may serve (with your favorable construction of it) to signify the desire I
have of expressing my self most affectionately to be

Sir, Your Honors most Faithful and most Humble Servant, Robert Hook.

The Experiment, as I find it set down in the forementioned Epistle, runs thus;
AN Eminent Mathematician told me one day, that some inquisitive Frenchmen
(whose Names I know not) had observed, that in case one end of a slender and
perforated Pipe of Glass, as A. B. or C. be dipped in water, as in that contained
in the Vessel, G. H. of the 8th. Figure, the Liquor will ascend to some' height
in the Pipe, as to D. E. or F. though held perpendicular to the plain of the
water. And to satisfy me, that he mis-related not the Experiment, he soon
after brought two or three small Pipes of Glass, which gave me the opportunity
of trying it, though I had the less reason to distrust it, because I remember I
had often in the long and slender Pipes of some Weather-Glasses, which I had
caused to be made after a somewhat peculiar fashion, taken notice of the like
ascension of the Liquor, though (presuming it might be casual) I had made but
little reflection upon it. But after this trial, beginning to suppose, that
though the water in these Pipes that were brought me, rise not above a quarter
of an Inch (if near so high) yet, if the Pipes were made slender onough, the
water might rise to a very much greater height; I caused several of them to be,
by a dexterous hand, drawn out at the flame of a Lamp, in one of which that was
almost incredibly slender, we found that the water ascended (as it were of it
self) five Inches by measure, to the no small wonder of some famous
Mathematicians, who were Spectators of some of these Experiments And this
height the Water reached to, though the Pipe were held in as erected a posture
as we could: For if it were inclined, the water would fill a greater part of
it, though not rise higher in it* And we also found, that when the inside of
the Pipe was wetted beforehand, the water would rise much better than
otherwise: but we caused not all our slender Pipes to be made straight, but
some of them crooked, like Siphons: And having immersed the shorter Leg of one
of these into a Glass that held some fair water, we found as we expected, that
the water arising to the top of the Siphon, though that were high enough, did
of it self run down the longer Leg, and continue running like an ordinary
Siphon. The cause of this ascension of the water, appeared to all that were
present, so difficult, that I must not stay to enumerate the various
Conjectures that were made at it, much less to examine them; especially having
nothing but bare Conjectures to substitute in the room of those I do not
approve. We tried indeed, by conveying a very slender Pipe and a small Vessel
of water into our Engine, whether or no the Exsuction of the ambient Air would
assist us to find the cause of the ascension we have been speaking of: But
though we employed red Wine in stead of water, yet we could scarce certainly
perceive through so much Glass, as was interposed betwixt our eyes and the
Liquor, what happened in a Pipe so slender, that the redness of the Wine was
scarce sensible in it. But as far as we could discern, there happened no great
alteration to the Liquor: which seemed the less strange, because the Spring of
that Air that might depress the water in the Pipe, was equally debilitated with
that which remained to press upon the Surface of the Water in the little
Glass. Wherefore, in favor of his ingenuous Conjecture, who ascribed the
Phenomenon, under consideration to the greater pressure made upon the water by
the Air without the Pipe, than by that within it, (where so much of the water
(consisting perhaps of Corpuscles more pliant to the internal surfaces of the
glass) was contiguous to the sides) it was shown, that in case the little
Glass-Vessel that held the water, of which a part ascended into the slender
Pipe, were so closed, that a man might with his mouth suck the Air out of it,
the water would immediately subside in the small Pipe. And this would indeed
infer, that it asscended before only by the pressure of the incumbent Air. But
that it may (how justly I know not) be objected, that peradventure this would
not happen, in case the upper end of the Pipe were in a vacuum: And that it is
very probable the water may subside, not because the pressure of the internal
Air is taken off by exsuction, but by reason of the spring of the external Air,
which impels the water it finds in its way to the Cavity deserted by the other
Air, and would as well impel the same water upwards, as make it subside, if it
were not for the accidental posture of the Glasses. However, having not now
leisure to examine any further this Matter, I shall only mind your Lordship,
that if You will prosecute this Speculation, it will be pertinent to find out
likewise, Why the surface of Water (as is manifest in Pipes) uses to be
concave, being depressed in the middle, and higher on every side? and why in
Quicksilver on the contrary, not only the surface is wont to be very unequal,
or swelling, in the middle; but if you dip the end of a slender Pipe in it, the
surface of the Liquor (as it is called) will be lower within the Pipe, than
without. Which Phenomenon, whither, and how far, they may be deduced from the
Figure of the Mercurial Corpuscles, and the Shape of the Springy Particles of
the Air, I willingly leave to be considered.

An Attempt for the Explication of this New Experiment.
MY former Conjecture, That the unequal height of the surfaces of the water
proceeded from the greater pressure made upon the water by the Air without the
Pipes A. B. C. than by that within them; I shall endeavor to confirm from the
Truth of the two following Propositions.

The first of which is, That an unequal pressure of the incumbent Air, will
cause an unequal height in the waters Surfaces.

And the Second is, That in this Experiment there is such an unequal pressure.

Now that the First is true, the following Experiment will evince: For if you
take any Vessel so contrived, as that you can at pleasure either increase or
diminish the pressure of the Air upon this or that part of the Superficies of
the water, the equality of the height of those parts will presently be lost.
And that part of the Superficies that sustains the greater pressure, will be
inferior to that which undergoes the less: A fit Vessel for this purpose, will
be an inverted Glass Siphon, such an one as is described in the Sixth Figure.
For if into it you put a quantity of Water, suppose enough to fill it as high
as the Line A. B. and applying your mouth to one end, as to D. you shall find,
that by gently blowing in at it, you shall depress the Superficies B. and
thereby raise the opposite Superficies A. to a considerable distance; and by
gently sucking, you may perceive the clean contrary effects produced.

Next, That there is such an unequal pressure, I shall prove from this, that
there is a much greater inconformity or incongruity (call it what you please)
of Air to Glass, and some other Bodies, than there is of Water to the same.

What I mean hereby, I shall in short explain, by defining conformity or
congruity to be a property of a fluid Body, whereby any part of it is readily
united or intermingled with any other part, either of it self, or of any other
Homogeneal or Similar, fluid, or firm and solid body: And unconformity or
incongruity to be a property of a fluid, by which it is kept off and hindered
from uniting or mingling with any heterogeneous or dissimilar, fluid or solid
Body.

This last property, any one that has been observingly conversant about fluid
Bodies, cannot be ignorant of: For (not now to mention several Chimical Spirits
and Oils which will very hardly, if at all, be brought to mix with one
another, insomuch that there may be found some 8 or 9, or more, several
distinct Liquors, which swimming one upon another, will not be brought to mix)
we need seek no further for Examples of this kind, than to observe the drops of
rain falling through the air; and the Bubbles of air which are by any means
conveyed under the surface of the Water; or a drop of common Sallet Oil
swimming upon water: In all which, and many more Examples that might be
enumerated, of this sort, the incongruity of two fluids is easily discernable.
And as for examples of Congruity or Incongruity of Liquids one with another, or
with several kinds of firm, or solid Bodies, they have long since been taken
notice of, and called by the Names of Drieness and Moisture, (though these two
Names are not comprehensive enough, they being commonly used to signify only
the adhering or not adhering of water to some other solid Bodies) of this kind
we may observe that water will more readily wet some woods than others; and
that water let fall upon a Feather, the whiter side of a Colwort, and some
other leaves, or upon almost any unctuous or resinous superficies, etc. will
not at all adhere to them, but easily tumble off from them, like a solid Bowl;
whereas if dropped upon Linen, Paper, Clay, green Wood, etc. it will not be
taken off, without leaving some part of it behind adhering to them: So
Quicksilver, which will very hardly be brought to stick to any vegetable body,
will readily adhere to, and mingle with several clean metalline bodies.

Now from what cause this congruity or Incongruity of bodies one to another,
does proceed, whether from the Figure of their constituent Particles, or
interspersed pores, or from the differing motions of the parts of the one and
the other, as whether circular, undulating, progressive, etc. whether I say
from one, or more, or none of these enumerated causes, I shall not here
determine; It being an enquiry more proper to be followed and explained among
the general Principles of Philosophy, whither at present I shall refer it; as
fearing lest it might here seem absurd, without the concatenation of several
other Principles to explicate it; and knowing it likewise sufficient for this
enquiry to show, that there is such a property, from what cause soever it
proceeds.

These Properties therefore (always the concomitants of fluid bodies) produce
these following visible Effects:

First, They unite the parts of a fluid to its homogeneal Solid, or keep them
separate from its heterogeneal: Hence Quicksilver will (as we noted before)
stick to Gold, Silver, Tin, Lead, etc. and unite with them: but roll off from
wood, stone, glass, if never so little situated out of its horizontale
Paralelisme; and water that will wet salt and dissolve it, will slip off from
Tallow, or the like, without at all adhering; as it may likewise be observed to
do, upon a dusty superficies. And next they cause the parts of homogeneal fluid
bodies readily to adhere together and mix, and of heterogeneal, to be exceeding
averse thereunto. Hence we find, that two small drops of water, on any
superficies they can roll on, will, if they chance to touch each other,
readily unite and mix in one 3d. Globule or drop: the like may be observed with
two small Bowls of Quicksilver upon a Table or Glass, provided the surfaces of
those Globule be not dusty; and with two drops of Oil upon fair water, etc. And
further, water put unto wine, salt water, Vinegar, spirit of wine, or the like,
does immediately (especially if they be shaken together) disperse it self all
over them: hence on the contrary also we find, that water powered upon
Quicksilver, and Oil upon that water, and Air upon that Oil, though they be
stopped closely up into a Bottle, and shaken never so much, they will by no means
long suffer any of their bigger parts to be united or included within any of
the other Liquors (by which recited Liquors, may be plainly enough represented
the 4 Peripaterical Elements.) From this property it is that a drop of water
does not mingle with, or vanish into Air, but is driven (by that fluid equality
protruding it on every side) and forced into as little a space as it can
possibly be contained in, namely, into a Round Globule. So likewise a little
air blown under the water, is united or thrust into a Bubble, by the ambient
water. And a parcel of Quicksilver enclosed with Air, water, or almost any
other liquor, is formed into a round Ball.

Now the cause why all these included fluids newly mentioned, or as many others
as are wholly included within a heterogeneous fluid, are not exactly of a
spherical Figure (seeing that if caused by these Principles only, it could be
of no other) must proceed from some other kind of pressure against the two
opposite flatted sides. This adventitious or accidental pressure may proceed
from diverse causes, and accordingly must diversifie the Figure of the included
heterogeneous fluid: For seeing that a body may be included either with a fluid
only, or only with a solid, or partly with a fluid and partly with a solid, or
partly with one fluid, and partly with another, there will be found a very
great variety of the terminating surfaces, much differing from a Spherical,
according to the various resistance or pressure that belongs to each of these
encompassing mediums.

Which Properties may in general be deduced from two heads, viz. Motion, and
Rest. For either this Globular Figure is altered by a natural Motion, such as
is Gravity, or a violent, such as i^ any accidental motion of the fluids, as we
see in the wind rufling up the water, and the purlings of Streams, and foaming
of Cartaracts, and the like, which because they are so obvious and easily
understood, and so little pertinent to our present enquiry, I shall refer to
some other intended Speculations, to which they do more properly belong. Or
thirdly, By the Firmness and Stability of the ambient Solid. For if the
including Solid be of an angular or any other irregular Form, the included
fluid will be near of the like, as a Pint Pot full of water, or a Bladder full
of Air. And next, if the including or included fluid have a greater gravity one
than another, then will the globular Form be deprest into an
Eliptico-spherical: As if for example, we suppose the Circle A. B. C. D. in the
first Figure, to represent a drop of water, Quicksilver or the like, included
with the Air, or the like, which supposing there were no gravity at all in
either of the fluids, or that the contained and containing were of the same
weight, would be equally deprest into an exactly-spherical body (the ambient
pressing equally against every side of it*) But supposing either a greater
gravity in the included, by reason whereof the parts of it being pressed from A.
toward B. and thereby the whole put into motion, and that motion being hindered
by the resistance of the subjacent parts of the ambient, the globular Figure,
A. D. B. C. will be deprest into the Eliptico-spherical, E. G. F. H. For the
side A. is detruded to E. by the Gravity, and B. to F. by the resistance of the
subjacent medium: and therefore C. must necessarily be thrust to G. and D. to
H. Or else supposing a greater gravity in the ambient, by whose more than
ordinary pressure against the under side of the included globul, B. will be
forced to F. and by its resistance of the motion upwards, the side A. will be
deprest to E. and therefore C. being thrust to G. and D. to H. the globular
Figure by this means also will be made an Eliptico-spherical. Next if a fluid
be included partly with one, and partly with another fluid, it will be found to
be shaped diversely, according to the proportion of the gravity and incongruity
of the 3 fluids one to another, as in the second Figure, let the upper M M M be
Air, the middle L. M. N. O be common Oil, the lower O. O. O. be water, the Oil
will be formed not into a spherical Figure, such as is represented by the
pricked Line, but into such a Figure as L. M. N. O. whose side L. M. N. will be
of a flatter Eliptical Figure, by reason of the great disproportion between the
Gravity of Oil and Air, and the side L. O. M. of a rounder, because of the
smaller difference between the weight of Oil and water. Lastly, The globular
Figure will be changed, if the ambient be partly fluid and partly solid. And
here the termination of the encompassed fluid toward the incompassing is
shaped according to the proportion of the congruity or incongruity of the
fluids to the solids, and of the gravity and incongruity of the fluids one to
another. As suppose the subjacent medium that hinders an included fluid's
descent, be a solid, as let K. L. in the first Figure represent the smooth
superficies of a Table, E. G. F. H. a parcel of running Mercury, the side G. F.
H. will be more flatted, according to the proportion of the incongruity of the
Mercury and Air to the Wood, and of the gravity of Mercury and Air one to
another; The side G. E. H. will likewise be a little more deprest by reason the
subjacent parts are now at rest which were before in motion [I have not here
time, nor is it much to my present purpose, to show how much the Figure of the
descending fluid may be altered from this Eliptico spherical Figure, by a very
small resistance of the subjacent medium, for the advantage the under parts of
the descendent may have as to the acceleration of their motions of descent, may
be able to draw them out into the Form of the Figure X.] Or further in the 3d.
Figure, let A. I. L. D. represent an including solid medium of a cylindrical
shape (as suppose a small Glass Jar) Let F. G. E. M. represent a contained
fluid, as water; this toward the bottom and sides, is figured according to the
concavity of the Glass: But its upper Surface, which by reason of its gravity,
(not considering at all the Air above it, and so neither the congruity or
incongruity of either of them to the Glass) should be terminated by part of a
Sphere whose diameter should be the same with that of the earth, which to our
sense would appear a straight Line, as F. G* E. Or which by reason of its
having a greater congruity to Glass than Air has, (not considering its
Gravity) would be thrust into a concave Sphere, as C. H. B. whose diameter
would be the same with that of the concavity of the Vessel. But by reason of
its having a greater gravity than the Air, and having likewise a greater
congruity to Glass, than the Air has; from hence I say it is terminated, by a
concave Eliptico-spherical Figure, as C. K. B. For by its congruity it easily
conforms it self, and adheres to the Glass, and constitutes as 'twere one
containing body with it, and therefore should thrust the contained Air on that
side it touches it, into a spherical Figure, as B. H. C. but the motion of
Gravity depressing a little the Corners B. and C. reduces it into the aforesaid
Figure, C. K. B. Now that it is the greater congruity of one of the two
contiguous fluids, than of the other, to the containing solid, that causes the
separating surfaces of the two liquids to be thus or thus figured: And that
it is not because this or that figurated surface is more proper, natural or
peculiar to one of these fluid bodies, than to the other, will appear from
this, that the same fluids will by being put into differing solids, change
their surfaces for the same water, which in a Glass or wooden Vessel will have
a concave surface upwards, and will rise higher in a smaller than greater Pipe,
the same water, I say, in the same Pipes greased over or oyled, will produce
quite contrary effects, for it will have a protuberant and unequal surface
upwards, and will not rise so high in small, as in bigger Pipes: Nay, in the
very same solid Vessel, you may make the very same two contiguous Liquids to
alter their Surfaces; for taking a small Wine-Glass, or such like Vessel, and
pouring water gently into it, you shall perceive the surface of the water all
the way concave, till it rise even with the top, when you shall find it (if you
gently and carefully pour in more) to grow very protuberant and unequal; the
reason of which is plain, for that the solid sides of the containing body are
no longer extended, to which the water does more readily adhere, than the air;
but it is henceforth to be included with air, which would reduce it into a
hemisphere, but by reason of its gravity, it is flatted into an Oval.
Quicksilver also which to Glass is more incongruous than Air (and thereby being
put into a Glass-Pipe, will not adhere to it, but by the more congruous air
will be forced to have a very protuberant surface, and to rise higher in a
greater than a lesser Pipe) this Quicksilver to clean Metal, especially to
Gold, Silver, Tin, Lead, etc. Iron excepted, is more congruous than Air, and
will not only stick to it, but have a concave Surface like water, and rise
higher in a less, than in a greater Pipe.

In all these Examples, it is evident, that there is an extaordinary and
adventitious force by which the globular Figure of the contained heterogeneous
fluid is altered, neither can it be imagined, how it should otherwise be of any
other Figure than Globular: For being by the heterogeneous fluid equally
protruded every way, whatsoever part is protuberant, will be thereby deprest.
From this cause it is that in its effects it does very much resemble a round
Spring (such as a Hoop) I shall not here speak of the nature of Springs in
general, as being more proper for another Discourse, but only take notice, that
as in a round Spring there is required an additional pressure against two
opposite sides, to reduce it into an Oval Form, or to force it in between the
sides of a Hole whose Diameter is less than that of the Spring, there must be a
considerable force or protrusion against the concave or inner side of the
Spring, ^o to alter this spherical constitution of an included fluid body,
there is required more pressure against opposite sides to reduce it into an
Oval, and to press it into an Hole less in Diameter than it self, it requires a
greater protrusion against all the other sides. What degrees of force are
requisite to reduce them into longer and longer Ovals, or to press them into
less and less holes, I have not yet experimentally calculated; but thus much by
experiment I find in general, that there is always required a greater pressure
to close them into longer Ovals, or protrude them into smaller holes: the
necessity and reason of this, were it requisite, I could easily explain: but
being not so necessary, and requiring more room and time than I have for it at
present, I shall here omit it; and proceed to show, that this may be presently
found true, if Experiment be made with a Round Spring (the way of which trials
can scarce be mist by any one, at all conversant in Experiments*) And with the
fluid bodies of Mercury, Air, etc. the way of trying, which will be somewhat
more difficult; and therefore I shall in brief describe it. He therefore that
would try with Air, must first be provided of a Glass-Pipe, made of the shape
of that in the fifth Figure, whereof of the side A. B. represents a straight
Tube of about 3 foot long (C. D.) represents an other part of it, which
consists of C. E. F. G. D. etc. several round Bubles so ordered, that there is
left a passage out of each of them, into its next, of which passages, that
between C. and E. is to be the biggest; (as for example, of an Inch in
Diameter) that between E. and F. is to be less, ( viz. of an Inch) that between
F. and G. (1/12 of an Inch) that between G. and D. (1/16) that above D (1/24 or
half a Line) there may be added as many more as the experimenter shall think
fit, with passages or interjacent holes continually decreasing by known
quantities so far as his senses are able to help him; I say so far, because
there may be made Pipes so small that it will be impossible to perceive the
perforation with ones naked eye, though by the help of a Microscope, it may
easily enough be perceived: Nay, I have made a Pipe perforated from end to end,
so small, that with your naked eye you would very hardly have seen the body of
it, insomuch that I have been able to knit it up into a knot without breaking,
but this by the by.

To proceed then, for the trial of the Experiment, the Experimenter must place
the Tube (A. B.) perpendicular, and fill the Bubble E. with the passage beneath
it, full of water, but leave the bubble C. full of Air, and then gently pouring
in water into the Pipe A. B. he must observe diligently how high the water will
rise in it before it protrude the Bubble of Air, (C.) through the narrow
passage into E. and denote exactly the height of the Cylinder of water, then
filling the bubble F. with water and E. with air, he may proceed as formerly,
denoting likewise the height of the Cylinder of water, able to protrude the
Bubble E. through the passage E. F. the like may be do with the next passage,
and the next, etc. as far as he is able, then comparing the several heights of
the Cylinders, with the several holes through which each Cylinder did force the
air (having due regard to the Cylinders of water in the Tube C. D) it will be
very easy to determine, what force is requisite to press the Air into such and
such a hole, or (to apply it to our present experiment) how much of the
pressure of the Air is taken off by its ingress into smaller and smaller holes.
Now because to prepare this Instrument, is something difficult (by reason of the
holes which will be found very troublesome to be measured) it will be better to
prepare small Glass-Pipes, such as F. G. H. I. K. L. of the several Bores
desired, each of them about an Inch long, and having a Pipe, (such as is
described in the 5th. Figure) with only one Bubble, as (C) with the passage (C.
E) and proceeding as before, to force the Air first through that; then to
fasten into it with Cement the next smaller Pipe, and try with it as with the
other; then a less, and so to the least, denoting, comparing, and collecting as
before. From these, and other such trials, it will be found very evident, that
to force the air or other fluid into a smaller hole, of an incongruous Solid,
there is required a greater force, than there is requisite for the protrusion
of it into a bigger. Come we therefore to the explanation of the Phenomenon, in
the experiment of the rising of water in a smaller Pipe; And from the
application of what has been said to the entering of the Air into the bigger
hole of the Vessel and* into the smaller hole of the Pipe, we shall clearly
find, that there is a greater pressure of the air upon the water in the Vessel
or greater Pipe, than there is upon that in the Lesser Pipe: For since the
pressure of the air every way is found to be as much as is able to press up and
sustain a Cylinder of Quicksilver of two foot and a half high, or thereabouts;
And since of this pressure so many more degrees are required to force the Air
into a smaller than into a greater hole, that is full of a more congruous
fluid. And lastly, since those degrees that are requisite to press it in, are
thereby taken off from the Air within, and the Air within left with so many
degrees of pressure less than the Air without; it will follow, that the Air in
the less Tube or Pipe, will have less pressure against the superficies of the
water therein, than the Air in the bigger: which was the minor Proposition to
be proved.

The Conclusion therefore will necessarily follow, viz.

That this unequal pressure of the Air caused by its protrusion into unequal
holes, is a cause sufficient to produce this effect, without the help of any
other concurrent, and therefore is the principal, (if not the only) cause of
this Phenomenon.

This therefore being thus explained, there will be diverse Phenomenon
explicable thereby, as, the Rising of Liquors in a Filtre, the rising of Spirit
of Wine, Oil, Melted Tallow, etc. in the Weak of a Lamp, (though made of small
Wire, Threeds of Asbestus, Strings of Glass, or the like) the Rising of Liquors
in a Sponge, piece of Bread, perhaps also the ascending of the Sap in Trees and
Plants, through their small, and some of them imperceptible Pores, (of which
perhaps I may say more on another occasion) at least the passing of it out of
the earth into their roots. I know not also whether it will be requisite to add
what things occurred to my thoughts, when I had these Phenomenon under
consideration; which I shall only propound as Queries, that may serve as hints
to some further discovery, and not as Axioms.

In short, they were these;

First, Upon the consideration of the congruity and incongruity of Bodies, as
to touch, I found also the like congruity and incongruity (if I may so speak)
as to the Transcursion of the Rays of Light: For in this regard, water (not
now to mention other Liquors) seems nearer of affinity to glass than Air, and
Air than* Quicksilver: For an oblique Ray out of Glass, will pass into water
with very little refraction from the perpendicular, but none out of Glass into
Air, excepting a direct, will pass without a very great refraction from the
perpendicular, nay any oblique Ray under 30 degrees, will not be admitted into
the Air at all, but reflected. And Quicksilver will neither admit oblique or
direct, but reflect all; so that Quicksilver as to the transmitting of the
Rays of Light, seems to be of a quite differing constitution, from that of
Air, Water, Glass, etc. and to assimilate most those opacous and strong
reflecting bodies of Metals: and as to the property of cohesion or congruity,
it seems to keep the same order.

A Second thing (which was hinted to me, by the consideration of the included
fluid's globular form, caused by the protrusion of the ambient heterogeneous
fluid) was whether the Phenomenon of gravity might not by this means be
explained, by supposing the Globe of Earth, Water and Air to be included with a
fluid, heterogenous to all and each of them, which is so subtle, as not only to
be every where interspersed through the Air, (or rather the air through it) but
does pervade the bodies of Glass, and even the closest Metals, by which means
it does endeavor to detrude all earthly bodies as far from it as it can; and
partly thereby, and partly by other of its properties (of which I may some
other time give a fuller account) move them toward the Center of the Earth.
Now that there is some such fluid, I could produce many experiments and
Reasons, that do seem to prove. But because I see it would ask some time and
room to set them down and explain them, and to consider and answer all the
Objections (many whereof I foresee) that may be alleged against it; and
because I know a more likely hypothesis for gravity, which I can make out by
experiment; I shall at present proceed to other Queries, contenting my self to
have here only given a hint of what I may elsewhere determine.

A Third Query then was, whether the heterogeneity of the ambient fluid may not
be accounted a secondary cause of the roundness or globular form of the greater
bodies of the world, such as are those of the Sun, Stars and Planets, the
substance of each of which seems altogether heterogeneous to the circum-ambient
fluid ether?

A Fourth was; Whether the globular Form of the smaller parcels of matter here
upon the Earth, as that of Fruits Pebbles or F^ints etc. (which seem to have
been a Liquor at first) may not be caused by the heterogeneous ambient fluid.
For thus we see that melted Glass will be naturally formed into a round Figure;
so likewise any small Parcel of any fusible body, if it be perfectly enclosed
by the Air, will be driven into a globular Form, and when cold, will be found a
solid Ball. This is plainly enough manifested to us by their way of making shot
with the drops of Lead, or a shower of Rain congealed in its falling into
Hailstones; and if you gently let fall a drop of water upon small sand or dust,
you shall find as 'twere an artificial round stone quickly generated. I cannot
upon this occasion omit the mentioning of the strange kind of Grain which I
have observed in a stone brought from Kettering in Northamptonshire, and
therefore called by Masons Kettering-Stone, like to which are found also at
Tormanton, near to Sudberry in Glocestershire: For I found it to consist of a
great number of small and almost globular parcels of matter, which to my naked
eye looked much like the Cob or Spawn of a Herring, though through a Microscope
it looked like a great Beach of round Pebble stone, such as I have often seen
by the Seashore, some of which I perceived to be hollow, much like the broken
Shells of Grenades: Which brings into my mind what I long since observed in the
fiery Sparks that are struck out of a flint, etc. For having a great desire to
see what was left behind, after the Spark was gone out, I purposely struck fire
over a very white piece of Paper, and observing diligently where some
conspicuous sparks went out, I found a very little black spot no bigger than
the point of a Pin, which through a Microscope appeared to be a perfectly round
Ball, looking much like a polisht ball of Steel, insomuch that I was able to
see the Image of the window reflected from it, making the like Observation in
very many others, I found some to be hollow, and to look like the broken shells
of Grandoes, much like that represented in the 4th. Figure. I cannot here stay
to examine the particular Reasons of it, but shall only hint, that I imagine it
to be some small parcel of the flint or steel (for I find it may be of either)
which by the violence of the motion of the stroke (most of which seems to be
impressed upon those small parcels) is made so glowing hot, that it is melted into
a Vitrum, which by the ambient Air is driven into a round Globul.

A Fifth thing which I thought worth Examination was, Whether the motion of all
kind of Springs, might not be reduced to the Principle whereby the included
heterogeneous fluid seems to be moved; or to that whereby two solids, as
Marbles, or the like, are thrust and kept together by the Ambient fluid.

A Sixth thing was, Whether the Rising and Ebullition of the water out of
Springs and Fountains (which lie much higher from the Center of the earth than
the superficies of the Sea, from whence it seems to be derived) may not be
explicated by the Rising of water in a smaller Pipe: For the Seawater being as
it were strained through the Pores or Crevices of the earth, is as it were
included in little Pipes, where the pressure of the Air has not so great a
power to resist its Rising: But examining this way, and finding in it several
difficulties almost irremoveable, I thought upon a way that would much more
naturally and conceiveably explain it, which was by this following Experiment:
I took a Glass Tube of the form of that described in the 6th. Figure, and
choosing two heterogeneous fluids, such as water and Oil, I poured in as much
water as filled up the Pipes as high as (A. B.) then putting in some Oil into
the Tube (A. C.) I deprest the superficies (A.) of the water to (E.) and B. I
raised to G. which was not so high perpendicularly as the superficies of the
Oil F. by the space (F. I.) wherefore the proportion of the gravity of these
two Liquors was as (G. H.) to (F. E.)

This Experiment I tried with several other Liquors, and particularly with
fresh water and salt (which we made by dissolving Salt in warm water) which two
though they are nothing heterogeneous, yet before they would perfectly mix one
with another, I made trial of the Experiment: Nay, letting the Tube wherein I
tried the Experiment remain for many days, I observed them not to mix; but the
superficies of the fresh was rather more than less elevated above that of the
salt. Now the proportion of the gravity of Seawater, to that of River-water,
according to Stevinus and Varenius, (for I have not now the opportunity of
making trial my self) is as 46. to 45. that is, 46. Ounces of the salt water
will take up no more Room than 45* of the fresh* Or reciprocally 45 pints of
salt, water weigh as much as 46 of fresh. Though I conceive the difference to
be much more, for I found the proportion of Brine to fresh water to be near 13
to 12: Supposing therefore G. H. M. to represent the Sea, and F. I. the height
of the Mountain above the Superficies of the Sea, F. M. a Cavern in the Earth,
beginning at the bottom of the Sea, and terminated at the top of the Mountain,
L. M* the Sand at the bottom, through which the water is as it were strained,
so as that the fresher parts are only permitted to transude, and the saline
kept back; if therefore the proportion of G. M. to F. M. be as 45. to 46. then
may the Cylinder of salt water G. M. make the Cylinder of fresh water to rise
as high as E. and to run over at N. I cannot here stand to examine or confute
their Opinion, who make the depth of the Sea below its Superficies, to be no
more perpendicularly measured than the height of the Mountains above it: It Is
enough for me to say, there is no one of those that have vented it, have
experimentally known the perpendicular of either; nor shall I here determine,
whether there may not be many other causes of the separation of the fresh water
from the salt, as perhaps some parts of the earth through which it is to pass,
may contain a salt, that mixing and uniting with the Sea salt, may precipitate
it* much after the same manner as the Alkalizate and Acid Salts mix and
precipitate each other in the preparation of Tartarum Vitriolatum. I know not
also whether the exceeding cold (that must necessarily be) at the bottom of the
water, may not help toward this separation, for we find, that warm water is
able to dissolve and contain more salt, than the same cold; insomuch that
Brines strongly impregnated by heat, if let cool, do suffer much of their salt
to subside and chrystallize about the bottom and sides. I know not also whether
the exceeding pressure of the parts of the water one against another, may not
keep the Salt from descending to the very bottom, as finding little or no room
to insert it self between those parts, protruded so violently together, or else
squeeze it upwards into the superior parts of the Sea, where it may more
easily obtain room for it self, amongst the parts of the water, by reason that
there is more heat and less pressure. To this Opinion I was somewhat the more
induced by the relations I have met with in several Geographical Writers, of
drawing fresh water from the bottom of the Sea, which is salt above. I cannot
now stand to examine, whether this natural perpetual motion may not
artificially be imitated: Nor can I stand to answer the Objections which may be
made against this my Supposition: As,

First, How it comes to pass, that there are sometimes salt Springs much higher
than the Superficies of the water? And,

Secondly, Why Springs do not run faster and flower, according to the varying
height made of the Cylinder of Seawater, by the ebbing and flowing of the Sea?

As to the First, In short, I say, the fresh water may receive again a saline
Tincture near the Superficies of the Earth, by passing through some salt Mines,
or else many of the saline parts of the Sea may be kept back, though not all.

And as to the Second, The same Spring may be fed and supplied by diverse
Caverns, coming from very far distant parts of the Sea, so as that it may in
one place be high, in another low water; and so by that means the Spring may be
equally supplied at all times. Or else the Cavern may be so straight and
narrow, that the water not having so ready and free passage through it, cannot
upon so short and quick mutations of pressure, be able to produce any sensible
effect at such a distance. Besides, that to confirm this hypothesis, there are
many Examples found in Natural Historians, of Springs that do ebb and flow like
the Sea: As particularly, those recorded by the Learned Camden, and after him
by Speed, to be found in this Island: One of which, they relate to be on the
Top of a Mountain, by the small Village. Kilken in Flintshire, Maris aemulus
qui statis temporibus suas revomit and resorbet Aquas; which at certain times
rises and falls after the manner of Sea-Tides. A Second in Caermardenshire,
near Caermarden, at a place called Cantred Bichan; Qui (ut scribit Giraldus)
naturali die bis undis deficiens, and toties exuberans, marinas imitatur
instabilitates. That twice in four and twenty hours ebbing and flowing,
resembles the uustable Motions of the Sea. The Phanomena of which two may be
easily made out, by supposing their Cavern by which they are fed, to arise from
the bottom of the next Sea. A Third, is a Well upon the River Ogmore, in
Glamorganshire, and near unto Newton, of which Camhden relates himself to be
certified, by a Letter from a Learned Friend of his that observed it, Fons
abest hinc, etc. The Letter is a little too long to be inserted, but the
substance is this, that this Well ebbs and flows quite contrarily to the
flowing and ebbing of the Sea in those parts: for it is almost empty at Full
Sea, but full at Low water. This may happen from the Channel by which it is
supplied, which may come from the bottom of a Sea very remote from those parts,
and where the Tides are much differing from those of the approximate shores. A
Fourth lies in Westmerland, near the River Loder; Qui instar Euripi saepius in
die reciprocantibus undis fluit and refluit, which ebbs and flows many times a
day. This may proceed from its being supplied from many Channels, coming from
several parts of the Sea, lying sufficiently distant asunder to have the times
of High Water differing enough one from the other; so as that whenever it
shall be High Water over any of those places where these Channels begin, it
shall likewise be so in the Well. But this is but a Supposition.

A Seventh thing was, Whether in general the Glutinousness of most bodies may
not be partly attributed to this property! For supposing glutinous bodies to be
such as will easily conform themselves to the superficies of homogeneal bodies,
and being suffered for some time to rest in that Position, until they grow
hard, the intercourse of the Air or other fluid body being hindered, the force
requisite to disjoyn those two superficies must necessarily be such as is able
to preponderate and prevail against the pressure of the Air upon a superficies
equal to that of the body which is touched by the glutinous substance; for these
two touch so exactly, that it is impossible for the Air to get between, until
they are somewhat disjoined, by which means the pressure of the Air can only be
against the two outward sides opposite to those which join them together: This
may be confirmed by the Experiment of two flat Marbles, pieces of Glass, and
the like smooth bodies; for if they be so exactly plain, that by rubbing them
together, you can detrude the interjacent Air, Of this much has bin ^^id in the
31 (...) 32 Experiments of the ^bove-menti^ned Discourse ^f the Air, and (...)
more copi^usly ex^lained in a Treatise of ^he same Honorable Au^hour now in
^he Press.
you shall find them stick so hard, that an ordinary strength can hardly
separate them; especially if they be of any bigness.

This Property I say, may at least be the cause why some bodies adhere to
Glass, and the like: For I am not ignorant, that as for Wood, and many other
porous bodies, the glutinous substance may penetrate into their little
cavities, and so hardening, become little Hooks or Buttons, that may contribute
much to the former Cohesion.

An Eighth Query was, Whether the dissolution or mixing of several bodies,
whether fluid or solid, with saline or other Liquors, might not partly be
attributed to this Principle of the congruity of those bodies and their
dissolvents? As of Salt in water, Metals in several Menstruums, Unctuous Gums
in Oils, the Mixing of Wine and water, etc. And whether precipitation be not
partly made from the same Principle of Incongruity? I say partly, because there
are in some dissolutions, some other Causes concurrent.

I shall lastly make a much more seemingly strange and unlikely Query; and that
is, Whether this Principle well examined and explained, may not be found a
co-efficient in the most considerable Operations of Nature? As in those of Heat
and Light, and consequently, of Rarefaction and Condensation, Hardness or
Solidity and Fluidness, Perspicuity and Opacousness, Refractions and Colors,
etc. Nay, I know not whether there may be many things done in Nature, in which
this may not (be said to) have a Finger? This I may possibly further enquire
into and examine, if God grant me Life and Opportunity. In the mean time, I
would not be thought guilty of that Error, which the thrice Noble and Learned
Verulam justly takes notice of, as such, and calls Philosophiae Genus Empiricum,
quod in paucorum Experimentorum Angustiis and Obscuritate fundatum est. For I
neither conclude from one single Experiment, nor are the Experiments I make use
of, all made upon one Subject: Nor wrest I any Experiment to make it quadrare
with any preconceiv'd Notion. But on the contrary, I endeavor to be conversant
in all kind of Experiments, and all and every one of those Trials, I make the
standards (as I may say) or Touchstones by which I try all my former Notions,
whether they hold not in weight and measure and touch, etc. For as that Body is
no other than a Counterfeit Gold, which wants any one of the Proprieties of
Gold, (such as are the Malleableness, Weight, Color, Fixtness in the Fire*
Indissolubleness in Aquafortis, and the like.) though it has all the other; so
will all those notions be found to be false and deceitful, that will not
undergo all the Trials and Tests made of them by Experiments. And therefore
such as will not come up to the desired Apex of Perfection, I rather wholly
reject and take a new, than by piecing and patching endeavor to retain the
old, as knowing old things to be rather made worse by mending, than better. And
this course I learned from Nature; whom we find neglectful of the old Body, and
suffering its Decaies and Infirmities to remain without repair, and altogether
sollicitous and careful of perpetuating the Species by new Individuals. And
it is certainly the most likely way to erect a glorious and everlasting
structure and Temple to Nature, such as she will be found (by any zealous
Votary) to reside in; first to raze the old Pile built upon unstable Fancies
and unsound opinions, and to begin a new upon a sure Foundation of Experiments.
Thus Medaea when she renewed old Aeson, first searches Heaven and Earth,
gathers and collects simples and Ingredients of all kinds, nor would these do
any thing till well mixed, concocted and digested.

Omnia confudit, summisque immiscuit ima. Then we find her examine whether it
will do what she expected.

Ecce, vetus calido versatus stipes aheno
Fit viridis primo, nec longo tempore frondes
Induit, and subito gravidis oneratur Olivis.
At quacunque cavo spumas ejecit aheno
Ignis, and in terram guttas cecidere calentes:
Vernat humus floresque and mollia pabula surgunt.
And finding it to come up to what she desired, she then begins her great work.

Quae simul ac vidit stricto Medaea recludit
Ense senis jugulum: veteremque exire cruorem
Passa, replet succis:
After which, what succeeded, but a miraculous Renovation?

-- Barba, comaeque
Canitie posita, nigrum rapuere colorem
Pulsa fugit macies: Abeunt pallorque situsque
Adjectoque cavae supplentur corpore rugae:
Membraque luxuriant --
The Application of it is obvious, and therefore (to digress no further from
the consideration of the Phenomenon, more immediately explicable by this
Experiment) we shall proceed to show, That,

As to the rising of water in a Filtre, the reason of it will be manifest to
him that does take notice that a Filtre is constituted of a great number of
small long solid bodies, which lie so close together, that the Air in its
getting in between them, does lose of its pressure that it has against the
fluid without them, by which means the water or liquor not finding so strong a
resistance between them as is able to counter balance the pressure on its
superficies without, is raised upwa^d, till it meet with a pressure of the Air
which is able to hinder it. And as to the Rising of Oil, melted Tallow, Spirit
of Wine, etc. in the Weeck of a Candle or Lamp, it is evident, that it differs
in nothing from the former, save only in this, that in a Filtre the Liquor
descends and runs away by another part* and in the Weeck the Liquor is
dispersed and carried away by the Flame (which what it is, and how it consumes
bodies, I shall on some other occasion by many luciferous Experiments
manifestly prove) something there is ascribable to the heat, for that it may
rarifie the more volatile and spirituous parts of those combustible Liquors, and
so being made lighter than the Air, it may be protruded upwards by that more
ponderous fluid body in the Form of Vapors. But this can be ascribed to the
ascension of but a very little, and most likely of that only which ascends
without the Weeck, as for the Rising of it in a Sponge, Bread, Cotton, etc.
above the superficies of the subjacent Liquor; what has been said about the
Filtre (if considered) will easily suggest a reason, considering that all these
bodies are bound with small holes or pores.

From this same Principle also (viz.) the unequal pressure of the Air against
the unequal superficies of the water) proceeds the cause of the accession or
incursion of any floating body against the sides of the containing Vessel, or
the appropinquation of two floating bodies, as Bubbles, Corks, Sticks, Straws,
etc. one toward another. As for instance, Take a Glass-jar, such as (A. B.) in
the 7th. Figure, and filling it pretty near the top with water, throw into it a
small round piece of Cork, as (C.) and p^unge it all over in water, that it be
wet, so as that the water may rise up by the sides of it, then placing it any
where upon the superficies, about an inch, or one Inch and a quarter from any
side, and you shall perceive it by degrees to make perpendicularly toward the
nearest part of the side, and the nearer it approaches it, the faster to be
moved; the reason of which Phenomenon will be found no other than this, that
the Air has a greater pressure against the middle of the superficies, than it
has against those parts that approach nearer, and are contiguous to the sides.
Now that the pressure is not so much, may (as I showed before in the
explication of the 3d Figure) be evinced from the rising of the water near the
sides, higher than that in the middle: Hence the Ball having a stronger
pressure against that side of it which respects the middle of the superficies,
than against that which respects the approximate side, must necessarily move
toward that part from whence it finds least resistance, and so be accelerated,
as the resistance decreases. Hence the more the water is raised under that part
of its way it is passing above the middle, the faster it is moved: And
therefore you will find it to move faster in E. than in D. and in D. than in C.
Neither could I find the floating substance to be moved at all, until it were
placed upon some part of the Superficies that was sensibly elevated above the
height of the middle part. Now that this may be the true cause, you may try
with a blown Bladder, and an exactly ro^nd Ball upon a very smooth Table. For
if the Ball be placed under a part of the Bladder which is upon one side of the
middle of its pressure, and you press strongly against the Bladder, you shall
find the Ball moved from the middle toward the sides. Having therefore shown
the reason of the motion of any float toward the sides, the reason of the
incursion of any two floating bodies will easily appear: For the rising of the
water against the sides of either of them, is an Argument sufficient, to show
the pressure of the Air to be there less, then it is further from it, where it
is not so much elevated; and therefore the reason of the motion of the other
toward it, will be the same as toward the side of the Glass; only here from
the same reason, they are mutually moved toward each other, whereas the side of
the Glass in the former remains fixed. If also you gently fill the Jar so full
with water, that the water is protuberant above the sides, of the same piece of
Cork that before did hasten toward the sides, does now fly from it as fast
toward the middle of the Superficies; the reason of which will be found no
other then this, that the pressure of the Air is stronger against the sides of
the superficies G. and H. then against the middle I. which may be argued from
its being much lower then the middle; and therefore the consecution will be the
same as in the former. It is very odd to one that considers not the reason of
it, to see two bodies of wood to approach each other, as though they were
endued with some magnetical vigor; which brings into my mind what I formerly
tried with a piece of Cork or such like body, which I so ordered, that by
putting a little stick into the same water, one part of the said Cork would
approach and make toward the stick, whereas another would discede and fly away,
nay it would have a kind of verticity, so as that if the equator (as I may so
speak) of the Cork were placed toward the stick, if let alone, it would
instantly turn its appropriate pole toward it, and then run a tilt at it, and
this was only by taking a dry Cork, and wetting one side of it with one small
stroke; for by this means gently putting it upon the water, it would depress
the superficies on every side of it that was dry, and therefore the greatest
pressure of the Air being near those sides caused it either to chase away, or
else to fly off from any other floting body, whereas that side only against
which the water ascended, was thereby able to attract. I cannot here stay to
explain the Reasons of magnetical and electrical attraction, nor the Reasons of
gravity or magnetical direction and variation, they being little or nothing at
all to my present Subject, and besides, will afford matter enough to fill
another sheet when I have leisure.

It remains only, that I should determine now high the water or other Liquor
may by this means be raised in a smaller Pipe above the superficies of that
without it: But to determine this, will be exceeding difficult, unless I could
certainly know how much of the Air's pressure is taken off* by the smalness of
such and such a Pipe, and whether it may be wholly taken off, that is, whether
there can be a hole or pore so small, into which Air could not at all enter,
though water might with its whole force, for were there such, it is manifest,
that the water might rise in it to some five or six and thirty English Foot
high. I know not whether there may not be such natural Pipes in the bodies of
small Trees, which we usually call their Pores, But I have already
pretergressed the bounds of a Sheet, which I at first prescribed my self for
the explication of this Phenomenon, and therefore I shall at present make

AN END.

