Honors Preservation WITHOUT BLOOD: OR, A Sober Advice TO DUELLISTS.

Being a Compendious Tract of the most Exquisite Nature to Appease the Sudden
Fits of Fury, which ENGLISH-SPIRITS have of Late been too much Subject to.

With many Cautions how without the Loss of Reputation, or the least Imprint of
Cowardice, as well the Nobility as Gentry of this Nation may Refuse to Hazard
their Lives and Fortunes on such mean Pretenses of Vindicating a Miscalled
Honor, or Unmanly Gallantry: Showing likewise, into what Dangerous
Inconveniences MEN thrust themselves forward in such Cases.

With an Account how such DVELS prove plain Murder, and are contrary to the
Laws of God and Man.

Written by a Well-wisher to both Peace and Honor.

London, Printed for Phillip Brooksby, 1680.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
READER,
SOund Judgment has not capacitated me for the State, nor has sober Learning
qualified me for the Church: no, I am not acute enough for the Knotty Law, nor
profound enough for the Mysterious Gospel. Therefore having (perhaps)
unadvisedly run my self into a little Tract, that borders upon Policy and
Religion, I have endeavored to steer my course so, as that I may not fall foul
on that Rock, nor be swallowed up in this Gulf: For I intend nothing contained
in this Essay, as counsel from the Bar, or reproof from the Pulpit, but only as
the Remarques of a Moralist.

If thou expectest an account of the motives that induced me to this Rashness:
know, that being by Birth an Englishman, and by Education an Academian, by the
Affection I have for my Country, and out of the respect I owe to my Mother, the
University, I thought my self obliged ( at least to endeavor) not to be a
disparagement to either: And since it lies not in my way, to contribute to the
making of Combs, nor bringing in of Honey: that I might exempt my self from
the Imputation of Drone, I resolved to busy my self, though about nothing.

If this will not satisfy thee, but that having read such a Trifle, thou must
full into great admiration, and many questions, such as, Why should this fellow
pretend to Write, etc. Let all thy Wonder cease, and all thy questions be
resolved in this; That Few Men, who have not Wit enough to Write well, have
judgment enough to discern that they Write ill.

An Essay of Duelling.
WHile we conceive Duelling as an Action: under that Conception, we must have
recourse to Circumstances for its Discreminating Epethets of good or bad: But
these are so various both in Number and Kind, that it will be very difficult to
reduce the Thesis to any certainty, without mustering up a Volume of Instances
out of God's Revenge against Murder, or some Book like it; and so by the
several descants upon every Individual Duel, to deduce Arguments to prove one
general Assertion: (Viz.) That all Duels are unlawful.

But since I intend a Discourse more Concise, and (I hope) more to the Purpose,
than that comes to, I designedly omit the Enumeration of that long train of
Circumstances which wait on our Actions: instancing only in the most general
motive that enduceth men to Duelling; which I look upon as the proper Basis on
which the stress of my present Discourse ought to rely. This Motive I have
generally observed to be the preservation of Honor, and look upon it as the
end (or more properly the beginning) of all Duels; and is indeed a very fair
mark to aim at: so that nothing can redound to the disparagement of the Archer,
but his proving so Purblind, as not rightly to distinguish between the reality
and the resemblance; or so Unskillful, as never to come near the White.

And I am fearful that I shall too easily make it apper that many Gentlemen are
very short-sighted in this Particular; and that either through the false
Vizards they have put upon Honor, or the unjust estimates they make of it,
they oftentimes Fight for the shadow instead of the substance, and (through
that mistake) destroy what they so Zealously endeavor to maintain. A true
Diamond is indeed a Jewel of Price, but it is Rivalled by Glass and Pebbles;
Iron may wear a superficies as curiously Engraved as the purest Steel, but it
is not so familiar and kind to the Loadstone: Brass may bear the same impress
with Gold, but it cannot put a cheat upon the Touchstone: and as for Honor, I
Fancy it is as distinguishable by its proper and genuine marks, as any of these.

The Touchstone of Honor I take to be Morality; nothing certainly can be so
true a Gage, or so just a Standard of it, as the Ethics: So that I shall
adventure to make this general assertion: (in spite of Hectors) Viz. That it
is impossible for a Man to be truly Honorable, who is not truly Virtuous: And
though Men have either carelessly, or industriously suffered that one great
embelishment, Magnanimity; as it were to Monopolize all Virtue, making a
convertible Proposition of it. That no man can be Honorable, but he that is
Stout: and again, That no Man can be Stout, but he must be Honorable: Yet I
believe the rest of the Moral Virtues would take it very unkindly, so to be
shouldred out of doors, but that they see Magnanimity so grosely abused, as it
is even by those who pretend to be the greatest admirers of it. How this Error
came to escape Conviction, I know not, but certainly it is the greatest
imaginable; and carries Pawn (I am confident) with none but such as really are,
or however would be thought Rank Hectors: And even such quickly find
themselves hugely disappointed in their ill-grounded hopes: For whatever they
purpose to themselves in the midst of their huffing, yet while they are
endeavoring to impose the name of Bubble upon others, they become the greatest
ones themselves, owing their Greatness to a vapor, till they break into
Nothing. And after they have convinced the whole World by their Duels and
Murders, what undaunted Spirits they have, for which they expect Adoration from
all that pass by them, they are forced to content themselves with the applauses
of two or three of their Brethren, and the submissive respect of some few of
their Creatures: And I make my appeal to any sober and rational Man, whether a
person notorious for Lying, a Prodigious Sot, an abominable Lecher, or the
like, gain the least Honor or Esteem with any, but such as are like himself,
though he be the stoutest man living. For my part, I would no more espouse such
an acquaintance, because of his Courage, than I would choose to Marry a beastly
common Strumpet, because she had a sprightly eye, or some other commendable
feature: and do not find any Catachresis in the Analogy, more, than that the
latter is a companion the least mischevious and dangerous of the two.

Thus it is my opinion, that a man who is every way morally vicious, excepting
in his Courage, ought to live with less Honor, than he that is in all other
respects morrally good, and well accomplished, though a Coward, for Courage is
the gift of Nature, and if a man wants it, it is not his fault but his
misfortune: Nature is unkind, and he is unhappy; he is good to the uttermost of
his Power, by suppressing Nature when it is rebellious, but he cannot encourage
it when it is faint-hearted: he finds it deficient in his heart, and therefore
supplies that chasm by a more than common liberality of his hands, affability
of his Tougue, etc. And since he wants one branch in the Tree of Honor, he so
orders and disposes of the rest, that they flourish to the making up of that
Breach.

Thus while the Gentleman I mentioned even now, makes necessity of a Virtue, by
pressing his courage to vindicate the Quarrels of his many other vices, this
makes a virtue of necessity, by marshalling all his other excellencies to the
concealment of this deformity. While he has a mind so beclouded, as to abate
much of the lusture of his Fortitude; This has a Soul so serene, as even to
lend Rays to his Pusillanimity. While he Arrests his Magnanimity to pay the
debts of his drunkenness, this by his temperance, plays the good Husband, and
contracts none.

Not that I intend this for a Panegyrique of Cowardice, but only by this
Antithesis to evince how grosely they mistake, who think all Honor placed in a
readiness to go into the Field upon every the least occasion; and him to be the
only Gentleman, that will do this, though in all other matters he be vitiated,
even to a Debauch. But taking what I have said for granted, the consequence
will be this: That Courage alone cannot maintain, much less purchase Honor,
unless there be a consent, and a combination of the other virtues to assist it.
Arms look very naked without Suporters: And let the Soloecism appear how great
soever, it is a Truth that Affability and Meekness is the best varnish to
Courage, which (like vinegar) will fret and feed upon it self, unless it be
allayed with Water, or some more innocent Liquor. But the mischief of it is,
that Men are now generally become their own Heralds, they will not remember
that Honor est in honorante; nor be beholding to the World for that Worship,
which they conceive to be a just Debt to their Merit. They grow furious, and
are like Nebuchadnezer: for putting all men (like Neba) to Death that will not
Idolize these Images of their own setting up. But if these would consider that
their Reputation lies in other Men's hands, they would certainly remember that
it is rather to be won with gentleness, and civility, than by rigor and force.
The sudden snatching of so brittle a Mettle may crack it, when Care and soft
usage may preserve it entire. And the best advice that can be given in this
case, is certainly this: (viz.) That Men would be so Ingenious as to get a
Reputation before they grow so very Zealous to keep it.

But there is a Second sort of Gentlemen, who would take this advice as an
Affront, because they come not under the scandal of Debauchery: And yet many of
these are Peccant in a more than commendable forwardness to receive affronts,
though not so ready to give them. These (in their own conceits) have Honors of
a most Prodigious Magnitude, and indeed swelled to that Disproportion, that it
is rather to be feared they are puffed up with a Tympany of Pride, than
consolidated with firm Nobility. If a Man that has not the Breeding of the Town
come into their Company, it is impossible he should live: Alas! this dull Animal
cannot breath in their Aura. There is Civility in its Purity, when a Man that
does not understand himself can neither look, speak, nor do any thing but what
is taken for an abuse: If there arise any Dispute, he must offer nothing in
opposition, but what must be Ushered in with a by your pardon Sir, I think it is
so --. And indeed the ill-bred Gentleman may gain a Fortune in the Country with
half the ceremony that he must here make use of to Arm himself against a
Challenge. I confess these clowns are unhappy in their want of Education, and
either by their ill Managery of their actions, or their foolish retorts in a
dispute, they oftentimes become rediculous in themselves, and abusive to
others. But yet methinks an ingenious Soul should make these Occurrences the
object of his Laughter, rather than of his Anger. I would have Honor like the
Palm Tree, to rise and appear vigorous under any weight, and not like the Plant
we call Sensitive, to shrink in at every little Touch.

But the two instances already mentioned come not fully to my Purpose: the
disparity is such that it seldom proceeds to a Duel: For the Hector or Ruffin,
is one with whom scarce any man will Fight, and the Pedant or Buffoon, is one
who will scarce Fight with any Man. The former is usually Compounded with, and
the latter commonly lets fall the Suit before it comes to a Trial: Therefore
before you bring the Man of Honor upon the Stage, you must bring him a
Competitour, one that is a Gentleman, and in all respects lays as great a claim
to Gallantry as himself; when such meet upon the least shadow of an affront
arises a Quarrel, which is presently seconded with a Challenge, and ends in a
Duel, as if it were impossible for these Cocks of the Game to see one another
without Animosity. If they cannot be happy in a better occasion, the taking of
the Wall shall serve the turn, and if either attempts to go next it, his
Adversary shall do his best to verify the Proverb, by endeavoring him to
prove him the weakest.

But almost daily experience informs us of worse effects of the Sword, than
those we hear of in rencounters, of which, if we inquire into the causes and
originals, we shall find them comprised chiefly in three Heads: namely, PLAY,
WINE and WOMEN. And whosoever will be at the trouble of keeping a Diurnal of
the Transactions of this City, I dare say, shall scarce need any other
Commonplace, to refer all the Duels that have been fought for some years past,
and will be Fought for some years to come, than These. How frequent (I may say
constant) effects of this Nature do we daily find to be the Natural
consequences of Play? Passion is its unseperable Companion, and if Fortune
prove ever so little adverse, the Loser takes occasion to Quarrel, not only at
Her, but the very person she assists, though (perhaps) a Bosom Friend, or a
near Relation. As if he resolved to humor his Fortune with his Carriage, and
scorned to behave himself well, when the Dice run ill: Every unlucky throw puts
him into an Outrage, and being grown desperate upon the loss of his money, he
Pawns his Reason: Then follow the God-dam-you's, and Plague-confound-you's:
Nay, and it is much if he give not the Lie, or the Son of a Whore, nor is it at
all to be admired, if having broken out into Profaneness, he keeps not within
the Rules of Civility. These (I confess) are indignities not to be endured, and
let a Man be never so well Armed with Moderation or Friendship, yet such
assaults as these, presently make a breach, and force him to Proclaim open War.
So that in effect Speering's Ordinary proves the ready way to Lambs-Conduit;
and a smooth Table becomes as fatal to throw Dice upon, as a Drum-head.

Nor is Wine a less incendiary to these kind of Heats and Quarrels, than Play:
Nay, most commonly it is the first mover, not only of the remoter Effects, but
also of the more immediate causes; for Gameing and Whoring would be meagre and
disregarded vices, (...) they not pampered up with Drinking. This takes away
those Rubs and Obstacles which Sobriety Dictates to our Reason; and removes
those Boomes, which a temperate resolution had set up as Guides, and non
ultra's, and while we miss these, no wonder if we run our selves a ground:
Every Man when he is Sober, knows that to play with Rooks and Confederates, is
to make Ducks and Drakes of his Money, and yet one drunken fit removes all his
Jealousies, and then he will venture himself with any Fellows, and his money at
any rate.

But supposing him so prudently drunk, as not to be drawn into Play, it is odds;
but you find him so foolishly Quarrelsom, as that way to run himself into equal
inconveniences. Not one in twenty but is so grosely abusive, that it is beyond
the patience of a stranger to endure it: Nay, even his most intimate
acquaintance know not where to have him; their good advice is misconstrued, and
their actions of friendship mislikt; and unless they have less wine, or more
wit in their Heads than he, you may rationally expect one or more of the
Company in the literal sense Bloody-drunk. But it may so happen that they are
intercepted, and these Intestine (I cannot call them civil) Broyls reconciled:
Yet the mischief does not commonly end there, they do but like neighboring
Princes, who in the heat of War make a League, and both join against a common
Enemy. They cannot walk (or rather reel) the Street without offering an affront
to every one they meet. The best qualified Gentleman, or the modestest Lady
cannot pass them without a Rudeness offered: So that tracing them from the
Tavern to Whetstones-Park, you will assuredly find some drops of Blood, or hear
of some work cut out for the next Morning.

And then indeed begins a Tragi-comoedy, enough to make Democritus look
serious, or Heraclitus laugh: Were there a thousand Craessus's, it is impossible
they should contain themselves, seeing these Asses mumbling Thistles: One of
these awakes in discontent, just remembering that he did challenge a Gentleman,
and appointed him a place of meeting, but has forgotten where: A Second
remembers the place, but knows nothing else of the Quarrel, A third remembers
the Gentleman to have been most grosely abused, without any cause at all. Well,
after this coucil of war has debated the thing, and consulted their Honors,
the result of all is a necessity of Fighting. Thus as the Pope proves himself
infallible by maintaining the Errors he runs into: so these Gentlemen justify
all their actions to be Honorable by vindicating those that are otherwise.

And now I am to beg pardon of the Ladys for shouldring them into any concern
in this Tragedy: How they came to be engaged, I know not, but according to my
observation, they are rather the occasions of it, than actors in it. We have a
saying, that there is seldom any mischief done, but a woman is at one end of
it. But in this case, the mischief proceeds most commanly from our foolish
zeal, not from their instigations. I conceive the Precedence due to those that
are honorable, and therefore I shall first instance in them; such (I mean) as
have preserved their reputations, and are esteemed Virtuous: and certainly no
such person can be thought accessory to our follies, or a fomentour of our
vices, but it (as the Sophister calls it) causa per accidens, as in this case.

Supposing a Lady Young, Rich, and Handsome, having done that, you suppose her
surrounded with Servants, of whom possibly she Affects one more Peculiarly, and
he that is thus happy or unfortunate, (call it which you please) must either
Relinquish his hopes, or Maintain them with his Sword. If he be Victorious in
the first Encounter, he shall meet with a Second, and if there be Twenty of
these Rivals, they shall have the Fate of Red breasts, shut up in an Aviary:
all must dye save one, and none must enjoy this Venus, but the God of War:
While each has set up a resolution not to desire her Affection, but win it;
which to effect, they propose no other way, than by destroying the object of
it: and yet this goes for a piece of Gallantry, not only Justifiable, but
Meritorious: such an example of Knight-Errantry, as that a Man cannot prove
himself a Gentleman without it. I confess I admire Actions of this Nature, as
much as any Man, but it is for the rashness and folly of them: for I cannot
fancy they have any rational aim or design. Do men hereby propose to themselves
enjoyment of the Lady? To me it seems very improbable that such a woman as we
have already supposed, should love a Man for no other reason but that he has
Murdered him she formerly inclined to: or to reward the improvident Husband
with the Grapes, because she chatcht him cutting down the supporters of the
Vine.

But allowing this to be well received on the Ladies part, there remains yet
another difficulty to be removed before it can proceed to a Sack-posset: there
is a place night Newgate, and a Creature ^^^eped, a Judge, that will have
something to say to Mr. Bridegroom, in Potentia, who perhaps forbids the Banns,
and so deprives him of the opportunity of being called handsome Man, as he is
going to Church, but gives him as fair a one as he is going to the Gallows.
Thus falls this Champion of Honor a Martyr to Love, and he that fancied
himself to live with all Imaginable esteem, and repute, now dies with
unconceiveable reproach and disgrace, confessing that Honor in Youth is but an
itch of the blood,
Of doing things extravangantly good.


Yet, I confess, of all instances this last, as it is the most excusable in it
self, so it is the least deplorable in the consequences of it: because he that
suffers is a single person, and pays no debts but those of his own contracting:
whereas in some cases, though the Halter puts an end to a Man's Life and Honor
together, yet the Shame and Misery survives to his Posterity (if he has any.)
It Is possible the Pendant Gentleman may leave a Widow and Orphans bewailing his
Dishonor, and their own Misfortune: for while he makes a forfiture of his
estate to the King, and his good Name to the World, he Entails upon them
nothing but Scandal and Beggary.

As these Disasters therefore are not always occasioned by Civil WOMEN, so
neither are they always the effects of Love: For if a Gentleman be handing a
Lady along the Street (whatever she be) how unmercifully stout does he grow
upon a sudden, a Man cannot pass by this shrine, but he must do it reverence,
at least by keeping a fit distance, if casually he gives her the least justle,
it is ten to one but this zealous Gallant, out of an ambition to ingratiate
himself, and appear a Man of mettle, comes out with his Damme what do you mean?
or how now Loggerhead, what is that for? and either he draws himself, or gives
the other provocation enough to do it. Is not this the Mode of the Town? and do
not several occurrences like these happen in a Year? Insomuch that many times
men lose their lives in vindicating the reputation of a common Whore, as if
Honor (by a kind of Antiperistasis) were to be maintained by things
dishonorable, or (like the Fig Tree) did flourish best, when planted near to
Rue.

And now having traced these disturbed and unpleasant streams through all their
bypath, and Moeanders, from their several spring-heads, down to the Red Sea,
whether they all tend. I think it time to cast an eye toward the Mountain tops:
Those (I mean) of the Nobility and Gentry, who either by their Valor or
Wisdom, are grown to a greatness and height above the level of other men. To
whom I intend not to be so unjust, as to endeavor to raze or undermine those
Pyramids, which either their Ancestors or themselves have erected as perpetual
Memorials of their Honor. And indeed, could I be so malicious, or daring, to
attempt this, how strangely would my endeavors be intercepted, when our
English Noblemen, like those of Troy, put forth their assisting hand, to their
own destruction, and themselves become instrumental to the Demollishing of
their own Babel? If two of these Structures stand near together, lifting up
their heads of equal height, what aemulation and envy does it beget, one must
be pulled down, e're the other can be thought thoroughly established? as if the
Temple of Honor could be well built upon nothing but its own ruins: or like
the Capitol, it could not be firmly founded, but where the builders find a dead
Man's skul. So that if you take a strickt Survey of any of these, you will find
the Walls graced (as they call it) with several Hic jacet's; of which kind of
Monuments, the more there are, the more beautiful and gorgeous is the Fabric
esteemed. Thus do they make Honor a Canibal, or Horsleach, hungry for want of
Man's flesh, and thirsting after blood; and intimate to the World that there is
a God of Honor, so incensed, that nothing will apease him but Human Sacrifice,
and that his Votaries must offer nothing at his Altar, but like the Priests of
Baal, with the dreadful Cerimony of Cutting and Wounding. This kind of Religion
I dare not contradict or reprove, it being the constant resolve of the Maturest
deliberations, to attempt Achievements of this Nature, and the Pride and Glory
of the stoutest Champions, to be blessed in these their undertakings, with a
Prosperous success, of whom he is the most Honorable that has the most Gules
in his Escutcheon, and the most happy that has enrolled the greatest number of
Martyrs in the Calendar of Honor.

This, for ought I know, may not be an error in Planets of the Superior Orbs:
but sure I am, it begets one in the inferior and sublunary bodies, who while
they look upon these as true lights, and safe guides, find themselves (as by an
Ignis fatuus) benighted, and seduced. Noblemen cannot but discern how Gentlemen
of less quality throng and crowd to come as near them as is possible, imitating
them according to (nay beyond) their Abilities, in their Habit, Carriage, and
all pieces of Gallantry: Nay, even in their Vices; esteeming all things Lawful,
or at least Creditable which are worthy of their pursuit. And were it not an
easy matter for them to bring this foolish and rash way of Duelling into
contempt, by being neither examples nor countenancers of it?

It would be Arogance in me, to propose any way for the effecting of this, but
my confidence of the Facility of it is (I believe) well grounded, for all Men
know, that whosoever kills a Man in a Duel, is Ipso Facto, to be put to death
by the Law, and yet the Fountain of Honor, and the Lawgiver, are one and the
same Person: (Viz.) The King: whom we must Accriminate with absurd and
incongruous contradictions in his actions, if we suppose him to confer Honor
upon a Person, and then immediately make such Laws, which if he obeys it is
possible for him to preserve. Were there no other means to be used for the
preservation of a Man's Honor, but to Duel the person that assaulted it, is it
to be imagined that there would ever have been so severe a Law against
Duelling? so then, the necessity of Fighting must be removed, or the
incongruity allowed, which would be flat Treason.

A Man is dubbed Knight Banneret in the Field, for some signal piece of Service;
is this person therefore obliged to challenge every Hotheaded Boy, that shall
call him Coward at home? or may he not by a Sober and Prudent carriage maintain
his Honor without it: and order it so, that the Pert Youth appear a Ridiculous
Child, while he proves himself as Prudent as Stout. And have we not many
gallant examples of this temper in the Kingdom? Are there not Men of
unquestioned Valor, who have made the Enemy confess them to be Lions, and yet
will suffer these wanton Kids to leap into their very mouths without harm? By
which means (I think) they rather confirm themselves to be true bred, than give
any man occasion to suppose them degenerate.

And now (I fancy) I have but one sort of Men left to deal with: (viz.) Those
that allow Duels to be unlawful, and consequently dishonorable; and yet out of
a vain glorious humor will venture at all, resolving to purchase the Name of
Man, though with the Epethets of foolish or miserable. Yet I am of an opinion,
that if the good Laws provided in this case were duly executed, much of this
fool-hardiness would be abated. But I can never hope to convince one by Reason,
whom the remissness of Justice, or abundance of Mercy has thus emboldned: and
therefore I will try (if he be not above Fear) to deter him, by setting before
him the unequal terms upon which he must sometimes fight. This Catholic
Dueller must be supposed to maintain his Honor in all places, and with all
persons: If so, than fancying him to be small in stature, or to have any
natural defect, or impediment whereby he is rendered incapable of bearing up
against one every way complete, is it probable that such a one should be
Victorious? So that this poor Lamb goes into the field but as a victim to
Honor, and dies with double disadvantage to be first abused, and afterward
killed for it: and all the benefit that he reaps by it, is the Encomium of
pretty mettl'd fellow, and the Elegy, of a thousand pitties. Thus does he gain
compassion instead of Honor, and Fools Paradise instead of Heaven.

But though Probability gives this Giant the Victory, yet it is possible that
Fortune may so guide the Pigmy's sword, that it may reach the heart of this Man
of Gath, who upon such an accident, falls with all imaginable disgrace; so that
in an unequal Duel it is almost impossible for either of the Swordmen to obtain
even that which the vauntingest huff miscalls Honor; for in the first instance
the infirmities of the Enemy are traduced as blots in the Escucheon of the
Victor, and in the last, the Conquest is wholly ascribed to Chance: and
therefore I approve of the answer given by a Gentleman, who having a great
Impediment in his Eyes, desired his Antagonist (who Challenged him at Rapier)
to meet him in a dark Cellar with a Hatchet: But fancying all desired Parity,
persons equal in Strength, Skill, and Courage, how Casual then is the Event!
Certainly in such a case the Victor must allow himself indebted to Fortune for
his Success, because (as I said) there is an equallity. Might not such
Desperadoes as these, be persuaded upon a mutual affront, to draw cuts for
their lives, agreeing that he who drew the shortest should hang himself to give
the other satisfaction? Why not? For the prudence of this way it is certainly
the best, because the equallest, having its whole dependence upon a casualty;
whereas in a Duel one of the Combatants may have the advantage of skill. For
the mettle of it, it is the stoutest, because one of them must assuredly dye;
whereas in a Duel a Coward may encourage himself with the hopes of being
disarmed, or lightly wounded: For the mercy of it, it is the most commendable;
for here only one perishes, whereas in a Duel both may be slain, or
desperately hurt: For the satisfaction of it, it is the compleatest; for here a
Man has Plenary Restitution, made by the Offenders own hands, while he lives at
peace and liberty, to enjoy the happiness: whereas in a Duel, though he does
kill his Adversary, yet the Laws call a Man into question, and perhaps take
away his Life: For the pleasure of it, it is (without doubt) the most ticking;
for here you may please your self with seeing your Enemy do Execution
artificially upon himself, whilst you stand by as a safe Spectator: whereas in
a Duel the danger much abates of the Lechery: And lastly, for the Honor of it,
it is far the greatest: for here the vanquished is but hanged: and that only in
sight of two or three Friends (perhaps:) whereas in a Duel, the conqueror many
times suffers a more ignominious death, even among Malefactors, and before
thousands of beholders. What a Ridiculous Soloecism in Morrals is Duelling!
when even so Brutish a proposition as this, should appear far more Rational
and Eligible.

But there is one thing yet behind, which hugely agravates the indiscretion of
it, that indeed whereby the name of Folly is swallowed up in madness: That is
the use of Seconds. How this custom crept into the World, I cannot tell, but
to me it seems the most absurd that can be thought of: I am not so well versed
in Martial History, as to give you an account of the Original of these. But
sure I am, if they were intended for good, their Design is strangely perverted:
Were they Spectatours only to see that no Foul play (as they call it) be
offered: or such as might be assistant, as Surgeons, it were tolerable: But
as they are now used, it is a Frenzy not to be Paralleled. I need not inform the
complete Dueller that the Mode now adays, is for all the Seconds to draw at
once with the Principal; and among them the Engagement is as vigorous as if
each were the very person that first gave the affront. This indeed is Honor in
it is purity! wherein the most curious eye cannot discern the least dregs: this
is that excellently refined Metal, which will endure the nicest touch of the
choicest Loadstone! The Principal may be encouraged by Passion, or animated by
Revenge, but here is he that will fight with any man in the quarrel of a Friend;
nay, of a Stranger, quickened by no other Spur than that of Honor: In Heavens
Name! what irreconcilable absurdities? what unavoidable dangers do men
voluntarily run into? was ever, (no it is impossible) any thing in the world so
heteradox to reason, nay, to common-sence, as this? for a man to go into the
Field, to meet he knows not whom, perhaps a bosom Friend: to fight in
justification of he knows not what, it may be giving the Lie: to lose his life
in Complezance, he knows not how: possibly by being overpowered by two or
three This is an Intreague, that for my Soul I cannot comprehend: A Gordian
knot so interwoven, and complicated, that were Alexander himself alive, it
would nonplus both him and his Sword. What can be 'th Riddle of this! Do men
propose safety to themselves, by electing Seconds? If they do, I deny their
Major. For if either of the Seconds fall, I suppose (pardon me if ^err) he that
slew him, may if he please, return to the assistance of his own principal, and
then there are two against one. So that one chosen for a safe guard, may become
either through his want of skill, or good luck, destructive to the Person for
whom he Engages. But there is yet a a greater inconvenience that attends this
Folly: For when only two fight, it is very possible that satisfaction may be had
without the Death of either. But in this case where four or six engage, it is
not to be imagined they shall all escape, and all Men know that the Death of
either, renders all parties concerned as obnoxious to the Law, as if each were
the man that had given him his mortal wound. In my apprehension, such
undertakers seem to have no other Plot, than by setting themselves beyond the
bounds of safety, to let the World know how little they fear Death: And does
not every fellow that is possessed with Despair, a Frenzy, the Devil, or what you
will call it, while he Stabs, Hangs, or Drowns himself, deserve to be enrolled
among these Martyrs of Honor, upon the same account? I think he does.

But to what purpose do I argue, when even men's own inclinations supersede my
reasonings. In this case men by a Diabolical kind of infatuation, do that which
they would not, and confute the succession of Action and Election. It Is in vain
to diswade a man from an enterprise, when he says himself, -- Video meliora
proboque
Deteriora sequor. --
Nor can I rationally expect such men's compliance with my arguments, who cannot
be obedient to their own wills. I dare appeal to any Man, whether he ever went
into the Field (to fight a Duel I mean) unconcernedly: or having slain his
adversary, returned joyfully. And can this be true Honor that has Regret for
its Companion, and Sorrow for its Lackey?

And now having gone so far, as to decry Duelling, and to declare it as my
opinion, that a wounded reputation is not to be cured by weapon-salve: It may
be expected that I should propose some more justifiable way for the
satisfaction of a Person injured in his good Name, by the reproaches of another.

But I conceive it improper to prepare Restoratives, before a Patient is
satisfied that he is distempered: and Rude, thus to endeavor to drench him
into Health against his Will; and take away the edge of that, which he calls a
good stomach, when, indeed, it is appetitus caninus.

But if the attempt I have made, chance to work any way upon the Spirits of the
Duellist, so as to bring him to himself, out of those raving fits, in which
there is no coming near him, without danger; I have those Lenitives in store,
that will not (I hope) prove so Ganenically nauseating, but that he may down
with them: nor so Spirituous, and Chimical, but that he may take them safely:
such as I dare say, will be conducing to long Life, and effect the Cure (as the
Quack's Bill runs) without hindrance of business, or loss of reputation.

And if this first Essay find the least of a favorable reception among Men, I
shall adventure upon a second endeavor, to show how in most cases a Man's
Honor may be preserved without Duels: and remove the Tyranical imposition of
sitting at a Feast with a Sword hanging over our heads, fastened only by a hair.
Yet least I should never meet with this encouragement; I only say in general,
he that will preserve his Honor entire, and his Reputation sound; let him be
morally good; let him behave himself submissively toward his Superiors,
Valliantly toward his Enemies, Civilly toward his Equals, and Courteously
toward his Inferiors; such a Deportment as this will prove a gag to Malice,
and a scourge to Slander: and whosoever is of this temper, will soon find that
the satisfaction a man gives to the World, by his own life, is better than that
which he reaps to himself by another Man's Death.

FINIS.

