Lectiones Cutlerianae, OR A COLLECTION OF LECTURES: PHYSICAL, MECHANICAL,
GEOGRAPHICAL, and ASTRONOMICAL.
Made before the Royal Society on several Occasions at GRESHAM College. To
which are added diverse MISCELLANEOUS DISCOURSES.

By ROBERT HOOK, S.R.S.

LONDON: Printed for John Martyn Printer to the Royal Society, at the Bell in
S. Paul's Churchyard. 1679.

The Titles of the several TRACTS.
I. AN ATTEMPT to prove the Annual MOTION of the EARTH, by Observations made
with accurate Instruments: wherein is shown the Impossibility of doing it, by
the most exact Instruments and ways used by preceding Astronomers. The
Instruments and method used in these Observations: The way of seeing the fixed
Stars in the Day time; and a new Hypothesis for solving the motions of the
Heavenly Bodies is hinted.

II. ANIMADVERSIONS on the Machina Coelestis of Mr. Hevelius, wherein is
detected the imperfection of Astronomical Instruments hitherto used, and diverse
ways of reforming and perfecting those and several other Instruments are
explained and described. And several other new Inventions are added and
explained, as particularly Water-Levels: The Circular Pendulum, the Perfection
of Wheel-work for Clocks and Watches, etc. together with their uses, and the
great advantage of these above other Inventions of the like nature.

III. A DESCRIPTION of Helioscopes with other Instruments. Wherein are
Discovered and Described, several new ways of making Glasses to look upon the
Body of the Sun without offense to the Observers Eye. 2. A shortning Reflective
and Refractive Telescope. 3. A way of using a Glass of any length without
moving the Tube. 4. An Instrument for taking the Diameter of the Sun, Moon and
Planets, or other small Distances in the Heaven, to the certainty of a Second.
5. An Instrument for describing all manner of Dials by the Tangent Projection.
6. The uses of the said Instrument, First, for adjusting the Hand of a Clock,
so as to make it move in the shadow of a Dial, whose Style is parallel to the
Axis: Or, Secondly, in the Azimuth of any Celestial Body, that is, in the
shadow of an upright, or any other way inclining style, upon any plain.
Thirdly, for making a hand move according to the true Aequation of Time.
Fourthly, for making all manner of Elliptical Dials, in Mr. Foster's way, etc.
Fifthly, for communicating a circular motion in a Curve Line, without any
shaking: And for diverse other excellent purposes. To which is added an
Observation of the Eclipse of the Moon, Jan. 1. 167 ^/5. And a Postscript
concerning the Invention of regulating Watches, by Springs applied to their
Balances: together with a Decade of other useful Inventions, part discovered,
part described in Anagrams.

IV. LAMP AS, or Descriptions of some Mechanical Improvements of Lamps and
Water-poises, with other Physical and Mechanical Discoveries. Wherein are
discovered besides the ways of obviating the inconveniences of other
contrivances of Lamps, Eight several ways of making Lamps so, as to regulate
the flame of them for various uses: several of which are therein mentioned and
explained: Besides which, various ways and uses are described of poysing
liquors, by the by, several Theories and Explications are inserted,
particularly about Flame and Burning, about Light, Color, Gravity, Local
Motion, Pressure of Fluids, etc. in Answer to some Objections of Dr. More,
against some former Discourses published by the Author. To these are added the
Description of a new sort of Clepsydra or Water-Clock. 2. A new Principle for
regulating Pocket Watches. 3. Several Microscopical Observations about the
Seeds, of Moss, Mushrooms, all kinds of Ferns, Wall-Rue, Hart's-tongue, Osmund
Royal, etc. 4. An Observation of spots in the Sun.

V. COMETA, containing Observations on the Comet in April, 1677. Also for the
years 1664. 1665. Sir Christopher Wren's Hypothesis and Geometrical Problem
about those Comets. A Discourse concerning the Comet, 1677.

Mr. Boyl's Observation made on two new Phosphori of Mr. Baldwin, and Mr. Craft.

Mr. Gallet's Letter to Mr. Cassini, together with his Observation of sub.

Mr. Cassini's Reflections upon those of Gassendus and Hevelius, and upon this.

Mr. Hally's Letter and Observation of the same made at St. Helena.

Mr. Cassini's Observation of the Diurnal motion of, and other Changes
happening in it.

MICROSCOPIUM, containing Mr. Leeuwenhoecks two Letters concerning some late
Microscopical Discoveries.

The Author's Discourse and Description of Microscopes, improved for discerning
the nature and texture of Bodies.

P. Cherubines Accusations Answered.

Mr. Yonge's Letter containing several Anatomical Observations.

VI. LECTURES de Potentia Restitutiva or of Spring, Explaining the Power of
Springing Bodies. To which are added some Collections, viz.

A Description of Dr. Pappins Wind-Fountain and Force-Pump.

Mr. Yong's Observation concerning natural Fountains.

Some other Considerations concerning that Subject.

Capt. Sturmy's Remarks of a Subterraneous Cave and Cistern.

Mr. G. T. his Observations made on the Pike of Teneriff, Anno 1674.

Some Reflections and Conjectures occasioned thereupon.

A Relation of a late Eruption in the Isle of Palma.

AN ATTEMPT To prove the MOTION OF THE EARTH FROM Observations MADE BY ROBERT
HOOK Fellow of the Royal Society.

Senec. Not. Qu. lib. 1. cap. 30. Ne miremur tam tarde erui qua tam alte jacent.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for John Martyn Printer to the Royal Society, at the
Bell in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1674.

TO THE TRULY HONORABLE Sir John Cutler KNIGHT and BARONET, My Worthy PATRON.
SIR,
AMong several Eminent Marks of your Greatness of Mind for promoting the
Public Good, that of your Bounty for the Advancement of Experimental and Real
Knowledge, by the Founding a Physico-Mechanical Lecture, deserves to be
Recorded as One, and more especially by me whom you have honored by
establishing your first Lecturer. As an Earnest of others more considerable
shortly to follow, I here present you with one of my Discourses in that
Employment, which though short and plain, conteins somewhat of Information
which the Learned have hitherto desired, though almost with despair. As I hope
their kind Acceptance will produce their thanks to you to whom they are justly
due, so your Acceptance will encourage me in the further prosecution of these
Inquiries to approve my self,

Noble Sir, Your most obliged, and most humble Servant ROBERT HOOK.
From Gresham College, March 25. 1674.
READER,
I Have formerly in the Preface of my Micrographia given the World an account
of the founding a Physico-Mechanical Lecture in the Year 1665, by Sir John
Cutler, for the promoting the History of Nature and of Art. In prosecution
thereof, I have collected many Observations both of the one and the other kind,
and from time to time (as obliged) I have acquainted the Royal Society at their
Public Meetings, both at Gresham College and Arundel House therewith, by
Discourses and Lectures thereupon.

Now in order to the further promoting the End and Design of this Lecture, I
have complied, with the desire of several of my Friends (though otherwise not
thereunto obliged) to commit diverse of those Discourses to the Public, though
of themselves for the most part incomplete, and Essays or Attempts only upon
several Subjects which have no dependencie or coherencie one with another. In
the doing hereof, I design to avoid any kind of Method or Order that may
require Apologies, Prefaces, or needless Repetitions of what is already known,
or might have been said upon that Occasion, or may necessitate me to follow
this or that Subject, that does not some way or other offer it self as it were,
and prompt me to the consideration thereof. But because they may possibly admit
of some better order hereafter, I design to print them all of the same Volume,
that so they may be, when ranged, either stitched or bound together, and may,
as occasion requires, be referred to under the Title of their Number and Page.
This way I choose as the best for promoting the Design of this Lecture; for as
there is scarce one Subject of millions that may be pitched upon, but to write
an exact and complete History thereof, would require the whole time and
attention of a man's life, and some thousands of Inventions and Observations to
accomplish it: So on the other side no man is able to say that he will complete
this or that Inquiry, whatever it be, (The greatest part of Invention being but
a luckey hitt of chance, for the most part not in our own power, and like the
wind, the Spirit of Invention blows where and when it lists, and we scarce
know whence it came, or whether it is gone.) 'Twill be much better therefore to
embrace the influences of Providence, and to be diligent in the inquiry of
every thing we meet with. For we shall quickly find that the number of
considerable Observations and Inventions this way collected, will a hundred
fold outstrip those that are found by Design. No man but has some luckey
hitts and useful thoughts on this or that Subject he is conversant about, the
regarding and communicating of which, might be a means to other Persons highly
to improve them. Whence 'twere much to be wished, that others would take this
Method in their Publications, and not torment their Readers with such nauseous
Pepetitions, and frivolous Apologies, as Method and Volumes do necessitate them
to; But would rather enrich the Storehouse of Art and Nature with choice and
excellent Seed, freed from the Chaff and Dross that do otherwise bury and
corrupt it.

The communicating such happy Thoughts and Occurrences need not much take up a
man's time to fit it for the Press; the Relation being so much the better the
plainer it is. And matter of Fact being the Kernel Readers generally desire (at
least in these Subjects) it will be so much the readier for use if it be freed
from the thick and hard shell of Impertinences. This way also is more grateful
both to the Writer and the Reader, who proceed with a fresh stomach upon
variety, but would be weary and dulled if necessitated to dwell too long upon
one Subject. There are other conveniences also in this Method of Communication
not less considerable then the former, amongst the rest the securing of
Inventions to their first Authors, which it is hardly possible to do by any
other means; for there are a sort of Persons that make it their business to
pump and spy out others Inventions, that they may vend them to Traders of that
kind, who think they do ingenuously to print them for their own, since they
have bought and paid for them. Of this there have lately been some Instances,
and more may be expected, if this way prevent not.

When things cannot be well explained by words only (which is frequent in
Mathematical and Mechanical Discourses) I add Schemes and delineatious
Descriptions of that kind being easier to be made and understood. As near as I
can I omit the repeating things already printed, and endeavor to deliver such
as are new and my own, being my self best pleased with such usage from other
Authors.

I have begun with a Discourse composed and read in Gresham College in the
year 1670. when I designed to have printed it, but was diverted by the advice
of some Friends to stay the repeating the Observation, rather then publish it
upon the Experience of one Year only. But finding that Sickness has hitherto
hindered me from repeating the Trials, and that some Years Observations have
already been lost by the first delay: I do rather have it out now, though
imperfect, then detain it for a better completing, hoping it may be at least a
Hint to others to prosecute and complete the observation, which I much long for.

This first Discourse is upon an Observation of Nature, and may therefore be
properly referred to that Head, though it contein also somewhat of the
Improvement of Art: The second speedily to follow, will more properly be
referrable to Artificial Improvements, though it will contein also many
Observations of Nature; and I design always to make them follow each other by
turns, and as 'twere to interweave them, being apart but like the Warp or Woof
before contexture, unfit either to Cloth, or adorn the Body of Philosophy.



AN ATTEMPT To prove the Motion of the EARTH BY OBSERVATIONS.
WHether the Earth move or stand still has been a Problem, that since
Copernicus revived it, has much exercised the Wits of our best modern
Astronomers and Philosophers, amongst which notwithstanding there has not been
any one who has found out a certain manifestation either of the one or the
other Doctrine. The more knowing and judicious have for many plausible reasons
adhered to the Copernican Hypothesis: But the generality of others, either out
of ignorance or prejudice, have rejected it as a most extravagant opinion. To
those indeed who understand not the grounds and principles of Astronomy, the
prejudice of common converse does make it seem so absurd, that a man shall as
soon persuade them that the Sun does not shine, as that it does not move; and
as easily move the Earth as make them believe that it does so already. For such
Persons I cannot suppose that they should understand the cogency of the Reasons
here presented, drawn from the following observations of Parallax, much less
therefore can I expect their belief and assent thereunto; to them I have only
this to say, It Is not here my business to instruct them in the first principles
of Astronomy, there being already Introductions enough for that purpose: But
rather to furnish the Learned with an experimentum crucis to determine between
the Tychonick and Copernican Hypotheses. That which has hitherto continued the
dispute has been the plausibleness of some Arguments alleged by the one and
the other party, with such who have been by nature or education prejudiced to
this or that way. For to one that has been conversant only with illiterate
persons, or such as understand not the principles of Astronomy and Geometry,
and have had no true notion of the vastness of the Universe, and the exceeding
minuteness of the Globe of the Earth in comparison therewith, who have confined
their imaginations and fancies only within the compass and pale of their own
walk and prospect, who can scarce imagine that the Earth is globous, but rather
like some of old, imagine it to be a round plain covered with the Sky as with a
Hemisphere, and the Sun, Moon, and Stars to be holes through it by which the
Light of Heaven comes down; that suppose themselves in the center of this
plain, and that the Sky does touch that plain round the edges, supported in
part by the Mountains; that suppose the Sun as big as a Sieve, and the Moon as
a Chedder Cheese, and hardly a mile off. That wonder why the Sun, Moon, and
Stars do not fall down like Hailstones; and that will be martyred rather then
grant that there may be Antipodes, believing it absolutely impossible, since
they must necessarily fall down into the Abyss below them: For how can they go
with their feet toward ours, and their heads downwards, without making their
brains addle. To one I say, thus prejudiced with these and a thousand other
fancies and opinions more ridiculous and absurd to knowing men, who can ever
imagine that the uniformity and harmony of the Celestial bodies and motions,
should be an Argument prevalent to persuade that the Earth moves about the Sun:
Whereas that Hypothesis which shows how to salve the appearances by the rest of
the Earth and the motion of the Heavens, seems generally so plausible that none
of these can resist it.

Now though it may be said, It Is not only those but great Geometricians,
Astronomers and Philosophers have also adhered to that side, yet generally the
reason is the very same. For most of those, when young, have been imbued with
principles as gross and rude as those of the Vulgar, especially as to the frame
and fabric of the world, which leave so deep an impression upon the fancy,
that they are not without great pain and trouble obliterated: Others, as a
further confirmation in their childish opinion, have been instructed in the
Ptolomaick or Tichonick System, and by the Authority of their Tutors, overawed
into a belief, if not a veneration thereof: Whence for the most part such
persons will not endure to hear Arguments against it, and if they do, it is only
to find Answers to confute them.

On the other side, some out of a contradicting nature to their Tutors; others,
by as great a prejudice of institution; and some few others upon better
reasoned grounds, from the proportion and harmony of the World, cannot but
embrace the Copernican Arguments, as demonstration; that the Earth moves, and
that the Sun and Stars stand still.

I confess there is somewhat of reason on both sides, but there is also
something of prejudice even on that side that seems the most rational. For by
way of objection, what way of demonstration have we that the frame and
constitution of the World is so harmonious according to our notion of its
harmony, as we suppose? Is there not a possibility that the things may be
otherwise? nay, is there not something of probability? may not the Sun move as
Ticho supposes, and the Planets make their Revolutions about it whilst the
Earth stands still, and by its magnetism attracts the Sun, and so keeps him
moving about it, whilst at the same time and move about the Sun, after the same
manner as and move about the Sun whilst the Satellites move about them?
especially since it is not demonstrated without much art and difficulty, and
taking many things for granted which are hard to be proved, that there is any
body in the Universe more considerable then the Earth we tread on. Is there not
much reason for the Hypothesis of Ticho at least, when he with all the
accurateness that he arrived to with his vast Instruments or Riccioli, who
pretends much to outstrip him, were not able to find any sensible Parallax of
the Earths Orb among the fixed Stars, especially if the observations upon which
they ground their assertions, were made to the accurateness of some few
Seconds? What then, though we have a Chimera or Idea of perfection and harmony
in that Hypothesis we pitch upon, may there not be a much greater harmony and
proportion in the constitution it self which we know not, though it be quite
differing from what we fancy? Probable Arguments might thus have been urged
both on the one and the other side to the Worlds end; but there never was nor
could have been any determination of the Controversy, without some positive
observation for determining whether there were a Parallax or no of the Orb of
the Earth; This Ticho and Riccioli affirm in the Negative, that there is none
at all: But I do affirm there is no one that can either prove that there is, or
that there is not any Parallax of that Orb amongst the fixed Stars from the
Suppellex of observations yet made either by Ticho, Riccioli, or any other
Writer that I have yet met with from the beginning of writing to this day. For
all Observators having hitherto made use of the naked eye for determining the
exact place of the object, and the eye being unable to distinguish any angle
less then a minute, and an observation requisite to determine this requiring a
much greater exactness then to a minute, it does necessarily follow that this
experimentum crucis was not in their power, whatever either Ticho or Riccioli
have said to the contrary, and would thence overthrow the Copernican System,
and establish their own. We are not therefore wholly to acquiess in their
determination, since if we examine more nicely into the observations made by
them, together with their Instruments and ways of using them, we shall find
that their performances thereby were far otherwise then what they would seem to
make us believe. The Controversy therefore notwithstanding all that has been
said either by the one or by the other Party, remains yet undetermined, Whether
the Earth move above the Sun, or the Sun about the Earth; and all the Arguments
alleged either on this or that side, are but probabilities at best, and admit
not of a necessary and positive conclusion. Nor is there indeed any other means
left for humane industry to determine it, save this one which I have
endeavored to make; and the unquestionable certainty thereof is a most
undeniable Argument of the truth of the Copernican Systeme; and the want
thereof has been the principal Argument that has hitherto somewhat detained
me from declaring absolutely for that Hypothesis, for though it does in every
particular almost seem to solve the appearances more naturally and easily, and
to afford an exceeding harmonious constitution of the great bodies of the World
compared one with another, as to their magnitudes, motions, and distances, yet
this objection was always very plausible to most men, that it is affirmed by
such as have written more particularly of this subject, that there never was
any sensible Parallax discovered by the best observations of this supposed
annual motion of the Earth about the Sun as its center, though moved in an Orb
whose Diameter is by the greatest number of Astronomers reckoned between 11 and
12 hundred Diameters of the Earth: Though some others make it between 3 and 4
thousand; others between 7 and 8; and others between 14 and 15 thousands; and I
am apt to believe it may be yet much more, each Diameter of the Earth being
supposed to be between 7 and 8 thousand English miles, and consequently the
whole being reduced into miles, if we reckon with the most, amounting to 120
millions of English miles. It cannot, I confess, but seem very uncouth and
strange to such as have been used to confine the World with less dimensions,
that this annual Orb of the Earth of so vast a magnitude, should have no
sensible Parallax amongst the fixed Stars, and therefore 'twas in vain to
endeavor to answer that objection. For it is unreasonable to expect that the
fancies of most men should be so far streined beyond their narrow dimensions,
as to make them believe the extent of the Universe so immensly great as they
must have granted it to be, supposing no Parallax could have been found.

The Inquisitive Jesuit Riccioli has taken great pains by 77 Arguments to
overthrow the Copernican Hypothesis, and is therein so earnest and zealous,
that though otherwise a very learned man and good Astronomer, he seems to
believe his own Arguments; but all his other 76 Arguments might have been
spared as to most men, if upon making observations as I have done, he could
have proved there had been no sensible Parallax this way discoverable, as I
believe this one Discovery will answer them, and 77 more, if so many can be
thought of and produced against it. Though yet I confess had I failed in
discovering a Parallax this way, as to my own thoughts and persuasion, the
almost infinite extension of the Universe had not to me seemed altogether so
great an absurdity to be believed as the Generality do esteem it; for since
it is confessedly granted on all hands the distance of the fixed Stars is merely
hypothetical, and not founded on any other ground or reason but fancy and
supposition, and that there never was hitherto any Parallax observed, nor any
other considerable Argument to prove the distances supposed by such as have
been most curious and inquisitive in that particular, I see no Argument drawn
from the nature of the thing that can have any necessary force in it to
determine that the said distance cannot be more then this or that, whatever it
be that is assigned. For the same God that did make this World that we would
thus limit and bound, could as easily make it millions of millions of times
bigger, as of that quantity we imagine; and all the other appearances except
this of Parallax would be the very same that now they are. To me indeed the
Universe seems to be vastly bigger then it is hitherto asserted by any Writer,
when I consider the many differing magnitudes of the fixed Stars, and the
continual increase of their number according as they are looked after with
better and longer Telescopes. And could we certainly determine and measure
their Diameters, and distinguish what part of their appearing magnitude were to
be attributed to their bulk, and what to their brightness, I am apt to believe
we should make another distribution of their magnitudes, then what is already
made by Ptolomy, Ticho, Kepler, Bayer, Clavius, Grienbergerus, Piff, Hevelius
and others.

For supposing all the fixed Stars as so many Suns, and each of them to have a
Sphere of activity or expansion proportionate to their solidity and activity,
and a bigger and brighter bodied Star to have a proportionate bigger space or
expansion belonging to it, we should from the knowledge of their Diameters and
brightnesses be better able to judge of their distances, and consequently
assign diverse of them other magnitudes then those already stated: Especially
since we now find by observations, that of those which are accounted single
Stars, diverse prove a congeries of many Stars, though from their near appearing
to each other, the naked eye cannot distinguish them; Such as those Stars which
are called Nebulous, and those in Orion Sword, and that in the head of Aries,
and a multitude of others the Telescope does now detect. And possibly we may
find that those twenty magnitudes of Stars now discovered by a fifteen foot
Glass, may be found to increase the magnitude of the Semidiameter of the
visible World, forty times bigger then the Copernicans now suppose it between
the Sun and the fixed Stars, and consequently sixty four thousand times in bulk.
And if a Telescope of double or treble the goodness of one of fifteen should
discover double or treble the said number of magnitudes, would it not be an
Argument of doubling or trebling the former Diameter, and of increasing the
bulk eight or twenty seven times. Especially if their apparent Diameters shall
be found reciprocal to their Distances (for the determination of which I did
make some observations, and design to complete with what speed I am able.) But
to digress no further, This grand objection of the Anti-copernicans, which to
most men seemed so plausible, that it was in vain to oppose it, though, I say,
it kept me from declaring absolutely for the Copernican Hypothesis, yet I never
found any absurdity or impossibility that followed thereupon: And I always
suspected that though some great Astronomers had asserted that there was no
Parallax to be found by their observations, though made with great
accurateness, there might yet be a possibility that they might be mistaken;
which made me always look upon it as an inquiry well worth examining: first,
Whether the ways they had already attempted were not subject and liable to
great errors and uncertainties: and secondly, Whether there might not be some
other ways found out which should be free from all the exceptions the former
were encumbered with, and be so far advanced beyond the former in certainty and
accurateness, as that from the diligent and curious use thereof, not only all
the objections against the former might be removed, but all other whatsoever
that were material to prove the ineffectualness thereof for this purpose.

I began therefore first to examine into the matter as it had already been
performed by those who had asserted no sensible Parallax of the annual Orb of
the Earth, and quickly found that (whatever they asserted) they could never
determine whether there were any or no Parallax of this annual Orb; especially
if it were less then a minute, which Kepler and Riccioli hypothetically affirm
it to be: The former making it about twenty four Seconds, and the latter about
ten. For though Ticho, a man of unquestionable truth in his assertions, affirm
it possible to observe with large Instruments; conveniently mounted and
furnished with sights contrived by himself (and now the common ones for
Astronomical Instruments) to the accurateness of ten Seconds; and though
Riccioli and his ingenious and accurate Companion Grimaldi affirm it possible
to make observations by their way, with the naked edge to the accurateness of
five Seconds; Yet Kepler did affirm, and that justly, that 'twas impossible to
be sure to a less Angle then 12 Seconds: And I from my own experience do find
it exceeding difficult by any of the common sights yet used to be sure to a
minute. I quickly concluded therefore that all their endeavors must have
hitherto been ineffectual to this purpose, and that they had not been less
imposed on themselves, then they had deceived others by their mistaken
observations. And this mistake I found proceeded, from diverse inconveniences
their ways of observations were liable to. As first from the shrinking and
stretching of the materials wherewith their Instruments were made, I conceive a
much greater angle then that of a minute may be mistaken in taking an altitude
of fifty Degrees. For if the Instruments be made of Wood, it is manifest that
moist weather will make the frame stretch, and dry weather will make it shrink
a much greater quantity then to vary a minute: and if it be Metal, unless it be
provided for in the fabric of the Instrument accordingly, the heat of Summer,
when the Summer observations are to be made, will make the Quadrant swell, and
the cold of Winter will make it shrink much more then to vary a minute: Both
which inconveniences ought to be removed. Next the bending and warping of an
Instrument by its own weight, will make a very considerable alteration. And
thirdly, the common way of Division is also liable to many inconveniences: And
it is hardly possible to ascertain all the subdivisions of Degrees into minutes
for the whole Quadrant, though that be not altogether impossible. But I will
suppose that they did foresee, and in some manner prevent all these
inconveniences, especially Ticho and Riccioli, who seem to have been aware
thereof. But there was one inconvenience which was worse the all the rest,
which they seem not to have been sufficiently sensible of, from whence
proceeded all their own mistakes, and their imposing upon others, and that was
from their opinion that the sight of the naked eye was able to distinguish the
parts of the object as minutely as the limb of the Quadrant (of what largeness
soever) was capable of Divisions; whereas it is hardly possible for any unarmed
eye well to distinguish any Angle much smaller then that of a minute: and where
two objects are not farther distant then a minute, if they are bright objects,
they coaless and appear one, though I confess, if they be dark objects, and a
light be interposed, the distance between them shall be visible, though really
much less then a Second; and yet notwithstanding, my first assertion stands
good; for though a bright object, as a candle or light at a distance, or a
Star, or the like, can be seen by the eye, though its body do really not
subtend an Angle of one third, yet it proceeds from a radiation (that is, from
reflection and refraction together) in the air and in the eye, whereby the body
thereof is represented to the naked eye some hundred times bigger then it
really is. That this is so, any one that will but carefully examine will find
it true.

It was, I doubt not, their extraordinary desire and care to be exact, that
caused them to make their Instruments so large, and to subdivide them to such
an exactness, as to distinguish, if possible, to Seconds; And I question not
but that they used their utmost endeavor in directing the sight to the object:
but since the naked eye cannot distinguish an Angle much smaller then a minute,
and very few to a whole minute, all their charge and trouble in making and
managing large Instruments, and in calculating and deducing from them, was as
to this use in vain. Hence I judged that whatever men's eyes were in the younger
age of the World, our eyes in this old age of it needed Spectacles; and
therefore I resolved to assist my eyes with a very large and good Telescope,
instead of the common sights, whereby I can with ease distinguish the parts of
an object to Seconds: and I question not but that this way may be yet made
capable of distinguishing much more curiously, possibly even to some few
Thirds. This invention removed that grand inconvenience which all former
observations were spoiled with: but there remained yet further this difficulty,
How to make an Instrument large enough for this purpose, that I might be
assured did not shrink, nor warp, nor stretch so much as to vary a Second; for
such is the nature of all Materials that can be made use of for Instruments of
the bigness I designed this, that it is almost impossible to make a moveable
Instrument that shall not be subject to a variation of diverse Seconds: It was
therefore my next inquiry where I might fix this Archimedean Engine that was to
move the Earth. For the doing of which, I knew 'twas in vain to consult with
any Writer or Astronomer, having never then heard of any person that had ever
before that time had any thoughts thereof: and when I first propounded it to
the Royal Society, 'twas looked upon as a new thought, and somewhat
extravagant, and hardly practicable, until upon hearing my explication, and the
various ways how it might be reduced into practice, it was at length judged
possible, and desirable to be tried. I propounded therefore to them the several
ways that it was possible to be performed, and what method was to be observed
in every one of them, and somewhat of the conveniences and inconveniences in
each of them; for having seriously meditated upon the Inquiry, I quickly
thought of many expedients for the doing thereof. As first, I had thoughts of
making use of some very great and massy Tower or Wall that were well settled, or
of some large Rock or Hill whereunto I might fix my Glasses, so as to take the
exact altitude of some eminent Star near the Pole of the Ecliptik, when at its
greatest height, at two differing times of the year; to wit, about the Summer
and Winter Solstice, to see if possibly I could discover any difference of
altitude between the first and second observation. But to accomplish this
(besides the vast difficulty there would have been to have measured such an
Angle to the accurateness requisite, if at least it were desired to have the
Angle of altitude to Minutes and Seconds, which ought also to have been
repeated as often as any observation had been made for fear of settling or
swelling, etc.) I was destitute of such a convenience near my habitation;
besides, had I had my wish, I found that 'twas liable to an inconvenience that
would wholly overthrow my whole design, which I knew not well how to avoid:
Namely, to that which has hitherto made even the very best observations of
Parallaxes ineffectual and uncertain, the refraction of the Air or Atmosphere,
which though it could have been but very little at the greatest altitude of the
Pole of the Ecliptic, yet it might have been enough plausibly to have spoiled
the whole observation, and to have given the Anti-copernicans an opportunity of
evading the Arguments taken from it, especially upon the account of the
differing constitution of the Atmosphere in June and December, which might have
caused so much a greater refraction of the same altitude at one time then
another, as would have been sufficient to have made this observation
ineffectual for what it was designed. Add to this, that it would have been no
easy matter to have set the Glasses or Telescope exactly against the Meridian,
so as to see the highest altitude of any Star near the Pole of the Ecliptic
distinctly to a Second.

The like difficulties I found if observations were made of the greatest
altitude of the Pole of the Ecliptic in June and December, or the least
altitude of the same in December and June. For besides all the uncertainties
that the Instruments, be they what they will, are liable to, the grand
inconvenience of the refraction of the Air, which is enough to spoil all
observations if it be intermixed with uncertainty, in the former is
considerable, and in the later intolerable.

Having therefore examined the ways and Instruments for all manner of
Astronomical observations hitherto made use of, and considered of the
inconveniences and imperfections of them; and having also duly weighed the
great accurateness and certainty that this observation necessarily required: I
did next contrive a way of making observations that might be free from all the
former inconveniences and exceptions, and as near as might be, fortified
against any other that could be invented or raised against it. This way then
was to observe by the passing of some considerable Star near the Zenith of
Gresham College, whether it did not at one time of the year pass nearer to it,
and at another further from it: for if the Earth did move in an Orb about the
Sun, and that this Orb had any sensible Parallax amongst the fixed Stars; this
must necessarily happen, especially to those fixed Stars which were nearest the
Pole of the Ecliptic. And that this is so, any one may plainly perceive if he
consider the annexed Scheme, Fig. I. where let S represent the Sun placed as it
were in the center of the Planetary Orbs, A B C D an imaginary Orb of the fixed
Stars of the first magnitude, whose center for demonstration sake we will
suppose the Sun. Let represent the Orb in which the Earth is s^pposed to move
about the Sun, obliquely projected on the Paper. Let represent the Earth in
Capricorn, and the Earth in Cancer, let 1 2. 1 2. represent the imaginary Axis
of the Earth, keeping continually a parallelism to its self, and let AICD
represent an imaginary Plain passing through the center of the Star at D in the
Solstitial Colure, and the two centers of the Earth in and, and C represent the
Zenith point of Gresham College at noon, when the Earth is in Cancer, and A
the Zenith point of the said College at midnight in the aforesaid Orb A B C D
when the Earth is in Capricorn, it is manifest therefore that since the Poles of
the Earth, the Poles of the Ecliptic, and the Zenith points of the Earth at
noon, when in Cancer, and at midnight, when in Capricorn, are all in the same
Plain; and that the Axis of the Earth keeps always its parallelism, and that
the Angles made by the Perpendiculars of Gresham College, with the Axes are
always the same, that the aforesaid Perpendiculars of the said College shall
be parallel also one to another, and consequently deno^e out two points in the
abovesaid Orb A and C as far distant from each other as the parallel Lines A
and C are, and consequently the point A shall be farther from the Star in D,
and the point C shall be nearer to it, when in the Meridian near the Zenith of
London, and consequently if the said Star be observed when in the Meridian of
the place abovesaid, if there be any such difference considerable, it may be
found if convenient Instruments and care be made use of for the observation
thereof: and the difference between the Angle A D, and the Angle C D, will give
the parallactical Angle D of the Orb of the Earth to the fixed Star D of the
first magnitude. The same demonstration will hold mutatis mutandis, supposing
the Star be not in the Meridian or Plain abovesaid, but in some other Meridian,
as any one upon well considering the nature of the thing it self may easily
prove, if the observation be made when the Zenith passes by the Star at
midnight, and at midday. But the nearer the Zenith of the place of observation
passes to the Pole-point of the Ecliptic, the better; The Angle of Parallax
being still the more sensible. Therefore the best place to complete this
observation were in some place under the Polar Circles, as in Iseland, where
the Zenith of the place at the times abovesaid, must consequently pass at one
time to the North side of the Pole of the Ecliptic, and at the other on the
South side, and the Zenith of March and Sept. must pass through the very
Pole-point it self. Now it falling out so, that there is no considerable Star
in that part of the Heavens nearer the above said Plain, and nearer the Zenith
point of Gresham College in that Plain, then the Bright Star in the head of
the Dragon, I made choice of that Star for the object by which I designed to
make this observation, finding the Zenith point of Gresham College to pass
within some very few minutes of the Star it self; the declination thereof
according to Riccioli being 51. 36. 7. and the Plain the Star and Pole of the
World, making an Angle with the aforesaid Plain but of 2. 52. 36, the right
ascension thereof being according to Riccioli 267. 7. 24.

And that this may be made a little plainer, let us suppose in the third
Figure, the North part of the Heavens projected stereographical upon a Plain to
which the Axis is perpendicular. Let p represent the Pole, e the Pole of the
Ecliptic, I the bright Star in the head of Draco, and let a c c c represent an
imaginary Circle described by the Zenith of Gresham College among the fixed
Stars in June, and b d d d a like Circle described by the said Zenith in
December, and e f f f a like Circle described as above in March, and g h h h in
September. It is very evident that the true distances of the Zeniths in that
part of the Meridian which is next the Pole of the Ecliptic, to wit, in the
head of the Constellation Draco, shall be to the true distances of the said
Zeniths in that part which is furthest from the said Pole, to wit, near the
constellation of Auriga in consequentia, as the sign of 75 degrees to the sign
of 14. 54, and the variation of the Zeniths, or the Angle of Parallax here at
Gresham College, to the Angle of Parallax in Iseland, or any other place under
the Pole of the Ecliptic, or Artick Circle is, as the sign of seventy five to
the sign of ninety or the Radius. This will be very evident if we consider in
the second Scheme: AB to represent the Diameter of the great Orb: AC and BD the
perpendiculars of Iseland, or some other place under the Polar Circle. GA, HB
the perpendiculars of Gresham College in Draco: and LA, MB the perpendiculars
of the same place to the Solstitial Colure near Auriga, the several distances
CD, GH, IK, LM, will be as the signs of 90 75 66.30 14.54. to wit, as the Lines
or Cords AB. AO. PB. QB.

I might have made observations of the distances of the transits of our Zenith
from any other Star as well as from this of Draco, and the same Phenomena might
have been observed, taking care to make one of the observations when the Star
is in the Zenith at midnight, and the other when the same Star is in the Zenith
at noon or midday; and upon this account when I next observe, I design to
observe the transits of our Zenith by Benenaim, or the ultima caudae ursae
majoris, it being a Star of the second magnitude, and having almost as much
declination as Gresham College has latitude. The principal days of doing
which will be about the 4 of April, when our Zenith passes by the said Star at
midnight, and the 7 of October, when it passes by it at noon or midday: the
reason of all which will be sufficiently manifest to any one that shall well
consider the preceding explanation.

This Star I would the rather observe, because as it is placed so as that the
Parallax thereof will be almost as great as of the Pole of the Ecliptic in
Iseland, or under the Artick Circle, so it being a Star of the second
magnitude, and consequently perhaps as near again as one of the fourth, the
Angle of Parallax will be near about twice as big, and the Star it self much
more easy to be seen in the day time. This will be very easy to be
understood, if we consider in the first Scheme the differing distances of the
Orb A B C D, in which we may suppose the Stars of the second magnitude to be
fixed, and of the Orb a b k d, in which we may suppose the Stars of the fourth
magnitude, and a b c d in which we may suppose those of the third magnitude,
and A B C D in which we may suppose those of the first; for if the Stars are
further and further removed from the Sun, according as they appear less and
less to us, the parallactical difference found by observation must necessarily
be less and less, according as the observation is made of less and less Stars.

The reasons then why I made choice of this way of observing will be easy to
any one that shall consider that hereby, first, I avoid that grand
inconvenience wherewith all ancient and modern observations have been perplexed,
and as to Parallax insignificant, and that is the refraction of the Air or
Atmosphere. How great an inconvenience that was is obvious, since it is
certainly much greater at one time then another, and never at any certainty;
and secondly, It Is nor equally proportionable, for sometimes the refraction is
greater at some distance above the Horizon, then in or nearer to the Horizon it
self, and sometimes the quite contrary, which I have very often observed; and
this to so exorbitant a difference, as to confound all Hypothetical
Calculations of Tables for this purpose. This arises from the uncertain and
sudden variations of the Air or Atmosphere, either from heat and cold, from the
thickness and thinness of Vapors, from the differing gravity and levity, from
the winds, currents, and eddyes thereof, all which being not so well understood
by what way, and in what degree, and at what time they work and operate upon
the Air, must needs make the refraction thereof exceedingly perplexed, and the
reduction thereof to any certain theory fit for practice, a thing almost
impossible. Now if we are uncertain what part of the observed Angle is to be
ascribed to refraction, we are uncertain of the whole observation as far as the
possible uncertainty of refraction. Let me have but the liberty of supposing
the refraction what I please, and of fixing the proportional decrease thereof
according to the various elevation of the Rays above the Horizon; I will with
ease make out all the visible Phenomena of the Universe, Sun, Moon, and Stars,
and yet not suppose them above a Diameter of the Earth distant. Now in this
observation there is no refraction at all, and consequently be the Air thicker
or thinner, heavier or lighter, hotter or colder, be it in Summer or Winter, in
the night or the day, the ray continually passes directly, and is not at all
refracted and deflected from its straight passage. In the next place, by this
way of observing I avoid all the difficulties that attend the making, mounting,
and managing of great Instruments: For I have no need of Quadrant, Sextant, or
Octant, nor of any other part or Circle bigger then a Degree at most; nor have
I need to take care of the divisions and subdivisions thereof, nor of the
substance whether made of Iron, Brass, Copper, or Wood, nor whether the parts
thereof shrink or swell, or bend or warp, to all which the best Instruments
hitherto made use of, have been some ways or other liable. And notwithstanding
the vast care and expense of the noble Ticho about the making, fixing, and
using his great Instruments; yet I do not find them so well secured from diverse
of these inconveniences, but that they were still subject to some considerable
irregularities. Nay, notwithstanding the seemingly much greater curiosity and
expense of Hevelius, and his infinite labor and diligence in the completing
and using of his vast Apparatus of Astronomical Instruments, I do not find them
so well secured, but that some of the causes of erros that I have before
mentioned, may have had a considerable effect upon them also; especially if
they were supposed to measure an Angle to some few Seconds, as I shall
hereafter perhaps have more occasion to manifest. Now, if the Instruments of
Ticho and Hevelius, (who had certainly two of the most curious and magnificent
Collections of Astronomical Instruments that were ever yet got together or made
use of) were subject to these uncertainties, What shall we say of all that
other farrage of trumpery that has been made use of by most others? We see
therefore the necessity of the conjunction of Physical and Philosophical with
Mechanical and Experimental Knowledge, how lame and imperfect the study of Art
does often prove without the conjunction of the study of Nature, and upon what
rational grounds it was that Sir John Cutler, the Patron and Founder of this
Lecture, proceeded in joining the contemplation of them both together.

The next thing was the Instrument for the making of this observations, such a
one as should not be liable to any of the former exceptions, nor any other new
ones that were conside^able. To this purpose I pitched upon a Telescope, the
largest I could get and make use of, which I designed so to fix upright, as
that looking directly upwards, I could be able certainly to observe the
transits of any Stars over or near the Zenith, and furnishing it with
perpendiculars and a convenient dividing Instrument, I should be able not only
to know exactly when the Star came to cross the Meridian, but also how far it
crossed it from the Center or Zenith point of Gresham College, either toward
the North, or toward the South. All which Particulars, how I performed, I
shall now in order describe, and this somewhat the more distinctly, that such
as have a desire to do the like, may be the more ready and better enabled to
proceed with the same.

First then (finding a Tube would be very troublesome to the Rooms through
which it past, especially if it were placed pretty far in the Room, and that
one wanted so free an access as was necessary if it were planted nigh the wall,
and that there was no absolute necessity of such an intermediate Tube,
supposing there were a cell to direct the eye fixed to the Eye Glass, and that
there were some short cell to carry the Object Glass in at the top, so as to
keep it steady, when raised upward or let downwards, the light in the
intermediate Rooms not at all hindering, but rather proving of good use to this
purpose for seeing the Mensurator) I opened a passage of about a foot square
through the roof of my lodgings (see the Fourth Figure) and there in fixed a
Tube a a perpendicular and upright, of about ten or twelve foot in length, and
a foot square, so as that the lower end thereof came through the Ceiling, and
was open into the Chamber underneath: This Tube I covered with a lid at the top
q, housed so as to throw off the rain, and so contrived, as I could easily open
or shut it by a small string n o p, which came down through the Tube to the
place where I observed. Within this perpendicular Tube a a, I made another
small square Tube b b, fit so as to slide upwards and downwards, as there was
occasion, and by the help of a skrew to be fixed in any place that was
necessary: Within this Tube in a convenient cell c, was fixed the Object Glass
of the Telescope (that which I made use of was thirty six foot in length,
having none longer by me, but one of sixty foot, and so too long to be made use
of in my Rooms) the manner of fixing which was this: The Glass it self was
fixed into a cell or frame of Brass, so exactly fitted to it, that it went in
stiff; and to fill up all the Interstitia's, there was melted in hard Cement;
this cell had a small bar that crossed under the center of the Glass, or the
aperture thereof; in which bar were drilled two small holes at equal distance
from the middle of the Glass, through which the upper ends of the two
perpendiculars d d were fastened; and in the fixing this brass cell or frame
into the square Tube that was to slide up and down, care was taken to make the
bar lie as exactly North and South as could be, though that were not
altogether so absolutely necessary to this observation. These perpendiculars d
d fastened to the bar hung 36 foot and better in length, and had at the lower
ends of them two balls of lead e e as big as the Silks could bear, by which the
lowest parts of this Instrument were adjusted, as I shall by and by explain.
But first, I must acquaint the Reader, that I opened a so perpendicularly under
this Tube a hole r r a foot square in the floor below, which with shutters
could be closed or opened upon occasion; by this means I had a perpendicular
Well-hole of about forty foot long, from the top of a to the lower floor s s.
Upon the second floor s s I fixed the frame that carried the Eyeglass and the
other Apparatus fit to make this observation. I made then a Stool or Table,
such as is described in the same Fourth Figure i h h i, having a hole through
the top or cover thereof h h, of about nine inches over; the middle of which I
placed as near as I could perpendicularly under the middle of the Object Glass
in the cell above, and then nailed the frame fast to the floor by the brackets
i i, that it could not stir; underneath the cover of this Table I made a slider
g g, in which was fixed in a cell an eye Glass f, so as that I could through
the eye Glass moved to and fro, see any part of the hole in the Table that I
desired, without stirring the stool from its fixtness. This was necessary,
because many Stars which were forerunners of this Star in Draco, and served as
warning to prepare for the approaching Star, went pretty wide from the parallel
that passed over our Zenith; by this means also I took notice of the Star it
self, at above half a degree distance from the Zenith to the East, and so
followed the motion of it with my eye Glass, and also with my measuring Clew,
and at the same time told the Seconds beat by a Pendulum Clock, and so was very
well prepared to take notice of all things necessary to complete the
observation, but might have been otherwise surprised by the sudden approach
and swift motion of the said Star. The measuring Instrument or Mensurator was a
round thin plate or circle of Brass, delineated in the Seventh Figure, the
aperture a b of which was about nine inches over, crossed in the middle by two
very small hairs a b and c d, which served to show the Zenith point at e, by
which the Star was to pass; there were also two other small hairs f g and i h
drawn parallel to that which was to represent the East and West line, that past
under our Zenith, these cut the Clue that represented the Meridian, or North
and South Line at the places k and l, where the perpendicular points were made
by the two long plumb lines: This Instrument was produced on the side a to n, n
e being made fifteen times the length of e m, so that e m being one inch and
two thirds, e n was twenty five inches: at n the line n e was crossed by a rule
of about 3 foot long o p, which from the point n was divided each way into
inches and parts, each inch being subdivided into thirty parts, which served to
determine, though not precisely, the Seconds on the line c d, for a minute of a
degree to a thirty six foot Glass, being very near one eighth part of an inch,
and this eighth part, by the help of the Diagonal, being extended to two whole
inches upon the three foot Rule o p, it became very easy to divide a part of c
d, which subtended a minute into sixty parts, and consequently to subdivide it
into Seconds. Now though the sixtieth part of an eighth of an inch be very
hardly distinguishable by the naked eye, yet by the help of looking through the
Eyeglass placed in the cell, and so magnifying the Objects at the Mensurator
more then sixteen times, it is easy enough to distinguish it. But to proceed, I
had one small arm m t in the Mensurator, to which the Diagonal thread was
fastened at the point m, which served for the more nice subdivisions into
Seconds; The other Diagonal thread which was fastened at u, served for such
observations where so great niceness was not so necessary, distinguishing only
every four Seconds. The points where these Diagonal threads were fastened, were
exactly over the line a b, and the distances e m and e u were an inch and two
thirds, and five inches.

There is somewhat of niceness requisite to the fixing these Diagonal threads
(which is very material) at m and u, and that is that there be a small
springing slit to pinch the hair fast exactly over the line a b, so that the
point of its motion may be precisely in the said East and West line, and not
sometimes in it, and sometimes out of it, which it is apt to be, if the
Diagonal line be fixed in a hole, and move round in it.

This was the Mensurator by which I measured the exact distance of the Stars
from our Zenith: it may be also made use of for the measuring the Diameters of
the Planets; for the examining the exact distances of them from any near
approaching fixed Stars; for measuring the distances of the Satellites of
Jupiter and Saturn from their discks, for taking the diameters and magnitudes
of the spots of the Moon, and for taking the distances of approaching Stars,
and for many other mensurations made by Telescopes or Microscopes, if it be so
placed as to be in the focus of the Object Glass and Eye Glass. I could here
describe at least thirty other sorts, some by the help of screws, others by the
help of wedges, some after the way of proportional Compasses, others by wheels,
others by the way of the Leaver, others by the way of Pullies, and the like;
any one of which is accurate enough to divide an inch into 100, 1000, 10000
parts if it be necessary; but I must here omit them, they being more proper in
another place, and shall only name one other, because I sometimes made use of
it in this observation, which is as simple and plain as this I have described,
and altogether as accurate; but for some accidental circumstances in the place
where I made my observation, was not altogether so convenient as the former.
This Mensurator then is made thus: take a Rule of what length it seems most
convenient for the present occasion, as two, three, or four foot long,
represented by a b in the Eighth Figure, divide this into 100, 1000, 10000
equal parts, with what accurateness it is possible, between the points a b. On
the top of this Rule, at each end fix two cross pieces g h and e f, then from
the two cross pieces e f and g h, strain two very fine and even clues, as
Silkworms clues, curious small hairs, or the like, so as that they cross each
other at n, and be distant at o and p, an inch, or any other certain measure
desired. Let this Rule, bezelled on each side, slip in a frame between two
cheeks q and r, upon the top of which strein another small hair as s t. This
frame must be fastened to the Telescope, so as s t may lie in a due position to
the Eye Glass of it. Now in the time of observation the frame q r being fastened
to the Telescope as above, by sliding the Rule a b to and fro, you give upon
the line s t any length desired, which is noted out by the line s t upon the
rule; for if o p be put one inch, then x y will be 494/1000 of an inch, and if
o p be the subtense of 10 minutes, then x y will be the subtense of 4/94; this
is so plain, simple, and easy, that as any ordinary Workman will be able to
make it, so I doubt not but every Reader will, without more application,
understand both the description and use thereof. I shall return therefore to
the description of the former Mensurator.

The next thing then is the way of fixing this Mensurator, so as to set the
threads in their due posture, that is East and West, and North and South, and
that they cut each other under the middle of the Glass. This last was that
which had the most of difficulty in the whole Experiment. For the performing of
this, I removed the slider underneath the Table that carried the Eye Glass, and
also the Mensurator, and suffered the plumb lines to hang down through the
aperture of the Table, and that the Balls might come the sooner to their
perpendicularity, I suffered them to hang into a vessel of water, deep and wide
enough, that they might not touch either side or bottom.

This expedient of hanging the plumbets in water I mention, because without it
it is not to be imagined how much time is lost by expectation of the settlement
of the said perpendiculars, and how very apt they are to be made to vibrate by
the little imperceptible motion of the Air, and by any small hair or other
impediment how apt to be put out of their perpendicularity: which by the way
makes me very fearful that all common Instruments have hitherto been liable to
very great errors, by the unaccurate hanging of their plumb lines, being made
for the most part to hang and play against the side of the Instrument. By this
means they would soon come to hang perpendicularly, and be so detained when in
that posture; not being apt to be stirred by the motion of the Air, or their
own swing; and whilst thus steady, I fixed two small arms of Bras, such as are
described in the Seventh Figure by z z, z z, which had small holes at the
extremes, with a small slit on the side to admit or emit the plumb line as
there was occasion; one of these is more at large described in the Sixth
Figure. Now the plumb line being let into the middle of this, I did with all
the accurateness I could so fix the said arm, that the plumb line past exactly
through the middle of the hole y. When I was sufficiently satisfied that the
plumb line past exactly through the middle of the trying arms, I fixed those
arms zz, zz, and removed the plumb lines, then I laid the Mensurator l l in the
Fourth Figure, upon the surface of the Table, and took great care that the
crosses k and l in the Seventh Figure, lay exactly under the middle of the
holes in the arms, which having done by the help of certain screws, I fixed the
Mensurator fast to the Table, and prepared for the observations, putting in the
slider g g in the Fourth Figure, that carried the cell f, and lying down upon a
Counch (k of the Fourth Figure) made purposely for this observation, I could
look directly upward, and with my left hand move the Cell and Eye Glass so as
to find any Star which passed within the hole of the Table, and at the same
time with my right hand I could move the Diagonal thread (r m of the Seventh
Figure) so as to find exactly how far distant from the Zenith e, either
Northwards or Southwards, the Stars past the Meridian d c, and giving notice to
my Assistant to prepare, he upon the sign given took notice exactly by a
Pendulum Clock to the parts of a Second when the said Stars past, and also took
notice what division the Diagonal thread m r cut upon the Rule o p.

With all these difficulties I was forced to adjust the Instrument every
observation I made, both before and after it was made, which has often made me
wish that I were near some great and solid Tower, or some great Rock or deep
well, that so I might fix all things at once, and not be troubled continually
thus to adjust the parts of the said Instrument; for whoever has that
opportunity will, I question not, especially if the lines of his Mensurator be
made of the single clues of a Silkworm, with much ease discover plainly a
change of the distance of Stars of the greater magnitude from the Zenith, in a
much shorter time then six months. This variation also will be much more easy
to be discovered, if instead of a thirty six foot Glass, there be made use of
one of four times that length, to wit, one of one hundred forty four foot; and
if instead of a Tower some deep and dry Well be made use of, such as I have
seen at a Gentleman's house not far from Bansted Downs in Surry, which is dugg
through a body of chalk, and is near three hundred and sixty foot deep, and yet
dry almost to the very bottom: For such a one is much less subject to any kind
of alteration, either from the settling toward this or that side, which most
Towers and high Buildings, whether new or old, are liable to: This also is safe
from bending and shaking with the wind, which I find the strongest Houses,
Towers, and Walls, if of any considerable height, are apt to do, nor would the
wind have any power to swerve the perpendiculars, which it is almost impossible
to prevent in high Buildings above ground. But this I can only wish it were
perfo^^ed, but cannot hope to have any opportunity of Doing it my self. But
certainly the discovery of the observation will abundantly recompense those
that have the curiosity to make it.

Having thus resolved upon the way, and prepared the Instruments sit for the
observation, I began to observe the Transits of the bright Star in the head of
Draco; and always both before and after the observation, I adjusted the
Mensurator by the Perpendiculars, that I might be the more certain of the
exactness of the Instrument; for I often found that when I came to examine the
Instrument, a day, or two, or three, or more, after a former observation, that
there had been wrought a considerable change in the Perpendiculars, in so much
as to vary above a minute from the place where I left them, which I ascribe
chiefly to the warping of the Tube that rose above the roof of the House,
finding sensibly that a warm day would bend it considerably toward the South,
and that a moist Air would make it bend from the quarter of the wind: But yet I
am apt to think there might be somewhat also of that variation ascribable to
the whole Fabric of the Roof, and possibly also to some variation of the
Floors; but yet I never f^und these variations so sudden, as to be perceptible
in the time of a single observation, finding always the preceding and
subsequent adjustings to answer.

The first observation I made was the Sixth of July, 1669. when I observed the
bright Star of Draco to pass the Meridian Northwards of the Zenith point of the
Mensurator, at about two Minutes and twelve Seconds.

The second observation I made was upon the Ninth of July following, when I
found it to pass to the Northwards of the said Zenith or cross of the
Mensurator, near about the same place, not sensibly differing.

The third observation I made upon the Sixth of August following; then I
observed its transitus North of the aforesaid Zenith, to be about two Minutes
and six Seconds.

The last observation I made upon the One and twentieth of October following,
when I observed it to pass to the North of the Zenith, at one Minute and about
48 or 50 Seconds.

Inconvenient weather and great indisposition in my health, hindered me from
proceeding any further with the observation that time, which has been no small
trouble to me, having an extraordinary desire to have made other observations
with much more accurateness then I was able to make these, having since found
several inconveniences in my Instruments, which I have now regulated.

Whether this Zenith so found out upon the Mensurator, be the true Zenith of
Gresham College, is not in this inquiry very material (though that also I
designed to examine, had not an unhappy accident broken my Object Glass before
I could complete the observation) for whether it were, or were not, it is
certain that it always had the same position to the true Zenith, the Object
Glass and Perpendiculars having not been in all that time removed out of the
Cell, whence if the said Object Glass were thicker upon one side then upon the
other (which is very common and very seldom otherwise) and consequently
deflected the ray toward the thicker side, and so made the Perpendicular of
the Mensurator to lie on that side of the true Perpendicular, that the thicker
side of the Object Glass respected, yet it being always so if the transitus of
the Star varied from this false Perpendicular, it must also vary from the true
one. The manner how I designed to examine and find out the true Perpendicular,
is this, which is the way also of adjusting of Telescopical sights, as I shall
afterward have occasion to show. Having marked the four sides of the Glass,
the North with N, the East with E, the South with S, and the West with W, about
the first of June I begin to observe and measure the true distance of some
remarkable fixed Star, as of this of Draco from the Zenith found one night when
the side N of the Glass stood North. Then I change the side of the Object
Glass, and put the North side Southwards, and the South, Northwards, and
observe the Transitus of the same Star the next night, and note down the same;
the third night following I put the East side or E North, and observe the
transit of the same Star over the Meridian; and the fourth night I put the West
side or W North, and observe the transit of the said Star. Now by comparing all
these together, it will be very easy to deduce what the false refraction of
the Object Glass is, and which way it lies, and consequently to regulate the
apparent Zenith by the true one. But this only by the by.

It Is manifest then by the observations of July the Sixth and Ninth: and that
of the One and twentieth of October, that there is a sensible parallax of the
Earths Orb to the fixed Star in the head of Draco, and consequently a
confirmation of the Copernican System against the Ptolomaick and Tichonick.

Before I leave this Discourse, I must not forget to take notice of some things
which are very remarkable in the last observation made upon the 21 of October.
And those were these. First, that about 17 minutes after three a-clock the same
day, the Sun being then a good way above the Horizon, and shining very clear
into the Room where I lay to observe, and having nothing to screen off the
rays of light, either in the Room where I was, or in the next Room through
which I looked, I observed the bright Star in the Dragons head to pass by the
Zenith as distinctly and clearly as if the Sun had been set, though I must
confess it had lost much of the glaring brightness and magnitude it was wont to
have in the night, and its concomitants were vanished: The like I found it
diverse other days before, when I observed it, the Sun shining very clear into
both the aforesaid Rooms, which by the way I suppose was the first time that
the fixed Stars were seen when the Sun shined very bright, without any obscuring
of its light by Eclipse or otherwise. And though we have a great tradition that
the Stars may be seen with the naked eye out of a very deep Well or Mine in the
day, yet I judge it impossible, and to have been a mere fiction, without any
ground: For the being placed at the bottom of a Well does not at all take away
the light of the Atmosphere from affecting the eye in and near the Axis of
vision, though indeed the sides thereof may much take off the lateral rays;
but unless the radiation of the false rays of the Star be brighter then that
of the Air, the true rays from the body are so very small, that it is
impossible the naked eye should ever be affected by them. For in the second
place, by this observation of the Star in the day time when the Sun shined,
with my 36 foot Glass I found the body of the Star so very small, that it was
but some few thirds in Diameter, all the spurious rays that do beard it in the
night being clearly shaved away, and the naked body thereof left a very small
white point.

The smalness of this body thus discovered does very fully answer a grand
objection alleged by diverse of the great Anti-copernicans with great vehemence
and insulting; amongst which we may reckon Ricciolus and Tacquet, who would
fain make the apparent Diameters of the Stars so big, as that the body of the
Star should contain the great Orb many times, which would indeed swell the
Stars to a magnitude vastly bigger then the Sun, thereby hoping to make it seem
so improbable, as to be rejected by all parties. But they that shall by this
means examine the Diameter of the fixed Stars, will find them so very small,
that according to these distances and Parallax they will not much differ in
magnitude from the body of the Sun, some of them proving bigger, but others
proving less; for the Diameter of the parallactical Circle among the fixed
Stars, seems to exceed the Diameter of the Star almost as much as the Diameter
of the annual Orb of the Earth does that of the Sun. And possibly longer and
better Telescopes will yet much diminish the apparent bulk of the Stars by
bringing fewer false rays to the eye that are the occasion of the glaring and
magnifying of the said bodies. It may for the present suffice to show that even
with this Glass we find the Diameter of this Star considerably smaller then a
Second, and the Parallax we judge may be about 27 or 30 Seconds. It will not
therefore be difficult to find many Stars whose Diameters shall be less then a
two hundredth part of this Parallax, as possibly upon more accurate observation
this very Star may be found to be. Now we find that the Diameter of the Orb of
the Earth is but two hundred times bigger then the Diameter of the Sun in the
Center thereof; and therefore if the parallactical difference be found to be
two hundred times more then the visible Diameter of the Star, the Star will
prove but of the same magnitude with the Sun.

This Discovery of the possibility and facility of seeing the fixed Stars in the
day time when the Sun shines, as I think it is the first instance that has
been given of this kind, so I judge it will be a discovery of great use for the
perfecting Astronomy; as first, for the rectifying the true place of the Sun in
the Ecliptic at any time of the year; for since by this means it is easy to
find any Star of the first, second, or third magnitude at any time of the day,
if it be above the Horizon, and not too near the body of the Sun: And since by
a way I shall shortly publish any Angle to a Semicircle in the Heavens, may be
taken to the exactness of a Second by one single observator: It will not be
difficult for future Observators to rectify the apparent place of the Sun
amongst the fixed Stars to a Second, or very near, which is one hundred times
greater accurateness, then has hitherto been attained by the best Astronomers.
The like use there may be made of it for observing any notable appulse of
the,,,, and, to any notable fixed Star that shall happen in the day time, which
may serve for discovering their true places and parallaxes. The Refractions
also of the Air in the day time may by this means be experimentally detected.

I should have here described some Clocks and Time-keepers of great use, nay
absolute necessity in these and many other Astronomical observations, but that
I reserve them for some attempts that are hereafter to follow, about the
various ways I have tried, not without good success of improving Clocks and
Watches, and adapting them for various uses, as for accurating Astronomy,
completing the Tables of the fixed Stars to Seconds, discovery of Longitude,
regulating Navigation and Geography, detecting the proprieties and effects of
motions for promoting secret and swift conveyance and correspondence, and many
other considerable scrutinies of nature: And shall only for the present hint
that I have in some of my foregoing observations discovered some new Motions
even in the Earth it self, which perhaps were not dreamt of before, which I
shall hereafter more at large describe, when further trials have more fully
confirmed and completed these beginings. At which time also I shall explain a
System of the World differing in many particulars from any yet known, answering
in all things to the common Rules of Mechanical Motions: This depends upon
three Suppositions. First, That all Celestial Bodies whatsoever, have an
attraction or gravitating power toward their own Centers, whereby they attract
not only their own parts, and keep them from flying from them, as we may
observe the Earth to do, but that they do also attract all the other Celestial
Bodies that are within the sphere of their activity; and consequently that not
only the Sun and Moon have an influence upon the body and motion of the Earth,
and the Earth upon them, but that also,,, and by their attractive powers, have
a considerable influence upon its motion as in the same manner the
corresponding attractive power of the Earth has a considerable influence upon
every one of their motions also. The second supposition is this, That all
bodies whatsoever that are put into a direct and simple motion, will so
continue to move forward in a straight line, till they are by some other
effectual powers deflected and bent into a Motion, describing a Circle,
Ellipsis, or some other more compounded Curve Line. The third supposition is,
That these attractive powers are so much the more powerful in operating, by how
much the nearer the body wrought upon is to their own Centers. Now what these
several degrees are I have not yet experimentally verified; but it is a notion,
which if fully prosecuted as it ought to be, will mightily assist the
Astronomer to reduce all the Celestial Motions to a certain rule, which I
doubt will never be done true without it. He that understands the nature of the
Circular Pendulum and Circular Motion, will easily understand the whole ground
of this Principle, and will know where to find direction in Nature for the true
stating thereof. This I only hint at present to such as have ability and
opportunity of prosecuting this Inquiry, and are not wanting of Industry for
observing and calculating, wishing heartily such may be found, having my self
many other things in hand which I would first complete, and therefore cannot so
well attend it. But this I durst promise the Undertaker, that he will find all
the great Motions of the World to be influenced by this Principle, and that the
true understanding thereof will be the true perfection of Astronomy.

LONDON, Printed for John Martyn, Printer to the Royal Society. 1674.

ANIMADVERSIONS On the first part of the MACHINA COELESTIS Of the Honorable,
Learned, and deservedly Famous Astronomer JOHANNES HEVELIVS CONSUL OF DANTZICK;
Together with an Explication of some INSTRUMENTS MADE BY ROBERT HOOK,
Professor of Geometry in Gresham College, and Fellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON, Printed by T.R. for John Martyn Printer to the Royal Society, at the
Bell in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1674.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Reason of the present Animadversions. page 1. How far Hevelius has
proceeded. That his Instruments do not much exceed Ticho. The bigness, Sights
and Divisions, not considerably differing. Ticho not ignorant of his new way of
Division. p. 2. Proved by several passages out of his Works. p. 3, 4. That so
great curiosity as Hevelius strives for is needless without the use of
Telescopical Sights, the power of the naked eye being limited. That no one part
of an Instrument should be more perfect then another. p. 4, 5. Hevelius his
Letter of 1665. with his opinion of Telescopical Sights. p. 5, 6. That if
Hevelius could have been prevailed on by the Author to have used Telescope
Sights, his Observations might have been 40 times more exact then they are. p
6, 7. That Hevelius his Objections against Telescope Sights are of no validity;
but that Sights without Telescopes cannot distinguish a less Angle then half a
Minute. p. 7. That an Instrument of 3 foot Radius with Telescopes, will do more
then one of 3 score foot Radius with common Sights, the eye being unable to
distinguish. This is proved by the undiscernableness of spots in the Moon, and
by an Experiment with Lines on a paper, by which a Standard is made of the
power of the eye. p. 8. That it had been much to be wished that Ticho and
Hevelius had, and that Observators for the future would, well consider this. p.
9. That Altitudes of the Sun and some of the Moon may have been taken to
greater exactness, but still short of what may be done with Telescopes. ibid.
The Author's Engagement for describing an Instrument more perfect in 7
particulars. p. 10. A more particular Examination of Hevelius his Instruments,
and first of his first Instrument, being a brass Quadrant. Hevelius having a
very great aversion to Glass-Sights, used common. p. 11. Took great pains in
the dividing it himself. p. 12. Of which he might have spared almost 80/90, if
he had known either the first way of Diagonal Divisions, described in p. 12,
13. or the second way described and exemplified. p. 14, 15. Some inconveniences
in the Contrivances about his first Instrument. p. 16. A Description of his
second, third, fourth, fifth, and sixth Instruments, and some of their
conveniences and inconveniences noted. p. 16, 17. Hevelius wholly rejecting all
wooden Instruments, made better of Brass and Iron. p. 18. That notwithstanding
there may be a good use made of Wood for the material of Instruments. Proved by
the Experiment of an Instrument made long since by Sr. Chapter Wren. ibid. Hevelius
his Reason for rejecting the use of wood-Instruments, not without some
exceptions. p. 19. Animadversions on the Description of three smaller metalline
Instruments, one of 24, a second of 18, and a third of 12 inches, and
particularly about the new way of Division, which he ascribes to Benedictus
Hedreus. p. 20. That Hevelius was mistaken in supposing Hedreus his way more
capable of Demonstration then Ticho's by Diagonals. p. 21. Ticho Brahe's
Calculation of the quantity of Angles, made by Diagonals and equidistant
parallel Circles. p 21, 22. It Is strange that Ticho and Hevelius should not
think of putting the parallel Circles at unequal Distances. ibid. How to
calculate, and what those unequal Distances are. p. 23. Dr. Wallis his Letter
to Hevelius about the same Subject, wherein that Doctrine is largely and fully
handled. p. 23. 24, 25, 26 The Diagonal Divisions more easy to be seen then
those of Hedreus or Nonnius. Ticho's Description of Nonnius his way of
Division. p 27. Hevelius his Description of the way of Hedreus. p. 28. That
this way of Hedreus is subject to great inequalities, proved by the Divisions
on the Plate T. of Hevelius his Book. A practicable way of enlarging the small
Divisions. p. 29. That Hedreus was not the first inventer of this way of
Division, but Pierre Vernier was before him. p. 30. A second, third, and fourth
Objection against this way of Divisions, drawn from a supposed unequal poise of
the Plumb-Rule, caused by its unequal make or dust, or from the unpracticable
way of hanging it either on a smaller or bigger Pin or Hole. ibid. Hevelius his
invention for steadying the Quadrant ingenious, but the convertible Frame more
easy for use. p. 31. Some Remarks in the Description of his large brass
Quadrant, wherewith he took many Meridian Altitudes of the Sun. ibid. A new way
hinted for making a Table of the fixed Stars, and regulating their places, by
the help of a Mural Quadrant, some parts whereof are described as the way of
Dividing, and of the Sights, and of poysing the Tube and Observator, and of
keeping the Tube from bending, etc. p. 32, 33. Some Difficulties therein now
obviated, and some Objections answered ibid. That this Subject deserves to be
better enquired into, and to be promoted by some Prince. p. 34. Some
Animadversions on the Description of Hevelius his large Quadrant of Brass. That
the Instrument is good in its kind, but yet far short of what it might have
been, if Glasses had been used for the Sights. ibid. How very small Seconds are
even upon large Instruments, and how uncertain the Penumbra of the Sun's light
is, contrary to the general Principles of Optical Writers, being sometimes
bigger, sometimes less, according to the smalness and bigness of the hole
through which it is trajected. p. 35. The curiosity of this Instrument further
expressed by Hevelius, in the multitude of its parts and Contrivances, in the
proper Turret for it, in the make and great use of Screws, for moving, fixing
and dividing the Quadrant. p. 36. Some Objections and Emendations propounded,
and a Conclusion on the whole Instrument and Apparatus. p. 36, 37. Some
Animadversions on the large Sextant, and the way of using it, and on the
difficulty acknowledged of taking Stars Distances from the Moon and Sun, and a
way promised of doing them with more ease. p. 38. The seeming difficulty and
even impossibility of taking 8 several Distances in the Heavens, without
failing one Second, and the reason why it is more likely that there could not be
a greater certainty then of 4 Minutes in the whole. ibid. Hevelius his Letter
concerning my Animadversions, and about Telescopical Sights. p. 39, 40, 41. An
Answer to it. p. 41, 42, 43. A Conclusion of the Animadversions. That the
learned World is obliged to Hevelius for what he has done, but would have been
more, if he had used other Instruments. p. 43, 44. That the Animadvertor has
contrived some hundreds of Instruments, each of very great accurateness for
taking Angles, Levels, etc. and a particular Arithmetical Instrument for
performing all Operations in Arithmetic, with the greatest ease, swiftness and
certainty imaginable. p. 44, 45. That the Reader may be the more certain of
this, the Author describes an Instrument for taking Angles in the Heavens,
whose perfection more then common consists, 1. In the manifesting of the
Sights. 2. In the Divisions. 3. In the reflective construction of the Sights.
4. In its exact Perpendicularity. 5. In its fixation and motion fit for
Observations. 6. In its facility for make; and 7. In its cheapness. p. 45, 46.
An Explication of the make and singular conveniences of these new Sights. p.
46, 47, 48. An Explication of the new way of Dividing, and the great advantages
of it above others. p. 48, 49, 50. Made more easy by the Explication of the
Delineation in the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, and 11th. Figures, expressing
the Frame, hollow Center, Moveable arm, Screw-Frame, and Screw for the
Divisions. The Obliquity of it to the Plain of the Quadrant, and the reason
thereof. p. 51, 52. The way of certainly-determining the Obliquity, and the
resolving the whole Quadrant thereby into one grand Diagonal, and the
magnifying thereof in a duple, triple, decuple, etc. Proportion. p. 53. Then
follows a more particular Description of the Screw-Frame, its Collers, Centers,
Screws, Handles, Indices, Pinnion, Divisions, etc. p. 53, 54. How by these
Indices is pointed our the Measure of the angle, in Degrees, Minutes, Seconds,
etc. p. 55. The great advantage of these new ways of ordering Sights taken
notice of. ibid. And the whole Contrivance more particularly described. p. 56.
And explained by a Delineation, and the manner how they are applicable to a
Quadrant or other Instrument. p. 57. How they are made use of for taking an
angle bigger then a Quadrant, is farther described, and made more intelligible
by a Delineation. p. 58. The way of adjusting the two fixed Sights, so as to
look forwards and backwards exactly in a right Line, and how to adjust and fix
the Sight-Threads in the Tubes, with the reason thereof. p. 59, 60. A
Description of the Water-Level, for setting the Instrument exactly Horizontal.
Some Difficulties, and the way of preventing them proposed. p. 61, 62. This
Instrument farther explained by a Delineation, and the reason of its
accurateness manifested. p. 63. Some Difficulties about the make of the Glasses
for these Levels, and some Expedients propounded, together with other ways and
forms of Levels. p. 64, 65. After the Difficulties of Observations made the old
ways are taken notice of, follows the Description of a new Method of moving and
fixing Instruments for Observations, so as to prevent and obviate them. p. 66,
67, 68. This is made more plain by a Delineation and Explication. p. 69. When
the Circular Pendulum was first invented and published. p. 69, 70. Here by the
way is published a Description of Wheel-work, which may be called the
perfection of Wheel-work, having the perfectest Idea that toothed Wheel-work is
capable of, performing the same effect as if the Wheel and Pinnion had an
indefinite number of Teeth. p. 70, 71. A farther Explanation of the Pole or
Conical hole of the axis. p. 72. A Description of the Frame for keeping the
Instrument in its Perpendicularity, and yet always in the azimuth of the
celestial Object, with a Digression of the great use of this Principle in
Dralling, equalling Time, Clock-work, etc. p. 73. The way of finding an exact
right angle or Quadrant, more particularly described and explained. An
Objection about the inequality of the Divisions answered. p. 74, 75. Some Uses
of this Instrument hinted: 1. For measuring the Refraction of the air. 2. For
regulating the place of the fixed Stars. 3. Of the Planets. 4. For stating the
Latitude of places. 5. For examining the influence of the Planets on the Earth.
6. For measuring a Degree, which was the cause of its Contrivance. 7. For
measuring seen Distances. 8. For taking the Diamenters of the Sun, Moon and
Planets.
p. 77. Where by the By are mentioned two other Instruments; one for taking
Diameters to Seconds; and a second for looking on the Body of the Sun, without
harming the eyes. p. 78. A ninth Use for Levelling, etc. with a short
Conclusion. ibid.






SOME ANIMADVERSIONS On the first Part of HEVELIVS His MACHINA COELESTIS, etc.
HAVING lately perused a Discourse of Hevelius, newly published, entitled,
Johannis Hevelii Machina Coelestis, pars prior Organographiam sive
instrumentorum Astronomicorum omnium quibus Author hactenus sidera rimatus and
dimensus est accuratam delineationem and descriptionem plurimis Iconibus aeri
incisis illustratam and exornatam exhibens, etc. and finding it a Discourse
about practical and mechanical Knowledge, and of that kind wherein Geometry
seems to be more then ordinarily concerned; I thought it might not be
ungrateful to my Auditory, ( nor improper to the Subject of Sr. JOHN CUTLER 's
Lecture, which is partly Mechanical and partly Physical) to consider a little
the Contents thereof: And somewhat the rather too, because having heretofore
communicated to him somewhat of this Subject, which I had occasion to read in
this place in one of my former CUTLERIAN Lectures, I find he has made some
Animadversions and reflections thereupon.

I find then that this excellent Person has been for the most part exceedingly
circumspect, to find out the inconveniences and difficulties that do accrue to
the best Observators, even with the best instruments, and has not been less
industrious to find out ways to obviate and overcome them; In the doing of
which, he seems not to have spared either for labor and vigilance, or for any
cost and charges that might effect his purpose, for which he has highly
merited the esteem of all such as are lovers of that Science: But yet if he had
prosecuted that way of improving Astronomical instruments, which I long since
communicated to him, I am of opinion he would have done himself and the learned
World a much greater piece of service, by saving himself more then 1/10 of the
charge and trouble, and by publishing a Catalogue ten times more accurate. For
though I doubt not in the least but that he has by his own extraordinary
diligence, care and cost, corrected several mistakes and errors committed by
the assistants of the Noble Ticho: yet I am not satisfied that his Instruments
are capable of making Observations more accurately then those of Ticho, though
it is possible they may do it with somewhat less trouble and inconvenience. For
first, I find that those of Ticho were as large as those of Hevelius, and
consequently were capable of as accurate and minute divisions, and of as long
and convenient Sights. Secondly, I find that the Sights made use of by Hevelius
are the very same, at least not at all materially differing from those of
Ticho, being only naked Sights, made by a slit and edge, serving only to
regulate the direction of the naked eye, but no ways capable of assisting the
eye to distinguish more accurately the object. Thirdly, I find that though the
way of Division made use of by Hevelius, be a very ingenious invention, and
that which is Geometrically true and certain, yet if we consider the great
difficulty there is in Mechanically performing it, we shall find it not much
preferrable, if altogether as good as that of Ticho. And it is plain enough that
Ticho himself was not ignorant of it, though his particular reasons why he made
no more use of it, we certainly know not: It Is very probable, because he
thought it not altogether so accurate, as that he did make use of. For somewhat
to this purpose he says himself, in the second Book of his Observations of the
Comet of 1577. page 461. Hanc graduum in singula minuta, meaning the Division
by Diagonal Lines; and etiam horum in dena scrupula secunda subdivisionem in
omnibus meis machinis Astronomicis usurpo, eo quod illam multis ab hinc annis
exquisitissimam expertus sum. Licet enim ejus demonstratio in Rectilineis
parallelogrammis proprie conveniat, nihilominus arcualibus etiam in tam exili
interstitio quod a recta linea insensibiliter differt, citra omne erroris
vestigium convenienter applicatur. It Is true, Ticho's Objection against this
way of Division by Diagonals is material, as to a Geometrical accurateness, but
his Answer to it is altogether as material, that though it be not exactly true,
yet it does insensibiliter differ, and so long as the error is not discovered
by sense, there can be no error committed in observation; and indeed the whole
matter both one way and the other is insignificant, and but a vain curiosity to
endeavor to divide an instrument into seconds, or parts smaller then a minute,
for I shall by and by show that the eye can hardly distinguish minutes in the
object: But were such niceness of Division of any use, it is easily enough to be
done to Mathematical truth; for as I shall anon show, there is a certain
distance of each of the parallel Circles, which being given, the straight
Diagonal Lines will divide the degree, by the intersection with those parallel
Circles, into exactly equal parts, which would have better answered Ticho's
Objection, had he known it, which I wonder, I confess, how he could over-see,
since he seems to have spent many thoughts on the matter; but this only by the
By, because I shall speak more at large of it afterward. But he proceeds to
this other way of Divisions, which he, as well as Hevelius, ascribes to
Nonnius, whereas the other that he approves of came first from England, as it
appears by a passage in another Book of his, where he discourses somewhat of
the same Subject.

Altera Divisio ad clarissimi Mathematici Petri Nonnii in Libello de
crepusculis propositione tertia imitationem per plures quadrantis arcus
introrsum descriptos, and diversimode subdivisos procedit; etsi autem in hac
ipsa apprime ingeniosa Nonnii inventione aliquid Auctuarii loco expeditius a
nobis additum est, ita ut exterior arcus in plurimas partiunculas dividatur,
neque is ordo aut numerus arcuum sese introrsum concomitantium quem ille
praesinivit sed multo expeditior and perfectior observetur; ( I am apt to think
he knew this very way, and here hints it:) Tamen quia haec subtilitas cum ad
praxin deventum est plus habeat laboris quam fructus, neque id in recessu
praestet quod prima front pollicetur, ut alibi before ostendemus, idcirco
apud nos dudum in usu esse desiit. From which words, and also from what he says
in his first Book of the new Star in 1572. page 671, speaking of the comparison
between these two ways of Divisions, to wit, Sit cujuscunque velit ingeniosa
certe and apprime utilis est distributio, quam and ego postea arcualibus
graduum divisionibus in quadrantibus sextantibus and armillis, non inconcinne
aut infrugifere applicui. Licet enim demonstratio ejus in solis rectilineis
superficiebus ad unguem se habeat; tamen cum quinorum vel denorum minutorum
spatium in circumferentiis majusculis a rectilineo insensibiliter differat, hic
quoque ejus usus satis commodus and ratus esse poterit, multoque Nonniana
plurimorum arcuum intricata and difficili subdivisione expeditior aptiorque
deprehenditur. From his Discourse I say in these two places, and from several
others dispersed up and down his Works, which 'twould be too long now to quote,
it is evident that Ticho was not ignorant of this way of Sub-division, so much
applauded by Hevelius, invented by Petrus Nonnius, and promoted by Ticho
himself; and yet we see he preferred that way of Diagonals, first made use of in
England by the most skilful Mathematician Richard Cantzler, before it,
rejecting the one and making use of the other in all his Instruments. But
either of them will do well enough if the Divisions be done with great
circumspection and care, and instruments of the size of those larger ones both
of Hevelius and Ticho, are capable of Divisions ten times more accurate then
are needful for common Sights, be they never so long, without making use of
either Ticho's or Hevelius's way of Division, the eye being unable to
distinguish a smaller Angle. To what purpose therefore is it to make the
Divisions so fine, or any one part of the instrument or observation more
accurate then another? since the power of distinguishing by the naked eye is
that which bounds and limits all the other niceness, and whatever part is more
curious then that can equalize, is of no significancy. For instance, in taking
the altitude of a Star, it would be but labor lost to distinguish by the
Diagonals, or otherwise to Seconds, whilst in the mean time you are not certain
that the Plumb-line is true to a minute, or whilst you are not able to direct
the Ruler, bearing the Sights to a greater certainty then to that of a minute.
And the like might be said of the extraordinary curiosity in any two parts, and
the failure in any third, that is essential to an observation; as fruitless it
is to calculate to seconds, when the observations are not true to minutes, or
to be certain by the Sights and Divisions to seconds, and uncertain in the
Plumb-line to minutes.

There is therefore one thing in Hevelius his Instruments, that though they be
never so large, never so accurately divided, of never so choice and convenient
materials, and never so tractable for use, and never so skilfully and
industriously used, will notwithstanding make them all equal as to use, with
one of about two or three foot radius of metal with Ticho's Sights and
Diagonal Divisions, which is occasioned by the limited power of distinguishing
by the naked eye.

Something to this purpose I communicated to Hevelius in the year 65. and hoped
that I might have thereby somewhat assisted him in his great and laborious
Work, first by easing the eye, and next by making it capable of distinguishing
more exactly, I having hinted to him the way how to reform and obviate that
inconvenience by Telescopical or Perspective Sights, as also the way of making
instruments of much less bulk, to do ten times more then 'twas possible to do
with the largest instruments made the common way. In answer to which he returns
me this Discourse, in a Letter to the Royal Society, in the year 65.

MODUS ille observandi per Telescopia adminiculo Sextantis vel Quadrantis,
videtur mihi vix adeo tutus, quam vulgaris, si pinnacidia recte ac just sint
affixa. Haec enim sunt immobilia; Telescopia vero nulla ratione adeo firmiter
affigi possunt ut loco haud dimoveantur; etiamsi omni diligentia juxta methodum
descriptum per totum Horizontem experiundo sint semel collocata. Adhuc quam
arduum sit, ea ratione-verum eorum locum indagare, satis superque expertus sum;
sicut vix videam, an alicui circa restitutionem Fixarum Planetarumque
adminiculo esse possint; in majoribus scilicet illis distantiis capiendis: In
minoribus, largior, posse aliquid praestari; sed an Instrumenta, unius
Spithamae radio instructa, elaborari possint multo exactius, quam optima
quoevis, vulgares Dioptras habentia, licet 60 pedum radio elaborata, nollem
adhuc asseverare. Multa namque in Theoria videntur certissima, quae in praxi
satis long nonnumquam a vero recedunt. Si quis mihi certas observationes
quarundam distantiarum and quidem Fixarum, circa Eclipticam and Aequatorem
existentium, illis ipsis Instrumentis, Dioptris Telescopicis instructis habitas
exhiberet: (utpote distantiam Lucidae a Palilicio; Palilicii a Polluce;
Pollucis a Regulo; Reguli a Spica Spicae a Boreal. sinist. manus Serpentarii;
Boreal sinist. manus Serpentarii ab Aquila Aquila a Marcab; and Marcab a Lucida
Arietis) vellem protinus de rei illius certitadine and meum quale quale
judicium far; sed antequam eas observationes obtineam, judicium suspendo.
Interea utiq fateor; si quis adminiculo minoris cujusdam Instrumenti
observationes corporum Coelestium peragere potest, multo sane illum esse
feliciorem, variis de causis, eo, qui per majora id praestare allaborat.
Rations dividendi Instrumenta, diversae quidem mihi probe cognitae sunt;
easque etiam in usum transtuli; number autem sint eaedem quas Clarissimus Dominus
Hookius novit, ac invenit, me prorsus latet: Si illi non adversum est, rogo, ut
praecipuas communicet, ego ut meas intelligat rursus studebo.

Since which time I have not sent any other description of instruments, save
that of the manner of making and using a Tube for a 60 foot Glass, which I am
much pleased to find he makes use of, and should gladly have communicated any
thing further, if I had not found they were esteemed insignificant. It did much
trouble me, I confess, that I could not prevail with him to make use of
Telescopical Sights at least, since with less trouble he would have afforded
the World Observations, and a Catalogue of the Stars, ten times more exact. And
I am the more sorry to find that he has proceeded to finish his Machina
Coelestis, by instruments not more accurate then those of Ticho, and that he
still remains in the same opinion of Telescopical Sights, and other
improvements of instruments. For page 293. of this first Part of his Machina
Coelestis, speaking concerning Sights, he says, Possibly some may wonder that I
do not make use of Telescopical Sights, since they are by some accounted better
and more accurate, insomuch that there is one in the World has proceeded so
far, as to suppose Telescopical Sights to be ten, twenty, thirty, nay forty
times more accurate then the common Sights; and that it is possible to make an
instrument of a Span Radius to do more with Telescopical Sights, then an
instrument of 60 foot with the common Sights. 'Twould be a thing of much moment
could it be done, and not to be valued by money, but many things do seem true
in the Theory, which do not answer upon Experience. You may perceive by
comparing this slender Refutation with his Letter before, who he means by the
Assertor of Telescopical Sights. But I am troubled he should think them so
slight as not to deserve one trial in seven years time, especially since by
explaining the manner of making use of them much in the same sense with that
which I sent him, he seems to have understood enough of the way to have made
use of it if he would. As to his Objection, That the Glasses are apt to be
broke, and the Pins or Threads are apt to be bent and broke, there is not the
least color for it, for they cannot without much labor and design be broken
or put out of order, but if they were, it might as well be said, that the
Plumb-line of any of his instruments may be broken, or his Sights bended, and
the like, and therefore those instruments, were not to be used. But these
Objections I shall not urge against his instruments, nor a great many other I
could produce of lesser moment, but only this one which is very fundamental,
and cannot any ways be helped but by the help of Glasses, and that is, It Is
impossible with Sights made after Ticho's or Hevelius his way, to distinguish
any distance in the Heavens less then half a minute, or thirty Seconds, and
hardly one of a hundred can distinguish a minute.

And this being proved, what will become of all the machinations and
contrivances for greater instruments, to show the Divisions of single or double
Seconds? May not single minutes, nay half minutes, by the help of Diagonal
Divisions, be sufficiently di^tinguished in an instrument of three foot Radius?
What need is there then of all the other cumber? Certainly any one that will
but try with the one and the other instrument, will find himself able to do as
much with an instrument of three foot, as with one of threescore, since the eye
cannot distinguish a less Angle, at least none that I have yet met with
hitherto. Who is there that by his bare eye can distinguish any of the
Telescopical spots in the Moon, though some of them are above a minute in
Diameter? As for instance, Who can see Mount Sinai, so called by Hevelius,
which is a bright spot in a dark field, and consequently must appear near two
minutes in Diameter to the naked eye? Or who can see the Palus Mareotis, or the
Lacus niger, which are two dark spots in light fields, and each more then a
minute in Diameter? Now if the eye cannot distinguish a smaller object then
appears within the angle of half a minute, it is not possible to make any
observation more accurate, be the instrument never so large.

Now that any one may presently satisfy himself of the truth of the I assert,
concerning the limited power of the naked eye, as to the distinguishing of
Angles; Let him take a sheet of white Paper, and thereon draw two parallel
Lines, as O O, and P P, in the 28th. Figure, at four of five inches distance,
then draw as many other small lines between them at right angles to them, and
parallel one with another, as he thinks convenient, as aa, bb, cc, dd, ee, ff,
gg, hh, ii, etc. and let them be drawn distant from each other an inch, then
let him alternately blacken or shadow the spaces between them, as between aa
and bb, between cc and dd, between ee and ff, between gg and hh, between ii and
kk, between ll and mm, etc. leaving the other alternately white, then let him
expose this Paper against a Wall open to the light, and if it may be so that
the Sun may shine on it, and removing himself backwards for the space of 287
feet, let him try whether he can distinguish it, and number the dark and light
spaces, and if his eyes be so good that he can, then let him still go further
backwards and backwards from the same, till he finds his eyes unable any longer
to distinguish those Divisions, there let him make a stand, and measure the
distance from his eye to the aforesaid Paper, and try by calculation under what
Angle each of those black and while spaces appears to his eye, for by that
means it will be manifest how small an Angle his eye is capable of
distinguishing, and beyond which it cannot reach: Which being once known, he
has a Standard, by which he is able to limit the bigness and exactness of his
Instruments, if he make use of common Sights, beyond which all magnitude and
curiosity is not only useless, but of much detriment upon many accounts.

This is that Consideration which I could wish had occurred both to Ticho Brahe
and to Hevelius, especially to the latter, who has so earnestly endeavored to
outdo the former, and for the accomplishment thereof, seems to have spared no
charge, labor, or endeavor he was able to expend. I hope at least that this
public notice will for the future engage all such as shall attempt this Work,
to be as sollicitous about assisting the Eye in the discovery of the parts of
the Object, as of distinguishing the Divisions of the Instrument, for the doing
of the one without being able to reach the other, will avail nothing.

Those therefore that desire or need Instruments to make Observations to
Seconds, must take another course then any that I know yet described. It Is true
indeed, That Altitudes of the Sun may be taken, with the Sights commonly used
for that purpose, to what accurateness is desired, if the Instrument be large
enough, because the Image of the Sun being transmitted by the upper Sight
through a small round hole, is represented within a Circle upon the lower
Sight, and by means of the eyes approaching near that Sight, it is possible by
Instruments large enough, to arrive at the accurateness of a Second, in
Observations made of that kind. And somewhat of this may be done also by the
Moon, when very bright and clear, but in all the other celestial Bodies it has
never yet been done.

But then if we compare even this way with that of Telescopes, caeteris
paribus, we shall find it much short, both as to clearness and distinctness,
and therefore even here also Telescopical Sights are to be preferred, as I
shall sufficiently manifest hereafter more at large, when I come to describe my
own Instruments for this purpose; for I doubt not but to make it sufficiently
plain, That by the help of an Instrument I have contrived, of three foot
Radius, I will be able to make all Observations whatsoever, ten times more
accurate, excepting those of the Sun, then any one can make with the largest
Instrument, described either by Ticho or Hevelius, and to manage the same with
a quarter the trouble, clutter, and Apparatus necessary to either of theirs,
and to make the Divisions as accurate and sensible as can be desired.

For the doing of which, I will show, First, How to make the Plain of the
Instrument, that it shall not be subject to bending or warping, and yet be so
light as to be easily manageable. Secondly, How to make the Divisions on that
Instrument, so as to distinguish certainly and exactly to Seconds, without any
trouble, or wearying the sight. Thirdly, I will show how to make the Sights of
that Instrument, so as to distinguish the parts of the Object to Seconds, if
need be, even by those who cannot distinguish to Minutes with common Sights,
certainly, and without fallacy or error. Fourthly, How to make the Sights, so
as to see two Objects, though never so far distant, with one glance of the eye.
And Fifthly, I will show how to adjust the Perpendicular, so as to set it
exactly upright and plain to a Second, so that if it meets with a diligent,
accurate, and experienced Observator, it will serve to make as curious
Observations as are hitherto desirable. Sixthly, I will show a way how to fix
this Instrument, either for taking Altitudes or Azimiths, so as to be
manageable with the least trouble imaginable, for Observations of that kind,
and to be always steady and fixed in any Perpendicular posture, to whatever
Azimith it be applied. Seventhly, I will explain an exact way for fixing the
Instrument, so as to take the Distances of any two Stars, or celestial Object,
and several other contrivances of the like nature. But of each of these
hereafter, after I have examined over the several particulars mentioned by
Hevelius, in his Descriptions of the Instruments and Contrivances made use of
by himself.

To pass by then his long Preface, and the Discourse of Instruments in general,
which he has premised in the first Chapter; I shall proceed to an examination
of those Instruments of his own, which he does more fully and particularly
describe.

The first of which kind I find to be a Quadrant of Brass, which he describes
in the second Chapter, and begins with that first, as being an Instrument which
he least esteemed, and which at length he made no use of, though for many
Reasons I think of a quantity big enough, to be as good, nay better, then any
he made use of. But of that anon.

This Brass Quadrant was of three foot Radius, and so well fitted with cross
Bars, and strengthened, that it was not subject to warp or bend; it had also a
convenient Pedestal, and was made easy to be removed from place to place; it
was suspended by a Cylinder placed on the backside, in the Center of Gravity
of the Quadrant, and could by this means more easily be moved to and fro to
take any Altitude, then that way of Ticho's, who fixed his Cylinder at the upper
corner: But it has this of inconvenience that Ticho's has not, namely, That
the Plumb-Line or Perpendicular will be longer before it settle, and the
Instrument somewhat more apt to warp. The Sights of it are the same with that
of Ticho, and indeed the best of Common Sights, now commonly every where made
use of in Instruments of that bigness, but far inferior to those which are made
of Glasses, as I shall afterward prove.

The way of Sights which he describes, page 98. for taking the Altitude of the
Sun, is very good, but yet far inferior to one fitted with the Object-Glass of
a Telescope, though he had omitted the Tube, for he might thereby have enlarged
the hole of the upper Sight to what bigness he pleased, and consequently have
made the image of the Sun as bright as it should be thought convenient, and
that without any manner of Penumbra, if the lower Sight were placed at the due
distance of the Focus of that Object-Glass. And therefore I do wonder at his
carefulness to inform his Reader aright, for fear he should understand a
Telescope by the Tube he made use of, to keep off the adventitious light from
the lower Sight, saying, page 99. Per Tubum autem mi Lector non intelligo
Telescopium aliquod lentibus instructum, sed plane nudum ex charta constructum
Tubulum, as if he had some dread of making use of Glasses in any of his Sights.
Whether it were, that he supposed Glasses to have some hidden, un-intelligible,
and mysterious way of representing the Object, or whether from their fragility,
or from their uncertain refraction, or from a supposed impossibility of fixing
them to the Sights, or whether from some other mysterious cause, which I am not
able to think of or imagine, I cannot tell. Sure I am, that none of these I
have named, are any thing at all considerable Objections against their use, and
I have been so fully satisfied of the exceeding great use, nay absolute
necessity of them in curious and exact Observations, that I do assure him there
is not, nor can be any considerable Objection against them, which cannot easily
be answered, nor any inconvenience, which cannot with ease be obviated and
rectified; of which I shall say more hereafter.

The Divisions of it were made wholly by himself, with extraordinary labor and
curiosity, insomuch that he says, he could not only distinguish each minute of
a Degree, but almost every quarter of a minute, sufficiently accurate for his
Common Sights, if he could have only distinguished every half minute, and
indeed much more then most men's eyes are able to reach. He seems to have been
at infinite trouble and pains, to perform the Divisions made by the help of
Diagonals, cutting parallel Circles, a way made use of by Ticho, and now so
commonly known, that I think I need not spend time in the Explication thereof;
only I must take notice, That whereas he supposes these Circles to be equally
distant, he ought to have placed their Distances according to the Proportions
of the differences of the Secants of some ten minutes, next successively
following one another in some Degree of the Quadrant, which is easy to
determine, from the Distance of the two extreme or bounding Circles; of which
more hereafter.

Now though the Circles ought not according to the strict Rules of Geometry, to
be equally distant from each other, as Hevelius seems to suppose, yet I
confess, unless the space wherein these Circles lie be very large, and the
parts of a Degree that are to be distinguished, very small, there is no
necessity of so curiously distinguishing those unequal Distances, but they may
serve well enough for use, if they be taken equal, as Hevelius supposes, and
indeed much more accurate, then it is possible to distinguish the Object by the
bare eye; and therefore I shall not need to insist upon the further Explication
thereof, especially because when I come to show a more accurate way of Sights,
I shall also show a much more accurate way of Division, then either of those
two of Ticho Brahe, or this set down by Hevelius, which is much the same with
one of those which was 100 years since made use of by Ticho, and described, and
is by him attributed to an English Mathematicians.

But because this industrious and careful Person put himself to the trouble, of
making and examining the Divisions himself, I could heartily have wished he had
thought upon some such way as this, which I here describe, and call a
Compendium of Diagonal Divisions, it being a way, whereby as 89/90 of the
trouble is saved, in performing the manual operation thereof, so I judge it to
be much more certain, exact and plain, then the other way of Diagonals. My
Reason for the first is plain, The Division of one Degree serving for the whole
ninety: And my Reasons for the second are, First, Because it is much plainer to
be distinguished, then by the help of the edge of a Ruler, lying over the
Diagonals, one being able to see but one part of the Diagonal. And Secondly, I
think it much better then a small fiducial Thread, which is very apt to be
bended and broken, if it lies close to the Superficies of the Diagonal, and if
it lies at a distance, a skew glance of the eye will much alter the seeming
intersection of the Diagonals, which in this way are both prevented. The way
then in short is nothing but this; Take a thin piece of clear Looking-glass
Plate, well smoothed and polished on both sides, and large enough one way to
cover the whole breadth of the Rim of the Quadrant, on which the Diagonals were
to be made, and the other way to cover two or three Degrees, (this I do the
bigger, that the sides of the Arm may not shadow or darken the Divisions and
numbrings.) Suppose a a a a in the 29th. Figure, Plate 2. to represent such a
Plate, upon this Plate describe with great care a Degree of the Quadrant you
would have divided, and complete it with all its parallel Circles and
Diagonals, as you would have done any one Degree upon the Quadrant, and if the
Rim of the Quadrant be very broad in proportion to its Radius, you may by the
Table of natural Secants or Tangents, set the parallels at their due Distances,
but if the Rim be narrow, 'twill be sufficiently accurate to make their
Distances equal. These Divisions must be done with Compasses, pointed with
small Diamant Points, in the manner of those wherewith Glasiers cut their
Glass. The Glass being thus divided and lined, number the Diagonals, and place
it in the Frame of the Ruler, with the lined side next the Quadrant, so that
moving it to and fro, the side of the Glass may immediately touch the Brass Rim
of the Quadrant. This Brass Rim must be divided into 90 equal parts or Degrees
and at each Division straight Lines drawn from the Circumference to wards the
Center, the whole breadth of the Limb, (at least as much as is made use of for
the Glass-Plate, for the breadth of the Diagonals) the Frame to carry this
Plate is a convenient Cavity, left in the moveable Arm of the Quadrant, the
whole manner of which will be better understood by the Delineation thereof, to
which I shall therefore refer the Reader. The Distances of the parallel Circles
if unequal, may be easily set down true, according to the numbers of natural
Tangents or Secants, with a pair of Compasses, contrived like Beam-Compasses,
but having its Points to be set at any distance, desired by the help of a
Screw, moving upon one side of the Beam, which I may have occasion to describe
elsewhere more properly, and therefore will here omit it.

Next, If this way had not pleased, I could have wished he had known this
following, which is altogether as easy, and as Geometrically true, which I
have contrived, and have made small Instruments thereby to show very minute
Divisions, very easily and very plainly. I strike then upon the Limb of the
Quadrant I would divide, being first made exceeding smooth and plain, a Circute
very fine, and as lightly as possibly I can, so it be but discernable, and by
the help of a very large Quadrantal Dividing Plate of ten foot Radius, I divide
the said Quadrant in the faint Circle abovementioned, into 90 parts or
Degrees, then by a peculiar contrivance of a very curious Point that strikes
with a Spring, which I describe in another Discourse, the said Degrees are
marked upon the Plate by curious, small, round and deep holes, these are by
another Line without it, which is divided and figured the Common way,
distinguished and numbered by Figures, according to the Common manner. Then for
the sub-Divisions, I make a small Hold-fast by a Screw, which is fixed on to
the moveable Arm of the Quadrant, this serves to hold the end of a Diagonal
Hair, the other end of which is strained over the Supplementary Degree, till it
lies directly over some prickt-Hole of the curious Divisions, on the Limb of
the Quadrant, this gives me the sub-Divisions of the Quadrant, to what
accurateness I desire. The Supplementary Degree is a Degree of a very large
Circle, put on upon a small Rule, fixed on to the side of the moveable Arm,
whose Magnitude and Distance is found by this Proportion, as the Distance
between the end of the small Hold-fast and the pointed Circle, is to the Radius
of that Circle, so make the Distance between the said End and the Supplementary
Circle to the Radius of that Circle. This will be more plain by a Scheme.

Let a a a in the 32th. Figure represent a Quadrant, b b b a very fine Circle,
struck on the Limb of the Quadrant, from the Center l, which by a large
Quadrant of 10 foot Radius, I divide into Degrees, and by a springing Point
strike so many small Points, and number them to 90. beginning at m, and
numbering toward i. Let d d represent the moveable Arm, c c the hold-fast,
fixed upon the side of that Arm, which by a small Screw pincheth and holds fast
a very fine Hair at k, ee the small Ruler fixed at right Angles, with the Line
l k f, in this Line (through the Points l and k) I take a Point, as f, and
through f I strike a part of a Circle f g, whose Center is somewhere in the
Line f k l produced, which I find by resolving this Proportion, as k i is to l
i, so will k f be to the Radius of the Supplementary Circle f g, which will
fall somewhere in f k l produced, toward l, then take a Degree of that Circle,
which will extend from f to g, and divide it into as minute Divisions as are
necessary, and number them from f to g. Now to find what Angle the Sight d d
makes with the Sight m m, I strain the Hair h k, till I find it lie over the
next Division Point toward the right hand, and observe in the Ruler e e, what
part of a Degree is there marked, and on the Circle b b b, what Degree is
marked, the sum of both which gives me the true Measure of the Angle d d l m.
But this only by the By, and I will not now further enlarge on the Explication
thereof, designing it for another Discourse, where I shall describe various,
Mechanical and Practical ways, of accurately dividing Lines, into any
assignable number of equal or proportional parts.

To proceed then where I left off, to the examination of the Instruments of
Hevelius, I find that together with the Brass Quadrant I was speaking of, he
describes two Contrivances about it; The first is, How to set it presently to
an upright, without the trouble of turning the Screws in the Pedestal, which is
plain enough, and so much the better; but it has this of inconvenience, that
it must be altered for every Azimith, which is a very great one, and which by
another way altogether as easy and plain, may be avoided; of which more
hereafter.

Another Contrivance about this Instrument, is a small Screw, for moving it and
keeping it steady in any posture in the same Azimith, which is convenient
enough, but will not perform what he afterward supposes it capable of, as I
shall afterward show.

The second Instrument, which in the third Chapter, page 102, 103, etc. 108. he
describes, is a Sextant of Brass, of three foot Radius, carefully made, and
divided with the same care and after the same way as the former. The Sights
also are much the same, only whereas in the Quadrant he makes use of a Plate,
with parallel edges for the Sight that is at the center, and furthest from the
eye; in this he makes use of a Cylinder, which way also Ticho made use of 100
years ago, and has been ever since made use of. The other Sights next the eye
are the same with the former: There is nothing singular in the Pedestal, nor in
the Ball and Socket, only it is somewhat bigger then ordinary. His way of moving
and fixing the Rule of it is convenient enough, and the same with his
Instrument for moving and fixing his Quadrant, but it is not capable of
performing what he promises for it.

The third Instrument, which in the fourth Chapter he describes, is a Sextant
of Iron, of four foot Radius, to be managed only by one Observator, by putting
the Center next the eye. The whole Instrument is little differing from the
former, save only that the Cylinder at the Center which is here next the eye,
is covered with another hollow Cylinder, which is voluble and convertible about
the former, and carries two small Slits for the Sights, which performs the
same as the other Sights, but nothing more, and as the Author himself affirms,
is not so accurate for use as the other Sextant, where there are two
Observators, and therefore was seldom made use of by him. But I shall anon show
a way by which one Observator alone shall be able to take any Distance to a
Semicircle with much more accurateness and convenience then any two Observators
can; and therefore will be an Instrument of the best use for Astronomical and
Nautical affairs, for the perfecting both which I design it.

The fourth Instrument, which in the fifth Chapter, from page 114, etc. to 123.
he describes, is a Quadrant of six foot Radius, whose Frame was all made of dry
Oak, but the Limb, Sights, Sockets, etc. were made of Brass, divided so as to
see every quarter of a Minute distinctly, the Sights the same as in the first
Quadrant, and the way of suspending it not much differing, save only, whereas
in the former the Pedestal was moveable, in this it is fixed, which is much
better. And the Instrument is kept in an Aequilibrium, by the help of counter
poises hung at the end of a string, and cast over a Pully, as is more visible
by his Description. But this (as all other wooden Instruments do) he found to
shrink and warp, and consequently to lose its exactness, and therefore he made
little or no use thereof, but laid it aside, and made himself better of Brass.

The fifth Instrument described in the sixth Chapter, from page 123. to 132. is
a Sextant of Wood of six foot Radius, made in all particulars like the former
Sextant of Brass of three foot; nor has it any other contrivance about it
considerable, save only a rest made to slip up and down for the Observators to
rest their Elbows upon. But this Instrument also he found to be vitiated by the
shrinking and warping of the Wood, and therefore he laid that by also, and
seldom made use of it.

The sixth Instrument is a large Octant of Wood of eight foot Radius; this is
made exactly according to the Form of Ticho's Octant, and serves for taking any
Distance not exceeding 45 degrees. The Sights near the eye are made exactly as
the former, but moveable, so as to slip upon the Limbs of the Octant; the
Divisions of it are performed by Diagonals as before, and gives a greater
niceness of Division then the Eye is capable of distinguishing in the Object,
and therefore of little use.

And thus far the Author proceeded in Ticho's way. But finding these
Instruments which were made for the most part of Wood to be subject to faileur,
he aspired to get better Instruments made all of Brass or Iron, and wholly laid
aside the rest as altogether useless. And I cannot but very much approve of his
Judgment in so doing, for certainly caeteris paribus Instruments, well made of
Brass or Iron, are much to be preferred before the best of Wood. But yet
neither are all manner of Wooden Instruments to be rejected; nor are all sorts
of Metalline Instruments free from error, though it is confessed, if they be
made and used with skill, they suffer not any considerable or sensible
variation. First, I say, Wooden Instruments may be so contrived as very near to
equalize those of Metal, the Joints and Plates for Divisions only being made of
Metal, they being very easy to be rectified before, and examined after every
time of using. Such a one was contrived by Sir Christopher Wren, being two
square Wooden Tubes or Telescopes, joined together at the end next the Object
by a Joint of Brass, and the Angle made by the opening of them, measured by a
straight Rule equal to half the Radius, divided by Diagonals into 5000 equal
parts, which will by the help of a Table of natural Signs or Subtenses, show
the parts in Degrees, Minutes, and Seconds, of which I think I acquainted
Hevelius some years since, Next Brass and Metalline Instruments, if they be not
very carefully fortified against it, are more apt to bend then even those of
Wood. And the best way I have found to secure them true and plain in all
postures, is to lay them on a Table or Frame of Wood, well fortified underneath
against bending, and by the help of small Screws in several parts of the
Instrument to adjust it upon that Frame; the whole Table and Quadrant being so
counterpois'd, as to be easily moveable and fixed in any posture. But Hevelius
is pleased, as I said before, wholly to lay aside all manner of Wooden
Instruments as useless, and to endeavor the obtaining of Instruments of Brass
or Iron. Nam (says he page 136.) cum longa experientia probe tandem didicerim,
multo securius esse ex solido prorsus metallo obtinere Instrumenta, tum quo
majora and ampliora eo esse accuratiora and absolutiora, adhaec prioribus
admodum Tichonicum constructis plurima deesse quibus ditari merito deberent,
and quod iisdem de causis omnino necessum sit, ut part corrigerentur and
meliorentur, tam qua eorum materiam fructuram commotionem facilitandam
divisionem quam alia diversa subsidia and adminicula, quo sic aptius,
exquisitius, promptius, minorique labor, etc. ac temporis dispendio possent
Astris exponi observationesque peragi. Idcirco omnem curam atque operam pro
tenui ingenii mei facultatumque mearum modulo a Deo concesso (reliqua
sublimioribus ingeniis at que ampliori fortuna Viris, five posteritati nostrae
relinquens) adhibui: quo minora, tam lignea universa ab Astris plane removerem,
atque in ejus locum ex puro solidoque metallo, organa mihi compararem: and
quidem ejusmodi, quae insigni amplitudine essent conspicua, simul commoditate
regendi, simul aliquanto accuratioribus adhuc divisionibus, ad paulo
subtiliores observationes obtinendas gauderent. His Reasoning indeed is very
good, that since he had from much and long experience learned, that Instruments
of Wood after Ticho's manner, were not to be trusted to by reason of their
warping and shrinking, and consequently that Instruments of solid Metal were
much to be preferred before them, and also that the larger the Instruments
were, the more exactly they could be made and divided, and that the more easy
they were to be moved, and the more steady and sure they were to be fixed in any
position, the more convenient they were for use, he had therefore rejected all
those Instruments which he had made after Ticho's way; and had endeavored to
procure for his own use such as were complete, both for their matter and form,
having caused them to be made of Metal that which could not be subject to the
inconvenience of warping, swelling, or shrinking, with the variety of Weather,
or length of Time: And likewise of such a bigness as was capable of receiving
more nice and curious Divisions; and in the dividing them had found such
contrivances, and used such diligence, that they were more then ordinarily true
and exact. As far as he has gone on with these Designs, he seems to have been
even profuse in his expenses, and exceeding bountiful of his own care, labor,
and diligence; but I could have wished heartily that it had been some other way
employed. Those Instruments which he chiefly labored to perfect, he professes
to be Quadrants, Sectants, and Octants, after Ticho's manner, rejecting all
other Instruments of whatsoever Figures, whether Radii, Astrolabs, Zodiacal or
Aequinoctial Rings, Parallactical Instruments or Hoops, as more troublesome,
and less accurate. But whether he has in this his choice been rightly advised,
I shall hereafter have more occasion to examine when I come to describe an
Apparatus of Instruments necessary for such a one as designs to promote and
perfect the knowledge of the Celestial Bodies and their motions; wherein I
shall show that of some Instruments rejected by him, there is a use absolutely
necessary.

The Instruments therefore that he begins with are three small Quadrants of
Brass; the first of two foot, the second of eighteen inches, and the third of
one foot Radius. Each of these Instruments, he says, were made somewhat larger
then common Quadrants, to wit, of an arch of 110 degrees, which is to no other
end, but only in order to show the subdivisions of each degree of the Quadrant,
by the help of a new invented Perpendicular of Brass wherewith each of them was
furnished. This Invention is by him highly extolled for most excellent and
useful; and to that end is made use of for the division of all his other
Instruments, both great and small. Hear what he says of it: Quiscunque hujus
rei (to wit, the new way of subdividing the degrees of the Quadrant) primus
fuerit repertor, sublimes profecto cogitationes exercuit, hoc ipso ad
congruentem effectum deducendo, and inter praestantissima inventa meritissimo
refertur, quod etiam minora Instrumenta remotis omnibus transversalibus Lineis,
in singula minuta corumque particulas minimas subdividi liceat. He seems indeed
both here, and elsewhere in many other places of his Book to be highly possessed
with admiration of the sublimity, subtilty, and extreme usefulness of this
invention, and seems very much concerned that the Author thereof should not
certainly be known, but dares not father it upon any one positively. He says
that one Benedictus Hedreus in a Work of his which he published Anno 1643.
about the new and accurate Structure of the Geometrical Astrolab, describes it;
but he gathers that he was not the Inventor himself, but rather that he got
both this Invention and the whole Quadrant, which he describes out of the
Observatory, or rather Repository of Ticho Brahes Instruments, for that it
seems Ticho was the Inventor of this way of division; and yet, as I noted
before, he preferred the way by Diagonals much before it, whatever Reason
Hevelius had to be of a contrary Judgment. What this way is I shall by and by
explain. But in the mean time I am sorry to find Hevelius joining with Hedreus
in the Opinion or Demonstration, as Hevelius calls it, that the Sub-divisions
by Diagonals is not capable of a Geometrical demonstration, especially in
lesser Instruments, which have need of many Circles. I confess I understand not
their meaning nor reasoning, nor why it should be less demonstrable in lesser
then in greater Instruments; since it is very easily demonstrable both in
greater and lesser Instruments, and as Geometrical as any other way of Division
whatsoever: the Diagonal Line being always a piece of a Tangent Line, that is
to say, the spaces between the Parallel Circles upon the Diagonals are always
to be in proportion to the difference of some Tangent Lines, and the different
distance of those Circles from the Center are always in proportion of some
Secants: And the way of finding what those Tangents or Secants are, and
consequently what must be those Distances of the Parallel Circles I mentioned
briefly before, and shall now more fully demonstrate. From which I will make it
evident, that the Theory was not as Hedreus and Hevelius have supposed,
incapable of Calculation or Mechanical Demonstration.

But first give me leave to show you what way Ticho Brahe made use of to
demonstrate, or rather to find out the true Angle unto each equal Distance,
which I find set down at the latter end of his Mechanics, as a Supplement to
the rest. Divisionis puncta habentis transversalia modus talis est, ut 34
exprimit figura in qua singula denominata per Lincolas in december interstitia
aequalia discriminatum punctis notata sunt, sicque regula fiducioe quodcunque
horum inter observandum transiens ip sum minutum gradus, quod quaerebatur
promit aut aliquotam ejus partem, prout ab hoc vel illo puncto removeri
discernitur. Ut vero hoc etiam demonstratum hic addam ob sciolos forte quosdam
qui ea quae non satis capiunt carpunt sic habe.

In Figura 34. Sit A centrum Instrumenti ejusque Semidiamiter A O, assumitur
autem O I, Particula in qua divisio ista per lineas transver sas fit ea
proportione quae est 1 ad 48. qualis in meis Instrumentis ut plurimum
usurpatur. Cumque A I ponatur partium 10000000000. integri canonis majoris
Rhetici, erit earundem O I 208333333 utpote pars quadragesima octava radii
Arcus I E sit 20 and IV. 10 horum sinus 29088779 Y I. Sinus autem secundus
corundem 42308. V Y. qui additus N V quod aequale est O I facit N Y 208375641.
In triangulo igitur NYI ad Y rectangulo nota sunt duo Latera N Y and Y I. quare
datur basis I N 210396208. una cum angulo NIY 82. 3. 10. 47. sui additus YIA
89. 50. conficit N I A. 171. 53. 10. 47. Basis vero N I in triangulo rectangulo
N V I dividatur in december parts aequales ut conveniant uni minuto 21039621
representatae per I B. Moxque in triangulo obliquengulo BIA. dantur duo latera
IB and IA. radius, una cum angulo BIA, qui idem est cum NIA 171. 53. 10. 47.
prius reperto: quare innotescit angulus IAB 1. 1. 7. qui tantummodo 1. esse
deberet, ita ut major sit saltem 1. 7 differentia sane insensibili: similiter
si F I assumatur, noven particularum erunt eae 189356587 habebimusque rursus
triangulum F I A in quo dantur duo latera FI modo dictum una cum radio I A. and
angulo F I A ab iisdem comprehenso velut antea exurgitque angulus I A F 9. 1.
6. qui debebat esse 9 exact deficiente in ultimo minuto F N. 1. 6. Porro ut
circa medium idem tentetur quod nunc apud extremitates fecimus inveniuntur
eadem qua antea primo Angulus NAH 5. 3. 6. abundans 3. 6. Secundo Angulus N A H
4. 56. 55. deficiens 3. 5. Patet itaque quod maxima differentia, five
adjectiva, five ablativa in hac pragmatia proveniat minimum quid ultra 3. quam
subtilitatem visus acumen discernere in quocunque tandem instrumento nullatenus
sustinet, quae etiam per se otiosa est, quare frustra nodum in Scirpo quaerunt,
si qui hanc nostram satis accuratam distributionis formam cavillari praesumant.
By which it is evident that Ticho understood an inequality, and what it was, and
that it was insensible, and so not to be regarded. Now it is to me very
wonderful indeed that Ticho having thought of a way of calculating this
inequality, should not think of an easy expedient of reforming it by putting
the Parallel Circles at unequal, but their due proportionate distances. And
it is much more strange that Hevelius should still affirm it to be a way not
Geometrical: For to any one that considers this proportion, the inclination of
a Diagonal Line being given to find the true distances of the Parallel Circles
that shall divide any assignable part thereof in any proportion assigned:
Nothing can be more easy: and for more expedition use may be made of the Table
of Natural Tangents which is ready calculated to hand. For instance: Let B C
represent a Diagonal Line subtending an angul of 10^ at the Center A, produce
the said Line BC to F, and let full a Perpendicular, from the Center A to E.
Suppose then the Angle at B to be one Degree, then is B E the Tangent of 89. to
the Radius A E. and E C is the Tangent of 88. 50. and the differences between
the Tangents of 88 50, 88, 51.88, 52.88, 53.88, 54.88, 55.88, 56.88, 57. 88,
58.88, 59. and 89. gives the Distances of the several Circles, C. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
8 9 B. desired.

Since the Reading of this Lecture, Dr. Wallis has also described another way
of finding these Distances, which he has communicated in a Letter to Hevelius,
and I have prevailed with the said Doctor to permit it to be here printed,
being very ingenious and accurate, and proceeding by a differing method.

Dr. Wallis his Letter to Hevelius.
SED and est cur communi omnium Literatorum nomine rebus praesertim caelicis
addictorum reddam gratias, tum ob immensos in tanto apparatu sumptos erogatos,
tam praetiosum conquirendo supellectilem Astronomicam, graphice hic descriptam,
tum ob indefessos labores, insomnes noctes diesque occupatissimos coelestis
acquirendis observationibus impensos; quarum vim ingentem, The saurum supra
aurum and margaritus praetiosum erudito orbi jam ante dederis, plura daturus
indies, verum non est ut sperem me verbis aequare posse tua merita, qui ex
privato penu sumptos plane Regios erogasti; onusque suscepisti non infeliciter,
Herculeis Humeris (ne Atlanteis dicam) formidandum.

Oper is partem maximam jam evolvi, miratus inibi tanta molis Instrumentorum
ingeniosissimum regimen, and subtilissimam divisionum administrationem, cum
pari diligentia conjunctam in Regulis and Dioptris solicit curandis, and
quidem si hoc deesset reliquus in cassum caederet labor; quippe exiguus and vix
evitabilis in Regulis aut Dioptris error, totum Instrumentum vitiaret, omnesque
inficeret observationes, sed singulis immorari non licet, unum tamen est quod
attingam breviter, nempe divisiones per Line as Diagonales, circulos in limbo
concentricos oblique secantes. Hanc dividendi methodum jam diu receptam, ipse
retines and quidem merito, circulosque hos concentricos aequalibus intervallis
disjunctos habes, quod quamvis in exiguorum aut etiam mediocrium Instrumentorum
limbis latioribus aliquid erroris possit inducere in tuis tamen tantae
amplitudinis Instrument is cum limbis exiguae latitudinis (quod and turecte
mones) nihil quicquam erit discriminis quod in sensus occurrere possit. Hac
tamen occasine libet hic subjicere, quod ea de rejam olim ( circa A. 1650. aut
1651.) meditatus sum, atque apud auversaria mea nunc reperio: nempe si quis
vellet minoris Instrumenti limbum latiorem Lineis Diagonalibus sic dividere,
quibus intervallis oporteat concentricos illos circulos disponere ut angulos
invicem aequales designarent illae cum tranversali intersectiones calculo
Trigonometrico determinare.

Divisio arcus in limbo quadrantis (aliusve ejusmodi Instrumenti) per circulos
concentricos and rectam Diagonalem, sit latitudo limbi (RL=) L, Radius circuli
intimi (AR=) R, extimi (AZ=AL=) L+R=Z continentes angulum (RAZ=) A. dividendum
in parts quotlibet aequales ( quarum numerus n) rectis a, b, c, etc. (quarum
longitudo quaeritur) facientibus ad RZ diagonaelem, angulus a, b, g d. etc.
adeoque angulus RA a=1/n A, RA b=2/n A. RA c=3/n A, etc. sitque ARZ=O and
AZR=V. Datis ergo crucibus R, Z cum angulo contento A. ( adeoque reliquorum
summa O+V) inveniuntur reliqui O obtusus V accutus.) Nam Z+R. Z-R Ita tangens
O+V / 2. tangentem O-V / 2 and O+V / 2+ O-V / 2=O. deinde cognitis angulis O
and 1/n A ( adeoque reliquo a) cum trajecto latere R habetur latus a. nempe sin
a. R sinus O. a. and pari modo excognitis. O 2/n A. habentur b O 3/n A.
habentur c O 4/n A. habentur d etc. habentur etc.


Praxis sit R=1. L=0, 2. Z=1, 2. A=10. ergo O+V= 179. 50. O+V / 2=89. 55. tum
Z+R=2, 2. Z-R=0, 2. O+V / 2=687, 5488683.62, 5044427= tang. O-V / 2 cui
respondet angulus 89. 5. 0. 17. proxime. Ergo O+V / 2+O-V / 2=0 =179. 0 0. 17.
fere cujus sinus 0, 0174511. nempe idem qui sinus 0. 59. 59. 43.

Deinde secandus sit A in 10 parts quarum quaelibet sit 1. quaeruntur igitur
a, b, c, d; e, f, g, h, i, nempe.

1.00000=R Sin.a(0 585943)0.0171603. R=1 Sin. O=0.0174511.1.01694=a. 1694
Sin.b(0 51.59.43.)0.0168694. R=1 Sin. O=0.0174511.1.03448=b. 1754 Sin. g(0
56.59.43.)0.0165780.) 0.0174511(1.05264=c. 1816 Sin. d(0 55.59.43.)0.0162877.)
0.0174511(1.07144=d. 1880 Sin. e (0 54.59.43.)0.0159969.) 0.0174511(1.09091=e.
1947 Sin. z (0 53.59.43.)0.0157060.) 0.0174511(1.11110=f. 2019 Sin. e(0
52.59.43.)0.0154152.) 0.0174511(1.13206=g. 2196 Sin. th(0.51.59.43.)0.0151243.)
0.0174511(1.15383=h. 2264 Sin. i(0 50.59.43.)0.0148335.) 0.0174511(1.17647=i.
2353 1.20000=Z.

Praxis altera sit R=1. L=0, 1. Z=1, 1. A=10. ergo O+V / ^= 179, 50. O+V /
2=89. 55. cujus tangens 687, 5488693, and 2, 1. 0, 1 687, 5488693.32,
74042231/^= tang. 18. 15. 1. 57 O-V / 2 ergo O+V / 2+O-V / 2=O=178. 10. 1.
572/4. cujus complementum ad semicirculum 1.49.58. 2 cujus sinus 0,0319827.
ergo (1.00000=R Sin a=1.48.58.2)=316920)319827 (1.00918=a 918 16 Sin.b
(1.47.50.2)=314013)319827 (1.01852=b 934 17 Sin. g(1.46.58.2)=311103)319827
(1.02803=c 951 19 Sin. d(1.45.58.2)=308198)319827 (1.03773=d 970 19 Sin.
e(1.44.58.2)=305290)319827 (1.04762=e 989 18 302343) (1.05769=f 1007 20 299475)
(1.06796=g 1017 21 296567) (1.07843=h 1068 21 293660) (1.08911=i 1089 290752)
(1.10000=k=Z

Hactenus adversaria, ubi duos casus expendimus, nempe cum latitudo limbi
ponetur pars quinta and pars decima Radii brevioris, and angulus dividendus 10
minuta prima tanta fere (...), quantum feret vulgaris canon Trigonometricus:
and quidem ultima unitas in ambiguo est; nunc justo major nunc justo minor.
Radium autem (ut ego soleo) facio L ( non ut plerumque fit 10000000.) quo omnes
multiplicationes and Divisiones per Radium faciendae praecidantur: Adeoque
sinus haebeo pro partibus decimalibus, quibus itaque cum opus est, ciphras
praemitto quo de unius integri loco constet.

Simili processu utendum erit mutatis mutandis si latitudo limbi sumatur in
alia quavis proportione ad Radii longitudinem. Sed commodius erit (ad vitandam
molestiam toties quaerendi partem proportionalem) ut sumatur angulus O
commodae, magnitudinis (justis minutis primis determinandae absque annexis
secundis tertiisve) atq ita quaeratur Radii maximi Z longitudo, eodem modo quae
Reliquorum a, b, c, etc. puta si in praxi posteriori sumpto ut prius R=1 and
angulo A=10 sumatur angulus O non qui illic prodit 178, 10, 1, 57 sed potius
178. 10. cujus complementum ad duos Rectos est 10.50. hujus sinus in ipso
canone habetur 0,0319922 and reliquorum item a, b, g, d, etc. sinus similiter
ibidem habebuntur, ut una tantum divisione opus sit prosingulis exhibendis
ipsaque Raedii Z Longitudo habetur non quidem precise ut prius, 1, 1; sed
proxima (quae itaque sumenda erit) 109996 nempe.

(1.00000=R 917.17 Sin. a=1 49)=317015)319922 (1.00917=a 934.18
b=1.48=314108)319922 1.01851=b 952.17 etc. 311200) 1.02803=c 969.19 308293)
1.03772=d 988.19 305385) 1.04760=e 1007.20 302478) 1.05767=f 1027.20 299570)
1.06794=g 1047.20 296662) 1.07841=h 1067.21 293755) 1.08908=i 1088. Sin. k
(=1.40)-290847) 319922 1.09996=k=Z similiter omninores succed it si sumptis
Radiis R L cum angulo A quaeramus V and Radios intermedios, aut sumpto Radio L
cum angulis A V quaerantur R and Radii intermedii.

Verum si limbi latitudo sit Radii non nisi pars trigessima quadragessima,
quinquagessima aut adhuc minor, atque angulus dividendus non quidem 10 minuta
prima sed totidem secunda, aut minor adhuc, subtilior res est quam ut canon
vulgaris Trigonometricus hic adhibe^ atur; and quae omnem sensum fugit, ipsique
circuli concentrici distanti is aequalibus quantum sensu possumus distinguere
invicem disjuncti: quippe unius pollucis pars millesima nedum decies aut
centies, millesima minor est discrepantia quam ut sensu percipi pessit. Sed
nimius sum in re levi felicem itaque excuntem annum tibi comprecatus longa
sequentium serie contrivandum, valere jubeo.


But to proceed. In the next place I think it will be sufflicently plain, to
any one that shall try both the ways, that the Divisions are by Diagonals much
easier distinguished by the eye, then by this way so applauded by Hevelius, and
therefore I cannot choose but conclude with Hevelius, (page 140.) though to a
quite differing end and sense: Sunt igitur splendidissimae tantum speculationes
mentisque ideae quaecunque de Nomanis vel Hedrianis Divisionibus proof untur.
But because perhaps there may be several persons that have not yet perused this
Book of Hevelius, nor that of Benedictus Hedreus, printed in 1643. nor Ticho's
Mechanics, of a much longer standing, and thence may perhaps not so well
understand what this way of sub-dividing is; give me leave a little to
explicate it, and show you plainly what it is.

The way then as it is described by Ticho Brahe, and ascribed by him to Petrus
Nonius, that excellent Spanish Mathematician, who published it in his learned
Book, de Crepusculis, supposing it also to have been heretofore used by
Prolomy, but (as Ticho is of opinion) without much reason, is this; Ut ducantur
intra extremum quadrantem alii minores numero 44. successive sese comitantes,
quorum extimus in 89. sequens in 88. vertius in 87. and sic deinceps donec ad
ultimum and intimum perventum fuerit qui 46. portiones habebit. To which
Description published in his Mechanica, he adds in the second Book, de Mundi
AEtherei recenstoribus Phenomenis, page 461. Altern Divisio ad Clarissimi
Mathematici Petri Nonii -- imitationem per plures quadrantis arcus introrsum
descriptos and diversimode subdivisos procedit. Etsi autem in hac ipsa imprimis
ingenios^ Nonii inventione; aliquid anctuarii loco expeditius a nobis additum
est, ita ut exterior arcus in plurimas portiunculas dividatur; neque is ordo
aut numerus arcuim sese introrsum concomitantium, quem ille praefinivit sed
multo expeditior and perfectior observetur, camen quia haec subtilit as cum ad
praxin deventum est plus habeat laboris quam fructus, neque id in recessu
praestet quod prime front pollicetur, ut alibi before ostendemus; ideirco
apud nos dudum in u^uesse desiit. [See more of this, page 62. Epistolarum
Astronomicarum.]

From which way of Division, this of Hevelius (which he ascribes to Hedreus,
but is more properly ascribable to Pierre Vernier, as I shall afterward show)
is somewhat different, and possibly might be the same that Ticho Brahe
contrived to compendifie that of Nonius.

The way then is this, described by Hevelius, page 141: Quadrantes
contractiores ita a me sunt adornati, ut limbos little tantum in integros and
semigradus distinxerim; quae ut haec distinctio non nemini admodum rudis
videatur, sufficit tamen affatim commonstrandis singulis minutis primis;
dummodo perpendiculi excentro appensi extremitas limbum stringens in certas
particulas fit subdivisa, imo quod magis de quo non nemo sane mirabitur, non
solum haec rudior limbi subdivisio sufficiens exhibendis singulis minutis
primis sed etiam pro denis quinis quinetiam singulis secundis in majoribus
organis si videlicet nostrum Instrumentum directorium adhibeas. Oportet ut
inferior illius pars curiosissime and levissime sit limata and levigata, ut
limbum totum aequabilissime quidem tangat, sed nullibi nimis adhaereat; tum
quovis loco liberrime pendeat atque divisionis tam quadrantis quam perpendiculi
observator rite discernere valeat. Dividitur autem istud perpendiculum hac
rations, si videlicet spatium 31 semigraduum in limbo perpendiculi
accuratissime denotes; idque primum in tres aequales parts, rursum quamlibet
trientem in december dividas; atque it a obtinebis spatiola paul admodum ampliora
quam spatiola unius semigradus, quia intercapedo 31 partium in 30 transmutata
necessario fiunt modice ampliores. Attamen si divisiones perpendiculi ad limbum
quadrantis accedant circa extremitates perpendiculi, discrepantiola illa
divisionum ab invicem vix ac ne vixcognoscitur; circa medietatem vero
perpendiculi satis evidenter. In medio limbo perpendiculi and divisionum
parvulus index and quidem inter 15 and 16 spaciolum constituitur pro
discernendis integris and semi gradibus; quos accurate dictus index indicat,
quando totum spatium perpendiculi in 30 partibus divisum in ipso limbo
quadrantis spatium 31 partium exquisite subtendit. Ea tamen expressa lege si
totum Instrumentum absolute ab omni part sit constructum; quando vero iste
index pauxillum promotior existit integro aliquo vel semigradu certissimum est
indicium, observation iminuta quidem adhaerere aut integro aut semigradui
adnumeranda, si index huic vel illi vicinior est. Cognoscitur autem minutorum
numerus ex eo, quando lineola aliqua divisionum in perpendiculo cum una aliqua
in limbo quadrant is prorsus in unam eandemque coincidit rectam. Nunquam enim
nisi unica lineola in perpendiculo cum altera in quadrante, si exquisite
peracta sunt omnia omnino concurrit. In isto igitur utriusque lineolae concursu
ubi una eademque videlicet constituitur linea est terminus ipsorum minutorum
vel integro gradui vel semi gradui adhaerentium.

This same way is also made use of by Hevelius, for the Division of all his
larger Instruments, as well as for the Division of this smaller, by fixing it
upon the Perpendicular, as he afterward mentions, cap. 15. page 307. where he
also gives a fuller description of it, to which I refer the Reader.

The way indeed is exceeding ingenious, and very much improved by Hevelius, but
yet at the very best it is very difficult, both to make the Divisions, and much
more difficult to distinguish them, as may be plainly enough seen even by that
very Specimen published by Hevelius, in the first and second Figure of the
Plate T. especially if it be viewed with a magnifying Glass or Lens; and I do
wonder that Hevelius did not all this while think of making use of a Lens, to
make the Divisions and Distinctions appear more plain, without which Seconds
are not to be distinguished, by those kinds of Divisions even in an Instrument
of 10 foot Radius, and by the help of it they may be made and distinguished, in
Instruments of a quarter that bulk, as he may find, if he please to make use of
the shallowest Object-Glass of that Microscope which he had from London; he
may, I say, by looking upon the Divisions of the first and second Figures of
the Table T. with his Microscope, plainly detect how far those Divisions are
short of accurat^ness, and how many faults and inequalities the naked eye and
unmachined hand do commit.

It is therefore one of my ways for dividing and distinguishing Divisions, to
make use of one, two, or three Lenses, whereby not only the eye is very much
eased, but the judgment is very much augmented, and the hand directed, as I
shall afterward explain, when I come to show some particular ways of making
Divisions.

But because this Benedictus Hedreus, from whom Hevelius affirms he received
this invention of dividing the Limb of the Quadrant, was not so ingenuous as to
confess that he received this invention from another, and because perhaps the
Book being small, may have been long since lost and forgotten, having
accidentally met with one, I shall acquaint Hevelius, that one Pierre Vernier
(as he calls himself) Capitain and Chastelain pour sa Majeste au Chasteau
Dornans, Conseiller, and General de ses Monnoies au Conte de Bourgongne,
printed at Brussels, by Francis Vivien, 1631. (to wit 12 years before Hedreus)
a Treatise in French, which he calls, La construction l'Usage and les
Proprietes du quadrant nouveau Mathematique, comme aussi la construction de la
table des sinus de minute en minutes successivement par un seul maxim. De plus
un abrege desdicts tables en une petite demi page avec son usage: and
finallement la method de trouver les angles d'un triangle par la cognoissance
des costez and les costs par les angles sans l'ayde d'aucune table. In which
he has at large and very plainly described this way of dividing the Quadrant,
to what accurateness is desired, and pretends it to be, as possibly it was, an
invention of his own.

But to return where I left to Hevelius his Division on the Quadrant by the
help of the Brass arm, I say, against this way, besides what I have already
mentioned, I have a second Objection, and that is, that it requires a most
exceeding great curiosity and care to make that Metal Pendulum or Plumb of
Brass, so as to be exactly of equal weight and make on both sides of the
supposed middle Line, for if it be not so, it may easily vary not only some
Seconds, but even some Minutes from its exact Perpendicularity, and if so, it is
to little purpose all the former curiosity about Subdivisions.

Thirdly, The Perpendicular ought always to be kept very clean from Dust, for
if a little more Dust settle on the one side then on the other, the
Perpendicularity will be vitiated, and all the curiosity else about the
Observation will be lost.

Fourthly, If the Pin on which this Brass Perpendicular hangs be not of some
bigness, it may easily warp or bend; and if it be of a considerable bigness, it
will not move easily, and consequently the Plumb will not hang tender, but
stiff; in both which cases it can be of no use in the World for Astronomical
Observations. Further, if it hang loose upon the Center, which it must do to
hang tender, then there will lie as material an Objection against it, for its
not moving true upon the Center of the Instrument; and therefore upon the whole
matter I conclude it to be an Invention indeed of great sublimity and
subtleness, but of little or no use for Astronomy, to which Hevelius applies
it. He had much better therefore have been content to have followed Ticho
Brahe, and made use of a common Plumb Line and Diagonal Divisions; where there
is occasion for them, for that is true and practicably capable of exhibiting
the Subdivisions of a Degree, as Minute, as are necessary to common Sights.

In the next place, before he leaves the Descriptions of these three smaller
Quadrants, he mentions an Invention of his whereby he fixes the Quadrant in any
altitude, and easily moves it steadily into any posture desired by the help of
Screws. This Invention of his own contrivance he does indeed very highly
applaud, insomuch that he believes no good Astronomical Observations can be
made without it. But he must pardon me if I am not altogether of his mind; I
grant indeed the thing is exceedingly convenient, in comparison with any yet
used, if it be well made, and that the way of applying it to the Quadrant be
very facil and easy. But it is not always so necessary, but that Observations
may be as conveniently made without it, as I shall afterward show, in the
Description of the moveable Axis, for continuing the Instrument in the Plain of
the Object, whether a Distance or an Altitude be to be taken.

In the next place he proceeds to describe his large Quadrant of Brass adjusted
so as to take Altitudes and Azimuths, of which he makes a full and particular
description; but the most considerable thing that is new in it is, that instead
of a Screw used by Ticho for lifting and moving the Arm with Sights, he makes
use of two Lines poys'd with Plumbets, by the pulling of this or that of which
he is able to raise or sink the Ruler with Sights, all the rest of the
contrivance being to make it stand perpendicularly in any Azimuth, which I
think may be done to greater certainty with less trouble, by a way I shall
afterward show: As an Essential part of this Instrument, he takes occasion to
give the description of the Turret or Observatory which he built for it, and
the several contrivances about it, which I now omit.

The use he made of this Instrument was for the taking the Meridian Altitudes
of the Sun, of which he affirms to have taken a very great number, especially
such as were of principal use for the regulating the motion of the Sun: Such as
the Solstitial and Aequinoctial Altitudes, of which I hope we may expect an
account in the second and third Part of his Machinae Caelestis. I know not to
what exactness he has proceeded in taking his Meridian Altitudes of the Sun;
but had he proceeded in the way by Telescopes, he might have taken all his
Altitudes of that kind to a single Second, with great ease and certainty.

And upon this occasion I hope it will not be unacceptable to my Astronomical
Reader to hint a very expeditious and exceeding accurate way of making a
Catalogue of all the visible, as well as the most considerable Telescopical
Stars of the Heaven. For the doing of which there will not need a tenth part so
much time as for the other ways that have already been made use of, and yet
will very much exceed them all in accurateness and certainty. The way then in
short is nothing but this: Let there be made a very large mural Quadrant, or
rather Semicircle, of 30 foot Radius, fixed exactly in the Meridian against a
Wall made of squared Stones, well joynted and cramped together, and settled on a
foundation very firm and solid, to prevent all manner of slaking and swarving.
Let the rim of this be made of Brass Plates, stayed in their due posture by
cramps or bars of Iron fixed in the Wall, by running them with Lead: then
having divided this Semicircle into 180 Degrees, and subdivided each Degree by
the help of Diagonals, on a flat and well polisht Plate of Glass, according to
the way I before described into Minutes and Seconds: adapt to it a 30 foot
Telescope, so that the Tube shall not warp, nor the Glasses deviate out of
their true posture; the Focus of the Object Glass make to be exactly upon the
edge of the Brass Limb, so that by the help of the Eye-glass, which is a deep
Unequal, the punctual place or altitude of a Star to a quarter of a hairs
breadth, even to Seconds of a Minute, may be discovered: the trouble of
dividing this Quadrant will be no more then of one of an ordinary size, the
subdivision of one Degree subdividing and examining all the rest. The way of
making the Tube of the Telescope so as not considerably to bend, may be done
somewhat after that way of stiffning the Tubes of very long Telescopes, which I
communicated to Hevelius, and you will find at large described in this Treatise
of Hevelius: Save only, that instead of Ropes which I first made use of, I
rather commend so many Braces of Wood. Now though notwithstanding all the
Diligence that can be this way used, the Tube do somewhat bend in the middle,
yet it can be of no manner of significancy as to the vitiating the Observation;
since first, the Object Glass always stands in the same posture as to the
Center, and secondly, the Focas thereof is exactly in the edge of the Limb.

Further, to prevent the inconvenience of looking up or in any other uneasy
posture by the help of a reflex Metal one may always look Horizontally, that
is, perpendicularly to the plain of the Wall or Mural Quadrant. And to prevent
the trouble and labor of moving or lifting the Tube by the help of a long yard
poysed upon Centers on a Frame before the said Instrument, both the Tube and
Arm for the Sight, and the Seat on which the Observator sits, may be
counterpoised, so that by turning a Windle, he may easily raise himself with
the Tube to any posture desired. The Object Glass is just before the Center,
and the Eye Glass looks directly on the Divisions of the Limb, and there is
nothing to strain or stir the Instrument it self, nor can the warping of the
Tube, if there should be any, have any effect on the Observation: Of this I may
say more on another occasion. By this means (in one Nights Observation) the
Declinations of some hundreds of Stars may be taken to a Second by one single
Observator, having only one or two Assistants to write down the Observations as
fast as made. And at the same time the right Ascension of every one of them may
be taken by the help of a very accurate. Compound-circular Pendulum Clock,
which I shall elsewhere describe, denoting even to of a Second of time the
appulse of the Star to the Meridian: There needs indeed great exactness in
every part of this Apparatus, and 'twill not be done without a considerable
charge, and much labor and diligence in the performance thereof; but if we
compare it with the methods and ways that have been hitherto used, we shall
certainly find that the Observations will be near 30 times more accurate, the
charge not a quarter, and the labor not near a tenth part so much as in other
ways made use of by Ticho and Hevelius. And though it may be objected against
this way (which indeed may be much more so against any other) that the
refraction of the Air will considerably vary the Declination of such Stars as
are very far South, yet since the same Instrument affords a way beyond any in
the World for the discovering the several Refractions of the Air at several
Altitudes above the Horizon, to the accurateness of a Second, by taking the
Altitude of such Stars as never set in the North, in the greatest and least
Altitude above the Horizon; a Table of such Refractions will easily rectify
the Declination of the other Stars to as great accurateness. This Subject does
deserve a much larger and more particular Description of every Branch thereof,
and the Encouragement of some Prince, whose Name and Honor will thereby be
Registered among those glorious Celestial Bodies to all Posterity, and the
succeeding Learned World will be obliged to celebrate his memory. But I fear
this Age will hardly yield another Alphonsus, another Ticho, or another
Hevelius, who have not spared to expend their utmost Endeavors in performing
this task, though by other methods. But leaving this for another time, I shall
proceed.

In the third place then he goes on to describe his great Horizontal voluble
Brass Quadrant, of which he says, he does not believe that ever the like was
made by any, if the splendid Apparatus and the whole Fabric thereof be
considered. It is in Diameter six foot and an half, and serves, as he affirms,
to take Altitudes to Seconds; but yet he is necessitated to allow, that it is
short both of Ticho's large wooden Quadrant, and of his large mural Quadrant;
nor do I see any reason why Ticho's mural Quadrant should not take Meridian
Altitudes somewhat more accurately, since I believe his Sights every whit as
good, and his Divisions altogether as exact; what he might fail in diligence, I
cannot say. I do believe this Instrument to be an exceeding good one of the
kind, and that he has from much practice and experience found out many
contrivances, in order to the making it convenient to make Observations, and he
has not spared for cost, pains, study and industry, for the completing
thereof; but still whether he be arrived to the greatest perfection, or to so
great as to take Altitudes to Seconds, seems to me very dubious, and if he made
use of the Sights before-described, wholly impossible. For first, a Degree upon
the Limb is but about 6/3; of an inch, and consequently a Minute is but the
50th. part of an inch, and a Second but the 3000th. part of an inch, which he
that can distinguish with his naked eye, has better then I, or I fear, any man
now living. Shortsighted men, I grant, can do much toward the distinguishing
very minute Divisions, by being able to bring the Object very near the eye, but
the most short-sighted must be yet very much shortened by Glasses, before he
will be able to distinguish the 3000th. part of an inch, and when he has
distinguished it, which he may possibly do with a Microscope, how will he
distinguish of the Penumbra, which is not certain even to a Minute? And though
it may be said, it is the same, round the Circle, and the Circle is the true
bigness of the Sun, so that if a Circle of a bigness, answering to the Diameter
of the Sun, and the Distance of the lower Sight from the upper be described on
the lower Sight, it must bound the Limb of the Sun, and that consequently it
will be easy to distinguish when that Circle is perfectly filled with the
figure of the Sun, admitted through the hole in the upper Sight. I answer, That
this seems very probable and easy, and is indeed believed and asserted so by
Optical Writers: But yet it is quite otherwise; for not to mention that there is
confessed by all, that the Penumbra of this Circle must be as big at least as
the Diameter of the hole above, through which it is trajected, which cannot be
less then a Minute; I say, that experience does demonstrate that it is quite
otherways, and that the Limb of this Image painted on the lower Sight is
terminated with a Penumbra, which is sometimes five or six times bigger then
the Diameter of the hole, and which is yet stranger, the smaller the hole be,
the bigger is the Penumbra, and the bigger (to a certain Degree) the less, but
there is no bigness which will take it off quite, and the Diameter of the Sun
that way taken, is sometimes bigger and sometimes less then it ought, and that
to a very considerable quantity: Of which, and several other very strange
proprieties of Light, I shall hereafter say more on another Subject.

But to proceed. That he has made this Instrument his chiefest, you may
perceive by his pathetical describing thereof; for he says of it, page 184. Ad
commodiorem hujus quadrantis usum, tot ac tot adminicula recens excogitata
atque huic organo applicata fuere, ut nesciam a quibus primum inchoare debeam.
Imo etiamsi vel maxim velim, nullo tamen modo omnia and singula adeo perspicue
vel delineare vel describere potero, ut universi praeprimis qui similia haud
ipsimet oculis usurparunt quaevis recte ac plane intelligant, quinetiam credas
velim utut aliis sunt attentiores atque hujus rei been gnaros, aliquoties sane
hocce Instrumentum visuros antequam dimidiam tantam partem debite animadvertant
ac plenissime comprehendant. Quippe and verum fateor nec ipse ego, licet
singula ex meo solo cerebro prodierint ac confecta fuerint, possem adeo
distinct tibi eum sub aspectum ponere nisi mihi hocce organum sub oculis
assidue versaretur. Nihilotamen minus dabo operam, ut quantum fieri poterit,
dilucide omnia proponam, reliqua very exercitatis caeli metaloribus ulterius
rimanda and perquirenda commit am, etc.

And so he proceeds with the Description of this Quadrant, and the Apparatus
about it, and first, he tells us of the weight of this Instrument, that it was
80 l. Next, of the shape of the Turret in which it was fixed, which is indeed
very convenient and ingenious, it being so contrived, as to be voluble or
convertible upon Truckles, having one only side open, and enclosed on all sides
else, so that neither the Observator nor the Quadrant was much exposed to the
injury of the weather, which is indeed of no small use in Astronomical
Observations. But this may be done many other ways also. He tells us further of
the admirable and prodigious use of Screws, in order to the setting and fixing
the Quadrant. Next, As to the giving a motion to it, in order to follow the Sun
and fixed Stars in their diurnal motion. Thirdly, As to perform all the
Subdivisions of a Degree, not only into Minutes but into single Seconds. To all
which I say first, As to the use of the small Hand-screws, I do grant, that in
some cases they may have their convenience, as to the moving and staying the
Instrument. But then since he is fain to make use of two Screws, whereby both
the hands must be employed to manage these Screws, I judge them too troublesome
for that use, and that there is a much better way, whereby the Quadrant being
once set into the Azimuth of the Stars, it shall continue to be so, and to move
along with it, without any trouble to the Observator, so long as the Observator
has occasion to have it remain so, which (that I may hint that only now by the
By) is a small Automaton, which shall continue it for many hours exactly, in
the Azimuth of the Star desired, of which more hereafter.

Next, whereas he affirms this way capable to show Seconds as well as Minutes,
I grant it may be capable; but then I must further affirm, that he has not at
all showed how that can be done, nor is it indeed feasible in his way, for he
shows us not any way how to set it, that is, fix it certainly to any Degree:
Now if he be not sure in the fixing it exactly to a Second, upon that Degree
where he would begin his Division, it is a vain thing to be so accurate in the
other Dimension, for he cannot be more certain, (let him be never so curious in
the Subdivision with his Screw) then he is certain in the first fixing of his
Screw to the Degree, for whatever he varies from the Degree in the setting, he
varies at least as much in the Subdivisions, and consequently unless that be
some ways taken care of, which I do not find, it is a nicety without use.

To conclude therefore, I say, the Frame of this Instrument is extraordinary
good, and by the help of some additions, as to the Sights, Divisions,
Perpendicular and Erection, might be made as good as need be desired for any
use in Astronomy, and 40 times better then what it is now made and described by
Hevelius, or then any I have yet heard of to be made in the world. But as it
is, it is not more exact then the large Instruments of the Noble Ticho Brahe,
which he used 100 years since, and much short of his mural Quadrant, for taking
Meridional Heights.

He proceeds to the Description of his new and large Brass Sextant of six foot
Radius: The Sights and the Divisions thereof are in nothing differing from
those of the Quadrant, nor do I find any thing very considerable in the
Description thereof; it was made use of by two persons in the same manner as
the former Sextant, and like that of Ticho; but what grand inconveniences do
attend that way of Observation, I shall afterward show, when I come to explain
how one person alone may be able to do it with less trouble by half, and ten
times more exactness.

But by the way, I cannot but take notice of what Hevelius ingeniously
confesses, of the great difficulty there is in taking the Distance of fixed
Stars from the Moon, which is from nothing else but the imperfections of his
Common Sights, and all that difficulty vanishes, if the Sights be made another
way. Next, He seems to make it a much more difficult business, to take the
Distance of the Sun from Venus, when she is seen in the daytime; but by a way
I shall hereafter show, it will not only be easy to take the Distance of the
Sun in the daytime from Venus, but from Mars, from Jupiter, nay, from several
of the fixed Stars.

I shall pass by therefore his Apparatus, which seems very great and
chargeable, since I shall elsewhere show a single, plain way, without any
trouble or perplexity, how the matter may be quite otherwise ordered, much to
the advantage of the Observator.

As to what he asserts of his extraordinary care, diligence and pains, in
dividing and examining the truth of his Instrument, I do no ways doubt it, but
that he has proceeded as far as it was possible for one to do in that way he
made use of, but might have saved much of it, if he had thought of the way by
Diagonals on Glass, which I have already described. Yet I should have been very
glad to have seen the Distances, which he mentions to have taken of eight fixed
Stars near the Ecliptic, to wit, Lucidae Arietis and Palilicii, Palilicii and
Pollucis, Pollucis and Reguli, Reguli and Spicae, Spicae and in manu
Serpentarii, in manu Serpentarii and Aquilae, Aquilae and Marchab, Marchab and
Lucidae Arietis, and that to so great exactness, as not to miss one single
Second in the whole Circle of the Heavens, taken at eight Observations. For to
me indeed it seems one of the greatest affirmations I ever met withal, and not
less then humanely impossible, were there no Refraction in the Air, and did all
the Objects stand still in the Horizon, but the Refraction of the Air, were it
much less then it is granted by all, would necessarily cause a variety of a
great number of Seconds. And I durst undertake to demonstrate it to any, as
plainly as any Geometrical Proposition, that it, was wholly impossible for him,
with all or any of the Instruments he has described, to make any one of these
Observations, to the certainty of 30 Seconds, whence if that uncertainty be 8
times multiplied, it will follow, he cannot be certain in the whole Circle to
240 Seconds, or 4 Minutes, which how much it is differing from one single
Second, any one may judge.

I had many other things to have added, which have occurred to me in the
perusing of Hevelius his Book, but I will say no more at present by way of
Objection, having, I fear, wearied the Reader, with showing him my doubts and
scruples, especially about the imperfection of that way of Sights and Divisions
made use of by him: Only, to make my Reader some mends for his patience, I
shall describe a short Apparatus, which I have contrived for this purpose, and
in the doing thereof, shall be as plain and brief as possible the matter will
bear.

Since the reading these Lectures, the Author having been acquainted, that some
considerable Objections had been made against the certainty and accurateness of
his Instruments, and that I had affirmed it impossible to perform what he had
promised in his Book, he returns his Sentiments thereof in a Letter to Mr.
Oldenburg, to this effect:

-- Caeterum percipio vestrates non omnes mihi adstipulari in isto Dioptrarum
negotio, de quibus in machinae meae coelestis Organographia tractavi, verum
etiamsi Cla. Hookius and Cla. Flamstedius aliique plane aliter sentiant,
experientia tamen quotidiana me edocuit atque etiamnum docet, rem long aliter
se habere in magnis illis organis, quadrantibus scilicet sextantibus and
octantibus imprimis quadrantibus Azimuthalibus aliisq, quadrantibus regulis
constructis, quae nempe adeo procliviter commoveri and inverti (dum Dioptrae
Telescopicae examinantur) imo nullo modo possunt, ut quidem Instrumenta illa
trium quatuorve pedum perpendiculo constructa. Rei cum primis in eo consistit,
quod nullam plane observationem suscipere possint suis Dioptris Telescopicis
nisiprius denuo eas examinent ac rectificent; in quo tamen examine varia via,
tum jugiter utut studiosissime illud suscipiatur hallucinari datur. Adhaec in
quadrantibus Azimuthalibus, octantibus and sextantibus, qua ratione examen
istud adeo accurate nunquam non haud magno negotio temporisque dispendio
institui possit, profecto nondum capio, vix mihi persuadeo ullibi adhuc ullum
aliquem magnum quoddam Instrumentum 6 vel 9 pedum utpote sext. octant. vel
quadrantem cum regula vel quadrant. Azim. cum pinnacidiis Dioptricis
construisse, eumque ad coelum felici aliquo successu adhibuisse, and quicquam
solid observasse; si tentasset ac per annos abiquot observationibus continuo
invigilasset sine dubio aliter sentiret. Hoc negotium enim non solum in eo
consistit quod stellae aliquanto distinctius conspiciantur (quanquam fixae ab
eo qui visu pollet and exercitatus est aeque been nudis oculis discernantur)
sed an Instrumenta ab omni part correct commonstrent, an pinnacidia
Telescopica Instrumentis toties ad quasvis observationes rite imponi and tuto
conservari queant; de quibus quidem id omni tempore aeque praecise fieri posse
valde dubito. Quare Clarissimos illos-viros humanissime rogatos volo nisi jam
possideant ejusmodi vastissima organa utpote sext. octant and quadrant. Azim.
Dioptris Telescopicis munita, eaque caelo continuo admoneant, suspendant
judicium paululum, donec longa annorum serie experti fuerint haud fuisse
multoties egregie elusos. Nam ex una alterave observatione quadrant. aliquo
leviori perpendiculo gaudenti obtenta, res haec non est decidenda, sed si quis
per 10 and amplius annos assidue observaverint, tum ab ovo seriam stellarum
restitutionem per distantias susciperit, poterit quaedam certiora in medium hac
de re proferre. De reliquo satis mirari nequeo, eas omnes qui ejusmodi Dioptris
Telescopicis gaudent, nondum locorum suorum, elevationem poli ubi degunt and
observationes peragunt, quantum sciam recte and omnino praecise determinasse
and stabilivisse. Hucusque enim ad aliquot minuta integra Parisiis elevatio
poli nondum est definita, alii quippe eandem observationem 48.49 alii 50. alii
51, alii 52, alii 53, alii 54, 55 imo ampliorem adhuc statuerunt: sicuti legere
est ex discertatione Petri Petiti de latitudine Lutetiae, sed nolo in his
prolixius esse;ad observationes ipsas provoco, tempus aliquando docebit quorum
observationes universas accuratiores fuerint, si modo nonnulli censuram suam eo
usq, rejicere possent. Nam video aliquos inter quos etiam Cl. Fl amstedit^s
invenitur, prout ex Epistola ad Cassinum apparet, jam judicium de nostris
qualibus observationibus tulisse, priusquam illas adhuc viderunt examinarunt
vel quicquam de iis cognoverunt. Nolo quidem vanus esse rerum mearum jactator,
nec unquam mihi imaginatus sum rem in omni isto negotio circa scilicet
restitutionem ste llarum fixarum acu omnino tetigisse vel tangere posse. Sed
hocce penitus mihi imaginor si totum istud negotium Dioptris Telescopicis
suscepissem, quod non solum plurimos annos examinibus trivissem, sed spe sine
dubio varia via (de qua hic non est discerendi locus) cecidissem. Exinde
gratulor mihi me ad eam sententiam nondum transusse, ac me mea methodo universa
perfecisse se quic quid praestitum Dei beneficio erit: an nibil amplius (ut
putat Claris. Flamstedius) quam hactenus and quousque progressum fuerit,
liberum erit cuique cum deinde viderit judicium suum exponere quinetiam
integrum erit alium novum integrum catalogum super additis tot ac tot centenis
nonis fixis, hactenus neglectis alia ratione construere. Verum nondum video an
cura haec molestissima, taediosissima ac laboriosissima, quae non nisi multorum
annorum vigiliis suscipi and peragi potest, aliquem adhuc serio tangat. Unam
aut alteram stellam open Telescopii vel Dioptrarum Telescopicarum, dum
praecipuas ac majores fixas earumque intercapedines supponimus correctas ad
debitum locum deducere, tum nonnunquam distantias nonnullas stellarum capere
haec ludicra sunt; sed omnes conjunctim secundum longum and latum restituere,
tum ductu continuo singulis serenis diebus ac noctibus, tam altitudinum
solarium quam reliquarum stellarum observationibus operam dare, easque orbi
exponere ut pateat motuum harmonia atque Instrumentorum certitudo, hoc artis
hoc laboris est. Quando observationes 20 vel 30 annorum spatio continuatas ab
utraque part aliquando habebimus, nimirum tam quae Dioptris Telescopicis quam
quae solummodo nostris ex caelo deprompta sunt res omnino clarior erit. Interea
quilibet fruatur suo ingenio, ac sua ratione pro libitu rem tentet. Honorificum
nobis omnibus erit pro modulo nostro a Deo concesso, rei literariae incrementum
varia via promovere.

To this Letter of Hevelius I have this to answer, That the Author neither
has, had, nor can have any experience, to show Telescopical Sights not to be
as good as the Common, or that they are less applicable to large Quadrants,
Sextants, Octants, or Azimuth Quadrants, or to any other Quadrants furnished
with Rules, and so fixed, that they cannot be easily inverted, or turned, then
they are to Quadrants or Instruments of 3 or 4 foot Radius. Nor is his Reason
against them of any validity, that no Observation can be made, without a
repeated previous examination and rectification of the Sights, in which, says
he, notwithstanding all the care and diligence, there is a Reason of failure
and mistake. For first, I say, There is less need of rectifying the Instruments
or Sights, after they have been once adjusted, then of Instruments with Common
Sights, all things being perfectly fixed, and so strong as not easily to be
stirred or removed. I now begin to fear, that he has not a true notion of the
manner of performing the same, otherwise he would never have propounded such an
Objection; and indeed he seems to say as much in the following words, Qua
ratione examen illud omni tempore commode and sine magno temporis dispendio
institui possit profecto nondum capio. Though I am very sorry that he should be
so:for first, I thought I had about 9 years since, explained to him the way,
when I exhorted him by all means to the use thereof; at least if he had not
understood it thereby, I should, upon his desire, have sent him a more ample
and particular Description thereof, or have procured an Instrument of that kind
made and fitted for him here. But I fear, he had been some ways or other
prepossest or prejudiced against them, before I writ first unto him concerning
them, at least before he writ that Answer, which I have before printed in the 5
and 6 Pages, for there by it appears, that he was then of the same opinion he
seems now to continue of. And whereas he thinks, that no trial has ever been
made of Telescopical Sights, to a large Instrument of 6 or 9 foot, I do assure
him, (and I mis-remember, if I did not then acquaint him with as much.) that I
had then by me several, and particularly one of Sr. Christopher Wren's
invention, furnished with two Perspective Sights of 6 foot long each, which I
made use of for examining the motions of the Comet, in the year 1665. And if
the same thing can be better done with a Quadrant of 6 inches Radius, then he
can perform with one of 6 foot the common way, I think he might have concluded
at least, that the same thing would be 10 times better done in one of 6 foot
Radius, made after the same manner; of this, I am sure, I gave him then an
account. Now it is not with these kinds of Instruments, as it is with Common
Instruments, where it is not possible to make any better then one may be made of
3 foot Radius, because that is capable of Divisions, accurate enough to reach
the power of the naked eye; but Instruments with Telescopical Sights, are
capable to be made to distinguish minutes, seconds, nay single thirds, if they
be proportionably augmented. Nor is there any need that a man must make 7 years
trial of an Instrument, before he can be certain of the greater excellency
thereof, for I can be as certain with 3 or 4 times viewing an Object through a
Telescope, and with my naked eye, that I can see it better, and distinguish
many more and much smaller parts in it through the Telescope, then I can with
my naked eye, as I could be, supposing I had been viewing it 20 years together.
But yet I must assure Hevelius, my experience has not depended upon 3 or 4
trials only; I cannot choose but wonder why he should be of that opinion, who
has not been less exercised in the use of the Telescope, then any at present
in Europe: Possibly indeed his Telescopes were not altogether so good as now
they are made, yet sure I am, he saw more with them then any one can see
without them, as will sufficiently appear by his Phases of the Moon, Jupiter
and Saturn. But I hope he will not wonder at me, though I do now venture to
affirm, without staying 10 years or more to make Observations, that I can do
more with a Quadrant, Sextant or Octant, of 1 foot Radius, furnished with
Telescopical Sights and Screws, then can possibly be done with any other
Instrument, furnished only with Common Sights, though 10, 20, 30, nay
threescore foot Radius; nor does it at all follow, that the Latitude of Paris
is not yet exactly known, because Monsieur Petit was ignorant of it; but it
rather shows, that Observations made with Common Sights, (such as I suppose
Monsieur Petit's Instruments and others, before the publishing of his Book
were) are no ways capable of certainty to a minute or two.

But I have done, and am sorry I have been forced to say so much in vindication
of Telescopical Sights; and that in the doing thereof, I have been necessitated
to take notice of the imperfections, that are the inseparable concomitants of
Instruments made with Common Sights. Nor should I have published these my
thoughts, had I not found them so highy decryed by a person of so great
Authority, fearing that thereby other Observators might have been deterred from
making any use of them, and so the further progress of Astronomy might have
been hindered. Nor would I willingly be thought to depretiate or undervalue the
Works and performances of a person, so highly meriting the thanks of all the
learned World, both for his great and liberal expense, and for his vast pains,
care and diligence, in the performing a Work so highly useful to Astronomy and
Navigation, and of such infinite tedium, trouble, labor and cost, to the
undertaker. I do not in the least doubt, but that it will be a Work worthy so
excellent a person, of perpetual esteem and fame, and much preferrable to any
thing yet done of the like kind in the World, and that he has gone as far as
it was possible for humane industry to go with Instruments of that kind, and
that his Instruments were as exact, and complete, and fit for use, as such
Instruments with Common Sights could be made, and that he has calculated them
with all the skill and care imaginable, and delivered them with all the candor
and integrity. But yet I would not have the World to look upon these as the
bound or non ultra of humane industry, nor be persuaded from the use and
improvement of Telescopical Sights, nor from contriving other ways of dividing,
fixing, managing and using Instruments for celestial Observations, then what
are here prescribed by Hevelius. For I can assure them, that I have my self
thought of, and in small modules tried some scores of ways, for perfecting
Instruments for taking of Angles, Distances, Altitudes, Levels, and the like,
very convenient and manageable, all of which may be used at Land, and some at
Sea, and could describe 2 or 3 hundred sorts, each of which should be every
whit as accurate as the largest of Hevelius here described, and some of them
40, 50, nay 60 times more accurate, and yet everyone differing one from another
in some or other circumstantial and essential part. And that this may not seem
altogether so strange, I will assure them, that I have contrived above 20 ways
for dividing the Instrument, each of them as much distinct from each other as
this of Hevelius, and that of Diagonals, and yet every one capable of as great
certainty and exactness at least, and some of them 100 times more. I have above
a dozen several ways of adjusting the Perpendicularity or Horizontality of
Instruments, all as exact as the common Perpendicular, and some of them very
much more, even to what accurateness shall be desired, and yet each of these
very differing one from another. I have as many differing kinds of Sights, for
improving, directing, adjusting and ascertaining the Sight, some of which are
applicable to some particular uses, but some for all, by means of which that
part also may be improved to what accurateness is desired. I have various ways
of fixing those Instruments, and appropriating them for this, that, or the
other particular use. I have various mechanical ways for making and working the
several parts of them with great expedition and certainty, which is a knowledge
not less useful then the knowledge of the theory and use of them when made,
there being so very few to be found in the World that can or will perform it. I
have a mechanical way of calculating and performing Arithmetical operations,
much quicker and more certainly then can be done by the help of Logarithms,
which compleats the whole business of measuring Angles. These I mention, that I
may excite the World to enquire a little farther into the improvement of
Sciences, and not think that either they or their predecessors have attained
the utmost perfections of any one part of knowledge, and to throw off that lazy
and pernicious principle, of being contented to know as much as their Fathers,
Grandfathers, or great Grandfathers ever did, and to think they know enough,
because they know somewhat more then the generality of the World besides:
Reptat humi quicung; vult, Coelo restat itur, Coelo tentabimus ire. Let us see
what the improvement of Instruments can produce.

And now to make my Reader some amends for his patience, I shall give a
Specimen or two, of each of the several parts that belong to the perfecting of
celestial Instruments: And this I shall do, in the Description of an Instrument
for taking all manner of Angles and Distances in the Heavens, which if
increased in bulk, is capable of as great accurateness, as the Air or
Atmosphere will ever permit celestial Observations to be made. Its perfection
consists in seven several particulars. 1. In the Sights, which are such as may
be made to discover the minutest part discoverable in an Object, they do no
ways strain the eye, and are fit for all Sights, whether short-sighted or old,
etc. 2. In the Divisions, which are such as will distinguish the Angle, as
minutely as the Sights will distinguish the parts or Objects. 3. In the Sights,
being so contrived, that with one glance of the eye, both the Objects though a
Semicircle distant, are at once distinguished and seen together. 4. In the
method of setting it exactly perpendicular to a Second, if need be. 5. In its
fixation and motion, it being so fixed and moved, that if once set to the
Objects, it continues to move along with them, so long as it is necessary to
continue, or be very certain of any Observation. 6. In its not being difficult
to be made and adjusted, and its not being without industry and design put out
of order, and its being presently, and with all imaginable ease rectified and
again adjusted. 7. In its not being very chargeable.
First, For the Sights, They are no other then plain Telescopes, made with two
unequal Glasses, an Object and an Eye-Glass, of what length and charge shall be
thought most convenient, fixed into square Boxes or Tubes of Iron or Brass, and
having cross Clews at the Focus, made with very sine Hair, or Silkworms Clews.
One of these is fixed upon the side of the moveable Bar or Plate of the
Quadrant, the Object-Glass of which is next the Rim, and the Eye-Glass is next
the Center. The other of these is fixed upon the side of the Quadrant by
several Screws, and care is taken to keep it from bending or sagging. This Tube
is made of twice the length of the former, and has at each end an
Object-Glass, each of them of the same length with the former, and has two
Eye-Glasses in the middle, the manner of ordering which I shall show by and by
under the third head.

But first I shall explain the manner of fitting a Telescope for a Sight. Let a
a b b in the 12th. Figure represent a Tube, in which let p represent the part
toward the Object-Glass, whose Focus is at o, and let n represent the
Eye-Glass, whose Focus also is at o, let s represent the point, where the eye
being placed, the whole Eye-Glass n will be enlightened and filled with the
Object, then make a small Tube about an inch in length, and of such bigness as
it will just slide within the hollow of the Tube a a b b, and cross the Cavity
of that strain two very fine Hairs or Silkworms Clews, which may cross each
other in the Center of the Cavity, by the means of which Box, the said crossing
Clews or Hairs may be moved to and fro, till they are exactly placed in the
very Focus both of the Object-Glass and Eye-Glass, for if they be not there,
the moving of the eye to and fro over the hole at s, will make the Threads seem
to move upon the Objects, but if they be exactly in both the aforesaid Focus's,
the moving of the eye will not at all make the said Threads seem to move upon
the Object, but they will appear as steady and fixed to the Object, as if they
were strained and fastened to it. And though they are exceeding small, even as
small as the Web of a Spider or Silkworm, they will appear very big and
distinct, and much plainer and bigger then a Thread in the Common Sights, at
the further end thereof, will to the naked eye, though above 100, nay 1000
times the bigness, which at the first glance will sufficiently discover the
vast advantage these kind of Sights have above the Common ones. Nor is this way
of Sights at all confined, but may be made to distinguish the smallest part of
the Object desirable, even the parts appearing to the naked eye, under the
Angle of a single second or third of a Degree, which is some hundred of times
more curious then the naked eye can distinguish, without the help of them, for
the Telescope can be made longer, and the Eye-Glass can be made deeper, and
according as the Telescope is longer, and the Eye-Glass deeper, so will the
Object appear bigger, and more minute parts be distinguished, the power of the
eye being increased proportionably to the length of the Object Glass, and the
charge of the Eye-Glass, and the goodness of the both. Now as Sights this way
made, are capable of the greatest accurateness desirable, so they are so
appropriated to the eye, that they no ways strain it, for they may be so
ordered, as to make all those parts that are to be distinguished, to appear to
the eye under the Angle of 3 or 4 minutes, which most eyes are able well to
distinguish, without using too much attention or straining to discover them.
This is no small convenience, to one that is to make many Observations one
after another, for the eye by too much attention is apt to be suddenly wearied,
and it does very much harm and weaken the Sight, to endeavor to distinguish
parts so small, as appear to the eye under the Angle of a minute, very few eyes
being able to reach it at all, and most others not without much difficulty and
endeavor. It Is further considerable upon this account, that it is fitted for
all kinds of Sights: For a short-sighted person, the Eye-Glass may be made to
slide a little nearer the Cross in the Focus; and for an old or decayed Sight,
the Eye-Glass may be moved a little longer or further off from the said Cross
or Focus; for a dim Eye, the aperture of the Object-Glass may be augmented, and
the Eye-Glass made shallower, or of a less charge; and for a weak, tender and
curious Eye, the charge of the Eye-Glass may be augmented, and the aperture of
the Object-Glass made less. And according to the several constitution of the
Observators eyes, the manner of Sights may be accommodated, which the other
Common Sights without the help of Glasses, are no ways capable of.

The second thing wherein the perfection of this Instrument consists, is the
way of making the Divisions, which I think, is far beyond the Common way, both
for the certainty and ease of making, and secondly, for the plainness and
certainty of it, in being distinguished; nor is it capable of less accurateness
for measuring, then the Sights are for distinguishing. And it excels all the
Common ways of Division in these particulars: 1. That it is made certain and
not by guess, we being not at all to depend upon the care, credit and diligence
of the Instrument-maker, in dividing, graving or numbering his Divisions, for
the same Screw makes it from end to end, as you will see by and by. 2. That the
Divisions are not at all difficult to be distinguished, and there is no
uncertainty in the Fabric, nor can there be any reason of mistake, there being
nothing to be looked after, but the Numbers expressed in Figures at large,
sufficiently plain to any one that can read the Print of a large Church-Bible.
It excels the Common ways thirdly, upon the account of its Compendium; for
whereas by Ticho's or Hevelius's way, the Instrument must be made of 150 foot
Radius at least, easily and certainly to discover and distinguish Seconds, in
this way it may be made to do it within the compass of 3 foot Radius. And
whereas in either of their ways, even in an Instrument of 150 foot Radius, the
Divisions are not easily distinguished and discovered without the help of
Glasses, in this way they are made so easy and plain, that a man cannot
mistake, that is able by his naked eye to distinguish Decimals of an inch. Now
that this is so, as I affirm, the Reader will easily understand, if he
considers, first, that the bigness of a minute is hardly half an inch, in an
Instrument of 150 foot Radins, and consequently the bigness of a second is but
^/120 of an inch, which to a good eye is but barely a visible point at the best
advantage, and to most eyes is not distinguishable without much difficulty, and
to very many not at all without the help of Glasses. Now though Hevelius
pretends to be able to do much by the help of the new way of Nonnius, Vernier,
or Hedreus, yet if he considers what I have now said, he will be of much
another mind, a Radius of 10 foot being but a 15th. part of one of 150, and
consequently every 120th. part of an inch, being no less then 15 whole Second.
At least, I am sure, he will be convinced that his own is not true, if he look
upon that Specimen of it which he has printed in his Machina Coelestis, in the
Plate T. with a moderately magnifying Glass, as I hinted to him before. He will
further understand the truth of my Assertion, if he considers in the next
place, that by the help of the Screw, I am able to make the bigness of a Minute
as much as I please; for since in an Instrument of 5 foot Radius, a Degree is
somewhat better then an inch, it is easy enough to understand, that there may
be 30 Threads of a Screw in the length of an inch, and consequently there will
be but 2 Minutes to fill up the whole Circle of the Index-Plate, and
consequently if the Circle be 7 inches Diameter, the Circumference will be
almost 22 inches about, and consequently the bigness of a Minute not less then
11, and the bigness of a Second not much less then the 5th. part of an inch.
Now the Index-Plate e in the first and 11th. Figures, shows exactly the number
of Revolutions, and the Hand 8 in the same Figures, shows the parts of a
Revolution, and both these in Characters large and distinct enough; and
therefore the certainty and truth of this Assertion cannot be further doubted.

The way then for these Divisions is this: Make a Frame of a Quadrant of
hammered Iron, after the manner expressed in the first Figure, and in the
Center hereof fix or raise a hollow Cylinder, whose hollow may be about a 40th.
part of its Radius, and whose unequal part may be about a 30th; leave this
standing above the Plain of the Quadrant about 1/90 part of the Radius, let the
outside of this Cylinder be made as exactly round as it is possible to be
turned or wrought, then make a Ruler or Plate, with a round hole in it at one
end, turned, groun'd and fitted exactly about the abovementioned Cylinder, and
as long as you design the Telescope for the Sights of the Quadrant, this by a
Screw on the top thereof must be kept close and steady upon the said Cylindeer:
Upon the end next the Limb is to be fitted a Socket or Frame with Screws, to
carry the Screw-Frame steady and firm, according to the contrivance expressed in
the first and 11 Figures; this Plate must be filed or bended at that part of it
which touches the Limb of the Quadrant, so as to lie obliquely to the Plain of
the Quadrant, and to be parallel to the Plain of the Frame which carries the
Screw, and upon the part beyond the Limb must be fixed with a Screw k, the Frame
h h h, which carries of the Screw 9 9 9, and the Index Plate t t; the
contrivance of this Frame h h, is to keep the Screw 9 9 9 close against, and
very steady to the Limb of the Quadrant, and is moved to and fro upon the Limb
of the Quadrant, b b b, by the help of the Screw turning upon and against the
edge of the Quadrant; and this Screw by reason of its distance from the center
and eye, (the reason of the placing of which in that place you will understand
by and by) being too far off to be reached by the hand, is turned by a small
Rod of Iron, 0 0 0 in the first and 11 Figures lying by the side of the Ruler
or Plate, which has a small Wheel q q, at the end next the Limb, by which the
Screw is turned round with it, and has a small Handle or Windle p p next the
Center, by which it is made convenient to be so turned round. Upon the end of
the abovementioned Screw-Frame h h, is fixed a round Plate t t, which is
divided into 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5 hundred equal parts, according as it is in
bigness, and as it shall be thought convenient, which Divisions are numbered and
marked accordingly, serving to show what part of a Revolution is made of the
aforesaid Screw; for the end of the Screw 9 9 9 coming out through the middle
thereof, and a Hand 8 being fastened upon the said end, every turn of the Screw
does make a Revolution of the Index upon the said Plate; and consequently the
motion of the arm made by one turn of the Screw, is actually and sensibly
divided into 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5 hundred equal parts, which is so exceeding exact,
and withal so Mathematically and Mechanically true, that it is hardly to be
equallized by any other way of proceeding. This Description will be much better
understood by the Explication of the Figure, and the several parts thereof.

Let a a a a a, etc. represent the Frame of the Quadrant, consisting of 5 Bars,
radiating from the Center, steadyed all of them by a Quadrantal Limb, and a
straight subtending Chord Bar; this whole Frame is to be made of very good
Iron, partly welded and partly sodered together with Brass; the breadth of the
Bars may keep the same Proportions expressed in the Figure, and the thickness
may be about 180 part of the Radius in large Instruments. In the Center of
this, out of the solid Bar, is to be raised a Cylinder, as d d, expressed above
more plainly in the 2d. Figure; the outside of this Cylinder is to be turned
and wrought, as Founders do their Stopcocks, as exactly as possibly it can be,
and the end of the Iron Plate or moveable arm c c c c, shaped as is expressed
in the 3d. and first Figure, must be bored and wrought upon it very well, so as
they may turn exactly true, evenly and smoothly, without any manner of sticking
or shaking, which a good Workman will easily perform. This arm being put on the
Cylinder, is screwed down fast by the help of a Screw-Plate, expressed in the
4th. and first Figures by e e, which has two notches in it f f, by means
whereof a Handle g g in the 6th. Figure, does readily screw and unscrew it, as
there is occasion. Between this screwed Plate and the hole of the Plate c c c
c, is a thin Brass Plate, let on upon an 8 sided part of the Cylinder, that so
the turning of the Plate c c c c, may not have any power to unscrew the Plate e
e, which otherwise it is very apt to do. Why this Center is thus made, and a
hole left in the middle thereof, you will shortly understand more plainly. Upon
the Iron Limb of the Quadrant last mentioned, is screwed and rivetted a Limb of
fine Brass, first cast into that shape, and then very well hammer-hardned and
filed, represented in the Figure by b b b b: This, as I said, by many holes
drilled through the Iron and the Brass, is screwed and rivetted upon the iron
Limb, so as about half an inch in a Quadrant of 5 foot Radius does over-hang
the iron Limb, and the ends thereof extend a considerable deal longer then the
Quadrant, the reason and use of which you will by and by understand, when I
give the Description of the Screw-Frame. The edge of this Brass Limb must be,
by the help of the Plate c c c c, and a File or Plain, cut very exactly round,
to answer the Center of the Quadrant, and the upper side thereof must be
plained exactly smooth and flat, upon which Plain-side the Loop-holed Plate c c
c c must move, as is visible in the Figure. This Plate at i i must be wrenched
or wreithed, so that the Plain thereof must stand parallel to the Plain of the
Index-Frame, and by the wr^^thing of it at i i, as aforesaid, there is room
left for the Screw to lie obliquely, without the Screws touching the aforesaid
Plate, or grating against it. The reason why I put the Screw obliquely to the
Plain of the Quadrant is, that that part of the Thread which touches the edge
of the Limb, may be exactly at right Angles, or perpendicular to that Plain,
and consequently that the Teeth upon the said edge, may likewise be exactly
cross or perpendicular also, and consequently that no bending of the Rule c c c
c, (to the end of which the Frame of the Screw is fastened) may at all vary the
Angle, nor any unequal thickness in the Limb of the Quadrant, but that the
turning only of the Screw shall produce a variation, and that exactly
proportionate to the number of Revolutions, and the parts thereof, showed by
the Index.

The way to know exactly what the obliquity of the Screw ought to be, to make
the Teeth upon the Limb perpendicular, is to number how many Threads of the
Screw there are in a known length, and what the Compass of the said Screw, or
the Cylinder out of which it is made is, and multiplying the said Compass by
the number of Revolutions into a Product, the Proportions of that Product to
the known length, will give the obliquity of the Screw, the Product being the
Radius, and the known length the Tangent of obliquity, thus; Suppose in the
length of 4 inches, there be 83 Threads of the Screw, and that the Compass of
the Cylinder of the Screw be 92 Centesms of an inch, I multiply the 92 by 83,
the number of Revolutions, and it gives me 7636, that is 76 inches, and 36
Centesms of an inch, making this Product the Radius, and the known length, viz.
4 inches, the Tangent of the obliquity of the Thread of the Screw to the Axis
thereof, or of the Axis of the Screw to the Plain of the Quadrant. The
demonstration of this is so plain, that I need not insist upon it, for the
length of the Thread of the Screw is the Secant, the Compass of the Cylinder is
the Radius, and the bigness of the Thread, or the Distance between two Threads,
is the Tangent, in a right angled Triangle, and the Screw is such a right
angled Triangle, wound about a Cylinder, putting the Tangent thereof parallel
to the Axis of the Cylinder, and consequently in the Mechanical ^ryal of these
Proportions, the more Threads are taken to make that comparison or measurement,
the more exact is the inclination found. The consideration of which does
plainly show, how exact a way of Division this by the help of the Screw is, for
the whole Quadrant is thereby resolved into one grand Diagonal, the same with
Triangle, the length of the Thread upon the Compass of the Cylinder being the
Diagonal, and the Distance of the two ends of those Threads, in a Line parallel
to the Axis, being the space to be divided by it, and consequently by
augmenting the bigness or Compass of the Cylinder, and diminishing the Thread,
you may augment the Diagonal in any Proportion assigned. Or by making the Hand
or Index upon the end thereof, of double, treble, quadruple, decuple, etc. of
the semi-Diameter of the Cylinder, out of which the Screw is made, you may
duplicate, triplicate, quadruplicate, decuplicate, etc. the said length of the
Diagonal, in Proportion to the space to be divided.

The next thing then to be described is the Screw-Frame, made of Iron, much of
the shape represented by h h h, in the first and 11 Figures: This Frame, by the
help of a Screw through the aforesaid Plate, whose head is expressed by the
round head k, is fixed on to the long Plate from the center, and by the help of
the Screw I, is forced and kept down very close, upon the edge of the Limb of
the Quadrant; the Frame has 4 Collers for the Screw-Pin to run against, which
are indeed but half Collers, serving only to keep the Screw steady; two of
these are made with most care, marked with m m, in the 11th. Figure against m
i, does rest the Shoulder of the Screw-Pin 3, which is kept close home against
it, by the Cylinder g g, in the 10 and 11 Figures; the sharp Conical Point of
this Screw 9 9, goes into the Conical hole, at the end of the said Cylinder g
g g. The shape of this Cylinder, and the Screw by which it is forced against
the end of the Screw 99, is represented in the 10th. Figure; 7 in the 9th.
Figure represents the Conical Point; 3 the place lying against the Collar m i;
6 the Screw that moves upon the edge of the Limb of the Quadrant; 5 the Nut or
Pinnion by which the Screw is turned by a Rod from the Center, expressed alone in
the 8th. Figure, but the manner how it lies in the Frame, is expressed by p p 0 0
0 in Fig. 1.0 0 0 representing the Rod; p p the Handle by which it is turned; q
q the Nut or Pinnion that turns the Pinnion 5 of the Screw; s r the Collers
or Holes that hold it fast to the moveable Plate or arm of the Quadrant; s s
represents two small pieces that clip the edge of the Limb, and serve to keep
the Screw-Frame steady and true in its oblique posture, and move equally on the
Limb, by a strong springing of one side of it; t t represents the
Index-Plate, which is divided into what number of parts are thought necessary,
1, 2, 3, 4, or 5 hundred parts, according to the bigness of the Thread of the
Screw at 6, a greater Thread requiring a more minute Division, and a smaller
Thread requiring a more gross. These Divisions are pointed at by the Index 8 at
the end of the Screw, and the number of Revolutions or Threads are marked on
the Limb of the Quadrant, and pointed at by the Tongue e e, upon the which is
fastened a small Pin f, serving to carry a Lens over the Point of the Tongue,
which makes the number of Threads appear more plain and big: The manner of
doing which upon the Frame of the Screw, is so easy, that I shall not spend
more time in the Explication thereof, and the manner of making the whole
Instrument, will be easy enough to any ingenious Workman; but if any person
desire one of them to be made, without troubling himself to direct and oversee
a Workman, he may employ Mr. Tompion, a Watchmaker in Water-Lane near
Fleetstreet; this person I recommend, as having employed him to make that which
I have, whereby he has seen and experienced the Difficulties that do occur
therein, and finding him to be very careful and curious to observe and follow
Directions, and to complete and perfect his Work, so as to make it accurate and
fit for use.

By the help of these Indices, 'twill be easy and plain to see how many
Revolutions of the Screw, and what parts of a Revolution make a Quadrant of a
Circle, and consequently 'twill be easy to make a small Table, which shall
show what parts of a Quadrant, divided into Degrees, Minutes and Seconds, will
be designed by the Revolutions, and parts of the Revolutions of the Screw. As
for instance, If I find that 1600 Revolutions and 912 make a Quadrant, then
17788 Revolutions make a Degree, and 296 Millesms of a Revolution make a
Minute, and about 5 Millesms make a Second, thence 'twill be easy to find (if
you observe) an Angle to contain 294358, that is, 294 Revolutions, and 358
Millesms of a Revolution, that the Content of that Angle in Degreess, Minutes
and Seconds, is 16 Degrees, 32 Minutes, and 47 Seconds, which is plain enough,
and much less subject to mistake, then the common way made use of. I shall
therefore proceed to

The third particular, wherein this Instrument excels all others, and that, is,
That one Observator with a single glance of his eye, at the same moment does
distinctly see, that both the Sights of the Instrument are exactly directed to
the desired Points of the two Objects, and this, though they be removed by
never so great an Angle, nay, though they are opposite to each other directly
in a Line. This, I question not, will by all that know any thing of
Instruments, or celestial Observations, be accounted one of the greatest helps
to such Observations, that was ever found out. For whereas other Instruments
require two Observators, for taking a Distance in the Heavens, and Ticho
generally made use of four, amongst which there was necessary so unanimous a
concurrence in their readiness and certainty, that the failure of any one
spoiled all the rest, and made the Observation become uncertain and of no use;
and such Instruments as were contrived for one Observator, were accompanied
with so great difficulty, in the adjusting to both the Objects, being both in a
continual and swift motion, and but one to be seen at once, that they were
generally left off and dis-used, there being so vast a trouble and fatigue of
looking now upon one, then upon another, by many repeated trials, and so many
new settings of the Instrument to the Objects in motion, before the Sights
could be adjusted, besides the great uncertainty at the best, of several
Minutes of truth In this way, the Observator has no farther trouble, then
first, to set the Plain of the Quadrant in the Plain of the Objects, and by the
Screw to move the arm of his Instrument, till he perceive both the Objects to
touch each other, in those Points he would measure the Distance between. That
this is so, he will easily perceive, when he understands the method of so
adapting two Telescopes, that by looking in at one small hole in the side of
one of them, he will be able to see both those Objects distinctly to which they
are directed, how much soever separated. The way then of doing it is in short
this.

Join them together at one end, by a hollow Joint that has a hole through it,
about of the hollow of the Tubes, prepare two square Tubes of Wood, Brass,
Iron, etc. of what length you please, and directly against the Center of this
hole in the Joint, make a small hole, about the bigness of the blackest part or
pupil of the eye, so as the eye looking in at that hole, may see
perpendicularly into the lower Tube, then obliquely place two pieces of
reflecting Metal, very well and truly polisht, so as to reflect the Axis of
both those Tubes, perpendicular or at right Angles, which is by fixing the
Plain of the Plates, inclined to the said Axis, in an Angle of 45 Degrees, let
the upper reflex Plate reach from the upper side of the Tube, so low as to
touch the Axis or middle of the Tube, and let the lower extend over the whole
Tube, from the top to the bottom, and from one side to the other. These will be
known to be duly placed, if looking in at the small hole against the Center of
the Joint, the two round holes of the Tube do appear to the eye to coallesce
into one, and that the eye sees directly through the lengths of them both
alike. Then into these Tubes fit two Telescopes, with unequal Eye-Glasses, and
cross Threads for Sights in their Foci, that they may be both of them at due
distance from the eye, looking in at the side-hole, then opening those Tubes
upon the said Joint to any Angle, and looking in at the side hole, you shall
plainly distinguish at once both the Objects, that are brought into the Tubes
directly, and reflected up to the eye.

That this may be the plainer understood, I shall add a Delineation thereof in
plano.

Let a a b b in the 12th. Figure represent the upper Tube, and c c c c the
lower Tube, and let d d represent that part of the Joint, which belongs to the
lower Tube, at one end, by which they are joined together, and can be opened in
the manner of a Sector. Let i represent the hollow or center of this Joint,
which communicates the Cavities of the two Tubes. Let e e represent that part
of the said Joint which belongs to the upper Tube, being only a hole through
the lower side, big enough to incompass the Cylinder d d of the lower Tube; and
let r r represent a Plate screwed or pinned on, to keep the parts of the Joint
together instead of rivetting, Let s represent the hole in the side, by which
the Eye h is to look in, and f the reflex Metal in the upper Tube, reaching
only half way the Tube, and g g the reflex Metal in the under Tube, reaching
over the whole Cavity; then will n o and p represent the Eye-Glass,
Sight-Threads, and Object-Glass of the upper Tube, and k l and m the same parts
in the lower, and whatever Angle the Tubes make to each other, whilst they open
upon the beforementioned Joint, the Eye h looking in at s, will see directly
by the Axis of them both, and see the Sight-Threads distinctly crossing the
Points of the Objects, whose Distances are to be measured.

These being thus explained, I suppose, it will be no difficult matter for any
man to conceive, how these may be applied to the above-described Quadrant; for
it is but supposing c c, the upper side of the under Tube in this Figure, to
represent a p a p, the fixed side arm of the Quadrant, and d d the Joint of
this, to represent d d the Joint of the Quadrant, and b b the under side of the
upper Tube, to represent c c c the moveable arm of the Quadrant, and applying
two Tubes to these parts, and fitting them with reflecting Plates, Eye-Glasses,
Sight-Threads, and Object-Glasses, at due Distances, the whole will be
performed.

These Tubes thus fitted, will serve to take any Angle less then a Quadrant, to
what exactness is desired, but for bigger Angles, the Contrivance must be
somewhat varied, the Description of which I shall now add.

Let either of the two Tubes for the Sights, be made double the length of the
other, that is, let it be as long behind the Center as before it, and make the
Reflex-Glass, that it may be turned round, and reflect the Ray exactly
backwards, as before it did forward, then fix into this other half of the Tube
a Telescope-Sight, in all things fitted, adjusted, and like the other two, then
adjust them, that they may look forwards and backwards in the same like, which
being done, the Reader will easily understand how any Angle may be taken, even
to the extent of two right ones: For it is plain enough, that the two Tubes I
first described, applied to the Quadrant, will measure any Angle to a Quadrant
or right Angle; and 'twill be as easy to understand, how by the help of the
Reverse-Tube, any Angle between a Quadrant and two right Angles may be measured.

To make this a little plainer to the Reader, let c c c c c in the 12th. Figure
represent the under Tube or fixed Sight, s the hole or Eye-cell, t r a round
piece carrying the reflex Metal g g; this is made to turn round, and the
reflecting Metal g g being fixed to it within the Tube, is carried round also
with it. Let s i k l m x represent the Ray passing forwards by the Eye-Glass,
Thread-Sight, and Object-Glass; then this round piece t r being turned and made
r t, as in the 13th. Figure, is represented, and with it the reflecting Metal
g g, here marked q q, being turned also: the Line s q k l m y will represent
the Ray reflected, and passing backwards by the reflex-Mettal q q, Eye-Glass k,
Thread-Sight l, and Object-Glass y.

The measure of the Angle is found by the same Apparatus or Screw-Plate; for as
much as the Screw-Plate would show the Angle less then a Quadrant, if the
forepart of the Tube were used, by so much is the Angle more then a Quadrant,
if the reverse or back part of the Tube be used; and the same reason of the
accurateness and certainty for the one, is good for the other, without being
liable to any manner of Objection or Inconvenience.

It remains therefore now only to show, First, How these two Perspective or
Telescope Sights, placed within the same Tube, may be made to look exactly
forwards or backwards in the same Line. And secondly, How they shall be
adjusted to the Telescope, fixed upon the moveable arm of the Quadrant, so as to
know when the Division-Angle begins, and when they are opened to a Quadrant,
right Angle, or 90 Degrees; for unless these be ascertained, and fixed to as
great a measure of accurateness, as the contrivance of the Screw is capable of
dividing, or the Telescope-Sights are capable of distinguishing, or the
Perpendicularity ascertained, all the pains, care, industry, and curiosity,
bestowed about the other, are of no use.

First then, For fixing the Thread-Sights of the two Telescopes within the same
Tube, so as to look directly forward and backwards, care must be taken, that
every one of the four Glasses, that is to say, the two Object-Glasses, and the
two Eye-Glasses, must be so steadily and securely fixed into the Tube, that they
cannot by any means be stirred or removed; the manner of doing which, I
suppose, so exceeding easy, that I need not spend time in describing a way to
do it. Next, Sufficient care must be taken of the stiffness of the Tubes, that
they may not warp or bend. Thirdly, One of the Thread-Sights must be fixed as
firmly and securely as the Glasses, and so, that the crossing of the Threads
may be, as near as possible, in the Axis of the Object and Eye-Glass, the other
Thread-Sight must be left free, till by several trials it be found to stand
exactly in the same Line with the first; the manner of doing which, I shall now
describe.

There being two Threads which cross each other, the one Perpendicular and the
other Horizontal, care must be taken, that both these lie exactly in the same
Lines with the Horizontal and Perpendicular Threads in the other Sights; and in
order thereunto, there must be two Frames of Brass, represented in the 29 and
30 Figures of the 2d. Plate, of the bigness of the hollow of the Tube; these
must have groves made in the Tube fit to receive them, in which they may by the
help of Screws be moved, and made to slide to and fro, as there is occasion,
for their adjusting. Next, They must lie so close together, that the Hairs may
touch each other. And thirdly, They must cross exactly in the Focus of the
Object and Eye-Glass. One of these Frames must carry the Perpendicular Thread,
and by a Screw in the side of the Tube, must be moveable to the right or left
side, as there is occasion; the other Frame must carry the Horizontal Thread,
and by a Screw in the top of the Tube, must be made to rise or fall in the
Tube, as there is need. The Mechanical Fabric of which is so easy, that, I
hope, I need not spend time in the further Description thereof, but refer the
Reader to the 29 and 30 Figures.

These things being thus done, from the top of some Turret, or any other
Station, where two opposite places at a considerable distance, as half a mile,
or a mile or two, can be plainly seen, find out two Points, which, at the first
looking through your Glasses, you find to be shown out by the Crosses of the
Thread-Sights, then note those Points very diligently, that you may be sure to
find them and know them again, when you have removed the Glasses; this done,
turn the ends of the Tube, and (if you were looking Eastwards and Westwards)
turn that part toward the East which before looked Westwards, and vice versa,
and find out the two Points you saw in the former Observation, then directing
that part that has the fixed Threads, to the Point that was seen before by the
moveable Threads, find out the other Point, which you will be sure to see
within the compass of your Eye-Glass, and observe how far the cross Threads are
now removed from it, either Northwards or Southwards, upwards or downwards,
then, as near as you can, by your judgment half that Difference, and by the
Screws move the Frames, that the Threads may stand in the middle between the
two Points, then take notice again of the Points shown by the Threads, and turn
the Tube again: Do this so many times, till you find upon converting the Tubes,
that you see the same Points to be marked by the Crosses of the Thread-Sights,
with which end soever you look on them, and then the Tube will be exact and fit
for use.

The reason of this adjusting will be sufficiently plain, to any one that shall
consider the 14th. Figure: Where let v represent the middle of the Tube t u b,
or the place of the Eye, and let w represent the Object seen Westwards, and e
the Object Eastwards, at the first view; then keeping the middle of the Tube
exactly upon the same Point u, turn the end of the Tube t toward the East, and
the end b toward the West, and find out first the Eastern Object e, and
finding the other Cross to direct now to the Point p, and not to w, divide the
Distance between the Point w, and the Point p, as exactly as you can, in half,
which if you chance to hit exactly at first, it will be the middle Point m, but
if you do not, but you rectify it only to r, then by the next turning of your
Tube you will find s, where you must again rectify to half the Difference
between s and r; now the Difference being grown yet less, you will a 3d. or
4th. time set it so exactly, as to see the Points m and e, which lie in the
straight Line with the Center of the double Tube.

The 4th. thing wherein this Quadrant exceeds the Common, is for its
accurateness for taking Altitudes; and this is done by the help of a
Water-Level, for adjusting the exact Perpendicularity thereof. This Level may
be made and fixed so exactly, that any Observator may be sure of the Level of
his Instrument to a Second or two. The Level it self is nothing but a short
Tube of Glass, about 6 or 8 inches long, Hermetically sealed at each end, and
filled with a Liquor that will not freeze nor grow foul with standing.

The Glass, as near as can be gotten, should be Cylindrical and straight, it
being the better the nearer it be to a straight, provided it have a sensible
bending or swelling in the middle, the gibbous part of which should be set
upwards, and a proper Cell and Box made for it of Brass.

This Glass is to be filled almost full of distilled Water, to which about a
3d. part of good Aquafortis or spirit of Niter has been put, to keep the same
from freezing, and also from growing foul, then carefully sealed up
Hermetically, and placed in its Box of Brass, and with hard Cement fixed into
the same, which by Screws is fixed to that side of the Quadrant, that is to lie
Horizontal.

The Brass Box being thus fixed to the right side of the long fixed Tube ap ap
ap, and underneath the Quadrant, so as not to hinder the free movement of the
arm c c c, as at x x; the next thing to be done, is by it to set the Quadrant
truly Horizontal, which is thus performed.

Setting the side a p a p a p Horizontal, and the Limb of the Quadrant upwards,
and looking in at the Center, take notice of two Objects in the Horizon
opposite to each other, observe the limits of the bubble of Air on the top of
the Liquor, on each side of the middle of the Level, and make a mark, then
turning the ends of the Quadrant, set it, till the ends of the bubble stand as
in the former Observation; then look again at those Objects in the Horizon, and
find what the difference is between these opposite Objects, and those in the
former Observation; then halve the difference between them as near as you can,
and by your eye set the Sights to the middle between them, by inclining the
Quadrant, then by the Screw that rectifies the Level, set the Glass-Level so,
that the ends of the bubble may be equally distant from the middle, and convert
the Quadrant again, and see if the ends of the bubble standing at the same
marks, the two opposite Telescope-Sights do see the same Objects, for if so,
you are assured of the perfect Horizontality of the Sights, upon the fixed arm
of a p a p; but if you do not find it to direct to the same Objects, continue
examining and converting, till you find it perfect.

Now this way of Perpendicular being subject to the inconvenience of heat and
cold, which does rarifie and condense the Liquor, and consequently make the
bubble of Air less or more, care must be taken, to mark all the varieties of
those kinds of the bubble, that are caused by the degrees of heat and cold,
which you may thus easily effect.

Reduce the Liquor in the Tube of the 24th. Figure, by the help of Ice and
Salt, to as great a degree of cold as you can, then by the method newly
directed, set the Quadrant Horizontal, and mark the two ends of the bubble with
44, then by gently applying heat to the ambient Air warm likewise the Water,
and observe the expansion thereof at both its ends, and mark them on the Glass
with the point of a Diamant, as 33. 22. 11. 00. which being done, it will be
exceeding easy at any time, to adjust the Quadrant to any accurateness
desired, by being careful to see, that the two ends of the bubble be
proportionably extended, as to 00. 11, 22. 33. 44, etc. or to any intermediate
space.

The Contrivance of fastening and adjusting this Level to the Quadrant or other
Instrument, will be very easily understood, by the Delineation thereof in the
24th. Figure.

Let a a a a represent the Frame or Plate of Brass, which by four Screws d d d
d, is fixed to the Tube, as before. This Plate has 4 upright Cheeks, b b, c c,
between which the Brass Box e e e e, (into which the Cylindrical Glass-Level f
f, is fixed with hard Cement) is held steady, without any manner of shaking.
This Brass Box, at the end of it near the right hand, has 2 Pevots, which are
fitted exactly into 2 small holes in the Cheeks c c, and at the other end next
the left hand, has a small Screw-Pin g, which holds it down fast to the bottom
Plate, and keeps it from rising out from between the Cheeks b b, which a very
strong Spring lying underneath it, between the Plate a a, and the Box e e,
would otherwise force it to do. By this Screw the Level is to be adjusted to
the Sights of the Quadrant, by the way I just now described, and being once
thus adjusted and fixed, it is not easily put out of order, without moving or
altering the Screw g, which may easily be prevented by 100 Contrivances.

The Reason of the accurateness of this kind of Level, will be easily
discovered, if we consider, that the upper part of the Tube being very near to
a straight Line, is consequently either a part of a Circle of a very great
Radius, or of some irregular Curve, very near of the same nature with a Circle,
as to this business of Levelling, and consequently a Degree of the same will be
proportionably large, and the flexure of the Tube may be made of a Curve of so
large a Radius, that every Second of Inclination may cause a change in the
Level of a very sensible length.

This can hardly be performed by the ordinary way of Plumbets, without hanging
from a vast height, which is not practicably to be performed, without almost
infinite trouble, expense and difficulty, and when done, can be of no use in
the World, as any one will grant, that considers the vast Apparatus that is
requisite to obviate the great unsteadiness of Buildings, the motion of the
Air, and a multitude of other encumbrances.

Now the Curvature this way made may be a portion of a Sphere of 1000 foot
Radius, or more, if it be desired, and consequently a Minute of the same will
not be less then 20/100 of a foot, and every Second will be almost half a
Centesm of a foot, which is sufficiently distinguishable to the naked eye. So
if the Glass Cylinder be 9 inches long, it may contain two whole Minutes of
such a Circle between f and f, and one between 4 and 4, and consequently the
said Glass may be set Horizontal to the certainty of a Second, which is hardly
to be ascertained any other way.

But there remains yet one great Difficulty, how to be able to make such a
Curviture, for though the thing be true in theory, yet is it not without some
trouble, put in practice. Very few Glass Canes are so conveniently bent, as is
desirable, and it is as difficult to find them true straight.

To prevent this, If Glass Canes be used, there must be much care taken, and
many trials made, for the finding what pieces, and what side of those pieces
will be most fit for this purpose, for our Glass-House Workmen know not yet a
way, certainly to draw them of this or that curviture or straightness, nor are
they easily ground into a straightness or curviture by the Glassgrinder
afterward, though that can be done with some trouble. But diligence and trial
will quickly find some piece or other, that will be sufficiently exact for any
trial, among those which are only drawn at the Glass-House. I made use of one
of another form, such as is described in the 25th. Figure, which I found to do
exceeding well, the dark part representing the Water, and the lighter part the
Air. This was made of two Glasses, drawn in distinct Pipes at the Glass-House,
but joined together in the Lamp, and the upper part of the larger or under
Tube, was incurvated with its convexity downwards, so that the Water touched
the middle part, and the bubbles of Air at each end thereof, communicated
together by the small Pipe above. I tried also another way, by which I was more
certain of the truth of the Curvity, and could make the Curvity of a greater
Circle: This was by a long piece of a Looking-Glass-Plate, ground very smooth
and polished, which by the help of Screws I bent upon the circular edges of a
brass prismatical Box, and cemented the same very tight, with hard and soft
Cement; this Plate had a hollow Channel ground in it the length thereof, which
served to keep the bubble in the middle. By this means, it is not difficult to
bend such a Plate, into the Curviture of a Circle of 50, 60, 100, 1000 foot
Radius, and the Brass Box can easily be made to fill or empty, as there shall
be occasion for the use thereof, so that the Bubble may be at any time left, of
what bigness shall be desired. It will be convenient also to varnish the
inside of this Brass Box with Lacker-Varnish, very thick and close, both to
keep it from rust^ng, and also to preserve it from being corroded by Aqua
fortis, whenever there shall be occasion to put it in, for the cleansing he
inward tarnish and foulness of the Glass-Plate. This Curvity of the upper side
of the Level may be made, by grinding the under side of such a long Plate of
Looking Glass, upon a Unequal Glass-Tool of 50, 60, 100, 1000 foot Radius, and
polishing the same accordingly of that Figure: The Curvity of the said Plate is
expressed in the 26th. Figure. Now what by this way may be done with Water and
Bubbles of Air, the same may be done with the same Glasses turned upside-down,
by the help of an exactly round and polisht Cylinder or Globule of Glass,
Crystal, Cornelian, Agate, or other exceedingly hard and close Stone, after
the manner represented in the 27th. Figure, for the Ball or Cylinder will
naturally roll to the lowest part of the Concavity, and there stand. But in the
doing of this, great care must be taken, that the Globule be exactly round and
polisht, and that they Concavity of the Plate be as smooth and well polisht,
and that they be both very clean and free from dust, otherwise the Cylinder or
Globule will be apt to stand in a place where it should not, and consequently
produce considerable errors.

And here I cannot omit to take notice of a very curious Level, invented by Sr.
Chr. Wren, for the taking the Horizon every way in a Circle. Which is done by a
large Concave, ground and polisht on a very large Sphere, and the Limb of it
ground and polisht on a flat, for by placing the same Horizontal, and
rectifying it by a small quantity of Quicksilver, poured into the Concavity
thereof, 'twill be easy, by looking by the flat polisht Limb, to discover the
true Horizon. The only inconvenience I find in it is, that the has some kind
of sticking to the Glass, but a small Crystal Bowl, I suppose, may remedy that
inconvenience, and make it fit for use.

The 5th. thing wherein this Instrument is made to excel others, is in its
easinesses to be adjusted to the Objects, and in this, that being once
adjusted, the whole Instrument is so ordered, as that it will remain constant
to those Objects, though they are moved. The want of this is so great an
inconvenience, in all other Instruments hitherto made use of, that almost all
Observations have been thereby vitiated. And Hevelius, to prevent and obviate
this, has found out many contrivances, but they are such, as though they do it
in part, yet it is but in part, and that with much trouble and inconvenience. I
need not spend time to show, how many inconveniences his way by 4 several
Hand-Screws, to be managed by 2 Observators at the least, is subject to; they
are indeed so many and so great, that it was not without very good reason, that
he so often appeals to experience, for the truth is, there was great need of
long practice and much experience, to be able to make an Observation in that
way well, the removal of every one of those Screws, having an influence upon
every one of the other, so as no Screw could be turned, but the whole
Instrument was put out of its due situation, and both the Objects being
continually in motion, the whole Instrument was to be rectified every moment.
There was therefore necessary so great a judgment and dexterity, to manage
every one of those Screws, that without an acquired habitude and handiness by
long practice and experience, nothing could be done to any certainty, nay, not
even to that little accurateness that the common Sights are able to reach. But
this, though it were a very great unhappiness to Hevelius, that he was not
furnished with better Contrivances, yet it no ways tends to his dispraise, for
his most extraordinary and indefatigable care, pains and industry, is so much
the more to be admired, esteemed and honored, and will be so much the more, by
such as have by experience found the difficulty, of making any one Observation
certain in that way.

But that he or any other, that has a mind to make further Trials and
Observations, may be freed from this intolerable trouble and difficulty, I
have thought of this following Instrument, by means whereof the Quadrant being
once adjusted, and set to the Objects, will continue to be so, for as long a
time as shall be desired, without at all requiring the help of any one hand of
the Observator, though he be but one.

My way then in short is this: I make an Axis of very dry and strong Dram-Fir,
of a bigness thick enough for its length, to desend it from bending; at the
lower end of this, I fix into the middle of it, (well bound and hoop'd about
with Iron) a Center or Point of Steel, very well turned, hardened and sharp,
which is to move in a conical hole fit to receive it, of as good and well
hardened Steel; at the other end of this Rod, I fix another piece of Steel into
the middle thereof, that, immediately contiguous to the Wood, has a Neck very
well turned and hardened, a little tapering from the Wood outward, which is to
be moved in a Collar fit for it, as I shall show by and by; and at a convenient
Distance from the said Neck, as at somewhat more then half the Radius of the
Instrument, is made a Cylindrical Neck, fitted with a Collar of Brass, with a
Joint, and other Apparatus, large enough to carry the Table and Instrument firm
and true, without sliding or yielding in its Socker, after it be once set. This
Axis by the Collar and conical hole below, I place parallel to the Axis, which
by some trials is easily enough adjusted; about the Cylindrical Neck, at the
upper end of this Axis, is a Socket of Brass fastened with a Screw, which Socket
claspeth in a Joint, a short Arm, which has at one end a Ball that is fitted
into a Socket, that is fixed under the Table and Frame of the Quadrant, and at
the other end a Counterpoise of Lead, to balance the weight of the whole
Apparatus, about the Quadrant, upon the middle Line of the long Axis, then the
Table and Quadrant is rectified, so as to lie in the Plain of the two celestial
Objects, whether Planets or fixed Stars, and by the small Screws in the Sockets
it is fixed in that Plain. What further adjusting is requisite, is done by the
help of small Screws in the Quadiant it self, which are easily enough conceived
without Description. The Table being adjusted to the Plain of the Objects, with
the Quadrant on it, and all counterpois'd pretty near by the poises underneath
the Table, and the fixed Sight directed to one of the said Objects, the said
Table and Instrument continues to be in that Plain, so long as is desired,
without any father trouble to the Observer, though the Objects continually
change their places, and the fixed Sight remains directed at one of the Objects,
till the other can be found by the moveable Sight. To effect which motion of
the Table and Instrument, a Watch-work is fitted to the Axis, so as to make it
move round in the same time, with a diurnal revolution of the Earth, and
consequently to keep even pace with the seeming motion of the fixed Stars; the
manner of doing which is thus: About some part of the Axis, where it is most
convenient for the Room in which it is to be used, six an Octant of a Wheel of 3
foot Radius, let the Rim of this be turned true to the Centers of the Axis, and
cut the edge there of into 360 Teeth, there being so many half minutes of an
hour in the 8th. part of a whole Revolution, though these minutes and hours
which respect the fixed Stars, will be considerably shorter then the solar
hours; then sit a Worm or Screw to these Teeth, that one revolution of the Worm
being made in, a minute may move one Tooth forward; the revolution of the Worm
is adjusted by a circular Pendulum, which is carried round by a Fly, moved in
the form of a one wheeled Jack, from a swash toothed Wheel, fastened upon the
shank of the Worm or Screw abovementioned; the weight that carries round this
Wheel must hang upon the shank of the Worm, and must be of about a 3d. or 4th.
part of the weight of the Quadrant and Table, that it may carry it round
steadily and strongly; and the circular Pendulum must be so ordered, that the
Observator may at any time of his Observation either shorten or produce the
length thereof, so as to make it move quicker or slower, as there shall be
occasion, which is done, by sliding the hole upon which the Pendulum makes its
conical motion, a little higher or lower, without listing up or letting down
the Pendulum, or else by winding up the Thread of the Pendulum a little
shorter, or letting it down a little longer, by the help of a Cylinder, above
the hole or apex of the Cone, in which the Pendulum is moved.

This whole Contrivance will be somewhat better understood by a Delineation.
Let a b then in the 15th. Figure represent the Axis of Fir or Iron, c the
conical Point at the bottom, d the conical center or hole in which it is to
move, e the Collar above, in which the tapering Neck of the iron Par f is to be
moved. The Axis of this is to be placed as exactly as may be, parallel to the
Axis of the Earth: at the end or head of the Iron f g, is fitted a Socket b h,
with a Screw 4, which will fix it to the head in any posture. This Socket hh in
the 15 and 16 Figures, has a large Joint to be stiffned by a Screw 5, in which
Joint is moved a strong Bar of Iron, about 4 foot in length, to wit, 2 foot on
each side of the Joint, the one end 6 has a large weight or counter poise of
Lead 8, which serves to counter balance the whole weight of the Frame and
Instrument upon the other, and can be screwed either nearer to or farther from
the Joint, as there shall be occasion for poising; at the other end of the Iron
is a large Ball of Iron 7, to which is fitted also a Socket of Brass 9, with a
Screw to fix it and move it, as there shall be occasion. This Socket is fastened
under the middle of a Table s s, upon the plain side of which the Quadrant is
to lie. Upon some convenient part of this Axis is fixed an Octant or Sextant of
a Circle, represented in the 15th. Figure edge-ways, and in the 17th. Figure
broadways, by 3 3 ii, whose circular edge 3 3 is cut into Teeth, as before is
directed; unto these is adjusted a Worm or Screw k, which is the Axis or Arbor
of the Wheel PII; this Wheel is moved round by the weight x, whose Line is
coiled round the Barrel u u, and with it it turns round the Fly n n, by the
help of a Screw m, fixed upon the Arbor o o, in the manner of the Fly of a one
wheeled Jack; this Fly moves circularly the Pendulum p p, in the 15th. and
29th? Figures, which is shortened or lengthned, by slipping up and down the
Cylinder q q, the Thread of the Pendulum being fastened at r.

I shall not now spend any more time in the Explication of the making or
contriving the circular Pendulum, reserving it for another opportunity and
Discourse, wherein I shall show several useful Contrivances and Inventions
about the same, and particularly about this and some other Experiments of
motion, which was the cause of the Invention thereof by me long since, in the
year 65. Upon which occasion, I cannot but take notice of a Publication, made
by Christianus Hugenius Zulichemius Constable. F. in his Book called, Horologium
Oscillatorium sive demotu Pendulorum ad Horologia aptato demonstrationes Geome
tricae; containing a short Description of a circular Pendulum-with somewhat
about the Explication of it, without naming, me at all, as concerned therein,
though I invented it, and brought it into use in the year 1665, and in the year
1666, I communicated it to the Royal Society, at their public Meetings, both
as to the Theory and Practick thereof, and did more particularly explain the
Isocrone motion of the Ball of a Pendulum, in a parabolical Superficies, and
the Geometrical and Mechanical way of making the same move in such a
Superficies, by the help of a Paraboloeid, which I caused also to be made and
showed before the same Society, upon several days of their public Meeting,
where besides many of the Society, were diverse strangers of foreign parts.
This many of the Royal Society can bear me witness, and the public Registers
thereof do testify and make appear, and I was told by Sr. Robert Moray, that
he did then write to Monsieur Zulichem concerning the same. But of this more
hereafter, when I examine some other things in that Book, about finding the
descent of heavy Bodies, and of finding the Longitude of places, and publish
some more certain and practicable ways of doing them.

This puts me in mind of publishing an Invention, which I made and produced
before the Royal Society, in the same year 1666, much about the same time that
I produced the Theory and Experiment of the circular Pendulum complete, which I
called the perfection of Wheel-work, as being indeed founded on a principle
capable of the greatest perfection can be imagined. It is in short, First, To
make a piece of Wheelwork so, that both the Wheel and Pinnion, though of never
so small a size, shall have as great a number of Teeth as shall be desired, and
yet neither weaken the Work, nor make the Teeth so small, as not to be
practicable by any ordinary Workman. Next, That the motion shall be so equally
communicated from the Wheel to the Pinnion, that the Work being well made,
there can be no inequality of force or motion communicated. Thirdly, That the
Point of touching and bearing, shall be always in the Line that joins the 2
Centers together. Fourthly, That it shall have no manner of rubbing, nor be
more difficult to be made then the common way of Wheel-work, save only that
Workmen have not been accustomed to make it.

First then, If there be a certain number, and no more of Teeth required to be
made in a small Wheel, them must the Wheel and Pinnion consist of several
Plates or Wheels, lying one besides the other, in the manner they appear in the
20th. Figure. Where suppose it be required, that the Wheel shall have 1000
Teeth, and the Pinnion 100, and yet that the Teeth both of the Wheel and
Pinnion have sufficient strength; take 10 Plates all of equal bigness and
thickness, and by 2 or more Screws fix them firmly together, as if one Wheel,
cut this Wheel into 100 Teeth, and complete it, then fit the middle hole upon
the round neck of an Arbor, then unscrew the Plates, and place them in such
order, that the Teeth may gradually follow each other, much after the manner as
is expressed in the 20th. Figure, (though it be there very ill expressed, by reason
of the mistake and failure of the Graver) and with such steps, that the last
Tooth of one Degree, may within one step answer to the first Tooth of the next
Degree. I call the 10 Teeth comprehended within the lighter part, a b c d, or e
f g h, or i k l m, a Degree of Teeth in steps, and d c f e, or h g k i, are
Degrees of Notches between the Teeth, and the Tooth b c, which is the last to
wards the right hand, should have been placed within one step as low as e h,
the first of the next Degree on the left side, (though it be much otherwise
here graven) whence all the inequality in the touching, bearing or rubbing, in
a Wheel-work thus well made, would be no more then what could be between the 2
next Teeth in one of the Degrees, which would be much less then a 10th. part,
of what must necessarily happen in a Wheel of one Plate of 100 Teeth only.

Secondly, If it be desired, that the Wheel and Pinnion should have infinite
Teeth, all the ends of the Teeth in the Degrees of the 20th. Figure, must by a
Diagonal slope be filed off, and reduced to a straight, as in the 21, which may
indeed be best made by one Plate of a convenient thickness, which thickness
must be more or less according to the bigness of the sloped Tooth. And this is
to be always observed in the cutting thereof, (though it be otherwise and very
falsely expressed in the 21 Figure) that the end of one slope Tooth on the one
side, be full as forward as the beginning of the next Tooth on the other, that
is, that the end b c of one Tooth on the right side, be full as low as e h, the
beginning of the next Tooth on the left side, (though by the Gravers mistake it
be here quite otherwise expressed.) I shall not spend more time in explicating
the Pinnions, r s t u, r s t u, of the 20 and 21 Figures, which are to answer
the Teeth of the Wheels, they being plain enough to any person a little versed
in Mechanics, and because the further and more full Explication of the form
and reason of this and other Wheel-work, is comprised in another Discourse,
which I may after wards publish.

But to proceed where I left at this Digression, to the finishing of the
Description of the Instrument for moving the Quadrant, so as always to respect
the Object. The conical hole, in which the end of the Axis is to move, may be
made after the form expressed in the 18th. Figure, where a a a a represents an
iron Frame screwed fast to the Floor, b b b b the iron piece, containing the
conical steel hole, c c c c 4 long Screws, by which the piece is moved and
fixed in any part of the space, included within the Frame a a a a; this by a
strong springing Frame underneath, is kept down close to the Superficies of the
Floor, and cannot in any wise totter or shake. There is no great difficulty in
the Contrivance, and therefore I shall proceed.

In the next place then, having showed the way how to keep the Instrument, in
the Plain of two Objects that are to be observed, I shall show, by what means a
Quadrant may be kept always Perpendicular, and in the Azimuth of the celestial
Object. And this I do, by a small addition to the former Contrivance; that is,
Let a b in the 22 Figure, represent the Axis described in the former
Contrivance, accommodated with all the Contrivances of the moveable Center
below, of the Clock-work of the circular Pendulum, to keep it moving equally
round in the middle, and of the Collar e above. But unto the small Neck f must
be joined a semi-circular piece of Iron c d, with a Center-hole in each arm at
c and d, to receive the Pevots i i, of the circular piece of Iron x, in the 22
and 23 Figures; upon the second Floor o o, must be steadfastly fixed a Bow or
Frame of Iron h h, which must have a hole through it, exactly over the middle
of the Plate x, this is to be a Collar for the Neck k, of a perpendicular Axis
l k, which by means of a moveable Center fixed in the cieling, in which the
Point l moves, may be exactly adjusted to a Perpendicularity; to this Axis at
right Angles is fixed a Frame m m, steadied by the Brakets or Braces n n; upon
this Frame the fixed Sights of the Quadrant, are laid and adjusted to an exact
Horizontality, and the Plain of the Quadrant being once adjusted to the Plain
of the celestial Object, will by the circular Pendulum moving the Axis a b, in
an equal motion with that of the Object about the Axis of the Earth, be always
kept in the Plain of the Object, whose Azimuth and Altitude is to be observed.
Now the motion of the under or inclining Axis a b, is communicated to the
perpendicular Axis l k, by means of the circular Plate x, in the 22 and 23
Figures, for the semi-circular Arms c d of the lower Axis, taking hold of the
Points 11 of the Plate x, and the semi-circular Arms of the upper Axis, taking
hold of the Points 22 of the said Plate, the perpendicular Axis is moved in a
proportionate motion with the inclining Axis a b, which Proportion is
Geometrically and strictly such as it ought to be, to keep the Plain of the
Quadrant exactly in the Azimuth of the celestial Object, as any one never so
little versed in Geometry, will easily find; and I shall hereafter more at
large demonstrate, when I come to show, what use I have made of this Joint, for
a universal Instrument for Dialling, for equalling of Time, for making the Hand
of a Clock move in the Shadow of a Style, and for performing a multitude of
other Mechanical Operations.

The next thing I have to explain, is the way of finding how many Revolutions
of the Screw, and what parts of a Revolution go to make a right Angle, or 90
Degrees upon the Quadrant. For the doing of which, I must, in a place where I
can have a good Prospect for a Semicircle, first direct both the Sights of the
Telescopes directly at the same Object, and the same Point thereof, and then
rectify the Indices to o, or the beginning of the Divisions; then I turn the
Screw, till as near as I can measure with Compasses, the moveable Telescope
has moved a Quadrant, and through the three Telescopes take notice of three
Points in the Horizon, that is to say, two Points exactly opposite one to
another, in respect of the Center of the Quadrant, and a third pretty near the
middle between them, in the same respect, which I further adjust thus; I showed
before how I rectified the fixed Sights, so as to look exactly forwards and
backwards, which being accordingly done, I observe the supposed right Angle,
with the moveable Sight on the Quadrant, and with the Sight fixed on the
Quadrant looking forwards, and note diligently the two Objects pointed at; then
without moving the Screw, or moveable Arm upon the Quadrant, I find those
Objects through the moveable Sight, and the fixed Sight, looking backwards, and
directing one of the Sights exactly to one Point, I observe, how much the other
does vary from the other Object, either by being within it or without it; then
I half that Difference, as near as I can judge by my Sight, and move the
moveable Sight by the help of the Screw, so as to respect the middle Point:
Then I observe this second found Angle, by the fixed Sight looking forwards, and
by the moveable Sight, and see whether there be any Difference, and if I find
any, as near as possible, I adjust it again, to half this last Difference, and
so continue to examine and adjust, till I am certain, that the Angles on each
side of the moveable Tube, between the same and the Sights, looking forwards
and backwards, are equal to each other, and consequently are both right Angles,
or Quadrants of a Circle. Which when I have found, I observe, by the Indices on
the Screw-Plate and Limb, how many Revolutions, and what part of a Revolution,
the Screw has been turned to open that Angle; this Number I set, as the Number
answering to 90 Degrees, and dividing that Number into 90 equal parts, I have
the Numbers that belong to every Degree, and dividing the common Difference
between them into 60 parts, I find the Numbers answering to the Minutes of the
Quadrant, and dividing the common Difference between the Minutes into 60 parts,
I easily make the Numbers answering to the Seconds; but these will be needless,
for subducting the next Number, less then it in the Table from the Number
observed, you have the Degree and Minute, and some Number perhaps over, which
may presently be found by one small Table of the common Differences of Seconds.
See page 55.

Here methinks I hear some object possibly, That the Divisions on the Quadrant,
do not exactly correspond to the Divisions made on the Plate. I answer, That in
part they do, and in part they do not. First, They concur, in that all the
Divisions made by whole Revolutions, show exactly the same by the Indices, that
they do upon the Quadrant. Secondly, I say, in part they do not, that is, the
parts of any single Revolution, are not exactly and Mathematically the same
pointed out by the Index, upon a Ring equally divided, that are made upon the
Limb of the Quadrant. But yet, I say, they are sensibly equal even to the
sense, assisted by a 60 foot Telescope, and consequently need no manner of
rectification; but yet if any one will be so curious and nice, he may make the
Divisions on the Index-Ring, according to the proportion of the Differences of
the Tangents, that are subtended within half the compass of the distance of the
two next Threads. As suppose in the abovementioned instance, half the Distance
of two Threads be the Tangent of three Minutes, or thereabout; if we examine
any large Table of Natural Tangents, we shall find the Differences between the
Minutes themselves, even till six Minutes, (which is much more then double
three) does not differ above one or two parts of a thousand thousand, which is
1000 times more nice, then our Sight, even with Glasses, can arrive to, much
less then will be the difference between the Differences of the Seconds; and
therefore it will be a niceness merely notional, and of no use, and as such,
ought to be omitted, and the plain and equal Divisions made use of, they being
as to all sense true and perfect, and proper Divisions, though as to curiosity
of Theory and Calculation, unequal.

Now I have done, possibly some may say, To what purpose all this curiosity? To
which I answer, That though possibly in many common cases it is of but little
value, yet I conceive in general, that it is of infinite value, to any that
shall design to improve Geography, Astronomy, Navigation, Philosophy, Physics,
etc. And to instance in some particulars, I conceive,

First, That one use of this Instrument, may be for taking the exact Refraction
of the Air, from the Horizon to the Zenith; by which we shall be able not only
to rectify all Observations, and clear them from Refractions, which in some
Observations, especially those of Parallax, is absolutely necessary, but it may
give us a new means to judge of the qualities and constitutions of the Air, as
to the seasons of the year, and the temperature of the weather, which are to
succeed. For it is most certain, that there is as great a variety in the
refractive, of the Air, as there is in the heat and cold, gravity and levity,
dryness and moisture, rarefaction and condensation thereof, and sometimes when
none of those do seem at all to be sensibly altered, its refractiveness has
been very much varied, which change does seem to proceed from some alterations
in the upper Regions thereof, far removed from the Superficies of the Earth,
and is sometimes many days in descending and fermenting, as it were deeper and
deeper, into the lower Regions of the Air, before it descend so low as the
bottom thereof next the Earth. But of this much more in another place.

A second use is for regulating the places of the fixed Stars, as to their
Longitudes and Latitudes, and Distances from one another, especially those
within the Zodiac, by which we shall in a short time be able to judge, whether
those Bodies that we account so fixed and constant, do not vary their Positions
one to another, which I have very good grounds to believe they do.

A third use of this Instrument, is for regulating the places of the Planets,
by their Appulses to those fixed Stars, so that not only Astronomy will be
perfected, but the Longitude of places upon the Earth, (a thing so highly
advantageous for Trade and Navigation) will of consequence follow, which
without such an Instrument as this, is in vain expected from the Heavens.

A fourth use of this may be for stating the exact Latitude of places to a
Second, whereby we shall quickly know, whether those Latitudes do vary, as well
as the variation of the Loadstone, which has been conjectured, not without
somewhat of probability, but is hardly to be determined, without some such
accurate way of Trial, as this Instrument is capable of performing.

A fifth use of it may be, for examining what influence the approach or recess
of the other Planets have upon the Earth, as to its Periodical motion, and what
influence the Earth has upon them as to theirs; for I have good ground to
believe, each of these to have influence upon one another, and to cause such
motions, as have hitherto much confounded all Astronomical Hypotheses and
Calculations: Of which I shall say more on another occasion.

A sixth use may be for measuring the quantity of a Degree upon the Earth; the
best Experiment of that kind, that is yet public to the World, is that of Mr.
Norwood, made between London and York: But if we examine with what Instruments
he made it, we shall find, that he was not certain in either of his Latitudes
to a Minute, and consequently could not be certain of the quantity of the
Earth, answering to his supposed mark to two miles, and consequently it could
not be made the common standard of all measure. But by the means of this
Quadrant, all Latitudes may be certainly taken to a Second, and consequently
the error in 150 miles, cannot be more then the 30th. part of a mile, and
consequently a foot, or yard, or rod, this way stated, cannot vary above a 6000
part of its length, which is sufficiently accurate for a universal and common
standard of all measure and quantity, to which all other measures in the World
should be referred and proportioned. this was the occasion of the contriving
and making thereof; His Sacred Majesty having commanded me to see that
Experiment accurately performed, and to give Him a true Account thereof, which
had been before this performed, had not my indisposition of health prevented.

A seventh use may be for measuring the Distance between two places, exactly in
a straight Line. This it will perform to admiration, by the exactness of taking
the Angles, if some length be exactly measured at the place that is to be the
Object, insomuch that it is hardly possible, by any other means in the World, to
come to that exactness, nay, though there were a continued Plain extended
between the two places, whose Distances are to be found, and the same were
carefully measured with Chains, Rods, or Wheels. By this means the Distance of
a Ship on the Sea, can be found more exactly, then any other way whatsoever, by
one or two Stations, and a multitude of Philosophical Trials under this Head,
which are not practicably to be done with any tolerable accurateness, by other
ways.

An eight use may be for taking the exact Diameters of the Sun, Moon, and
Planets, even to a Second, and the Distance of the smaller appearing Planets
from the fixed Stars, near adjoining. Now because for this Design, it may
perhaps seem a little too cumbersom, and by reason of its short Tubes, somewhat
too small, I have therefore contrived an Instrument of 6 times the length or
radius, which will take in an Angle of about 5 Degrees, and yet take in the
whole Angle by one glance of the eye, and determine the measure thereof to less
then a Second. I have likewise invented and made a new Helioscope, by which the
Body of the Sun may be looked on as inoffensively to the eye; as a sheet of
white Paper; of great use for such, as will make Physical Observations of that
glorious Body. These I will in some ensuing Papers describe.

A ninth may be for exactly taking the Level, for the conveyance of a River or
Water from place to place; and under that Head of performing infinite of
Philosophical Experiments, which can hardly be tried by any other way in the
World, about the Refractiveness of the Air near the Earth, whereby distant
places sometimes appear, and sometimes disappear, under the Horizon. By this
means also the Rotundity of the Earth may be truly found, vastly surpassing
any thing performed by the best Levels yet known. To this we may add, the
height of Hills, if their distance be known, or their distance, if their height
be known.

I could have enlarged upon these, and have named diverse others; but designing
it only as an Answer to such, as may captiously put such a Question, I shall
rather leave the pleasure of finding them, to such as shall really seek them,
to be assisted thereby in their own undertakings.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 2. l. 13. r. 9/10 p. 6. l. 14. r. aquilae. p. 13. l. 3. r. Mathematician.
p. 15. l. 11. r. Fig. 32. p. 13. l. 28. r. Fig. 31. p. 18. l. 39. r.
structuram. p. 21. l. 26. r. dena minuta. p. 21. l. 27. r. discriminatim. p.
22. l. 3. r. Fig. 35. p. 28. l. 34. r. quaedam. p. 32. l. 21. r. shaking. p.
33. l. 8. r. focus. p. 39. l. 28. r. res. p. 40. l. 11. r. admaveant. p. 40. l.
39. dele se.



A DESCRIPTION OF HELIOSCOPES, And some other INSTRUMENTS MADE BY ROBERT HOOK,
Fellow of the Royal Society.

Hos ego, etc.
Sic vos non vobis --.
LONDON, Printed by T. R. for John Martyn Printer to the Royal Society, at the
Bell in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1676.

A DESCRIPTION OF HELIOSCOPES, And some other INSTRUMENTS.
THE necessary avocations of business, and the urgent importunity of some, for
the speedy publication of my Animadversions, made me conclude them in the
Eleventh sheet, without staying to Explicate several things which I designed to
go along with them. But having now retrieved a little more of leisure, both for
Delineation and Description, for a further elucidation of what I have said, I
shall make it my third Attempt, to explain;

First, A Helioscope to look upon the body of the Sun, without any offense to
the Observers eye.

Secondly, A way of shortning reflective and refractive Telescopes.

Thirdly, A way for using a Glass of any length, without moving the Tube.

Fourthly, An Instrument for taking the Diameters of the Sun, Moon and Planets,
or for taking any other Distances, to five or ten Degrees, to the certainty of
a Second. Two of these I promised in the 78th. or last page of my
Animadversions, and the other fall in as analogous to them.

Fifthly, An Instrument for describing all manner of Dials, by the tangent
projection.

Sixthly, The uses thereof; 1. For adjusting the Hand of a Clock, so as to make
it move in the shadow of a Dial, whose style is parallel to the Axis: Or, 2. In
the Azimuth of any Celestial Body, that is, in the shadow of an upright, or any
other way inclining Style, upon any plain. 3. For making a Hand move according
to the true aequation of Time. 4. For making all manner of Elliptical Dials, in
Mr. Foster' s way, etc. 5. For communicating a circular motion in a Curve Line,
without any shaking: And for diverse other excellent purposes.


And first, For a HELIOSCOPE which shall so take off the brightness of the Sun,
as that the weakest eye may look upon it, at any time, without the least
offense. My contrivance is, By often reflecting the Rays from the surfaces of
black Glasses, which are grownd very exactly, flat, and very well polished so
to diminish the Radiations, that at length they become as weak and faint as
those of the Moon in the twilight, so that one may with ease, and very much
pleasure, view, examine and describe the phase of the Sun, and the maculae and
faculae thereof, if any such happen to appear when the Observation is made, and
it gives a good opportunity of discovering them, before we have any
advertisement thereof from others. The reason of which will be sufficiently
plain to such as consider, how great a quantity of the rays of Light is lost by
every reflection, and that every reflection does duplicate, triplicate,
quadruplicate, quintuplicate, etc. the first proportion of loss. For Instance:

Suppose I have a Helioscope made of an Object Glass, an Eye Glass, and four
Reflecting Glasses, and that, by the first reflection, I lose of the Direct
light, I affirm there will remain but 1/256 part of the Direct rays of the Sun,
which can fall upon the eye at the last, for if every reflection does lose of
its Rays, and reflect but, and that quarter loses, and reflects only of its
received Light, there will remain but 1/16 part of the whole, and if this
sixteenth part loses three quarters of its Rays, and reflects only a fourth,
it will follow, the remainder will only be 1/64 part of the whole, and if that
be once more reflected, the Ray will return but with 1/2^6 part of its first
light.

This, although it be obvious, and easy enough now it is known, yet I do not
find that any Person has yet had thoughts of applying it to this use. The
generality of Observers have hitherto made use of, either some very opacous and
thick Glasses next the Eye, whether of red, green, blew, or purple Glass;
others have diminished the Radiation, by covering the Glasses with a very thick
and close coat of the soot of a Lamp; others, by casting the figure upon a
piece of white Paper, whence it is reflected to the eye; Others have contracted
the Aperture into a less circle, and thereby let in less Light, and so make use
of one single Ray instead of a pencil of Rays; Others have expanded the figure
of the Sun, by the help of Eye Glasses, into a circle of ten, twenty, or an
hundred times its Diameter. But none of all these ways do come near this which
I now describe by the help of three, four, or more Reflections, as any one upon
trial will very plainly discover.

First, As to the colored Glasses, I cannot at all approve of them, because
they tinge the Rays into the same color, and consequently take off the truth
of the appearance, as to Color; besides, it superinduces a haziness and
dimness upon the Figure, so that it does not appear sharp and distinct. The
same inconvenience is also produced by Monsieur Hugenius's way, of covering the
Glass with the soot of a Lamp, though not to so great a degree. The Figure on
paper, or a smooth white surface is not magnified enough, nor the difference of
shadows so very distinct, though that does very well, if the surface be very
smooth, and the Object be magnified by a Hand Glass. That by the contracted
Aperture is the worst of all, by reason of a certain propriety of Light not
taken notice of yet by Optic Writers, the edges of Objects seeming ragged, of
which I have hinted somewhat in my Animadversions, page 35, and shall shortly
say much more, the whole ground of Optics depending thereon.

The way of expanding the figure of the Sun by the Eye Glass, to me seems the
best of all the rest, but that is apt to vitiate the Figure, to super-induce
somewhat of Color, and does not give the smallest distinctions of lights and
shadows, without somewhat of color, and somewhat of haziness and dimness.

The Glasses of this HELIOSCOPE may be made either by refracting or reflecting
Spherical Glasses. The best way for taking in a large Angle, is, the using
refracting Glasses, both for the Object and Eye Glasses; but the best way for
taking in a small part, and for avoiding haziness, dimness, and colors, is, by
Reflection, either in part, or in whole; that is, either to make the Object
Glass only by way of Reflection, and the Eye Glass by that of Refraction, or,
both the Object-glass and Eye Glass also by reflection, and to have no
refraction at all. The several ways of doing which I have represented in the
adjoining Table, wherein I have expressed ten several ways of placing the
several Glasses, so as to be fit for the use designed.

The first way represented in the first Figure, is, a sixty foot Object-Glass,
contracted into a twelve foot Tube, by the help of four several
Reflecting-plates placed between the Object-Glass and Eye-Glass. The Experiment
of doing which, I produced and showed before the Royal Society, at diverse of
their public Meetings at Arundel house, in the year 1668, and it remains upon
their Register.

This (as I then showed) would be of exceeding great use in all manner of
Perspectives and Telescopes, if we could find a good material that would make
the Reflections very strong and full. And that would not be subject to lose its
Figure, which all our specular Metals are very apt to do; for, by it, 'twould
be possible to contract the Tubes for long Glasses into very short lengths, and
so make them of easy use and manage.

This I attempted with several sorts of Metal, made with,,, Antimony and
Arsenick, but most of these compound Metals I found to be very spongy, and
consequently in the last polish to receive, though a very glaring polish, yet
such as did much confound the Object by a kind of haziness, especially if Putty
be used to glase it, and, for this purpose, Putty must not in any wise, that I
yet know of, be used, it being so very apt to round off the edges of pores or
scratches, which does much contribute to the haziness and confusion of the
Object.

If I made use of Glasses foiled with Quicksilver, which I found to give much
the best reflection, yet I found this inconvenience, that a considerable part
of the Ray was lost, by the double reflection at the unfoil'd superficies of
the Glass. The first from the surface of the Glass before it entered; this, as
it weakened the Ray, so mingling with the other reflection that came from the
bottom, it created some kind of haziness and confusion, if the two superficies
of the Glass were parallel, but if they were not parallel, it superinduced
somewhat of Color, unless it were helped by a contrary refraction in a second
Reflecting-glass, after the manner of that which is delineated in the fifth
Figure, where let a b represent the Object-Glass, c g the first
Reflecting-plate, whose thinnest side is to c, and d th the second
Reflecting-plate, whose thinnest part is toward th, which does thereby take
off the first Refraction of c g, and destroy the Colors superinduced by the
first. The Ray also was weakened much more from the second reflection it
suffered at the unfoil'd superficies of the Glass, from the reflection of the
Air, or ether, which is much stronger than that of Glass, at its re-entring
into the Air. Besides this, I find that the substance of most Glass is so
imperfectly mixed, that there is in the very best much of veinyness and
inequality of Refraction in the parts thereof, and thence, though there were no
visible vein appearing in the body of the Glass, and though both the surfaces
thereof were very truly figured and polished, yet there was some kind of
dimness superinduced upon the Objects, by the rays passing through those
Glasses. But this was not in all, for I found some that did very well answer my
expectation, and I am very apt to believe, that if a pot of Glass were made on
purpose, by a way I know, the body thereof might be made perfectly clear,
uniform, and transparent, without blebs, veins, or sands, which, when I have
leisure and opportunity I design to experience farther. But this only by the
by, in relation to the shortning the Tubes of Telescopes for the Moon, Planets,
and other Objects, because it is not at all to our present purpose of making a
Helioscope, where we make use only of the reflection of the first superficies
of the Glass, and where our main aim and design is, the loss of the strength
and brightness of the Rays, and not for preserving the strength and briskness
of the Rays, or augmenting them. And therefore for this use, the best material
I have yet met with, is, black Glass, black Marble, and Glass of Antimony. For
these substances being very dark and opaque, do reflect but a very small part
of the Rays that fall upon it, and none of those that penetrate into it,
especially if they be thick; and being of a very hard and permanent substance,
are capable of receiving a very curious and exact polish, and qualified
sufficiently to retain and keep it, without receiving injury from the Air, or
ordinary wiping.

But in the making of these Glasses for Long Telescopes, very great care and
diligence must be used to make them of a true flat, and so much the more, by
how much the nearer they are placed to the Object-Glass, and the further from
the Eye-Glass; a little err our at a great distance from the eye being vastly
magnified to the eye at that distance, whereas a greater becomes insensible, if
it be near the eye. Let a b, in the first; represent a sixty foot Glass, whose
focus is at o; let a c d e f o, and b g h i k o, represent the two side Rays
of the pencil of light, this Pencil, by the four Reflecting surfaces (g e, d
th, e i, z k) is broken into five shorter lengths (e d answering to c d, g th
to g h, d e to d e, th i to h i, e z to e f; and i k to i k, and lastly, z o
and k o to f o and k o) as will be sufficiently plain to any one that will but
consider the Scheme.

By this way four fifths of the length of the Tube is taken away, which is the
most that can be taken away by four Reflections, every reflection running the
whole length of the Tube, a lesser part of the length may be taken away in any
proportion assigned, as in the second contrivance, described in the second
Figure, two thirds are taken off, when the same Letters answer to the
Object-Glass, Eye-Glass, the flexures of the side Rays of the Pencil, and the
Reflecting-plates that make those flexures. The third and fourteenth Figures
represent the Tube shortened by two or three reflections, and so serves to
shorten the Tube by two thirds only. These are of use for a very strong Eye and
with a small aperture of the Object-Glass, and when the Sun is near the
Horizon, or its light is a little diminished, by a Fogg, thin Clouds, or the
like.

If it be thought more convenient to have this long Tube to lie always
Horizontal, and consequently, that there should be no need of having a Pole or
Engine to raise the Tube: It may be framed somewhat like that in the fourth
Figure, where the same Letters answer to all the parts abovementioned, or else
like that in the sixth Figure, the Letters of both which being the same with
the former, will easily explain them.

Now in all these, and 20 other contrivances of this nature; with one, two,
three, or four Reflecting-plates which may be presently thought of, the sight
is directed exactly at the Sun, so that there will be little difficulty of
finding it after the Glasses are fixed to their due lengths and positions.

I explained also at the same time to the Royal Society, at their public
Meeting at Arundel-house, several other ways of facilitating the use of very
long Glasses, for other Objects in the heaven, by the help of one Reflecting
plate only, and that was by a Tube fixed, either perpendicularly, horizontally,
or obliquely, for it mattered not whether as to the seeing the Object in any
part of the Heaven, supposing other circumstances hindered not, and the object
could be as easily found as by the common Telescopes of the same length. But of
these elsewhere.

These contrivances with four Reflections, may be made use of by such whose
sight is weak, but such as can endure it somewhat brighter, and would see the
parts more strong, may make use of one of three Reflections only, like that of
Fig. 14. which does best suit my eye.

Next, this Helioscope may be made by Reflection only, without any Refraction,
and that may be done either in the manner of that in the seventh Figure, when a
b represents a concave surface of a black Glass, whose focus is o, which, for
Instance, we will suppose at the distance of forty foot, c d represents a clear
plate of Glass of two flat surfaces, which are made not parallel but a little
inclining, so as the reflection from that side which is furthest from the
concave may be cast another way; and not fall at all upon the third
Reflecting-plate ^ z, and because the wedg-like form of this transparent plate
of Glass, c d, will cause a refraction, and consequently a coloration of the
Ray; therefore there must be another wedg-like Plate exactly as may be like the
former, which at some distance, as at m p, where the reflection will not come
to fall upon the Plate, ^ z must be so fixed that the thinnest part of this may
lie just upon the thickest part of c d, and the thickest of this over the
thinnest of that, by which means both the false reflections and refractions
will be removed. From ^ z that Rays are reflected to g th, and from g th to o
the focus, and so through the lens, z, to the eye x. This I take to be the best
by Reflection; but it may be twenty other ways contrived, which I shall not
now spend more time in describing, it being so easy a matter from the
consideration of these I have mentioned, to make an hundred other variations of
the principle.

To this Helioscope may be fitted Instruments for measuring the Maculae,
faculae, and Nebulae, visible in the body of the Sun, as also the spaces passed
by them in a day, two, three, ten, etc. together with the variation of their
Figures and Magnitudes; but the diameter of the body of the Sun will be better
taken by the following Instrument. And by reason that it will be often
necessary to draw their figures more exactly, the Engine that I have described
in my Animadversions, in the 67, 68, and 69 pages, may be made use of to keep
the Helioscope always directed at the body of the Sun, which will be no small
ease to an Observer, that is to delineate the figures on Paper. When the
brightness and radiation of the Moon, Venus or Jupiter, do somewhat offend the
eye, they will presently lose their beards and look very distinct, if one
reflection from glass be made use of in the Telescope.

Another Instrument I promised to describe, is, for taking any such Diameters
transits, or distance to the certainty of a second Minute, by which more may be
done for the finding the Parallax of the superior Planets, and the Longitude
on the Earth, then has been ever yet done by all the Instruments that have
been used in the World.

1. This is made exactly, in all particulars like the Quadrant, as to its
hollow center, Screwd-limb, Screw-frame, and long Rod to turn the Screw from
the Center; and that the Screw-frame may be kept down the truer, upon the edge
of the Limb, there should be made a small Arm to clasp behind the inward limb
of the Instrument, after the manner represented in the 8th. Figure by w, by
which means the Screw will be kept close, steady, and eaven to the outward edge
of the Limb. The Letters in this 8th. Figure being the same with those of the 1
and 11th. Figures of the Animadversions, and representing the same parts, need
no further explanation.

2. Instead of this Screw upon a circular Limb, a Screw may be made to move
upon a straight Limb, or Ruler; the end of which must move upon Centres or
Rowlers, the centres or axes of which Rowlers must be exactly in the same line,
when both the Perspective-sights are adjusted to the same Object, and the
divisions began. The same thing may be done by a straight Screw, in the manner
of a pair of dividing Compasses, where the same care must also be had, that the
axes of the Rowlers must be exactly in the same line, and the sides of the
Incompassing-screw, being made of steel, must be made to spring about the long
Straight-screw; this long Screw must be made of steel of half an inch of
diameter at least, if it be made 18 inches long, and 'twill be best to screw it
with a small thread, otherwise it will be apt to be moved out of a straight by
screwing a large thread; and the thread, whether greater or less, must be made by
degrees with a pair of cutting-stocks, that may be set closer every time of
screwing.

The manner of contriving the Centres and Sockets may be seen in the 12 and 13
Figures, where the 13 represents it in an end way Prospect, and the 12 in a
lateral or side-Prospect; 1 is the Rowler of the upper Tube, and 2 of the
under, 33 the Screws to fasten them in the holes, 44 the incompassing or
Socket-screw which springs close to the Cylinder 5, 6 the Cylinderical smooth
Socket which guides the Cylindricalscrew, so as to make its Axis pass exactly
over the center of the Rowler 22, and which, by means of a Ring 7 on the screw,
keeps the pointed-end thereof 8 against the stay or portance 9; it is not
difficult how to make a Dividing-plate, and an Hand or Index thereunto, nor how
it may be turned from the center of the two Tubes by a long Rod, as in the 8th.
Figure; nor will it be difficult, after it is known by Observation, how many
Revolutions, and what part of a Revolution answers to five whole degrees, to
calculate a Table of Subtenses, which shall show what part thereof goes to
make the subtense of every Minute and Second of the said angle.

3. The same thing in the year 1665, I performed by a Rowler, rolling upon the
limb of the Quadrant, by the help of two Wires which were coyled about those
Rowlers, and the ends thereof were fastened upon the limb of the Quadrant; for,
by a large index on the end of this Rowler, I was able to move the arm of the
Instrument to any fifth Second of the Quadrant, with great ease and certainty.

I also at the same time made another Frame with a straight Screw, which
opened to five degrees only, with Tumbrels or Rowlers like a pair of dividing
Compasses (after the same manner with this I have newly described, for taking
Diameters or Distances to five degrees) and by the help of very curious Lines
drawn upon a smooth Glass-plate, and Points very curiously made at every five
degrees on the limb of the Quadrant, or Instrument on which it was fixed, and
the help of a very deep Plano unequal lens, whose plain side was turned
downwards toward the Plate, and the unequal side toward the eye, the said
Frame was moveable from five degrees to five degrees, upon the whole limb of
the Quadrant or Instrument, by which Instrument I could with great ease
actually and accurate divide an angle into every five Seconds, and consequently
take any angle to the accurateness of sive Seconds; for, removing the Frame to
the next division, less than the Angle desired, and then by the Glass, fixing
one of the Arms that had the plate, exactly over the hole or point of division,
by the Screw the remaining part of the Angle could be exactly measured.

As to the method of dividing any of these, the best way will be to measure
upon some Plain 1000, 1500, or 2000 foot in length, by two Rods of twenty foot
long a piece, or else by Wires strained with weights, the way of which I
shall shortly describe: Beginning from the very center of the Instrument, and
at the end thereof, to set up so many Dealboards joined to the end of each
other in a straight line, or else to strain a pretty big Line, which shall cut
the measured line of distance from the center of the Instrument at Rightangles,
and then by a Table of natural tangents, according to the distance from the
center of the Quadrant, put as Radius, to set and mark off upon those Boards or
Lines the divisions of Degrees and Minutes, by Compasses or Rules, as exactly
as may be, and mark them accordingly, that the Degrees may be distinguished
very plainly from the Minutes: Then having adjusted the Instrument, so as to
see the beginning of those Divisions through both the Tubes at once, to set
both the Indices to o, or the beginning of the divisions, then keeping the
undermost of the two Tubes fixed to the same place, so as still to respect the
same point or beginning of the Divisions upon the Boards or Line, by the help
of the Rod to turn the Screw or Roll, till you find the upper Tube to respect
the first minute, and then the first degree, and so till you see the last
minute of the five whole degrees, or whatever Angle else you design it to
take in; then (for the first and third way) reckon how many whole Revolutions,
and what part of a Revolution goes to make up that whole Angle, and
subdivide the same by a small Table into Minutes and Seconds, and you will
presently find by the Trial, that you will be able to divide to a strange
accurateness upon those Boards, by the help of your Tubes and Screw, even at
the distance of 1000, 1500, or 2000 foot, and even almost to equalize the
Divisions by your Compasses, when at the very Boards. And by this you may
easily examine, whether your Instrument does make the sub-divisions exactly or
not, which will be a great confirmation of the certainty and truth of your
Instrument. But for the second way, by straight Screws, the Table of
Sub-division into degrees, minutes, and seconds, must be proportioned according
to the length of Subtenses answering to the Radius, which is the distance of
the center of the Rowlers from the center of the Instrument.

Now, because in an Instrument of this bigness it will be somewhat troublesome
to turn the whole Angle by the help of the Screw upon the Limb, which I find
also is somewhat troublesome in the Instrument of three foot Radius, when the
Angle is large, therefore for preventing of that trouble, and to be able
immediately to open the Instrument to the Angle desired, or very near it. The
Screw l (in the first Figure of my Animadv.) at the end of the moveable Arm, is
made, by unscrewing, to draw off the long Screw from touching the threads on the
Limb, which being done, the Arm is at liberty to be moved to any part of the
Quadrant, when by returning the Screw l, the Screw-frame and Screw is brought
down again to take hold of the Threads of the Limb of the Instrument. The only
care to be taken in this action, is, that neither the Index e e be at all moved
out of its posture to the Index-frame h h, nor the Index 8 be moved at all
about the rod of the Screw 999. It matters not at all though the Screw-rod 999
be turned round or moved, so as it be done by the Rod 000, and the handle
thereof p p, or by the small handle x at the end of the Screw-rod, and that the
Index 8 being very stiffly fixed to the said Rod, be moved round with it by the
same motion, without varying its position to the Rod; for being again brought
down by the return of the Screw l, to take hold of the Threads of the Limb, into
which it must be steadily guided by hand, the Index e e will show upon the Limb
the number of Threads or Revolutions from the beginning, and the Index 8 will
show what part of a Revolution there is to be joined to it.

I hope I shall not need to spend time to explicate, how the Center of these
Tubes are to be made, nor how the Glasses and Thred-sights are to be fixed, nor
need I much to show, how the Tubes may be stiffned to keep them from warping
very much; A small matter of warping not creating any sensible error, I am not
much concerned to prevent.

If it be desired to make the Screw less, and only long enough to subtend one
whole degree, which is enough in Instruments of fisty or sixty foot Radius, it
may be done by a straight Screw very well, if care be used, which will very
exactly take Diameters and Transits to a single Second.

Another thing I promised further to explain, was, the contrivance of the Arms
and Joint, mentioned in page 73, as a Universal Instrument for describing all
manner of Dials. For adjusting the-Hand of a Clock, so as to make it move in
the shadow of the Style of a Dial, that is, in the Plain of the right ascension
of any Point, of the Ecliptic, or of the Heaven; or secondly, in the shadow of
a perpendicular, or inelined Style: For dividing and describing all manner of
Ellipses in any Analematical projection; and also, For making all manner of
Elliptical Dials in Mr. Foster 's way. For communicating a round motion through
any irregularly bent way, without shaking or variation, and the like.

First, The Instrument for describing all manner of Dials by the Tangent
projection, must be made in this manner, described in the 11th. Figure, in
which there are two Axes or rods of Wire that are joined together by a Joint,
which from the applicability of it to, and fitness for all kinds of motions and
flexures, I call a Universal Joint. One of these Rods b b, is, by the help of a
Frame a a, placed perpendicularly over the center of the Dial, the sharp or
pointed end thereof c being sunk into the Center, about which it is to be moved
according as it shall be guided by the motion of the second Rod or Axis d d.
This second Rod or Axis, is, by its Frame, to be moved and set so as to be
parallel to the Axis of the World; then the Hand e e of this last being turned
to the hour of Twelve on the Plate f f, the Hand of the first g g will point
out upon the Dial-plain, the Meridian or Twelve of Clock Line.

And so for describing any manner of Dial, you have nothing to do but to find
the Substile, and the altitude of the Style above the Plain, and to put the
Axis in its due situation accordingly, that is, parallel to the Axis of the
Earth, and then by the Plumbet at the end thereof to rectify the Meridian or
Twelve of clock point: For then, by turning round the Axis or Rod d d by the
handle, till you see the Index e e on the Axis to point at those Hours, halfs,
quarters, or minutes you have a mind to take notice of in your Dial; by the
second Index g g, you are directed to the true corresponding point in the Plain
of the Dial it self. But in such Dials as are in or near a Polar-plain, it will
be convenient to make use of a small Thread to extend from the Cross, till it
touch the Plain in the several hours, halfs, quarters, minutes, etc. The Arms
of the Joint in this Operation are to be so fixed, that the axis of the Plate
may cross the axis of the Rod at right Angles.

The Universal Joint for all these manner of Operations, having not had time to
describe the last Exercise, I shall now more particularly explain. It
consists then of five several parts, each of which I shall describe in the 9
and 10 Fig.

The two first parts are, the Rods and Axes A and B, on which the Semicircular
Arms are fastened, which are to be joined together so, as that the motion of the
one may communicate a motion to the other according to a proportion, which, for
distinctions sake, I call Elliptical or Oblique.

The two next parts are, the two Semicircular Arms C C and D D, which are
fastened to the ends of those Rods, which serve to take hold of the four Points
of the Ball, Circle, Medium, or Cross in the middle, X; each of these pair of
Arms have two Centre-holes into which the sharp ends of the Medium are put, and
by which the Elliptical or oblique proportion of Motion, is steadily, exactly,
and most easily communicated from the one Rod or Axis to the other. These
Centre-holes I call the Hands.

The fifth and last thing, is, the Ball, Round-plate, Cross, or Medium X in the
middle, taken hold of by the hands both of one and the other pair of
Semicircular Arms, which, for distinctions sake, I henceforth call the Medium,
and the two Points 11, taken hold of by the Hands of the Axis, I call the
Points, and the other two Points 22, taken hold of by the second pair of Arms,
I call the Pivots.

First, for the Rods, they may be made of what bigness you think fit, according
to the use for which you design the Instrument. The only care to be taken in
the making of them, is, first that they may be exactly Cylindrical in those
parts that move in Collers, and secondly, that the Axis or middle line of them
do cut each other exactly in one point, which point must not vary upon any
alteration or change of the Joint by bending the angle they make with each
other, more or less, nor with the inclination of the Semicircular-arms to any
desired obliquity, nor with the rotation or turning round of the whole
Instrument. They require therefore a very dexterous, and a very knowing Artist,
to make them as they ought to be, to perform their motion with exactness. Let a
b then represent one of those Rods, and c d a second, which are turned exactly
cylindrical within the Collers e f g and h, and these Collers are so disposed
and fixed on some frame, that the middle line or axis of both these Cylinders
may cut each other in the point e; if then both their necks and collers be
wrought true and exact, the Axis or middle lines of them will always cut each
other in the same point, howsoever they be turned round within their Collers;
nor must this point i be varied, howsoever those two Axes are inclined to each
other, so that though c d be inflected to l m, or n o, and so make either an
obtuser or acuter Angle, yet the point i must be the center of the Medium,
where both the Axes concur and cut each other.

Secondly, The Semicircular-arms may be made of what bigness, thickness, or
strength, the occasion for which they are designed shall require; that is, if
they are only to carry the Hand of a Clock in the shadow of a Common Dial,
whether made after the Orthographical, Stereographical, or Horological
projection; or if they are by an Annual motion to show the motion of the Sun in
the Ecliptic, or the aequation of Time, a very small strength is sufficient;
but if they are for carrying round a great Quadrant, such as that I have
heretofore described, there they must be made stronger and more substantial.
Care also must be had, that the inclining the Arms to any angle may not vary
the center of the Ball or Cross out of the point, where the two Axes cut each
other. Both these Arms are to be made so as to be inclined to any angle; that
is, that the Axis of the Medium, taken hold of by the Arms of Iron, may be made
to incline to the axis of the Rod, on which they are in any angle desired, and
being set to that Angle, to be steadily fixed, which may be done by a pin,
screw or wedge; the way I make use of for the Azimuth-Instrument, described in
the 73 p. of my Animadversions, is this which is delineated and explained in
the 9th. Fig., where G represents a socket of Brass, movable cylindrically
round about the end or neck B, of the Axis or Rod B B, the same with a b, in
the 22 Fig. of my Animadversions, and fixable in any posture desired, by help
of a side-Screw h, such as is very commonly made use of for most Instruments
that are fixed upon the end of a three legged Staff, and is commonly called a
Cylinder and Socket; this Socket of Brass has a small Rod of Iron, k, fixed
into it at k, which is near the middle of its concave part, through this Rod
there is made a small eye or hole, and through that hole a wedge-like pin m
being thrust, serves to keep the Semicircular Iron-arms C C, steady and fixed
in any posture they shall be rectified to. The Semicircular-arms C C, are to be
made of very good Iron, or rather Steel, and to have a channel or grove quite
through the middle of one of them, and extending the whole length of a quadrant
of a Circle, namely from n to o, because, according to the variety of
occasions, it may be varied to any point between n and o; and it is to be
observed, that the Iron-rod k must be so far fixed out of the axis of the
Socket g, as n is distant from i, or o from p the middle of the Iron-arms
between i and i, that so when there is occasion, the Centre-hole or hands i may
be moved to p and fastened. At q must be made a Joint in the Semicircular-arms,
so that when the end n of the Arms is fixed in or near k, the other arm C may
fall back from the point i, otherwise the circular motion, in many cases,
cannot be continued quite round, and communicated from one Rod to the other, by
help of the Medium or Plate x. The several pieces of this Joint, as they are
apart and distinct, you may see in the 9th. Figure, and as they are joined all
together sit for motion you may see in the tenth Figure, to which also the
description of every part is adjoined in words referred to by the help of
Literal marks, I hope, will make it sufficiently plain to any Artist to
understand.

Thirdly, The medium Ball or Cross X, must be made of a bigness suitable to the
Arms and Cylinders, and great care must be had that all the ends, points, or
handles, lie exactly in the same plain, and that they be all equally distant
from their Center, at least, that any two opposite ones be so made, because it
is not absolutely necessary that they should be so all four, though in most
cases it be best; and farther, the Handles or Pivots ought to be exactly round,
conical, or cylindrical, and the middle lines of them to cut each other at
right angles, or upon a square; and in general, that all things about the said
Joint be so contrived and wrought that the Axis of the two Rods may always cut
each other in the center of the medium Cross or Plate, and that the said
Center, whatever change happens to the Joint, may always keep exactly in the
same very point, without any alteration.

The shape of this Medium may be either, a Cross whose four ends has each of
them a Cylinder, which is the weakest way, it is described in the 9 and 10th.
Figures by the Cross X; or secondly, it may be made of a thick plate of Brass,
upon the edge of which are fixed four Pivots, which serve for the handles of
the Iron-arms to take hold of; this is much better than the former, but has
not that strength and steadiness that a large Ball has, which is the way I
most approve of, as being strong, steady, and handsome; these are delineated in
the aforesaid Figures, by X x, and X x x.

If it be an Elliptical Dial to be described by the Orthographical projection,
the former way for describing Tangent Dials, gives the lines that divide the
Ellipsis of the Equinox in its true proportions: and if you would have the
Lines that divide the Ellipsis of either Tropic, or of any other parallel
Circle, you must rectify the Semicircular Arms C C of the Axis B B, to the
degree of the declination of that Parallel, and them proceeding as before, you
have the Lines which from the aforesaid Circle divide the Ellipsis of that
Parallel accordingly. Perpendiculars also, let fall from the ends of the Cross
11, give the true Ellipsis in the Orthographical projection answering to that
Parallel.

These Lines thus found, are the true azimuth Lines of the points or divisions
of that Parallel, and are this way traced out exactly, without any trouble of
Calculation, which for some purposes, in Surveying, Navigation, etc. are of
very great use, as I shall afterward show.

The Universality of this Contrivance, for resolving almost all Spherical
Questions, makes it of very great use in Navigation, if it be adapted as it
ought to be, especially for the Common Sea-mans use, who, with a very few
Rules, will be able immediately to find the hour, and azimuth of any point in
the Heaven, sufficiently accurate for most Observations that can be made at
Sea; of which more hereafter.

For making the Hand or Index of a Clock move in the shadow of the Style, made
upon the Face of the Dial, and exposed to the Sun, this Joint, being made to
join the arbor of the Wheel that goes round in twenty four hours, with the
arbor of the hand, performs it without any other Wheel or Pinion in the Dial
or Face part of the Clock; if the Arbor of the Clock that should have carried
the Hand round in twenty four hours, be made to have the same inclination to
the plain of the Dial that the Axis has, whether parallel to the Axis or not,
it matters not at all, so that the Hand be rectified accordingly as it ought to
be, and that the Style of the Dial arises from the center of the Dial,
out-through which the Arbor is produced for carrying the Hand, and placed in
its Parallel respect to the Axis, as it ought to be for a Tangent Dial. For the
shadow-Line of the Axis upon the plain of the Dial, being always carried round
the center of a Dial in a plain, which passes through the Axis or Style, and
makes equal progressions about it in equal spaces of Time, and unequal
progressions upon the Dial-plain, according to the proportion of Inclination,
and the whole Revolution being performed in twenty four hours, and the Hand of
the Clock upon the Face of the Dial being always moved in a plain which
passes through the Arbor of the Clock, and makes equal progressions in equal
spaces about the said Arbor, but unequal progression about the Center of the
Dial, according to the differing Inclinations: And those Inclinations being
both in the Sun-Dial and Clock-Dial the same, it will follow, that the Hand of
the Clock must always move in the shadow of the Style, if the Hand be once
rectified to the true Plain, and the Axis or Arbor make its Revolution as it
ought to do in twenty four hours.

If it be further desired, for the ease of taking Azimuths and Altitudes, that
the Arm of the Azimuth quadrant that is once adjusted to the Celestial Object,
should, by the aforesaid Joint or Instrument, be kept always respecting and
following the said Object in its Diurnal motion, it may be very easily
performed by the help of a small perpendicular Ruler, whose lower end is
Joynted into either of the Arms 11, of the circular Plate X, in the 22 and 23d.
Figure of my Animadversions, and the upper end joynted into the movable Arm, at
the same distance from the Center of the Quadrant that the lower end is from
the center of the Plate X, and that the center of the Quadrant be set exactly
perpendicular over the center of X; but then the divisions by the help of the
Screw cannot be made use of, because the Clock-work it self is to turn and move
the Arm: But it may be done by any Quadrant, where the minute Divisions are
performed by the help of Diagonals. For the Arms of the Circular-plate 11 being
always moved in the superficies of the Cone described, by the radiation from
the Celestial Object to the center of the Plate X, that is to say, the Line
that passes through the Center of the said Plate, and through the two Points
11, being always directed to the Celestial Object, if the Arm of the Quadrant
be moved perpendicular over it, and parallel to it, that also must be always
directed to it. And hence it may very easily be conceived, how the aforesaid
Semicircular Arms may be readily and certainly rectified to any Celestial
Object; that is, by fixing Telescopes or Common-sights upon the Circular-plate,
so as the Axis of them may be parallel to the Line through 11, and loosing the
Screw h to rectify it to the Object by the sight, and then immediately to fix
it in the said posture by the aforesaid Screw; the Clock-work of the said
Instrument having been before that put into motion. The reason of all which
will easily appear to any one that thoroughly considers, that all Celestial
Objects seem, by the diurnal motion of the Earth, to move equally from East to
West about the Axis of it, and would all do exactly so, were they not somewhat
varied by their own proper periodical revolutions, which though it does indeed
make a real difference between their velocities about the Axis of the Earth,
yet that difference is but small; and the same circular Pendulum will serve
both for the Sun, Moon, Planets, and Stars, if at least the Pendulum p, in the
fifteenth Figure, be a little lengthened or shortened, by lifting up or letting
down the Rod q q, in proportion as the Body k moves swifter or flower. And
'twill not be difficult to mark upon the Rod q q, the appropriated length of
the Pendulum for the Sun, Moon, or Stars; but this only by the by.

If in the next place it be desired, that the Hand of the Clock should be
always carried round upon the face of the Clock, in the shadow of a Style
perpendicular to that plain, by reason that the declination of the Sun daily
varieth, the angles of the shadow about that Style varieth also, and
consequently the inclination of the plate of the Joint to the Axis or Arbor
must vary also, and that variation must always be the same with the variation
of the declination of the Sun, which is twenty ways mechanically performable
in Clock-work, so that the motion shall be performed by the Clock-work alone,
without touching it with the hand. All the other directions that are requisite
to adjust the Clock-work to such a Dial, is, only to make the Arbor of the
Clock-work to have the same inclination to the plain of the Dial, that the Axis
of the Earth, or a line parallel to it has; and rectifying the Hand into the
true plain of the Axis, or Inclined arbor, the equality of the motion of the
Clock-work, according to the diurnal and annual motion of the Sun, we suppose
also to be provided for.

If the Hand of the Clock be desired to be moved in the shadow of any other
straight Style, howsoever inclined to the plain of the Dial, then must there be
another Joint like the former, added to the end of that Axis which was
perpendicular to the plain of the Dial, and all the three Axes must be situate
in respect of the Plain, in which the Hand on the end of the last is to move,
that the inclination of the said Axes to each other, may represent the
inclination of the Axis to the perpendicular axis of the Plain, and of that
perpendicular Axis to the axis of the Style. Or, which is somewhat shorter, and
may be made handsome enough, Let the two ends of the Hand represent the two
points of the second circular Plate or Globe, extended long enough to reach to
the hour Circle, then let the axis of this second Arm be placed in the axis of
the inclined Style, and let the axis of equal motion, representing the axis of
the diurnal motion of the Earth, be placed with such inclination to it, as the
axis of the Earth has to the oblique Axis or Style of the Dial, and the motion
will be most exactly performed mechanically, and according to the truth of
Geometry and Calculation.

Now, in all these motions, care must be taken, to provide that the inclination
of the declination of the Sun from the Equinoctial, be expressed by the ends 11,
in the 22 and 23 Figures of the second Plate of my Animadversions, of the
Cross, taken hold of by the semicircular arms c d, upon the end of the first
Axis; that is, that the said arms may, by their revolution, make the line of
the Cross describe such a cone about the first Axis, as the motion of the Sun
does about the axis of the Earth, making the center of the Earth the apex of
that Cone; which will be done, if the said semicircular Arms be moved, and set
to the declination of the Sun for that day. Or, that an additional motion be
added to the first Axis, that the Clock it self may perform it. This may be
done twenty ways easily enough, which I suppose will be sufficiently obvious
to any knowing Mechanic, and that without the help of Tooth-wheels or Pinions,
which in works of this nature are in no wise to be made use of, by reason of
their shaking and uncertainty, which I shall elsewhere describe.

There is one only difficulty in this motion, and that is only in such Objects
as pass over, or very near the Zenith or Nadir of the place, for in those
cases, when the Object comes very near the Zenith, the obliquity of the motion
of the one to the other is so very great, that the first Axis does not move the
second without some difficulty: But to remedy this, the expedient is as easy,
and that is, by having a little barrel about the perpendicular Arm, to carry it
forward as far and as fast as the first Inclined axis will permit it; which
weight may be removed as soon as the Object is a little way past the Zenith.

The next use that may be made of this, is, for carrying the Hand of a Clock
so, as always to move over that point of the Ecliptic in which the Sun is, in
a Stereographical projection of the Sphere upon the Plain of the Equinoctial,
or in an Orthographical projection of the said Sphere upon the same Plain, so
as to express thereby not only the differing right ascensions, but the anomaly
also of the Suns motion in the excentrick of the Ecliptic. And by this means
the Face of the Clock may be made by a Planispherical projection, to represent
the motion of all the Stars appearing in any Horizon that is not too near the
Equinoctial, their Risings, settings, culminatings, azimuths, and almicauters;
Risings and settings of the Sun, the lengths of the Days and Nights, and of the
Twilights and Dawnings, and many other Problems of the Sphere. And, which is a
consequent of this, it may be made to show the equation of Time, which is
necessary to be made use of for setting a pendulum Clock by the Sun, the manner
of doing which I must refer to another opportunity, as I must also the use of
this Joint, for drawing Ellipses, drilling and boring of bending Holes, for
turning Elliptical and Swash-work, till I publish my description of a Turning
Engine, capable to turn all manner of Conical Lines, and Conoeidical; all
manner of Foliage and Flower-work, all variety of Basket or Breaded-work, all
variety of Spiral and Helical-work, serving for the imitation of the various
forms and carvings of all sorts of Shells; for cylindrical and conical Screws;
all variety of Embossments and Statues; all variety of edged and Wheel-like
work; all variety of Regularly shaped Bodies, whether the five Regular bodies
of Plato, or produced from those by various sections or additions, of which the
variety is infinite; all variety of bended Cylinders or Cones, and those
whether round, in the manner of an Oxes-horn, or compressed and angular, like
those of a Ram or Goat; for all manner of Swasht-work, Comprest-work, etc.
every of which principal parts has a vast variety, and the compound and
decompound principles have a variety almost infinite.

Appendix. Concerning the Eclipse of the Moon, observed in London.
JAnuary the first, 167 4/5, being at Sr. Jonas Mores in the Tower of London,
and making use of a Telescope of eight foot, and my pocket-Watch, whose
balance was regulated with springs, I observed the Eclipse of the Moon, which
began at about twenty minutes after five, the penumbra very much cheating the
naked eye; for the Penumbra had darkened that side of the Moon, next the spot
Grimaldi, about half an hour before, and grew darker and darker toward the
edge where the Umbra entered, so that if the light of the Moon were diminished
either by reflection upon dark Glass, or looking through a small hole, between
a quarter and a third part of the Moon seemed eclipsed before the Umbra entered;
but the Telescope discovered it plainly to be no true umbra, but penumbra.

This I note, because such Persons as do not make use of a Telescope, but only
of their naked eye, are very apt to be much deceived in their estimation of the
beginning and end of the Eclipse.

At 5.48. we judged by the Telescope that the Moon was eclipsed six digits, or
half; at 6.19. the total Eclipse began, when the Moon appeared of a very red
color, especially toward that part of the Limb where the direct Rays left
it, which was at the Mare Crisium, which is opposite to Grimaldi. Now the Sky
being somewhat clearer, it being before hazy, with the Telescope I began to
discover a great number of small Stars about the Moon, which appeared yet much
more conspicuous, after I had taken off the apperture from the Object-glass,
and amongst the rest, one seemed very conspicuous, and lay in the way of the
Moon, which I diligently watched and observed, that it was just covered by the
Moon at 6h. 47. 30. the Moon first covering it with that part of it which was
almost perpendicularly under the center of the Moon.

About three quarters of an hour after the total immersion, the body of the
Moon was exceeding dark, and almost unperceivable, being then near the center
of the Umbra, and afterward the Eastermost or foremost part of the Limb of the
Moon began to be enlightened, whereas before the Westermost Limb had been the
brightest. This was also very notable, that that part of the Moon that was
toward the North Pole, a pretty while before the emersion of the Moon out of
the total Eclipse, and even till the very emersion, and somewhat after too,
appeared enlightened with a much brisker light than any other part of the body,
except that which was next the Limb where the light again entered. From what
cause this should happen, I know not; possibly it might be caused by a greater
refraction of the Air near the North Pole of the Earth, and I am much troubled,
that I had not taken notice whether the like phenomenon had not happened to the
body of the Moon before it had past the center of the Umbra. It was very
manifest, that there was a considerable quantity of light that kept that Limb
of the Moon which was next the light, conspicuous by the Telescope all the time
of the total Eclipse; and it is very rational to ascribe it to the Rays of the
Sun, refracted by the Air, or atmosphere of the Earth.

I was very well pleased to observe the Moon to cover several small Stars that
lay in its way, but I kept no account of them, but only watched diligently when
the Star that entered behind the Moon at 6.47.30. would come out again, which I
found it to do at 7.30. seeing it at the very moment of time that it began to
appear again. And it was also at the same instant discovered by Sr. Jonas More,
who was expecting it with another Tube.

At 7.58. the body of the Moon first emerged out of the Umbra at the spot
Grimaldi, and soon after all those small Stars that were conspicuous before
about the body of the Moon, vanished. However I had, before its first emersion
out of the shadow, taken a little draught of the small Stars, according to
their several positures and magnitudes, only by guess, that I might a week
after, when the Moon was gone farther off, inquire what that Star was that had
suffered so conspicuous an Eclipse, and that thereby I might the more certainly
determine the true place of the Sun and Moon at that instant, which I found to
be that in Bayer, touching the Ecliptic, in about 21. 40. of Cancer. The Umbra
ceased wholly at eight of the Clock and five minutes, though the Penumbra then
possessed almost a third of the Moons Diameter, and lasted near half an hour
after, before that side of the Moon was perfectly enlightened like the other.

There was one Phenomenon very remarkable, which I took more especial notice
of, as seeming to me very considerable for the determining that controversy,
whether the Moon have an atmosphere or not, like that of the Earth? And that
was, that after the Moon was entered wholly into the Umbra of the Earth, that
part of the Limb of the Moon which was last enlightened, continued for a
considerable while to have a very great brightness upon it, which extended on
each side that part of the Limb, both northwards and southwards, to about a
quadrant of the Moons Limb, making a representation almost of a New Moon about
a day or two old, and as the body of the Moon was immerged deeper into the
shadow, so this brightness or light grew fainter and fainter, but still seemed
to spread it self very far upon the Limb of the Moon only, and not upon the
body thereof. That which was spread into the body being much fainter and
weaker, and seeming (as I before noted) to proceed from the refraction of the
Atmospheres of the Earth. Nor was this only conspicuous at the Moons entering
into the total darkness, but as remarkable also at the exitus thereof out of
the same, insomuch that some of those Persons, who at the same time viewed the
same with me, verily believed the Moon was not wholly eclipsed so soon as
really it was, nor continued so long in that obscurity, as very visibly it did
by the space of two or three minutes. For I took especial notice when this
inlightning of the Limb began again to appear, and I observed its increase, and
spreading about the Limb, till the very instant that the immediate light of the
Sun touched the very extremity of the Limb it self, which was indeed so very
briskly bright and strong, that it did not only soon make the other light
disappear, but also all the Telescopical Stars that were near to it, and
toward the end also many of the more conspicuous Stars, especially such as
were not far from the body of the Moon.

Postscript.
I Should have here taken leave of my Reader for this time, but that finding in
the Transactions a passage inserted out of the French Journal de Scavans, about
the invention of applying a Spring to the Balance of a Watch, for the
regulating the motion thereof, without at all taking notice that this Invention
was first found out by an Englishman, and long since published to the World: I
must beg the Readers patience, whilst I, in vindication of my own right against
some unhandsome proceedings, do acquaint him with the state of this matter.

About seventeen years since, being very inquisitive about the regulating the
measure of Time, in order to find the Longitude, I did from an Art of
Invention, or mechanical Algebra (which I was then Master of) find out and
perfect this contrivance, both as to the Theory and Experimental verification
thereof, of which I then discoursed to diverse of my Friends, but concealed the
modus.

About fifteen years since, to wit, in the year 1660, presently after his
Majesty's happy Restoration, I was in treaty with several Persons of Honor
(some of which are yet living, though one of them is since dead, but I have
sufficient evidence to produce in his own writing that he was one) for the
discovery thereof, upon proposed Articles of encouragement. This I can prove by
undeniable Witnesses yet living, and I have still all the Papers, Articles, and
Transactions of this matter by me, in their own handwriting.

In order to bring this Treaty to pass, I was necessitated to discover
something of Invention about measuring Time, which was, this way of applying
Springs to the arbor of the Balance of a Watch, for the regulating the
vibrations thereof in all postures. And this I did, to the end that I might
gain somewhat of belief in those Noble Persons (with whom I was to treat) That
I had somewhat more than ordinary, and was not one of the heard-of Pretenders
to that Invention: which effect it had, and their Treaty with me had finally
been concluded for several Thousand pounds, had not the inserting one Clause
broke it off, which was, That if after I had discovered my Inventions about the
finding the Longitude by Watches, or otherwise (though in themselves
sufficient) They, or any other Person should find a way of improving my
Principles, he or they should have the benefit thereof, during the term of the
Pattent, and not I. To which Clause I could no ways agree, knowing 'twas easy
to vary my Principles an hundred ways, and 'twas not improbable but that there
might be made some addition of convenience to what I should at first discover,
it being facile Inventis addere. And judging it most unreasonable to be
deprived of the benefit of my Inventions, in themselves sufficient, because
others might vary them, or any other ways improve them, of which it was very
probable they would have no thought, if they had not the advantage of being
instructed by my discovery, it having lain hid some thousands of years already,
as indeed the effect has made evident and certain, there having been nothing
done by any body else upon that matter for these fifteen years.

Upon this point our Treaty was broken off, and I concealed the farther
discovery of any of the other more considerable parts of my Inventions, for the
regulating of Timekeepers, as hoping I might find some better opportunity of
publishing them together with my way of finding the Longitude of Places, for
which I hoped to have had some benefit for all the labor, study, and charge I
had been at for the perfecting thereof. Upon this I was told, That I had better
have then discovered all, since there were others that would find it out within
six months; to which I answered, that I would try them one seven years; and it
is now above twice seven, and I do not find it yet found out. Indeed Mr. Hugens
has made use of that part I discovered, and somewhat Mr. Leibnitz has hit
upon, but both of them are imperfect as I shall hereafter show.

It Is true, I was alarmed by one of those Persons about two years after that,
who told me, That he had news that the Longitude was found out by a Person of
Honor; by a way of carrying Mr. Hugens 's Pendulum-Clock, at Sea, by the help
of a Ball and Socket, hung to the under side of the Deck of a Ship. But having
a description of it, I presently told that Person, That that Invention would do
mine no harm; and indeed we experimentally found it useless to that effect not
long after, upon a trial made of carrying the said Clocks off to Sea in one of
His Majesty's Pleasure-Boats, in the year 1662.

The Invention indeed in it self was ingenious, and did much more than what Mr.
Hugens did expect, as I was then informed by the Right Honorable the Earl of
Kincardine, the Author and perfecter of that part of the Invention. But wanting
a little addition (which I concealed, and Mr. Hugens has not got yet that I
hear of) it failed of the effect that was expected. Notwithstanding this, it
was not long after published in Low Dutch, and presently after in English;
wherein what made for it was related, but what made against it was concealed,
though they were both equally known.

But on the otherside, all that I could obtain was a Catalogue of Difficulties,
first, in the doing of it, secondly, in the bringing it into public use,
thirdly, in making advantage of it. Difficulties were propounded from the
alteration of Climates, Airs, heats and colds, temperature of Springs, the
nature of Vibrations, the wearing of Materials, the motion of the Ship, and
diverse others. Next, it would be difficult to bring it to use, for Seamen knew
their way already to any Port, and-Men would not be at the unnecessary charge
of the Apparatus, and observations of the Time could not be well made at Sea,
and they would no where be of use but in East and West India Voyages, which
were so perfectly understood that every Common Seaman almost knew how to Pilot
a Ship thither. And as for making benefit, all People lost by such
undertakings; much had been talked about the Praemiums for the Longitude, but
there was never any such thing, no King or State would ever give a farthing for
it, and the like; All which I let pass.

At the earnest importunity of a Dear Friend of mine, since deceased, I did, in
the year 1664, read several of my first Cutlerian Lectures upon that Subject,
in the open Hall at Gresham College, at which were present, besides a great
number of the Royal Society, many Strangers unknown to me. I there showed the
ground and reason of that application of Springs to the Balance of a Watch,
for regulating its motion, and explained briefly the true nature and principle
of Springs, to show the Physical and Geometrical ground of them. And I
explained above twenty several ways by which Springs might be applied to do the
same thing, and how the Vibrations might be so regulated, as to make their
Durations either all equal, or the greater slower or quicker than the less, and
that in any proportion assigned. Some of these ways were applicable to lesser
Vibrations, others to greater, as of 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. or what number of
Revolutions were desired; the models of which I there produced, and I did at
the same time show wherein the aforesaid Sea-Clocks were defective.

All these particulars also were at several other times, at the Public
meetings of the Royal Society, discoursed, experimented, and several Models
produced. I did also, at the earnest desire of some Friends, in the year 1664
and 1665, cause some of the said Watches to be made, though I was unwilling to
add any of the better applications of the Spring to them, as waiting a better
opportunity for my advantage.

Of all these things the Publisher of the Transactions was not ignorant, and I
doubt not but Mr. Hugens has had an account, at least he might have read so
much of it in the History of the Royal Society as was enough to have given him
notice of it, for page 247 of that History, amongst other Experimented
Inventions, there are recounted several new ways of Pendulum Watches for the
Pocket, wherein the motion is regulated by Springs, etc. The account of the
several ways was given somewhat larger to the Learned Author of that excellent
History, though he, as judging it more proper to his design, was pleased to
give only this summary account. Mr. Hugens might therefore, if he had pleased,
have mentioned the first Inventer, Nam ingenuum est fateri; as he might also
that of the Circular Pendulum, which is mentioned in the same page of the
aforesaid History.

But though he would not please to confess he knew my published Invention, yet
I am sure he has manifested, that he knows no more than what I had formerly
discovered, he having not in least mentioned the oath Contrivance, which is the
principal, and without which the first part of the Invention is but lame and
imperfect, and does but limp on one leg, and will some time hobble, and
stumble, and stand still. And the said Watches will not be tres Just, nor show
the Longitude at Sea or Land, but, on the contrary, they will be subject to
most Inequalities of motion and carriage, and with many of those motions will
be apt to stand still, whatever to the contrary is affirmed in the French
Journal, or in the English Transactions.

I forbear now to mention any further the carriage of the Writer of the
Transactions in this Affair, and begging my Readers excuse for this digression,
I shall conclude this Tract with a short communication of the general ground of
my Invention for Pocket-Watches, the number of particular ways being very
great, which (that the true Lovers of Art, and they only may have the benefit
of) I have set down in the Universal and Real Character of the late Reverend
Prelate, my Honored Friend Dr. John Wilkins, Lord Bishop of Chester, deceased.
In which I could wish, that all things of this nature were communicated, it
being a Character and Language so truly Philosophical, and so perfectly and
thoroughly Methodical, that there seems to be nothing wanting to make it have
the utmost perfection, and highest Idea of any Character or Language
imaginable, as well for Philosophical as for common and constant use. And I
have this further to desire of my Reader, who will be at the pains to decipher
and understand this description, that he would only make use of it for his own
information, and not communicate the explication thereof to any that has not
had the same curiosity with himself.

This I do, not so much to hinder the spreading of this Description here
delivered, as to revive, and, if possible, bring into use and practice that
excellent Design: It being a Character and Language perfectly free from all
manner of ambiguity, and yet the most copious, expressive and significative of
any thing or Notion imaginable, and, which recommends it most to common use,
the most easy to be understood and learnt in the World. See Table the third.

To fill the vacancy of the ensuing page, I have here added a decimate of the
centesme of the Inventions I intend to publish, though possibly not in the same
order, but as I can get opportunity and leisure; most of which, I hope, will be
as useful to Mankind, as they are yet unknown and new.

1. A way of Regulating all sorts of Watches or Timekeepers, so as to make any
way to equalize, if not exceed the Pendulum-Clocks now used. 2. The true
Mathematical and Mechanichal form of all manner of Arches for Building, with
the true butment necessary to each of them. A Problem which no Architectonick
Writer has ever yet attempted, much less performed. abccc ddeeeee f gg
iiiiiiii llmmmmnnnnnooprr sssttttttuuuuuuuux. 3. The true Theory of Elasticity
or Springiness, and a particular Explication thereof in several Subjects in
which it is to be found: And the way of computing the velocity of Bodies moved
by them. ceiiinosssttuu. 4. A very plain and practical way of counterpoising
Liquors, of great use in Hydraulicks. Discovered. 5. A new sort of
Object-Glasses for Telescopes and Microscopes, much outdoing any yet used.
Discovered. 6. A new Selenoscope, easy enough to be made and used, whereby the
smallest inequality of the Moons surface and limb may be most plainly
distinguished. Discovered. 7. A new sort of Horizontal-Sayls for a Mill,
performing the most that any Horizontal-Sayls of that bigness are capable of;
and the various use of that principle on diverse other occasions. Discovered. 8.
A new way of Post-Charriot for traveling far, without much wearying Horse or
Rider. Discovered. 9. A new sort of Philosophical-Scales, of great use in
Experimental Philosophy. cdeiinnoopsssttuu. 10. A new Invention in Mechanics
of prodigious use, exceeding the chimera's of perpetual motions for several
uses. aaaaebccddeeeeeegiiilmmmnnooppqrrrrs tttuuuuu. aaeffhiiiillnrrsstuu.
FINIS.
(...)



LAMPAS: OR, DESCRIPTIONS OF SOME Mechanical Improvements OF Lamps and
Waterpoises. Together with some other PHYSICAL and MECHANICAL DISCOVERIES.

MADE BY ROBERT HOOK, Fellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON, Printed for John Martyn, Printer to the Royal Society, at the Bell in
St. Paul's Churchyard. 1677.

LAMPAS: OR, A DESCRIPTION OF SOME Mechanical Improvements OF LAMPS.
THe Hypothesis of Fire and Flame I did about eleven years since publish in the
16. Observation Page 103, 104, and 105. of my Micrographia, which has so far
obtained, that many Authors have since made use of it, and asserted it; nor
have I yet met with one considerable objection against it. It shall not
therefore be my business at present to discourse of, or farther explain that
Theory, which any one upon a strict inquiry into, I question not, will find
cause sufficient to confirm him in, but rather to mention some pleasant and
beneficial uses thereof, and to hint some Mechanical contrivances for the
supplying the Pabulum Oil or Spirit by the same Degrees by which it is consumed
in the flame of a Lamp, that great dissolvent.

I do not here design to show a way how to make a perpetual Lamp, that being a
Chimera which my Hypothesis of flame does seem to destroy, for the dissolvend
must in time be dissolved: But to show a way how to make the Receptacle of a
Lamp in such manner as that it shall continue to supply the Pabulum to the
flame equally and for a very long time till it be all consumed. The
consideration of which Problem first put me upon the enquiry after a
counterpoise for Liquors of Fluids, which is also of very great use in
Hydraulicks, as I shall hereafter have occasion to manifest.

This I can do by very many contrivances, depending from very differing
Principles, all and every of which may be fitted so as to supply the Oil or
Pabulum of the Lamp in such quantity, and after such manner and proportion as
shall be desired. I shall now omit all the other ways of performing this
effect, though diverse of them are as much or more considerable than any of
these I here mention. And having promised in the 32 Page of my description of
Helioscopes to publish a Counterpoise for Liquors, I shall only explain several
ways by the help of these Counterpoises to do whatsoever can be required, as to
the manner and quantity of supplying Oil to the flame.

The chief design of the Counterpoise in this inquisition is to keep the
Superficies of the Liquor (whether Oil, Spirit of Wine, Oil of Turpentine, or
the like) whatever quantity there be in the Vessel, always to the same height,
so that the said Pabulum shall always be equally distant from the bottom of the
flame, and the Wick or flame being once placed at a convenient height or
distance above the Superficies of the Oil, shall not be deserted by the said
Superficies till the whole quantity be consumed; but it is as easy to contrive
it, to supply it by decreasing or increasing degrees, which are conveniences
that none of all the Lamps I have ever yet met with have had, that was
tolerable for use. The most ingenious is that which is commonly known by the
name of Cardans Lamp, as being published and very probably invented by Cardan,
which does in some manner supply the wasting and decay of the Oil caused by the
flames Consumption. But then it is subject to a great many inconveniences,
which make it intolerable and disused: The first is, though it does supply the
defects of the Oil to the Wick, yet it does it not constantly and equally, but
by starts and gluts; for after the receptacle by the Wick is filled, the
Superficies of the Oil continues to sink by degrees a considerable space below
the flame, before there be any more supply added from the great Magazine or
Repository, and till the Air can break in, (which it does very unequally) so
that there sometimes comes down so great a quantity that the receptacle is
over-filled, and the flame extinguished, and these gluts are more unequal the
bigger the Magazine be in proportion to the Receptacle by the flame, and the
more the quantity of the Oil be that is suspended, and the more the Air space
be above the Oil, and the more tenacious or sluggish the constitution of the
Oil is.

The second inconvenience of Cardans Lamp is that the Air is apt to rarifie it
with heat, so as sometimes to drive down so much Oil as to overflow the
receptacle, and choke the flame.

The third Inconvenience is, that the Wick by the sinking of the oil does
sooner decay the flame, being sometimes a little higher and sometimes lower
upon the Wick; for if the Wick rise up into the hollow dead part of the Cone of
the flame, the streams and coals of the Oil will be so caked together as to
dead the flame and much to diminish the light and heat thereof, whereas if the
Wick be but short, and suffered only to go but a very little within the
under-Superficies of the flame, it will not be so stopped and caked with those
feculencies. The reason of which is evident, for the flame, as I formerly
proved, being nothing but the parts of the Oil rarefied and raised by heat into
the form of a vapor, smoke, or steam, the free Air that incompasseth this
steam keeps it into a Cylindrical form, and by its dissolving property
preyeth upon or dissolveth those parts of it that are outward and next to the
Air, so as by the said dissolution it continues the heat, and produces the
light which we observe; but those parts of the body of steams that rise from
the Wick; which are in the middle, and not contiguous to the outward Air, are
not dissolved or turned into shining flame by the Air till they rise toward
the top of the Cone of flame where the free Air can come to reach, and so to
dissolve them, and thence gathering about the Wick in the Center of the Cone of
flame they choke, clog, and quite stifle it that the flame will quickly go out.
That this is so, any one may easily find if he examine the flame of a Lamp or
Candle by the help of a piece of glass: For by the transparency thereof he will
plainly perceive that all the middle of the Cone of flame neither shines nor
burns but only the outward Superficies thereof that is contiguous to the free
and unsatiated Air, and that the middle parts may be collected in the form of
Soot, or very fine powdered coal dust.

Take then a piece of Glass, whether Window-Glass, Looking-glass Plate, or the
side of a Viol, it matters not, or, which is best of all, a thin Plate of
Selenitis or Muscovia Talk, and hold it Horizontally in the middle of the
flame, so as to cut off the top or upper part of the Cone thereof, then
presently, before it be choked with soot, look down upon it, and you shall
plainly see that all the middle parts of the Flame and the Wick have no shining
power or light at all; nor are they dissolved by the Air, but remain in the
form of Soot, but that only the Superficies or outside of the said Cone does
burn, shine, and consume into and mix with the ambient Air.

In the same manner, if you hold the Glass or Selenitis perpendicularly, and
apply the side of it so as to cut the flame per axin coni, that the Air cannot
come to one side thereof, you may plainly perceive that the shining part of the
flame is only that which is contiguous to, and preyed upon by the free and
unsatiated Air, and that where that Air cannot come free without being glutted
and satiated in its way, there neither the consumption of the Oil, nor the heat
and light of the flame is produced, but only a sooty, choking, and stifling
substance.

To make then the reason of the Phenomenon observable about the lasting or
stifling of the flame of a Lamp the more clear and easy to be understood and
comprehended, give me leave to explain the manner of its production and
continuation by a Scheme, delineation, and description thereof.

Let A A then in the second Table represent a body of Oil, or any other
combustible fluid substance, the Superficies whereof B B is Horizontal, and
pretty near plain. [I say, pretty near, because it is always either Concave, or
Unequal, more or less according to several circumstances; to wit, the capacity
and the nature of the Vessel E E, in which it is contained; for if the Vessel
be small, and that the Oil has a greater congruity with it than the Air, the
Superficies of the Oil will be very much concavated especially toward the
sides of the Vessel as at C C; but if the Vessel be incongruous to Oil, the
Superficies will be Unequal as at D D, the reason of which I have long since
explained in another place.]

Let F F then in the third figure represent the Wick, which consists of a great
number of very fine Cylinders or hairs of Cotton f f f twisted and laid very
close together, into, and between which the Oil (having a very great congruity
therewith) does readily insinuate it self and adhere, and is by the pressure of
the Air (much greater without than between those Cylinders or hairs) forced up
to a considerable height between them, (as to the height of an inch and half,
or two Inches) and if by any means the Oil be taken out at the top thereof, the
remaining part of the Oil in the Vessel will ascend to supply the vacancy of
the part drawn off, which is evident in Filtration. About the sides of this
Wick the Oil will be sure to ascend, and the Superficies thereof will be
concavated as at G G, because unless there be a congruity between the Oil and
the Wick there will be no ascent of the Oil therein, and therefore that
substance that the Oil does not readily adhere to cannot be a fit material for
that purpose.

Now to this Wick thus filled with Oil apply the flame of a Lamp or Candle, or
any other substance extremely hot, as a glowing piece of Iron, Copper, or the
like, and by this means the parts of the Oil in the Wick will be very much
heated, and expand themselves in vapors into the contiguous Air by the steams
h h h h h, and fill all the Ambient space of the Air H H therewith, which
vapors being very much rarefied, and consequently lighter than the
incompassing Air, are by the greater gravity and pressure thereof carried
upwards by the Curve Lines h i k. These at first gush out of the Wick at Right
Angles, but by the protrusion of the Air are quickly turned into a kind of
Parabolick Curve h i k The motion of the Particles in which is swiftest in k k,
that is to a certain degree of Altitude. The motion of ascent increasing
somewhat after the nature of the motion of descent in heavy bodies, I say
somewhat in that nature, for if the ascending bodies were uniformly lighter
than the Ambient they would be the same, but because the rarefaction and nature
of them is varied by Circumstances, therefore it has but part of that Analogy.

To proceed then with the Explication: I say, these steams of the Oil thus
ascending, if they are heated to a sufficient degree of heat are preyed upon,
and dissolved or burned by the Ambient Air; which dissolution has this effect,
first, that it produces light; next, that it produces heat enough to make the
succeeding parts of the steams that rush out of the Wick and follow after it to
be sufficiently heated for dissolution by the Air, the heat of which produces
the same operation upon a third, and that upon a fourth, and that upon a fifth,
and so successively so long as there are steams of Oil to be dissolved, and
plenty of fresh and unsatiated Air to dissolve. The action also of this
dissolution causes heat sufficient to raise up the succeeding parts of the Oil
into the Wick, and expand them into vapors, and so to make them fit to be
further heated and dissolved. It is further observable in the flame of a Lamp,
that those vapors that issue out of the Wick are by degrees dissolved, and not
all in a moment, for the parts of the flame that are lowermost about H have a
kind of faint blew light until they come to I, where they seem to have their
brightest and clearest light and heat, the said vapors not being heated to
that degree at their first breaking out that they afterward acquire by the
farther action of the Air upon them. At I they seem to be in their highest
degree of dissolution, and from thence upwards are made one with the dissolving
Air, so that they are not but by other means discernable to the eye of the
observer; so that the shining part of this Conical shaped space of the flame is
only the outside of the Cone, it being that part where the Ambient Air preys
upon the ascending eruptions of the Oil, namely, where the Chain of small
Circles intercept the Curve lines of the motion of the ascending eruptions.

This Figure and shape of the flame and vapors may be plainly seen by the help
of a Metalline Concave placed at a certain distance and Position, and also by
observing the shadow of the Candle cast by the beams of the Sun upon a sheet of
white Paper, or white Wall, but that way of a Concave speculum is incomparably
beyond it, because it does so very plainly show the form and manner of the
steams rising above i i i i, as about k k k k, etc.

The Air after it has performed the action of Dissolution, and is satiated and
incorporated with the parts of the Oil at i i i, ascend by k k k, but shine
not. All the steams or eruption of the vapors of the Oil out of the Wick f f f
shine not between the Wick f f and i i, but begin to be dissolved, and to shine
as they approach the fresh Air at ii, where the dissolution is completed.

The upper parts of the flame shine more than the lower, the parts having been
heated to a much greater degree by the longer space of passage they have had
through the hot Concave part of the flame, and contiguous or very near to the
glowing sides thereof at i i i.

All the under parts of the Wick neither shine nor burn, but are as it were
charkd by the extremity of the heat of the Conical Superficies of the flame,
they are defended from burning at the bottom by the fresh access of new Oil
from the Vessel underneath; and the middle parts are defended from burning or
shining by reason the Air cannot approach them before it be satiated at the
Conical Superficies i i i by the dissolution of the steams of the Oil it there
meets with. But the upper parts of the Wick do burn and shine, if they be
high enough, into the smaller part of the Cone of flame that the Air before it
be satiated can reach at them. And if any part of the Wick fall into the said
Conical and shining Superficies of the flame, it does both shine and consume,
and suffers the same dissolution into the Air as the steams of the Oil, and if
any part of this Wick be without this Conical Superficies at i i i, it is
presently consumed and reduced to Ashes; as by many experiments differing ways
made is very plainly visible.

This plainly gives the cause why knots and Tophus's do as it were grow to the
Wick of the Lamp like so many Mushrooms on a rotten Tree, which as soon as they
are removed out of the middle and dead part of the flame are immediately
consumed by, and dissolved into the Air, and shine like a coal of fire, as
being indeed nothing else.

Hence we may give a plain Reason why upon applying any cool Superficies very
low into the flame of a Lamp, there is immediately condensed upon it a great
quantity of soot, namely, that the middle parts of the Cone of flame, being
nothing but a great number of oily steams ascending, are not fired nor consumed
by the Air, till they can come to be wrought upon by the free and unsatiated
Air. Now if the Air be so intercepted that it cannot come at them, and the
steams be cooled by the plates coldness that the Air is not able to prey upon
or dissolve them for want of a preparatory heat sufficient, they must remain in
the form of burnt Oil, or Lamp-black.

I have been somewhat the longer and more particular in this description and
explanation of my Theory of the flame of a Lamp or Candle, that so the Reader
understanding the nature and causes thereof the more fully and plainly, he may
the easier discover the inconveniences that may occur in the burning, heating,
shining, duration, etc. thereof, and the sooner and more readily and
scientifically find a cure and prevention of those inconveniences, which he
that is ignorant of can but hoodwinked grope after, and at best can but hope
possibly after long puzling himself in vain attempts and blind trials, nothing
to the purpose, he may at length stumble upon that which had he been enlightened
by the true Theory, he would have readily gone to at the first glance.

I could have further expatiated into the contemplation of this most admirable
Phenomenon of flame, producing heat and light, the two most spirituous and most
potent Agents in Nature, and the ways of Intending and Diminishing them, and
the uses that may be made of them, but that it is not my present design to
annex a discourse on those subjects, which does more properly belong to another
Lecture I shall shortly publish. I shall therefore at present proceed only to
show some Mechanical contrivances for counterpoising Liquors in Vessels, so as
to keep them running or supplying a stream always with equal swiftness,
whatever quantity there be of the said Fluid; which as they are very convenient
for perfecting Lamps for diverse uses, which they could not otherwise perform,
so in Hydraulick they are of most admirable benefit for diverse effects, hardly
to be performed without them, as I shall hereafter manifest. But first, I will
explain some few ways by which more conveniences may be obtained, and more
inconveniences prevented in the use of Lamps for Chemical, Mechanical, and
Philosophical uses than by this way of Cardan, or any other I have met with:
For this I look upon as one of the Tools to be made use of in the Workhouse or
Elaboratory of Nature, without a good Apparatus of which, be the Workman
otherwise never so well accomplished, he will never be able to produce any very
considerable effect; and with them, even a Bungler otherwise, will, if well
furnished, do wonders to such as know not the means by which they are done.

It may possibly seem very strange to some to hear, that by the flame of a Lamp
Plants may be made to grow, bear Leaves, blow Flowers, ripen Seeds; that the
Eggs of Fowls and Insects may be hatched, and brought to life and perfection;
that Metals, even the hardest, Glass, Stones, etc. may be almost in a moment
melted, softened, liquified, hardened, etc. that thousands of separations of
conjoined and naturally united bodies may be effected, and they reserved
distinct; and as many other bodies, naturally distinct, and very differing, may
be united and compounded into Homogeneous mixtures, some scarce separable
afterward; that Glass may be shaped and molded like Wax; that almost all the
sensible qualities of bodies may be increased, diminished, annihilated, and
created; and some also of the qualities insensible (otherwise than by the
effects;) and yet even these, and many more, may be effected by this Tool or
Instrument, if rightly used, as I could manifest if I had now time. But I shall
not here any further expatiate on it, possibly I may hereafter but at present I
shall only proceed to the description of one sort of those Instruments which
serve to supply the Oil or Pabulum of a Lamp conveniently by any degrees, and
in what quantity is desired. This sort does depend upon some contrivance of
Counterpoises for the Liquor in the Receptacle that is to feed the Lamp, and
may be made use of in Hydralicks as well as Lamps to feed and continue any
running stream any time desired.

These Counter poises then of Fluids might be made to feed the flame of a Lamp
equally for any time assigned, and consequently would make a kind of Perpetual
Lamp, but the Pabulum it self will be some ways or other unapt for such an
effect; as Oil has a foulness whereby the Wick is choked or stopped, so as
that it will no longer ascend in it; Spirit of Wine will in length of time
evaporate and lose much of its nature; and other Oils have their several
defects which make them incapable of continuing the flame very long. But there
are none of these that I have met with but may be in great measure avoided by
the help of some Chemical or Mechanical contrivances, some instances whereof I
shall hereafter give, which the Theory of Fire and Flame does readily hint.

The first way then I shall now describe is by a round Box, the inward Cavity
of which is divided by a Diaphragm into two equal parts, and fitted with a
proper Counterpoise, the Axis of whose motion lies Horizontally. The
contrivance of which will be more plainly understood by the Delineation thereof
in the first place, where the second Figure represents the whole Instrument,
with its Globe, Frame, Pedestal, Socket, and lighted Lamp.

A represents the Pedestal or foot upon which the Instrument stands, which may
be made of Silver, Brass, Wood, or the like. B C D E F, the Frame fastened to
the Pedestal, and shaped in the form of a Snake, perforated at B and D to
receive the Pivots or Gudgeons of the Lamp G H, and hollow from E to F to serve
to convey the Oil or Spirit of Wine from the end of the hollow Gudgeon H to the
Wick I, to feed the Flame K; the hole at E to receive the end of the hollow
Gudgeon; H is made a little tapering, and the end of the Gudgeon H is ground
fit into it, so as to turn easily, and yet so true, as not to let any Oil there
leak out, the said Gudgeon being kept close home by the springing of the Arm B;
the Supersicies of the Oil or Spirit for the Pabulum is always kept by the
motion of the said Globe upon its Axis G H, exactly in the Line L M, until it
be all consumed, which how it is done will be better conceived by showing the
contrivance of the inside of the aforesaid Globe, how the same is divided, how
filled, and how counterpoised.

Suppose then the aforesaid Globe cut in sunder by the middle Line or Circle N
O, and discovering the Inside or Cavity thereof to be represented in the first
Figure, where P A H R Z P represents the aforesaid Circle, or half shell of the
Globe; O represents the middle of the hollow Gudgeon H, which is the Pole or
Axis about which the said Globe does move. H O Z represents the Horizontal Line
or Plain passing through the aforesaid Axis; P R the Perpendicular to that
Plain. Let H Z then represent a Diaphragm or Partition of the same material
with the Globe, by which the Concavity thereof is divided into an upper
Hemisphere H P Z O H, and into an under Hemisphere H R Z O H. Let the under
Hemisphere be filled with Oil, Spirit of Wine, etc. or the like fit material
for a Lamp to burn; and let the upper part be filled with some material of half
the weight of the Oil, Spirit, or other material, or because that will be
somewhat difficult to do, let there be a counterpoise of Lead or other
ponderous matter fixed somewhere in the Line P O, so that the said upper
Hemisphere shall have half the gravity of the under Hemisphere upon the Center
of motion O. I say, whatever quantity of the Fluid Pabulum is in the Cavity of
the said under Hemisphere, the Superficies thereof shall always be in the
Horizontal Line or Plain O Z, the counterpoised upper Hemisphere keeping it
always up to that height. For instance, supposing the said Hemisphere full,
there is no doubt but that the under Hemisphere being double the weight of the
uppermost will be lowermost, and that Horizontal Line will lie Horizontally,
since it is evident, that the Center of gravity of the whole will be below the
Center of motion O, and somewhere in the Line O R, which is Perpendicular to
the aforesaid Plain. Next, suppose so much of the aforesaid Liquid Pabulum
consumed as to leave enough only to fill the space C O Z B R C, and the
Diaphragm be moved from its Horizontal Position H Z, and placed in the Oblique
Position C O D. I say, the said upper Hemisphere CHAPDOC shall exactly
counterpoise the said under Hemisphere C R B Z D O C, so as the Superficies of
Liquor shall be in the Horizontal Plain O Z. Make A P equal to P D, and draw
the Line A O B through the Center O, it is manifest then that the Wedge C O R
of the Liquor does counterpoise the Wedge R O B on the other side the
Perpendicular, and that the Wedge P O D of the upper Hemisphere does
counterpoise the Wedge P O A on the other side of the Perpendicular, so that
neither of these have any prepollency to move the Globe out of this Posture.
Next, it is plain that the Wedge B O Z of the Liquor will be counterpoised by
the Wedge A O C, which is double the bigness of B O Z, and consequently of
equal weight, the parts of the upper Hemisphere being put of half the gravity
or weight of the under Hemisphere.

Next, suppose half the Oil be consumed, and there be only left enough to fill
the quadrantal Wedge Z O R, I say, the Superficies thereof shall be in the
Horizontal Line O Z; for since the upper Hemisphere is half the weight of the
under, the two quadrantal Wedges P O H and H O R must necessarily counterpoise
the quadrantal Wedge R O Z of the Oil.

Thirdly, Suppose that more than half the said Oil or liquid Pabulum be
consumed, and that there be only left enough to fill the Wedge B O Z, I say,
the counterpoising upper Hemisphere now made the under, and placed in the
Position A H C R B O A shall exactly counterpoise the said Wedge of Liquor, so
as that the Superficies thereof shall be in the Line O Z; for the Wedge R O B
of the aforesaid upper Hemisphere does counterpoise the Wedge C O R on the
other side of the Perpendicular, and the double Wedge A O H and H O C will
counterpoise the Wedge B O Z.

Nor can the Superficies of the Liquor be any whit higher or lower than the
Line O Z, for if it be any whit higher as at E F, the Liquor must necessarily
overpoise the aforesaid Wedge A O C, by all the weight of the Liquor contained
in F G O Z F. And if it be any whit lower as at I K, the Wedge K I B must be
too light for the counterpoising Wedge A O C by the weight of the Liquor
contained in the space Z O T K Z, since I just now showed that A O C did just
counterpoise Z O B, which was the thing to be proved.

Now though in this Instance I have chosen to explicate I have made choice of a
Globe, yet that form is not necessary, but it may be made of any Figure
whatsoever that is turned upon an Axis or Poles, so as wheresoever the said
Figure be cut by a Plain to which the Axis is Perpendicular, the Superficies of
the said Figure shall describe a Circle, the Center whereof is in the said
Axis, whether the said Figure be a Cylinder Cone, or any other Conoeidical,
mixed, or otherwise, regular, or irregular figure. Such as the Figures A B C D E
F G, which represent the Section of the said Vessel through the Axis.

The second way for the poysing the Liquor, and keeping the Superficies thereof
always to an equal height, is this:

Make a Concave Receptacle for the Oil or Liquor of a Hemispherical,
Semicylindrical, Semiconical, or of any other half-round hollow Figure, where
the turned Figure is cut in two parts per Axin, and whereof the Axis is placed
Horizontal, and the plain Section per Axin likewise Horizontally, so as it may
be filled with any Liquor up to that Plain; and that the Liquor may not be apt
to dash, be shaken, or filter over, it will be convenient to extend the brims
of that Receptacle somewhat above the half-Round, that there may be about half
or three quarters of an Inch of space above the Superficies of the Oil vacant
or empty. And that upon whatever Plain the foot stand, the Plain per Axin may
stand Horizontal, it will be good to suspend the Receptacle in the same manner
as a Sea-mans Compass is suspended, within a frame: Fix this Receptacle, or the
Frame that is to keep the Receptacle, Horizontal upon a convenient Pedestal;
and fit within the Hollow or Concavity of the Receptacle a half-round solid
poise, turned of the same form with the hollow of the Receptacle, and cut
exactly through the Axis in two equal parts. Let this solid poise be made
exactly half the weight of the Liquor that is to be poised, and fit to it two
Pivots or Pins at each end of the Axis, which may be exactly in the Poles of
the half-Round, and fit to those Pins make two holes in the Centers of the Ends
of the Concave Receptacle, in which the Pins may freely move, and suffer the
half-Round poise to move round within the hollow of the Receptacle, according
as the quantity of the Oil or Liquor is increased or diminished. Fit to this
Receptacle a neck and socket fit for the Wick and flame of the Lamp, and the
same operation will be performed by this as by the first contrivance; to wit,
the Oil will be kept always to the same height in the Receptacle.

This will be easier understood by explaining a Designation thereof which is
shadowed forth in the fourth Figure: Where

A A A represents a Pedestal, which may be made with three claws or toes to
make it stand the steadier and evenner upon any Plain or Table.

B B represent one of the Semicircular Arms that are fixed to the top of the
Pedestal, this has two holes in it at the ends or extremities, as at C is one,
the other hole being in the other arm which goes behind the Globe, and
therefore cannot be seen, is supposed to be Diametrically opposite to this at
C. These two holes are the Center holes in which two small Pins or Centers,
fastened into two opposite points of the Hoop or Frame are made fit to move, by
which means the said Hoop is preserved in an horizontal Position.

D D is this Hoop or Frame, which is made to incompass the Vessel or Receptacle
of the Oil, and is shaped exactly like it. This is made strong enough of Brass,
Iron, Silver, or other material to bear the Receptacle, Poise and Oil without
bending, and has, as I said before, two Pins or Gudgeons at C, and opposite to
it Diametrically, or Semicircularly, upon which the said Hoop always hangs
Horizontally. It has also on each side in the middle between the aforesaid
Pivots, two Centers as at F and E to receive the ends of the Axis of the
Receptacle appearing at F and E, by which the said Receptacle is always free to
hang plumb or in its Perpendicularity, so as that the upper edge thereof at F F
will always lie Horizontally.

One of these Pivots, namely, that on the Right hand is the Pipe to convey the
Oil to the Socket of the Lamp I, in which is fitted a Wick of Cotton to serve
for the flame, K G G represents the Vessel or Receptacle of Oil, which is here
described Hemispherical, that being the most capacious uniform Figure, but may
be of any other, qualified as those I mentioned in the first contrivance. The
Brims of this are extended somewhat higher than a Semicircle, namely, to F F,
to keep the Oil from flashing or filtring over. This is always kept full with
Oil or other Liquor to the Horizontal pricked Line L L, which passes through
the Center or Axis of its Cavity by the Counterpoise moved on the Center C.

H H H represents that Counterpoise which is made exactly half the weight of
the Oil or Liquor, and the Center of gravity of it must be somewhere in the
Line M M; and it ought to be fitted as exactly into the hollow of the
Receptacle as it is possible, that there may be left as little space as may be
between its unequal sides and the Concave of the Receptacle, but yet so much
must be left that it may move very freely upon its Center C a whole Semicircle.
This done, and the Receptacle being filled with Oil, the same effect will
follow as in the first contrivance, and the Demonstration of it being much the
same, I shall not now spend time to explain it. But rather proceed to the
description of a third way of keeping the Liquor counterpoised to the same
level.

The third way then is:

Take any round Vessel, whose Concavity and Convexity is turned upon an Axis,
and suspend that Vessel upon two small Pivots (but yet big enough to bear the
said Vessel filled with Oil, etc.) fastened in the Poles of that Axis; and leave
or cut open a sixth part more or less as you please of the side thereof, that
thereby any thing may be put into or taken out of the Cavity of the Vessel;
then poise the Vessel exactly on those Centers, that no side be heavier than
the other; then fit into it a float of Brass, Silver, Tin, Lead, etc. Unequal on
the under side, so as just to fill to the Cavity of the Vessel. And on the
upper side, Plain, or Unequal, or any other convenient Figure, it matters not
much. Make this float as heavy as you can at the bottom, and as light as may be
at the top, but yet of such weight as may well float upon the top of the Oil,
etc. Let one end of this be fastened by a wire or string, so as that end thereof
may always touch that point of the Concave of the Vessel to which it is tied,
and that the rest thereof may turn and follow the sinking of the Oil; and
through the end of it, near the place where it is fastened, let a Pipe go
through it to receive the Wick, which Pipe has no communication with the
Cavity of the hollow float. This done, fill the Vessel as full as convenient
with Oil, and light the Wick, and you shall find that as the fire consumes the
Oil, the Vessel will turn upon its Poles and keep the Superficies of the Oil
always at the same distance from the flame that it was put at at first till the
whole be consumed.

This will be made more conceivable by a figure and explanation thereof, which
therefore take as follows in the fifth figure.

A C B B represents a hollow Vessel, the Cavity whereof is very exactly turned
upon an Axis whose Poles are in P, the space between A and B in the side
thereof is left open into the Cavity of it. This Vessel is suspended upon its
Poles at P, so as to be free to move round upon them, and exactly poised as no
one side thereof be heavier than another. To the hollow of this Vessel is
fitted a float D of Brass, Latton, Silver, Lead, etc. whose underside is made
of a Convexity just fit for the Concavity of the Vessel, as may be seen at K D
I, and the upper straight or Plain. Let this float be made somewhat lighter
than the Oil or Liquor on which it is to swim, so that a part thereof may float
above the Superficies thereof. Let one end thereof E be fastened to the side of
the Vessel a little below the Brim B; through the end of this float is put a
Pipe and Wick h, for the flame i, then pouring in Oil by the open side A Q B,
fill the same till it carry the float up to touch the hollow of the Vessel;
then light the Wick, and you will find that the Lamp will consume the Oil, and
this contrivance will continually supply it till the whole be consumed, and the
Poise be moved to touch the Concave of the aforesaid Vessel; for when the
Vessel is filled up to f g, the float D will touch at O and E, and the Cavity
above f g being empty, the Vessel will be as is described in the Figure, the
open part A B being upwards. And as the flame consumes the Oil, the side of
the Vessel B will descend downward toward B 1; and so by B 1, B 2, B 3, to B
4, where the whole quantity of Oil will be consumed, and the bottom of the
float will touch the hollow side of the Vessel; in all which gradual wasting of
the Oil the Superficies thereof will lie at the same distance below the upper
side of the float D that it had at first, and consequently at the same distance
from the bottom of the flame. The reason of all which will be very easy to be
understood by any one that shall seriously on this Delineation consider that
the float D must necessitate the Vessel A C B to move on its Axis B according
as its Oil wastes, because one end thereof E being fastened to the brim of the
Vessel B, the other end O being loose will as the Oil wastes descend toward N,
whence the end E must hang heavier on the brim B, and consequently must move it
down toward B, till the upper side f g of the float be reduced to a
Parallelism with the Superficies of the remaining Oil, and the end E have no
gravitation on the brim B, which motion will be continued as the Oil wastes, and
the brim B will be moved downwards by the points B 1, B 2, B 3, to B 4. I shall
not therefore spend any more time in the Geometrical demonstration thereof, but
proceed to explain a fourth way by which the Flame and Superficies of the Oil
keep always at the distance they were first put at.

The Fourth way then is, the making the Socket of the Wick to swim upon the top
of the Oil, so that the Socket may sink as well as the Oil, by reason it is
sustained by that, and by that only. The Vessel or Receptacle is generally made
of Glass, and it is best of a Hemispherical Figure, the light casting it self
through the body of the Oil as well as of the Glass. This is so plain and
obvious, and so commonly used and practiced, that I need not spend more time in
the explanation or demonstration thereof, but proceed to describe a Fifth way.

The Fifth way then is much upon the same principle with the Fourth, but avoids
several inconveniences to which that is subject: For whereas the Flame in the
Fourth is necessitated to be within the capacity or the Receptacle in this
Fifth, it may be at any distance, and so is made much more convenient to be
come at, and to be dressed and trimmed. Take then a Vessel of Glass,
Cylindrical is best, as a Glass Bottle, and fit to it a Siphon, long enough to
draw the Oil from the bottom of the said Vessel, make the one end of this
Siphon extend at what distance you think convenient for the placing the flame
of the Lamp, and so order it that it may always draw from the Receptacle by its
arms to feed the flame, which it will do if the end of the Siphon be made where
the Socket of the Lamp is placed to return or bend upwards again. So that the
Plain of the upper Superficies of the Oil may cut that end of the Siphon where
the flame is between the top of the mouth of it next the Socket and the return
thereof upwards; then by a counterpoise so suspend this Siphon that it may
follow the Oil as it wastes, and fit into the return of the Siphon a Socket and
Wick for the flame to be continued. A contrivance somewhat of this kind you
have in diverse Authors, and therefore I shall spend less time in the
description thereof. Let A A A A in the Sixth Figure then represent a large
Cylindrical Viol of Glass through the mouth B of which the Cavity thereof may
be filled with Oil, and also the end D and float C of a convenient Siphon may
be put in. This Siphon D D D P G must be made long enough that the float C may
reach the bottom of the Vessel when the Oil is spent, and the other end thereof
must be so curved that the knee of the Siphon P may be below the Superficies of
the Oil E F, and yet that the Socket H made for holding the Wick for the flame
I may be somewhat above it, this Siphon D D D P G with its Socket and float
should be so counterpoised with a weight M, hung over a Pulley K, by a string
L, that the float may not sink deep into the Surface of the Liquor, but swim as
it were at the top. This done, if the Wick I be lighted, the Surface of the Oil
will be kept always at the same distance below the flame that it was first put
at.

In the first, third, fourth, and fifth ways the flame of the Lamp descends
equal spaces with the Superficies of the Oil in the Vessel, and therefore
though for some uses it be very convenient, as in annealings, where things are
to be cooled by degrees, yet for many other it is not; Especially in Lamp
Furnaces, where the same heat is to be continued, and in some cases gradually
increased. For such cases therefore the first and second ways will be very
convenient. In some other cases the sixth and seventh ways, which do much the
same thing.

The sixth way then is this: Through an arm or Siphon (like the Branch of a
Lamp hung against a Wall) fixed in any convenient place, the Oil from the
Receptacle is continually and equally supplied to the flame of the Lamp by the
raising of the Receptacle as fast as the Oil wastes, so as to keep the
Superficies of the Oil always in the same Horizontal Plain. The Receptacle is
raised by a Counterpoise hung upon a Fusey, which Fusey is a part of an
Archimedean Spiral.

Let C C then in the seventh Figure represent the Receptacle for the Oil, being
a Cylindrical or Prismatical Vessel, of what Bigness or Length you please; to
this by two Ears at L L fasten two Lines or Ropes K K, the ends of both which
are fastened to the Wheel or Pulley G, though one of them do run over the Pulley
F. Fit into this Receptacle is made a Cylindrical or Prismatical Plug A A,
which is fixed in some convenient place, so as not to rise or sink, and through
the middle thereof passes a Siphon B B B, the one end whereof extended like
the branch of a Candle or Lamp sustains the Socket D for the Flame E, which is
fed with Oil through the Siphon B B B by the rising Receptacle C C.

To the side of the Pulley G is fastened a Fusey H, made with very great care of
one Revolution of an Archimedean Spiral, not beginning from the Center, but
from some convenient distance from it, where the weight I hanging, may just
counterpoise the Receptacle C C, when quite empty of Oil, the other hanging
counterpoise (Tangent to the largest part of this Spiral) must be so far
distant from the Center of the Wheel G, that the same weight I may just
counterpoise the said Receptacle filled top-full of Oil, and the Fusey must be
filed true to a Spiral, drawn with great care of one Revolution between those
two points. I say here of one Revolution, because I have supposed the Wheel or
Pulley G big enough, by one Revolution of it to draw up the Receptacle the
whole space it is to be raised; for if the said Pulley be so small as to
require two, three, four, or more Revolutions, then must the piece of the
Spiral between those points be drawn of two, three, four, or more Revolutions
proportionably, which being very Artificially and Mechanically performed, the
Receptacle C C will be raised by the same Degrees by which the Oil is consumed
at E, and the upper Superficies thereof shall always be in the same Horizontal
Line MM. The Geometrical and Mechanical Reason of which being so very plain, I
hope I shall not need to spend any more time in the explication thereof than
only to say, that by means of the Archimedean Spiral-Fusey the Power of the
weight I upon the Pulley G decreaseth in the same proportion as the weight of
the Oil in the Receptacle C C is diminished by its consumption.

The seventh way then is, by a Cylindrical or Prismatical Plug fitted into a
Cylindrical or Prismatical Receptacle, and let down into it by a Counterpoise,
hung upon a Spiral Fusey, the Oil is so raised in that Receptacle as always to
stand Brimfull, or to the same Horizontal height till the whole Oil be consumed.

The contrivance of this way will be very easily understood by any one that
shall peruse the Delineation in the eighth Figure, and examine it by this
following description.

Let A A in the eighth Figure then represent a Cylindrical or Prismatical
Receptacle, standing fixed upon a Table or Pedestal, from the side of which
issues a hollow Arm or Branch B B, bearing the Socket for the Wick C, where the
flame D is continued. Into the Cavity of this Receptacle is fitted a
Cylindrical or Prismatical Plug E E, big enough to fill the whole capacity
thereof, and yet not so close but that it may freely slip up and down the
Cavity of the said Receptacle without sinking. Let this Plug be made
considerably heavier than the Oil of the Receptacle; that is, let the
Counterpoise L, hanging upon the little Wheel M just reduce its gravity to be
equal to that of the Oil; then let the point I, where the Perpendicular
touches the Spiral, be so far removed from the Center of the Wheel H, that the
counterpoise L may just take off its whole gravity, and suffer it to have no
degree of gravity or pressure downwards. Then draw the Spiral n o p according
to the direction I gave in the former way, and the effect will be produced. The
Geometrical and Mechanical Demonstration of which is very plain to any one that
shall consider, that, As the Plug E E by sinking into the Receptacle A A so far
as to raise the Oil to the Horizontal Superficies M M will lose its gravity by
the same Degrees by which it sinketh into the Receptacle, and that is always
proportionable to the diminishing of the Oil in the Receptacle by the flame: So
the weight L will lose its power upon the Wheel H, by the same degrees by which
the Plug descends, by reason the Line by which it is suspended becomes a
Tangent to a proportionately shorter Radius of the Spiral, of the Rays of the
Spiral.

I know indeed that both in this and the former Fusey there lies an objection
against the true form of the Spiral, because the Line K K of the weight L does
not touch the Spiral in a point level with the Center, but in one somewhat
above it, and in this latter somewhat beneath it; but though that be a seeming
material one, yet as to practice it signifies very little. For first, it will
not be difficult to prove that this may be Mechanically drawn true enough, that
there shall be no sensible error, and if the error be not sensible, it is no
error in practical Mechanics. Next, were it the true Spiral, yet it would not
be more Geometrically Delineated than this which is here required, and at best
it would prove but a Mechanical approach, which is sufficient for the effect to
be produced by it.

These two last contrivances do keep the flame of the Lamp always in the same
place, and of the same strength and fullness. But the succeeding ways, though
they maintain the flame in the same degree of strength and nourishment, yet by
their motion upwards they may be made to increase, and intend the heat produced
by them in the bodies posited above them, which is of great use in many
Chemical and Philosophical Experiments.

The eighth way then is this: Make a Cylindrical or Prismatical Receptacle for
the Oil exactly like the former, with its Arm, Socket, Wick, etc. and fit into
it a Cylindrical or Prismatical Plug, as in the former, that may be able to
fill the said Receptacle. Fix this Plug fast into some Wall or Standard, so
that it shall not be able to stir; Then by the help of two Lines fastened to a
Counterpoise at one end, and the other to the Ears of the Receptacle, so
counterpoise the said Receptacle that it shall have no weight or gravity
downwards, but hang in a perfect equilibrium; I say, whatever quantity of Oil
there be in the said Vessel, the Superficies thereof shall always be in the
Plain which is equal to the top of the Oil when the Vessel is filled as high as
is desired, which will very plainly appear to any one that shall examine and
consider well this following description, and compare it with the Delineation
of the Instrument in the ninth Figure, where A A represents a Receptacle for
the Oil of any convenient capacity, made Cylindrical or Prismatical, to which
is fastened a hollow Neck or Arm B B for bearing the Socket C, to which through
its Cavity (being made hollow) is conveyed the Oil or Pabulum for the
continuance of the Flame D; into this Receptacle fit a Cylindrical or
Prismatical Plug, so as it may pretty equally fill the said Cavity of the
Receptacle, yet not so as any ways to hinder the sliding on upon it of the
Receptacle. Let this Plug then be fixed by the top in any convenient place
Perpendicularly, and setting the Receptacle underneath it, Counterpoise the
same when filled up with Oil by a Counterpoise I, which is fastened to the two
strings F F F F, by which the Receptacle is to hang, which two strings for
their more easy sliding to and fro move upon the two Pulleys or Truckles G G,
that are fixed to the same frame to which the Plug E E is fixed; which being so
adjusted, as fast as the flame D consumes the Oil out of the Receptacle A A,
the Counterpoise I raises the said Receptacle on upon the Plug so far till the
top of the Oil be equal to the height it was at first counterpoised at, to
which height it always keeps it till the whole be consumed.

This last way of poising the Liquor or Oil does make the Superficies thereof
run higher and higher as the quantity thereof is more and more consumed, which
for diverse Expedients in Mechanics, Natural Philosophy, and Chemistry is of
excellent use, as I may hereafter have opportunity to manifest upon many
occasions where I shall make use of them; and it would be, I fear, too tedious
to the Reader to have them here enumerated.

But because it may not possibly be ungrateful to him to have some uses of this
Principle here hinted, I shall now specify a few, and hereafter add many more,
together with a great number of other Poises for Liquors which serve for very
differing effects in their kinds, not less considerable, but rather somewhat
more strange, as being yet farther removed from the common practices and
discourses of Hydraulicks.

The first use then that I shall mention of this Liquorpoise shall be in
Hydraulicks, viz. to make a Cistern of whatever bigness and depth is required
to deliver all its water at the top, or so near unto it as it shall be desired:
By which means nothing of the Descent of the water falling into the Cistern is
lost, but without any labor or trouble the whole quantity of water that is
delivered at the top into the Cistern is re-delivered again out of the Cistern
at the top. This may be done by the first, second, and seventh ways of poising
Liquors; this, that, or the other, of which may be more convenient to this,
that, or another effect or operation to be performed by it, which must be
chosen and applied with judgment, according to the occasion, and the
circumstances of it. Every of the three, though they all agree together in the
producing the effect of keeping the Superficies perficies of the water to the
same Level, and there delivering it, have yet each of them their several
proprieties, which makes some one of the three more proper and adapted to one
design than either of the other two, and each of the other two in some other
effects and applications may be much more usefully applied than the first. By
this means the whole depth of the Cistern is gained, and all that water that
was used to be delivered at the bottom is now delivered at the top, and
consequently gains the advantage of the Perpendicular height of the Cistern to
be employed, for any use, for turning an Automaton, or conveying the Stream
farther, or to a higher level.

A second effect performable by these Poises may be for delivering any quantity
of water with an equal degree of swiftness, so as to continue an equal supply
of water till the whole Cistern or Receptacle be emptied, the spending of the
water in the Cistern not at all abating the stream without, the Counterpoise
always keeping the Cistern full, and maintaining the current till the last.
This may be useful for sawing or grinding stones by an Engine; for gauging of
Glass Tools, or grinding glasses by an Automaton, in all which cases there is
need of a constant and equal supply of water and sand; as also for washing and
Fulling of Cloth; it may also serve for various sorts of Clepsydras, or
measuring the quantity of time by the quantity of the current of water, as I
shall by and by show. And thirdly, for maintaining any slow and constant
motion, as that of a Jack, or Clock; an Engine for continually stirring of a
liquid body, or shaking, tumbling, and turning of dry Solids and powders, of
which sort there are a great number of uses in Chemistry for the operations of
Digestion, Calcination, Pounding, Grinding, Trituration, Searcing, and the
like; which operations being certainly, evenly, and constantly performed by an
Engine supplied by such a stream of water will far exceed the same kind of work
done by the hands of men, especially in such operations where the Labor and
Diligence is to last diverse days and nights together without any intermission,
which are Requisites not at all strange to Chemistry, and which will weary the
diligence of the best Laborant and his Attendants.

A third effect performable by these Poises is the making a perpetual and
constant stream in imitation of that of a natural Spring or Fountain in the
Earth. This may be done if the Cistern be once in twenty four hours recruted
and supplied with a new access of water from some Pipes, which is usual enough
here in London, and elsewhere, where there are Waterworks and Conveyances of
water. For as the wasting of the water in the Cistern does no ways abate or
diminish the stream of the water from the Cistern, so the new access of other
water for a supply to refill the Cistern does not at all accelerate it, but the
stream remains equal; And hence, consequently constant, and, as it were,
perpetual.

A fourth effect is, the delivering any quantity of water to any degree of
swiftness, and the whole quantity of the water by the same degree. This is
performed by tapping the Cistern at any part of the depth thereof, for
according as the Vessel is tapp'd lower under the Surface, so will the motion
of the water be swifter; and here the depths must be in a duplicate proportion
to the Velocity desired: As for instance, the Cistern being tapped with a hole
of a quarter of an Inch bore, at the depth of an Inch below the Surface, is
found to deliver a certain quantity of water in a minute; if it be desired that
through a Tap of the same bore there should be delivered twice that quantity,
the Cistern must be tapp'd at four Inches deep; and if thrice that quantity in
the same time, it must be tapp'd at nine Inches deep; and so forwards, as is
already demonstrated by Mersennus, and other Authors. For since the pressure of
Fluids upon the parts thereof increase, in the same proportion with the depth
below the Surface. And since the forces requisite to accelerate motions must
always be in duplicate proportion to the Accelerations, it follows, that the
perpendicular depths of the Tap under the Superficies of the water must be
always in duplicate proportion to the Velocities required.

The plainness and certainty of this truth in Hydrostaticks, long since so
fully and excellently demonstrated by Stivinus of all Fluids, and so highly
improved of late in the particular applications thereof by many more modern
Authors, who have writ most learnedly and clearly thereof, as well as
experimentally and practically, makes me much admire at the learned Doctor
More, who in his Enchiridion Metaphysicum, in the 11, 12, and 13 Chapters, and
in a Book, newly published, called, Remarks upon two late ingenious discourses,
etc. does not only deny this Gravitation in the parts of Air, but of Water,
quicksilver, and other Liquors. And instead thereof, to solve the Phenomena,
would introduce into the World a Principle, which he terms an Hylarchick
Spirit, which at command acts and performs whatsoever is necessary to solve all
the Phenomena of Mechanical, Hydrostatical, and, in a word, all Physical
motions and effects.

In answer to whose Doctrine about Hydrostaticks I shall only urge this one
Experiment of the Velocity of the current of Fluids, tapp'd and running at
several depths under the Superficies of that Fluid, which can no ways be solved
by the Hylarchick Spirit, and we must be fain to come to the Mechanical and
plain Rules of motion, and to allow every particular of that Fluid to press
with its own gravity where ever placed. And this I will prove from his own
words in his Enchiridion Metaphysicum, page 113. where explaining very
ingeniously the Hypothesis of Gravitation of the parts of Fluids one upon
another by the similitude of six men standing in a Line, and pressing against a
Wall, (which men he marks with A B C D E F, and the Wall with G) He says, that
A the first man cannot press F the last against the Wall G, but by pressing B
against C, and C against D, and D against E, and E against F; nor can A press B
against C, nor C press D against E, nor E press F against the Wall G, but at
the same time it must be understood that B presses D toward F, and D presses F
toward the Wall G, for A C and E, says he, are here put for Des Carts Materia
Coelestis, pressing the parts of the water within the pores, and B D and F for
those parts of the water pressing the bottom of the Vessel. But, says he, that
B presses D, and D presses F appears from this, that casting out E and F, D
does run to the Wall G, and casting out C D E and F, B also will run to the
said Wall. And so, says he, the state of the matter would be if Gravity did
proceed from the mere Mechanical motion imparted to the Terrestrial parts of
the Fluid by the Materia Coelestis of Des Carts, to wit, the Elements would
actually gravitate in their proper places. But since there is no such thing, it
is a sure sign that Gravity does arise from a higher cause, which higher cause
he elsewhere supposes to be an Hylarchick Spirit. This from so plain reasoning
is a strange Conclusion, and contrary to all experience.

Now though, I confess, I suppose Gravity to be otherwise performed than as Des
Carts has supposed, yet do I believe his Suppositions so Rational and
Ingenious, and so much above the Objections brought against them, and so much
better than any other I have yet met with, as no wise to deserve to be esteemed
foeda deliria, as the learned Doctor is pleased to term them, page 125.

It shall not be my business to defend Des Carts Principles at the present,
nor to set up any new Hypothesis instead thereof, but only to urge this
Experiment of the running of a Liquor swifter and swifter, according as the
hole through which it runs is deeper and deeper placed below the Surface of the
said Liquor or Fluid, and that the Velocities of those streams are always in a
subduple proportion to the Altitude of the Fluid above those holes; whence it
is evident, that the force that makes that Fluid run is always in the same
proportion with the Altitude of the fluid parts above those holes; and
consequently, that the motion of them is exactly according to the plain and
obvious Rules of Mechanical motions. And consequently for the solving all the
Phenomena of Hydrostaticks there is no need of any other Principles than the
plain Mechanical Principles, which supposes every Terrestrial Body to have a
Gravity in it, which is always the same, and always communicates its Gravity to
the Terrestrial Bodies subjected under it, and not only its own, but the
Gravity of all other Bodies above it, which have communicated their Gravity to
it, and that this Gravitation is always the same, and acts continually by
continual repetitions indefinitely swift. And that this gravitating or
communicating of its weight, together with the weight of all other Bodies
communicated to it, is no ways differing from all other communications or
propagations of motion, which the Doctor must confess to be merely Mechanical,
if at least he will admit of any such thing as Mechanical motion. For I cannot
conceive any Reason why the Doctor should not allow for instance the parts of a
Cylinder of Lead to press upon one another as much when they are kept melted in
an Iron Cylinder into a Cylindrical form part over part as when the Lead is
cold and divided into several parts, and laid one over another in the same form
that they were kept in by the incompassing Iron Cylinder. Since if the Iron
Cylinder and melted Lead, and the Iron Cylinder and cold Lead be weighed, it
will be found that they have both the same weight or gravity downwards, and do
communicate continually the same force, pressure, endeavor, impetus, strength,
gravity, power, motion, or whatever else you will call it to the Scale. And I
suppose the Doctor will grant, that if the cold Cylinder of Lead, weighing ten
pounds, be divided into ten shorter Cylinders, that are each a tenth part of
the whole, and do each weigh a pound alone, every one of the upper shall
gravitate upon every one of the lower; and that the tenth, with the other nine
upon it, shall press the Scale with ten pound weight, and consequently, that
the tenth does not only communicate its own gravity of one pound, but the
gravity of all the other nine above it, which is nine pounds; and, if the tenth
be taken away, and the ninth be put to touch the Scale, with the other eight
upon it, it is certain that the ninth will not only communicate its motion, or
press the Scale with its own weight of a pound, but will communicate the motion
to, or press the Scale with the weight of eight pounds more, or of all the
eight Cylinders superincumbent, and the like Ratiocination may be upon the
eighth, seventh, sixth, fifth, fourth, and second, but the last will only press
the Scale with its own weight, unless we take in the consideration of the
weight of the Air, which in this Ratiocination is not necessary. Since then I
think it cannot be denied but that the whole tenstanding in a Cylinder one over
another, the tenth is pressed by nine, and presses with ten pound weight; the
ninth presses with nine, and is pressed with eight; the eighth is pressed with
seven, and presses with eight, and so onwards, and that the pressure of the
lowest downward is always proportionable to the height of this Cylinder.
Supposing these to be all melted in an Iron Cylinder, but kept in the same
position and situation, and finding the whole to keep the same weight, why
should we not believe that each of those parts will exert the same effects, as
to gravity, on those beneath it as the same parts cold, and in the same posture
did; since if the Cylinder of the Fluid be shortened by 1, 2, 3, or 4, tenths of
its height, the same abatement of weight or gravity will appear. Having
seriously perused all the Ratiocination that the Doctor has produced, both in
this late Book, and in his Enchiridion Metaphysicum, I cannot find any
convincing reason against it, but what seems grounded upon some pre-conceived
Notions and Hypotheses which I cannot understand; and I cannot see how he can
avoid acknowledging this to be a Mechanical motion, if at least he will allow
any Mechanical motion at all, since it does so perfectly, and in all
circumstances so exactly conform and agree with the Laws of Mechanical motion,
that I do not know any difference, nor any one Phenomenon of Hydrostaticks or
Gravity but what may be clearly solved by the common Rules of Mechanics.

But to pass by all other Mediums to prove this Gravitation or pressure of the
parts of Fluids one upon another, I shall only insist upon this one Experiment
of the Velocity of Fluids, vented or running at several depths below the
Superficies of that Fluid. In which it is observable, that the quantity of
water running within a certain space of time is always in a Subduple proportion
to the height of the pressing Fluid above the hole. That is, the quantities of
water are in proportion to one another as the square Roots of the several
Altitudes. As for instance, it is the observation of Mersennus in his
Hydraulicks, that a Tap of an Inch bore, four foot under the Superficies of the
water will yield a pound or pint of water in 13 Seconds of time; now, if it be
desired to make the water run through a Tap of the same bore twice as fast,
that is, to yield a quart or two pounds of water. This new Altitude must be
made to the former Altitude, as the square of two to the square of one, that
is, as four to one; whence it will follow, that the Altitude of the water above
the Tap must be made sixteen foot to make the Tap run a quart of water in 13
Seconds of time. And if it be desired to have the Tap run a Gallon or eight
pints in 13 Seconds, the proportion of the new Altitude to the first must be as
the square of eight to the square of one, that is, as 64 to 1, whence the
Altitude of the water must be 256 foot, and the like for any other quantity or
Velocity desired. As if it be desired that the Tap should only run half a pint
in 13 Seconds, the Tap must be placed at one foot under the Superficies, which
is a quarter of the former Altitude. Now this is exactly according to the
General Rule of Mechanics. Which is, that the proportion of the strength or
power of moving any Body is always in a duplicate proportion of the Velocity it
receives from it; that is, if any Body whatsoever be moved with one degree of
Velocity, by a determinate quantity of strength, that body will require four
times that strength to be moved twice as fast, and nine times the strength to
be moved thrice as fast, and sixteen times the strength to be moved four times
as fast, and so forwards. This is most certainly true in the motion of Bullets
shot out of Cannons, Muskets, Pistols, Wind-guns, Cross-bows, Spitting-Trunks,
and the like; as likewise in the motion of Arrows shot with Bows or Ballistae;
of Stones thrown by the hand, or with Slings; of Pendulums moved by Gravity or
Weights; of Musical Strings; of Springs, and all other vibrating Bodies; of the
motion of Wheels, Flies, etc. drawn and turned by Weights or Springs; of the
motion of Perpendicularly or Obliquely falling Bodies; and in a word, of all
other Mechanical and Local motions, allowance only being made for the
impediment of the Air or other Fluid Medium, through which the Body is moved.
Now if the Doctor will contend for an Hylarchick Spirit to perform all these,
he may plausibly enough contend for it also in the Experiment of the
Gravitation of the parts of Fluids one upon another.

We see then how needless it is to have recourse to an Hylarchick Spirit to
perform all those things which are plainly and clearly performed by the common
and known Rules of Mechanics, which are easily to be understood and imagined,
and are most obvious and clear to sense, and do not perplex our minds with
unintelligible Idea's of things, which do no ways tend to knowledge and
practice, but end in amazement and confusion.

For supposing the Doctor had proved there were such an Hylarchick Spirit, what
were we the better or the wiser unless we also know how to rule and govern this
Spirit? And that we could, like Conjurers, command this Spirit, and set it at
work upon whatever we had occasion for it to do. If it were a Spirit that
Regulated the motion of the water in its running faster or flower, I am yet to
learn by what Charm or Incantation I should be able to incite the Spirit to be
less or more active, in such proportion as I had occasion for, and desired; how
should I signify to it that I had occasion for a current of water that should
run eight Gallons in a minute through a hole of an Inch bore? If the Doctor
should tell me, that I must make the Tap at such a depth under the Superficies
of the water, and then the Hylarchick Spirit will make the water run as I
desire, I would then inquire how he comes to call that an Hylarchick, or
matter-governing Spirit, which is rather commanded by matter, and subjected to
its Laws, and is necessitated to act exactly according to the quantity and
position of matter, by what means soever it be so placed? This Principle
therefore at best tends to nothing but the discouraging Industry from searching
into, and finding out the true causes of the Phenomena of Nature: And
incourages Ignorance and. Superstition by persuading nothing more can be known,
and that the Spirit will do what it pleases. For if all things be done by an
Hylarchick Spirit, that is, I know not what, and to be found I know not when or
where, and acts all things I know not how, what should should I trouble my self
to enquire into that which is never to be understood, and is beyond the reach
of my Faculties to comprehend? Whereas on the other side, if I understand or am
informed, that these Phenomena do proceed from the quantity of matter and
motion, and that the regulating and ordering of them is clearly within the
power and reach of man's Industry and Invention; I have encouragement to be
stirring and active in this inquiry and scrutiny, as where I have to do with
matter and motion that fall under the reach of my senses, and have no need of
such Rarefied Notions as do exceed Imagination and the plain deductions of
Reasons therefrom.

For what is clearer to be seen and tried by Experiment, and what more easy to
be imagined and understood than that a Cylinder of water, or any other
Homogeneous substance of twice the height should have twice the gravity or
pressure: of thrice the height, thrice the pressure: of ten times the height,
ten times the pressure: of 100 times the height, 100 times the pressure, and
consequently, to imagine that as in all other Mechanical motion, four times the
pressure will double the Velocity, nine times the pressure will treble it,
sixteen times will quadruple it, and 100 times will decuple it, and so forward;
So in this Experiment the same pressure will perform the same effect, and a
proportionate pressure a proportionate effect. And since we find that the
effect does most exactly answer the Theory (as most certainly, evidently, and
undeniably it does) why should we doubt of the cause which is so certain and
Regular a Concomitant, that it is always present when the effect is performed?
And where ever it is present, (if other Circumstances hinder not) the effect
certainly follows. I could have gone over all the other Ratiocinations of the
Doctor for an Hylarchick Spirit to perform the effects which do clearly belong
to Mechanical motions and powers, and are performed and regulated exactly
according to the quantity and quality of matter, and according to the general
and universal Laws of motion, and not otherwise. But that is not my present
business, but rather to explain how this contrivance of Poises does serve to
make a Cistern or Vessel to run any quantity of water required in any space of
time. And that to run the whole quantity either with an equal Velocity or
stream, or by any desired degrees to be accelerated or retarded from the
beginning to the end, which for some occasions in Mechanics is of great use,
and has not been explained by any Writer of Hydraulicks hitherto.

I should have here left this Digression, but that I find a little further in
the aforesaid Doctors Enchiridion, to wit, in theninereenth Chapter, in the
fifth, sixth, seventh, and eighth Sections, continued from the 246. to the 256.
Page, some Animadversions upon an Explication of Colors which I did formerly
publish in my Micrographia, from the confutation of which he endeavors to
assert this Hylarchick Spirit. But in this he does Canere triumphum ante
victoriam, and seems to make very slight of that which he neither has hitherto
by all he has said in his Enchiridion Metaphysicum, nor can by all other
Arguments he can produce answer. For if the Doctor had pleased to have
confidered the Objections I made against the Hypothesis of the Rotation of the
Cartesian Globuli, with a little more seriousness and deliberation, he would
not, I conceive, have believed that one that understood the Objection would be
satisfied with so slight and insignificant answers, as he is pleased to make to
them. His Answer then to the first Objection which I brought against this
Hypothesis, which was raised from Experiments made with thin plated bodies,
producing colors, though the refracting Superficies were parallel, is no more
but this: That it is not every second Refraction of the Ray in a Parallelipiped
that does destroy the Rotation generated by the first, but only that which
entering at one side, passes through, and goes out again with the same
refraction it entered. In which case only, says he, the Rotation of the
Globuli, generated in the first Superficies, is destroyed in the second. But,
says he, a Ray falling upon a Parallelipiped, and being reflected from the
second Superficies, suffers a double Refraction in the same Superficies, the
one at entering, and the other at going out again; both which Refractions, says
he, do promote the Rotation of the Globuli the same way. This he says very
positively, but gives no reason for it. Nor indeed could he, since it is
expressly contrary to Des Carts Principles, and to all the Phenomena of such
Parallel sided bodies until they come to a certain degree of thinness: For if
his Affirmation were true, then must all Reflections from the Quicksilver, or
foil of Lookingglasses, especially if a little oblique, make the Object spread,
and become colored in the same manner as Objects do which are looked at
through Prismes. But this is contrary both to Experience, and the Laws of
Reflection; for the Refractions in the Parallelipiped B are the very same with
the Refractions in the Parallelipiped A, the Reflection at D making the Ray to
be refracted at F, in the same manner as if it were refracted at G by G H, and
the Parallelipiped were twice as thick, and consequently the color generated
in E must be destroyed in F, and consequently produce no colors, as really it
does not in plates beyond such a thickness; whereas if the Refraction at F did
promote the Rotation, as he affirms, then must the reflected Superficies I K
not be Parallel to E F, but inclined to it with an Angle at L M. Then G N would
represent F O, which is impossible, and contrary to the Laws of all reflection,
as he might have understood if he had considered my Demonstration about the
Reflections of a Globe. Nor will the Doctors adding, Sed de hac prima
objectione non est quod sumus adeo soliciti, cum sit in materia magis incerta
ac inequali cujus interna contextura videatur Globulorum motus variis modis
posse mutari. For since all transparent bodies whatsoever produce the same
effect, that Subterfuge of supposing some strange invisible texture in the body
of Muscovy Glass, differing from that of other transparent bodies, will prove
but a lame help, for this interna contextura must be common to all transparent
Bodies. And why it should do it at one time, and not at another, the Doctor
does no where show, nor seems to understand.

Next, whereas in the seventh Section of the said nineteenth Chapter he says,
Verum in materia illa idonea Gutta scilicet Pluvia, si nullus Demonstrationis.
Scopo subsit error, actum est de Globulis Cartesianis. Sed videtur (says he)
ingeniosus demonstrator non satis intellexisse scopum quo collinneare debeat
ipsius Demonstratio. To which I answer, that I perceive by the Learned Doctors
endeavors to refute it, that he neither understood that, nor the Laws of
Reflection and Refraction according to Des Carts Hypothesis. Neque enim satis
erat probare (quod agnosco eum fecisse site and eleganter) Refractiones in
gutta pluvia ita fieri, ut si in duobus pellucidi Parallelipipedi Lateribus
oppositis, factae essent, sed oportebat praeterea evicisse quod eodem modo
refringatur radius in utrisque Locis quo in Parallelipipedo A refringitur, hoc
est ut Radius B C quamvis oblique, perpetuo tamen currat versus candem
extremitatem tam in F quam in D Parallepipedi A puta versus extremitatem E, nam
in hoc casu Rotatio ad D dissolvitur iterum ad F ut supra dictum est; sed
Demonstratio Ingeniosi Micrographi huc non attingit; sed probat secundam
refractionem in opposito Latere fieri ad modum refractionis in Parallelipipedo
C ubi Radius B N primo refringitur in D and procurrens versus extremitatem E
ibique inflexus pergit postea versus alteram extremitatem G and Refringitur in
F, quae refractio non diluit Rotationem prioris refractionis in D, quippe quod
tendentia Radii sit in partem oppositam. If the Learned Doctor had better
consulted Des Carts Doctrine, or the common Laws of Reflection and Refraction,
he would have been of quite another mind, and would not so positively have
asserted a Proposition so positively contrary to the Principles of Des Carts,
and all Experiments. For if what he affirms were so, then (as I urged before)
according to Des Carts Doctrine, and the Doctrine he would defend, the Image
from a Looking-glass must be returned colored, and the same also from a plain
sided Prisme, where the refracting sides are Perpendicular or equally inclined,
but contrary ways to the Reflecting Superficies. But this is contrary to
Experiment, he must therefore once again consider how to find out a Reason why
there is no color generated, where, according to his Assertion, there is so
great a refraction, and a doubly promoted Rotation made in both the refracting
Superficies the same way, and both so much promoting the said Rotation of the
Globuli. He might therefore, if he had pleased, have suspended his Conclusion.
Adeo ut Doctrina Cartesiana de Globulis eorumque Rotationibus nihil
periclitetur ab hac Demonstratione quae quamvis satis elegans sit and concinna,
debitum tamen scopum non omnino attingit, until he had a little farther
considered the nature of Reflection and Refraction. Now, because I find that
the Learned Doctor is not the only person that has not rightly apprehended
this Theory, give me leave to explain a little more particularly the manner
thereof: Suppose we then in the three Figures D E and F, that the space between
the two Parallel Lines a c and b d does represent a Ray or Radiation of light;
Not a Mathematical Line, but a Physical one of some Latitude, between which
Lines is propagated a motion, or something equivalent thereunto, which serves
to produce the effect of light. This motion we suppose to be propagated by a
Pulse or Wave in all uncoloured Rays at Right Angles with the Line of
Direction, but in colored Rays more or less obliquely according to the greater
or less refraction. We will suppose the stroke of the Pulse to be the length of
the space between 1 and 2, or 2 and 3, or 3 and 4, etc. and consequently, in a
uniform medium the pulse will continue the same, and the expansion of it will
be Perpendicular to the Line of Direction or progress; but when it comes to the
Refracting Superficies c d, Obliquely the side of the Pulse c touches the
refracting Superficies first, and being propagated into the refracting medium
by a longer and quicker Pulse, it is propagated to 4 below c before the other
side of the Pulse touches the Superficies at d, the Pulse therefore 44, 55, 66,
etc. becomes Oblique to the tendency of the Radiation; and by the Superficies
of it is reflected by 77, 77, 77, till it touches the second refracting
Superficies g h; where it is observable, that the same side of the Ray that
entered first the Superficies c d enters first into the Superficies g h, in the
same manner as if it had proceeded on by the straight Lines f m e l till it met
with a Parallel Superficies l m to the first c d; for the Ray between the two
Parallel Lines f h, e g, has the same inclination and respect to the
Refracting Superficies h g, that the Ray between f m and e l would have to the
Superficies m l, supposing there were no Reflecting Superficies at e f. I shall
not need, I hope, more particularly to demonstrate every part of this
Explanation, the very observing the Delineation of the Scheme being enough to
make it plain to any one never so little versed in Geometry, from which he will
plainly perceive that what I endeavor to demonstrate was really so, and that I
did understand what scope my Demonstration aimed at, so far as to hit the Mark,
which was to show that Colors were generated, where, according to Des Carts
own Principles, there could be no Rotation of the Globuli. Now, though the
Learned Doctor would not admit of this Demonstration to be sufficient to do the
work, yet he says, Page 252. Veruntamen dissimulandum non est, non pauca me
meapte opera excogitasse quibus pro persuasissimo habeo eorum motus and
rotationes modis pure mechanicis semper fieri non posse. And in prosecution of
the destruction of this Rotation of the Globuli, which he has hitherto seemed
to defend, he adds four several Arguments, I shall not now stay to repeat them.
But whosoever will please to read what the Learned Doctor has suapte opera
excogitated against the Cartesian Hypothesis, and set down in the 252, 253,
254, and 255. pages. And compare them with what I have said in the
forementioned place, to wit, at the latter end of the 60. and the beginning of
the 61. pages of my Micrographia, may plainly find the Arguments brought by the
Doctor do very little, if at all, differ from those I there published.

I could heartily therefore have wished that the Learned Doctor had made use of
some other Mediums to prove the Existence of an Hylarchick Spirit, and not have
meddled with Arguments drawn either from Mechanics or Optics; for I doubt,
that such as understand those subjects well, will plainly see that there is no
need of any such Hylarchick Spirit; and if there be no need of it, but that all
the Phenomena may be done without it, then it is probable that there is none
there, for Natura nihil agit frustra. It had been much easier to have proved
the existence of it by Arguments drawn from subjects we less perfectly
understand, as from the generation, nutrition, vegetation, and propagating of
Vegetables, and animal substances; for there the manner of the progress of
Nature being infinitely more curious and abstruse, and further removed beyond
the reach of our senses and understandings, one may more boldly assert strange
things of this Hylarchick Spirit without fear of control or contradiction, and
from whence possibly it may never lie within the power of Reasoning to banish
him.

But to leave this Digression, and return to the use of these water-poises.

A fifth effect may be for washing and refining of Earth, Clays, Powders, and
the like; the clear water by these contrivances being made to run over gently
at the top, and so leaving all the settlement from the water at the bottom.

By any one of these, with a receptacle Cistern added to it, the stream of
water from that Cistern may be accelerated or retarded by any degrees
desirable. This does depend partly from the proportion of the Tap of the
Receptacle Cistern to the Tap of the counterpoised Cistern, and partly from the
shape and make of the Receptacle Cistern, by the proportion and shape of which
the stream of Liquor through the Tap of the Receptacle Cistern may be modulated
at pleasure, as any one, a little versed in Hydrostaticks, will easily perceive
and demonstrate.

A sixth effect may be for governing the heat of Lamps for Distillations,
Digestions, Fermentations, Putrefactions, Dissolutions, hatching the Eggs of
Birds or Insects; accelerating, and seasoning, or timing the growth of Plants;
nealing of Glasses and Metals by the gradual access of the heat, so as to make
them fit for stronger degrees, or by the gradual recess to bring them out of
the greater degrees to make them tough and capable to receive the cold of the
Air.

It would be too long to give instances of contrivances for every of these
operations but the skilful Mechanist, Philosopher or Chemist will easily supply
his own desires by some one of these I have instanced in, or at least by a
composition of them. I shall therefore only add a description of a Clepsydra or
time-keeper or two, and so leave this subject for the present.

A description of a new sort of Clepsydra.
THis contrivance is nothing else than that Two of the second sort of Vessels
are so contrived as to run into each other and to empty themselves and be
filled alternately, and their bigness or capacity and the hole through which
the Liquor is vented are so proportioned as to be emptying the space of an
hour, which is easy enough, and may be adjusted to what accurateness is
desired. Then the unequal Superficies of the Cylindrical poise is divided into
sixty equal parts by straight Lines drawn upon its Surface Parallel to the
Axis, and to each other; these lines by the sinking or turning of the said
poise denote the minutes, and if smaller Divisions of time be desired, the
spaces between them may be divided by other smaller Parallel Lines denoting the
parts of each minute to what niceness is desired. One of these Cylindrical
Receptacles may be fixed, and the other by an easy apparatus may be made to
rise a little when it is topfull, and fall a little when quite empty below the
Level of the other that is fixed: The Chanel between them, through which the
water is to run out of the one into the other, may be a small pipe with a hole
in it of a bigness proportioned, as I said above, to let the Liquor run out of
one into the other in the time desired, and its ends may be fastened to the two
Receptacles by a part of the neck of a bladder or gut, so that it may be
limber, and may always have a Declivity into the Vessel that is to be filled;
the Declivity need not be above half an Inch. The Liquor used in it may be
Water, Oil, or any other Liquor that does not easily evaporate: But the best of
all is Quicksilver, because it does not with keeping evaporate at all sensibly,
which I have carefully observed for these fifteen years last past. Nor does it
grow thick or foul by the alteration of the Air, nor do I find it sensibly
alter by the heat and cold, at lest not comparable to the great changes which
other Liquors suffer by the alterations of those qualities. It is an excellent
material for measuring time in a standing Machine; and there may be hundred of
ways contrived to make it measure the space thereof as accurately as a
Pendulum; and I have many times admired that Tycho Brahe, who was otherwise so
curious and exact in the contrivance and make of his Engines and Instruments,
was yet so defective in his contrivances of measuring time by Quicksilver, when
there were so many obvious and easy ways of doing it, as he seems to complain
in his works. I have made trial of several with very good success, and found
some of them even beyond expectation certain, of which I may hereafter upon an
other occasion add the descriptions, when I publish the various ways of making
exact Time-keepers or Watches. In the mean time, being now speaking of
Time-keepers, for variety sake I shall mention.

A New Principle for Watches.
THis is a way of regulating both standing Watches, and movable Watches, either
for the Sea, or the Pocket, which some ten or twelve years fince I showed the
Royal Society, when I showed them my contrivances of the Circular Pendulum,
which is since published by Monsieur Hugenius, which is also mentioned in the
History of the said Society, p. 247. lin. 20. This was by a fly moving
Circularly instead of a balance, whose motion was regulated by weights, flying
further and further from the Center according as the strength of the Spring of
the Watch had more and more force upon its Arbor. The Weights were regulated
from flying out further than they ought to do by the contrivance of a Spiral
Spring, drawing both the said Weights to the Center of the motion or fly, in
the same proportion as I then demonstrated Gravity to attract the weight of a
Circular Pendulum, moved in a Parabolical Superficies, toward the Center or
Axis of its motion. The Weights were so contrived as always to counterpoise
each other. The Skeleton of this fly you have represented in the Figure. The
particular explanation of the parts, and the Geometrical Demonstration of the
Principle both of the Springs, and of the flying from the Center, I shall
explain in the Theory of Springs, and in the description of Time-keepers and
Watches.

(...). Arist. Quaest. Mechan. An Observation about the Seed of Moss.
SInce the publishing of my Micrography, I have met with an Observation, which
though it be of one of the smallest compound bodies I have hitherto taken
notice of, yet does it afford a hint of very great concern in Natural
Philosophy; And it does seem to make clear the cause of a Phenomenon, that
has appeared dubious, not only to me, but to many other more knowing
Naturalists. I have often doubted; I confess, whether Moss, Mushroms, and
several other small Plants (which the Earth seems to produce (...)) were the
offspring of a Seed or Grain; and I have been apt to believe, that they were
rather a secondary production of Nature; being somewhat the more inclined to
that opinion, because having formerly examined the small knots or Seed-cods of
Moss with a single Microscope, I could not perceive any thing in them that I
could imagine to be Seed, at least not so great a quantity as seemed necessary
to maintain so numerous a Progeny, as was every where to be found of it; that,
which then came out of them, seeming to be rather a pulp or pith, than any
thing like the Seeds in other similar Cods. But being since somewhat more
inquisitive, I did examine several of the abovementioned Knobs or
Seed-vessels, and found that there were seeds in them, no less wonderful for
the greatness of number, than the smalness of bulk. Taking then some of the
ripe and brown or reddish ones of them, and pressing them pretty hard, I found,
that there was a small dust went out of them, which seemed to vanish into the
Air. Pressing and squeezing others of these upon a black-plate, and examining
the powder with a Microscope, I found it to be a great heap of exceeding small
Seeds, Globular, and pretty transparent. It is the smallest, I confess, I have
yet seen, and, it may be, that has hitherto been discovered. And, unless that
be a plant, which I discovered growing on the blighted leaves of Roses, and
that those small bodies be seed vessels; or, unless those Knobs, I have
discovered on the top of mould, be the like; I cannot presently imagine where
there should be found a smaller. For, I find, that there will need no less than
thirty six hundred of them to be laid one by another in a line, to make the
length of an Inch; and, to cover the Superficies of an Inch-square, there will
need no less than nine hundred and threescore thousands, besides twelve
millions, of single Seeds if laid quadrangularly, but if laid triangularly,
there will need no less than two hundred and fourscore thousand, besides
seventeen Millions of single grains. And the number in a grain weight of them
cannot be less than one thousand three hundred eighty two Millions and four
hundred thousand single grains, about eighty of these square Superficies of
Seeds being laid one upon another in the Trigonal order, making, as near as I
can guess, the thickness of a piece of fine Paper, a square Inch of which
weighs a grain. And though this may seem a most incredible narration; yet I
would desire such as are apt to be too censorious, to take the pains to gather
a few of these Seed-vessels, and examine them as I have done, and then speak
what they find, and believe no more than their own sense and reason will inform
them, and they may easily see, that what I have asserted, will be rather short
of than exceed the real numbers. Now if this Shell of the Seed be thus small,
how much smaller must needs be the rudiment of the Plant that lies enclosed
within it? And how easily may such Seeds be drawn up into the Air, and carried
from place and place, even to the tops of the highest Towers, or to places most
remote, and be sowed by the passing Air, or falling drops of Rain, on the
boughs or branches of Trees, sides and tops of Walls, Houses, or Steeples? And
it is not in the Art of man to leave Earth exposed to the common Air, and to
exclude the entrance, or prevent the sowing of these imperceptible Seeds; and
therefore it is not to be wondered at, that, if any earth, though never so pure,
be exposed to the Air and Rain, though at the top of a Steeple, it will produce
Moss.

Further inquiry may possibly instruct us, that there may be Seeds of Mushroms,
Mould and other Vegetables of as small, if not smaller, bulk, which may be
dispersed and mingled with the Air, and carried to and fro with it, till washed
down by the falling drops of Dews or Rains; which, if they chance to light on a
convenient soil, do there Vegetate and spring up; but dye and perish, if the
ground, they light on, be not natural and agreeable. But whether this
conjecture hit right, further observation must determine.

This discovery I made the year after the late Fire of London, to wit, in the
year 1667. there being then vast quantities of it to be found every where
dispersed among the Ruins left by that Fire, which made me, I confess, very
much wonder at first how such vast quantities should come to be then so
suddenly rooted, and was the occasion of my more strict examination of it. This
I presently showed to many of my Acquaintants, and the next year 1668. upon the
eleventh of June I brought an account of it into the Royal Society, where I
suppose it may yet remain upon their Register; and it was not a little
surprising to all that saw it, when they considered how exceedingly small each
particular Seed was, and yet how infinitely vast the number of them was
produced by each Plant. How prodigiously small the first beginning and rudiment
of that Plant must be that was produced by it; now, though indeed the Plant it
self be one of the smallest, yet this Seed of it was much smaller in comparison
to the Plant than the Seeds of most other Plants compared with theirs. But
about two years after this I received from a very good friend of mine at
Bristol, the Ingenious and Inquisitive Mr. W. C. a Relation of some later
discoveries of his, which seemed much to outstrip even this, whether the
comparative magnitude of the Plant, and of the Seeds, or the number of the
Seeds, or the curiosity of the Seed-boxes, or the strange way of sowing and
dispersing, or the place and manner of the Seeds production be considered. As
they were sent to me by him in a Letter from Bristol, dated September 30. 1669.
take them in his own words and description.

NOtwithstanding my many other Avocations, variety of discoveries do almost
every day enlarge my experience; but more especially this last Week I was very
happy in the detecting of that which all the Philosophers and Physicians of
former Ages, have been ignorant of, as we may well imagine from what remains we
have of them. My Discovery in short was this, that all the kinds or species of
Ferns together with all the like Capillary Plants their Congeners are (though
generally denied to have any at all) more abundantly prolifical in Seeds than
any other Plant beside, especially the common Female. Ferns or Brakes, and
those more elegantly formed (I mean chiefly in the little Vesicles containing
the Seed) than many others, among the hundreds I have observed. To make it
demonstrable to you, I have now sent you both the Plants with the Seeds on
them, and the Seeds of the same Plants apart in Papers by themselves, which I
took off from other Plants of the same kind, having plentiful parcels of each
(excepting of what I have not sent you) this being the season of perfecting
their Seeds. I thought to have sent you draughts of the Seed Vessels, as they
appeared presently after gathering, but could not. I presume some of the
Vesicles or little boxes may remain whole, so that by your Microscope you may
see their true figures and distinctions, some of them being more flatted on
each side the little ring or embossed girdle encompassing them, others more
swelling.

Also those little rings or bands encompassing the boxes are different, in some
of the kinds broader and flatter, in others rounder, and standing up higher,
yet all agreeing in the principal parts of their form. I purpose to draw the
figures of them all as they appear by the Microscope, together with their
Seeds, and to add descriptions of all circumstances considerable, and join them
to the rest of my draughts of that kind. Some particulars most considerable I
now give you in the folfollowing account.

1. The little boxes containing the Seeds are in most of these Plants not half,
and in some not above one third, or one quarter as big as a very small grain of
common white sand; appearing like little bladders infolded with rings or bands,
shaped like certain little worms I have met with, which may be referred to the
Teredo's and Eruca's. 2. As near as I could compute, some of these bladders
contained about 100 Seeds, which were so exceeding small, as to be wholly
invisible to the nakedeye, and indiscoverable without a Microscope. 3. The
Leaves of both the Ferns, especially the common Female Fern, (which is more
abundantly stored with Seed than any of the rest) and the other I now send you,
being kept close without bruising, and soon after gathering exposed to the Sun,
or dry Air, the bands of as many of them as are ripe, will contract themselves
and break, and fling their Seeds all about, after the same manner as some other
small Plants, such as the Persicaria Siliquara, and some of the Cardaminas are
observed to do. This I have observed with a single unequal glass as well as with
the Microscope, but with the latter only I could discover the falling of the
Seed. And a pretty quantity of the Seed being rubbed or brushed off from the
Leaves upon a fine piece of Paper or Parchment, and sweeped together into a
heap, many of those boxes breaking together, and justling one another would
make the heap seem, as it were, full of Mites or living Creatures, even to the
bare eye; and if the place be free from noise, and the Ear be close applied,
the crackling of them upon breaking may easily enough be heard, and upon
running over the Paper with a Microscope the Seeds will be found dispersed, and
thrown at a great distance. 4. The figures of the Seed-vessels, as also of the
Seeds of all the Ferns and those their Congeners, called Capillary Plants, are
very near of the same shape and size, notwithstanding the vast disproportion
between them, as particular common Fern, Wall Rue, Hearts Tongue, and Osmond
Royal, the first three of which being very remarkable for their unlikeness to
each other, and the last chiefly for its excelling so many thousand times in
magnitude that of Wall Rue. Which observations may seem to confirm the opinions
of some learned Botanists that the affinity of Plants are to be judged by the
figures of their Seeds. 5. That Osmund Royal, which excels all the other
Ferns both in greatness, comeliness, and virtues, and which has been accounted
barren, with the rest has Vessels and Seeds of the same figure with the other,
and very near of the same size, the extreme smalness of which, even to
invisibility, and the greatness of the Plant, one root whereof, with all the
growth out of it, I have found weighing ten pounds and better, is surpassingly
more wonderful than that of Moss Seeds; of which I have some kinds of them
bearing Seeds, that a great number of them, with their Roots, Stalks, Leaves,
and Seeds, do not weigh a Grain. Besides, I have found of the common Female
Fern some which have been from the Roots to the utmost top of the Leaf nine
foot high, and within these three days measured the common broad-leaved Male
Fern six foot and an half long; some of the Leaves of which are among those I
now send you. 6. But that which appeared most admirable, both to me and some
other Gentlemen that were witnesses of it with me, was the many differing kinds
of small living Creatures, wholly invisible to the naked eye, and even through
largely magnifying spectacles, though some of them were to be seen through a
deep Unequal glass; but with a Microscope, when the Plant was newly gathered,
they might be seen nimbly running up and down among the Seed-vessels, and some
of them were so small as not to be above twice as big as the small Seeds in the
bladders; a description of some of which I may hereafter send you.
I have enclosed in the box sent you twelve sorts of Plants of this tribe,
being the greatest part of the number, and only seven sorts of the seeds; those
wanting are the Cetrach, Wall Rue, Maidenhair, and Polypody, of which
notwithstanding you may satisfy your self in the mean time till I can send
them green by those small parcels of the Plants which you will find amongst the
rest, though by keeping they are withered.

The Seeds of the Ferns through a very excellent Microscope appeared of the
higness of a small Vetch or Seed of Lentiles to the naked eye, and some of them
shrink like the sides of white Pease, with small regular knobs and hollows.
Those of Polypody are differing in color and shape being yellowish, as the
others are brown, red, and formed like the Seeds of the smaller Medicas that is
of a Kidney shape. All the rest I found very near of the same form. I cannot
omit what I observed in Cetrach, which Plant I have heretofore often
considered, and wondered at the ill-favored roughness on the under side of the
Leaf, appearing like the fleshy side of tanned Leather, being wholly ignorant
what Nature meant in it, but now by my Microscope I find it a very pleasant
object differing from all the rest, wherein the curiosity of Nature (in a Plant
so abject as that appears) is shown beyond imagination. This, when fresh
gathered, and not bruised, appears through the Microscope like fine thin
Membranes, such as the Wings of Flies, chequered with figures after the manner
of Honeycombs when the cells are full of honey, and closed with Membranes,
amongst which, as in so many Cells, lie the Seed-vessels, shaped as before is
mentioned. I doubt not but you have read the strange stories and fabulous
conceits of Authors about Fern Seeds. But Parkinson is more Orthodox in some
things than any of them: For he positively concludes from Genesis 1.11, 12. that
all Plants have their Seeds, and consequently Fern; where if he had staid, he
had asserted a general truth: But in coming to particulars, he affirms as great
an untruth, in saying, fol. 1036, and 1037. that the Seed is ripe at Midsummer,
according to the old traditional Fable, and tells how it may be gathered;
whereas now is the very season of their seeding, and at Midsummer this and the
rest are not come to their full growth, before which no Plant seeds. That
dustiness which he speaks of, and calls the Seed, is no other than what is
found on diverse other Plants, being an irregular Dust, and is not found on the
borders of the dents of the Leaves on the under side, on which the Seed grows,
but all over sprinkled on both sides, and not found when it is fully grown.
This he affirms of the Male Ferns, which are all differing very notably from
the common Female Fern, concerning which the fabulous tradition is held. But
after in the following Chapter of the Ferns and their Relatives now sent you,
he seems to give over his Scripture Proposition, and, speaking of the Seeds,
says no more but that they have spots, dashes, scales, or marks on their
back-sides. And of the Osmund Royal (speaking of the bush at the top of the
Plant) says it is accounted as the Flower and Seeds. And of the Lochitis aspera
says plainly they have none at all. Of this last I am yet to enquire, but doubt
not I shall find that it has Seed like the rest. Of all which Gerrard and
Johnson his Corrigitor gravely concludes (having indeed no demonstrable ground
to the contrary) that some have been too rash in affirming Ferns to have Seed.
I intend next Summer to observe whether these hitherto unknown Seeding Plants
have Flowers. In the mean time

I am, etc. W. C.
Bristol. September 30. 1669.

Maculae in Sole.
DUring this last great heat of weather in June I observed a very conspicuous
Macula with its immediately incompassing Nubecula, and some other less
conspicuous Spots at a further distance pass over the Disk of the Sun, and
found that it was nearest the middle when the heat was greatest, that the heat
increased as it came nearer the middle, and decreased as it departed from it.
It may be therefore worth observing for the future whether the like weather do
not happen upon the next appearance of the like Macula, since it seems not very
improbable to suppose that the body of the Sun it self may be much hotter when
such eruptions appear, those Maculae often times ending in Faeculae. And the
rather because I am informed that this extraordinary heat has not been
peculiar only to England, but very general to Europe; what it has been to
other parts of the world further intelligence will inform us.

Upon a second appearance of Spots in the Disk of the Sun at the latter end of
July and the beginning of August, when at one time, to wit, July 29. there
appeared about six greater and smaller in one knot with their proper Nubecules
or Umbra's, the heat of the weather again increased to a very great degree, and
abated as they drew toward the Limb, and grew fainter. But it has now since
the disappearing, viz. on the fourth of August, been exceeding hot also, though
I do not find any Spots this seventh of August; it may therefore possibly be
that other parts of the body of the Sun may have an extraordinary inflammation
which may cause so fervent and lasting heats as have happened this Summer. At
least this Hint may deserve some farther Inquiry, for though probably it may
not be attained to predict the appearances of those Spots, yet possibly the
appearances of the Spots may serve to predict the future constitution of the
weather. At least it seems worthy remarking that the greatest heat that has
been in the Air this year was on that day of June when the first Spot was near
the middle of the Sun.

POSTSCRIPT.
THe Publisher of Transactions in that of October 1675. endeavors to cover
former injuries done me by accumulating new ones, and this with so much passion
as with integrity to lay by discretion; otherwise he would not have affirmed,
that it was as certain that none of my Watches succeeded, as it was that I had
made themseveral years ago: For how could he be sure of a Negative? Whom I have
not acquainted with my Inventions, since I looked on him as one that made a
trade of Intelligence.

Next whereas he says I made them without publishing them to the world in
Print, he prevaricates, and would have it believed that they were not published
to the world, though they were publicly read of in Sir John Cutlers Lectures
before great numbers at several times, and though they were made and shown to
thousands both English and Foreiners, and writ of to several persons absent,
and though they were in the year 1665. in the History of the Royal Society
published to the world in Print, because, forsooth, they were not printed in
his Transactions.

Thirdly, whereas the Publisher of Transactions makes a long story of my seeing
his Journal De scavans, and my desiring to transcribe that part of it which
concerned this matter, as if I had requested some singular favor thereby. I
answer,

First, that he knew I designed presently to have printed it with
Animadversions, but he endeavored to prevent me, designing first clancularly
to get a Patent of it for himself, and thereby to defraud me.

Next, I say, I had a right without his favor to have seen, perused, and
copied it, as I was one of the Royal Society, the intelligence he there brings
in being the Societies.

Then it is denied that the Describer of Helioscopes well knew that the
Transcriber of Intelligence would publish it in his Transactions, though it was
believed if the publishing it would injure me it would not be long concealed;
which was the sole reason of Printing in the same Transactions, viz. 112. a
Letter which he had several years before.

Thirdly, Whereas he asserts that several discoveries of the Accuser had been
vindicated from the usurpation of others. It is answered, the clean contrary is
upon good grounds suspected from the Publication of a Book about Earthquakes,
Petrifactions, etc. Translated and Printed by H. O. the manner of doing which
is too long for this place. Such ways this mis-informer has of vindicating
discoveries from the usurpation of others.

To his upbraiding me with his having published some things of Mine; I answer,
he has so, but not so much with mine as with his own desire, and if he send me
what I think worth publishing I will do as much for him, and repay him in his
own coin.

Lastly, Whereas he makes use of We and Us ambiguously, it is desired he would
explain whether he means the Royal Society, or the Pluralities of himself. If
the former, it is not so, as I can prove by many Witnesses; if the later, I
neither know what he is acquainted with, or what has been imparted or explained
to him.

So not designing to trouble my self any further with him, unless he gives me
occasion, I dismiss him with his

-- Speque metuque
Procul hinc procul ito.
Ho. FINIS.
LECTURES AND COLLECTIONS Made by ROBERT HOOK, Secretary of the Royal Society.

COMET A. CONTAINING Observations of the Comet in April, 1677. Fragments of
several Lectures about those of 1664. and 1665. Sir Chr. Wren's Hypothesis and
Geometrical Problem about those Comets, A Discourse concerning the Comet of
1677. Mr. Boyle's Observation made on two new Phosphori of Mr. Baldwin, and Mr.
Craft. Mr. Gallet's Letter to Mr. Cassini, together with his Observation of
sub. Mr. Cassini' Reflections upon those of Gassendus, and Hevelius, and upon
this. Mr. Hally's Letter and Observation of the same made at St. Hellena. Mr.
Cassini's Observation of the Diurnal motion of, and other changes happening in
it.


MICROSCOPIVM. CONTAINING Mr. Leeuwenhoeck's two Letters concerning some late
Microscopical Discoveries. The Author's Discourse and Description of
Microscopes, improved for discerning the nature and texture of Bodies. P.
Cherubine's Accusations answered. Mr. Young's Letter containing several
Anatomical Observations.


LONDON: Printed for J. Martyn, Printer to the Royal Society, at the Bell in
St. Paul's Churchyard. 1678.

VIRO PERILLUSTRI Dno JOSEPHO WILLIAMSON EQUITI AURATO, Serenissimo CAROLO IIo.
Mag. Britan. Fran. and Hibern. REGI, A Consiliis Secretioribus, et a Secretis
Status, Nec non SOCIETATIS REGALIS LONDINENSIS, Ad Scientiam Naturalem
promovendam PRAESIDI DIGNISSIMO.
NEC potui, nec debui, Nobilissime Vir, cujusquam alius nomen his Chartis
inscribere, praeter Tuum. Sub Te natae, Tibi vitam debent; Tibi quoque debebunt
quod lucem aspiciant. Egregius ille Tuus animus ad instaurandam Philosophiam
artesque adeo omnes utiles, mihi homini, alioquin subtimido, audaciam hujus
dedicationis fecit. Ego quae nunc potui, profero, magis ad Gratulationem
ostendendam, quam Eruditionem. Spero autem, quemadmodum sub Tuo PRAESIDIO
majora indies Augmenta Scientiarum in hac gente fiunt, ita exorituros viros
doctos, qui Tibi justa praeconia laudum persolvant; quod ego prae tenuitate ne
conari quidem audeo, quanquam cum primis sim

Dignitatis and Honoris Tui Studiosissimus, ROBERTUS HOOK.

SYNOPSIS.
THE Comet seen April 21. 1677. between the Triangle and the Cloud of, its tail
not directly opposite to the, its Magnitude, Brightness, Head, Nucleus, Blaze,
(1.) Why sometimes shorter, sometimes longer; without sensible motion of parts.
Explanation of the first figure, as seen by the eye. (2.) Of the second Figure,
as seen through a glass, of a parabolick termination, differing from the
representations of Mr. Hevelius. (3.) The Medulla, and blaze with the manner of
shortning and lengthening, explained by the third figure; not seen the 22d. but
the 23d. The bigness of the Nucleus and Head through a Telescope, compared with
the top of a Tower. (4.) The place it then appeared in. Why the motion was not
more exactly observed. Its blaze still not opposite to the Sun. The 24th. not
seen, nor 25th. (5.) though the Sky clear by reason of the height of Vapors.
How they do lengthen the Crepusculum. Why Physical Remarks only were made. (6.)
Published in order to understand Objections, and propound pertinent Queries.
Some Observations, Notes, Queries, etc. concerning the Comets in 1664. and
1665. here. Collected out of several scattered Papers and Lectures of them
formerly read here imperfect. Queries of its substance, magnitude, density,
mutability, dissolution, fluidity, gravity, light, figure, motion bended or
straight, (7.) with equal or unequal velocity, in the Atmosphere or Ether,
above or below the Moon. Whether it wastes, or lasts to return. The Star of a
compacted light (8.) varied possibly from position, partly from real change,
Tail transparent, Body supposed more dense, side toward the Sun evenly defined,
Encompassed with a fluid yielding to motion, but dissolving its parts. Its
light from its self. (9.) Its Nucleus supposed dense possibly as the middle
part of the Earth, of which some conjectures. Dissolved by the Ether as in our
Atmosphere. (10.) Argument for the looseness of the central parts of the Earth
from the variation of magnetical direction. (11.) The Nucleus of Comets
possibly the same. Internal motion may weaken gravitation. Parts separated may
be agitated by the gravitation of the. Tail made not so much by the particles
receding as the Stars approaching the Sun. (12.) How the Comet may first lose
its Orb in the Universe, and passing through the spheres of Activity of several
central bodies is deflected and attracted by them, and the Blaze raised to a
prodigious length. (13.) The bodies being attracted by some gravity, Blaze
expelled by levity, explained by smoke, and steams. Somewhat for positive
levity. (14.) A digression concerning the method of speculating the great and
first principles of the Universe. The Coma and Blaze like smoke or flames.
(15.) Shining particles a shining point, not a line of light. Considerations
and Experiments about the ways light is augmented by, as by swift motion,
adjacent dark medium, Flame explained. Why the Particles coalesce into a
stream. (16.) Enquiry about the magnitude and place of Comets. Many supposed
them sublunary. Tycho and Kepler proved them celestial. How far we may rely
upon Observations for Parallax. Parallax and its effects described. (18.) Tycho
supposed the Comet of 1577. to move about the Sun. Kepler that of 1607. to move
in a straight line; that of 1664. had no sensible Parallax by what means it was
found. (19.) Refraction in this way varies little. Theory of Comets defective
as to Parallax hitherto. Parallax not to be enquired from the Observations of
several men. Errors creep in from the Press and the Graver, as in P. Gottignies
Plates. (20.) Nothing to be concluded from Observations made by persons in
differing places for want of accurate Instruments, and Observations. (21.) Even
the best as Hevelius, Gottignies, Petit, or Auzout err. Some reason for this
assertion. Most of the rest altogether insignificant. (22.) Want of Observers,
Instruments, and Tables the cause. How these wants are to be supplied. What the
world expects from Mr. Hevelius. (23.) And of how great use his Tables and
Projections made by them will be. Parallax from diurnal motion failing. (24.)
Other Parallaxes arising from other hypotheses of the proper motions either of
the Earth, or Comet, or both together considered arise to a certainty. (25.)
Others depending upon other suppositions define nothing of the magnitude or
distance of Comets. The inconvenience of Tycho's, and also of Kepler's
Hypotheses explained. A third way I have taken. What consequences follow from
it, (26.) As that it moves in a Circle that comes within the Earth Orb in, and
without Orb in, a sextant in 130 days, etc. This not relied on, because there
may be other hypotheses to solve the phenomenon; as that the Earth is unmoved,
and the Comet moved in a Circle, whose unequal side is toward the Earth. (27.)
This hypothesis explained by the sixth figure. (28.) The distance and bigness
of the Circle of the Comet undeterminable this way without a diurnal parallax,
since the appearances may be solved by Circles of any bigness, proved by the
eighth figure, (29.) Allowing inequality of motion, or more compound curve
lines, nothing can be determined. The circular Orb it seemed the most probable
solves Kepler's acceleration, according to the increase of a line of Tangents.
(30.) A gravitation toward the Sun makes out the motion of the Comet, and
Planets, and of the Blaze. The Blaze explained by experiment of dissolved in
oil of Virt. (31.) This experiment and hypothesis farther explained, and
applied to explain the Blaze which is from thence bent, brighter on one side
than the other, not direct from the Sun. (32.) Cometical body and motion as old
as the world, yet wasting in the Ether; explained by fire. Dissolution by
menstruums. (33.) Thence the proprieties of Comets conjectured, and the sum of
the foregoing discourse repeated, being the end of a Lecture. Recourse to Tycho
Brahe's Observation (34.) for making out the Comets Orb. His supposing its
motion unequal without reason a shift. Mr. Horrox his hypotheses in the ninth
figure a product of chance. (35.) A discourse on it, and some objections
against Tycho's. (36.) Kepler's hypothesis examined by these Observations of
Tycho's, found the most likely, but with some alteration. Line of Trajection
bent a little. Motion accelerated toward the Sun, retarded from it. (37.) The
swifter and further off the Comet from the Sun, the less the bend, explained by
the tenth figure. (38.) The way of enquiring parallax by Telescopes, (39.)
further explained. A second way by two Observers in distant places propounded.
The third way of Sir Chr.Wren his Majesty's Surveyor-General, (40.) Set down
and demonstrated by a Geometrical Problem. (41.) How exactly all those
Observations he had were made out by it, together with his own Schemes; both
which I had in the beginning of Feb. 1664/5. (42.) Some other Papers about
Comets added, being reflections on Mr. Descartes and Kepler's hypotheses, from
particular tracings of the Comets of 1664. and 1665. A Scheme of the later
Observations of that of 1664. added, and some reflections, being all the papers
could be found about those Comets. (43, 44.) Animadversions on this of April
last. Why the former conjectures were adhered to concerning the light of
Comets. (45.) Several sorts of shining bodies enumerated. (46) To which the
light of the Comet seems to have most affinity, and how produced. (47.) Further
described and explained. (48.) The reason of its parabolick figure demonstrated
from the proprieties of motion from or toward a gravitating body, as the Sun.
(49.) Concerning the wasting and lasting of the Cometical body. The bigness and
nature of the Particles that compose the Blaze. (50.) Some difficulties in this
supposition concerning the action of the Ether in levitation and ascent,
dissolution, shining, etc. cleared and explained by Experiments. (51, 52, 53.)
But would have been further examined by Observation if there had been
opportunity. (54.) That these assertions about the light of Comets may not seem
too paradoxical, some further Considerations and Observations about light are
added, and some new ways propounded. (55, 56.) Mr. Boyle's Memorial concerning
a Phosphoros, written for his own use, inserted; in which he first names the
Author of it, and describes his Apparatus. (57, 58.) Then the observables. 1.
Two spoonfuls of matter enlighten a large glass sphere. 2. A little enlightens
a large Cylinder. 3. Liquor shaken had a smoke and flasht. 4. A dry substance
affirmed to have continued shining 2 years, flashed.
(59.) 5. Some dust of this on a Carpet twinckled like Stars. Writing on paper
with it shined, and smelt of Sulphur and Onions. (60.) 7. The hand on which it
was rubbed, shined, but felt no heat. (61.) It fired Gunpowder first warmed.
(62.) And white paper held over coals. Other trials propounded, but refused.
(63.) Some Experiments made on the Phosphoros Baldwini in vacuo, and in the
open air. (64.) Preserved in Vacuo, but destroyed in Air. (65, 66.) Monsieur
Gallet's Letter to Monsieur Cassini, acquainting him with his Apparatus for
observing in. (67, 68.) His Observation of four spots in. (69.) The particulars
observed. (70.71, 72.) Monsieur Cassini's Reflections on these Observations.
(73, 74.) Mr. Hally's Letter to Sir Jonas Moore, containing an account of his
Observations of sub sole, three Southern Stars. The two Nubeculae, etc. (75,
76, 77.) Mr. Cassini's farther discoveries about the diurnal motion, and
several new appearances in. (78, 79, 80.) A second Discourse called
Microscopium, or some new discoveries with Microscopes, in a Letter of Mr.
Leeuwenhoeck. (81.82.) A confirmation of some of them by Observations here.
(83.) Mr. Leeuwenhoeck's second Letter, containing Observations of the Globules
of Blood, Milk, Phlegm, Gums first dissolved, then precipitated out of the
Spirit of Wine; Eels a thousand times thinner than a hair. (84, 85, 86, 87, 88,
89.) The ways how these discoveries were made here. 1. By holding the liquor in
small pipes, how filled, how made. The Lamp, Pipe, Oil, Manner, Materials for
making them described. (89, 90.) Muscovy-glass used instead of these Pipes, and
how the Microscope was fitted for this purpose. (91.) What light convenient.
Surfaces of bodies not perfectly fluid apt to delude an Observer. (92.) Plates
removing that deluding cause, and what farther use of them. (93.) How to find
the figure and texture of Animal and Vegetable parts. Instance in a ligament of
Beef. (94.) The figure of Muscles hinted, and an instrument stretching them
before the Glass described. (95.) A description of the Microscopes used, 1. Of
the single Microscope, and its advantages and difficulties. (96.) another sort
more easy described, and the ways how to make and use it explained. (97.)
Causes that vary the distance of objects from the Globule. The use of Selenites
and Looking-glass-plates, for holding the liquor. A Microscope of one single
refraction. (98.) The only inconvenience of them hinted, how prevented by
double Microscopes. Where these are made. (99.) The double Microscope, and its
parts, uses, and advantages described. (100.) The benefit of a dark Room, and
appropriated lights. And a digression in answer to P. Cherubines Accusation.
(101.) Some Observations made with this Microscope hinted. Animalcules in the
steeping of other Grains besides Pepper. Their smallness estimated, and
compared to a Whale. Muscular fabric hinted. Milk, Blood, Fat, Sugar, Alum,
etc. viewed. (102, 103.) Mr. Young's Letter of one who trying to cure a Colic
by leaden Pills, slipped one into his Lungs; grievous symptoms ensue. (105.)
Helps of skilful Physicians in vain attempted, and particularly of Dr. Mayow,
of suspending with the head downward; though in the interim he married and had
Children, yet it killed him. (106, 107.) His body dissected, and remarkables
taken notice of, and their causes explained by Mr. Young, (from 107. to 112.)


COMETA, OR, Remarks about Comets.
ON Saturday morning, April 21. 1677. I first saw the Comet, of which I had
been advertised the day before. It appeared in the Sign Taurus, between the
base of the Triangle, and the unformed Stars in the Cloud of Aries, dignified
by P. Pardies, with the figure of the Flower-de-luce. The head of it was in a
right line, with the heart of Cassiopea, and Alamak, or the South foot of
Andromeda. and as near as I could judge by my naked eye (having no Instrument
or help by me) it was of the distance between the feet and the Girdle of
Andromeda, distant from the said Alamak toward the South.

Its tail sometimes as the Air was clearer and darker, extended about three
quarters of its distance from the aforesaid Alamak, and pointed directly at the
Star in the nose of Cassiopea of the fourth Magnitude, and consequently the
head of the Comet pointed not directly at the Sun (the Sun then being about the
eleventh degree of Taurus) but rather toward the fourteenth degree of the same
Sign. Its appearance was very small and slender, and as people commonly
ghessed, about two yards long; and the head about the bigness of a Star of the
first magnitude, but of a much fainter and duller light. Its blaze about three
of the clock seemed to rise straight upward, before that about half an hour
after two it leaned a little Eastwards, or toward the right hand, and after
three, as it rose higher, inclined toward the left side or Westwards. The head
to the naked eye was brighter than the blaze, and seemed to be somewhat bigger
than that part of it which immediately joined to the head; but those parts of
it which were farther distant, were of a much greater breadth; spreading wider
and wider, as they were more remote from the head, and in the same proportion
also growing fainter and fainter in their light, especially toward the
outsides: but the middle parts or medulla appeared much longer, and the
brightness much greater, which made the whole blaze to seem to taper, or be
pointed toward the top.

The length of the Blaze appeared sometimes shorter, and sometimes longer, by
several vicissitudes; and as the daybreak, or dawning increased, so the Blaze
shortened, and especially toward the sides near the top, and shortly after
before the Sun rose, disappeared.

But notwithstanding this shortning and lengthening of the Blaze, I could not
perceive any kind of motion in the parts of it, such as is observable in flame,
smoke, or other steams rising from a burning or hot body: but the same parts of
the Blaze seemed to appear and disappear in their proper places as if they had
been fixed and a solid body.

The first Figure I have here annexed will with some short explications,
represent the appearance of it to the eye, more plainly than by a multitude of
words, without it it is possible to express.

A, represents the head of the Comet, the middle of which appeared brighter
than any other part; about which was a hazy light somewhat like the shining of
a Star through a thin cloud; the lower part of which was pretty round and
defined. B, the neck of it, which seemed to the naked eye of less Diameter, and
less bright than the head, but through a six-foot glass, as I shall mention by
and by, it appeared bigger, though not so bright. The middle of this was very
bright, and seemed to issue from the Nucleus or Star in the middle of the head.
C, the brushy parts which were fainter and paler toward the sides, especially
nearer the top, which made the whole seem to taper and resemble the Figure here
expressed: Observing it with Telescopes (one of which was fifteen foot, and the
other six foot long) I found the shape of it much like this, which I have
represented in the second Figure.

It had a pretty bright Star (if I may so call it) near the middle of the head,
seeming much about the brightness of when near the Horizon, and was about 25
seconds in Diameter; as is represented by A, not perfectly defined, but hazy;
the cloudy part or beard of the body encompassing it on all sides: but that
part of the Coma B, which was next toward the Sun, was the narrowest: nor was
this Coma well defined, but the outward parts of it were fainter and fainter.
However they were regularly enough terminated to make the outward most bounds
of it of a kind of Parabolical figure; the most bent part of which was toward
the Sun, and most defined: And the bright Star of it was, as I have expressed
it about four of its Diameters distant from the said parabolical limb. The
light parts of the ambient Cloud seemed to spread gradually toward that side
of it, which was opposite to the Sun; but those which were next the middle were
the brightest: and always as they were farther and farther from the Star in the
head, the fainter and paler they were.

I could not observe any representations like those which are given us by Mr.
Hevelius, in his Cometography, neither in the Head, nor the Blaze, no more than
I could in those which appeared in the years 1664. and 1665. as may be easily
taken notice of by comparing these which I have here delineated with those.

The middle part of the Blaze CC, which ascended from the Star in the middle,
seemed the brightest, and of this medulla or stem, those parts were brightest
which were nearest situated to the said Star. The sides of it grew fainter and
fainter, as they were farther from the head; and though they had brightness
enough to make them appear in a dark and clear sky, yet the dawning quickly
made them vanish, and disappear, as did any haziness of the Sky: and according
as the light increased, so was the Blaze diminished, after the order of the
tapering pricked lines expressed in the third Figure by a a a, b b b, c c c, d d
d, etc. and even in a clear and dark Sky, toward the farther end of the Blaze
they often disappeared for some short space of time, though the middle or stem
continued; and so it caused the remaining appearance to resemble the figure of
a very slender birchen whisk or brush, much like that represented in the first
figure.

The 22. from half an hour after two, till half an hour after three, the
North-east part of the Heavens to me was cloudy, and the Sky between the Clouds
was hazy, and the dawning struck much higher than the day before, so that I
could not find it.

The 23. with several friends I observed it again, the Sky being clear, and
confirmed my self in all my former observations, taking again diligent notice
of all circumstances remarkable, both with my naked eye, and with
Perspective-glasses. And I had this morning a very notable observation in order
to measure the bigness of the Star and its Coma which encompassed it, by
comparing it with somewhat fixed: for some few minutes before three of the Clock
the head of it past just behind the type or top-post of a tower not far
distant, and was quite eclipsed by it; and as soon as it appeared to have past
it, seeming yet contiguous, I observed it with my six foot Telescope, and found
the Coma or whole head to appear full as big as the said type or timber post,
and the Nucleus or Star in the middle of it, to be very near of the same
bigness of the iron spindle, upon which the weathercock was fixed. Whence upon
examining the bigness of the said parts, since by an accurate Instrument I
judge the head or Coma was about 4 minutes in Diameter, and the Nucleus or Star
about 25 seconds. I took notice this morning that it had much altered the
position in the Heavens, which it had upon Saturday morning, and that the Blaze
of it was very much deflected out of the line it appeared in the last time. And
with a small crossstaff, taking the distance of it from Alamak, and from Genib,
in the left side of Perseus. I judged it to be in the midway between the
Flower-deluce aforesaid, and Algol, or the head of Medusa, that is, about 14
degrees of, and 17 degrees of Northern Latitude: so that I judged its motion
almost East, but a little deflecting South. I was not much solicitous of making
observations of its true place, as not designing my present enquiry to be for
what kind of motion it had, conceiving its motion to be toward the Sun, and so
of very little duration: and expecting to hear an account of that from other
places, and persons that were better furnished with Instruments and
conveniences for observations of that kind than I was then.

The Blaze extended it self in a right line toward the Star in the right thigh
of Cassiopea, being a Star of the third magnitude. Its length at first was
about 7 or 8 degrees, and did sometimes seem longer, sometimes shorter, as I
noted before, without seeming to have any other motion in it but the Diurnal
motion, the same with the fixed Stars on Earth. Whence I collected, that the
head of it pointed toward the seventeenth degree of Taurus in the Ecliptic,
though the Sun at that time was about the thirteenth degree of the same Sign.

The 24. with several others, I attended the appearance of it, but the Sky in
that part of the Heavens was over-cast with Clouds.

The 25. I expected to have a farther Observation of it from half an hour after
two, till a quarter after four; but notwithstanding the South-easterly wind,
and the clarifying quality of the air, which before half an hour after three
had partly carried off, and partly dissolved the black thick Clouds (with which
the North-east parts of this Horizon was over-cast about three of the Clock)
and left that part of the Heavens where the Comet should have appeared clear,
and without Clouds. Yet the air being very high and heavy, as the Barometer
showed, the upper parts of it were so filled with the dawning light of the
morning, that neither the Blaze head or Star of the Comet appeared to me in the
least: nor had I any sight of it since.

The like appearance of the great height of vapors in the air, when it is very
heavy, I have often taken notice of, and have observed, that the twy-light and
dawning between the night, and appearing of the Sun is very much altered
thereby. And that a heavy air, when the vapors are raised high, will make the
length of them much greater, and consequently the night shorter. And a light
air, on the contrary, shortning them, does lengthen the night.

These were the most remarkable circumstances I took notice of in this Comet,
being altogether Physical, and designed only for enquirng into the constitution
of these wonderful bodies: the accounts and opinions we have hitherto had of
them of that kind, being very unfatisfactory. Though other Observations, to
wit, Mathematical, of the way, celerity, and magnitude of Comets have been
prosecuted with very much care, and great skill; such as those of the noble
Tycho, and the learned and diligent Hevelius, insomuch that I could not expect
to have better; yet as to Physical remarks, I wanted much information to be
able to satisfy many difficulties that occurred to my thoughts, upon enquiry
into the particular natures of them. I did therefore, as I designed, employ all
the time I could get of observing this Comet, in taking notice of such
circumstances as I judged would be pertinent to resolve any of those Queries I
had formerly made, in order to find out the nature of Comets in general. And
though the little opportunity I now had, and the disadvantageous appearance of
this last were very short of giving me that satisfaction in many particulars
which I wished for, and expected at first, yet since they may possibly serve
for hints to others that may hereafter have better opportunity than I, and that
I might understand what material objections could be made by observers from
preceding Comets, and that they might for the future more diligently take
notice of what from these queries and hints may be judged significant to this
design, such as they are I have here published as I had done formerly by my
Lectures in Gresham-Colledge, those which I had made of those in 1664. and 1665.

Now before I come to make relexions upon these remarks, I thought it might not
be improper to add some few of those things concerning those two former Comets
observed by me in the said years. I say, some few, because it would be needless
to set down all, especially such of mine as do agree with others since
published. I did therefore soon after I had seen the first Comet, to wit,
December 23. 1664. propound to my self certain Queries necessary to be
answered, in order to find out a true theory of them, and directed my
Observations accordingly; and they were these.

Of what substance its body, beard, and blaze is? and next, of what magnitude
each of those parts appear, and of what real magnitude they are?

Other Queries were concerning its density and rarity, its mutability or
immutability; that is, whether it dissolved and wasted or not? whether it were
fluid or solid? whether it participated of gravity or levity?

Whence it had its light, color, etc.

What was the sigure of the Star, Radiation, Blaze, etc.

Whether the Blaze were always opposite to the Sun, or deflected? whether
straight or bended, etc.

What kind of motion it was carried with? whether in a straight or bended line?
and if bended, whether in a circular or other curve, as elliptical or other
compounded line, whether the unequal or concave side of that curve were turned
toward the earth? Whether in any of those lines it moved equal or unequal
spaces in equal times?

Through what parts of the universe it moved, and how far distant it was at
several times? Whether in the lower Regions near the Earth in the Atmosphere,
or near it, or in the Heavens, or fluid Ether, with which the space of the
Heavens is filled? Whether above or below the Moon, etc.

Whether it wastes, and is dispersed and consumed? or whether it lasts and
endures for a longer time? If it lasts, Whether it ever appears again, being
moved in a circle; or be carried clear away, and never appear again, being
moved in a straight or paraboloeidical line? Whether it be collected or
generated when it first appears? and dissipated or destroyed when it
disappears; or whether the several distances of it do not make that appearance?

Whether it may not have some such propriety, as the Star in Cete, whereby it
may shine and appear for a certain period, and again lose its light, and
disappear by several vicissitudes? and whether that may not give some account
of the appearance of so many Comets about Aries?

First, As concerning the matter or substance of the Nueleus Star or body, of
the hazy shining part encompassing it, and of the Tail or Blaze: I say, that by
comparing all the circumstances that I was able to take notice of from the
beginning to the end, I found that the Star in the head was of a very compacted
and dense light, and almost equalled that of Saturn; though it were not like
that confined by an equal limb: that there were some parts distinguishable in
this body, some having a brighter, others a fainter light. That these parts did
not continue the same, but considerably varied, which might in part be caused
by the differing position of those parts which were seen before, from the same
seen afterward, in respect of the eye, situate on the surface of the Earth,
moved one way, and the Comet moved another; though I do not conceive it wholly
ascribable to that, but partly also to a real alteration of the parts of the
Comet. That I did very diligently watch to observe if it were possible, when it
passed over any fixed Star to find whether it were transparent; as I had
several times observed the tail of it to be even in its brightest parts, but I
had not the opportunity; but that I did several times observe the tail of it
transparent, not only with the naked eye, but through a Telescope: if at least
the fixed Stars be above it, which I think few doubt, that the light diminished
by degrees toward the extremes of the hazy part encompassing it; and yet the
extremes of it as to that part of it which respected the Sun, seemed pretty
evenly and smoothly defined, especially through a Telescope: From all which
remarks, and from the velocity of its motion, I conjecture it to be made up of
solid matter, not fluid; that the body of it especially, is considerably dense,
but that the haziness or Coma about it is much more rarefied, and the tail
thereof is most of all. That this body is encompassed with a body most fluid,
and easily permeable, and which does with very little resistance give way to
the motion of it, or any other body through it, that it does easily admit at
least (if not actually take into it self) the parts of this body, Coma, and
Blaze. I say, admit at least, (though there may be many reasons alleged that
it does actually prey upon, and dissolve those parts into it self, as I shall
show by and by) because that we find that the extreme parts do extend but to
such a distance, and beyond that there is no appearance of light, and that the
light is from it self, and not produced by refraction or reflection of the beams
of the Sun, I shall show reasons by and by. And consequently, where there is
most light appears, there are the greatest number, and there is the greatest
density of the Cometical parts. The middle of the body may be as dense as the
body of the earth; and I have not observed my self, nor met with any body else
that has taken notice of any thing to the contrary: If I could have seen any
Comet to have covered any Star in its way, it would have afforded a very
circumstantial information, especially if for this purpose it had been taken
notice of with a good Telescope. What the density of the innermost parts of
this Earth we live on is, none knows; for though we find the parts on which we
tread to be very compact, and though by the industry of Miners it has been
proved so also to the depth of many hundred foot, as Georgius Agricola relates:
and though it has been found so even to a greater depth by the soundings of
the bottom of the Sea, yet none can bring an undeniable proof that the same is
so solid to 25 miles deep; much less that it is so to the center: if therefore
the external shell of this Globe were broken, and removed, it is not impossible
but that the middle parts thereof may be of the same nature with the middle
parts of the Comets body; and that those parts (were the superficial parts or
shell removed) might, like these of Comets expand themselves into the
encompassing Ether. Nay we find, that notwithstanding the compactedness of the
superficial parts of this Earth, yet the Ether is able to take up into it self
vast quantities of them, and to keep them suspended, some of them, even to the
height of many miles, if any argument may be drawn from the height or length of
the dawning or Crepusculum; and this, notwithstanding the attraction of the
Earth in its perfect vigor, or the gravitation of these parts thus taken up, or
their endeavor toward the center of the Earth. How much more freely then
might we imagine the encompassing Ether to prey upon, and take up into it self
the internal parts, if they were of a loose and pervious texture, and almost in
a state of fluidity, like a heap of Sand, or a vessel of Alabaster-dust in
boiling, and were not so firmly united by the bonds of gravity, and the
vinculum of petrifaction, as we find the superficial parts of the earth now
are. There is one argument to prove to us, that there may be such a looseness
of the internal parts of the earth, and that is that the magnetical virtue
varies, which virtue without controyersie diffused through the whole body of
the Earth, and which has a relation to the whole Globe, and to every
magnetical part thereof. For by observation it is found, that the magnetical
virtue acts upon a needle without it, as the magnetical virtue of a round
Loadstone does on a Needle applied without that, which, as I may elsewhere
show, has a respect to the center of the stone differing from all the respects
that Authors have hitherto ascribed to it, even of Gilbert, Kepler, Kircher,
Descartes, and our Countryman Mr. Bond, who I think was the first man that
endeavored to reduce the variations observed by Wright, Gellibrand, Coster,
etc. into a Theory and calculation. Now this magnetical virtue, (which may be
called one emanation of the Anima mundi, as gravity may be called another)
being diffused through every part of it, and seeming to be, as it were Tota in
toto and tota in qualibet part, and to be more spiritual, and to act more
according to Magical and Mystical Laws than Light, Sound, or the like, it
giving to every magnetical body, and every piece of it, though infinitely
divided, the same proprieties it has it self; This magnetical virtue, I say,
having such a relation, and being forced thus to vary, it is very probable that
the internal parts to which it has a respect, have a variation likewise; and
consequently, that these internal parts which are supposed generally very
dense, compact, and very closely and solidly united, may be notwithstanding
more loose, and ununited, and movable from certain causes.

To proceed therefore, I say, that it seems very probable to me, that the body
of Comets may be of the same nature and constitution with that of the internal
parts of the Earth, that these parts may, by the help of the Ether, be so
agitated and blended together, as to make them work upon, and dissolve each
other in the same manner, as we have often had examples of some of the parts of
the Earth; a late instance of which was at Mongibel or Aetna in Sicily, where
the Fire continued for a long time, and produced very considerable effects.
That this internal agitation may confound the gravitating principle, and so
leave the parts in a greater freedom to be dissolved by the encompassing
Ether, which is the agent that sets the other two at work to destroy each
other, that it may at length prey upon both, and dissolve them both into it
self; and consequently, not only the parts thus dissolved are elevated to a
greater distance from the center of the Star or Nucleus, or the superficies of
it, whose gravitating or attractive principle is much destroyed, the Coma being
in this Comet four or five Diameters of the Star or Nucleus: but having given
those parts leave thus far to ramble, the gravitating principle of another body
more potent acts upon it, and makes those parts seem to recede from the center
thereof, though really they are but as it were, left behind the body of the
Star, which is more powerfully attracted than the minuter steaming parts: for,
I suppose the gravitating power of the Sun in the center of this part of the
Heaven in which we are, has an attractive power upon all the bodies of the
Planets, and of the Earth that move about it, and that each of those again have
a respect answerable, whereby they may be said to attract the Sun in the same
manner as the Lodestone has to Iron, and the Iron has to the Lodestone. I
conceive also that this attractive virtue may act likewise upon several other
bodies that come within the center of its sphere of activity, though it is not
improbable also but that as on some bodies it may have no effect at all, no
more than the Lodestone which acts on Iron, has upon a bar of Tin, Lead,
Glass, Wood, etc. so on other bodies, it may have a clean contrary effect, that
is, of protrusion, thrusting off, or driving away, as we find one Pole of the
Magnet does the end of a Needle touched on the opposite part; whence it is, I
conceive, that the parts of the body of this Comet (being confounded or
jumbled, as 'twere together, and so the gravitating principle destroyed) become
of other natures than they were before, and so the body may cease to maintain
its place in the Universe, where first it was placed. Whence instead of
continuing to move round some central body, whether Sun or Planet, as it did
whilst it maintained it self entire, and so had its magnetical quality (as I
may so call it) unconfounded, it now leaves that circular way and by its motion
(which always tends to a straight line, and would be so were it not bended into
a curve by the attractive virtue of the central body) it flies away from its
former center by the Tangent line to the last place, where it was before this
confusion was caused in the body of it. In this line ('it is probable) it passes
from one part of the Heavens to another, and so passes through the spheres of
the activity of multitudes of central bodies; in the passing through which
spheres, it is not improbable that those parts which by their dissolution are
made of a nature differing from the body in the center, are rather expelled
from, than attracted toward it; and so being by this dissolution rarefied, and
loosened from the middle, and by their acting upon one another, and dissolution
of the Ether made of another nature, after they have every way dispersed
themselves to a considerable distance from their proper body, are converted and
driven in a way almost opposite to that expelling body, and so continue to be
driven away to such a vast distance, as to make out that prodigious length of
the tail or Blaze of some Comets (such as was that of 1618. which, as Kepler
reports, was extended to 70 degrees from the body or head of it) till at last
they are dissolved also, and commixed with the Ether within them. So that
though I suppose the attractive power of the Sun, or other central body may
draw the body toward it, and so bend the motion of the Comet from the straight
line, in which it tends, into a kind of curve, whose concave part is toward
the Sun, by reason that there are some central parts of it, which are not yet
destroyed, and so retain somewhat of its gravitating principle: yet I conceive
that all those parts of the Comet which are thus wrought upon by the other, and
changed into another state, and are very much rarefied, and produce light, are
of a clean contrary nature, and recede from the center of the Sun: much after
the same manner as we find any combustible body with us; as Coal, etc. where we
find that the body of the Coal, before it be resolved into smoke, is a very
dense, and very heavy body, and tends to the center of the earth; but the parts
thereof agitated by the Air and Ether into steams and smoke, and those yet
farther dissolved into flame, do tend upwards, and from the center of the
earth. Now though one cause of the recess of flame from the center of the Earth
be the gravity of the ambient Air. Yet it is not impossible, but that there may
be somewhat also of positive levity conjoined therewith. Most certain it is,
that there must be a tendency of receding, as well as a tendency of approaching
the center of the Earth, and other attracting body. And there may be much said
for the supposition, that the recess of the purest Ether, from the center, is
the cause of the motion of the grosser Ether, and of all other bodies toward
it, though there are also very considerable arguments against it. But this
discourse is not my present business, though it may hereafter be the subject of
a Lecture in this place; for upon it do depend some of the greatest operations
in the universe. And as in the History of the Creation, we have an account of
the production of light, immediately after the making of matter, which is a
motion of recess from the center of the shining body. Next that, a Firmament
which divided between the waters or the fluids of the one, and the fluids of
another part of the world. And in the third place, the collections of
particular fluids to one center, as the center of the Earth: and lastly, out of
that collection of fluids appeared the dry and solid land. So I conceive the
most proper way of speculating on these great productions of the omnipotent
Creator, may be to begin with the consideration of light, or the motion of
recess from the center of a body. Next, with the consideration of the cause of
the separating of fluid from fluid, as Ether from Ether, as I may so call
differing Aethers; because we have not yet distinct names in use, and the
reason of their conglobation, the Ether from the Air, the Air from the Water,
the Water from Quicksilver, Oil, or other fluid. Thirdly, the cause of the
conglobating property of each of these fluids when separated, how they accept
and embrace Homogenea, and reject or expel Heterogenea. And fourthly, how they
condense and settle together, and produce a solid body: whence proceeds the
confirmation of attraction or gravitation, etc. But to digress no further, but
conclude this part of enquiry in short, I suppose the Nucleus or Star of the
Comet may be much of the like nature with the central parts of the Earth, Moon,
Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, or other Planets, but much impaired in its attractive or
gravitating power.

Next, that the Coma or Hazy Cloud about it, may be of the nature of the
Atmosphere or Air about the Earth, or the Smoke or steams about a heated or
burning body, before they are quite kindled, converted into Flame, or dissolved
into the ambient Air.

Thirdly, that the Tail or Blaze is much of the nature of the parts of Flame,
though with those differences I conceive, that the parts of these steams are
not so close together, as are those of Smoke: nor does the motion of them,
though much swifter upwards than that of our Flame, serve to make them appear a
shining line; but being at that distance, they appear much slower to the eye,
and so discontinue the appearance; whence every shining particle appears only a
shining point, though in the parts of flame (where notwithstanding the motion
be much slower, yet being nearer; and so varying the position to the eye much
quicker) each of the shining parts makes an appearance of a line of light, and
all of them passing pretty near together, make the appearance of a continued
fluid flame; though that indeed be nothing but a great number of single parcels
of the burning body, raised up in the particles of Smoke. This will appear
evident if we consider the appearances easily to be taken notice of in light:
for it is obvious from multitudes of experiments, that any shining body, as a
candle or brands end, being moved very quick, makes the same impression on the
eye, that a line of light does standing still: And as obvious also that any
very light body encompassed with a dark medium appears to the eye under an
angle bigger than really it is, and a dark body encompassed with a light medium
much less. This any one may presently find, if he make a small hole through a
thin plate of metal, and holding it first between the light and the eye, and so
seeing the light appear through it, and then placing it so as there is nothing
but darkness appears through the said hole, for he will plainly perceive that
the same hole will appear much bigger in the former position than in the
latter. Upon this account indeed each of the shining parts of the Comet seems
to fill and occupy a much greater space than really it does: and so, as it is
observable in the milky way, a great number of these small shining bodies
though dispersed at a pretty distance one from another, yet by reason of the
imperceptibleness of each of them they all seem to coalesce into a stream or
Blaze of light, the brightness of which is yet farther augmented by a clear and
unenlightened air, and by such a part of the Heaven wherein there appears
fewest of the Stars, whether they be greater or lesser.

To the Query, Of what magnitude the Body, Coma, and Blaze of Comets may be? No
answer can be given until another question be first answered; and that is, What
is the place of Comets, and what is their distance from the Earth? It was the
opinion of most Modern Writers before Tycho Brahe and Kepler (I know diverse of
the Ancients thought otherwise) that Comets were sublunary Meteors, drawn up
into the higher Regions of the Air, and there set on sire, and so continued
burning till the Meteor were consumed; and as the matter increased, or wasted,
so did the appearance of the Comet. But this noble Dane, and several others
about that time found by accurate observations made, that its Parallax was less
than that of the Moon; and consequently, that it was farther distant from the
earth: that it must be a body of another magnitude, and nature, than most
before that time had imagined; and therefore that it ought to be otherwise
thought of than the generality of mankind believed concerning it. Many had been
the attempts of former Writers concerning them, to find out their parallax; and
whether from their unaccurate instruments, or from their less skill and
diligence in using them, or from an imagination of the solidity, and
impenetrability of the Celestial Orbs, or from error in their calculations, or
from comparing Observations made at distant places, one or both whereof were
unaccurate, or from a prepossession of Tradition or common Fame, or from what
other cause soever it were is uncertain; but 'twas generally concluded by them,
that all Comets were sublunary Meteors: and there are not even at this day
wanting some of the same opinion, though for what reason I know not. 'Twill be
hard to convince some of these, that the opinion they have hitherto received
for good, is not so, because they will hardly give themselves the trouble of
examining strictly into the matter: And to understand the nature of Parallaxes,
and how significant they are in determining the distances of bodies from the
surface of the Earth, to certain degrees thereof; beyond which, by reason of
the imperfections in Instruments, and Observations, and the exceeding niceness
and curiosity necessary, they signify very little. It is not my present design
to explain what Parallax is, that I would suppose my Reader to understand;
otherwise there can be no reason shown him to convince him that it is possible
to prove that this or that Comet was not nearer than so many semidiameters of
the Earth, nor farther off than so many. There are then two ways, by which we
may come to some certainty of what distance a Comet is; and those are, first
the Parallax of its Diurnal motion, or its Parallax caused by the Diurnal
motion of the Earth. And secondly, the Parallax of its proper motion compared
with the Periodick or Annual motion of the Earth. The first of these may be
observed two ways; either by two Observers at parts of the Earth very far
distant from each other, but as near as may be under the same Meridian: as
suppose the one in London, the other in St. Helens; both conspiring in their
observing of the place of the Comet amongst the fixed Stars at the same time.
Or secondly, by one Observer in the same place, by observing the place of it
amongst the fixed Stars, in its rising or setting, and in a greater, or if it
may be, its greatest height: The noble Tycho by very accurate Observations of
the Parallax, proves the Comet of 1577. to be above the Moon. Kepler by his own
Observations proves that of 1607. at its beginning to be four times farther
distant; and I doubt not but some may have been above forty times farther. But
I do not yet find that any Observations have accurately determined that which
is indeed the great help by which we are enabled to judge of the nature, and
all the other accidents and proprieties of Comets. The Aristotelian Philosophy
for a long time prevailing, made the world believe them to be nothing but
Exhalations from the Earth, drawn up into the higher Regions of the Air. But
Tycho by his Observations of their Parallax, raises them out of that
confinement, but yet he seems to place them in an Orb about the Sun. But Kepler
frees them from that confinement, and assigns them the Universe to expatiate
in. But none of all these do accurately prove the true distance of them, their
Parallax being for the most part so very small, that I fear Instruments with
common lights will hardly reach them. But we must expect from future
observations made with Telescopical Instruments to receive a certain Answer to
this Query. Certain I am, that the Comet which began to appear in November
1664. and disappeared in March following, was far removed beyond the distance
assigned by Kepler. For by my own Observations diverse times repeated, I could
not find any senfible Parallax, though I endeavored by a new method to make my
Observations more accurate. Now though I had not the convenience of making use
of a Quadrant, or any such Instrument, to observe its place when near the
Horizon, yet the way I took, would, I think, be as good; which was this: With a
very good six foot Perspectiveglass or Telescope, I observed the place of the
Comet, in respect of the adjacent small Stars, as soon as it appeared, and so
traced its way till it disappeared in the vapors of the Horizon: the like I did
several other days successively, taking notice by what degrees, in what times
it made its progress, to see whether by its Parallax, when near the Horizon, it
would have been deprest below that line of its motion, which it kept, when at a
greater height above it. But though I tried this several times, yet I was not
able to discern that the Parallax of it caused either any sensible bending of
the line, or any sensible inequality in its progress, by which I should have
sooner found it, than by taking its altitudes with common Instruments: though I
confess these Observations were made when the motion of the Comet was slow, and
consequently, when in probability it was far distant from the earth. To me
there seems no doubt but that it was a long way removed above the Moon when I
made these Observations: for had it been of an equal distance with that they
allow the Moon, it must this way have manifested a very sensible Parallax of
diverse minutes: but whereas I could not certainly distinguish any sensible at
all, it must be many times higher than the Moon. Now that this way is
abundantly to be preferred before an Observation made with a Quadrant for the
taking of its altitude, is pretty evident; because, by this means the greatest
part of the irregularity, caused by the refraction or inflection of the Air is
removed; for by this means, though the Parallax be very large, yet the
refraction or inflection of the Air will not amount to many seconds, both the
objects being almost equally raised by refraction, especially when 5 or 10
degrees high; nearer than which the small Stars vanished out of sight by the
thickness of our air. It follows therefore that a Semidiameter of the Earth
must be a very inconsiderable measure in its distance.

This part therefore of the Theory of Comets has been much defective hitherto.
If we enquire the Parallax of them from the Observation of diverse men made in
differing places. we shall find them so differing one from another, that there
is great reason to suspect them all: Nay, not only so, but in this Comet of
1664. by comparing two Tables or Charts of the Stars, and Constellations of
that part of the Heavens, through which the Comet past, on which was also marked
out its way and place from day to day, both of them Printed from Copper Plates,
I find that strange errors and mistakes may be created, notwithstanding all the
Authors thors care and accurateness possible, from the carelessness or neglect
of the Graver: This I noted in the two Tables of the learned and accurate
Mathematician, P. Aegidius Franciscus de Gotignies, (whose skill and care from
other works of his and other Observations of this Comet I am sufficiently
assured of) and found that by the first table upon the of December, 1664. it
was in 4 of II in Longitude, and in 33 of Southern Latitude; but by the second
it is placed at the same time in 4II for its Longitude, and in 34 of South
Latitude. And this error is not only committed in the place of the Comet, but
also in the place of the fixed Stars: for Riget in the first Table is placed in
30 South Latitude, and in 12II for Longitude, but in the second in 31 South
Latitude, and in II II for Longitude: both which differ considerably from the
place of it assigned by Riccioli and Grimaldi; according to whose Observations
it should be in 31. II South Latitude, and 12. II. 40. II in Longitude.

Now if there be these differences to be remarked in the Observations of one,
we cannot but expect that much more disagreement should be found between those
which have been made by differing persons in differing places, and with
differing ways, and differing Instruments. And upon examination I have found it
no better: for from comparing such Observations as I have received from several
parts of the world, even of those which have seemed more than ordinarily exact,
I find them for the most part so unaccurate, that though they sufficiently
manifest that the Comet of 1664. which lasted above four months, was visible in
most parts of the world, and seen to pass in all those places pretty near in
the same way amongst the fixed Stars. Yet they are so far from manifesting the
Parallax, that some of them make the place of the Comet to be quite contrary to
what parallax would make it; some of the Southern Observators placing it much
more Southwardly than those of the North. Others indeed of them make the
Parallax so great, that one might ghess it to be not so far removed from the
Earth Something indeed in the general might be ghest of the way of that Comet
amongst the fixed Stars, especially when it approaches them pretty near: but
for exactness of Calculation for Parallax, they were no way useful. And evenin
the former use too it seems very doubtful for comparing the Charts of the
Comets way amongst the fixed Stars published by that diligent and unwearied
Observer Mr. Hevelius of Dantzick, the abovementioned P. Gottignies, Professor
at Rome, and Monsieur Petit of Paris, I find, that the two former make the way
of the Comet to lie below the Star in the Bill of Corvus; whereas the later,
though in a Latitude interposed between the parallels of the former, makes it
to lie above, or to the North of it: and with him agree some Observations which
I have seen of Monsieur Hugenius. Other differences I found between those
Tables in the way of the Comet of 64. near the middle of its arch; wherein
Monsieur Hevelius all the way places it more Southward than either Monsieur
Petit, or P. Gottignies: for whereas both P. Gottignies, and Mounsieur Petit
make it pass above the Star of the third magnitude in the right shoulder of
Lepus, Monsieur Hevelius makes it move below it, which seem to be ascribable to
Parallax. But I fear much cannot be concluded of certainty from them.

I shall not trouble the Reader with a multitude of other Histories, which I
have received concerning that Comet of 64. nor with the disagreements of them
one with another, and perhaps of most with the truth. They have given me
sufficient trouble in the examination of them, having little other benefit from
them, save only this, that I was thereby informed what a man might think of a
great number of Astronomical Observations that have been made: for, saving the
exact Observations of some few such, as Mr. Hevelius, Mr. Aurout, P.
Gottignies, etc. truly diligent and accurate men, the greater the Collections
of Observations are, the more trouble and difficulty is created to the
Examiner; they not only confounding one another, but perplexing those also
which are real and perfect.

Now the reasons or causes of these inconveniences seem to be these.

First, the want of accurate and knowing Observators.

Secondly, The scarcity of convenient Instruments.

Thirdly, The Imperfection of the Tables of the fixed Stars.

For the Observators, it is not enough to know how to manage an instrument, or
to have a good eye, or a dextrous and steady hand; but with these there must be
joined a skilfulness in the theorical and speculative part, and add to all a
love and delight in the thing it self; and even all these will signify but
little, without convenient and accurate Instruments, such as may be easily
manageable and sufficiently exact.

The first of these the love of the study being in it self the most excellent,
or the encouragement of Princes, Noblemen, and other Patrons of this Learning
must procure: and where both of these concur, thence most is to be expected,
and most fruit has hitherto been proceeded; though there are not wanting
diverse eminent instances where the first reason has been the only inducement.

As to the second, I have already in some of my former Lectures described
several convenient ones for these purposes; and therefore I shall not here add
any more concerning it.

But as to the third, I hope the indefatigable labor and skill of Monsieur
Hevelius will shortly supply the present defect, though it had been much to be
wished, that the Instruments he had made use of had been fitted with
Telescopical sights. These Tables, if well done, will alone (as to the business
of Comets at least) supply the place of all other Instruments almost, save only
a thread, especially if they be so delineated in Tables after the Tangent
projection, as that the minutes of every degree may be very distinguishable,
which will not swell the Maps of the Heavens into an extraordinary large
volume, and may possibly be the cheapest Instrument for this purpose an
Astronomer can be furnished withal; for having such a volume of Tables, it will
be very easy with a thread and one's eye, screen'd only with a spectacle made
of a thin plate of Brass, with a small hole through it, instead of a glass, to
observe what place the Comet possesses amongst the fixed Stars: for having by
the help of the said thread observed what two Stars lie in the same line with
the Comet on one side of it, and what other two Stars lie in a line with it,
which is at right angles (as near as may be) with the former line, by finding
out those four Stars in the Tables, ordered according to the Tangent
projection, and with a Ruler, drawing lines over them respectively, where those
lines do intersect, there will be the true place of the Comet, from which it
will not be difficult to find out the true Longitude and Latitude of it by a
Sector with Tangents. Now as these Tables of all the fixed Stars visible to the
naked eye, would serve for finding its place whilst very big and swift of
motion; so the like Tables of the small Telescopical Stars that lie near its
way, when almost disappearing, and moving very slow, will by the help of a pair
of measuring Compasses placed within the eye-glass of the Telescope, and a
straight line or hair drawn cross it, serve to find the true motion and way of
it, when only visible with a Telescope: according to which method I made the
annexed Schemes, and Observations of the last appearances of the Comet.

Now since neither from my own, nor from any other Observations that I have
hitherto met with, there can be any certain conclusion drawn of the distance of
these Comets, save only this, that their distance was very great, and much
higher than the body of the Moon, because else there must have been a
considerable Parallax caused by the Diurnal motion. The next enquiry will be,
what other ways there are of knowing its distance. Now though none could be
more demonstrative than the Parallax found this way by the Diurnal motion, yet
there are some other which seem more easy arising from the consideration of
the motions that may be thought to be concerned in the producing the
appearances. And though they be wholly hypothetical, and so need some other
arguments to prove the ground and principles on which they are founded, yet
since there are not very many considerable ones wanting to make them probable
and rational, I shall here add somewhat of my inquiries after the distance,
position, motion, magnitude, etc. of these Comets by these means.

Of these ways there are several depending upon several suppositions which
produce very differing effects, as to the magnitude, distance, motion, and way
of the same Comet.

The suppositions are these:

Either that the Earth moves in an annual orb about the Sun, as the Sun is
supposed by others to move about the Earth: Or that the Earth is perfectly
fixed, and has no such motion.

Next, that the Comet moves either in a straight line, or in a curve line; and
the curve is either a circle, or some other regular or irregular curve.

Further that the motion of the Comets in these lines is either by equal or
unequal spaces in equal times.

Now according as we take this, or those of these differing suppositions, and
compound them together, so will the product of them be strangely differing.
Amongst the great variety of compositions of these principles or suppositions,
these seem the most simple, and consequently being any otherwise proved, will
best determine the true distance and way of the Comet.

First, To suppose the Earth to stand still, and the Comet to move equal spaces
in equal times in a circle.

Secondly, To suppose the Earth to move in an annual Orb about the Sun, and the
Comet to move through the Ether or Expansum, equal spaces in equal times in a
straight line.

Thirdly, To suppose the Earth to move (as above) in its annual Orb, and the
Comet also to move equal spaces in equal lines in a circle.

The other are indeterminate and infinite, and nothing can be concluded from
them as to the distance, magnitude, motion, etc. of Comets; for the line or way
of the Comet may be placed at any distance, if we will suppose it moved in an
uncertain curve, with unequal degrees of velocity: And indeed, upon a supposal
of an inequality of motion, nothing of its way or distance can by any of these
suppositions be found out. This fault had that of Tycho Brahe, where he
supposed an unequal motion of it in its Orb about the Orb of Venus, which was
founded upon the first Hypothesis, but had introduced into it some inequality
of motion; besides his own supposition, that it was moved about the Sun, and
the Sun about the Earth. See the fifth Figure. Keplers way, which was after the
second Hypothesis, had the same fault; for he supposed the annual motion of the
Earth, and the motion of the Comet in a straight line, but introduces an
acceleration of motion in the Tangent toward the latter end.

The third way I have here taken, and from the best observation I could meet
with, I have delineated its respects or angles to the Sun: and accordingly
supposing it to move equal spaces in equal times, in a curve which for so much
of it as the Comet was observed to pass was very near a Circle, I found this
Circle would fall as it is expressed in the seventh Figure, where it is obvious
to take notice, that when the Comet was nearest to the Earth, namely, about the
19. or 20. of December, that it was not nearer than an eleventh part of the
distance of the Sun, that on the 23, it was twice as far, that on the 29. it
was four times as far; that on the 15. of January it was as far as the Sun, and
on the 14. of February it was above twice as far distant as the Sun. That this
way or Orb of the Comet is here bended so as (if it were an entire Circle;) one
part of it would go without the Orb of Jupiter, as the other which is here
delineated comes within the Orb of the Earth; that the plain of this Orb is
inclined to the plain of the Ecliptic about 18 degrees, that if from several
parts this Orb perpendiculars be let fall upon the Plain of the Ecliptic,
those perpendiculars shall fall in an Ellipsis, part whereof shall fall within
the Orb of the Earth in, and the opposite without the Orb of. That the Comet
moves a Sextant of this Orb in about 130 days, and consequently if its motion
should continue the same in such a Circle, it would appear about February,
March, or April, 1667. but being so far removed toward the South Pole, will
here hardly be seen: but by those that live toward the South, it may appear to
have some such motion by the South Pole, as that of 1618. had by the North. And
it is not impossible, but that the Comet of 1618. might be the same with this,
if we suppose the Nodes of it to have a motion contrary to the order of Signs:
and that the same Node which in this Comet, according to this supposition was
in, was then about or: but these as conjectures I shall not insist on, because
neither in this, nor in that have we Observations sufficiently accurate to
build any Theory upon. Now though upon these suppositions the motion and
appearances of the Comet seem to be very regularly, and very naturally made
out, yet it is not the only Hypothesis for that design: nor do I believe it so
evident a demonstration for that end, as some would suppose; though for other
reasons I am apt enough to think that opinion of the Earths motion very
probable: but the motion of this Comet is so well made out, by the contrary
supposition, that I think it may be alleged for a greater argument against the
motion of the Earth, than for it: for if we only grant one of the former
postulata, namely, that the body of the Comet is moved equal spaces in equal
times, and a quite contrary postulatum to the former; namely, that the Earth
remains fixed as to an annual motion, we may find all the observations of this
Comet, especially the most accurate of them, to happen so, that the Comet being
supposed to be moved in a great Circle, whose unequal side is turned toward the
Earth, whose center is extended toward the fixed * in; and whose Semidiameter
is about sixscore times the nearest distance of the Comet from the Earth, and
the Comet be supposed to be moved very near equal spaces in equal times, we
shall find, I say, all the appearances most exactly solved, and indeed much
more exactly than by the other supposition I was able to find any; for by this
supposition both the magnitude, longitude, latitude, retrogradation, station,
and direction of the Comet is most exactly made out as any one might have found
that should have by this means examined with me the observations I have
hitherto either made or met with: and indeed all the Observations hitherto have
so well answered this Hypothesis, that I do almost promise my self to be able
to see this Comet a month or six weeks hence, after the Sun has past by it; if
by its exceeding elongation it be not quite grown out of sight, as it is now
indeed already so exceeding dim, and faint, that it cannot be seen without a
very good glass, which will endure an exceeding big aperture: nor could I these
two last nights perceive it, though the Air were clear; but the reason I
attribute to its nearness to a fixed * of: This Hypothesis is explained in the
seventh Figure. By this supposition the return of the Comet will be much
longer, and the time of seeing of it much more uncertain; because the curvature
is so little that the making the circle a twentieth, or a sixteenth part bigger
or less, does not much alter the regularity; whence it is exceeding difficult,
unless we had much more accurate Observations than I have hitherto met with, to
determine exactly the bigness of the circle, and consequently the time of the
return. And by this supposition the Comet may be supposed either nearer or
farther from the Earth at any distance, which is not contradicted by a Diurnal
Parallax; that is, it may be supposed either above Saturn, or below the Moon,
or in any place between; by supposing only, that the farther the nearest part
of the Circle is distant from the Earth, the greater must that Circle be, and
the swifter the motion of the Comet in it: to prove which affirmation, let in
the Eighth figure A be the Earth, BCD the Orb of the Comet supposed very near
the Earth, and E F G the Orb of it supposed at a greater distance: let H be the
center of B C D, and I of E F G, and let A C, be to C H, as A F, to F I, all
the lines drawn from the point A, so as to cut the Circles B C D and E F G,
shall divide those Circles E F G, and B C D, into similar segments: as let A B
E be a line drawn cutting those Circles in B and E: I say, the Arch B C shall
be similar to E F. In which Hypothesis if we have together with the place of
the Comet when stationary, the place of it when in its greatest celerity,
perige, or the places of it when of the same celerity on each side of its
perige, we have from thence the proportion of the Radius of its Orb to the
perigean distance, and consequently all the other distances, the line in which
it appears when stationary, being the Tangent to the Circle in which it moves,
as A B E, to which a Perpendicular raised at B B E, and produced till it cut
the line A C, (produced) at H H I, it gives the Center of its Orb H H I, and
the proportions of the lines A B, AC, B H=H C, or of A E, A F, E I=F I, the
Angle B A C, being given by observation. So that by this Hypothesis the
Phenomenon of the motion and bigness of the Comet will be solved, though
supposed of any distance. Nor are these the only Hypotheses by which the
hitherto observed Phenomenon may be solved: for if we will admit an unequal
motion, such as is now granted to all the Planets: and if further we will admit
it to be moved in an Elleipsis, or other such like curve, there may be diverse
other Hypotheses that will solve the Phenomenon; so that the Comet may be
supposed to have no motion at all as to Longitude, but only as to Latitude:
that is, it may be supposed to be moved in an Elleipsis, described in a plain
which shall be at right Angles with the plain of the Ecliptic, and the ways of
the Earth in it: it may be supposed also to have been moved direct, according
to the order of the signs, that is, to have been first about Gemini, in respect
of the Sun, and to be now in some part of Leo: And it is not impossible to
solve the phenomenon of its periodick or proper motion, though it be supposed
not so high as the Moon, and that the motion of the Earth passing by it did
really alter its motions, had there not been made some Observations about the
Parallax of it, which prove it higher: so that according to this or that
Hypothesis which we take, the time of its return, if permanent, will be longer
or sooner.

And these Hypotheses may be so various, that till regulated by very exact
Observation of the Parallax, it is not to be hoped that the appearance of a
Comet can be certainly predicted: So that I fear the prophetic saying of
Seneca, Erit qui demonstret aliquando in quibus Cometae partibus errent, cur
tam seducti a caeteris eant, quanti qualesque sint, will hardly be verified at
this time by the help of this present Comet. Though in truth I cannot find by
the examination of several of them, but that they all seem to promise very
fairly a return of it: for all the Calculations I have hitherto made of its
motion, seem to cast it into a circular, and not a into straight line, as
Kepler supposed; and indeed upon examining even Keplers own Calculations of
those Comets which he observed, and has endeavored to make to move in a
straight line, I cannot find that any of them will be found to move equally in
such a line: but to solve the appearances, he is fain to make them move in such
supposed straight lines, by a line of Tangents, that is, to make the motion of
Comets accelerated the further they are moved; all which Phenomenon may be very
easily solved by supposing them to have moved equal spaces in a curve or
circle. The physical reason indeed seems pretty difficult, by what means it
should be confined or bound so as to move in a Circle: but this is no more than
is usually supposed in all the Planets, and without supposing a kind of
gravitation throughout the whole Vortice or Coelum of the Sun, by which the
Planets are attracted, or have a tendency toward the Sun, as terrestrial
bodies have toward the center of the Earth. I cannot imagine how their various
motions can with any satisfaction be imagined, but that being granted (for
which had I now time, I could alledg many reasons, and may do it hereafter on
another occasion) not only the reason of all the irregular motion of the
Planets may be easily found, but the reason also of the strange and various
motions of the Comets. The reason why its Beard is for the most part opposite
to the Sun, which was another Query, of which I have already said somewhat of
my suppositions, and shall now add, that the brighter spot or kernel in the
middle did seem to be some kind of body, which though it be not actually burnt,
may yet by the encompassing fluid Ether be dissolved and wasted, and those
dissolved parts may ascend upwards, or from the center of the Sun, (which seems
indeed to be the center of gravitation throughout the whole systeme of it.) To
illustrate which explication, I could produce several experiments which would
make a perfect representation of the phenomenon of the body, and beard of the
Comet: I shall only instance in one. Take a very clear long Cylindrical Glass,
which may hold about a quart of water; fill it three quarters full with water,
and put into it a quarter of a pound of Oil of Vitriol, and in the midst of
this suspend by a small silver wire, a small wax-ball, rould in filings of iron
or steel, and you may plainly observe a perfect representation of the Head,
Halo, and Beard of the Comet; for the menstruum falling on, or dissolving the
iron, there is a continual eruption of small bubbles, and dissolved particles
from all the sides of this body; and after the eruption they all afcend upwards
from the center of the earth; for being of a much lighter consistence than the
anbient liquor, they are by the greater gravity of that, continually protruded
upwards. The same appearance may be made with any kind of menstruum, and a
convenient dissoluble body suspended in it; so that if we suppose the Ether to
be somewhat analogous to a menstruum, and that there is a gravitation toward
the center of the Sun, if the Nucleus or head of the Comet be supposed such a
dissoluble substance, the phenomenon of the shape of the Comet may, I think, be
rationally explained. Now that the Ether may have such a kind of propriety,
seems to me to be argued from this, that the Air about the Earth seems to owe
its original to it, it being only a dissolution of terrestrial bodies into the
Ether, the Ether being the principal fluid body, and greatest part of this
dissolution; and the substance of the Air, some very few and small saline and
earthy particles: of which elsewhere. By this Hypothesis the phenomenon of the
Comet may be solved; for hence it is easy to deduce the reason why the Beard
grows broader and broader, and fainter and fainter toward the top: why there
is a Halo about the body; for this will appear clearly in the experiment: why
the Beard becomes a little deflected from the body of the Sun; for if the
dissolving Ball be by the wire moved either this way or that way, the arising
stream or bubbles will bend the contrary: and to countenance this supposition,
both in those Comets observed by Tycho, Kepler, and also in this last the beard
was contrary to the motion; so that the head or body going faster, seemed to
leave the beard or tail somewhat behind: by this supposition also 'twill be
easy to explicate why the beard is sometime bended, and not straight, and why
it is sometimes brighter upon one side than upon another? why the bottom of it
is more round, and the other sides more undesin'd; and diverse of the like
phenomenon. Against this supposition it seems difficult to conceive whence so
vast a body should be generated; next, how it should be able to supply such a
constant stream of ascending parts, and yet last so long as this has done,
almost a quarter of a year. Thirdly, Whence such a newly generated body should
receive so great a degree of motion. In answer to which, I say, it is not
impossible but that the body of it may be as old as the world, and that it may
have then received its first determination, or laws of motion, and may have
ever since preserved them, that it may have been all this time also in
dissolution, and yet not be quite wasted; and that it may continue yet for many
ages before it be quite dissolved into the Ether. And to make this probable,
diverse experiments and reasons might be alleged, as that of the slowness of
the wasting of many bodies, by the dissolution made on them by the fire: the
slowness also of the dissolution of multitudes of bodies in menstruums. And I
have already shown how small a quantity of dissolved particles will be able to
make as great a show of light: besides that, the motion of the ascending stream
or beard being but slow, there needs no very quick supply of other parts. We
see also into what a vast quantity of smoke a small parcel of a combustible
body may be turned. From all which particulars, it is not unlikely but that the
Comet may be a body moved with a regular circular or elliptical motion as the
Planets are, that it may be a body of such a constitution, as that the fluid
Ether through which it passes, may dissolve it much after the manner as a
me^struum; (such as Aquafortis, Spirit of Niter, etc.) does a dissoluble body;
that by this means there may be a slow, but continual eruption of somewhat
opacous parts, which may by their dissolution afford a sufficient quantity of
light to make as great an appearance as any of the Comets, that this stream or
beard may by the resistance of the Ether be a little deflected back wards in
the same manner as an ascending stream of smoke will be by the resistance of
the Air, if the burning body be moved this or that way through it, that the
body of the Comet may be both as ancient and as lasting as the world; and that
this which has lately appeared may have appeared heretofore, and may likewise
hereafter appear again; that it is probable the nearest distance of it was much
greater than that of the Moon, that the length of its Beard was longer than its
distance from the Earth, and consequently several times longer than the
distance between the Earth and the Moon; that its visible way among the Stars
was very differing from a great circle, especially toward the latter end, when
it became retrograde; that its way through the Ether could not be supposed
equal in a straight line, though it might be supposed equal in a curve or
circle, that the exact way of it could not be certainly determined by the best
Observations I have yet met with: and that therefore the best help we have to
ghess of its way and distance, is by its manner of moving, as to appearance
among the fixed Stars, which I have already shown to be explicable by various
Hypotheses: for both the Earth and Comet may be supposed to be moved, either
both one way, or contrary ways, or cross ways, the Earth may be supposed to
stand still, and the Comet only to be moved, and the like.

These Requisites therefore being hitherto wanting in the Observations I have
met with of this Comet, all that can be said of it will at best be but
conjectural and hypothetical; since nothing can be reasonably built upon those
Observations where the truth of them is dubious; wanting therefore sound
materials to work upon in this Comet, I had recourse to the Observations of the
noble Dane Tycho Brahe, being sufficiently satisfied both of the ability,
industry, and veracity of that excellent Author, who left nothing unattempted
for the perfecting of such Observations as seemed to him requisite for the
completing a History of that Comet which appeared in 1577. And from those
Observations of his I endeavored to trace the way of it according to several
hypotheses; and found, that supposing the Earth not to be moved with an annual
motion, but only a diurnal about its own Axis, the way of Comets will fall in a
line very near approaching the nature of a circle, though neither into an exact
circle, nor an exact ellipse; and therefore seems irregular, and not at all
probable. Again, supposing it moved about the Sun, as Tycho has done, we find
from his Calculation of it, he was fain to allow it a quicker and slower motion
in its Orbit, to solve the Phenomenon, which seems to me but a shift, that will
serve to help out any lame Hypothesis whatsoever: And that granted, and the
Parallax of the Comet unknown, I will undertake very easily to make out almost
any Hypothesis, which is the fault also of Mr. Horox his Hypothesis, wherein he
supposes the Earth to be moved about the Sun, and the Comet like a Rocket to be
shot out of the Sun, and by degrees to return to it again; in which Hypothesis
indeed there seems to be much more reason for aninequality of motion, though
not in the manner as he has placed it; 'twas very rational that the motion of
it at first, if cast out of the Sun, should be very swift; but then it ought
likewise to have accelerated its motion in the same manner in its return back
to it again, which it does not in his Hypothesis; for a stone or any other
heavy body being shot up into the Air, does make its return back again to the
Earth, almost by the same degrees of velocity, by which it ascended from it:
almost, I say, because the resistance of the Air does so far impede the motion
of the body through it, that it never suffers it to acquire the same degree of
velocity with which it was first shot upward. This is sufficiently evident from
a Pendulum, which if it be thrown upwards, and be suffered to return back, it
will never rise again on the opposite side to an equal height, with that it
descended from, on that side toward which it was thrown: but besides, in his
Hypothesis he seems to take no notice at all of the Latitude of the Comet,
which seemed to carry it much farther off from the Sun, when he supposes it to
be returning nearer. And indeed upon the whole his Hypothesis seems rather a
product of chance than of any contrivance. For he in endeavoring to set off
the Longitude of the Comet according to Tycho's Tables, and to trace its way by
supposing the Earths annual motion, making use always of the same Radius to set
off the aspect, or apparent angle of it with the Sun, his line of Chords he
made use of did always direct the point of his Compasses to the place where he
situates the Comet, as may be easily found by examining the ninth figure; where
you may find that he places the Comet always equally distant from the Earth,
and that distance is always equal to the distance of the Sun, which has so many
inconveniences and improbabilities, that I shall not insist farther on it;
especially since I do not find that he bestowed any farther pains in
explicating or cultivating this his Hypothesis, than only the bare delineation
of this ninth figure. But to return to Tycho's Hypothesis, if that be true, why
did not the Comet again appear after a certain space of time? and why could not
he have foretold when it should again appear, as well as he could predict the
appearance of Venus, about whose Orb he supposes it to circulate? I shall pass
by several other very material objections that might be made against that his
supposition, because many of them might be made also against his Hypothefis of
the Heavens in general, which I shall the rather omit, because I do not find he
has many followers in that supposition; the generality of Astronomers embracing
rather the Copernican System, especially as it is refined and rectified by the
ingenious Kepler.

Lastly, I endeavored to trace the way of the Comet from Tycho's Tables,
according to Keplers Hypothesis; which was, that the appearances of the motion
of the Comet were ascribable to two causes; namely, the motion of the Earth
about the Sun in its annual Orbit, and the motion of the Comet in a straight
line, not accelerated according to the proportion of the increase of Tangents;
but upon supposition that it moved equal spaces in equal times: (for I cannot
imagine what reason he had to suppose its motion to be accelerated, and much
less why he should assert it to be according to the proportion of Tangents,
which in a little time must necessarily come to move infinitely swift: than
which nothing is more hard to be granted.) And I found it after many trials and
essays to fall in a straight line, inclining to the plain of the Ecliptic by
anangle of 47.40. and cutting it in 9 degrees of Scorpio, if computed out of
the Sun, and moved faster by half than the Earth in its Orb; and this to so
great an exactness to answer all the Observations of Tycho, that from a very
large Scheme which I drew of it on a plain, I could never find many minutes
difference; so that I concluded that to be the most likely Hypothesis for that
Comet, it seeming to solve all the several Phenomenon of the motion and
magnitude of the Comet, with the least imaginable difficulty, and to be most
agreeable with my physical notions of Comets: For, first it only supposes a
solid body moved in a fluid, with an almost direct motion. I say, almost
direct, because for some physical reasons, as I have said before, I imagine it
not exactly straight, but inflected a little toward the curvity of a circle,
which I shall presently endeavor to explain farther in this Comet. Next, it
supposes that body to move in that line almost equal spaces in equal times; I
say, almost equal, because some of those equal spaces may be increased by an
accelerating cause or principle, such as that of a gravitation toward the body
of the Sun, placed in the center of its Vortice or System, when the motion of
the Comet carries it toward the Sun, and may be diminished from other impeding
causes, such as the impediment of the fluid medium through which it passes, and
the attraction of the Sun operating on it when its motion carries it farther
and farther off from it: besides, it is not unlikely, but that the attraction of
the Earth, or some of the other Planets may have some kind of influence on it,
especially, when its line of Direction does somewhat nearer approach those
attractive points. But the deslection from a straight line is always so much
the less by how much the swifter the body is moved, and by how much the farther
off its line of trajection is perpendicularly distant from those attracting
bodies. According to this supposition of mine, I have endeavored to make out
all the appearances of this last Comet, taken notice of in the best
observations I have yet met with, amongst which I find no one of the Parallax
satisfactory, as in the tenth figure, let S represent the Sun, O R B, the Orb
of the Earth, A C D E F, a bended or curve line in which the Comet is supposed
to move: the Comet then coming into the Sphere of the attractive power of the
Sun, by the straight line P A G, at A, the power of the Sun works on it, and
by degrees attracting it toward its own Center by that time the Comet has
moved to C, the attractive power has deflected its direct course from P A G,
to C H, and so the Comet would continue to move in that straight line C H, but
it is still deflected so, that at D, it moves toward I, but the gravitation of
the Sun attracting it, deflects it from that line toward E, and so from E to
F, when it begins again to Jet out of the attractive beams of the Sun, and so
it will continue to proceed, as if it had come to that point by the line M F L,
the reason of which is the great velocity of these bodies, which are generally
much swifter in their motions than the Earth or other Planets are supposed to
be, in theirs. We must seek out some other way therefore of finding of the
distance of Comets than the commonly used: I shall therefore somewhat further
explain the contrivance I newly invented for this purpose, by which not only
the Parallax of the Comet but of the Planets also may be found with great
facility and exactness.

Having a large Telescope prepared (as I formerly directed) with Eye-glasses
capable of taking in an Angle of about two degrees at once, and furnished with
a dividing Scale, observe when the motion of the Comet or Planets is not too
fast, the position and distances of the small fixed Stars which are next
adjoining to the moved body whose Parallax you would find; of these small fixed
Stars you shall seldom miss a sufficient number, which will be taken into the
glass at once, if at least the object-glass be allowed a very large aperture;
and having found such Stars as will be convenient for your purpose, be very
diligent in taking, by the help of the dividing Scale, the exact distance of
them one from an other, and when the body is highest above the Horizon, viz. in
or near the Meridian, by the same means take the exact distance of it from two
or three of the nearest and most conspicuous fixed Stars about it, and by the
help of a plumb-line, hung likewise within the cell, near the dividing Ruler,
find exactly the positions of all those bodies you take notice of to the
Perpendicular or Horizon, which may be easily enough done, if together with a
Plumb-line or Perpendicular placed within the glass you have also a small
Diagonal thread fastened to a ring, whose circumference is divided into 360
degrees, and moveable so as by the finger easily to be turned any way, by which
means this Diagonal thread may be made to cross over any two of the bodies you
observe, and by observing what division of this divided limb the Perpendicular
cuts, it will be easy to determine the exact position of those Stars to the
Horizon; this same may be done by the dividing Scale also, if that be fixed in a
divided Circle which is movable, in the same manner as the thread is supposed to
be. This Observation, with all other circumstances of it is likewise to be
repeated at the setting or rising of the Planet or Comet, and again the next
night when it comes to the Meridian, and in each of those observations the
exact time is to be noted by a time-keeper, and the altitude by some of those I
have before described, for by comparing these three observations together it
will be very easy to find what irregularity in its motion is ascribable to its
Parallax. And this will be so much the easier because the examination and
reduction of it may be done (with as great exactness as the observation can be
made,) by the help only of Ruler and Compasses, for all the distances will be
set off by equal divisions of straight lines, the line also of the periodick
motion, whether of the Comet or Planet, especially if the observations be made
when the body is near an opposition with the Sun, which is much the best time,
will be with sufficient exactness taken for a straight line, and the motion in
that line may be supposed by equal spaces in equal times; for the difference
between the Tangents of the centesms of a degree to two degrees is not
increased much more then 2/1745 that is not a quarter of a centesm of the
hundredth part of a degree, which is much more exact than I fear our
observations will ever be.

Another way of finding the Parallax may be by the help of exact observations
made by several persons at the same time, in places much differing in Latitude,
though as near as may be under the same Meridian (because of saving the trouble
of Calculation, and for being assured that the observations were both made
exactly at the same time) each person by the help of very long Telescopes
observing the exact distance of the body from the small fixed Stars next
adjoining.

A third way of finding the Parallax of Comets is wholly new, and though
hypothetical (as supposing the annual motion of the Earth, and the motion of
the Comet in a right line through equal spaces in equal times) yet it is founded
upon a Problem in Geometry (invented by the incomparable Mathematician, Doctor
C. Wren) which is truly noble and wholly new, and though it had been of no use
in Astronomy, deserves none of the meanest places in Geometry, by the help of
which (which is much more than either of the other ways is capable of) one may
easily find the true parallax of the Comet, from any four exact observations of
it, made at differing times in the same place: Nor does it require so nice and
accurate Instruments and Observators as are altogether necessary in the other
ways. The Problem as I received it, is this.

Problema.
Datis quatuor lineis utcunque ductis (quarum nec tres sunt parallelae neque ab
eodem puncto ductae) quintam ducere quae a quatuor primo datis in tres parts
secetur ratione and positione datas.

Sint in Figuris 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, and 18, quatuor rectae ADC, BEC, AE, BD,
productae versus K, g, ph, M, oportet quintam ducere ut KM, quae secetur a
primo datis in segmenta KN, NO, OM, secundum datas rations, R, S, T. Fiat ut R
ad S, T, simul sumptas ita CD, ad CF. Rursus ut T ad S, R, simul sumptas, ita
EC, ad CG, ductis autens AGH, BFH, a mutua intersectione H, ducantur H g K, H
ph M, parallelae nimirum lineis AC, BC, quae mediae interjacent inter extremas,
BD, AE. Denique inter puncta extremarum KM, ducatur Recta secans medias in NO.
Dico segmenta KN, NO, OM, esse in Data ratione RST.

Quoniam FD, parallela est ipsi HK, ergo ut CD, ad CF, ita K g, ad g H, and
quoniam g N, parallela est ipsi HM, ergo, ut K g ad g H, ita KN, ad NM, ergo ut
KN, ad NM, ita CD, ad CF; sed CD, ad CF, est ut R ad S, T, simul sumptas, ergo
KN, est ad NM, ut R, ad ST, simul sumptas. Similiter quoniam EG, parallela est
ipsi MH, and ph O, ipsi HK, demonstratur MO, esse ad OK, ut T ad S, R, simul
sumptas. Quare tres KN, NO, OM, erunt ad invicem ut R, S, T, ergo ducitur linea
KM, cujus tria segmenta a quatuor lineis datis intercepta sunt in data Ratione
R, S, T, and servata quidem positione sive rationum ordine R, S, T, quod erat
faciendum.



From the invention of which Problem 'twill be very easy by any four
observations Graphically to describe, or Geometrically to calculate the true
distance of the line of the trajection of the Comet, and consequently to answer
all those questions that can be demanded concerning the bigness of the body and
head, and concerning the bigness and length of the blaze, and concerning the
distance of it from the Earth in every part of its way when it was nearest the
Earth, when nearest the Sun, where it cuts the Plain of the Ecliptic, seen
from the Sun, and where seen from the Earth, with what Angle it was inclined to
the said Plain, how swift the motion was, that is, what length it passed, in
what time, when it must appear Stationary, when Retrograde, when disappear, and
the like.

According to this method I received at the same time, (whilst it yet appeared
very visible to the Eye, and was not Retrograde,) the way of the first Comet
delineated by the said person, which did very near solve all the appearances
preceding and subsequent, which I have therefore here annexed in the Table
expressed in the 19.20. and 21. figures, where in the 19. is delineated the
Place of the Sun in the Center of the Circle, N, D, I,, which represents the
annual Orb of the Earth about the Sun, the points between N and D represent the
places of the Earth in that Orbit in the days of November, and the lines drawn
from them to the points in the straight line, represent the lines in which the
Comet appeared in respect to the Sun; in like manner the points between D and
I, the places of the Earth in December, and the lines drawn from them to the
straight line, as before the visible places of the Comet at those times, etc.
The 20. figure represents singly the several Longitudes of the Comet at several
times seen from the Earth. And the 21. represents the several Latitudes, at the
several times, together with the true distances of the Comet at those times,
both which are made out of the 19. figure, where E at the end of the line
represents the Center of the Earth, from which to the figures in the pricked
curve-line, are the true distances of the Comet, the Perpendiculars from those
figures to the line E C are the signs of the Latitude of the Comet from the
plane of the Ecliptic E C, the aforesaid distances being made the Radii.

Now though according to my former Delineation the Comet seemed to take a
circuit, as if it would within three years return to its former position, yet I
am not wholly convinced that it moves in a circle or Ellipse, but I rather
incline to the incomparable Keplers opinion, that its natural motion tends
toward a straight line, though in some other suppositions I differ from him.

As first that the Comet perseveres exactly in a straight line. Secondly, that
after it has past its Perige it accelerates its motion in proportion to
Tangents of equal Angles. Thirdly, that it either is extinguished dissipated,
broken in pieces, or burnt out into ashes. Fourthly, that it receives all its
light from the Sun. Fifthly, that if the blaze were not made by the beams of
the Sun passing through the head of the Comet, and so carrying the parts along
with them, the blaze would not be opposite to the Sun. Sixthly, that the cause
of the bending of the blaze is the refraction of the Suns rays in the body,
and their being bent by the Ether as with a wind (which is the opinion that
the Ingenious Descartes follows also.) To these I cannot consent, and I have
many objections to several other of his opinions concerning this matter, which
would be too tedious to insert; only I shall add, that having traced several of
the Comets according to the best observations I could get, I found it very
difficult to make their motion fall in a straight line, unless it be granted
that their motions are really accelerated and retarded in that line, which
seems not so probable, at least not in those parts of their transit where he
places them. And particularly by tracing the way of this Comet of 1664. it is
very evident that either the observations are false, or its appearances cannot
be solved by that supposition, without supposing the way of it a little
incurvated by the attractive power of the Sun, through whose system it was
passing, though it were not wholly stayed and circumflected into a Circle, as I
have already mentioned.

That it is not extinguished or quite burnt out, when it ceases to appear, I
argue from this, that I was able to see it with a Telescope above a month after
it disappeared to the naked Eye, as may be seen by the observations I have
annexed in Fig. 4. and had not the cloudy weather and the light of the Moon, and
nearness of the Crepusculum hindered, I suppose I might have seen it much
longer, as I am apt to believe the great one in 1618. might have been seen
several months longer, if it had been diligently followed with Telescopes, it
disappearing in such a part of the Heavens as might have been seen every clear
night between the Crepusculum and Dawning.

Nor can I suppose it to receive all its light from the Sun, since if so it
would follow, that the Nucleus in the head, would have a dark shadow opposite
to the Sun, the contrary of which has always been observed. Nor can I well
understand that the Sun beams are like a stream of water, carrying the parts of
the Comet along with them so as to make its blaze, since no such effect is
found of them here with us upon the Earth: Nor how they should come to be
bended like smoke, since we observe no such property of light in a uniform
medium, such as in probability the Ether is.

These were my thoughts about those Comets which appeared in 1664. and 1665.
which I have found in several loose papers of Lectures, read in the beginning
of 1665. And I have not had the opportunity of making many observations since,
concerning Comets, save these two last, in which I had not the convenience of
observing any thing certain concerning its motion or Parallax. And therefore I
applied my self to mark as near as I could the true figure of it, through a six
foot Telescope, and to take notice of as many circumstances as the short time I
had would permit, which though they were very short and transitory
observations, and I wanted time to repeat them so often as I could have
desired, yet even from them I was sufficiently satisfied, that I had reason to
adhere to my former conjecture, that the light of the Comet did not depend
wholly from the reflection of the Sun beams, from the parts thereof, but rather
from its own light, for upon well considering of the form of this Comet, I
manifestly saw that the middle of the blaze was brighter than the side parts
thereof, and especially that part which was immediately opposite to the Sun, was
the brightest of all, which would have been otherwise if the light had depended
wholly from the deflection of the rays of the Sun, for one might rationally
conclude that the Nucleus or Star in the middle, which reflected so great a
quantity of light should have caused a darkness in the parts behind it, as we
see all strong reflecting bodies do, and consequently that the middle part of
the stream or blaze, especially that which was next the body should not have
been so bright as those other parts to which the light of the Sun had a more
free access, unless it may be said that even the Star it self, though it seem
so bright, is notwithstanding not so Dense, but that it admits rays enough to
pass through it unreflected, to inlighten the parts behind it. But this seems
not so likely, since be the body of the Star supposed a thousand times thinner
than a Cloud (which yet it is hard to suppose, since it gives so considerable a
reflection,) yet it being in all probability ten thousand times bigger in bulk,
the rays in passing through so great a bulk, must needs meet with more
obstruction than in the thinnest Cloud, and yet we find that there is no Cloud
so thin, but casts shadow opposite to the Sun, and therefore in probability
this would do the like, but I diligently observed that there was no such
appearance here, but the contrary, that is, that where the shadow should have
been, there was the lightest part of all the blaze, and consequently in
probability it did depend upon some other cause than a reflection of light.

It is a hard matter to assign the particular cause of its light, but it seems
from these circumstances to be very probable that it was (in part at least)
from its own nature, whether that might be somewhat of that of the Sun and
Stars, or of that of our fire, or of that of decaying fish, rotten wood,
glowworms, etc. or of that of the Ignis Fatuus, at Land or Sea, or like that
of Seawater, or a Diamond, or like that of the falling meteors, or
Star-shoots, it will be very hard to determine, unless one had a much greater
stock of observations to build upon. But it may possibly be somewhat of the
nature of them all, though it agree not in all particulars with any one of
them. All these ways that I have named seeming to agree in one particular, and
that is an internal motion of the parts which shine, whether that motion be
caused by some external menstruum dissolving it as in fire, and Ignes fatui, or
an external motion, stroke, or impulse as in a Diamond, Seawater, and possibly
some Ignes fatui, or from the parts of the bodies working and dissolving one
another, as in decaying fish, rotten wood, glowworms, or whether it be
susceptible of a much more subtle impulse, even from light it self, as the
Bononian stone, and Bladwines Phsophorus, which seems to be so harmonious (as I
may so speak) to the motion of light, that a new motion is thereby raised in
it, and continues for some time to move of it self after the impulse or
influence ceases, not much unlike the unison string, or other sounding body,
which in Music receives a tremulation and sound from the motion and sound of
the unison body, or string that is struck.

To me It seems most probable that the body and parts of the Comet are in a
state of dissolution, whether that dissolution be caused by the parts of the
Ether through which it passes, after the manner as a Torch is dissolved by the
air, or whether by the internal working of the constituent parts one upon the
other, as in Gunpowder, shining Fish and rotten Wood, I cannot determine; but
I rather guess it to be in some things analogous to the one, and somewhat to
the other, though not exactly the same with either. And this I conceive from
the figure and make of the shining parts, for if it had been of the same nature
with a Torch, the blaze would have resembled that of the flame of a Torch or
Candle, that is, the sides would have been brighter, and the middle darker, as
I have shown in my Lampas; whereas it was very manifest that the middle of the
blaze was brightest, and of that blaze that which was next the Star or Nucleus
was brighter than that which was further off: whereas in flame the contrary is
very observable, as I have in the said Treatise shown.

From the shape of the figure, the manner of its dissolution seems to be thus.
The Star or Nucleus in the middle, seems to be the fomes or source from whence
all the light proceeds: this we suppose to be a dense body encompast with a
very fluid body (such as the Ether seems to be) but of such a loose and spongy
nature, as that the Ether does cause those parts which are contiguous to it,
to be dissolved and expanded into it self. This dissolution and expansion I
conceive does generate or cause the light that seems to proceed from it, that
dissolution causing such a motion of the Ether, as is necessary to produce the
appearance of light; now so long as any part thereof remains in dissolution, so
long does it continue to shine, as is also observable in the flame of any body
burning in the air, but when the part separated from the body is quite
dissolved into the Ether, the effect of shining ceases, as it does also in the
parts of flame. Now I have observed that the blaze is so very much rarefied,
that first the Ether I conceive comes very freely to every particle of the
body after it is separated from it, but especially to the outermost, and
continues to be encompassed with it so long as till it be quite dissolved into
it, which I conceive to be at a little farther distance from the head than the
greatest length of the blaze seems to be to our sight. And further I conceive
that the outward parts being thus encompassed more perfectly with the free and
undisturbed Ether, are sooner dissolved into it than those of the middle, and
consequently the sides seem first to disappear, and the middle parts continue
their shining to a much greater distance from the Star in the head, though
somewhat also of that appearance may be ascribed to the dispersing and rarity
of the parts near the sides.

The Nucleus or Ball in the middle of the head, which I have called the Star, I
conceive to be dissolved equally on all sides, and the parts which are
dissolved or separated from it, I conceive to fly every way from the center of
it, with pretty near equal celerity or power, like so many blazing Grenades or
Fireballs, these continue their motion so far toward the way they are shot,
till the Levitation from the body of the Sun deflect them upwards, or in
opposition to the Sun into a Parabolick curve, in which Parabolick curve, every
single particle continues its motion till it be wholly burnt out, or dissolved
into the Ether. These are continually succeeded by new separations from the
aforesaid body in the same manner as it is observable in a burning, steaming, or
smoking body in our air, or a dissolving body encompassed with its proper
menstruum, as I before mentioned, and will so continue until the whole be at
length dissolved into the Ether, through which it passes.

It has been demonstrated by Torricellius, of bullets or other bodies cast or
shot upwards, that the same or equal bullets discharged or shot out from the
same point, with the same degree of strength, but with differing degrees of
inclination to the Horizon, each of them shall be moved in a parabolical line,
and every one of those parabolical lines shall touch a parabolical line, whose
axis is the perpendicular, and whose apex is distant from the said point, the
full altitude of the perpendicular shot; So that supposing in the twenty second
figure, A to be the point from whence all the shots are made with equal
velocity, A C the greatest height of the perpendicular shot, and A D the
greatest Horizontal random at 45 degrees of inclination, and suppose E D C D E
a parabola passing through those points D C D, all the shots made with equal
bullets, with equal velocity from A, but with all variety of inclination
between the perpendicular upwards, and the perpendicular downwards that touch
the said parabolical line, and consequently if there be an indefinite number of
such balls continually flowing out of the point A, with equal degrees of
celerity every way dispersing themselves equally in orbem, the whole aggregate
of such an emanation will make a solid parabolical conoeid E D C D E. Now about
the point A, if we suppose a Sphere as B B B B, and from this Sphere an
indefinite number of such equal Balls be thrown off perpendicularly to the
superficies of it, from every point thereof, with equal celerity at their
leaving it, those emanations will form also a conoeid, which will be very near
the same with the former: And if this Ball in the middle be supposed a burning
and shining body, and that all these emanations have every one of them equal
light in proportion to the Globe B B B B A, the effect produced hereby will
perfectly resemble the appearance and figure of Comets, if at least the
Parabolical conoeid be inverted; which will somewhat explain the manner how I
conceive the figure of the Cometical body is naturally, and most proportionably
formed; for if the effect of such an emanation of shining bodies be examined,
it will very plainly exhibit the exact and true apparent figure of Comets, as
they may be seen through a good Telescope, which is to me a very great
argument, that it is the genuine cause of its shape and figure: Now though the
Comets appearance be this way caused, and so a man might conceive the Globous
body would in a little time (by so copious an emanation) be consumed, yet I do
not believe that it does in a short time wast and disperse the whole Ball, nor
can I conceive that the disappearing of those blazing bodies toward the latter
end, does depend upon their dissolution (though possibly that may somewhat
diminish them) but that rather is to be ascribed to their distance and position
in respect of us: Though this I remember I observed very manifestly in that of
1664. that the body toward the latter end of its appearing was very much less
in proportion to the radiations about it, than it seemed to be at the
beginning, but whether that might not be partly ascribed to the great distance
it then was from us, and the turning of the head pretty near toward us, and
thence the spreading of the Tail (appearing beyond it,) might add to the
breadth of the radiation about the Nucleus, I will not positively determine.
Now though for explication sake, I have compared the parts separated from the
body of the Comet to blazing Grenades or Fireballs, yet I would not be
understood to suppose these parts so separated to be of any very large bulk,
for I see no necessity to suppose them bigger than the Atoms of smoke, or the
particles of any other steaming body, or than the parts of the Air, which make
the body of it appear thick and hazy; nor do I believe that all the light of
the Star, head, and blaze, does depend only upon the shining of the dissolving
body and particles thereof: but I do suppose that it does proceed both from the
reflection of the Sunbeams from those parts, and also from an innate and
momentaneous light produced by the action of dissolution wrought on the parts
by the incompassing Ether.

It may possibly seem very difficult to suppose that the dissolution of the
parts of the Nucleus, by the incompassing Ether, should cause or impress so
violent a motion into the separated parts, as to make them depart from it to
the space of four or five Diameters, before it be overpowered by the power of
Levitation from the body of the Sun, and so deflected into a parabolical line
upwards. It may likewise seem strange to suppose that the Ether should have
such power in it, as first to dissolve a body into it self, and secondly to
cause a shining, and thirdly to cause a Levitation of the dissolved parts
upwards; whereas I supposed before (and I think it is very manifest) that they
cause a gravitation downwards, toward the Center of the Sun: But to these for
explication, I answer that we need not go far for instances to make these
things probable, the Atmosphere about the Earth, as I have formerly mentioned
in my Micrographia, I take to be nothing else but the dissolution of the parts
of the Earth into the incompassing Ether; for the proof of which, I could
bring many arguments, were it here a proper place, by which I could most
evidently demonstrate the thing to be as I have asserted. It is here evident
that this Ether does take up the particles of bodies to a very great distance
from the surface from which they were separated, and it does not only raise
them but susteins them at those heights, nor is this peculiar only to the
Ether when a menstruum, but to all dissolving menstruums in general.

As to give one instance, in stead of many, we find that Gold (the heaviest of
all Terrestrial bodies we yet know,) being dissolved by Aqua Regis, is taken up
into it, and kept suspended therein, though the parts of the Gold be fifteen
times heavier than the parts of the Aqua Regis. So Pit-coal though very heavy,
is yet taken up into the Air, and kept suspended therein, though it will be
found to be some thousands of times more ponderous than the menstruum of the
Air that keeps it suspended.

Many reasons I could produce to show the great power of the Ether, and the
universality of its activity almost in all sensible motions, but reserving them
for another Discourse hereafter, I shall at present, only mention those
suppositions which seem to have the greatest difficulty, in this Theory, viz.
how the dissolution of the parts of the Star by the incompassing Ether should
cause light, and secondly how it should cause an actual Levitation of the
dissolving particles upwards. For the explication of these two difficulties, I
must at present crave favor to explain them by examples taken from operations
of Nature in the Atmosphere wherein we live, very similar and analogous to
them. First, for the production of light, we find that the Air incompassing the
steams of bodies prepared by heat or otherwise, and made fit for dissolution,
does so operate upon them, as to make them fly and part asunder with a very
impetuous motion, insomuch that the small particles or Atoms of the dissolved
bodies, do not only leave one another, but depart and dart out with so great an
impetuosity, as to drive off all the incompassing Air from their Center from
whence they flew, and this I take to be the cause not only of their Light, but
also of their Levity upwards, this may be seen very plainly by the small parts
of crackling Char-coal, which upon the blowing them with Bellows, and so
crowding a great quantity of the fresh menstruum on them, fly and dart asunder
with great celerity and noise, but is abundantly more evident in the kindling
of Gunpowder, where the impetuosity is so very great as to drive away not only
all the incompassing Air but all other bodies, though never so solid, that
hinder its expansion, in the performing of which operation the Ether has a
great share, as I may hereafter show, it is very probable that the Ether in the
same manner dissolving the particles of the Star, causes the Atoms thereof to
fly asunder with so great an impetuosity as to leave a vacuity even of the
parts of the Ether, which flying asunder does not only cause light by
impressing on the Ether a stroke or pulse which propagates every way in Orbem,
but makes such an agitation of the the Ether, as causes a rarefaction in the
parts thereof, whilst the parts that are once actually separated, by continual
rebounding one against another before they come to be at rest and quietly to
touch each other, prolong that first separation or vacuity between them.

This Explication, though it be somewhat difficult, yet I hope it is
intelligible, and may be, with probability enough, supposed to be the true
cause of the appearance, whilst there is nothing therein supposed which is not
manifestly the method of Nature in other operations; and though the supposition
even of the Ether, may seem to be a Chimera and groundless; yet had I now
time, I could by many very sensible and undeniable experiments, prove the
existence and reality thereof, and that it does actually produce not only as
sensible effects as these I have named, but very much the same, and many others
much more cosiderable, which by Philosophers have hitherto been ascribed to
quite different causes.

Had I been able to have made some other observations (which I designed, if I
had had the opportunity of seeing it, some of the succeeding Nights,) I should
have hoped to have explained several other difficulties concerning the nature
of the body and blaze of Comets, but being therein prevented, I must leave them
till I can make some further observations on some Comets that may hereafter
appear.

In the mean time that what I have discoursed concerning the light of Comets,
may not seen so altogether paradoxical and unintelligible as some may imagine,
I have here added an account of some trials and observations made on shining
substances of natures exceedingly differing from those that are commonly to be
met withal. And this I the rather do, not only because it affords an instance
of shining where there is no Air, but that hereby I may enlarge the limits of
their imagination, who shall consider of this subject. For nothing is more apt
to misguide our reasoning than a narrow and limited knowledge of causes, we are
not to conclude the body of a Comet a sulphurous vapor exhaled from the Earth
and kindled above, because here are such vapors observed and such effects
produced, nor a collection of Sun beams made by a Lentiformed vapor, after the
manner of a Burningglass (as some eminent Writers have lately done,) because
some such appearances may be Artificially produced in a smoaky or thickened Air;
since if we diligently inquire, we may find that light which is the most
sensible quality of Comets that affects our senses, may be, and really is
produced by very many, and those very differing ways. In Nitre and Sulphur
kindling each other by heat, we have one way; in a body burning in the Air a
second, in a heated Iron or Glass a third, in a piece of Iron hammered till red
hot a fourth, in rotten Wood and decayed Fish a fifth, in Glowworms,
Scolopondras, and other living Worms, and in the sweat and excrements of other
living creatures a sixth, in a Diamond rubbed a seventh, in Dews Ignes fatui,
etc. an eighth, in Seawater a ninth, in the Bononian stone, and in the
Phosphorus Baldwini (which I take to be much of the same nature) a tenth, in
the Phosphorus of Mr. Kraft an eleventh, and possibly wholly differing from all
these, may be the light of the Sun, a twelfth, and that of the Star may differ
from that of Sun, and the Comet may be differing from all the rest. Whether
they be so or not, the being acquainted with the several proprieties of them
will the better enable one to judge of what is pertinent to be observed in
Comets, in order to find out which is concerned.

The Phenomenon of most of these shining bodies are very common and obvious,
and therefore needless to be added; but that of the Bononian stone prepared,
and that of the Phosphorus Baldwini (lately discovered by Mr. Baldwine) are
rare and hard to be got, and the effects of them are wholly differing from all
the ways I have yet met with, and will therefore prove Experimenta Crucis,
highly instructive in the Theory of Light, of which more hereafter. As for the
Phosphoros Fulgurans of Mr. Kraft (more scarce and rare than the other) it is
wholly differing from any of the rest, and very strange and surprising, at
least it appeared so to me, who had the good fortune to be present at a good
part of the experiments made by the Author in the presence and at the Chamber
of the Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire; that great Judge and Promoter of all
curious inquiries into Nature and Art, who at my earnest entreaty, was not only
pleased to commit to writing what he observed, but (for the information of
Curious and Inquisitive Naturalists,) to give me liberty here to publish it.

A short Memorial of some Observations made upon an Artificial Substance, that
shines without any precedent Illustration.
September, 1677.
ON Saturday the fifteenth of this month I was after supper visited by Mr.
Kraft, a famous German Chemist, who was pleased to come and show me a strange
rarity he has newly brought into England, to the sight whereof he allowed me
to invite several members of the Royal Society, he being desirous, because the
matter he imploys is very costly and of difficult preparation, to be a good
Husband of it, and by showing it to several curious persons at once, to exempt
himself from the need of showing it often. The Company being met, the Artist
took out of a pretty large box he had brought with him, diverse Glass Vessels
and laid them in order on the Table. The largest of them was a Sphere of Glass,
which I guessed to be four or five Inches in Diameter, being hollow and entire,
save that in one place there was a little hole, at that time stopped with sealing
wax, whereat to pour in the Liquor, which seemed to me to be about two
Spoonfuls or somewhat more, and to look like muddy water made a little reddish
with brick-dust or some other powder of that color, he also took out of his
Box three or four little pipes of Glass sealed, or otherwise stopped at both
ends, being each of them somewhat bigger than a Swans quill, and about five or
six Inches long, and having at one end a small fragment or two of that matter
that was to shine in the dark.

He likewise laid upon the Table three or four Vials of several sizes, but none
of them judged capable to hold above very few Ounces of water: in each of which
Vials there was some Liquor or other, that was neither transparent nor well
colored, which Liquors I confess upon his making no particular mention of what
they were to do, I was not curious to compare together, either as to quantity
or as to color. Besides all these substances which were fluid, he had in a
small Crystalline button Bottle, a little lump of matter, of which he seemed to
make much more account than of all the Liquors, and which he took out for a few
moments to let us look upon it, whereby I saw that it was a consistent body,
that appeared of a whitifh color, and seemed not to exceed a couple of
ordinary Pease, or the kernel of a Hasel Nut in bigness, some other things it is
possible Mr. Kraft took out of his Box, but neither I or (for ought I know)
others of the Company took notice of them, partly because of his have, and
partly because the confused curiosity of many spectators in a narrow compass,
kept me from being able to observe things as particularly and deliberately as I
would gladly have done, and as the occasion deserved. Which Advertisement may I
fear be but too applicable to a great part of the following Narrative.

The forementioned Glasses being laid in order upon the Table, the windows were
closed with woodenshuts, and the Candles were removed into another Room by that
we were in; being left in the dark we were entertained with the ensuing
Phenomenon.

I. Though I noted above that the hollow Sphere of Glass had in it but about
two Spoonfuls (or three at most) of matter, yet the whole Sphere was
illuminated by it, so that it seemed to be not unlike a Cannon bullet taken red
hot out of the fire, except that the light of our Sphere looked somewhat more
pale and faint. But when I took the liberty to hold this Glass in my hand and
shake it a little, the contained Liquor appeared to shine more vividly, and
sometimes as it were to flash.

II. I took one of the little pipes of Glass formerly mentioned, into my hand,
and observed that though the shining matter had been lodged but at one end, yet
the whole Glass was enlightened, so that it appeared a luminous Cylinder, whose
light yet I did not judge to be always uniform, nor did it last like that which
was included in the Vials.

III. In the largest of the Vials next the Spherical already mentioned, the
Liquor that lay in the bottom being shaken, I observed a kind of smoke to
asscend and almost to fill the cavity of the Vial, and near the same time there
manifestly appeared as it were a flash of lightning that was considerably
diffused, and pleasingly surprised me.

IV. After this I took up that small Crystaline Vial that I lately called (by a
name familiar in our Glass-shops) a Button-Bottle, wherein was contained the
dry substance which the Artist chiefly valued, as that which had continued
luminous about these two years, and having held that Vial long in my hand, in
the same position in reference to my eye, and looked attentively at it, I had
the opportunity to observe (what I think none of the Company did) that not only
this stuff did in proportion to its bulk, shine more vividly than the fluid
substances, but thaat which was the Phenomenon I chiefly attended) though I
could perceive no smoke or fumes ascend from the luminous matter, yet I could
plainly perceive by a new and brisker light that appeared from time to time in
a certain place near the top of the Glass, that there must be some kind of
flashy motion in the matter that lay at the bottom, which was the cause of
these little coruscations, if I may so call them.

V. The Artist having taken a very little of his consistent matter, and broken
it into parts so minute, that I judged the fragments to be between twenty and
thirty, he scattered them without any order about the Carpet, where it was very
delightful to see how vividly they shined; and that which made the spectacle
more taking, especially to me, was this, that not only in the darkness that
environed them, they seemed like fixed Stars of the sixth or least magnitude,
but twinkled also like them, discovering such a scintillation as that whereby
we distinguish the fixed Stars from most of the Planets. And these twinkling
sparks without doing any harm (that we took notice of) to the Turkey Carpet they
lay on, continued to shine for a good while, some of them remaining yet vivid
enough till the Candles being brought in again made them disappear.

VI. Mr. Kraft also calling for a sheet of Paper and taking some of his stuff
upon the tip of his finger, writ in large Characters two or three words,
whereof one being DOMINI, was made up of Capital Letters, which being large
enough to reach from one side of the page to the other, and being (at least as
I guessed) invigorated by the free contact of the external Air, shone so
briskly and looked so oddly, that the sight was extremely pleasing, having in it
a mixture of strangeness, beauty and frightfulness, wherein yet the last of
those qualities was far from being predominant. And this Phenomenon did in
more senses than one afford us the most of light, since not only the Characters
shone very vividly upon the white Paper, but approaching it to my Eyes and
Nostrils, I could discern that there ascended from them a fume, and could smell
that fume to be strong enough, and (as it seemed to me) to participate of the
odor of Sulphur and of that of Onions. And before I past from the mention of
these resplendent Characters, I must not forget that either by their light, or
that of the Globe, or both by the one and the other a man might discern those
of his fingers that were nearest the shining stuff, and that this being held to
the face though without touching it, some of the conspicuousest parts,
especially the Nose, were discoverable.

VII. After we had seen with pleasure, and not without some wonder, the
foregoing particulars, the Artist desired me to give him my hand, which when I
had done, he rubbed partly upon the back of it, and partly on my cuff, some of
his luminous matter, which as if it had been assisted by the warmth of my hand
shone very vividly, and though I took not notice of any thing upon my skin,
that was either unctuous or rough, yet I often times tried in vain by rubbing
it with my other hand to take it off, or manifestly diminish its splendour, and
when I diverse times blowed upon some of the smaller parts of it, though they
seemed at the instant that my breath beat upon it, to be blown out, yet the
tenacious parts were not really extinguished, but presently after recovered
their former splendour. And all this while this light that was so permanent, was
yet so mild and innocent that in that part of my hand where it was largely
enough spread, I felt no sensible heat produced by it.

By that time these things were done 'twas grown late, which made Mr. Kraft,
who had a great way to go home, take leave of the Company after he had received
our deserved thanks for the new and instructive Phenomenon, wherewith he had so
delightfully entertained us.

Because Mr. Kraft had twice attempted to fire heated Gunpowder with his
Phosphorus, but without success; probably because the powder was not very good
(as by some circumstances I conjected) and because it was not sufficiently
heated before the matter that should set it on fire was put upon it, he
promised me he would come another time to repair that unsuccesfulness: And
accordingly, On the two and twentieth of September in the Afternoon I recived a
visit from Mr. Kraft, who told me he came to make good his promise of letting
me see that his shining matter was able to kindle heated Gunpowder, and
because no strangers were present, I had the fairer opportunity to view it,
which I was able to do better by day light, than I had done by its own light,
for when he had taken it with a new Pen out of the liquor with which he kept it
covered to preserve it, I perceived it to be somewhat less than the nail of one
of my fingers, and not much thicker than a shilling, and I observed that when
it had lain a little while upon a piece of clean Paper and discharged it self
from its superfluous moisture, it began to emit withish fumes which seemed to
be very ponderous, since for the most part they did not ascend but surrounding
the matter whence they issued, by their stagnation made as it were a little
Pond or small Atmosphere about it; so that lest it should wast too fast, he was
obliged as soon as he had cut off a little corner less than half a pins head,
to put the stuff nimbly back into the Vial out of which he he had taken it;
where I observed it for a very short time to send up exhalations into the
liquor that covered it, and quickly after, as it were, quenched it. This done
the Artist divided the little corner he had cut off into two parts, one of
which he spread as far as it would reach upon a piece of white Paper, which he
presently after held at a distance over a chafing dish of burning Coals, by
whose heat being excited it presently flasht and burnt away, and I having
perceived that there was another part of the Paper which though not heeded by
him, had been lightly besmeared by the same matter, I held it over the Coals,
but at a considerable distance from them, and yet this little matter nimbly
took fire and burnt a hole in the Paper. And to satissie my self that the heat
did but excite the luminous matter, and that it was this its self that lighted
the Paper, I held the rest of the same piece of Paper far nearer the fire and
kept it there a pretty while without finding it at all scorched or discolored.
Lastly, the other part of the divided fragment of the hitherto mentioned
matter, Mr. Kraft put upon the tip of a quil, and having at a distance from the
fire, very well dried and warmed some Gunpowder upon another piece of Paper,
he laid that Paper upon the ground, and then holding his quill upon it, as if
it had been a match, within half a minute (by my guess) that powder took fire
and blew up.

'Twill not perhaps be impertinent to add that on occasion of the operation I
observed the Air to have on the shining substance when freely exposed to it. I
took a rise to tell Mr. Kraft that I presumed it might be worth while to try
whether his Phosphorus did shine by virtue of a kind of real or (if I may so
call it) living flame, which like almost all other flames required the presence
and concourse of the Air to maintain it, or whether it were of such a kind of
nature as the Phosphorus of the learned Baldwinus, which I suspected to shine
not like a flame or a truly kindled substance; but like a red hot Iron, or an
ignited piece of Glass, wherein the shining parts are not repaired by fuel, as
in other burning bodies, but are put by the action of the fire into so vehement
an agitation as whilst it lasts suffices to make the body appear luminous. This
conjecture Mr. Kraft seemed much to approve of when I told him that the way I
proposed to examine his noctiluca by, was to put a little of it into our
Pneumatick Engine, and Pump out the Air, whose absence, if it were of the
nature of other flames, would probably extinguish, or very much impair its
light, but yet since he offered not to have the trial made; probably because he
had but very little of his shining substance left, I thought it not civil to
press him. But to countenance what I said of the nature of Baldwinus
Phosphorus, I shall recite an Experiment that I purposely made, to examine
whether the presence of the Air were necessary to the shining of this
Phosphorus, as I had long since found it to that of some pieces of shining wood.

We exposed for a competent time to the beams of a vigorous light, a portion of
matter of about the breadth of the palm of ones hand, which we had prepared to
be made luminous by them. And then causing the Candles to be removed (for we
chose to make trial by night) we nimbly conveyed the matter into a receiver
that was kept in readiness for it, presuming (as the event showed we might)
that by using diligence the light would last as long as the experiment would
need to do; making have therefore to Pump out the Air, we heedfully watched
whether the withdrawing of it would, contrary to my conjecture, notably
diminish the light of the shining matter. And after we had thus withdrawn the
Air gradually, we tried whether by letting it return hastily, it would produce
a more sensible change in the matter (which had been purposely put in without
any thing to cover it, that it might be the more exposed to the Airs Action.)
But neither upon the gradual recess of the Air, nor yet upon its rushing in
when it was permitted to return, could we certainly observe any manifest
alteration in the luminousness of the Phosphorus, other than that slow
decrement that might well be imputed to the time during which the experiment
was making. It being well known that this luminous substance requires no long
time to make it decay, and by degrees to lose all its light; so that though
once there seemed to one or two of the bystanders, upon the return of the Air,
to be some recovery of part of the lost splendour, yet after repeated
experiments it was concluded that the presence of the Air was not at all
necessary to the shining of our matter, and it was judged most probable that
the absence or presence of the Air, had no manifest operation on it. I might
add to this that perhaps the presence of the Air is rather hurtful than
advantageous to this sort of lights, since for having had a large Phosphorus
that was much esteemed, and, whilst I kept it, exactly protected from the Air
did very well; a part of the Glass that covered it, having by mischance been
somewhat cracked, though none of the splinters appeared displaced, yet it seems
some of the Corpuscles of the Air made a shift to insinuate themselves at these
chinks (as narrow as they were) and in not many days made the matter cease to
be capable of being made luminous as before. I cannot stay to inquire whether
this unfitness or indisposition may be imputed to the bare moisture of the Air,
or to some other substance or quality that alone or in conjunction with the
moisture, may spoil that peculiar texture, or constitution that fits the matter
of the Phosphorus assisted by the impressions of external light to become
luminous. This, I say, I cannot stay to examine, though, That this Phosphorus
is of a nice and tender constitution, and easily alterable, I was induced to
think, by finding that the want of circumstances, seemingly slight enough,
would keep it from being made; and I guess that a convention of circumstances
did more contribute to the production than any peculiar and incommunicable
nature of the matter: Because having had the curiosity to make some trial upon
so obvious a material as quick Lime, though the success did not answer my
designs, yet, neither was it so bad, but that some luminous quality was
produced in the Lime by the action of the fire, and a saline Liquor; and I
scarce question but other materials will be found capable of being made
luminous by the same or the like operation, that is employed by Baldwinus, when
that learned man shall think sit to communicate his way to the Public. But to
return to what I was saying, that the contact of the Air might be rather
hurtful than advantageous to the Phosphorus, I shall only add here as matter of
fact, (for my conjectures about Light belong to my yet unpublisht Notes, of the
Origin of Qualities) that whereas the contact of the Air, though it were not
free, did in a few days destroy the luminousness of a good Phosphorus, yet
having included another in a Receiver, whence we afterward pumpt out the Air,
this matter though inferior to the other in vividness was so little spoiled by
lying open in our Vacuum, that at the end of not only some weeks, but some
months, I found that the beams of a Candle passing to it through the Receiver,
would notwithstanding the Vacuum it yet continues in, suffice to re-excite in
it a manifest light.

Thus far was the communication of this excellent person, who it is hoped may be
further prevailed with to communicate those other accurate observations, and
curious researches he has made concerning the light of the Bononian Stone, and
the Phosphoros Baldwini, which are indeed truly admirable, and very much
differing from the usual processes of Nature for the exhibiting of light.

Before I take leave of my Astronomical Readers, I shall here acquaint them
with some Collections I have made of other Astronomical matters and
discoveries, which I hope will not be less pleasing to them than they were at
first to me. The Discoveries are new, and not less significant. The first is,

A Letter from Johannes Carolus Gallet, L. L. D. and Provost of the Church of
St. Symphorean at Avignon, directed thus.
CLarissimo Eruditissimoque viro D. Johanni Dominico Cassino Matheseos
Professori Celeberrimo, Astronomo praestantissimo and Academiae Regiae
scientiarum alumno meritissime.

Containing an account of his observation of Mercury passing under the Sun.

Mr. Gallet then acquaints Mr. Cassini with his observation of sub and the
whole method and process of his observation. First, he fitted two excellent
Telescopes, the Glasses of which were given him by Mr. Jac. Borrellius, one of
the Academy Royal of Paris. The one of twenty three foot, he fitted with a
Glass covered with smooke, placed in the outward focus of the Eye-Glass: The
other of three foot he fixed to the Arm of his Quadrant of the same Radius, this
was so exquisite that compared with one of Divini, which was chosen by the care
of Honorato Fabri, and procured by Monsieur de Beanchamps, it was found to
represent the objects clearer: By this the figure of the Sun was cast on an
opposite Table, on which he had drawn a Circle of the bigness proper to the
Distance and Magnifying of the Glasses to contain the whole Face of the Sun,
and by Parallel Circles had subdivided the same into digits and Sexagesimals,
he had also placed three threads in the interior focus of the Glasses, that the
middlemost went through the Center, and the two outward touched the Limb of the
Sun by their shadow on the Table, he had also a Pendulum Clock that vibrated
thrice in a second. Thus accoutred he watched the fifth and sixth day, from Sun
rising to Sun setting, and the seventh after the Cloudy Sky had seemed to
delude his curiosity till Eleven a Clock almost, it then began to open and
discovered to him Mercury got within the Eastern Limb of the Sun, about 1/16 of
its Semidiameter; at length the Clouds being dispersed, the Sun being 27 45.
high, or at 10 h. 54 it self marked out its own place in the disk of the by its
own shadow cast on the Table by the shorter tube. Then he disposed the shadow
of the aforesaid thread so Parallel to the Equator, that this figure of the Sun
should move between the outward ones, and that the middle should mark out the
Parallel described by the Center of the Sun in motion, at the same time he took
the declination of from this middle Parallel and the right Ascension, by the
number of Vibrations of the Pendulum, from the Western Limb of the Sun, taken
by the shadow of a Perpendicular Cross-line to the other 3. by the same means,
also he measured the Diameter of the Sun and of Mercury.

Then to the end he might give less cause of doubt, according to his usual
custom, he procured several friends who were present and witnesses of all the
observations after the fourth mentioned in the Table. During the observation he
took notice of these remarkable accidents. First, that Mercury through the long
Tube was very black, and of an Elliptical figure whose longest Diameter was
Parallel to the Equator, but in the Species through the lesser Telecope, it
appeared round and of a dusky red (like a spot observed by him in the Sun from
the Ninth to the Fifteenth of April,) Secondly, that the Diameter of Mercury
going out of the Disc of the Sun, when it touched the periphery seemed to be of
four times the Diameter it appeared of through the whole Phase, so that Mr.
Beauchamp, who watched the exit with the longer Tube, whilst he himself minded
the Quadrant in order to take the Altitude of the Sun, at the time of the exit
cried out, O how large do I see the Diameter of Mercury now, it does not only
leave the Sun, but is confused with it, or as it were melts into it, and
presently it vanished, the Sun being then 13. 23. high.

He further adds that before he leaves to speak of the Sun, he will here insert
an observation that he had made of four spots he had seen in the Sun in the
first of October last (St. No.) with this his longer Telescope, one only of
which was visible by the Species cast with the lesser Glass.

October. Die. hora Declinat.maculae principalis a paral. Centri Differentia
temp. inter limbum Occident. and maculam. Tempus transitus disci Solaris. 1 10
0 4 44 austr. 1 4 20 2 10 0 2 10 0 2 43 aust. 49 0 2 10 20 3 10 30 1 21 aust.
35 40 2 10 20 4 10 35 0 40 aust. 25 40 2 10 30 6 10 0 3 0 boreal. 3 20 2 10 4

Thus submitting his method to the judgment of the Learned Cassini, and
earnestly desiring his thoughts thereon, he ends his Letter, and Dates it from
Avignon, Nov. 21. 1677.

To this Letter he subjoins the observation it self, Entitled,

Mercurius sub Sole visus Avenione die 7. November. 1677. Observante me Joanne
Carolo Gallet, J.V.D. Praeposito Ecclesiae Sancti Symphoriani Avenionensis. The
Contents of which are,

That designing to observe this passage of under he with his Tube watchfully
looked for it in the Suns place, from the 5th to the 7th. day, with a Telescope
of 23 foot (as above) he observed a spot of an elliptical figure which had
already gotten a 16th. part of the semidiameter of the Sun within the limb, and
declined a little to the South in respect of the parallel of the Equator drawn
through the Suns center, at 10 hours 26 min. but the Clouds hindering he could
not observe its motion till it had ascended as high as the parallel: when the
Suns altitude was 27. 45. or 10 a Clock 54 minutes. From the quickness of its
motion he soon found it to be and not a spot, and therefore he forsook
Telescope and Table to receive the figure of the but observed the times of the
Immersions and the Emersion of by the help thereof, being assisted by several
of his friends who were witnesses of what passed, and particularly by the
Illustrious Monsieur De Beauchamp, who with the twenty three foot Glass
determined the Exit of Meroury, whilst he himself took the Altitude of the Sun
with his Quadrant, as in the tenth Observation.

The Order of the Observations of Mercury seen under the Sun.
The number of the Phases observed. Thenorth Declination of from the Parallel
of the equat. through the Center. The difference of the time between the
Transit of West Limb of the Sun, and the body of under the same Meridian,
collected from the Pendulum Vibrating of a second. The distance of from the
Center of the Sun. The apparent altitude of the Sun. The hour Collected by the
Altitude. M. S. vib. Pend. M. S. T. M. S. T. G. M. H. M. S. 1 0 0 345 1 55 0 11
20 37 27 45 10 53 58 2 2 3 276 1 32 0 6 0 55 29 36 12 0 0 3 2 45 258 1 26 0 5 9
20 29 34 0 9 55 4 3 40 224 1 14 40 4 7 30 29 03 0 35 50 5 5 30 164 0 54 40 7 13
7 25 0 1 44 10 6 6 30 148 0 49 20 8 15 0 24 5 1 55 22 7 6 53 132 0 44 00 9 16
45 22 30 2 11 58 8 8 14 100 0 33 20 12 1 45 19 30 2 39 14 9 8 55 80 0 26 40 14
5 30 17 17 2 57 28 10 9 38 39 0 13 00 16 30 0 13 23 3 26 56

The time of the Transitus. The Diameter in the Parallel. The Diameter in a
great Circle. of the Sun. 414 2 18 34 30 0 43 0 0 of Mercury. 3 0 1 10 0 17 30

From this Observation he had the Declination of Mercury in respect of the
Parallel through the Center of the Sun, and thence its absolute Declination
from the Equator, supposing the place of the Sun according to Hecker, and the
obliquity of the Ecliptic, 23, 30 the right Ascension also of appeared by the
difference of time between the Transit of and the West limb of the Sun by the
same meridian. Then from the Declination and right Ascension of given by
Trigonometrical Calculation, he found out the Longitude and Latitude of it in
every Observation, and the time of its true Conjunction.

The time of the phases observed. Heckers place of the in The Decl. of South
ascen. The right Ascension of Mercury. the N. Lat. of ascen. The Long. of
Mercury in H. M. S. G. M. S. G. M. S. G. M. S. M. S. G. M. S. 1 10 53 58 15 33
55 16 32 33 223 16 40 3 10 15 44 48 2 12 0 0 15 36 41 16 31 38 223 13 43 3 14
15 40 40 3 0 9 55 15 37 6 16 30 43 223 12 37 3 53 15 40 30 4 0 35 50 15 38 11
16 30 7 223 10 51 3 55 15 38 27 5 1 44 10 15 41 3 16 29 7 223 8 54 4 15 15 36 3
6 1 55 22 15 41 31 16 28 12 223 7 59 4 55 15 35 6 7 2 11 58 15 42 13 16 28 4
223 7 36 4 56 15 34 40 8 2 39 14 15 43 22 16 27 4 223 7 4 5 48 15 34 5 9 2 57
28 15 44 8 16 26 36 223 6 10 5 57 15 33 0 10 3 26 56 15 45 23 16 26 15 223 5 50
6 12 15 32 37

Therefore the time of the true conjunction of the Sun and Mercury at Avignon,
was Nov. 7. Hor. 2. Min. 39. Sec. 14. Afternoon.

To this he has adjoined this ensuing Table, to show how much the Heavens do
differ from the Astronomical Tables.

Tempus datum ex Tabulis November. Differentia ab observata conjunctione. D. H.
M. D. H. M. Rudolphinis Reyneri. 7 8 3 0 7 24 excessus. Calculis Heckeri. 7 6 9
0 5 9 excessus. Lansbergianis. 6 1 12 0 23 27 defectus. Philolaicis Bullialdi 7
4 18 0 3 39 excessus. Ricciolinis juxta calculum. 7 8 17 0 7 38 excessus, R.
admodum Patris Bonifa. Societatis Jesu. 7 8 17 0 7 38 excessus.

These Observations are delineated in the 23. Figure.

Upon this Observation I find in the twenty third Journal de Scavans of the
Year 1677. Mr. Cassini made these Reflections.
THat having compared this Observation of Monsieur Gallet, of 1677. with that
of Mr. Gassendus, of 1631. the same day of the year, to wit the seventh of
November, he found that the Latitudes of at its leaving the Disc of the Sun,
determined by these two Astronomers were equal, even to the sixth part of a
minute. And by consequence that was both in the one and the other Observation
at the same distance from its North node, and that it traced in the Disc of the
Sun an equal line: And for that was here at the like distance from its Apoge;
as the Sun was also pretty near, the swiftness of its apparent motion in the
Sun was equal. By the Observation of Mr. Gallet it is found considerably more
slow than that which Mr. Gassendus has supposed from the Rudolphin Tables of
which he made use for the determining of it, not having been able to make
Observation immediately by reason of the Clouds. He believes then that spent
more then five hours in running through the Disc of the Sun, since by the
Observation of Mr. Gallet, it has spent 5 hours and 35 minutes, which may
serve for an Advertisement for determining more exactly the time of the true
conjunction of with the in the year 1631.

The same equality of Latitude at Mercury's leaving the Sun shows that the Sun
was equally distant from the Node of Mercury at the time of these two
Observations. And as the Sun was more advanced in that of this year from 63 to
64 minutes, than in that of the year 1631, So it follows that the septentrional
Node of is advanced from 63 to 64 minutes in the space of 46 years, as
precisely as by the Rudolphin Tables, which agree also exactly in the Epochas
of the Nodes: a matter of no small Importance in Astronomy, which has not a
little difficulty to determine with preciseness the Nodes of the Planets and
their motions.

But having compared the observation of Mr. Gallet, with that of Mr. Hevelius,
in 1661. which happened the third of May, in a place of the Zodiac opposite to
that of this year, he has found the septentrional Node of less advanced than
the Meridional was in the preceding Observation; so that if the Nodes of in
regard of the Sun are precisely opposite the one to the other, it appears that
they have gone backward since the year 1661. as do those of the Moon, and by
consequence their motion is sometimes direct, sometimes retrograde: But if
their motion is supposed uniform, it will follow that the Line of the Nodes of
does not pass at all through the center of the Sun, but that it is removed from
it toward the septentrional limit about a two hundredth part of the
Semidiameter of the Orb of Mercury.

Thus far this knowing and accurate Astronomer Monsieur Cassini, who we hear
has since farther discoursed concerning this matter, which we hope to procure
so soon as he shall make it public; and to add some other curious Observations
made by other hands, I have as yet been able to procure but one more; but that
is one so considerable, that it will excite the skilful Astronomers anew to ply
their Calculations, to see what the comparing of this with the rest will
produce; which as they come to my hands, I design to publish, as I shall also
somewhat of my own Observations thereupon: and therefore I omit to make any
reflections at present. This Letter is of Mr. Edmund Hally, now residing at St.
Helena, directed to Sir Jonas Moore, Surveyor of his Majesty's Ordnance; a
person to whom the Learned world is very much obliged for his patronizing and
promoting these Celestial enquiries; who has not been sparing of his own
pains and purse in providing the best apparatus of instruments and other
conveniences for such Observations the world ever had; from whom we may with
good reason hope a great advancement toward the perfecting thereof.

St. Helena, November. 22. 1677.
HOnored Sir, You may with reason wonder that I should so long be negligent to
write to your Worship, to give you an account of my proceedings since my
departure from you, seeing that in the business I am now engaged upon, the
Honorable Sir Joseph Williamson, his Majesty's Principal Secretary of State,
and your self are my only Patrons: but I have not been unmindful of my Duty in
this particular, only I delayed, that what I sent you might not be altogether
inconsiderable. I hoped still that we might have some clear weather when the
Sun came near our Zenith, that so I might give you an account that I had near
hand finished the Catalogue of the Southern Stars, which is my principal
concern; but such has been my ill fortune, that the Horizon of this Island is
almost always covered with a Cloud, which sometimes for some weeks together
has hid the Stars from us, and when it is clear, is of so small continuance,
that we cannot take any number of Observations at once; so that now, when I
expected to be returning, I have not finished above half my intended work; and
almost despair to accomplish what you ought to expect from me. I will yet try
two or three months more, and if it continue in the same constitution, I shall
then, I hope be excusable if in that time I cannot make an end. However it will
be a great grief to be so far frustrated in my first undertaking: I have
notwithstanding had the opportunity of observing the ingress and egress of on
the, which compared with the like Observations made in England, will give a
demonstration of the Suns Parallax, which hitherto was never proved, but by
probable arguments. Likewise I have seen those two Eclipses, one of the Sun,
the other of the Moon in May last, both which I send you, but the mighty winds,
and extraordinary swift motion of the Clouds hindered the exactness of the
Observations. That of the Moon may help for the difference of our Meridians,
which is about 7 degrees to the Westwards of London: but it may more curiously
be found by Mercury sub Sole. There are three Stars of the first; Magnitude
that never appear in England, but none near the South Pole of any brightness,
except one of the third Magnitude, which is about ten degrees distant from it.
The two Nubeculae called by the Saylors the Magellanick Clouds, are both of
them exactly like the whiteness of the milky way lying within the Antartick
Circle; they are small, and in the Moon shine, scarce perceptible; yet in the
dark the higger is very notable. I need not relate unto you the temperature of
the Weather for heat and cold here in the Torrid Zone, you your self having
long since had experience of a Latitude little different: only this I shall
certify you, that ever since I came to this Island, we have had no weather
that is hotter than the Summer of England is ordinarily. Mr. Clark is a person
wonderfully assistant to me, in whose company all the good fortune I have had
this Voyage consists, to me all other things having been cross: nevertheless
I despair not of his Honors and your Worships favor, which alone is sufficient
to encourage me to bear with patience these disappointments, and expect some
fitter opportunity.

I am your Worships most obliged Servant, and true Honorer, Edmund Halley.


St. Helenae, Latitudo Australis, 15.55. Anno 1677.
Octobris 28. die mane apparuit intra.
h. m. s. 9 26 17 Pars aliqua corporis ii intrasset Solemn december gradus a nadir
ad dextram circiter. 9 27 30 Formabat angulum contactus totus scilicet. intus 2
38 39 Limbus ii proximus dissiti a limbo Solis sui Diametro. 2 40 8 Limbus ii
tetigit limbum. 2 41 0 Centrum exiit e Sole 30 grad. circiter a Nadir ad
dextram. 2 41 54 limbus integer factus.

Longitudo and Latitudo trium Stellarum illustrium prope polum austrinum.
Long. Latit. Canopus 11 3 75 49 Centauri pes 25 24 42 22 Alcarnar. 10 31 59
18.

The Period of the Revolution of Jupiter upon it Axis; verified by new
Observations made by Monsieur Cassini: Extracted out of the Journal de Scavans.
THE Globe of Jupiter, whose Revolution about its Axis was determined by the
Observations of Monsieur Cassini, in the Year 1665. This Revolution of the body
of upon its Axis I first discovered in May 1664. and published in the first
Transaction, which was a considerable time before it was discovered by Monsieur
Cassini; but we are obliged to him for the perfecting the Theory, as we are
also for many other rare Discoveries and excellent improvements in Astronomy.
to be 9 hours, and 56 minutes, is as it were a watch for visibly pointing the
hours and minutes to half the Earth at once; so that it shows the same time to
all under the same Meridian, and a different time to different Meridians,
according as they differ in Longitude.

It has for an Index of its motion one principal spot, which is very neatly
distinguished from the rest of its surface, and seems from its figure and
situation to have some resemblance to the Caspian Sea of the Terraqueous Globe.
By the help of good Glasses it may be seen passing the under Hemisphere of it,
from the East to the West, with a velocity so sensible, that one may determine
to one or two minutes, the time that it comes to the middle of the Disc, which
is the place the most fit for establishing of the Epochas, and for finding the
difference of Longitude. There may be a great number of such Revolutions
observed, since in one year of 365 days there are made 882 Revolutions. But it
does not appear in every year, but as if it were some kind of Marish which is
dried at certain times, and so disappears during two or 3000 Revolutions; and
after it has remained thus imperceptible for some years, it returns again to
its former state. After it had been observed the last six months of the year
1665. and some months of 1666. it became invisible till the beginning of the
year 1672. then being returned to its former appearance, Monsieur Cassini
compared the intervals of the six years, and limited the revolution to be made
in 9 hours, 55 minutes, 51 seconds; and continuing his Observations to the end
of the year 1674. he found by these two years that it was too slow by two
seconds and a half: so that it appeared to be in 9 hours, 55 minutes, 53
seconds.

This spot has been invisible in 1675. and 1676. during which space there
happened other very considerable changes in the body of Jupiter; for the clear
interstice which was between the two dark belts of Jupiter was separated into
many little parts, in the manner like so many Islands; as if the two obscure
belts had been two great Rivers broken one into the other, and had left these
parts which appeared like Islands, which yet were at last all effaced, and the
two dark belts, and the interjacent space at length all coalesced into one
large belt. But after the coming of Jupiter out of the Rays of the Sun in the
year 1677. the belts again took their form, and situation which they had
heretofore; to wit, the same which is described in the 24 figure. The principal
spot appeared anew after the beginning of July last. Monsieur Cassini found
this spot in the middle of Jupiter the night after the eighth of the said
month, at 13 minutes after one at night; and has hitherto ever since observed
it at the hours proper to its revolution. Having compared many Observations of
this year with as many others made the same days of the year 1665. for avoiding
the scruples which may arise from the inequality of times, he has found by the
intervals of twelve years that those revolutions compared the one with the
other, complete themselves in 9 hours, 55 minutes, 52 seconds, and 5 or 6
thirds. And because that in the years 1672, 1673. they appeared more slow by 2
seconds and a half, during the time that Jupiter was in its greatest elevation
from the Sun. Monsieur Cassini inclines to suppose that these revolutions have
some little inequality depending on the variation of the distance of from the,
and that they are a little slower when is more ^emoved, and somewhat faster
when nearer approached that body; the same which several great Astronomers have
supposed to happen to the Diurnal Revolutions of the Earth in the Copernican
Hypothesis.

In this account he has separated the inequality which does result from the
variation of the two equations of Jupiter (as he has explained in diverse
Letters in 1665.) the which may amount to one half hour, besides the inequality
of natural days, which according to his Hypothesis may amount to 16 minutes.

For the finding then of the return of the principal spot to the middle of for
many years to half an hour or thereabout, there needs nothing but adding still
the time of the period to the Epoche of the 8. of July, 1677. and for the
finding precisely, even to some minutes, the two inequalities of Jupiter must
be observed according to the following Rule.

Differentiam inter medium locum Jovis and apparentem converte in tempus dando
singulis gradibus min. 1. hoc tempus add tempori restitutionis maculae
supputato, si locus apparens Jovis excesserit medium: subtrahe vero si
defecerit a medio.

We have then the mean time of the return of the spot, and to get the apparent
time the, equation of days according to the method of Monsieur Cassini (of
which a Table is inserted in the Ephemerides of Monsieur Flaminio de
Mezzavachi) must be made use of.

MICROSCOPIVM: OR, Some new Discoveries made with and concerning Microscopes.
A Letter of the Ingenious and Inquisitive Mr. Leeuwenhoeck of Delft, sent to
the Secretary of the Royal Society, October 5. 1677.
IN this Letter after the Relation of many curious Observations made with his
Microscope, he adds,

By some of my former Letters I have related what an innumerable company of
little Animalcules, I have discovered in waters; of the truth of which
affirmations, that I might satisfy the Illustrious Philosophers of your
Society, I have here sent the Testimonials of eight credible persons; some of
which affirm they have seen 10000, others 30000, others 45000 little living
Creatures, in a quantity of water as big as a grain of Millet (92 of which go
to the making up the bigness of a green Pea, or the quantity of a natural drop
of water) in the desiring of which Testimonials I made it my request that they
would only justify (that they might be within compass) half the number that
they believed each of them saw in the water, and even so the number of those
little creatures that would thereby be proved to be in one drop of water would
be so great, that it would exceed belief. Now whereas by my Letter of the 9th.
of October, 1676. I affirmed that there were more than 1000000 living Creatures
contained in one drop of Pepper-water. I should not have varied from the truth
of it, if I had asserted that there were 8000000; for if according to some of
the included testimonials there might be found in a quantity of water as big as
a millet seed, no less than 45000 animalcules. It would follow that in an
ordinary drop of this water there would be no less than 4140000 living
creatures, which number if doubled will make 8280000 living Creatures seen in
the quantity of one drop of water, which quantity I can with truth affirm I
have discerned.

This exceeds belief. But I do affirm, that if a larger grain of sand were
broken into 8000000 of equal parts, one of these would not exceed the bigness
of one of those little creatures; which being understood, it will not seem so
incredible to believe that there may be so great a number in the quantity of
one drop of water.

Upon the perusal of this Letter, being extremely desirous to examine this
matter farther, and to be ascertained by ocular inspection as well as from
testimonials. I put in order such remainders as I had of my former Microscopes
(having by reason of a weakness in my sight omitted the use of them for many
years) and steeped some black pepper in River water, but examining that water
about two or three days after, I could not by any means discover any of those
little creatures mentioned in the aforesaid Letter: though I had made use of
small glass canes drawn hollow for that purpose, and of a Microscope that I was
certain would discover things much smaller than such as the aforesaid Mr.
Leeuwenhoeck had affirmed these creatures to be; but whether it were that the
light was not convenient (the reason of which I shall show by and by) having
looked only against the clear sky, or that they were not yet generated, which I
rather suppose, I could not discover any. I concluded therefore either that my
Microscope was not so good as that he made use of, or that the time of the year
(which was in November) was not so fit for such generations, or else that there
might be somewhat ascribed to the difference of places; as that Holland might
be more proper for the production of such little creatures than England. I
omitted therefore farther to look after them, for about five or six days, when
finding it a warm day, I examined again the said water; and then much to wonder
I discovered vast multitudes of those exceeding small creatures, which Mr.
Leeuwenhoeck had described; and upon making use of other lights and glasses, as
I shall by and by show, I not only magnified those I had thus discovered to a
very great bigness, but I discovered many other sorts very much smaller than
those I first saw, and some of these so exceeding small, that millions of
millions might be contained in one drop of water. I was very much surprised at
this so wonderful a spectacle, having never seen any living creature comparable
to these for smallness: nor could I indeed imagine that nature had afforded
instances of so exceedingly minute animal productions. But nature is not to be
limited by our narrow apprehensions; future improvements of glasses may yet
further enlighten our understanding, and ocular inspection may demonstrate that
which as yet we may think too extravagant either to feign or suppose.

Of this, A later Discovery of Mr. Leeuwenhoeck does seem to give good
probabilities; for by a Letter of his since sent (the which is hereunto
annexed) it appears he has discovered a certain sort of Eels in Pepper-water,
which are not in breadth above one thousandth part of the breadth of a hair;
and not above a hundredth part of the length of a vinegar Eel.

Mr. Leeuwenhoecks Second Letter.
SIR,
Yours of the thirtieth of November I received not till January, whereby
understanding the kind reception of my former by the R. S. I here return my
acknowledgment to that illustrious Company for their great civility: but I
wonder that in your Letter I find no mention made of my Observations of the
second of December, St. No. which makes me doubt whether the same came to your
hands.

Since you assure me that what I send of this nature will be acceptable to the
renowned Society, I have adventured again to send you some of my farther
Enquiries, to be communicated to that learned Philosophical Company. Since I
wrote of the Blood of Eels, and of young Eels, I have not been idle to view
Blood, but especially my own, which for some time I have indefatigably
examined, after that I had put it into all conceivable motions. Among which
Observations I well saw that the globuli of my own blood took the same figure
which I formerly mentioned, that the Globules of the blood of Eels appeared of
to the eye: upon seeing which I doubted again at the cause of the smart which
the blood of the Eels causes in the eye.

These my many times repeated Observations of my own blood I made to no other
end, than if it were possible, to observe the parts out of which the Globules
of the blood consisted: With observing this, I found the globulous blood much
more pliable than I did imagine the same before. I have at several times bended
these Globules before my eyes, that they were three times as long as broad,
without breaking the Vesicule of them: and besides I saw that the Globules of
blood in passing by and through one another, did, by reason of their
pliableness receive many sorts of figures, and coming thence into a larger
place, they recovered their former globulosity which was a very great pleasure
to observe: and withal, that the Globules of blood coming many together, and
growing cold thereby, came to unite, and made a matter very smooth, wherein
there were no more parts distinct to be taken notice of, much after the same
manner as if we supposed a Dish filled with balls of wax set over a fire, by
which they would quickly be melted together, and united into one mass; by which
uniting of the Globules, I concluded this to be the reason of the accident
which is called the cold fire, and of that also which causes the hands or
fingers to be lost by cold: but I leave this to others. And I did very clearly
also discover that there were six other smaller Globules of blood contained
within each of the former and larger Globulous Vesicles: and withal, I took
much pains to observe the number of the same very small globules, out of which
the greater Globules do consist: that at last I strongly imagined, that every
of the greater Globules consisted of six smaller Globules, no less pliable than
the aforesaid: for oftentimes I saw very clearly how the small Globules joined
and adapted themselves according to the figure the Vesicle or larger Globule
stretched at length had taken, being themselves stretched after the same
manner: and thus made one of the larger Globules stretched out, to appear by the
lesser within it stretched also with it, as if it consisted of long threads.
Moreover, I put the greater Globules into so violent a motion, that their
Vesicles burst in pieces, and then the lesser Globules appeared plainly to be
scattered. This first Globule I can see as plainly and great, as with the naked
eye one should look upon the eggs or spawn of a Cod-fish.

About nine or ten years since Dr. Graff opened in my presence the vein of a
Dog, and let out so much blood that the Dog grew faint; then he opened the
Artery of another Dog, and by a pipe transfused the blood of this second into
the first, whereby the first was recovered, the second was faint. Then the said
Doctor injected back into the Artery of the second, a quantity of Cows milk,
supposing thereby to preserve the second dog alive, saying, milk was blood: but
no sooner was the milk put into the artery, but the dog died. And whereas it is
commonly said that milk is Blood, therefore I shall relate of what parts the
Milk consists, so far as I have hitherto discovered. I have said heretofore
that the Milk does consist of Globules swimming in a thin clear watery matter
which we call Whey: but as the great Globuli of Blood are all of the
samebigness, so in the Milk they are quite differing, being of as many sizes
and magnitudes as we can imagine, between the smallest sand, and a barley corn;
all of them being as clear as Crystal; save only that through and between the
same drive some irregular particles for the most part rounded: these had a
fatty substance, which I imagined to be the latter: their irregularity I
imagined came from the impression of the encompassing Globules made on them, in
which posture they grew cold.

Viewing the aforesaid differences of the Milk Globules, I supposed that the
Milk vessels have no other parts included but the matter out of which they are
all made; and that the same matter, so long as included in the vessels,
consisted of one uniform matter, so that one could not distinguish parts; and
that the same vessels discharging this uniform matter into other vessels,
containing a substance of a quite differing nature, which I suppose to be the
Whey, comes to be separated into these Globules of so differing magnitudes.
This may be represented by having two vessels filled, the one with Fat,
representing Whey; the other with Quicksilver, resembling the uniform matter of
the Milk: these blended together, the Quicksilver will be separated into small
Globules of differing magnitudes, and kept distinct by the fat.

Or further, it may be explained by a dissolution of some gums in Spirit of
Wine, a drop of which being put into rain water (which I compare to Whey) the
Gum becomes separated immediately into an incredible number of small clear
Globules, which makes it appear, also as white as Milk it self: and thence I
suppose that the whiteness of Milk has the same cause.

I have been often minded by some, that flesh was nothing else but clodded
blood; yet for all my endeavors I was neverable to find the first particles of
blood in the fibers of the flesh, but only such as are contained in the first
Globules.

The last Summer being sickly for some weeks, I voided much Phlegm, which was
green, tough, and acid in the throat, which yet continues; but nothing near so
much as before: and some of it which I voided in the morning was of so heavy a
matter, that it sunk in the water: the ponderosity of it I found to proceed
from its not being filled with airy bubbles, which most Flegms are mixed with.
By this means I observed my Phlegm very often, and found it to consist of tough
slimy moisture, mixed with many Globules; and the tougher the Phlegm was, the
greater was the quantity of Globules; and from them also proceeded the green
color of it. All these Globules were of one and the same bigness with the
first Globules of the blood; and indeed the blood is of the same make, but only
of a different color: for as I observed the greater blood Globules to consist
of six lesser, so here I could see them more plain; only they seemed more
slender and tender than in the blood: the reason whereof I suppose to be that
the vesicules of the Phlegm Globules had already received some kind of
corruption: besides, there was mixed with the tough part of the Phlegm great
quantity of very thin cuticles: and in the same manner as I have heretofore
explained how our cuticle is supplied underneath, as the upper part is rubbed
off in scurf, so I suppose the inner cuticles of the gullet aspera arteria, and
other vessels are taken off by the Phlegm. There drove also, through the Phlegm
some other particles, which from their smallness I could not assign them a
figure, but I conceived them rather cubical than round. I did last Summer shut
up some Caterpillars to spin Webs, and within these few days I broke some of
these Webs, when from each of them came out a fly, which from the cold were
very weak, and were unable to stand; by which I conceive that those which came
not out in the latter part of the year, remain the whole Winter in their Webs,
till the warmth makes them come out. I was pleased to understand that your self
and the Society had seen in so small a quantiy of water as a sand, so great a
number of Creatures; as also, that I shall be partaker of what you shall
observe, which I shall with longing desire expect. I cannot but mention that
that small sort of Creature which I heretofore could give no description of, I
now see their figure. And for the pleasure I take in the various pleasing
shapes, with their motions, which do now and then appear in the water, I have
the fourth of this month, when it froze hard, taken a third part of beaten
pepper, and of high rain water in a clean glass, which I set the first night in
my Bedchamber; the next day, the weather being milder, I set it in my
Countinghouse, and in three times 24 hours discovered so great a number, and so
unexpressible small Creatures, that it is hard to be conceived; and according to
my judgment, the most of them were much less than a thousandth part of the
thickness of the hair of ones head, and three or four times as long as thick;
the which made, with the hinder part of their body, oft-times so swift a
progress, as when we observe a Pike shooting through the water, and every shoot
was in length most times about half a hairs breadth; the other sorts or kind of
which were yet smaller, whose shape for brevity I omit; only I shall say, that
oft-times in pepper-water which has stood somewhat long, among the very small
Creatures, I have seen a sort of small Eels which had their shapes and motions
as perfect as great ones: these were to my appearance a thousand times thinner
than the hair of ones head, and that if 100 of these small Eels were laid in
length one behind another, the whole length would not extend to the length of
the Eel in vinegar: Whether you have also observed these small Creatures with
your Microscope, I shall be glad to understand. I would willingly also be
informed whether my Letter of the second of December mentioned above be come to
your hands, and how those Observations do please the Gentlemen of your Society;
and also to understand the receipt of this.


The manner how the said Mr. Leeuwenhoeck does make these discoveries, he does
as yet not think fit to impart, for reasons best known to himself; and
therefore I am not able to acquaint you with what it is: but as to the ways I
have made use of, I here freely discover that all such persons as have a desire
to make any enquiries into Nature this way, may be the better enabled so to do.

First, for the manner of holding the liquor, so as to examine it by the
Microscope, I find that the way prescribed by Mr. Leeuwenhoeck is to include
the same in a very fine pipe of glass, and then to view it by the help of the
Microscope; for by placing that at a due distance, whatever is contained in the
said liquor will most easily be discovered: The liquor will most easily
insinuate it self into the cavity of the said pipe, if the end thereof only be
just put within the liquor. This as it is exceedingly convenient for many
trials, so is it not very difficult to prepare; but because every one is not
instructed how to proceed in this matter, and it may cause him more trouble
than needs to procure them, I will here describe the way; and so much the
rather, because the same apparatus will serve for the preparing of Microscopes:
as I shall afterward show.

Provide then a box made of tin, with a flat bottom, and upright on all sides;
let this have fixed within it to the bottom a small piece of tin, hollowed like
a ridg tile, so that the wiek of the Lamp may lie and rest upon it, and let the
Tin-man fix on it a cover of tin, so that there may be only left one part of
the aforesaid box open, to wit, where the bent tin piece and the wiek do lie
and come above the sides: this cover may be turned back on its hinges when
there is occasion to raise the wiek, or put in more oil, etc. but for the most
part ought to lie flat and covered; for whilst it is using, it is necessary to
keep the flame from spreading too much, and taking fire all over. This box must
stand within another box of tin, made large enough to contain it; the use of
which is to keep the former Lamp box from fowling the board or table on which
it stands: This stands upon a board about one foot square, into which is
fastened a standard or stick upright, cleft so as to pinch and hold the sodering
pipe between its clefts, which may be fastened with a screw, or a slipping ring;
through which pipe, blowing with your breath, the flame will be darted forward
with great swiftness and brightness: if then into this flame you hold a small
piece of a glass pipe, made of white glass, (for green glass, or coarser glass
will not be melted easily in this flame) and keep it turning round between your
fingers and thumbs, you shall find that the flame will in a very short time
melt the middle part of the said pipe; so that if you remove it out of the
flame, and draw your hands one from another, you may easily draw the former
pipe into a very small size, which will yet remain hollow, though drawn never
so small. The best Oil for this purpose is good clean Sallat Oil, or Oil Olive;
but high rectified Spirit of Wine is yet better, and cleanlier, but much more
chargeable; and for most uses the Oil Olive will serve. This I have set down,
because many who are far off in the Country cannot have the convenience of
going to a Lamp-blower as often as they have occasion for such pipes; which if
they provide themselves with small white glass pipes from the Potters, they may
accommodate themselves withal, though they have nothing but a large candle, and
a tobacco-pipe, instead of the aforesaid apparatus, though not altogether so
conveniently. But I would rather advise them to have a Lamp made, which most
Tin-men know how to fit and prepare; and so it will not need much more
description.

But this way of Mr. Leeuwenhoecks, of holding the liquors in small glass
pipes, though it be exceedingly ingenious, and very convenient for many
examinations, yet for diverse others it is not so well accommodated as this which
I contrived my self for my own trials, at least for those Microscopes I make
use of; what it may be for those which Mr. Leeuwenhoeck uses I know not.

I take then instead of a glass pipe a very thin plate of Muscovy glass, this
serves instead of the moveable plate which is usually put upon the pedestal of
Microscopes; but because the common pedestal hitherto made use of in
Microscopes is generally not so convenient for trials of this nature, I lay
those by, and instead thereof I fix into the bottom of the Tube of the
Microscope, a cylindrical rod of Brass or Iron. Upon this a little socket is
made to slide to and fro; and by means of a pretty stiff spring, will stand
fast in any place. This has fastened to it a joynted arm of three or four
joints, and at the end a plate about the bigness of a half crown, with a hole
in the middle of it about three quarters of an inch wide; upon this plate I lay
the Muscovy glass, and upon that I spread a very little of the liquor to be
examined; then looking against the flame of a Candle, or a Lamp, or a small
reflection of the Sun from a globular body; all such parts of the liquor as
have differing refraction will manifestly appear. By this means I examined the
water in which I had steeped the pepper I formerly mentioned; and as if I had
been looking upon a Sea, I saw infinite of small living Creatures swimming and
playing up and down in it, a thing indeed very wonderful to behold.

If the flame of the candle were directly before the Microscope, then all those
little Creatures appeared perfectly defined by a black line, and the bodies of
them somewhat darker than the water; but if the candle were removed a little
out of the axis of vision, all those little Creatures appeared like so many
small pearls, or little bubbles of air, and the liquor in which they swimmed
appeared dark; but when the water began to dry off, the bending of the
superficies of the liquor over their backs, and over the tops of other small
motes which were in the water made a confused appearance, which some not used
to these kind of examinations, took to be quite differing things from what they
were really; and the appearances here are so very strange, that to one not well
accustomed to the phenomenon of fluids of differing figures and refractions,
the examinations of substances this way will be very apt to mis-inform, rather
than instruct him; especially of such substances as are not perfectly fluid,
and will not readily and naturally smooth their own superficies, such as
Tallow, concreted Oils, Marrow, Brains, Fat, inspissated juyces, etc. for if
those substances be so examined by spreading them upon this plate, and be
looked upon against the candle, or other small defined light, all the
inequalities left on the surface by the spreading do by the refractions of the
rays of light render such odd appearances, that they will easily deceive the
examinator, and make him to conceive that to be in the texture of the part
which is really no where but in the make of the superficies of it. This
therefore as another great inconvenience to be met with in Microscopical
Observations, I prevent by these ensuing methods: First, all such bodies as
Fat, Oil, Brains, Rhobs, Pus, tough concreted Phlegm, and the like, whose
surfaces are irregular, and ought to be reduced to smoothness before they can
be well examined, I order in this manner: First, I provide a very clear and
thin piece of looking-glass plate very smooth and plain on both sides, and
clean from foulness: upon the surface of this I lay some of those substances I
last mentioned, then with such another piece of Looking-glass plate laid upon
the said substance I press it so thin as not only to make the surfaces of it
very smooth, but also to make the substance of it very thin; because otherwise,
if the substance be pretty thick, as suppose as thick as a piece of Venice
paper, if it be a whitish substance, the multitudes of parts lying one upon
another in such a thickness, do so confound the sight, that none of them all
can be distinctly seen: but if by squeezing the said plates hard, and close
together, it be reduced to a twentieth part perhaps of that thickness, the
substance may be well looked through, and the constituent parts may be very
plainly discovered. Thus also it is very visible in the Globules of milk and
blood, discovered by the ingenious Mr. Leeuwenhoeck, for when either of those
substances are thick, the multitude of those little Globules confound and
thicken the liquor so as one cannot perceive any thing until it be run very
thin; for then all the remaining Globules with their motions may very
distinctly be apprehended. This therefore is an expedient by which thousands of
substances may be examined; and therefore the more fit to be communicated, that
there may be the greater number of observers well accommodated for such trials.
These plates therefore may be contrived so as to be pinched together by the
help of screws, and a frame, that thereby they may be forced the closer and the
evener together, as there shall be occasion; and may be kept firm and steady in
that posture, and then, that it may some ways or other be conveniently fastened
to the former plate, so as to be moved this way or that way steadily, as there
shall be occasion.

But there are other substances which none of these ways I have yet mentioned
will examine, and those are such parts of animal or vegetable bodies as have a
peculiar form, figure, or shape, out of which if it be put, the principal thing
looked after is destroyed: such are the Nerves, Muscles, Tendons, Ligaments,
Membranes, Glandules, Parenchymas, etc. of the body of Animals, and the Pulps,
Piths, Woods, Barks, Leaves, Flowers, etc. of Vegetables. Some of these which
are not made by dissection or separation from other parts may be viewed alone;
but there are others which cannot be well examined unless they be made to swim
in a liquor proper and convenient for them: as for instance, the parts of
flesh, muscles and tendons: for if you view the fibers of a muscle encompassed
only with the air, you cannot discover the small parts out of which it is made:
but if the same be put into a liquor, as water, or very clear oil, you may
clearly see such a fabric as is truly very admirable, and such as none
hitherto has discovered that ever I could meet with; of which more hereafter,
when I show the true mechanical fabric thereof, and what causes its motion.
Thus if you view a thread of a Ligament, you shall plainly see it to be made up
of an infinite company of exceeding small threads smooth and round, lying close
together; each of which threads is not above a four hundredth part of the
bigness of a hair: for comparing those of Beef with a hair of my head, which
was very fine and small, viz. about a 640. part of an inch, I found the
Diameter thereof to be more than twenty times the Diameter of these threads; so
that no less than 163 millions, besides 840 thousands of these must be in a
ligament one inch square. I shall not here enlarge upon the admirable
contrivance of Nature in this particular, nor say any thing farther of the
reason of the greater strength of the same substance drawn into smaller than
into greater threads; but only this in general, that the mechanical operations
of these minute bodies are quite differing from those of bodies of greater
bulk, and the want of considering this one thing has been the cause of very
great absurdities in the Hypotheses of some of our more eminent modern
Philosophers: For he that imagines the actions of these lesser bodies the same
with those of the larger and tractable bodies, will indeed make but Aristotle's
wooden hand at best. This put me in mind likewise of advertising the
Experimenter that he provide himself with instruments, by which, to stretch and
pull in pieces any substance whilst the same is yet in view of the Microscope,
of which there may be many which any one will easily contrive, when he has
this hint given him of the usefulness thereof in the examination of the texture
of several substances; as of Tendons, Nerves, Muscles, etc. those I have made
use of were made to open like a pair of Tobacco Tongues, by two angular plates
of thin brass rivetted together, which by pinching the opposite end, would
either open or shut at the other, as I had occasion. These having a part
extended between the two tops, were fixed at a due distance from the
object-glass that the body extended between them might be distinctly seen; then
with my finger squeezing together the opposite ends, the other ends opened, by
which means how the parts stretched and shrunk might be plainly discovered. Now
as this is of use for some kind of substances, so the two glass plates are for
others, and particularly for squeezing of several substances between them, so
as to break them in pieces, as those little Creatures in pepper-water, or the
Globules in blood, milk, phlegm, etc. whereby the parts within them may yet
farther be enquired into, as Mr. Leeuwenhoeck I find has done by his latest
Observations. Whether he makes use of this way, or some other, I know not.

Having thus given a description of the appurtenances, it remains that I come
to the description of the Microscope it self, which is the principal
instrument, and without which all the rest are insignificant.

The Microscopes then I design here to describe, are only of two kinds, either
single or double.

The single Microscope I call that which consists only of one glass, though
it have a double refracting superficies; and the double one I call that which
is compounded of two glasses, though it has for the most part a quadruple
refraction of the Rays.

The single Microscope then consists of one small lens so fastened into a
cell, that the eye may come conveniently to look through the middle part or
Axis of it; of these there are various sorts, as double Convexes, or plain
Convexes, or perfectly spherical.

I shall not need to describe the common lenses which are every where made use
of for this purpose, being plano-convexes of Spheres about half an inch
Diameter, save only this, that it is best to turn the plain side toward the
object, and the unequal to the eye: nor shall I say much concerning those double
Unequal Glasses, there being no great difficulty in the making or using of them;
but that the smaller the sphere is in which they are made, the nearer do they
bring the object to the eye; and consequently the more is the object magnified,
and the better and truer they are polisht in the Tool, the more clear and
distinct does the object appear, but to make any of a Sphere less than 1/10 of
an inch in Diameter is exceeding difficult, by reason that the glass becomes
too small to be tractable; and it is very difficult to find a cement that will
hold it fast whilst it be completed; and when it is polisht, it is exceeding
difficult to handle and put into its cell: besides, I have found the use of
them offensive to my eye, and to have much strained and weakened the sight,
which was the reason why I omitted to make use of them, though in truth they do
make the object appear much more clear and distinct, and magnify as much as
the double Microscopes: nay, to those whose eyes can well endure it, it is
possible with a single Microscope to make discoveries much better than with a
double one, because the colors which do much disturb the clear vision in
double Microscopes is clearly avoided and prevented in the single. The single
Microscope therefore which I shall here describe, as it is exceeding easy to
make, so is it much more tractable than the double Unequal glasses made the
common way by working them in a hollow Hemisphere with water and sand; for
those, supposing them made with all the accurateness imaginable, will be far
short from being so well polisht as these; and wanting the stem or handle which
these have, they are infinitely troublesome to remove, or place, or to cleanse
when there shall be occasion.

Take then a small rod of the clearest and cleanest glass you can procure, free
if possible from blebbs, sands, or veins; then by melting it in the flame of a
Lamp made with Spirit of Wine, or the cleanest and purest Sallet Oil, draw it
out into exceeding fine and small threads; then take a small piece of these
threads, and in the same flame of the aforesaid Lamp melt the end of it, till
you perceive it to run into a little ball or globule of the bigness desired;
then suffer it to cool, and handling it by the aforesaid thread of glass, which
is as it were a handle to it, fix it with a little wax upon the side of a thin
plate of Brass, Silver, or the like, that the middle of it may lie directly
over the middle of a small hole pricked through the said thin plate with a
needle: then holding this plate close to the eye, look through the said little
hole, and thereby you may also see very clearly through the aforesaid Globule,
fixed with wax on the side that is from the eye: if then either by a little
joynted arm, or by a little soft wax, and a needle, or a thin plate of Muscovy
glass, you fix the object you would examine; so that it may be at a due
distance from the said little Globule, you will perceive the minute parts
thereof very distinct. The focus of a sphere looked on by the naked eye, is
about half the radius of the sphere, without the superficies of it; but this is
varied much by the age of the eye that looks through it, by the imagination
also of the person, and by the differing specifique refraction of the glass
made use of.

By this means I have prodigiously magnified some small bodies, insomuch that I
have been able to see and distinguish the particles of bodies, not only a
million of times smaller than a visible point, but even to make those visible,
whereof a million of millions of them would hardly make the bulk of the
smallest visible sand; so prodigiously do these exceeding little Globules of
glass enlarge the prospect of humane sight into the more private recesses of
nature.

If the things to be viewed be liquors, they may be included either in those
little pipes of Mr Leeuwenhoeck I newly mentioned, or else they may be put upon
exceeding thin plates of Muscovy glass or Selenites, and the other side of the
plate may be made to touch the Globule, or at least be fixed at such distance,
as may make the parts of the liquor distinct: If you make use of a
Looking-glass plate to spread the liquor upon you would examine, you may turn
the liquor toward the Globule, and you may therein easily see all the parts
very distinctly, without at all hurting the prospect by the interposition of
the Muscovy glass; which though it be exceeding clear, especially if the plates
be very thin, yet has it some flaws, and some opacoufnesses in it, which do
somewhat cloud the prospect.

If further, you would have a Microscope with one single refraction, and
consequently capable of the greatest clearness and brightness that any one kind
of Microscopes can possibly be imagined susceptible of, when you have fixed one
of these little Globules as I have directed, and spread a little of the liquor
upon a piece of Looking-glass plate, then apply the said plate with the liquor,
next to the Globule, and gently move it close to the Globule, till the liquor
touch; which done, you will find the liquor presently to adhere to the Globule,
and still to adhere to it though you move it back again a little; by which
means, this liquor being of a specifique refraction, not much differing from
glass, the second refraction is quite taken off, and little or none left but
that of the unequal side of the Globule next the eye; by which means as much of
the inconvenience of refraction as is possible is removed, and that by the
easiest and most practicable expedient that can be desired. I could add various
other ways of making these Globular bodies both of glass and other substances
which will yet farther advance our prospect into nature, and are pleasant to
admiration; but those I shall yet reserve till I see what effects the
publishing of these may produce, and to the end to excite other persons to be
inquisitive into this matter: for let me assure them, very much more may yet be
done by a way I know, than by this I have here published. And I confess I have
very often wondered that no farther improvement had been made of this
Principle, since I published it in the year 1664. in the 20. page of my Preface
to Micrographia: for though some other reasons discouraged me from prosecuting
those enquiries, yet I hoped that others might long before this have carried it
much farther.

The only inconvenience in these kinds of Microscopes, is, that the object is
necessarily brought so near the glass, that none but such as are transparent,
and to be viewed by a through light are capable of examination by them: such
therefore are to be examined by the double Microscope; which, as it is
abundantly more tractable, so does it much less strain the eye; and from the
easiness of its use, when well fitted, is much more pleasant: and if ordered as
it ought, will magnify as much more than the common ones hitherto made, as
those did more than the naked eye.

Both these Microscopes I have directed Mr. Christopher Cock, in Long-Acre, how
to prepare, that such as will not trouble themselves in the making of them, may
know where to be accommodated with such as are good.

And of the improvement of this kind of Microscope, I see no limits, especially
as to the augmenting the visible appearance of such objects as are capable of
enduring the increase of light; for since it is demonstrable that light may be
augmented upon any one object fusceptible to any given degree, and that by the
double Microscope the image can be augmented to any assigned magnitude, what
but the difficulty of making all things correspondent should limit the power of
such an instrument. Now the making of this double Microscope, though it be
somewhat more difficult than of the single one, yet the tractableness thereof
when well fitted, and its easiness to be cleansed, and applied to use, makes
amends for the extraordinary charge, especially the situation of the object;
which being capable of any reasonable distance from the object glass, so as to
be fit for examination, makes it very desirable. Now as in all other mechanical
contrivances, that is best which is plainest, and most simple: so is it in
this, wherein nothing more is required, but two plano Unequal glasses, the one
for the object-glass, and the other for the eye-glass: the less the spheres of
the glasses be, the more do they magnify the object; and the thinner and
clearer the substance of them be, and the more exactly shaped, and the brighter
they are polisht, the clearer do they represent it; and the longer the glasses
are distant from each other, the more is the image magnified, caeteris paribus,
though indeed the same thing is performed by glasses of very differing
magnitudes, due proportions of all things about it being kept and observed. For
if as the distance of one object from the object-glass is to the distance of
another object from another object-glass, so the distance of the first image be
to the distance of the second image, the image in both must be equal: if
therefore this image be viewed with equal glasses the image must be equally
magnified at the bottom of the eye; so that in this way the object is capable
of a double way of augmenting, viz. first, the augmenting the figure in the
Tube, by the smallness of the object-Glass, and length of the Tube: and
secondly, by the augmenting that image in the bottom of the eye, and that is by
the Eye-glass; give therefore light enough to the object, and you may increase
the image at the bottom of the eye to what proportion you shall desire. And by
a way I shall shortly show, the objects may be perceived distinct, defined, and
colorless, as if seen by the naked eye. In all these ways the manner of
applying the light is very significant, and provided it be very strong, the
smaller the point be it proceeds from, the more distinctly does it exhibit
the difference of refraction in the transparent bodies viewed by it, and the
plainer will their parts be discovered: The light therefore of the Sun either
reflected from a Spherical Unequal body, or Spherical Concave body, the object
being placed beyond the focus, or Refracted through a Concave or through a
Unequal, if the object be placed beyond the focus, do exceedingly well. But
these with the help of a dark Room do yet better, the object being placed in a
Table against the Light, and all other Light screen'd from the Eye by the Dark
Room. Much the same thing is done by the Light of a Lamp or Candle in the
Night, which is indeed the most convenient Light, where Color is not so much
looked after.

Whilst this Discourse was Printing I casually met with a Treatise of P.
Cherubine, Printed at Paris, 1677. Entitled, LA VISION PERF AITE, ou les
concours des deux axes de la Vision en un sceul point de l'object; Wherein the
Author pretends amongst other things to have promoted Microscopes extremely by
so joining two together, as through them to see the same object distinct with
both the Eyes at once, and to see a large object all at one view, by which he
affirms to have discovered some mistakes and untruths in some of those figures
I have formerly published in my Micrography. But if he had pleased to have read
the Description as well as looked on the Figure, he might have been better
informed than by his Preface he would seem to be. I deny not but that there are
many failures in some of those draughts, some of my own and some of the gravers
committing. Humanum est. But those which he charges for such are not, as he
might have seen if he had made use of better glasses than those which he
describes, for they are so far short of equalling those I use, that I can
demonstrate from his own Description of them, that those I made use of did
magnify 10000 times more than that with which he pretends to have made these
great Discoveries. Nor is it any thing more than common to see as large an Area
as he mentions, with a glass that magnifies no more than his does. But I could
have showed him how he might see the whole Creature at once, and yet much more
magnify than that which I have described, nay though the Creature were twice
as big, and that with one Eye only, which is much to be preferred before that
with two. However I should be very glad to hear what Discoveries he does make
with his binocular Microscope more than was seen before. As also that he would
please to demonstrate the truth of Parallelogram prescribed for certain uses,
page of Dioptrique Oculaire, and in the Fourth Chapter of the Fourth Part of
this Book. But to digress no farther from what I was describing. I must add
that with both these kinds of Microscopes have I examined several substances;
as particularly the steepings of several grains and seeds in rainwater. And
though I have not yet found any one tincture more prolific than this of Pepper;
yet it is not the only tincture in which they do both breed and increase. I have
seen several sorts in the steeping of Wheat, Barley, Oats, Coffee, Anniseeds,
Pease, etc. some not above a third part of a hair in thickness; others not
above the twentieth part of the breadth of a hair, and some not more than a
thirtieth part of that breadth; so that no less than 900 of these least must go
to make an area as big as that of an hair cut transversly, and 27000 to make a
Cylinder as big as the hair of ones head, and of equal height with the Diameter
of that hair, which one may just call a visible point, and no more; few eyes
seeing things distinctly much smaller: Now the Diameter of a hair of my head
being by examination found but the 640 part of an inch, it follows that no less
than 19200 or to use a round sum about 20000 of them may lie in the length of
an inch, and consequently, that a circle an inch Diameter will be to the area
of one of these cut transversly as 400000000 to 1. four hundred millions to 1
and a Cylinder one inch Diameter, and one inch high, will be to one of these
mites, as 8000000000000 to one, eight millions of millions to one. If therefore
we compare the magnitude of one of these animals to the magnitude of other
creatures living in the water, we shall find that these will be found much
smaller in comparison to the body of an ordinary Whale, than the body of the
same Whale will be to the body of the whole Earth; which may prove an argument
for an anima mundi perhaps to some. But let every one make his own inferences,
and believe his own eyes, for they will make the best impression on his reason
and belief. Now if the Creature be so exceeding small, what must we think of
the Muscles, Joints, Bones, Shells, etc. certain it is, that the Mechanism by
which Nature performs the muscular motion is exceedingly small and curious, and
to the performance of every muscular motion in greater Animals at least, there
are not fewer distinct parts concerned than many millions of millions, and
these visible, as I shall hereafter show through a Microscope; and those that
conceive in the body of a muscle, little more curiosity of mechanism than in a
rope of the same bigness, have a very rude and false notion of it; and no
wonder if they have recourse to Spirits to make out the Phenomenon: but of this
hereafter more.

Further, I have examined the constitution of Blood, Milk, Phlegm, etc. and
found them much the same with what Mr. Leeuwenhoek has declared. A little fat
laid upon the glass plate whilst warm, melts, and becomes transparent, but
observed in a convenient posture against the light of a candle, etc. till it
congeals, and shrinks, make a pleasant fluid, and shows how considerably a
fluid and solid body do vary, and may give us a good hint to conjecture at the
reason of the swelling and greater lightness of Ice than of Water. The first
beginnings also of the shooting or crystallising of Sugar into rectangular
parallelipipeds, Alum, Salt, Vitriol, etc. are strangely surprising and
instructive, I could enumerate multitudes of these.

But (that I may not detain the Reader toolong in the perusal of these
anatomical descriptions of the minute and invisible parts of animal substances)
to ease both his eyes and imagination I shall proceed to acquaint him with some
Anatomical Observations more sensible, and which do seem more nearly to concern
us. And those are contained in the ensuing Discourse, being

A Relation communicated to me in a Letter by that ingenious and experienced
Surgeon Mr. James Young of Plymouth, in the beginning of January last, of
the fatal Symptoms caused by a Bullet swallowed into the Lungs.
SIR,
In the beginning of April, 1674. one Mr. Anthony Williamson of Liscard in
Cornwall, aged about 65 years, of a brisk, firm habit, became (after a too
liberal drinking of Cider) afflicted with the Colic, of which in four days he
cured himself, by swallowing two Musket Bullets, and receiving some Carminative
Clysters. On the 12. of the same month, his pain returning somewhat smarter
than before, he attempted to swallow three Pistol Shot, and supposing it the
easiest way, he lay on his back, and threw them all at once into his throat;
where they choking, had almost strangled him; constraining him to vomit, etc.
When they were past down, he became seized immediately with a violent Cough,
Wheasing, pain in the left side of his Breast, a great noise in respiration,
more especially after a fit of Coughing, for then his Breast would hiss, like
the sucking of a Pump, when the Air descends through the boxes.

These accidents so suddenly occurring, without any manifest cause, did much
surprise him, and the more, because he was naturally of a sound breast; the
Colic was cured by Clysters, Potions of Manna, ol.amyg.d. etc. and two of the
Shot were soon ejected, ex ano, and maugre the other accidents, he became
indifferently well, and able to walk about house.

Five or six weeks after this, those symptoms became more fierce, depaupering
his spirits, prostrating his appetite, disquieting his sleep with dreams, a
Dyspnoea, and rutling violent Cough; a straitness and load in his Breast kept
him in bed, extenuated his body (which without help of Milk Clysters, was
costive) he frequently fainted with sweats, and a tickling sleepiness in both
legs.

Under the tyranny of this legion of symptoms, our Western Apollo, Dr. Bidgood
of Exeter was consulted, who affirmed them all to be caused by the remaining
Bullet, which passing through the Larynx, was fallen into one of the branches
of the Trachea, where it would abide, in despite of any endeavors to eject
it: yet to alleviate the violence of the accidents, he directed to the use of
emollient Eclegma's, temperate Cordials, etc. by help of which, and some other
propitious circumstances, he not only recovered his legs, becoming able to
walk, and ride a small Journey, but also consummated Marriage with a young
woman of 25 -- who afterward brought him two Children, whereof one is now
alive, and very lusty; and was seven months gone with a third, when he died:
the more wonderful if the woman were just to him (of which there appears no
reason to doubt) because a very little motion would so increase his difficulty
of breathing, as to make him faint.

After Matrimony he had diverse lucid Intervals, at times would be very brisk,
and at others very languid, and faint, like a dying man: he continually
expectorated, sometimes grumous coagulated Blood, otherwhiles very recent; now
purulent foetid matter, then laudable pus. His natural aversion to Medicine
caused him to reject what was advised by Dr. Bidgood, Dr. Lower, Dr. Sprage,
etc. saving a few of the more slight mixtures: And although Sack had been
formerly very familiar to him, he was now forced to shun it, and all strong
Drinks, because they would infallibly produce a Cardialgia, a pulsant throbbing
of the Heart, and laboring in his Breast: the first of these perhaps proceeded
from his Constitution, which inclined to Choler; but the latter undoubtedly,
from the effervescency, and warm motion, to which it enforced the Blood, which
the obstruction and pressure the Bullet occasioned in the Pneumatick organs,
could not peaceably admit of: wherefore he resolutely fixed to small Drink, and
shunned, as much as possible, all evitable Exercise, saving that of his hands,
which he frequently employed in making Network.

In the Year 1676. he applied himself to our ingenious and learned Countryman,
Dr Mayow of Bath, who agreed with Dr. Bidgood, that the remaining Bullet
lodging in the Lungs, was the occasion of all those ill symptoms under which
he labored; but seemed to dissent from his presage, by hoping he might
expectorate it: to atchieve which, he directed to have the body suspended head
downwards, and fumes of Storax, Benjamin, etc. to induce expulsive Coughing,
together with concussions of the body, and all preceded with an opening course,
to relax, and dilate the vessels of the Breast; all which were used to no
purpose, save to verify Dr. Bidgoods Prognostic, that no efflation, how
violent soever, would be able to extrude it, and inhaunce the Patients despair
of being ever cured; from which time he never attempted it: so that those
symptoms before mentioned, continuing until the Winter, and then gaining
considerably on him, especially the Haemoptysis, etc. he languished till the
ninth of December last, and then died.

The tenth Ditto (assisted by his Son-in-law) I opened the Thorax, in presence
of two other Chirurgions of the place, together with diverse persons of Quality,
whose curiosity led them to see the examination; because the Bullets being
there, was so much doubted by many, and disputed as impossible by others. In
the dissection the following particulars were observable,

The Body was extenuate and tabid,

The right lobes of the Lungs were replete, sound, and well colored.

The Serum in the Pericardium was almost all absumed,

The Heart strangely shrivelled and very small.

Under the Pericardium (the Body being supine) we found a lump of coagulated
Blood, as big as a Pigeons Egg; near which lay also a substance, shaped like an
obtuse headed muscle, having a Tendon-like tail, which insinuated to the
Pendant Lobe: Its body was above an half inch thick. Its other dimensions and
shape exactly like that of the figure X, of which A shows the head or upper
end, B the tail, which in drawing out of the rotten Lungs (being also
corrupted) broke asunder. Its Texture seemed fibrous, like that of the Kidneys,
being white one half way through, the rest of a dark red: it was very soft and
plum, having a firm smooth tegument, and felt very much like a Sheeps kidney.

The left Lobe of the Lungs was cadaverous, and hollow, by an abscess which had
discharged near a pint of very foetid and purulent matter, into that side of
the trunk where it lay immured up, by the adhesion of the Lungs on that side,
to the Pleura, which with the Diaphragma, as far as the matter extended, was
livid, and eroded.

We examined this rotten part of the Lungs, with what exactness and curiosity
we were capable of, amidst such a crowd as were present; and the more
troublesome stench of the Cadaver; and found though the whole Parenchyma were
rotten, and no firmer than coagulated Blood (with which it had very near
resemblance) yet the branches of the Trachea continued into it were incorrupt,
and sound; nor in any of them could we find what we very confidently presumed
to be there, viz. the Bullet.

Wherefore I resolved to seek it the way by which it must have entered; and
accordingly dividing the Trachea at its insertion to the Lungs, I thrust in a
bended Probe to the left branch, and there felt him, lying loose about two
inches within it, which with my fingers I easily expressed at the divided end
of the pipe: to do which, I laid it bare so far as where the Bullet had lodged;
and I protest, to my wonder, I found it not any way injured, or altered, by
hardness, erosion, etc. though the Bullet had diverse impressions from the later.

The sanguiferous vessels, though lacerated, and cut in the dissection, did
yield little or no Blood, either fluid or coagulate.

Thus far is true History, and matter of fact; I must now beg your pardon, if I
presume to give my sense, and apprehension of some of those Phenomenon here
related.

The extenuation of the body, the absumption of the serum in the Heart-bag, and
the contraction of the Heart, were the effects of the Tabes; and that
occasioned by the Bullets injuring the Lungs, and pectoral vessels.

The lump of coagulate blood found under the Heart-bag was extravasate from the
rotted veins, and arteries of the Lungs.

That strange substance lodged between the Pericardium, and the Bullet, was
either a Polypus, and the excrescence of some part, or it was generated by
nature, and substituted for a cushion to defend the Heart from injury, by so
uneasy a neighbor. That Polypuses have been found in the Heart, is affirmed
by Nicolas Tulpius, Marcellus Malpighius, G. Garnarus, etc. but their shape and
texture differing vastly from that of ours, gives reason to believe this to be
none; especially considering that they all excrescing from the Heart, or some
carneous part, are inseparably united and radicated to their original, and are
spungy; whereas this was nothing less, having no root, nor so much as an
adhesion any where, saving at the tail; the small end of which, being rotted by
the Lungs, into which it continued, did easily divide upon my endeavor to draw
it out: the body of it also lay loose in the aforesaid interstice, and as
easily slipped out, as a Wen, or a Struma, when the containing parts are
opened. Its substance was not fungous, but of a soft firmness, like a Kidney;
and in what ever circumstances it may resemble a Polypus, as it does the figure
of that of the Nose, vide N. Tulpii oh.med.lib. 1. obs. 26. yet it also differs
from all other excrescences crescences, besides, in what has been mentioned,
in that it was not rooted in any fleshy, bony, or musculous part; and such the
Lungs are well known not to be: it must therefore be the strupendious effect of
Natures industry, and laid as a cushion to defend the Heart, etc. Its
composition being so delicately soft, and yet firm enough for such a purpose:
Its magnitude, situation, etc. concurring also to confirm this opinion
concerning it; besides which, I do almost remember, and believe (though I
cannot be positive) that the pulsant pain he had so violently in his Breast,
toward the left side, decreased gradatim, from the time of the deglutition: if
that be true, whatever the substance were, or its cause, its effects were very
propitious, manifesting nature to be, not only a diligent supplier of her own
defects, but as industrious to produce strange and unaccountable relief, in
such emergencies as this before us: A resembling story we have from A Pareus,
lib. 8. cap. 15.

The abscess was without doubt from a Phlegmon of the Lungs; and because for
the most part it was below, or beyond the Bullet, it proceeded rather from its
obstructing, and so stagnating the Blood, and recrements in that Lobe, than
from extravasation. What occurred of the latter, was expectorated, or remained
in such Coagulums as that found under the Heart.

The cause of the Bullets falling, rather into the left than the right Ramus of
the Trachea, is obvious from the more supine and direct figure thereof,
corresponding with the trunk, as the figure does manifest: which consideration,
together with the Bullets being loose in the pipe, renders the unsuccessfulness
of Dr. Mayow's attempt very wonderful: I am inclined to believe it was so,
either for want of a more early trial, or a more skilful tryer, than him who
was employed about it. The way was ingeniously contrived, and (as the Doctor
himself told me) had been successfully experienced in the like occasion.
Certainly, had not the distance of the Doctors abode, and very important
avocations, denied his personal assistance: or had any other person skilled in
Anatomy, etc. been substituted, the Bullet from his own favorable shape, and
more propitious gravity, and particularly from the strong efflations they
provoked, together with the assistant posture of the body, would have been
extruded. Had they instead of hanging him perpendicular, made him incline a
little to the right side, to have made the left Ramus more prone; and at the
same time made him distend the pipes by sucking in as much breath as they could
contain, their other means might have been effectual; which I am induced to
presume from the prosperous effects of the like attempt, and yet wanting many
of their advantages; I mean the reversion of a Stone, when sticking, and not
able, to pass through the Urinary Channels. Let any Physicians seriously
perpend the difficulty of this, with the advantages for the former, and they
will justify my opinion.

The erosion of the Pleura, and Diaphragme, was from the acidity of the matter,
gnawing and corrupting them; for though the Trachea wonderfully escaped such
impressions, the Bullet discovered on its superficies, diverse marks of erosion,
which all acids produce with much facility, upon the saccharous or saline parts
of Lead; as is to be seen by immersing it in vinegar.

And now Sir, to relieve your patience (no less than my own) perhaps already
wearied with the prolixity of this Narrative, give me leave to conclude, with
suggesting, that I am of a belief (having perused most of the public accounts
of this kind) that scarcely a rarer accident, and accompanied with such
stupendous circumstances, has occurred to the present age than this; that an
extraneous body, so large, so heavy, so hard, should slip down that difficult,
and unusual way of the Weason, and abide so long in the organs of respiration,
in so aged a person, admitting after it such exercises, as he performed,
Riding, Marriage, etc. that nature should so unaccountably provide such a
pertinent fence against injuries accidentally accruing, and that even the
smallest Ramifications of the Trachea, though immersed in such a Cadaver,
should be preserved from injury thereby. I am sure in the voluminous
Observations of Schenckius, Horstius, Riverius, Bartholine, Burnet, etc. nor
among all the stories in Mr. Oldenburg's Transactions, or the Miscellanea
Curiosa of the Leipswick Doctors, has it a Parallel.

This, and whatever is else contained in this History, as my (...), I submit to
the better sense, and reason of the Learned, not presuming to be positive in
any thing, save in affirming my self, etc.

JAMES YOUNG.
P. S.

For the plainer understanding where the Bullet lodged in the Windpipe, I have
drawn and sent you an exact figure of the Trachea, excarnified; as its to be be
found in Gerrard Blassius, Syntagma Anatomicum J. Veslingi. See figure Y in the
III. Table.

C points to the Trachea divided under the Larynx.

D the right Ramus of the Trachea. E the left.

F the place where the Lungs adhered to the Pleura.

g g g, etc. the extremities of those branches of the

Aspera arteria, divaricated into the rotten Lobe.

H the Bullet in the pipe where it was found.




ERRATA.
PAge 1. line 17. foot. p. 2. l. 6. joined, p. 8. l. 21. Cete, p. 11. l. 5. is
diffused, p. 11. l. 17. Fostor, p. 12. l. 33. within the sphere of its
activity, p. 12. l. 34. dele as, p. 14. l. 8. either, p. 19. l. 7. common
sights, p. 22. l. 31. Auzout, p. 23. l. 19. been produced, p. 24. l. 27. add
see fig. 4. p. 27. l. 5. of this orb, p. 27. l. 21. m, p. 28. l. 27. sixth
figure, p. 29. l. 18. and perige, p. 29 l. 25. B, B, E. ib. l. 26, 27. H, H, I.
p. 31. l. 9. for (.) put(,) p. 32. l. 28. stream of bubbles, p. 35. l. 29. add
fig. 9. p. 38. l. 28. to get out of, l. 34. of finding the, p. 46. l 31.
Baldwines p. 49. l. 17. downwards shall touch, p. 54. l. 26. Scolopendra, p. 69
l. ult. Suns phase, p. 71. l. 25. for 43 put 34, p. 83. l. 8. to my wonder, p.
93. l. 3. blot out first, p. 96. l. 14. plano connexes, p. 101. l. 22. for
table put tube, p. 101. l. 30. Seul, p. 102. l. 17. magnified, l. 23. the
parallelogram, l. 24, page 241, p. 104. l. 6. for fluid put field.

Potentia Restitutiva, OR SPRING.
THe Theory of Springs, though attempted by diverse eminent Mathematicians of
this Age has hitherto not been Published by any. It it now about eighteen years
since I first found it out, but designing to apply it to some particular use, I
omitted the publishing thereof.

About three years since His Majesty was pleased to see the Experiment that
made out this Theory tried at White Hall, as also my Spring Watch.

About two years since I printed this Theory in an Anagram at the end of my
Book of the Descriptions of Helioscopes, viz. ceiiinosssttuu, id est, Vt tensio
sic vis; That is, The Power of any Spring is in the same proportion with the
Tension thereof: That is, if one power stretch or bend it one space, two will
bend it two, and three will bend it three, and so forward. Now as the Theory is
very short, so the way of trying it is very easy.

Take then a quantity of even-drawn Wire, either Steel, Iron, or Brass, and
coyl it on an even Cylinder into a Helix of what length or number of turns you
please, then turn the ends of the Wire into Loops, by one of which suspend this
coyl upon a nail, and by the other sustain the weight that you would have to
extend it, and hanging on several Weights observe exactly to what length each
of the weights do extend it beyond the length that its own weight does stretch
it to, and you shall find that if one ounce, or one pound, or one certain
weight does lengthen it one line, or one inch, or one certain length, then two
ounces, two pounds, or two weights will extend it two lines, two inches, or two
lengths; and three ounces, pounds, or weights, three lines, inches, or lengths;
and so forwards. And this is the Rule or Law of Nature, upon which all manner
of Restituent or Springing motion does proceed, whether it be of Rarefaction,
or Extension, or Condensation and Compression.

Or take a Watch Spring, and coyl it into a Spiral, so as no part thereof may
touch another, then provide a very light wheel of Brass, or the like, and fix
it on an arbor that has two small Pivots of Steel, upon which Pivot turn the
edge of the said Wheel very even and smooth, so that a small silk may be coyled
upon it; then put this Wheel into a Frame, so that the Wheel may move very
freely on its Pivots; fasten the central end of the aforesaid Spring close to
the Pivot hole or center of the frame in which the Arbor of the Wheel does
move, and the other end thereof to the Rim of the Wheel, then coyling a fine
limber thread of silk upon the edge of the Wheel hang a small light scale at
the end thereof fit to receive the weight that shall be put thereinto; then
suffering the Wheel to stand in its own position by a little index fastened to
the frame, and pointing to the Rim of the Wheel, make a mark with Ink, or the
like, on that part of the Rim that the Index points at; then put in a dram
weight into the scale, and suffer the Wheel to settle, and make another mark on
the Rim where the Index does point; then add a dram more, and let the Wheel
settle again, and note with Ink, as before, the place of the Rim pointed at by
the Index; then add a third dram, and do as before, and so a fourth, fifth,
sixth, seventh, eighth, etc. suffering the Wheel to settle, and marking the
several places pointed at by the Index, then examine the Distances of all those
marks, and comparing them together you shall find that they will all be equal
the one to the other, so that if a dram does move the Wheel ten degrees, two
drachms will move it twenty, and three thirty, and four forty, and five fifty,
and so forwards.

Or take a Wire string of twenty, or thirty, or forty foot long, and fasten the
upper part thereof to a nail, and to the other end fasten a Scale to receive
the weights: Then with a pair of Compasses take the distance of the bottom of
the scale from the ground or floor underneath, and set down the said distance,
then put in weights into the said scale in the same manner as in the former
trials, and measure the several stretchings of the said string, and set them
down. Then compare the several stretchings of the said string, and you will
find that they will always bear the same proportions one to the other that the
weights do that made them.

The same will be found, if trial be made, with a piece of dry wood that will
bend and return, if one end thereof be fixed in a horizontal posture, and to the
other end be hanged weights to make it bend downwards.

The manner of trying the same thing upon a body of Air, whether it be for the
rarefaction or for the compression thereof I did about fourteen years since
publish in my Micrographia, and therefore I shall not need to add any further
description thereof.

Each of these ways will be more plainly understood by the explanations of the
annexed figures.

The first whereof does represent by A B the coyl or helix of Wire, C the end
of it, by which it is suspended, D the other end thereof, by which a small
Scale E is hanged, into which putting Weights as F G H I K L M N, singly and
separately they being in proportion to one another as 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8, the
Spring will be thereby equally stretched to o, p, q, r, s, t, u, w, that is, if
F stretch it so as the bottom of the Scale descend to o, then G will make it
descend to p, H to q, I to r, K to s, L to t, M to u, and N to w, etc. So that
x o shall be one space, x p, 2, x q, 3, x r, 4, x s, 5, x t, 6, x u, 7, x w, 8.

The second figure represents a Watch Spring coyled in a Spiral by C A B B B D,
whose end C is fixed to a pin or Axis immovable, into the end of which the Axis
of a small light Wheel is inserted, upon which it moves; the end D is fixed to
a pin in the Rim of the Wheel y y y y, upon which is coyled a small silk, to
the end of which is fixed a Scale to receive the weights. To the frame in which
these are contained is fixed the hand or Index z; then trying with the former
weights put into the Scale E, you will find that if F put into the Scale E
sinks the bottom of it x to o, then G will sink it to p, and H to q, I to r, K
to s, L to t, and z will point at 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 on the Wheel.

The trials with a straight wire, or a straight piece of wood laid Horizontal
are so plain they need not an explication by figure, and the way of trying upon
Air I have long since explained in my Micographia by figures.

From all which it is very evident that the Rule or Law of Nature in every
springing body is, that the force or power thereof to restore it self to its
natural position is always proportionate to the Distance or space it is removed
therefrom, whether it be by rarefaction, or separation of its parts the one
from the other, or by a Condensation, or crowding of those parts nearer
together. Nor is it observable in these bodies only, but in all other springy
bodies whatsoever, whether Metal, Wood, Stones, baked Earths, Hair, Horns,
Silk, Bones, Sinews, Glass, and the like. Respect being had to the particular
figures of the bodies bended, and the advantageous or disadvantagious ways of
bending them.

From this Principle it will be easy to calculate the several strength of
Bows, as of Long Bows or Cross-Bows, whether they be made of Wood, Steel,
Horns, Sinews, or the like. As also of the Balistae or Catapultae used by the
Ancients, which being once found, and Tables thereof calculated, I shall anon
show a way how to calculate the power they have in shooting or casting of
Arrows, Bullets, Stones, Grenades, or the like.

From these Principles also it will be easy to calculate the proportionate
strength of the spring of a Watch upon the Fusey thereof, and consequently of
adjusting the Fusey to the Spring so as to make it draw or move the Watch
always with an equal force.

From the same also it will be easy to give the reason of the Isochrone motion
of a Spring or extended string, and of the uniform sound produced by those
whose Vibrations are quick enough to produce an audible sound, as likewise the
reason of the sounds, and their variations in all manner of sonorous or
springing Bodies, of which more on another occasion.

From this appears the reason, as I shall show by and by, why a Spring applied
to the balance of a Watch does make the Vibrations thereof equal, whether they
be greater or smaller, one of which kind I showed to the right Honorable the
Lord Viscount Brounker, the Honorable Robert Boil Esquire; and Sir Robert Morey
in the year 1660. in order to have gotten Letters Patents for the use and
benefit thereof.

From this it will be easy to make a Philosophical Scale to examine the weight
of any body without putting in weights, which was that which I mentioned at the
end of my description of Helioscopes, the ground of which was veiled under this
Anagram, c e d i i n n o o p s s s t t u u, namely, Vt pondus sic tensio. The
fabric of which see in the three first figures.

This Scale I contrived in order to examine the gravitation of bodies toward
the Center of the Earth, viz. to examine whether bodies at a further distance
from the Center of the Earth did not lose somewhat of their power or tendency
toward it. And propounded it as one of the Experiments to be tried at the top
of the Pike of Teneriff, and attempted the same at the top of the Tower of St.
Paul's before the burning of it in the late great Fire; as also at the top and
bottom of the Abbey of St. Peter's in Westminster though these being by but small
distances removed from the Surface, I was not able certainly to perceive any
manifest difference. I propounded the same also to be tried at the bottom and
several stations of deep Mines; and D. Power did make some trials to that end,
but his Instruments not being good, nothing could be certainly concluded from
them.

These are the Phenomena of Springs and springy bodies, which as they have not
hitherto been by any that I know reduced to Rules, so have all the attempts for
the explications of the reason of their power, and of springiness in general,
been very insufficient.

In the year 1660. I printed a little Tract, which I called, An Attempt for the
explication of the Phenomena, etc. of the rising of water in the pores of very
small Pipes, Filtres, etc. And being unwilling then to publish this Theory, as
supposing it might be prejudicial to my design of Watches, which I was then
procuring a Patent for, I only hinted the principle which I supposed to be the
cause of these Phenomenon of springs in the 31 page thereof in the English
Edition, and in the 38 page of the Latin Edition, translated by M. Behem, and
printed at Amsterdam, 1662. But referred the further explication thereof till
some other opportunity.

The Principles I then mentioned I called by the names of Congruity and
Incongruity of bodies. And promised a further explanation of what I thereby
meant on some other occasion. I shall here only explain so much of it as
concerns the explication of this present Phenomenon.

By Congruity and Incongruity then I understand nothing else but an agreement
or disagreement of Bodies as to their Magnitudes and motions.

Those Bodies then I suppose congruous whose particles have the same Magnitude,
and the same degree of Velocity, or else an harmonical proportion of Magnitude,
and harmonical degree of Velocity. And those I suppose incongruous which have
neither the same Magnitude, nor the same degree of Velocity, nor an harmonical
proportion of Magnitude nor of Velocity.

I suppose then the sensible Universe to consist of body and motion.

By Body I mean somewhat receptive and communicative of motion or progression.
Nor can I have any other Idea thereof, for neither Extention nor Quantity,
hardness nor softness, fluidity nor fixedness, Rarefaction nor Densation are
the proprieties of Body, but of Motion or somewhat moved.

By Motion I understand nothing but a power or tendency progressive of Body
according to several degrees of Velocity.

These two do always counterballance each other in all the effects,
appearances, and operations of Nature, and therefore it is not impossible but
that they may be one and the same; for a little body with great motion is
equivalent to a great body with little motion as to all its sensible effects in
Nature.

I do further suppose then that all things in the Universe that become the
objects of our senses are compounded of these two (which we will for the
present suppose distinct essences, though possibly they may be found hereafter
to be only differing conceptions of one and the same essence) namely, Body, and
Motion. And that there is no one sensible Particle of matter but owes the
greatest part of its sensible Extension to Motion whatever part thereof it ows
to Body according to the common notion thereof: Which is, that Body is somewhat
that does perfectly fill a determinate quantity of space or extension so as
necessarily to exclude all other bodies from being comprehended within the same
Dimensions.

I do therefore define a sensible Body to be a determinate Space or Extension
defended from being penetrated by another, by a power from within.

To make this the more intelligible, Imagine a very thin plate of Iron, or the
like, a foot square, to be moved with a Vibrative motion forwards and backwards
the flat ways the length of a foot with so swift a motion as not to permit any
other body to enter into that space within which it Vibrates, this will compose
such an essence as I call in my sense a Cubick foot of sensible Body, which
differs from the common notion of Body as this space of a Cubick foot thus
defended by this Vibrating plate does from a Cubick foot of Iron, or the like,
throughout solid. The Particles therefore that compose all bodies I do suppose
to owe the greatest part of their sensible or potential Extension to a
Vibrative motion.

This Vibrative motion I do not suppose inherent or inseparable from the
Particles of body, but communicated by Impulses given from other bodies in the
Universe. This only I suppose, that the Magnitude or bulk of the body does make
it receptive of this or-that peculiar motion that is communicated, and not of
any other. That is, every Particle of matter according to its determinate or
present Magnitude is receptive of this or that peculiar motion and no other, so
that Magnitude and receptivity of motion seems the same thing: To explain this
by a similitude or example. Suppose a number of musical strings, as A B C D E,
etc. tuned to certain tones, and a like number of other strings, as a, b, c, d,
e, etc. tuned to the same sounds respectively, A shall be receptive of the
motion of a, but not of that of b, c, nor d; in like manner B shall be
receptive of the motion of b, but not of the motion of a, c or d. And so of the
rest. This is that which I call Congruity and Incongruity.

Now as we find that musical strings will be moved by Unisons and Eighths, and
other harmonious chords, though not in the same degree; so do I suppose that
the particles of matter will be moved principally by such motions as are
Unisons, as I may call them, or of equal Velocity with their motions, and by
other harmonious motions in a less degree.

I do further suppose, A subtle matter that incompasseth and pervades all other
bodies, which is the Menstruum in which they swim which maintains and continues
all such bodies in their motion, and which is the medium that conveys all
Homogenious or Harmonical motions from body to body.

Further I suppose, that all such particles of matter as are of a like nature,
when not separated by others of a differing nature will remain together, and
strengthen the common Vibration of them all against the differing Vibrations of
the ambient bodies.

According to this Notion I suppose the whole Universe and all the particles
thereof to be in a continued motion, and every one to take its share of space
or room in the same, according to the bulk of its body, or according to the
particular power it has to receive, and continue this or that peculiar motion.

Two or more of these particles joined immediately together, and coalescing
into one become of another nature, and receptive of another degree of motion
and Vibration, and make a compounded particle differing in nature from each of
the other particles.

All bulky and sensible bodies whatsoever I suppose to be made up or composed
of such particles which have their peculiar and appropriate motions which are
kept together by the differing or dissonant Vibrations of the ambient bodies or
fluid.

According to the difference of these Vibrative motions of the Incompassing
bulks. All bodies are more or less powerful in preserving their peculiar shapes.

All bodies near the Earth are encompassed with a fluid subtle matter by the
differing Velocity of whose parts all solid bodies are kept together in the
peculiar shapes, they were left in when they were last fluid. And all fluid
bodies whatsoever are mixed with this fluid, and which is not extruded from
them till they become solid.

Fluid bulks differ from solids only in this, that all fluids consist of two
sorts of particles, the one this common Menstruum near the Earth, which is
interspersed between the Vibrating particles appropriated to that bulk, and so
participating of the motions and Vibrations thereof: And the other, by
excluding wholly, or not participating of that motion.

Though the particles of solid bodies do by their Vibrative motions exclude
this fluid from coming between them where their motions do immediately touch,
yet are there certain spaces between them which are not defended by the motion
of the particles from being pervaded by the Heterogeneous fluid menstruum.

These spaces so undefended by the bodies and Vibrative motion of the
particles, and consequently pervaded by the subtle incompassing Heterogeneous
fluid are those we call the insensible pores of bodies.

According to the bigness of the bodies the motions are, but in reciprocal
proportion: That is, the bigger or more powerful the body is, the slower is its
motion with which it compounds the particles; and the less the body is, the
swifter is its motion.

The smaller the particles of bodies are, the nearer do they approach to the
nature of the general fluid, and the more easily do they mix and participate of
its motion.

The Particles of all solid bodies do immediately touch each other; that is,
the Vibrative motions of the bodies do every one touch each other at every
Vibration. For explication, Let A B C represent three bodies, each of these
bodies I suppose to have a Vibrative motion on either side of it, A between D
and E, B between E and F, and C between F and G. I suppose then that B in every
one of its Vibrations does meet A at E, and C at F, and so the motions are
continually interchanged: That is, B communicates its motion to A at E, and A
at the same time and place communicates its motion to B, which returning to F
meets there with C, and communicates its received motion to C, which at the
same instant and place communicates its own motion to B, which returns it back
to E: So that the Velocity of these bodies is always the same, and each body
impresseth on the contiguous bodies such a determinate number of pulses within
a certain space of time. Suppose for instance, in every second of time B
communicates to A and to C one million of pulses, and has received as many
from each of them, by which means each of them does preserve its own space of
Vibration, according to the power of its Vibration, that neither of the
contiguous bodies can enter into it. The extreme particles A and C are
repercussed by the motion of the ambient Heterogeneous fluid, whereof though
the bodies are of differing magnitudes, yet the body and motion of the one are
equivalent to the body and motion of the other, so that whatever the body be
less, the motion is quicker; and where the body is bigger, the motion is less.
But the Particles of fluid bodies do not immediately touch each other, but
permit the mixture of the other Heterogeneous fluid near the Earth, which
serves to communicate the motion from particle to particle without the
immediate contact of the Vibrations of the Particles.

All solid Bodies retain their solidity till by other extraordinary motions
their natural or proper motions become intermixed with other differing motions,
and so they become a bulk of compounded motions, which weaken each others
Vibrative motions. So that though the similar parts do participate of each
others motions, whereby they endeavor to join or keep together, yet do they
also participate of an Heterogeneous motion which endeavors to separate or
keep them asunder. And according to the prevalency of the one or the other is
the body more or less fluid or solid.

All bodies whatsoever would be fluid were it not for the external
Heterogeneous motion of the Ambient.

And all fluid bodies whatsoever would be unbounded, and have their parts fly
from each other were it not for some prevailing Heterogeneous motion from
without them that drives them more powerfully together.

Heterogeneous motions from without are propagated within the solid in a direct
line if they hit perpendicular to the superficies or bounds, but if obliquely
in ways not direct, but different and deflected, according to the particular
inclination of the body striking, and according to the proportion of the
Particles striking and being struck.

All springy bodies whatsoever consist of parts thus qualified, that is, of
small bodies endued with appropriate and peculiar motions, whence every one of
these particles has a particular Bulk, Extension, or Sphere of activity which
it defends from the ingress of any other incompassing Heterogeneous body whilst
in its natural estate and balance in the Universe. Which particles being all of
the same nature, that is, of equal bodies, and equal motions, they readily
coalesce and join together, and make up one solid body, not perfectly every
where contiguous, and wholly excluding the above mentioned ambient fluid, but
permitting it in many places to pervade the same in a regular order, yet not so
much but that they do wholly exclude the same from passing between all the
sides of the compounding particles.

The parts of all springy bodies would recede and fly from each other were they
not kept together by the Heterogeneous compressing motions of the ambient
whether fluid or solid.

These principles thus hinted, I shall in the next place come to the particular
explication of the manner how they serve to explain the Phenomenon of springing
bodies whether solid or fluid.

First for solid bodies, as Steel, Glass, Wood, etc. which have a Spring both
inwards and outward, according as they are either compressed or dilated beyond
their natural state.



Let A B represent a line of such a body compounded of eight Vibrating
particles, as 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and suppose each of those Particles to
perform a million of single Vibrations, and consequently of occursions with
each other in a second minute of time, their motion being of such a Velocity
impressed from the Ambient on the two extreme Particles 1 and 8. First, if by
any external power on the two extremes 1 and 8, they be removed further
asunder, as to CD, then shall all the Vibrative Particles be proportionably
extended, and the number of Vibrations, and consequently of occursions be
reciprocally diminished, and consequently their endeavor of receding from each
other be reciprocally diminished also. For supposing this second Dimension of
Length be to the first as 3 to 2, the length of the Vibrations, and
consequently of occursions, be reciprocally diminished. For whereas I supposed
1000000 in a second of the former, here can be but 666666 in this, and
consequently the Spring inward must be in proportion to the Extension beyond
its natural length.

Secondly, if by any external force the extreme particles be removed a third
part nearer together than (the external natural force being always the same both
in this and the former instance, which is the balance to it in its natural
state) the length of the Vibrations shall be proportionably diminished, and the
number of them, and consequently of the occursions be reciprocally augmented,
and instead of 1000000, there shall be 1500000.

Having thus explained the most simple way of springing in solid bodies, it
will be very easy to explain the compound way of springing, that is, by
flexure, supposing only two of these lines joined together as at G H I K, which
being by any external power bended into the form L N N O, L M will be extended,
and N O will be diminished in proportion to the flexure, and consquently the
same proportions and Rules for its endeavor of restoring it self will hold.

In the next place for fluid bodies, amongst which the greatest instance we
have is air, though the same be in some proportion in all other fluid bodies.

The Air then is a body consisting of particles so small as to be almost equal
to the particles of the Heterogeneous fluid medium incompassing the earth. It
is bounded but on one side, namely, toward the earth, and is indefinitely
extended upward, being only hindered from flying away that way by its own
gravity, (the cause of which I shall some other time explain.) It consists of
the same particles single and separated, of which water and other fluids do,
conjoined and compounded, and being made of particles exceeding small, its
motion (to make its balance with the rest of the earthy bodies) is exceeding
swift, and its Vibrative Spaces exceeding large, comparative to the Vibrative
Spaces of other terrestrial bodies. I suppose that of the Air next the Earth in
its natural state may be 8000 times greater than that of Steel, and above a
thousand times greater than that of common water, and proportionably I suppose
that its motion must be eight thousand times swifter than the former, and above
a thousand times swifter than the later. If therefore a quantity of this body
be enclosed by a solid body, and that be so contrived as to compress it into
less room, the motion thereof (supposing the heat the same) will continue the
same, and consequently the Vibrations and Occursions will be increased in
reciprocal proportion, that is, if it be Condensed into half the space the
Vibrations and Occursions will be double in number: If into a quarter the
Vibrations and Occursions will be quadruple, etc.

Again, If the containing Vessel be so contrived as to leave it more space, the
length of the Vibrations will be proportionably enlarged, and the number of
Vibrations and Occursions will be reciprocally diminished, that is, if it be
suffered to extend to twice its former dimensions, its Vibrations will be twice
as long, and the number of its Vibrations and Occursions will be fewer by half,
and consequently its endeavors outward will be also weaker by half.

These Explanations will serve mutatis mutandis for explaining the Spring of
any other Body whatsoever.

It now remains, that I show how the constitutions of springy bodies being
such, the Vibrations of a Spring, or a Body moved by a Spring, equally and
uniformly shall be of equal duration whether they be greater or less.

I have here already showed then that the power of all Springs is proportionate
to the degree of flexure, viz. one degree of flexure, or one space bended has
one power, two has two, and three has three, and so forward. And every point
of the space of flexure has a peculiar power, and consequently there being
infinite points of the space, there must be infinite degrees of power.

And consequently all those powers beginning from naught, and ending at the
last degree of tension or bending, added together into one sum, or aggregate,
will be in duplicate proportion to the space bended or degree of flexure; that
is, the aggregate of the powers of the Spring tended from its quiescent posture
by all the intermediate points to one space (be it what length you please) is
equal, or in the same proportion to the square of one (supposing the said space
infinitely divisible into the fractions of one;) to two, is equal, or in the
same proportion to the square of two, that is four; to three is equal or in the
same proportion to the square of three, that is nine, and so forward; and
consequently the aggregate of the first space will be one, of the second space
will be three, of the third space will be five, of the fourth will be seven,
and so onwards in an Arithmetical proportion, being the degrees or excesses by
which these aggregates exceed one another.

The Spring therefore in returning from any degree of flexure, to which it has
been bent by any power receives at every point of the space returned an
impulse equal to the power of the Spring in that point of Tension, and in
returning the whole it receives the whole aggregate of all the forces
belonging to the greatest degree of that Tension from which it returned; so a
Spring bent two spaces in its return receives four degrees of impulse, that
is, three in the first space returning, and one in the second; so bent three
spaces it receives in its whole return nine degrees of impulse, that is, five
in the first space returned, three in the second, and one in the third.

So bent ten spaces it receives in its whole return one hundred degrees of
impulse, to wit, nineteen in the first, seventeen in the second, fifteen in the
third, thirteen in the fourth, eleven in the fifth, nine in the sixth, seven in
the seventh, five in the eighth, three in the ninth, and one in the tenth.

Now the comparative Velocities of any body moved are in subduplicate
proportion to the aggregates or sums of the powers by which it is moved,
therefore the Velocities of the whole spaces returned are always in the same
proportions with those spaces, they being both subduplicate to the powers, and
consequently all the times shall be equal.

Next for the Velocities of the parts of the space returned they will be always
proportionate to the roots of the aggregates of the powers impressed in every
of these spaces; for in the last instance, where the Spring is supposed bent
ten spaces, the Velocity at the end of the first space returned shall be as the
root of 19. at the end of the second as the Root of 36. that is, of 19+17. at
the end of the third as the Root of 51. that is of 19+17 +15. At the end of the
fourth as the Root of 64. that is of 19+17+15+13. at the end of the tenth, or
whole as the Root of 100. that is as ^, equal to 100.

Now since the Velocity is in the same proportion to the root of the space, as
the root of the space is to the time, it is easy to determine the particular
time in which every one of these spaces are passed for dividing the spaces by
the Velocities corresponding the quotients give the particular times.

To explain this more intelligibly, let A in the fourth figure represent the
end of a Spring not bent, or at least counterpoised in that posture by a power
fixed to it, and movable with it, draw the line A B C, and let it represent the
way in which the end of the Spring by additional powers is to be moved, draw to
the end of it C at right Angles the Line C d D d, and let C D represent the
power that is sufficient to bend or move the end of the Spring A to C, then
draw the Line D A, and from any point of the Line A C as B B. Draw Lines
parallel to C D, cutting the Line D A in E, E, the Lines B E, B E, will
represent the respective powers requisite to bend the end of the Spring A to B,
which Lines B E, B E, C D will be in the same proportion with the length of the
bent of the Spring A B, A B, A C.

And because the Spring has in every point of the Line of bending A C, a
particular power, therefore imagining infinite Lines drawn from every point of
A C parallel to C D till they touch the Line A D, they will all of them fill
and compose the Triangle A C D. The Triangle therefore A C D will represent the
aggregate of the powers of the Spring bent from A to C, and the lesser
Triangles A B E, A B E will represent the aggregate of all the powers of the
Spring bent from A to B, B, and the Spring bent to any point of the Line A C,
and let go from thence will exert in its return to A all those powers which are
equal to the respective ordinates B E, B E, in the Triangles, the sum of all
which make up the Triangles A B E, A B E. And the aggregate of the powers with
which it returns from any point, as from C to any point of the space C A as to
B B, is equal to the Trapezium C D E B, C D E B, or the excesses of the greater
Triangles above the less.

Having therefore shown an Image to represent the flexure and the powers, so as
plainly to solve and answer all Questions and Problems concerning them, in the
next place I come to represent the Velocities appropriated to the several
powers. The Velocities then being always in a subduplicate proportion of the
powers, that is, as the Root of the powers impressed, and the powers impressed
being as the Trapezium or the excess of the Triangle or square of the whole
space to be past above the square of the space yet unpassed; if upon the Center
A, and space A C, (C being the point from which the Spring is supposed let go)
a Circle be described as C G G F, and ordinates drawn from any point of C A the
space to be past, as from B, B, to the said Circle, as B G, B G, these Lines B
G, B G, will represent the Velocity of the Spring returning from C to B, B,
etc. the said ordinates being always in the same proportion with the Roots of
the Trapeziums C D E B, C D E B for putting A C=to a, and A B=b, B G will
always be equal to ^, the square of the ordinate being always equal to the
Rectangle of the intercepted parts of the Diameter.

Having thus found the Velocities, to wit, B G, B G, A F, to find the times
corresponding, on the Diameter A C draw a Parabola C H F whose Vertex is C, and
which passes through the point F. The Ordinates of this Parabola B H, B H, A
F, are in the same proportion with the Roots of the spaces C B, C B, C A, then
making G B to H B as H B to I B, and through the points C I I F drawing the
curve C I I I F, the respective ordinates of this curve shall represent the
proportionate time that the Spring spends in returning the spaces C B, C B, C A.

If the powers or stiffness of the Spring be greater than what I before
supposed, and therefore must be expressed by the Triangle C de A. then the
Velocities will be the Ordinates in an Ellipse as C g g N, greater than the
Circle, as it will also if the power be the same, and the bulk moved by the
Spring be less. Then will the S-like Line of times meet with the Line A F at a
point as X within the point F. But if the powers of the Spring be weaker than I
supposed, then will C d e e A represent the powers, and C g g O the Ellipsis of
Velocity, whose Ordinates B g, B g, A O will give the particular Velocities,
and the S-like Line of time will extend beyond N. The same will happen
supposing the body (moved by the Spring) to be proportionately heavy, and the
powers of the Spring the same with the first.

And supposing the power of the Spring the same as at first, bended only to B
2, and from thence let go B 2 E A is the Triangle of its powers, the Ordinates
of the Circle B g L are the Lines of its Velocity, and the Ordinates of the
S-like Line B i F are the Lives of time.

Having thus showed you how the Velocity of a Spring may be computed, it will
be easy to calculate to what distance it will be able to shoot or throw any
body that is moved by it. And this must be done by comparing the Velocity of
the ascent of a body thrown with the Velocity of the descent of Gravity,
allowance being also made for the Resistance and impediment of the medium
through which it passes. For instance, suppose a Bow or Spring fixed at 16 foot
above a Horizontal floor, which is near the space that a heavy body from rest
will descend perpendicularly in a second of time. If a Spring deliver the body
in the Horizontal line with a Velocity that moves it 16 foot in a second of
time, then shall it fall at 16 foot from the perpendicular point on the floor
over which it was delivered with such Velocity, and by its motion shall
describe in the Air or space through which it passes, a Parabola. If the Spring
be bent to twice the former Tension, so as to deliver the body with double the
Velocity in a Horizontal Line, that is, with a Velocity that moves 32 foot in a
second, then shall the body touch the floor in a point very near at 32 foot
from the aforesaid perpendicular point, and the Line of the motion of the body,
so shot shall be moved in a Parabola, or a Line very near it, I say very near
it, by reason that the Impediment of the medium does hinder the exactness of
it. If it be delivered with treble, quadruple, quintuple, sextuple, etc. the
first Velocity it shall touch the floor at almost treble, quadruple, quintuple,
sextuple, etc. the first distance. I shall not need to show the reason why it
is moved in a Parabola, it having been sufficiently demonstrated long since by
many others.

If the body be delivered by the Spring at the floor, but shot by some Angle
upwards, knowing withwhat Velocity the same is moved when delivered, and with
what Inclination to the Perpendicular the same is directed, and the true
Velocity of a falling body, you may easily know the length of the Jactus or
shot, and the time it will spend in passing that length.

This is found by comparing the time of its ascent with the time of the descent
of heavy bodies. The ascent of any body is easily known by comparing its
Velocity with the Angle of Inclination.

Let a b then in the fifth Figure represent 16 foot, or the space descended by
a heavy body in a second minute of time. If a body be shot from b, in the Line
b f with a Velocity as much swifter than that equal motion of 16 foot in a
second, as this Line b f is longer than a b the body shall fall at e; for in
the same space of time that the oblique equal motion would make it ascend from
b d to a c, will the accelerated direct motion downward move it from a c to b
d, and therefore at the end of the space of one second, when the motions do
equal and balance each other, the body must be in the same Horizontal Line in
which it was at first, but removed asunder by the space b e, and for the points
it passes through in all the intermediate spaces this method will determine it.

Let the Parallelogram a b p q then represent the whole Velocity of the ascent
of a body by an equal motion of 16 foot in a second, and the Triangle p q r
represent the whole Velocity of the accelerated descending motion, p b is then
the Velocity with which the body is shot, and p is the point of rest where the
power of Gravity begins to work on the body and make it descend. Now drawing
Lines parallel to a q r, as s t u, s t gives the Velocity of the point t
ascending, and t u the Velocity of the same point t descending.

Again, p b s t signifies the space ascended, and p t u the space descended, so
that subtracting the descent from the ascent you have the height above the Line
b d, the consideration of this, and the equal progress forwards will give the
intermediate Velocities, and determine the points of the Parabola.

Now having the Jactus given by this Scheme or Scale, appropriated to the
particular Velocity, wherewith any body is moved in this or that line of
Inclination, it will be easy to find what Velocity in any Inclination will
throw it to any length; for in any Inclination as the square of the Velocity
thus found in this Scale for any inclination is to the square of any other
Velocity, so is the distance found by this Scale to the distance answering to
the second Velocity.

I have not now time to enlarge upon this speculation, which would afford
matter enough to fill a Volume, by which all the difficulties about impressed
and received motions, and the Velocities and effects resulting would be easily
resolved.

Nor have I now time to mention the great number of uses that are and may be
made of Springs in Mechanic contrivances, but shall only add, that of all
springy bodies there is none comparable to the Air for the vastness of its
power of extention and contraction. Upon this Principle I remember to have seen
long since in Wadham College, in the Garden of the learned Dr. Wilkins, late
Bishop of Chester, a Fountain so contrived as by the Spring of the included Air
to throw up to a great height a large and lasting stream of water: Which water
was first forced into the Leaden Cistern thereof by two force Pumps which did
alternately work, and so condense the Air included into a small Room. The
contrivance of which Engine was not unknown to the Ancients, as Hero in his
Spiritalia does sufficiently manifest, nor were they wanting in applying it to
very good uses, namely, for Engines for quenching fire: As Vitruvius (by the
help of the Ingenious Monsieur Clande Perraults interpretation) has acquainted
us in the Twelfth Chapter of his Tenth Book, where he endeavors to describe
Ctesibius his Engine for quenching fire. Not long since a German here in
England has added a further improvement thereof by conveying the constant
stream of water through Pipes made of well tanned and liquored Leather, joined
together to any convenient length by the help of brazen Screws. By which the
stream of water may be conveyed to any convenient place through narrow and
otherwise inaccessible passages.

The ingenious Dr. Denis Pappin has added a further improvement that may be
made to this Ctesibian Engine by a new and excellent contrivance of his own for
making of the forcing Syringe or Pump, which at my desire he is pleased to
communicate to the Public by this following Description, which he sent me
some time since.



Dr. Pappins Letter containing a Description of a Wind-Fountain, and his own
particular contrivance about the forcer of its Syringe.
SInce the Artificial Fountain you have seen at Mr. Boyles (which was of my
making upon his desire) has been so pleasing to you as to make you desire to
see my description thereof, I cannot doubt but the same will be as grateful
also, and well received by the Public, especially when they shall therein find
a remedy for one of the greatest inconveniences of forcing Pumps, which are of
so great use for raising of water, and quenching of fires. This was the
occasion of my sending you this present description, which would not have been
thus prolix had it been only for your self.

In the Figure then A A is the Receptacle or body of the Fountain careful
sodered in all places, B B is the Pump, C C the Plug or forcer, D a Pipe in the
middle of the Plug, which is perfectly shut and stopped when the Plate E E is
forced down upon it, E E is the Plate with a hole in the middle, upon which is
sodered a Pipe F, which serves for a handle to move the Plug up and down.

G is a Cock at the top of the Pipe, which serves to moderate the Jetto or
stream.

H H is a Valve at the bottom of the Pump, which opens outward for the
passage of the water out of the Pump into the Fountain or Receptacle.

I I is a Cross at the top of the Plug to hinder the Plate E E from being drawn
or separated too far from the hole D in working it to and fro.

K K are two Pins serving both to force down and keep open the Valve H H.

L L are two Appendices sodered unto the top of the Pipe F F, serving both for
a handle to the Rod of the forcer, and also to keep down the forcer.

M M are two other appendices or buttons fastened at the top of the two small
pillars N N, so as to turn upon the same, and serve to hasp or button down the
ends LL of the handle of the forcer that it be not driven up again.

OO is the Basin for receiving the water that falls from the Jet or stream from
which it may be forced again into the Fountain or Receptacle.

For charging this Machine the Basin O O must first be filled with water, and
then the Pump must be worked to and fro. In doing of which, when the Plug is
drawn upwards the water in the Basin runs in through the cross (through which
the Rod F F passes,) where finding the hole Dopen it fills the spaces of the
bottom of the Pump; then the Pump being thus filled, the Plug is to be forced
downwards, whereby the Plate E E being closely applied to the brims of the hole
D hinders the water from returning back again through the same, but is forced
through the valve H H into the Fountain A A. And by repeating this operation
all the water of the Basin O O is easily forced into the aforesaid Fountain,
whereby all the Air that was therein contained is compressed more or less
according as more or less water is forced in, and kept in that compression by
the valve H H, which hinders the water that it cannot return through the same.

But when you desire to have it return, you force down the Plug hard against
the bottom or plate, which by the help of the aforesaid Pins or Appendices K K
force, and keep open the valve H H, and the Rod F being kept fast down in this
posture by the aforesaid Buttons or Hasps M M, upon opening the Cock G the
water returns through the valve H H, so kept open, through the hole D, and
through the whole length of the Pipe F.

This way of putting a valve into the Plug of forcing Pumps will be of great
use for all such as serve for supplying Towns with water, and for quenching of
fire, as preventing a great inconvenience to which the common Pumps are usually
subject from the Air which is apt to be generated within them, which Air upon
working the said Pump remaining below the forcer, and by its Expansion when the
Plug is drawn upwards, hindering the water from filling the whole Cavity beneath
it, and by its Condensation when the Plug is forced downwards, losing a great
part of the strength of the force, much of the effect of the said Machine is
frustrated.

For preventing of which Inconvenience care is to be taken that the water in
all these forcing Pumps be admitted by the top thereof as in the present
Machine, whereby whatever Air shall be generated below the Plug, will readily
rise into the hole D as being the highest place next the Plate E E, from whence
when by the drawing up of the Plug the Plate is lifted from the brims of the
hole D the Air will readily slip up, and the water as readily descend and fill
all the parts of the Pump below the Plug. As I have often experimented in this
present Machine.

Some Persons may object against these kind of valves, assupposing the pressure
of the water to be on the wrong side thereof. But it is easy to be noted that
this objection is groundless, since it is the same thing whether the Plate be
pressed against the Rim of the valve, or the Rim of the valve against the
plate. In common valves the Pressure of the water forces the Plate against the
Rim: But in this the Rim against the Plate; for the remaining solid Rim of the
valve, being made thrice as big as the hole or Cavity thereof, the pressure of
the water against that Rim forces the said Rim against the Plate in the middle
three times harder than if the pressure of the water lay only on the plate of
the value, the same would be pressed against the Rim.

To this Discourse of an Artificial Fountain I thought it not improper to add
an ingenious Discourse of M. James Young of Plymouth containing his own
Observations and Opinion concerning natural Fountains and Springs.
SIR,
HAving now gained time, from my other avocations, I have drawn up those
observations. I told you I had made in my travels, which had confirmed in me
the opinion of my Lord Bacon, that Fountains and Springs were the Percolation
of the Sea; not (as your self, Mr. Ray, etc. do assert) from the rains descent
into the Earth, I now represent them to your consideration, rather as an
Apology (because they seem rational) to excuse, than Arguments to justify and
avow the presumption of my dissent.

The first shall be the Phenomenon, I observed at Isle de Mayo, which lies in
the Torrid Zone, about thirteen degrees and 30 minutes, North from the Equator.
It Is about six Leagues long, and four broad, the wind blows constantly North
East, or thereabout, and without rain, except three weeks in July, when it has
many showers; I here send you a Map of the Island, as exactly as I could draw
it. I was there two Voyages, and each remained a full month, the best part of
which I spent in hunting, and ranging the Island; there runs through the
middle of it a Rivulet, of very pure water; It takes its rise Its aperans S S
W. from you about 6 Leagues distant.

from the bottom of two Hills, which lie on the North East end; The stream at
the place marked D, is about fourteen foot wide and two deep; other than which
there is no fresh water on the whole Island, except what our people dig out of
the sand between the Ocean and the salt Pond.

The said Pond is in a large Bay, at the West side of the Island, which has
from one point to another a bank of Sand, about two or three foot above water,
covering the Bay like a string to a Bow, the said bank in the Flemish Road is
about 150 foot wide, at the English Road it is as broad again; there is never
any sensible ebbing or flowing of the Sea, only at full Moons, or a day before.
It rises in high Billows, which break over the Bank, at the North end of the
Pond, where it is lowest: By which means the Pond is replenished with water,
which condenseth into Salt in two days.

The Sand dividing the said Pond and the Sea is very fine and loose. Now
because the beforementioned Rivulet disembogues far from the Roads at an
inconvenient place for Boats, they are constrained to dig Wells, in the midst
of the bank of Sand, between the Pickle of the salt Pond and the Sea, the
manner thus: They first dig a pit about eight foot deep, and therein lay two
Hogsheads, the one on the top of the other, the head out of both save the
lowermost of the deepest; the sides of both are also full of Gimlet holes, and
the sand laid close to them: After twenty four hours they have three or four
foot of very clean water in them, which being dipped out, you plainly see the
new water strain gently through those holes in the sides of the Cask: After
which, in a days time, one man attending it, may draw about ten Hogsheads or
more of water, a little tasting of Salt, not so much but that it is drinkable,
and very fit to boil meat in, and is used by those that come there to load
Cattle, for their common drink. I have in the Map placed the Sign O where our
Well was made.

The next observations, pertinent to this subject I made at the Island Lipari,
near Sicily, about sixteen Leagues from Messina; it is famous for the best
Raisins in the Mediterranean; there is on it a large Castle, a small Town, many
Vineyards, and about one hundred Families, besides some Religiose I judge it
wants a fifth part of the bigness of the Isle de Mayo, it is mostly very high
Land, especially one Mountain, on which stands a Watch Tower, whence a man may
see a monstrous distance at Sea, as is confirmed by de Ruyter. In the relation
he gives the States of Holland, wherein he tells them, that from that place
they discerned the French Fleet's approach long before they could from any
other part, either of their own or the other Island. I am sure it is much
higher than either that at the Isle de Mayo, or any I have seen in England, and
yet on this fair fruitful Island springs not one drop of water, the Inhabitants
storing themselves with rain, which falling very frequently, they are careful
to preserve in Cisterns, diverse essays have been made in the most promising
part of it to find Springs by digging Wells, one of those which I saw was
without doubt the deepest in Europe, I remember not the exact profundity as
they related it, but I have not forgot, that throwing in a stone it was long
ere it got to the bottom, and then returned such a noise as it had been the
discharge of a Musket.

The cause of this dryness was by the people thought to be subterranean heats,
absuming the water, but no such thing appearing, to the sense of those that
dug the Wells, I gave no faith to that persuasion; they fancy such heats
partly from the want of water, but mostly because the four adjacent Islands,
Stromboli, Vulcano, Vulcanella, and M. Aetna, are constantly burning, and very
near them.

The obvious earth of this place is loose, and in all apparent qualities very
good, but by the heaps that had been thrown up, in digging the Wells, I saw the
inferior earth was clammy, or like clay, that had some greasy gummous matter
commixed, This the Religious told me was the very kind of Sulphur which
constantly boiled out of the burning Cranny on Vulcanella; and where with all
those Islands abounded, not excepting their own, though it were not yet kindled.

For my third observation, I will go no farther than the place of my present
abode, Plimmouth, in which on a kind of Piazza, commonly called the New-key, (a
plat of ground got in from the Sea) is a Well, which (before the ever famous
Sir Francis Drake by cutting a Rivulet of thirty miles procured us water in
great plenty) was of common use, having (as at this day) a Pump in it; about
seven years since (being before the Key was enlarged) the Well was not above
eigh foot from the edge thereof, over which the Sea would frequently flow, when
a high outwind and a Spring Tide concurred, I say this Well, though so near the
Sea, yields clean water, and as sweet as a mixture of three parts fresh and
one of salt water would be. About an hundred yards from that, on ground a
little rising, is a very large Well, which supplieth three or four Brew-houses,
by whose drink it is evident that the water has not wholly quitted its salt.
It is to be noted, that Plimmouth lies on a Peninsula three miles long, and
two broad, the Isthmus about two thirds of a mile wide, and not very high from
the surface of a full Sea. There are many Wells in it, those near the Sea are
saltish, those farther from it the less so.

My fourth observation I take from the late famous French Traveller Monsieur
Taverner, who in his first Volume, discoursing of the Coast of Coromandel, etc.
he says they there want fresh water, and are constrained strained to make pits
of two foot deep in the sand by the Sea to find it.

The fifth observation, and which I would call the most significant, were I
assured of its truth, I had from a very ingenious Surgeon, who had used the
West Indias, that there is in that Sea an Island called Rotunda, of a figure
agreeable to its name, which, though very small, has on it, arising in the
middle, a Spring of a very large stream of water, at which our Ships frequently
furnish themselves in their Navigation, he affirmed that it raineth there but
once a year, as at the Isle de Mayo; saying withal, that the Island is so short
of a proportion big enough for the stream, that if it constantly rained, it
could not be supply enough to maintain so large an Efflux.

My sixth and last, is the relation of Dr. Downs concerning Barbados, viz.
that all their Springs were formerly very near the Sea; that up in the Country
they supplied themselves from the rains by digging pits in the earth, able to
contain great quantities, and there preserving it; which they did a very long
time (the rains being there as unfrequent as at the Isle de Mayo) and that
without any sensible diminution by penetrating and descending into the earth;
and to prevent the loss thereof by the exhalations of the Sun they covered it
with leaves, etc. but that now by digging deeper they find Springs so plenty
that no Plantation is without one.

From all these observations the following consectaries do mechanically result.

From the first it appears that some Springs have manifestly their source
from the Sea; that sand sweetens transcolated Seawater, and that even pickle
strained through it loses much of its saltness thereby, all which is evident
from the Well therein mentioned, whose water could not possibly be other than
what soaked in from the Pond and the Ocean.

Hence also is manifest, that constant and large Fluxes of water may be made
for eleventh months without rain to refill the subterranean Cisterns, supposed
by you to supply them; this appears from the River running through the Island,
by whose banks I found (it being April when I was there, at which time they had
been ten months without rain) thsh after their showers it could run but little
larger that it did after so tedious a want of them. I had forgot to intimate in
the relation, that those two Hommets, A. are craggy Rocks, whereon live a great
number of Goats, and are consequently very unfit, if not incapable, either to
receive, or contain the Magazine for the supply of the Rivulet.

From the second it is manifest, that higher Mountains of earth, and
consequently more likely to receive and contain sufficient quantity of
rainwater to beget and supply Springs and Rivers have not always that effect,
although there was one great advantage more added here, viz. a clammy tyte
earth in the bottom to make the supposed Cistern the better able to contain the
store. I say, that frequent rain to fill, high Mountains to contain, loose
pervious earth to receive, and a well luted bottom to support and retain (being
all the qualifications and circumstances supposed necessary to make and
continue Springs according to the modern Hypothesis) though all here concurred,
did notwithstanding fail of producing that effect.

From the same it is also manifest, that where Springs fail, without want of
the causes that Hypothesis supposes necessary to produce them, the occasion
has been from an apparent defect in the other (that is the imperviousness of
the earth through which the water must pass before a Spring can be produced)
both these appeared at Lipary, where the general effect a Spring or fountain
was wanting, together with the causes of our Hypothesis, though those of the
other were manifestly existent, and with all the advantages necessary: It
seeming to me a very rational conjecture, that the greasy clammy Sulphur,
wherewith that earth was impregnated, did by oppilating it hinder the
insinuation of the Sea into it.

From the third observation you have the first deduction confirmed, viz. That
Springs are sometimes manifestly from the Sea; That earth sweetens Seawater by
Percolation; And that the nearer Springs are to the Sea, the more they retain
of their pristine saltness, and lose it by sensible degrees, as they insinuate
farther through it.

By the fourth the same is confirmed.

The fifth proves, that large streams flow without any possibility of being
supplied by rain, both for want of such rain, and of dimensions to receive and
contain it.

The sixth does evidence, that rain does not penetrate the Surface of the
earth, even in a very dry parched Country, and in the Torrid Zone, and yet that
Springs are under it, which at once proves ours, and refutes the other opinion;
the former appears by the water in those made Ponds, lying there for a long
time without any sensible loss thereof by its leaking into the earth: The later
by the Wells near the Sea, and those found since under that impervious Land.

He that is not altogether a stranger to the weight, pressure, and Elasticity
of the air, the ascension of liquors through Filters, and some other resembling
Phenomenon, would not account the like motion of the transcolated water to high
hills, to be an objection of any force against this Hypothesis, but sure such
solutions are no less beyond my ability than design.

Finding I have Paper enough left, I will presume to trouble you with one rare
appearance more, that occurred to one Mr. Brasey of this Town, and aged and
very fat man, who by taking Spirit of Vitriol in his mornings draughts (to
which he was advised as a remedy to assuage the exuberance of his belly) found
that it had no effect on his body; but that a bundle of Keys, which he used to
carry always about him, and that wonted to be very smooth and bright, of a
sudden became black and rusty, though he never handled the Spirit, nor carried
it in his pocket, so that we concurred in opinion that the sudorous Effluvia of
his body, impregnated with the Acid Spirit, had occasioned it.

If so, It Is very wonderful, that so small a quantity thereof, when diluted
with so much juice as is contained in such a corpulent man, should even insteam
and the insensible Emanations make impressions on smooth Iron, mauger the
perpetual attrition, by carrying them in his Pocket, whereby such an effect
(one would think) should be prevented, or soon rubbed of. -- I was going to
make some reflections on this notable accident, but I consider, etc. --

Plimmouth May 5. 1678. James Young.


THE Original of Springs is that which has exercised the Pens of many learned
Writers, and very various have been the conjectures concernning it. But amongst
all I have met with I conceive none more probable than that which seems to
fetch its original from the History of the Creation mentioned in Holy Writ;
that is, that there is a Magazine of waters above as well as a Receptacle of
waters upon or beneath the Surface of the Earth: And that the Air is that
Firmament which separates between the upper and lower waters, and between these
two is the circulation of waters (or blood of the Microcosm, if I may so call
it) performed. The water being sometimes by a particular constitution of the
Air assisted by heat, rarefied and separated into minuter parts, and so reduced
into the form of Air, and thereby being divided into Particles really smaller
than those of the air in compassing, and agitated with a greater degree of
motion, they take up more space, and so become lighter than the Ambient, and
are thereby elevated and protruded upwards till they come to their place of
poise or Equilibrium in the Air: At other times by a differing constitution of
the Air and deficiency of heat they lose their agitation, and many of them
again coalesce, and so having less motion they condense and revert into water,
and so, being heavier than the incompassing Air, descend down again to the
Earth in Mists, Rain, Snow, Hail, or the like.

That there is such a Circulation I think there is none doubts, but still it
remains a difficulty (with those persons that grant this) that all Rivers and
Springs should have their original from the water that falls or condences out
of the Air.

To persuade such persons it may not possibly be unsuccessful to mention:

First, That the great inundations or overflowing of Rivers manifestly proceed
either from the Rain that immediately falls, or from the melting of Snow or Ice
that has formerly fallen on the more eminent parts of Mountains; to confirm
which, Histories enough might be brought were it necessary of Nilus, Niger, etc.

Secondly, That it has been observed and computed that communibus annis and
locis; there falls water enough from the Sky in actual Rain, Snow, or Hail upon
the Surface of England to supply all the water that runs back into the Sea by
the Rivers, and also all that may be supposed to evaporate; nay, though the
quantity of the first be supposed twice as much as really it is. This I have
been assured by those that have both experimented and calculated it.

Thirdly, That there is not yet certainly (that I know or have heard of) any
other way of making salt water fresh, but by Distillation; which, had there
been such an Art, it would in all probability have been made use of, and so
there is little probability that the Springs at the top of a high Hill should
proceed from the Seawater strained through the earth. But were there such a
filtration known I hinted in my Attempt, published anno 1660 about Filtration,
how somewhat of that kind might be explained.

Fourthly, That this Operation is constantly and most certainly performed by
Nature both in exhaling and drawing up fresh steams and vapors from the Sea,
and all moist bodies, and in precipitating them down again in Rain, Snow, Hail,
but of the other we have no certainty.

Fifthly, I have observed in several places where a Tree has stood upon an
high Hill, singly and particularly at the brow of Box Hill near Darking in
Surry, that the body of the Tree is continually wet, and at the root some
quantity of water, which is always soaking and gliding down from the Branches
and body of the Tree, the leaves, sprigs, and branches of the said trees
collecting and condensing continually the moist part of the Air, the same being
indeed a true and lively representation of a River. Nor has it been my
observation alone, but the same is mentioned by diverse Authors: And it is
affirmed by some Authors, that there are some Islands in the Torrid Zone which
have no other water in them than what is condensed out of the Air by the Trees
at the tops of the Hills, and converted into drops of Rain.

Sixthly, That it is generally observed, wherever there are high Hills there
are generally many Springs round about the bottoms of them of very fresh and
clear water, and often times some which rise very near the tops of them, which
seems to proceed from their great elevation above the other plain superficial
parts of the earth, whereby the Air being dashed and broken against them, they
help to condense the vapors that are elevated into the higher and cooler
Regions of the Air, and so serve like Filtres to draw down those vapors so
condensed, and convey them into the Valleys beneath, And hence it is very usual
in Countries where there are high Hills to see the tops of them often covered
with clouds and mists, when it is clear and dry weather beneath in the Valleys.
And in the passing through those clouds on the top I have very often found in
them very thick mists and small rain, whereas as soon as I have descended from
the higher into the lower parts of the Hills, none of that mist or rain has
fallen there, though I could still perceive the same mists to remain about the
top. Consonant to this Observation was one related to me by an ingenious
Gentleman Mr. G.T. who out of curiosity with other Gentlemen whilst he lived in
the Island of Teneriff, one of the Canaries made a journey to the top of that
prodigious high Mountain, called the Pikc. The substance of which (to this
purpose) was, that the Caldera or hollow Cavity, at the very top thereof he
observed to be very slabby and moist, and the earth to slip underneath his
feet, being a very moist soft Clay or Lome like mortar. And farther, that at a
Cave, not far from the top, there was a great quantity of very fresh water,
which was continually supplied, though great quantities of Ice were continually
fetched from thence, and carried down into the Island for cooling their Wines.
Consonant to which Observation was that which was related to me by the
Inquisitive Mr. Edmund Hally made in St. Helena whilst he stayed there to
observe the places of the Stars of the Southern Hemisphere, in order to perfect
the Celestial Globe. Having then placed himself upon one of the highest
Prominences of that small Island, which he found to be no less than 3000 foot
Perpendicularly above the Surface of the Sea next adjoining, supposing that
might be the most convenient place for his designed observation; He quickly
found his expectation much deceived as to that purpose for which he chose it;
for being gotten so high into the Air the motion of it was so violent as much
to disturb his Instruments; but which was more, he found such abundance of
mists and moisture that it unglued the Tubes, and covered his Glasses presently
with a Dew; and which was yet more, the foggs and mists almost continually
hindered the sight of the Stars. But upon removing to a lower station in the
Island he was freed from the former Inconveniences.

I could relate many Histories of this nature, whereby it seems very probable,
that not only Hills, but Woods also, do very much contribute to the condensing
of the moisture of the Air, and converting it into water, and thereby to supply
the Springs and Rivulets with fresh water: And I am confident, whosoever shall
consider his own observation of this nature, and compare them with this Theory,
will find many arguments to confirm it. However, Nullius in verba, Let Truth
only prevail, and Theories signify no further than right reasoning from
accurate Observations and Experiments does confirm and agree with them.

Having thus delivered here somewhat of my own thoughts concerning Springs and
Rivers, finding among some of my Papers a Relation, wherein a very strange
subterraneous Cistern is mentioned, I have here subjoyned it as I received it
from Mr. Thomas Alcock from Bristol who together with Sir Humphry Hook was by
whilst Captain Samuel Sturmy made this inquiry, and who by interrogatories made
to him, penned this Relation for him as it follows verbatim.

IN pursuance of His Majesty's Commands to me at the presenting of my Mariners
Magazine, I have with much diligence, some charge and peril endeavored to
discover that great Concavity in the earth in Gloucester shire, four miles from
Kingrode, where His Majesty's great Ships ride in the Severn. And I find by
experience that what has been reported of that place is fabulous, whilst I thus
describe it.

Upon the second of July 1669. I descended by Ropes affixt at the top of an old
Lead Oar Pit, four Fathoms almost perpendicular, and from thence three Fathoms
more obliquely, between two great Rocks, where I found the mouth of this
spacious place, from which a Mine-man and my self lower ourselves by Ropes
twenty five Fathoms perpendicular, into a very large place indeed, resembling
to us the form of a Horse-shoo; for we stuck lighted Candles all the way we
went, to discover what we could find remarkable; at length we came to a River
or great Water, which I found to be twenty fathoms broad, and eight fathoms
deep. The Mineman would have persuaded me, that this River Ebbed and Flowed,
for that some ten fathoms above the place we now were in we found the water had
(sometime) been, but I proved the contrary by staying there from three hours
Flood to two hours Ebb, in which time we found no alteration of this River;
besides, it is waters were fresh, sweet, and cool, and the Surface of this water
as it is now at eight fathom deep, lies lower than the bottom of any part of
the Severn Sea near us, so that it can have no community with it, and
consequently neither flux nor reflux, but in Winter and Summer, as all
Stagna's, Lakes, and Loughs (which I take this to be) has. As we were walking
by this River thirty two fathoms under ground, we discovered a great hollowness
in a Rock some thirty foot above us, so that I got a Ladder down to us, and the
Mine-man went up the Ladder to that place, and walked into it about threescore
and ten paces, till he just lost sight of me, and from thence cheerfully called
to me, and told me, he had found what he looked for (a rich Mine;) but his joy
was presently changed into amazement, and he returned affrighted by the sight
of an evil Spirit, which we cannot persuade him but he saw, and for that reason
will go thither no more.

Here are abundance of strange places, the flooring being a kind of a white
stone, Enameled with Lead Oar, and the Pendent Rocks were glazed with
Saltpeter which distilled upon them from above, and time had petrified.

After some hours stay there, we ascended without much hurt, other than
scratching our selves in diverse places by climing the sharp Rocks, but four
days together after my return from thence I was troubled with an unusual and
violent Headache, which I impute to my being in that Vault. This is a true
account of that place so much talked of, described by me

Samuel Sturmy.


Having given you a Relation of something very low within the bowels of the
Earth, I now shall add,

An account of a Journey made to the highest part of the earthby my Ingenious
Friend Mr. G. T. as I collected it out of the Memorials which he writ at the
time of making it; The particulars whereof were,
THat August the twentieth, 1674. about Nine in the morning, in company with
Dr. Sebastian de Franques, Mr. Christopher Prancis, Mr. Thomas Proudfoot,
together with a Guide, and two other men with horses to carry themselves and
necessary provision for the Journey, he set out from

They passed up a Hill, which was very steep, till they came to the Pinal or
Wood of Pines. This Wood lies very high in the Island, and extends it self
from one end of the Island to the other, and is in many places of a great
Breadth, and is very frequently covered with a Bruma, fog, or mist, which is so
thick as to darken and hinder the appearance of the Sun through it, and so
moist as to make one wet in passing through it.

Through this Wood they rode by a pretty steep ascent near two Leagues,
crossing it till they came to the further or side, where alighting they rested
themselves under a Pine, and Dined. And the fog, which had accompanied them
through the whole Wood, here left them, and the Sun appeared.

From hence they parted about one in the Afternoon, and after an ascent of
about half a mile of very bad stony way they came to a sandy way, which for
about the length of a League was pretty plain; but then they began to ascend a
sandy hill, which for half a League farther was pretty steep, which having
passed they arrived at the foot of the Pike.

Here they alighted, and then rested themselves for some time, then taking
horse again, they began to ascend the Pike it self. This part of it was so
steep that the way up it is made by several turnings and windings to and fro to
ease and alleviate the steepness of the ascent, which were otherwise unpassable
for horses. All this part seems to be nothing else but burnt stones and ashes,
which may have formerly tumbled down from the higher parts of the Pike.

At this place they alighted, and unloaded their horses of the Provision of
Victual and water which they were forced to carry with them for their own
accommodation, as also of the Provender for their horses. And presently set
themselves to provide against the inconveniences of the ensuing night by
getting together in the first place a good quantity of the wood of a small
shrub, called Retamen, not much unlike our English Broom, which grows there
pretty plentifully, and when dry burns very well; then, having gotten wood
enough, they endeavored to shelter themselves against the piercing cold wind
by heaping up a wall of stones on the windward side, and making a good fire of
the dry shrubs they had collected to warm themselves.

But so furious was the wind which came pouring down from each side of the
Mountain that it blew the smoke and ashes into their eyes, and forced them
(though much to their Regret by reason of the extreme piercing coldness of the
Air) to remove their fire farther off. And to keep themselves as warm as they
could by lying down upon the ground very close together. Thus they passed the
night together as well as they could, but with very little sleep, partly by
reason of the cold, and partly for the continual expectation they had of the
moment when their Guide would call them to be mounting up the Pike, which is
usually about two or three hours before day, to the end that they may get up to
the top before the rising of the Sun. For at the rising of the Sun the Air is
the most clear, and all the Islands of the Canaries round about may be then
plainly discovered.

But at two a clock, when they should have been on their Journey, the wind
continued to blow with such violence, that their Guide would by no means venture
to go up for fear least in the climbing up some steep places the wind should
encounter any of them, and hurl them headlong down, so that they were forced to
continue and shelter themselves in their bad Lodgings till the Sun arose, and
had got some mastery of the wind.

About six a clock therefore they set forwards on their enterprise, having
first taken each of them his dish of Chocolatte to fortify their stomachs the
better against the cold, so with their Bottle of Strongwater in their Pockets,
and Staves in their hands, they began to mount the Pike, the way being just
such as they had passed the night before, but much more steep, and continued on
till they came to the Mal pays, or stony way, which may be about half a mile
from the place where they lay; This stony way lies upon a very steep ascent,
and is compounded of abundance of stones which lie hollow and loose, some of
them of a vast prodigious bigness, and others of them smaller, in such manner
as if they had been thrown up there by some Earthquake, as the Author
conjectures with very great probability. In the clambring up these stones they
took great care in placing their steps on such of them as were more firm for
fear of slipping or tumbling so as to break their Legs or Arms.

With this difficulty they ascended till they came to the Cave which he
conjectures to be about three quarters of a mile distant from the beginning of
the stony way.

At this Cave they found several persons who were come thither to get out Ice
to carry down into the Island, some of which were below in the Cave, digging
Ice which was very thick, others remained above. They found the mouth of the
Cave about three yards high, and two yards broad; and being all of them
desirous to descend into it, by a Rope fastened about their bodies under their
armpits they were all one after another let down into it till they came to set
their feet upon the Ice, which is about sixteen or eighteen foot from the mouth.

The Cave is not very large, but full of water and Ice, which at the time when
they were there lay about a foot under the Surface of the water, though the men
that usually go thither said that at other times they found the Ice above the
water, which makes many to suppose that it ebbs and flows by means of some
secret intercourse that it may have with the Sea, they averring that they have
seen it emptying of it self.

But this Gentleman so soon as ever he came down fixed his eye upon a stone that
lay just above the Superficies of the water, and observed very diligently but
could not in all the space that he staid there, which was half an hour, find it
either increase or diminish, which makes him believe that the fullness or
emptiness of the water may rather proceed from those thick fogs and mists which
are generally on the top, and which hinder the Pike from being seen sometimes
for twenty, thirty, nay, forty days together, except only just at the rising or
setting of the Sun, though at some other times it happens also that the Air is
clearer, and the Pike may be seen perhaps for a month together. From these
mists he conceives at some times much water may be collected at the upper parts
of the Pike, and soaking down may not only supply, but increase the water in
the Cave; and consonant to this Hypothesis he observed whilst he was there,
that there was a continual gleeting and dropping of water in six or seven
places from the sides of the Cave, which droppings he supposes may be greater
or less according; as those fogs do more or less encompass it, or stay about it
a longer or shorter time; He judges also that there may be some other more
secret ways both for the conveying water into and out of the said Cave than
those droppings, but supposes them to proceed from the aforesaid fogs. Hence he
concludes when the Air is clear, and none of those fogs condensed about the
Hill, the water in the Cave must necessarily decrease. And that which confirmed
him the more in this opinion was that when he came to the very top of the Pike,
he found the earth under him so very moist, that it was like mud or mortar, and
might be made into Paste as by experiment he found which he conjectures could
no ways be caused by the wind or clear Air, which is rather drying and
consuming of moisture, but must proceed from the fogs or mists which are above
the very top of the Pike.

He further took notice in the Cave that upon the sides and top thereof there
grew a snow-white furring like Saltpeter, which had a kind of saltish taste,
some of which he gathered and brought back with him to England to have it
examined.

After about half an hours stay in the Cave, which they found warmer than
without in the open Air, they were all pulled up again, and proceeded forward
in their Journey by continuing to clamber up the stony way, which lasted till
they came to the foot of that part of the Mountain which is called the
Sugar Loaf, by reason that at a distance from the Island it appears of that
shape, as it does also even when you are at it. The distance of this place from
the Cave they judged to be about half a mile, but the way much more steep and
ascending than the former part of the stony way, and extreme troublesome to
pass, their feet sinking and slipping down again almost as much as they could
stride upwards, so that they concluded it the most painful of all; however,
persisting in their endeavors, after many times resting themselves, they
gained the top, which they conceive might be about half a mile higher.

The very top they found not plain, but very Rocky and uneven, and in the
middle thereof a deep hole; the outside of this top this Gentleman conceived
might be about a quarter of a mile round about on the outside.

This hole he conceived to be the mouth of a Vulcano which has formerly been
in that place, for even at that time whilst they were there much smoke ascended
out of several holes and chinks of the Rocks, and the earth in diverse parts was
still so very hot as to be very offensive to their feet through their shoes,
and he observed Brimstone thrown up in several places, of which he collected
some, and brought back with him to England.

From this place may be seen in a clear day all the six adjacent Islands, but
the weather being then somewhat thick and hazy, they could discover none but
the grand Canaries, Palm, and the Gomera, which last, though distant near eight
Leagues from the bottom of the Pike seemed yet so near unto them as if it had
been almost under them. The rest of the Islands they could discover whereabout
they lay by means of a kind of white cloud hanging on them, but they could not
discern the Islands through those clouds.

Here they tried their Cordial Waters which they carried in their Pockets, but
found them not to abate of their usual strength, and become cold and insipid as
fair water, as several had positively averred to him that they had found it,
but he conceived them to be very much of the same nature and strength that they
were of before they were carried up, which he supposes to be by reason of their
arriving at the top so late.

After they had stayed on the top about an hour, and satisfied themselves in
observing much things as they were able, they descended again with very much
facility, and came to the Stancia about eleven of the clock, where they dined,
and thence about one in the Afternoon set forwards for the Villa, where they
arrived that afternoon about five that Evening.

After their return they found their faces (by reason of the heat of the Sun,
and the parching subtle wind) to cast their skins.

He did not measure the Perpendicular height of the Hill himself, but says that
he has been informed by diverse skilful Seamen, (who by their best observation
have taken the height of it) that it is between three and four miles
perpendicularly above the Sea.

IN this Relation it is very remarkable:

First, that this prodigious high Hill is the Product of an Earthquake, and
seems heretofore to have been a Vulcano, or burning Mountain, like those of
Aetna, Vesuvius, Hecla, etc. though at present it has only fire enough left to
send forth some few sulphurous fumes, and to make the earth of the Caldera or
hollow pit at the very top thereof in some places almost hot enough to burn
their shoes that pass over it. And possibly in succeeding Ages even this
little fire may be quite extinct, and then no other sign thereof may be left
but a prodigiously high Rock or spiring Mountain, which in tract of time may by
degrees waste and be diminished into a Hill of a more moderate height.

Now as this Hill seems very evidently to be the effect of an Earthquake, so I
am apt to believe that most, if not all, other Hills of the world whatever may
have been the same way generated. Nay, not only all the Hills, but also the
Land which appears above the face of the waters. And for this I could produce
very many Histories and Arguments that would make it seem very probable, but
that I reserve them in the Lectures which I read of this subject in Gresham
College in the years 1664, and 1665, which when I can have time to peruse I
may publish.

Therein I made it probable that most Islands have been thrown up by some
subterraneous Eruptions. Such is the Island of Ascension, the Moluccus, etc.

Secondly, that most part of the Surface of the Earth has been since the
Creation changed in its position and height in respect of the Sea, to wit, many
parts which are now dry Land, and lie above the Sea, have been in former Ages
covered with it; and that many parts, which are now covered with the Sea, were
in former times dry Land. Mountains have been sunk into Plains, and Plains have
been raised into Mountains.

Of these by observations I have given instances, and showed that diverse parts
of England have in former times been covered with the Sea, there being found at
this day in the most Inland parts thereof susficient evidences to prove it, to
wit, Shells of diverse sorts of Fishes, many of which yet remain of the animal
substance, though others be found petrified and converted into stone. Some of
these are found raised to the tops of the highest Mountains, others sunk into
the bottoms of the deepest Mines and Wells, nay, in the very bowels of the
Mountains and Quarries of Stone. I have added also diverse other instances to
prove the same thing of other parts of Europe, and have manifested, not only
that the lower and plainer parts thereof have been under the Sea, but that even
the highest Alpine and Pyrenean Mountains have run the same fate. Many
Instances of the like nature I have also met with in Relations and observations
made in the East as well as in the West Indies,

Of all which strange occurrences I can conceive no cause more probable than
Earthquakes and subterraneous Eruptions which Histories do sufficiently assure
us have changed Sea into Land, and Land into Sea, Vales into Mountains
sometimes, into Lakes and Abysses at other times; and the contrary -- unless we
may be allowed to suppose that the water or fluid part of the earth which
covered the whole at first, and afterward the greatest part thereof, might in
many Ages and long process of time be wasted, by being first raised into the
Atmosphere in vapors, and thence by the diurnal, but principally by the annual
motion thereof be lost into the ather, or medium through which it passes,
somewhat like that wasting which I have observed to be in Comets, and have
noted it in my Cometa: Or unless we may be allowed to suppose that this fluid
part is wasted by the petrifaction and fixation of such parts of it as have
fallen on the Land and Hills, and never returned to fill up the measure of the
Sea, out of which it was exhaled, for which very much may be said to make it
probable that the water of the earth is this way daily diminished.

Or unless (since we are ascertained by observations that the direction of the
Axis of the earth is changed, and grown nearer the Polar Star than formerly;
that the Magnetism or Magnetical Poles are varied, and do daily move from the
places where they lately were, and that there are other great and noted changes
effected in the earth) we may be allowed to conceive that the Central point of
the attractive or gravitating power of the earth has in long process of time
been changed and removed also farther from us toward our Antipodes, whence
would follow a recess of the waters from these parts of the world to those, and
an appearance of many parts above the surface of the water in the form of
Islands, and of other places formerly above the Sea now in the form of
Mountains, so to continue till by the libration or other-ways returning motion
thereof it repossess its former seat and place, and overwhelms again all those
places which in the interim had been dry and uncovered with the return of the
same water, since nothing in nature is found exempt from the state of change
and corruption.

Further, it is probable that Earthquakes may have been much more frequent in
former Ages than they have been in these latter, the consideration of which
will possibly make this Assertion not so Paradoxical as at first hearing it may
seem to be; though even these latter Ages have not been wholly barren of
Instances of the being and effects of them, to convince you of which I have
hereunto subjoyned a Relation and account of one very newly which happened in the
Isle of Palma among the Canaries.

Next, the clearness of the Air is very remarkable, which made an Island which
lay eight Leagues off to look as if it were close by. To this purpose I have
often taken notice of the great difference there is between the Air very near
the lower Surface of the Earth, and that which is at a good distance from it;
That which is very near the earth being generally so thick and opacous that
bodies cannot at any considerable distance be seen distinctly through it: But
the farther the eye and object are elevated above this thick Air, the more
clear do the objects appear. And I have diverse times taken notice that the same
object seen from the top and bottom of a high Tower has appeared twice as far
off when seen at the bottom as when seen at the top: For the Eye does very much
judge of the distance of Objects according as the Density of the Air between
the Eye and Object does represent them. Hence I have seen men look of Gigantick
bigness in a fog, caused by reason that the Fog made the Eye judge the Object
much farther off than really it was, when at the same time the visible Angle
altered not. This great thickness of the lower Air is sufficiently manifest in
the Celestial bodies, few of the fixed Stars or smaller Planets being visible
till they are a considerable way raised above the Horizon.

The third remark about the moistness of the fogs, and the production of water
at that height I have before insisted on. Only the almost continual fogs that
this Gentleman observed in the Wood they passed is very remarkable for the
origin of Springs.

Nor shall I say any thing concerning the vast perpendicular height of the
same, but for a close of this present collection I shall add the short account
of the Eruption which lately happened in the Palma.

A true Relation of the Vulcanos which broke out in the Island of the Palma
November. 13. 1677.
SAturday the thirteenth of November 1677. a quarter of an hour after Sun set
happened a shaking or Earthquake in the Island of St. Michael de la Palma, one of
the Canary Islands, from the lower Pyrenna, and within a League of the City
unto the Port of Tassacorte, which is accounted thirteen Leagues distant along
the Coast, but more especially at or about a place called Fuencaliente, being
seven Leagues from the Town to the Southwards. The trembling of the earth was
observed to be more frequent and violent than elsewhere, and so it continued
till Wednesday the 17. ditto. The People thereabouts were much affrighted, for
besides the Earthquake there was often heard a thundering noise as in the bowels
of the earth on a Plain called the Canios, which is before you come to the
great descent toward the Sea, where the hot Baths stand, or the holy Fountain;
likewise at the ascent from the aforesaid Plain upwards at the great and
wearisom Hill, called Cuesta Cansada, and until the Mountain of Goatyards, and
the same day in and about the said places mentioned, the Earth began to open
several mouths, the greatest of them upon the said Goat Mountain, being distant
from the Sea a mile and an half, and from the said opening came forth a very
great heat and smell of Brimstone; and the same day, an hour before Sunset at
one of the mouths of the wearisom Hill was a trembling thereabout with more
violence than any of the four days before; and a great and black smoke came
forth with a terrible thundering noise, opening a very wide mouth, and throwing
out much fire, with melted Rocks and stones; and immediately after at another
place eighty paces below happened the like terrible noise and sight, and in less
than a quarter of an hour after there opened to the quantity of eighteen mouths
toward the foot of the said Mountains, and there issued out fire, melted
Rocks, and other bituminous matter from all the said mouths, and was presently
formed into a great River of fire, which took its course over the first
mentioned Plain, slowly going down toward the said holy Fountain; but it
pleased God, being come within eight spaces of the Brink of the said great
descent, it turned a little on the right side, and took its course with a very
great fall toward the old Port, which is that which was first entered by the
Spaniards when they took the Islands.

Friday the nineteenth at two a clock in the afternoon in the aforesaid
Mountain of Goats, on the other side of Tassacorte, there opened another mouth
with much smoke and stones of fire, and so closed again. But the next day (the
twentieth) it began again to smoke, and continued with great trembling and
noise in the bowels of the Earth until Sunday the twenty first at noon, when
with many flashings of fire, and a greater thundering noise it finished that
opening of that monstrous birth, casting up into the Air both fire and stones,
and at night the smoke ceasing, the thundering noise, fire and stones increased,
forcing great fiery stones so high into the Air as we lost sight of them, and
with such violence sent them upwards that according to the best judgment they
were five times longer in falling down, which stones or Rocks were observed to
be bigger than a Hogshead,; and what was most to be admired was, that these
breaking in the Air, and changing into many several shapes, distinctly
appearing, yet notwithstanding did reunite again in falling down.

Monday the twenty second it began again to cast forth black smoke for two
hours time, and after to thunder, and throw up fire and stones with great
violence. Tuesday the twenty third at noon it smoaked again, and from thence
until night there was terrible thundering noise, and casting up of fire and
stones more fierce than before; and about nine of the clock at night a very
great trembling of the earth was felt, and presently after followed three great
stones of fire in the form of Globes which were forced about half a League in
height, and then like Grenades broke in the Air with very great noise.
Wednesday the twenty fourth it was for an hours time very quiet, and after it
began with greater force than ever before, by reason that some of the lower and
first mouths were partly stopped, with which the aforesaid River of fire ceased
from running, after it had dammed up the Bay of the old Port, with burnt and
melted Rocks and Stones, and other matter wherewith the said River had run, and
had forced the Sea backward above a Musket shot at random, and near twice as
much in breadth. It ran into the Sea above sixty paces. What fell into the Sea
went congealing with a great smoke, what came after, forced and ran over that
which went before, so that the smoke was very great many paces within the Sea,
as far as seven fathoms depth, which caused many men to imagine that some such
like Vulcano had opened under the Sea in the said seven fathoms depth. This
night it cast up some stones like great fiery Globes as the former.

Thursday the twenty fifth it proved yet more violent than ever with thundering
noise and flashes of fire. Friday the twenty sixth, the mouth that was at the
foot of the Mountain began again to cast up as much fire and stones as ever,
and formed two other Rivers; the one taking its course to Leeward of the first
River leading toward the Rocks called de los Tacosos; and the other took its
way to windward of the first, directly toward the Bathes or Holy Fountain; and
in this entrance the mouth of the Mountain was observed to be more quiet,
though it cast up much ashes like black small sand. What damage appears to
have been done from its beginning to this day the twenty sixth of November,
being of thirteen days continuance, has been about nine or ten Country Houses
burnt, besides Outhouses, and great Cisterns for water, which are the poor
Peoples only Remedy in those parts, and upwards of three hundred Acres of
ground are quite spoiled, being covered with Rocks, Stones, and other Rubbish
and Sand; and if, (which God defend) the said Vulcano do longer continue, the
damage must be far greater, especially if any other mouth should break out
higher, as it is much feared, by reason the earth in some places does open with
appearances as at first, so that all about that circuit of the Fuencalliente
will be lost; and for what already happened, and yet continues with much terror,
besides the fears of more in other parts thereabout, the Inhabitants do leave
their Habitations, and like poor distressed people seek relief at the City, and
many leave the Island to seek their fortunes in the others.

From the twenty sixth of November, that the aforesaid Relation was sent for
Teneriff by the Chamber of this Island unto the General, the said Vulcano
continues fierce and without ceasing, rather more than less, with a terrible
thundering noise, casting up Fire, Stones, Rocks, and black Ashes, and the three
Rivers of Fire still running into the Sea, and has now dammed up all the Baths
and holy Fountain, to the great detriment of the Island, that yearly received a
great benefit thereby, besides many damages daily added to the former. Several
other mouths have since opened in the like dreadful manner near about the same
place, we see the great smoke by day, and hear the thunder and noise, like the
shooting off of many Cannons, and by night see also much of the fire very high
in the Air from this City, which is one and twenty miles from it.

We are now at the eleventh of December, and fear we shall have more to write
to you by the next.

Other Letters of the thirtieth of December mention, that it then contined much
at one as before; and since others of the nineteenth of January say, it is yet
as dreadful as ever, and little likelihood of ceasing; from the thirteenth of
November that it began to the nineteenth of January is about ten Weeks that it
has burnt; and the last Letters mention abundance of Ashes or black Sand
forced into the Air, and carried all over the Island, falling thick like Rain,
and frequently gathered in the City, in the Streets, Houses, and Gardens,
though seven Leagues off.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 10. line 15. read the other, viz. the vibrating. l. 16. participates. l.
17. and 18. r. Vibration thereof, but all Solids do exclude that menstruum, or
participate not of its motion. p. 14, l. 11. for length r. number. l. 12. r.
occasions will be. p. 15. l. 6. r. L M N O. l. 12. r. have of Elasticity is. p.
18. l. 29. r. equal to ten. p. 42. l. 12. r. from Oratava. l. 12. r. or
Southcast side. p. 42. l. 9. for Prancis r. Francis.












