LECTURES AND COLLECTIONS Made by ROBERT HOOK, Secretary of the Royal Society.

COMETA. CONTAINING Observations of the Comet in April, 1677. Fragments of
several Lectures about those of 1664. and 1665. Sir Chr. Wren's Hypothesis and
Geometrical Problem about those Comets, A Discourse concerning the Comet of
1677. Mr. Boyle's Observation made on two new Phosphori of Mr. Baldwin, and Mr.
Craft. Mr. Gallet's Letter to Mr. Cassini, together with his Observation of
sub. Mr. Cassini' Reflections upon those of Gassendus, and Hevelius, and upon
this. Mr. Hally's Letter and Observation of the same made at St. Hellena. Mr.
Cassini's Observation of the Diurnal motion of, and other changes happening in
it.


MICROSCOPIVM. CONTAINING Mr. Leeuwenhoeck's two Letters concerning some late
Microscopical Discoveries. The Author's Discourse and Description of
Microscopes, improved for discerning the nature and texture of Bodies. P.
Cherubine's Accusations answered. Mr. Young's Letter containing several
Anatomical Observations.


LONDON: Printed for J. Martyn, Printer to the Royal Society, at the Bell in
St. Paul's Churchyard. 1678.











VIRO PERILLUSTRI Dno JOSEPHO WILLIAMSON EQUITI AURATO, Serenissimo CAROLO IIo.
Mag. Britan. Fran. and Hibern. REGI, A Consiliis Secretioribus, et a Secretis
Status, Nec non SOCIETATIS REGALIS LONDINENSIS, Ad Scientiam Naturalem
promovendam PRAESIDI DIGNISSIMO.
NEC potui, nec debui, Nobilissime Vir, cujusquam alius nomen his Chartis
inscribere, praeter Tuum. Sub Te natae, Tibi vitam debent; Tibi quoque debebunt
quod lucem aspiciant. Egregius ille Tuus animus ad instaurandam Philosophiam
artesque adeo omnes utiles, mihi homini, alioquin subtimido, audaciam hujus
dedicationis fecit. Ego quae nunc potui, profero, magis ad Gratulationem
ostendendam, quam Eruditionem. Spero autem, quemadmoduni sub Tuo PRAESIDIO
majora indies Augmenta Scientiarum in hac gente fiunt, ita exorituros viros
doctos, qui Tibi justa praeconia laudum persolvant; quod ego prae tenuitate ne
conari quidem audeo, quanquam cum primis sim

Dignitatis and Honoris Tui Studiosissimus, ROBERTUS HOOK.

SYNOPSIS.
THE Comet seen April 21. 1677. between the Triangle and the Cloud of, its tail
not directly opposite to the, its Magnitude, Brightness, Head, Nucleus, Blaze,
(1.) Why sometimes shorter, sometimes longer; without sensible motion of parts.
Explanation of the first figure, as seen by the eye. (2.) Of the second Figure,
as seen through a glass, of a parabolick termination, differing from the
representations of Mr. Hevelius. (3.) The Medulla, and blaze with the manner of
shortning and lengthening, explained by the third figure; not seen the 22d. but
the 23d. The bigness of the Nucleus and Head through a Telescope, compared with
the top of a Tower. (4.) The place it then appeared in. Why the motion was not
more exactly observed. Its blaze still not opposite to the Sun. The 24th. not
seen, nor 25th. (5.) though the Sky clear by reason of the height of Vapors.
How they do lengthen the Crepusculum. Why Physical Remarks only were made. (6.)
Published in order to understand Objections, and propound pertinent Queries.
Some Observations, Notes, Queries, etc. concerning the Comets in 1664. and
1665. here. Collected out of several scattered Papers and Lectures of them
formerly read here imperfect. Queries of its substance, magnitude, density,
mutability, dissolution, fluidity, gravity, light, figure, motion bended or
straight, (7.) with equal or unequal velocity, in the Atmosphere or Ether,
above or below the Moon. Whether it wastes, or lasts to return. The Star of a
compacted light (8.) varied possibly from position, partly from real change,
Tail transparent, Body supposed more dense, side toward the Sun evenly defined,
Encompassed with a fluid yielding to motion, but dissolving its parts. Its
light from its self. (9.) Its Nucleus supposed dense possibly as the middle
part of the Earth, of which some conjectures. Dissolved by the Ether as in our
Atmosphere. (10.) Argument for the looseness of the central parts of the Earth
from the variation of magnetical direction. (11.) The Nucleus of Comets
possibly the same. Internal motion may weaken gravitation. Parts separated may
be agitated by the gravitation of the. Tail made not so much by the particles
receding as the Stars approaching the Sun. (12.) How the Comet may first lose
its Orb in the Universe, and passing through the spheres of Activity of several
central bodies is deflected and attracted by them, and the Blaze raised to a
prodigious length. (13.) The bodies being attracted by some gravity, Blaze
expelled by levity, explained by smoke, and steams. Somewhat for positive
levity. (14.) A digression concerning the method of speculating the great and
first principles of the Universe. The Coma and Blaze like smoke or flames.
(15.) Shining particles a shining point, not a line of light. Considerations
and Experiments about the ways light is augmented by, as by swift motion,
adjacent dark medium, Flame explained. Why the Particles coalesce into a
stream. (16.) Enquiry about the magnitude and place of Comets. Many supposed
them sublunary. Tycho and Kepler proved them celestial. How far we may rely
upon Observations for Parallax. Parallax and its effects described. (18.) Tycho
supposed the Comet of 1577. to move about the Sun. Kepler that of 1607. to move
in a straight line; that of 1664. had no sensible Parallax by what means it was
found. (19.) Refraction in this way varies little. Theory of Comets defective
as to Parallax hitherto. Parallax not to be enquired from the Observations of
several men. Errors creep in from the Press and the Graver, as in P. Gottignies
Plates. (20.) Nothing to be concluded from Observations made by persons in
differing places for want of accurate Instruments, and Observations. (21.) Even
the best as Hevelius, Gottignies, Petit, or Auzout err. Some reason for this
assertion. Most of the rest altogether insignificant. (22.) Want of Observers,
Instruments, and Tables the cause. How these wants are to be supplied. What the
world expects from Mr. Hevelius. (23.) And of how great use his Tables and
Projections made by them will be. Parallax from diurnal motion failing. (24.)
Other Parallaxes arising from other hypotheses of the proper motions either of
the Earth, or Comet, or both together considered arise to a certainty. (25.)
Others depending upon other suppositions define nothing of the magnitude or
distance of Comets. The inconvenience of Tycho's, and also of Kepler's
Hypotheses explained. A third way I have taken. What consequences follow from
it, (26.) As that it moves in a Circle that comes within the Earth Orb in, and
without Orb in, a sextant in 130 days, etc. This not relied on, because there
may be other hypotheses to solve the phenomenon; as that the Earth is unmoved,
and the Comet moved in a Circle, whose unequal side is toward the Earth. (27.)
This hypothesis explained by the sixth figure. (28.) The distance and bigness
of the Circle of the Comet undeterminable this way without a diurnal parallax,
since the appearances may be solved by Circles of any bigness, proved by the
eighth figure, (29.) Allowing inequality of motion, or more compound curve
lines, nothing can be determined. The circular Orb it seemed the most probable
solves Kepler's acceleration, according to the increase of a line of Tangents.
(30.) A gravitation toward the Sun makes out the motion of the Comet, and
Planets, and of the Blaze. The Blaze explained by experiment of dissolved in
oil of Virt. (31.) This experiment and hypothesis farther explained, and
applied to explain the Blaze which is from thence bent, brighter on one side
than the other, not direct from the Sun. (32.) Cometical body and motion as old
as the world, yet wasting in the Ether; explained by fire. Dissolution by
menstruums. (33.) Thence the proprieties of Comets conjectured, and the sum of
the foregoing discourse repeated, being the end of a Lecture. Recourse to Tycho
Brahe's Observation (34.) for making out the Comets Orb. His supposing its
motion unequal without reason a shift. Mr. Horrox his hypotheses in the ninth
figure a product of chance. (35.) A discourse on it, and some objections
against Tycho's. (36.) Kepler's hypothesis examined by these Observations of
Tycho's, found the most likely, but with some alteration. Line of Trajection
bent a little. Motion accelerated toward the Sun, retarded from it. (37.) The
swifter and further off the Comet from the Sun, the less the bend, explained by
the tenth figure. (38.) The way of enquiring parallax by Telescopes, (39.)
further explained. A second way by two Observers in distant places propounded.
The third way of Sir Chr. Wren his Majesty's Surveyor-General, (40.) Set down
and demonstrated by a Geometrical Problem. (41.) How exactly all those
Observations he had were made out by it, together with his own Schemes; both
which I had in the beginning of Feb. 1664-5. (42.) Some other Papers about
Comets added, being reflections on Mr. Descartes and Kepler's hypotheses, from
particular tracings of the Comets of 1664. and 1665. A Scheme of the later
Observations of that of 1664. added, and some reflections, being all the papers
could be found about those Comets. (43, 44.) Animadversions on this of April
last. Why the former conjectures were adhered to concerning the light of
Comets. (45.) Several sorts of shining bodies enumerated. (46) To which the
light of the Comet seems to have most affinity, and how produced. (47.) Further
described and explained. (48.) The reason of its parabolick figure demonstrated
from the proprieties of motion from or toward a gravitating body, as the Sun.
(49.) Concerning the wasting and lasting of the Cometical body. The bigness and
nature of the Particles that compose the Blaze. (50.) Some difficulties in this
supposition concerning the action of the Ether in levitation and ascent,
dissolution, shining, etc. cleared and explained by Experiments. (51, 52, 53.)
But would have been further examined by Observation if there had been
opportunity. (54.) That these assertions about the light of Comets may not seem
too paradoxical, some further Considerations and Observations about light are
added, and some new ways propounded. (55, 56.) Mr. Boyle's Memorial concerning
a Phosphoros, written for his own use, inserted; in which he first names the
Author of it, and describes his Apparatus. (57, 58.) Then the observables. 1.
Two spoonfuls of matter enlighten a large glass sphere. 2. A little enlightens
a large Cylinder. 3. Liquor shaken had a smoke and flasht. 4. A dry substance
affirmed to have continued shining 2 years, flashed. (59.) 5. Some dust of this
on a Carpet twinckled like Stars. Writing on paper with it shined, and smelt of
Sulphur and Onions. (60.) 7. The hand on which it was rubbed, shined, but felt
no heat. (61.) It fired Gunpowder first warmed. (62.) And white paper held
over coals. Other trials propounded, but refused. (63.) Some Experiments made
on the Phosphoros Baldwini in vacuo, and in the open air. (64.) Preserved in
Vacuo, but destroyed in Air. (65, 66.) Monsieur Gallet's Letter to Monsieur
Cassini, acquainting him with his Apparatus for observing in. (67, 68.) His
Observation of sour spots in. (69.) The particulars observed. (70. 71, 72.)
Monsieur Cassini's Reflections on these Observations. (73, 74.) Mr. Hally's
Letter to Sir Jonas Moore, containing an account of his Observations of sub
sole, three Southern Stars. The two Nubeculae, etc. (75, 76, 77.) Mr. Cassini's
farther discoveries about the diurnal motion, and several new appearances in.
(78, 79, 80.)

A second Discourse called Microscopium, or some new discoveries with
Microscopes, in a Letter of Mr. Leeuwenhoeck. (81. 82.) A confirmation of some
of them by Observations here. (83.) Mr. Leeuwenhoeck's second Letter,
containing Observations of the Globules of Blood, Milk, Phlegm, Gums first
dissolved, then precipitated out of the Spirit of Wine; Eels a thousand times
thinner than a hair. (84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89.) The ways how these discoveries
were made here. 1. By holding the liquor in small pipes, how filled, how made.
The Lamp, Pipe, Oil, Manner, Materials for making them described. (89, 90.)
Muscovy-glass used instead of these Pipes, and how the Microscope was fitted
for this purpose. (91.) What light convenient. Surfaces of bodies not perfectly
fluid apt to delude an Observer. (92.) Plates removing that deluding cause, and
what farther use of them. (93.) How to find the figure and texture of Animal
and Vegetable parts. Instance in a ligament of Beef. (94.) The figure of
Muscles hinted, and an instrument stretching them before the Glass described.
(95.) A description of the Microscopes used, 1. Of the single Microscope, and
its advantages and difficulties, (96.) another sort more easy described, and
the ways how to make and use it explained. (97.) Causes that vary the distance
of objects from the Globule. The use of Selenites and Looking-glass-plates, for
holding the liquor. A Microscope of one single refraction. (98.) The only
inconvenience of them hinted, how prevented by double Microscopes. Where these
are made. (99.) The double Microscope, and its parts, uses, and advantages
described. (100.) The benefit of a dark Room, and appropriated lights. And a
digression in answer to P. Cherubines Accusation. (101.) Some Observations made
with this Microscope hinted. Animalcules in the steeping of other Grains
besides Pepper. Their smallness estimated, and compared to a Whale. Muscular
fabric hinted. Milk, Blood, Fat, Sugar, Alum, etc. viewed. (102, 103.) Mr.
Young's Letter of one who trying to cure a Colic by leaden Pills, slipped one
into his Lungs; grievous symptoms ensue. (105.) Helps of skilful Physicians in
vain attempted, and particularly of Dr. Mayow, of suspending with the head
downward; though in the interim he married and had Children, yet it killed him.
(106, 107.) His body diffected, and remarkables taken notice of, and their
causes explained by Mr. Young, (from 107. to 112.)





COMETA, OR, Remarks about Comets.
ON Saturday morning, April 21. 1677. I first saw the Comet, of which I had
been advertised the day before. It appeared in the Sign Taurus, between the
base of the Triangle, and the unformed Stars in the Cloud of Aries, dignified
by P. Pardies, with the figure of the Flower-de-luce. The head of it was in a
right line, with the heart of Cassiopea, and Alamak, or the South foot of
Andromeda. and as near as I could judge by my naked eye (having no Instrument
or help by me) it was of the distance between the feet and the Girdle of
Andromeda, distant from the said Alamak toward the South.

Its tail sometimes as the Air was clearer and darker, extended about three
quarters of its distance from the aforesaid Alamak, and pointed directly at the
Star in the nose of Cassiopea of the fourth Magnitude, and consequently the
head of the Comet pointed not directly at the Sun (the Sun then being about the
eleventh degree of Taurus) but rather toward the fourteenth degree of the same
Sign. Its appearance was very small and slender, and as people commonly
ghessed, about two yards long; and the head about the bigness of a Star of the
first magnitude, but of a much fainter and duller light. Its blaze about three
of the clock seemed to rise straight upward, before that about half an hour
after two it leaned a little Eastwards, or toward the right hand, and after
three, as it rose higher, inclined toward the left side or Westwards. The head
to the naked eye was brighter than the blaze, and seemed to be somewhat bigger
than that part of it which immediately joined to the head; but those parts of
it which were farther distant, were of a much greater breadth; spreading wider
and wider, as they were more remote from the head, and in the same proportion
also growing fainter and fainter in their light, especially toward the
outsides: but the middle parts of medulla appeared much longer, and the
brightness much greater, which made the whole blaze to seem to taper, or be
pointed toward the top.

The length of the Blaze appeared sometimes shorter, and sometimes longer, by
several vicissitudes; and as the daybreak, or dawning increased, so the Blaze
shortened, and especially toward the sides near the top, and shortly after
before the Sun rose, disappeared.

But notwithstanding this shortning and lengthening of the Blaze, I could not
perceive any kind of motion in the parts of it, such as is observable in flame,
smoke, or other steams rising from a burning or hot body: but the same parts of
the Blaze seemed to appear and disappear in their proper places as if they had
been fixed and a solid body.

The first Figure I have here annexed will with some short explications,
represent the appearance of it to the eye, more plainly than by a multitude of
words, without it it is possible to express.

A, represents the head of the Comet, the middle of which appeared brighter
than any other part; about which was a hazy light somewhat like the shining of
a Star through a thin cloud; the lower part of which was pretty round and
defined. B, the neck of it, which seemed to the naked eye of less Diameter, and
less bright than the head, but through a six-foot glass, as I shall mention by
and by, it appeared bigger, though not so bright. The middle of this was very
bright, and seemed to issue from the Nucleus or Star in the middle of the head.
C, the brushy parts which were fainter and paler toward the sides, especially
nearer the top, which made the whole seem to taper and resemble the Figure here
expressed: Observing it with Telescopes (one of which was fifteen foot, and the
other six foot long) I found the shape of it much like this, which I have
represented in the second Figure.

It had a pretty bright Star (if I may so call it) near the middle of the head,
seeming much about the brightness of when near the Horizon, and was about 25
seconds in Diameter; as is represented by A, not perfectly defined, but hazy;
the cloudy part or beard of the body encompassing it on all sides: but that
part of the Coma B, which was next toward the Sun, was the narrowest: nor was
this Coma well defined, but the outward parts of it were fainter and fainter.
However they were regularly enough terminated to make the outwardmost bounds of
it of a kind of Parabolical figure; the most bent part of which was toward the
Sun, and most defined: And the bright Star of it was, as I have expressed it
about four of its Diameters distant from the said parabolical limb. The light
parts of the ambient Cloud seemed to spread gradually toward that side of it,
which was opposite to the Sun; but those which were next the middle were the
brightest: and always as they were farther and farther from the Star in the
head, the fainter and paler they were.

I could not observe any representations like those which are given us by Mr.
Hevelius, in his Cometography, neither in the Head, nor the Blaze, no more than
I could in those which appeared in the years 1664. and 1665. as may be easily
taken notice of by comparing these which I have delineated with those.

The middle part of the Blaze CC, which ascended from the Star in the middle,
seemed the brightest, and of this medulla or stem, those parts were brightest
which were nearest situated to the said Star. The sides of it grew fainter and
fainter, as they were farther from the head; and though they had brightness
enough to make them appear in a dark and clear sky, yet the dawning quickly
made them vanish, and disappear, as did any haziness of the Sky: and according
as the light increased, so was the Blaze diminished, after the order of the
tapering pricked lines expressed in the third Figure by aaa, bbb, ccc, ddd, etc.
and even in a clear and dark Sky, toward the farther end of the Blaze they
often disappeared for some short space of time, though the middle or stem
continued; and so it caused the remaining appearance to resemble the figure of
a very slender birchen whisk or brush, much like that represented in the first
figure.

The 22. from half an hour after two, till half an hour after three, the
North-east part of the Heavens to me was cloudy, and the Sky between the Clouds
was hazy, and the dawning struck much higher than the day before, so that I
could not find it.

The 23. with several friends I observed it again, the Sky being clear, and
confirmed my self in all my former observations, taking again diligent notice
of all circumstances remarkable, both with my naked eye, and with
Perspective-glasses. And I had this morning a very notable observation in order
to measure the bigness of the Star and its Coma which encompassed it, by
comparing it with somewhat fixed: for some few minutes before three of the Clock
the head of it past just behind the type or top-post of a tower not far
distant, and was quite eclipsed by it; and as soon as it appeared to have past
it, seeming yet contiguous, I observed it with my six foot Telescope, and found
the Coma or whole head to appear full as big as the said type or timber post,
and the Nucleus or Star in the middle of it, to be very near of the same
bigness of the iron spindle, upon which the weathercock was fixed. Whence upon
examining the bigness of the said parts, since by an accurate Instrument I
judge the head or Coma was about 4 minutes in Diameter, and the Nucleus or Star
about 25 seconds. I took notice this morning that it had much altered the
position in the Heavens, which it had upon Saturday morning, and that the Blaze
of it was very much deflected out of the line it appeared in the last time. And
with a small crossstaff, taking the distance of it from Alamak, and from Genib,
in the left side of Perseus. I judged it to be in the midway between the
Flower-deluce aforesaid, and Algol, or the head of Medusa, that is, about 14
degrees of, and 17 degrees of Northern Latitude: so that I judged its motion
almost East, but a little deflecting South. I was not much solicitous of making
observations of its true place, as not designing my present enquiry to be for
what kind of motion it had, conceiving its motion to be toward the Sun, and so
of very little duration: and expecting to hear an account of that from other
places, and persons that were better furnished with Instruments and
conveniences for observations of that kind than I was then.

The Blaze extended it self in a right line toward the Star in the right thigh
of Cassiopea, being a Star of the third magnitude. Its length at first was
about 7 or 8 degrees, and did sometimes seem longer, sometimes shorter, as I
noted before, without seeming to have any other motion in it but the Diurnal
motion, the same with the fixed Stars on Earth. Whence I collected, that the
head of it pointed toward the seventeenth degree of Taurus in the Ecliptic,
though the Sun at that time was about the thirteenth degree of the same Sign.

The 24. with several others, I attended the appearance of it, but the Sky in
that part of the Heavens was over-cast with Clouds.

The 25. I expected to have a farther Observation of it from half an hour after
two, till a quarter after four; but notwithstanding the South-easterly wind,
and the clarifying quality of the air, which before half an hour after three
had partly carried off, and partly dissolved the black thick Clouds (with which
the North-east parts of this Horizon was over-cast about three of the Clock)
and left that part of the Heavens where the Comet should have appeared clear,
and without Clouds. Yet the air being very high and heavy, as the Barometer
showed, the upper parts of it were so filled with the dawning light of the
morning, that neither the Blaze head or Star of the Comet appeared to me in the
least: nor had I any sight of it since.

The like appearance of the great height of vapors in the air, when it is very
heavy, I have often taken notice of, and have observed, that the twy-light and
dawning between the night, and appearing of the Sun is very much altered
thereby. And that a heavy air, when the vapors are raised high, will make the
length of them much greater, and consequently the night shorter. And a light
air, on the contrary, shortning them, does lengthen the night.

These were the most remarkable circumstances I took notice of in this Comet,
being altogether Physical, and designed only for enquirng into the constitution
of these wonderful bodies: the accounts and opinions we have hitherto had of
them of that kind, being very unsatisfactory. Though other Observations, to
wit, Mathematical, of the way, celerity, and magnitude of Comets have been
prosecuted with very much care, and great skill; such as those of the noble
Tycho, and the learned and diligent Hevelius, insomuch that I could not expect
to have better; yet as to Physical remarks, I wanted much information to be
able to satisfy many difficulties that occurred to my thoughts, upon enquiry
into the particular natures of them. I did therefore, as I designed, employ all
the time I could get of observing this Comet, in taking notice of such
circumstances as I judged would be pertinent to resolve any of those Queries I
had formerly made, in order to find out the nature of Comets in general. And
though the little opportunity I now had, and the disadvantageous appearance of
this last were very short of giving me that satisfaction in many particulars
which I wished for, and expected at first, yet since they may possibly serve
for hints to others that may hereafter have better opportunity than I, and that
I might understand what material objections could be made by observers from
preceding Comets, and that they might for the future more diligently take
notice of what from these queries and hints may be judged significant to this
design, such as they are I have here published as I had done formerly by my
Lectures in Gresham-Colledge, those which I had made of those in 1664. and 1665.

Now before I come to make reflections upon these remarks, I thought it might
not be improper to add some few of those things concerning those two former
Comets observed by me in the said years. I say, some few, because it would be
needless to set down all, especially such of mine as do agree with others since
published. I did therefore soon after I had seen the first Comet, to wit,
December 23. 1664. propound to my self certain Queries necessary to be
answered, in order to find out a true theory of them, and directed my
Observations accordingly; and they were these.

Of what substance its body, beard, and blaze is? and next, of what magnitude
each of those parts appear, and of what real magnitude they are?

Other Queries were concerning its density and rarity, its mutability or
immutability; that is, whether it dissolved and wasted or not? whether it were
fluid or solid? whether it participated of gravity or levity?

Whence it had its light, color, etc.

What was the figure of the Star, Radiation, Blaze, etc.

Whether the Blaze were always opposite to the Sun, or deflected? whether
straight or bended, etc.

What kind of motion it was carried with? whether in a straight or bended line?
and if bended, whether in a circular or other curve, as elliptical or other
compounded line, whether the unequal or concave side of that curve were turned
toward the earth? Whether in any of those lines it moved equal or unequal
spaces in equal times?

Through what parts of the universe it moved, and how far distant it was at
several times? Whether in the lower Regions near the Earth in the Atmosphere,
or near it, or in the Heavens, or fluid Ether, with which the space of the
Heavens is filled? Whether above or below the Moon, etc.

Whether it wastes, and is dispersed and consumed? or whether it lasts and
endures for a longer time? If it lasts, Whether it ever appears again, being
moved in a circle; or be carried clear away, and never appear again, being
moved in a straight or paraboloeidical line? Whether it be collected or
generated when it first appears? and dissipated or destroyed when it
disappears; or whether the several distances of it do not make that appearance?

Whether it may not have some such propriety, as the Star in Cete, whereby it
may shine and appear for a certain period, and again lose its light, and
disappear by several vicissitudes? and whether that may not give some account
of the appearance of so many Comets about Aries?

First, As concerning the matter or substance of the Nucleus Star or body, of
the hazy shining part encompassing it, and of the Tail or Blaze: I say, that by
comparing all the circumstances that I was able to take notice of from the
beginning to the end, I found that the Star in the head was of a very compacted
and dense light, and almost equalled that of Saturn; though it were not like
that confined by an equal limb: that there were some parts distinguishable in
this body, some having a brighter, others a fainter light. That these parts did
not continue the same, but considerably varied, which might in part be caused
by the differing position of those parts which were seen before, from the same
seen afterward, in respect of the eye, situate on the surface of the Earth,
moved one way, and the Comet moved another; though I do not conceive it wholly
ascribable to that, but partly also to a real alteration of the parts of the
Comet. That I did very diligently watch to observe if it were possible, when it
passed over any fixed Star to find whether it were transparent; as I had
several times observed the tail of it to be even in its brightest parts, but I
had not the opportunity; but that I did several times observe the tail of it
transparent, not only with the naked eye, but through a Telescope: if at least
the fixed Stars be above it, which I think few doubt, that the light diminished
by degrees toward the extremes of the hazy part encompassing it; and yet the
extremes of it as to that part of it which respected the Sun, seemed pretty
evenly and smoothly defined, especially through a Telescope: From all which
remarks, and from the velocity of its motion, I conjecture it to be made up of
solid matter, not fluid; that the body of it especially, is considerably dense,
but that the haziness or Coma about it is much more rarefied, and the tail
thereof is most of all. That this body is encompassed with a body most fluid,
and easily permeable, and which does with very little resistance give way to
the motion of it, or any other body through it, that it does easily admit at
least (if not actually take into it self) the parts of this body, Coma, and
Blaze. I say, admit at least, (though there may be many reasons alleged that
it does actually prey upon, and dissolve those parts into it self, as I shall
show by and by) because that we find that the extreme parts do extend but to
such a distance, and beyond that there is no appearance of light, and that the
light is from it self, and not produced by refraction or reflection of the beams
of the Sun, I shall show reasons by and by. And consequently, where there is
most light appears, there are the greatest number, and there is the greatest
density of the Cometical parts. The middle of the body may be as dense as the
body of the earth; and I have not observed my self, nor met with any body else
that has taken notice of any thing to the contrary: If I could have seen any
Comet to have covered any Star in its way, it would have afforded a very
circumstantial information, especially if for this purpose it had been taken
notice of with a good Telescope. What the density of the innermost parts of
this Earth we live on is, none knows; for though we find the parts on which we
tread to be very compact, and though by the industry of Miners it has been
proved so also to the depth of many hundred foot, as Georgius Agrieola relates:
and though it has been found so even to a greater depth by the soundings of
the bottom of the Sea, yet none can bring an undeniable proof that the same is
so solid to 25 miles deep; much less that it is so to the center: if therefore
the external shell of this Globe were broken, and removed, it is not impossible
but that the middle parts thereof may be of the same nature with the middle
parts of the Comets body; and that those parts (were the superficial parts or
shell removed) might, like these of Comets expand themselves into the
encompassing Ether. Nay we find, that notwithstanding the compactedness of the
superficial parts of this Earth, yet the Ether is able to take up into it self
vast quantities of them, and to keep them suspended, some of them, even to the
height of many miles, if any argument may be drawn from the height or length of
the dawning o^ (...); and this, notwithstanding the attraction of the Earth in
its perfect vigor, or the gravitation of these parts thus taken up, or their
endeavor toward the center of the Earth. How much more freely then might we
imagine the encompassing Ether to prey upon, and take up into it self the
internal parts, if they were of a loose and pervious texture, and almost in a
state of fluidity, like a heap of Sand, or a vessel of Alabaster-dust in
boiling, and were not so firmly united by the bonds of gravity, and the
vinculum of petrifaction, as we find the superficial parts of the earth now
are. There is one argument to prove to us, that there may be such a looseness
of the internal parts of the earth, and that is that the magnetical virtue
varies, which virtue without controversy diffused through the whole body of
the Earth, and which has a relation to the whole Globe, and to every
magnetical part ther^of. For by observation it is found, that the magnetical
virtue, acts upon a needle without it, as the magnetical virtue of a round
Loadstone does on a Needle applied without that, which, as I may elsewhere
show, has a respect to the center of the stone differing from all the respects
that Authors have hitherto ascribed to it, even of Gilbert, Kepler, Kircher,
Descartes, and our Countryman Mr. Bond, who I think was the first man that
endeavored to reduce the variations observed by Wright, Gellibrand, Coster,
etc. into a Theory and calculation. Now this magnetical virtue, (which may be
called one emanation of the Anima mundi, as gravity may be called another)
being diffused through every part of it, and seeming to be, as it were Tota in
toto and tota in qualibet part, and to be more spiritual, and to act more
according to Magical and Mystical Laws than Light, Sound, or the like, it
giving to every magnetical body, and every piece of it, though infinitely
divided, the same proprieties it has it self; This magnetical virtue, I say,
having such a relation, and being forced thus to vary, it is very probable that
the internal parts to which it has a respect, have a variation likewise; and
consequently, that these internal parts which are supposed generally very
dense, compact, and very closely and solidly united, may be notwithstanding
more loose, and ununited, and movable from certain causes.

To proceed therefore, I say, that it seems very probable to me, that the body
of Comets may be of the same nature and constitution with that of the internal
parts of the Earth, that these parts may, by the help of the Ether, be so
agitated and blended together, as to make them work upon, and dissolve each
other in the same manner, as we have often had examples of some of the parts of
the Earth; a late instance of which was at Mongibel or Aetna in Sicily, where
the Fire continued for a long time, and produced very considerable effects.
That this internal agitation may confound the gravitating principle, and so
leave the parts in a greater freedom to be dissolved by the encompassing
Ether, which is the agent that sets the other two at work to destroy each
other, that it may at length prey upon both, and dissolve them both into it
self; and consequently, not only the parts thus dissolved are elevated to a
greater distance from the center of the Star or Nucleus, or the superficies of
it, whose gravitating or attractive principle is much destroyed, the Coma being
in this Comet four or five Diameters of the Star or Nucleus: but having given
those parts leave thus far to ramble, the gravitating principle of another body
more potent acts upon it, and makes those parts seem to recede from the center
thereof, though really they are but as it were, left behind the body of the
Star, which is more powerfully attracted than the minuter steaming parts: for,
I suppose the gravitating power of the Sun in the center of this part of the
Heaven in which we are, has an attractive power upon all the bodies of the
Planets, and of the Earth that move about it, and that each of those again have
a respect answerable, whereby they may be said to attract the Sun in the same
manner as the Lodestone has to Iron, and the Iron has to the Loadstone. I
conceive also that this attractive virtue may act likewise upon several other
bodies that come within the center of its sphere of activity, though it is not
improbable also but that as on some bodies it may have no effect at all, no
more than the Lodestone which acts on Iron, has upon a bar of Tin, Lead,
Glass, Wood, etc. so on other bodies, it may have a clean contrary effect, that
is, of protrusion, thrusting off, or driving away, as we find one Pole of the
Magnet does the end of a Needle touched on the opposite part; whence it is, I
conceive, that the parts of the body of this Comet (being confounded or
jumbled, as 'twere together, and so the gravitating principle destroyed) become
of other natures than they were before, and so the body may cease to maintain
its place in the Universe, where first it was placed. Whence instead of
continuing to move round some central body, whether Sun or Planet, as it did
whilst it maintained it self entire, and so had its magnetical quality (as I
may so call it) unconfounded, it now leaves that circular way and by its motion
(which always tends to a straight line, and would be so were it not bended into
a curve by the attractive virtue of the central body) it flies away from its
former center by the Tangent line to the last place, where it was before this
confusion was caused in the body of it. In this line ('it is probable) it passes
from one part of the Heavens to another, and so passes through the spheres of
the activity of multitudes of central bodies; in the passing through which
spheres, it is not improbable that those parts which by their dissolution are
made of a nature differing from the body in the center, are rather expelled
from, than attracted toward it; and so being by this dissolution rarefied, and
loosened from the middle, and by their acting upon one another, and dissolution
of the Ether made of another nature, after they have every way dispersed
themselves to a considerable distance from their proper body, are converted and
driven in a way almost opposite to that expelling body, and so continue to be
driven away to such a vast distance, as to make out that prodigious length of
the tail or Blaze of some Comets (such as was that of 1618. which, as Kepler
reports, was extended to 70 degrees from the body or head of it) till at last
they are dissolved also, and commixed with the Ether within them. So that
though I suppose the attractive power of the Sun, or other central body may
draw the body toward it, and so bend the motion of the Comet from the straight
line, in which it tends, into a kind of curve, whose concave part is toward
the Sun, by reason that there are some central parts of it, which are not yet
destroyed, and so retain somewhat of its gravitating principle: yet I conceive
that all those parts of the Comet which are thus wrought upon by the other, and
changed into another state, and are very much rarefied, and produce light, are
of a clean contrary nature, and recede from the center of the Sun: much after
the same manner as we find any combustible body with us; as Coal, etc. where we
find that the body of the Coal, before it be resolved into smoke, is a very
dense, and very heavy body, and tends to the center of the earth; but the parts
thereof agitated by the Air and Ether into steams and smoke, and those yet
farther dissolved into flame, do tend upwards, and from the center of the
earth. Now though one cause of the recess of flame from the center of the Earth
be the gravity of the ambient Air. Yet it is not impossible, but that there may
be somewhat also of positive levity conjoined therewith. Most certain it is,
that there must be a tendency of receding, as well as a tendency of approaching
the center of the Earth, and other attracting body. And there may be much said
for the supposition, that the recess of the purest Ether, from the center, is
the cause of the motion of the grosser Ether, and of all other bodies toward
it, though there are also very considerable arguments against it. But this
discourse is not my present business, though it may hereafter be the subject of
a Lecture in this place; for upon it do depend some of the greatest operations
in the universe. And as in the History of the Creation, we have an account of
the production of light, immediately after the making of matter, which is a
motion of recess from the center of the shining body. Next that, a Firmament
which divided between the waters or the fluids of the one, and the fluids of
another part of the world. And in the third place, the collections of
particular fluids to one center, as the center of the Earth: and lastly, out of
that collection of fluids appeared the dry and solid land. So I conceive the
most proper way of speculating on these great productions of the omnipotent
Creator, may be to begin with the consideration of light, or the motion of
recess from the center of a body. Next, with the consideration of the cause of
the separating of fluid from fluid, as Ether from Ether, as I may so call
differing Aethers; because we have not yet distinct names in use, and the
reason of their conglobation, the Ether from the Air, the Air from the Water,
the Water from Quicksilver, Oil, or other fluid. Thirdly, the cause of the
conglobating property of each of these fluids when separated, how they accept
and embrace Homogenea, and reject or expel Heterogenea. And fourthly, how they
condense and settle together, and produce a solid body: whence proceeds the
confirmation of attraction or gravitation, etc. But to digress no further, but
conclude this part of enquiry in short, I suppose the Nucleus or Star of the
Comet may be much of the like nature with the central parts of the Earth, Moon,
Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, or other Planets, but much impaired in its attractive or
gravitating power.

Next, that the Coma or Hazy Cloud about it, may be of the nature of the
Atmosphere or Air about the Earth, or the Smoke or steams about a heated or
burning body, before they are quite kindled, converted into Flame, or dissolved
into the ambient Air.

Thirdly, that the Tail or Blaze is much of the nature of the parts of Flame,
though with those differences I conceive, that the parts of these steams are
not so close together, as are those of Smoke: nor does the motion of them,
though much swifter upwards than that of our Flame, serve to make them appear a
shining line; but being at that distance, they appear much slower to the eye,
and so discontinue the appearance; whence every shining particle appears only a
shining point, though in the parts of flame (where notwithstanding the motion
be much flower, yet being nearer, and so varying the position to the eye much
quicker) each of the shining parts makes an appearance of a line of light, and
all of them passing pretty near together, make the appearance of a continued
fluid flame; though that indeed be nothing but a great number of single parcels
of the burning body, raised up in the particles of Smoke. This will appear
evident if we consider the appearances easily to be taken notice of in light:
for it is obvious from multitudes of experiments, that any shining body, as a
candle or brands end, being moved very quick, makes the same impression on the
eye, that a line of light does standing still: And as obvious also that any
very light body encompassed with a dark medium appears to the eye under an
angle bigger than really it is, and a dark body encompassed with a light medium
much less. This any one may presently find, if he make a small hole through a
thin plate of metal, and holding it first between the light and the eye, and so
seeing the light appear through it, and then placing it so as there is nothing
but darkness appears through the said hole, for he will plainly perceive that
the same hole will appear much bigger in the former position than in the
latter. Upon this account indeed each of the shining parts of the Comet seems
to fill and occupy a much greater space than really it does: and so, as it is
observable in the milky way, a great number of these small shining bodies
though dispersed at a pretty distance one from another, yet by reason of the
imperceptibleness of each of them they all seem to coalesce into a stream or
Blaze of light, the brightness of which is yet farther augmented by a clear and
unenlightened air, and by such a part of the Heaven wherein there appears
fewest of the Stars, whether they be greater or lesser.

To the Query, Of what magnitude the Body, Coma, and Blaze of Comets may be? No
answer can be given until another question be first answered; and that is, What
is the place of Comets, and what is their distance from the Earth? It was the
opinion of most Modern Writers before Tycho Brahe and Kepler (I know diverse of
the Ancients thought otherwise) that Comets were sublunary Meteors, drawn up
into the higher Regions of the Air, and there set on fire, and so continued
burning till the Meteor were consumed; and as the matter increased, or wasted,
so did the appearance of the Comet. But this noble Dane, and several others
about that time found by accurate observations made, that its Parallax was less
than that of the Moon; and consequently, that it was farther distant from the
earth: that it must be a body of another magnitude, and nature, than most
before that time had imagined; and therefore that it ought to be otherwise
thought of than the generality of mankind believed concerning it. Many had been
the attempts of former Writers concerning them, to find out their parallax; and
whether from their unaccurate instruments, or from their less skill and
diligence in using them, or from an imagination of the solidity, and
impenetrability of the Celestial Orbs, or from error in their calculations, or
from comparing Observations made at distant places, one or both whereof were
unaccurate, or from a prepossession of Tradition or common Fame, or from what
other cause soever it were is uncertain; but 'twas generally concluded by them,
that all Comets were sublunary Meteors: and there are not even at this day
wanting some of the same opinion, though for what reason I know not. 'Twill be
hard to convince some of these, that the opinion they have hitherto received
for good, is not so, because they will hardly give themselves the trouble of
examining strictly into the matter: And to understand the nature of Parallaxes,
and how significant they are in determining the distances of bodies from the
surface of the Earth, to certain degrees thereof; beyond which, by reason of
the imperfections in Instruments, and Observations, and the exceeding niceness
and curiosity necessary, they signify very little. It is not my present design
to explain what Parallax is, that I would suppose my Reader to understand;
otherwise there can be no reason shown him to convince him that it is possible
to prove that this or that Comet was not nearer than so many semidiameters of
the Earth, nor farther off than so many. There are then two ways, by which we
may come to some certainty of what distance a Comet is; and those are, first
the Parallax of its Diurnal motion, or its Parallax caused by the Diurnal
motion of the Earth. And secondly, the Parallax of its proper motion compared
with the Periodick or Annual motion of the Earth. The first of these may be
observed two ways; either by two Observers at parts of the Earth very far
distant from each other, but as near as may be under the same Meridian: as
suppose the one in London, the other in St. Helens; both conspiring in their
observing of the place of the Comet amongst the fixed Stars at the same time.
Or secondly, by one Observer in the same place, by observing the place of it
amongst the fixed Stars, in its rising or setting, and in a greater, or if it
may be, its greatest height: The noble Tycho by very accurate Observation of
the Parallax, proves the Comet of 1577. to be above the Moon. Kepler by his own
Observations proves that of 1607. at its beginning to be four times farther
distant; and I doubt not but some may have been above forty times farther. But
I do not yet find that any Observations have accurately determined that which
is indeed the great help by which we are enabled to judge of the nature, and
all the other accidents and proprieties of Comets. The Aristotelian Philosophy
for a long time prevailing, made the world believe them to be nothing but
Exhalations from the Earth, drawn up into the higher Regions of the Air. But
Tycho by his Observations of their Parallax, raises them out of that
confinement, but yet he seems to place them in an Orb about the Sun. But Kepler
frees them from that confinement, and assigns them the Universe to expatiate
in. But none of all these do accurately prove the true distance of them, their
Parallax being for the most part so very small, that I fear Instruments with
common lights will hardly reach them. But we must expect from future
observations made with Telescopical Instruments to receive a certain Answer to
this Query. Certain I am, that the Comet which began to appear in November
1664. and disappeared in March following, was far removed beyond the distance
assigned by Kepler. For by my own Observations diverse times repeated, I could
not find any sensible Parallax, though I endeavored by a new method to make my
Observations more accurate. Now though I had not the convenience of making use
of a Quadrant, or any such Instrument, to observe its place when near the
Horizon, yet the way I took, would, I think, be as good; which was this: With a
very good six foot Perspective-glass or Telescope, I observed the place of the
Comet, in respect of the adjacent small Stars, as soon as it appeared, and so
traced its way till it disappeared in the vapors of the Horizon: the like I did
several other days successively, taking notice by what degrees, in what times
it made its progress, to see whether by its Parallax, when near the Horizon, it
would have been deprest below that line of its motion, which it kept, when at a
greater height above it. But though I tried this several times, yet I was not
able to discern that the Parallax of it caused either any sensible bending of
the line, or any sensible inequality in its progress, by which I should have
sooner found it, than by taking its altitudes with common Instruments: though I
confess these Observations were made when the motion of the Comet was slow, and
consequently, when in probability it was far distant from the earth. To me
there seems no doubt but that it was a long way removed above the Moon when I
made these Observations: for had it been of an equal distance with that they
allow the Moon, it must this way have manifested a very sensible Parallax of
diverse minutes: but whereas I could not certainly distinguish any sensible at
all, it must be many times higher than the Moon. Now that this way is
abundantly to be preferred before an Observation made with a Quadrant for the
taking of its altitude, is pretty evident; because, by this means the greatest
part of the irregularity, caused by the refraction or inflection of the Air is
removed; for by this means, though the Parallax be very large, yet the
refraction or inflection of the Air will not amount to many seconds, both the
objects being almost equally raised by refraction, especially when 5 or 10
degrees high; nearer than which the small Stars vanished out of sight by the
thickness of our air. It follows therefore that a Semidiameter of the Earth
must be a very inconsiderable measure in its distance.

This part therefore of the Theory of Comets has been much defective hitherto.
If we enquire the Parallax of them from the Observation of diverse men made in
differing places* we shall find them so differing one from another, that there
is great reason to suspect them all: Nay, not only so, but in this Comet of
1664. by comparing two Tables or Charts of the Stars, and Constellations of
that part of the Heavens, through which the Comet past, on which was also marked
out its way and place from day to day, both of them Printed from Copper Plates,
I find that strange errors and mistakes may be created, notwithstanding all the
Authors care and accurateness possible, from the carelessness or neglect of the
Graver: This I noted in the two Tables of the learned and accurate
Mathematician, P. Aegidius Franciscus de Gotignies, (whose skill and care from
other works of his and other Observations of this Comet I am sufficiently
assured of) and found that by the first table upon the 21/31 of December, 1664.
it was in 4 of in Longitude, and in 33 of Southern Latitude; but by the second
it is placed at the same time in 4o for its Longitude, and in 34 of South
Latitude. And this error is not only committed in the place of the Comet, but
also in the place of the fixed Stars: for Riget in the first Table is placed in
30 South Latitude, and in 12 for Longitude, but in the second in 31 South
Latitude, and in 11 for Longitude: both which differ considerably from the
place of it assigned by Riccioli and Grimaldi; according to whose Observations
it should be in 31. 11 South Latitude, and 12. 11. 40. in Longitude.

Now if there be these differences to be remarked in the Observations of one,
we cannot but expect that much more disagreement should be found between those
which have been made by differing persons in differing places, and with
differing ways, and differing Instruments. And upon examination I have found it
no better: for from comparing such Observations as I have received from several
parts of the world, even of those which have seemed more than ordinarily exact,
I find them for the most part so unaccurate, that though they sufficiently
manifest that the Comet of 1664. which lasted above four months, was visible in
most parts of the world, and seen to pass in all those places pretty near in
the same way amongst the fixed Stars. Yet they are so far from manifesting the
Parallax, that some of them make the place of the Comet to be quite contrary to
what Parallax would make it; some of the Southern Observators placing it much
more Southwardly than those of the North. Others indeed of them make the
Parallax so great, that one might ghess it to be not so far removed from the
Earth. Something indeed in the general might be ghest of the way of that Comet
amongst the fixed Stars, especially when it approaches them pretty near: but
for exactness of Calculation for Parallax, they were no way useful. And even in
the former use too it seems very doubtful for comparing the Charts of the
Comets way amongst the fixed Stars published by that diligent and unwearied
Observer Mr. Hevelius of Dantzick, the abovementioned P. Gottigies, Professor
at Rome, and Monsieur Petit of Paris, I find, that the two former make the way
of the Comet to lie below the Star in the Bill of Corvus; whereas the later,
though in a Latitude interposed between the parallels of the former, makes it
to lie above, or to the North of it: and with him agree some Observations which
I have seen of Monsieur Hugenius. Other disserences I found between those
Tables in the way of the Comet of 64. near the middle of its arch; wherein
Monsieur Hevelius all the way places it more Southward than either Monsieur
Petit, or P. Gottignies: for whereas both P. Gottignies, and Mounsieur Petit
make it pass above the Star of the third magnitude in the right shoulder of
Lepus, Monsieur Hevelius makes it move below it, which seem to be ascribable to
Parallax. But I fear much cannot be concluded of certainty from them.

I shall not trouble the Reader with a multitude of other Histories, which I
have received concerning that Comet of 64. nor with the disagreements of them
one with another, and perhaps of most with the truth. They have given me
sufficient trouble in the examination of them, having little other benefit from
them, save only this, that I was thereby informed what a man might think of a
great number of Astronomical Observations that have been made: for, saving the
exact Observations of some few such, as Mr. Hevelius, Mr. Aurout, P.
Gottingnies, etc. truly diligent and accurate men, the greater the Collections
of Observations are, the more trouble and difficulty is created to the
Examiner; they not only confounding one another, but perplexing those also
which are real and perfect.

Now the reasons or causes of these inconveniences seem to be these.

First, the want of accurate and knowing Observators.

Secondly, The scarcity of convenient Instruments.

Thirdly, The Imperfection of the Tables of the fixed Stars.

For the Observators, it is not enough to know how to manage an instrument, or
to have a good eye, or a dextrous and steady hand; but with these there must be
joined a skilfulness in the theorical and speculative part, and add to all a
love and delight in the thing it self; and even all these will signify but
little, without convenient and accurate Instruments, such as may be easily
manageable and sufficiently exact.

The first of these the love of the study being in it self the most excellent,
or the encouragement of Princes, Noblemen, and other Patrons of this Learning
must procure: and where both of these concur, thence most is to be expected,
and most fruit has hitherto been proceeded; though there are not wanting
diverse eminent instances where the first reason has been the only inducement.

As to the second, I have already in some of my former Lectures described
several convenient ones for these purposes; and therefore I shall not here add
any more concerning it.

But as to the third, I hope the indefatigable labor and skill of Monsieur
Hevelius will shortly supply the present defect, though it had been much to be
wished, that the Instruments he had made use of had been fitted with
Telescopical sights. These Tables, if well done, will alone (as to the business
of Comets at least) supply the place of all other Instruments almost, save only
a thread, especially if they be so delineated in Tables after the Tangent
projection, as that the minutes of every degree may be very distinguishable,
which will not swell the Maps of the Heavens into an extraordinary large
volume, and may possibly be the cheapest Instrument for this purpose an
Astronomer can be furnished withal; for having such a volume of Tables, it will
be very easy with a thread and one's eye, screen'd only with a spectacle made
of a thin plate of Brass, with a small hole through it, instead of a glass, to
observe what place the Comet possesses amongst the fixed Stars: for having by
the help of the said thread observed what two Stars lie in the same line with
the Comet on one side of it, and what other two Stars lie in a line with it,
which is at right angles (as near as may be) with the former line, by finding
out those four Stars in the Tables, ordered according to the Tangent
projection, and with a Ruler, drawing lines over them respectively, where those
lines do intersect, there will be the true place of the Comet, from which it
will not be difficult to find out the true Longitude and Latitude of it by a
Sector with Tangents. Now as these Tables of all the fixed Stars visible to the
naked eye, would serve for finding its place whilst very big and swift of
motion; so the like Tables of the small Telescopical Stars that lie near its
way, when almost disappearing, and moving very slow, will by the help of a pair
of measuring Compasses placed within the eye-glass of the Telescope, and a
straight line or hair drawn cross it, serve to find the true motion and way of
it, when only visible with a Telescope: according to which method I made the
annexed Schemes, and Observations of the last appearances of the Comet.

Now since neither from my own, nor from any other Observations that I have
hitherto met with, there can be any certain conclusion drawn of the distance of
these Comets, save only this, that their distance was very great, and much
higher than the body of the Moon, because else there must have been a
considerable Parallax caused by the Diurnal motion. The next enquiry will be,
what other ways there are of knowing its distance. Now though none could be
more demonstrative than the Parallax found this way by the Diurnal motion, yet
there are some other which seem more easy arising from the consideration of
the motions that may be thought to be concerned in the producing the
appearances. And though they be wholly hypothetical, and so need some other
arguments to prove the ground and principles on which they are founded, yet
since there are not very many considerable ones wanting to make them probable
and rational, I shall here add somewhat of my inquiries after the distance,
position, motion, magnitude, etc. of these Comets by these means.

Of these ways there are several depending upon several suppositions which
produce very differing effects, as to the magnitude, distance, motion, and way
of the same Comet.

The suppositions are these:

Either that the Earth moves in an annual orb about the Sun, as the Sun is
supposed by others to move about the Earth: Or that the Earth is perfectly
fixed, and has no such motion.

Next, that the Comet moves either in a straight line* or in a curve line; and
the curve is either a circle, or some other regular or irregular curve.

Further that the motion of the Comets in these lines is either by equal or
unequal spaces in equal times.

Now according as we take this, or those of these differing suppositions, and
compound them together, so will the product of them be strangely differing.
Amongst the great variety of compositions of these principles or suppositions,
these seem the most simple, and consequently being any otherwise proved, will
best determine the true distance and way of the Comet.

First, To suppose the Earth to stand still, and the Comet to move equal spaces
in equal times in a circle.

Secondly, To suppose the Earth to move in an annual Orb about the Sun, and the
Comet to move through the Ether or Expansum, equal spaces in equal times in a
straight line.

Thirdly, To suppose the Earth to move (as above) in its annual Orb, and the
Comet also to move equal spaces in equal lines in a circle.

The other are indeterminate and infinite, and nothing can be concluded from
them as to the distance, magnitude, motion, etc. of Comets; for the line or way
of the Comet may be placed at any distance, if we will suppose it moved in an
uncertain curve, with unequal degrees of velocity: And indeed, upon a supposal
of an inequality of motion, nothing of its way or distance can by any of these
suppositions be found out. This fault had that of Tycho Brahe, where he
supposed an unequal motion of it in its Orb about the Orb of Venus, which was
founded upon the first Hypothesis, but had introduced into it some inequality
of motion; besides his own supposition, that it was moved about the Sun, and
the Sun about the Earth. See the fifth Figure. Keplers way, which was after the
second Hypothesis, had the same fault; for he supposed the annual motion of the
Earth, and the motion of the Comet in a straight line, but introduces an
acceleration of motion in the Tangent toward the latter end.

The third way I have here taken, and from the best observation I could meet
with, I have delineated its respects or angles to the Sun: and accordingly
supposing it to move equal spaces in equal times, in a curve which for so much
of it as the Comet was observed to pass was very near a Circle, I found this
Circle would fall as it is expressed in the seventh Figure, where it is obvious
to take notice, that when the Comet was nearest to the Earth, namely, about the
19. or 20. of December, that it was not nearer than an eleventh part of the
distance of the Sun; that on the 23, it was twice as far, that on the 29. it
was four times as far; that on the 15. of January it was as far as the Sun, and
on the 14. of February it was above twice as far distant as the Sun. That this
way or Orb of the Comet is here bended so as (if it were an entire Circle;) one
part of it would go without the Orb of Jupiter, as the other which is here
delincated comes within the Orb of the Earth; that the plain of this Orb is
inclined to the plain of the Ecliptic about 18 degrees, that if from several
parts this Orb perpendiculars be let fall upon the Plain of the Ecliptic,
those perpendiculars shall fall in an Ellipsis, part whereof shall fall within
the Orb of the Earth in ^, and the opposite without the Orb of in. That the
Comet moves a Sextant of this Orb in about 130 days, and consequently if its
motion should continue the same in such a Circle, it would appear about
February, March, or April, 1667. but being so far removed toward the South
Pole, will here hardly be seen: but by those that live toward the South, it
may appear to have some such motion by the South Pole, as that of 1618. had by
the North. And it is not impossible, but that the Comet of 1618. might be the
same with this, if we suppose the Nodes of it to have a motion contrary to the
order of Signs: and that the same Node which in this Comet, according to this
supposition was in, was then about or: but these as conjectures I shall not
insist on, because neither in this, nor in that have we Observations
sufficiently accurate to build any Theory upon. Now though upon these
suppositions the motion and appearances of the Comet seem to be very regularly,
and very naturally made out, yet it is not the only Hypothesis for that design:
nor do I believe it so evident a demonstration for that end, as some would
suppose; though for other reasons I am apt enough to think that opinion of the
Earths motion very probable: but the motion of this Comet is so well made out,
by the contrary supposition, that I think it may be alleged for a greater
argument against the motion of the Earth, than for it: for if we only grant one
of the former postulata, namely, that the body of the Comet is moved equal
spaces in equal times, and a quite contrary postulatum to the former; namely,
that the Earth remains fixed as to an annual motion, we may find all the
observations of this Comet, especially the most accurate of them, to happen so,
that the Comet being supposed to be moved in a great Circle, whose unequal side
is turned toward the Earth, whose center is extended toward the fixed in and
whose Semidiameter is about sixscore times the nearest distance of the Comet
from the Earth, and the Comet be supposed to be moved very near equal spaces in
equal times, we shall find, I say, all the appearances most exactly solved, and
indeed much more exactly than by the other supposition I was able to find any;
for by this supposition both the magnitude, longitude, latitude,
retrogradation, station, and direction of the Comet is most exactly made out as
any one might have found that should have by this means examined with me the
observations I have hitherto either made or met with: and indeed all the
Observations hitherto have so well answered this Hypothesis, that I do almost
promise my self to be able to see this Comet a month or six weeks hence, after
the Sun has past by it; if by its exceeding elongation it be not quite grown
out of sight, as it is now indeed already so exceeding dim, and faint, that it
cannot be seen without a very good glass, which will endure an exceeding big
aperture: nor could I these two last nights perceive it, though the Air were
clear; but the reason I attribute to its nearness to a fixed of: This
Hypothesis is explained in the seventh Figure. By this supposition the return
of the Comet will be much longer, and the time of seeing of it much more
uncertain; because the curvature is so little that the making the circle a
twentieth, or a sixteenth part bigger or less, does not much alter the
regularity; whence it is exceeding difficult, unless we had much more accurate
Observations than I have hitherto met with, to determine exactly the bigness of
the circle, and consequently the time of the return. And by this supposition
the Comet may be supposed either nearer or farther from the Earth at any
distance, which is not contradicted by a Diurnal Parallax; that is, it may be
supposed either above Saturn, or below the Moon, or in any place between; by
supposing only, that the farther the nearest part of the Circle is distant from
the Earth, the greater must that Circle be, and the swifter the motion of the
Comet in it: to prove which affirmation, let in the Eighth figure A be the
Earth, BCD the Orb of the Comet supposed very near the Earth, and EFG the Orb
of it supposed at a greater distance: let H be the center of BCD, and I of EFG,
and let AC, be to CH, as AF, to FI, all the lines drawn from the point A, so as
to cut the Circles BCD and EFG, shall divide those Circles EFG, and BCD, into
similar segments: as let ABE be a line drawn cutting those Circles in B and E:
I say, the Arch BC shall be similar to OF. In which Hypothesis if we have
together with the place of the Comet when stationary, the place of it when in
its greatest celerity, perige, or the places of it when of the same celerity on
each side of its perige, we have from thence the proportion of the Radius of
its Orb to the perigean distance, and consequently all the other distances, the
line in which it appears when stationary, being the Tangent to the Circle in
which it moves, as ABE, to which a Perpendicular raised at BBE, and produced
till it cut the line AC, (produced) at HHI, it gives the Center of its Orb HHI,
and the proportions of the lines AB, AC, BH=HC, or of AE, AF, EI=FI, the Angle
BAC, being given by observation. So that by this Hypothesis the Phenomenon of
the motion and bigness of the Comet will be solved, though supposed of any
distance. Nor are these the only Hypotheses by which the hitherto observed
Phenomenon may be solved: for if we will admit an unequal motion, such as is
now granted to all the Planets: and if further we will admit it to be moved in
an Elleipsis, or other such like curve, there may be diverse other Hypotheses
that will solve the Phenomenon; so that the Comet may be supposed to have no
motion at all as to Longitude, but only as to Latitude: that is, it may be
supposed to be moved in an Elleipsis, described in a plain which shall be at
right Angles with the plain of the Ecliptic, and the ways of the Earth in it:
it may be supposed also to have been moved direct, according to the order of
the signs, that is, to have been first about Gemini, in respect of the Sun, and
to be now in some part of Leo: And it is not impossible to solve the phenomenon
of its periodick or proper motion, though it be supposed not so high as the
Moon, and that the motion of the Earth passing by it did really alter its
motions, had there not been made some Observations about the Parallax of it,
which prove it higher: so that according to this or that Hypothesis which we
take, the time of its return, if permanent, will be longer or sooner.

And these Hypotheses may be so various, that till regulated by very exact
Observation of the Parallax, it is not to be hoped that the appearance of a
Comet can be certainly predicted: So that I fear the prophetic saying of
Seneca, Erit qui demonstret aliquando in quibus Cometae partibus errent, cur
tam seducti a caeteris eant, quanti qualesque sint, will hardly be verified at
this time by the help of this present Comet. Though in truth I cannot find by
the examination of several of them, but that they all seem to promise very
fairly a return of it: for all the Calculations I have hitherto made of its
motion, seem to cast it into a circular, and not a into straight line, as
Kepler supposed; and indeed upon examining even Keplers own Calculations of
those Comets which he observed, and has endeavored to make to move in a
straight line, I cannot find that any of them will be found to move equally in
such a line: but to solve the appearances, he is fain to make them move in such
supposed straight lines, by a line of Tangents, that is, to make the motion of
Comets accelerated the further they are moved; all which Phenomenon may be very
easily solved by supposing them to have moved equal spaces in a curve or
circle. The physical reason indeed seems pretty difficult, by what means it
should be confined or bound so as to move in a Circle: but this is no more than
is usually supposed in all the Planets, and without supposing a kind of
gravitation throughout the whole Vortice or Coelum of the Sun, by which the
Planets are attracted, or have a tendency toward the Sun, as terrestrial
bodies have toward the center of the Earth. I cannot imagine how their various
motions can with any satisfaction be imagined, but that being granted (for
which had I now time, I could alledg many reasons, and may do it hereafter on
another occasion) not only the reason of all the irregular motion of the
Planets may be easily found, but the reason also of the strange and various
motions of the Comets. The reason why its Beard is for the most part opposite
to the Sun, which was another Query, of which I have already said somewhat of
my suppositions, and shall now add, that the brighter spot or kernel in the
middle did seem to be some kind of body, which though it be not actually burnt,
may yet by the encompassing fluid Ether be dissolved and wasted, and those
dissolved parts may ascend upwards, or from the center of the Sun, (which seems
indeed to be the center of gravitation throughout the whole systeme of it.) To
illustrate which explication, I could produce several experiments which would
make a perfect representation of the phenomenon of the body, and beard of the
Comet: I shall only instance in one. Take a very clear long Cylindrical Glass,
which may hold about a quart of water; fill it three quarters full with water,
and put into it a quarter of a pound of Oil of Vitriol, and in the midst of
this suspend by a small silver wire, a small wax-ball, rould in filings of iron
or steel, and you may plainly observe a perfect representation of the Head,
Halo, and Beard of the Comet; for the menstruum falling on, or dissolving the
iron, there is a continual eruption of small bubbles, and dissolved particles
from all the sides of this body; and after the eruption they all ascend upwards
from the center of the earth; for being of a much lighter consistence than the
anbient liquor, they are by the greater gravity of that, continually protruded
upwards. The same appearance may be made with any kind of menstruum, and a
convenient dissoluble body suspended in it; so that if we suppose the Ether to
be somewhat analogous to a menstruum, and that there is a gravitation toward
the center of the Sun, if the Nucleus or head of the Comet be supposed such a
dissoluble substance, the phenomenon of the shape of the Comet may, I think, be
rationally explained. Now that the Ether may have such a kind of propriety,
seems to me to be argued from this, that the Air about the Earth seems to owe
its original to it, it being only a dissolution of terrestrial bodies into the
Ether, the Ether being the principal fluid body, and greatest part of this
dissolution; and the substance of the Air, some very few and small saline and
earthy particles: of which elsewhere. By this Hypothesis the phenomenon of the
Comet may be solved; for hence it is easy to deduce the reason why the Beard
grows broader and broader, and sainter and fainter toward the top: why there
is a Halo about the body; for this will appear clearly in the experiment: why
the Beard becomes a little deflected from the body of the Sun; for if the
dissolving Ball be by the wire moved either this way or that way, the arising
stream or bubbles will bend the contrary: and to countenance this supposition,
both in those Comets observed by Tycho, Kepler, and also in this last the beard
was contrary to the motion; so that the head or body going faster, seemed to
leave the beard or tail somewhat behind: by this supposition also 'twill be
easy to explicate why the beard is sometime bended, and not straight, and why
it is sometimes brighter upon one side than upon another? why the bottom of it
is more round, and the other sides more undefin'd; and diverse of the like
phenomenon. Against this supposition it seems difficult to conceive whence so
vast a body should be generated; next, how it should be able to supply such a
constant stream of ascending parts, and yet last so long as this has done,
almost a quarter of a year. Thirdly, Whence such a newly generated body should
receive so great a degree of motion. In answer to which, I say, it is not
impossible but that the body of it may be as old as the world, and that it may
have then received its first determination, or laws of motion, and may have
ever since preserved them, that it may have been all this time also in
dissolution, and yet not be quite wasted; and that it may continue yet for many
ages before it be quite dissolved into the Ether. And to make this probable,
diverse experiments and reasons might be alleged, as that of the slowness of
the wasting of many bodies, by the dissolution made on them by the fire: the
slowness also of the dissolution of multitudes of bodies in menstruums. And I
have already shown how small a quantity of dissolved particles will be able to
make as great a show of light: besides that, the motion of the ascending stream
or beard being but slow, there needs no very quick supply of other parts. We
see also into what a vast quantity of smoke a small parcel of a combustible
body may be turned. From all which particulars, it is not unlikely but that the
Comet may be a body moved with a regular circular or elliptical motion as the
Planets are, that it may be a body of such a constitution, as that the fluid
Ether through which it passes, may dissolve it much after the manner as a
menstruum; (such as Aquafortis, Spirit of Niter, etc.) does a dissoluble body;
that by this means there may be a slow, but continual eruption of somewhat
opacous parts, which may by their dissolution afford a sufficient quantity of
light to make as great an appearance as any of the Comets, that this stream or
beard may by the resistance of the Ether be a little deflected backwards in
the same manner as an ascending stream of smoke will be by the resistance of
the Air, if the burning body be moved this or that way through it, that the
body of the Comet may be both as ancient and as lasting as the world; and that
this which has lately appeared may have appeared heretofore, and may likewise
hereafter appear again; that it is probable the nearest distance of it was much
greater than that of the Moon, that the length of its Beard was longer than its
distance from the Earth, and consequently several times longer than the
distance between the Earth and the Moon; that its visible way among the Stars
was very differing from a great circle, especially toward the latter end, when
it became retrograde; that its way through the Ether could not be supposed
equal in a straight line, though it might be supposed equal in a curve or
circle, that the exact way of it could not be certainly determined by the best
Observations I have yet met with: and that therefore the best help we have to
ghess of its way and distance, is by its manner of moving, as to appearance
among the fixed Stars, which I have already shown to be explicable by various
Hypotheses: for both the Earth and Comet may be supposed to be moved, either
both one way, or contrary ways, or cross ways, the Earth may be supposed to
stand still, and the Comet only to be moved, and the like.

These Requisites therefore being hitherto wanting in the Observations I have
met with of this Comet, all that can be said of it will at best be but
conjectural and hypothetical; since nothing can be reasonably built upon those
Observations where the truth of them is dubious; wanting therefore sound
materials to work upon in this Comet, I had recourse to the Observations of the
noble Dane Tycho Brahe, being sufficiently satisfied both of the ability,
industry, and veracity of that excellent Author, who left nothing unattempted
for the perfecting of such Observations as seemed to him requisite for the
completing a History of that Comet which appeared in 1577. And from those
Observations of his I endeavored to trace the way of it according to several
hypotheses; and found, that supposing the Earth not to be moved with an annual
motion, but only a diurnal about its own Axis, the way of Comets will fall in a
line very near approaching the nature of a circle, though neither into an exact
circle, nor an exact ellipse; and therefore seems irregular, and not at all
probable. Again, supposing it moved about the Sun, as Tycho has done, we find
from his Calculation of it, he was fain to allow it a quicker and slower motion
in its Orbit, to solve the Phenomenon, which seems to me but a shift, that will
serve to help out any lame Hypothesis whatsoever: And that granted, and the
Parallax of the Comet unknown, I will undertake very easily to make out almost
any Hypothesis, which is the fault also of Mr. Horox his Hypothesis, wherein he
supposes the Earth to be moved about the Sun, and the Comet like a Rocket to be
shot out of the Sun, and by degrees to return to it again; in which Hypothesis
indeed there seems to be much more reason for an inequality of motion, though
not in the manner as he has placed it; 'twas very rational that the motion of
it at first, if cast out of the Sun, should be very swift; but then it ought
likewise to have accelerated its motion in the same manner in its return back
to it again, which it does not in his Hypothesis; for a stone or any other
heavy body being shot up into the Air, does make its return back again to the
Earth, almost by the same degrees of velocity, by which it ascended from it:
almost, I say, because the resistance of the Air does so far impede the motion
of the body through it, that it never suffers it to acquire the same degree of
velocity with which it was first shot upward. This is sufficiently evident from
a Pendulum, which if it be thrown upwards, and be suffered to return back, it
will never rise again on the opposite side to an equal height, with that it
descended from, on that side toward which it was thrown: but besides, in his
Hypothesis he seems to take no notice at all of the Latitude of the Comet,
which seemed to carry it much farther off from the Sun, when he supposes it to
be returning nearer. And indeed upon the whole his Hypothesis seems rather a
product of chance than of any contrivance. For he in endeavoring to set off
the Longitude of the Comet according to Tycho's Tables, and to trace its way by
supposing the Earths annual motion, making use always of the same Radius to set
off the aspect, or apparent angle of it with the Sun, his line of Chords he
made use of did always direct the point of his Compasses to the place where he
situates the Comet, as may be easily found by examining the ninth figure; where
you may find that he places the Comet always equally distant from the Earth,
and that distance is always equal to the distance of the Sun, which has so many
inconveniences and improbabilities, that I shall not insist farther on it;
especially since I do not find that he bestowed any farther pains in
explicating or cultivating this his Hypothesis, than only the bare delineation
of this ninth figure. But to return to Tycho's Hypothesis, if that be true, why
did not the Comet again appear after a certain space of time? and why could not
he have foretold when it should again appear, as well as he could predict the
appearance of Venus, about whose Orb he supposes it to circulate? I shall pass
by several other very material objections that might be made against that his
supposition, because many of them might be made also against his Hypothesis of
the Heavens in general, which I shall the rather omit, because I do not find he
has many followers in that supposition; the generality of Astronomers embracing
rather the Copernican System, especially as it is refined and rectified by the
ingenious Kepler.

Lastly, I endeavored to trace the way of the Comet from Tycho's Tables,
according to Keplers Hypothesis; which was, that the appearances of the motion
of the Comet were ascribable to two causes; namely, the motion of the Earth
about the Sun in its annual Orbit, and the motion of the Comet in a straight
line, not accelerated according to the proportion of the increase of Tangents;
but upon supposition that it moved equal spaces in equal times: (for I cannot
imagine what reason he had to suppose its motion to be accelerated, and much
less why he should assert it to be according to the proportion of Tangents,
which in a little time must necessarily come to move infinitely swift: than
which nothing is more hard to be granted.) And I found it after many trials and
essays to fall in a straight line, inclining to the plain of the Ecliptic by
anangle of 47. 40. and cutting it in 9 degrees of Scorpio, if computed out of
the Sun, and moved faster by half than the Earth in its Orb; and this to so
great an exactness to answer all the Observations of Tycho, that from a very
large Scheme which I drew of it on a plain, I could never find many minutes
difference; so that I concluded that to be the most likely Hypothesis for that
Comet, it seeming to solve all the several Phenomenon of the motion and
magnitude of the Comet, with the least imaginable difficulty, and to be most
agreeable with my physical notions of Comets: For, first it only supposes a
solid body moved in a fluid, with an almost direct motion. I say, almost
direct, because for some physical reasons, as I have said before, I imagine it
not exactly straight, but inflected a little toward the curvity of a circle,
which I shall presently endeavor to explain farther in this Comet. Next, it
supposes that body to move in that line almost equal spaces in equal times; I
say, almost equal, because some of those equal spaces may be increased by an
accelerating cause or principle, such as that of a gravitation toward the body
of the Sun, placed in the center of its Vortice or System, when the motion of
the Comet carries it toward the Sun, and may be diminished from other impeding
causes, such as the impediment of the fluid medium through which it passes, and
the attraction of the Sun operating on it when its motion carries it farther
and farther off from it: besides, it is not unlikely, but that the attraction of
the Earth, or some of the other Planets may have some kind of influence on it,
especially, when its line of Direction does somewhat nearer approach those
attractive points. But the deflection from a straight line is always so much
the less by how much the swifter the body is moved, and by how much the farther
off its line of trajection is perpendicularly distant from those attracting
bodies. According to this supposition of mine, I have endeavored to make out
all the appearances of this last Comet, taken notice of in the best
observations I have yet met with, amongst which I find no one of the Parallax
satisfactory, as in the tenth figure, let S represent the Sun, ORB, the Orb of
the Earth, ACDEF, a bended or curve line in which the Comet is supposed to
move: the Comet then coming into the Sphere of the attractive power of the Sun,
by the straight line PAGE, at A, the power of the Sun works on it, and by
degrees attracting it toward its own Center by that time the Comet has moved
to C, the attractive power has deflected its direct course from PAGE, to CH,
and so the Comet would continue to move in that straight line CH, but it is
still deflected so, that at D, it moves toward I, but the gravitation of the
Sun attracting it, deflects it from that line toward E, and so from E to F,
when it begins again to Jet out of the attractive beams of the Sun, and so it
will continue to proceed, as if it had come to that point by the line MFL, the
reason of which is the great velocity of these bodies, which are generally much
swifter in their motions than the Earth or other Planets are supposed to be, in
theirs. We must seek out some other way therefore of finding of the distance of
Comets than the commonly used: I shall therefore somewhat further explain the
contrivance I newly invented for this purpose, by which not only the Parallax
of the Comet but of the Planets also may be found with great facility and
exactness.

Having a large Telescope prepared (as I formerly directed) with Eye-glasses
capable of taking in an Angle of about two degrees at once, and furnished with
a dividing Scale, observe when the motion of the Comet or Planets is not too
fast, the position and distances of the small fixed Stars which are next
adjoining to the moved body whose Parallax you would find; of these small fixed
Stars you shall seldom miss a sufficient number, which will be taken into the
glass at once, if at least the object-glass be allowed a very large aperture;
and having found such Stars as will be convenient for your purpose, be very
diligent in taking, by the help of the dividing Scale, the exact distance of
them one from an other, and when the body is highest above the Horizon, viz. in
or near the Meridian, by the same means take the exact distance of it from two
or three of the nearest and most conspicuous fixed Stars about it, and by the
help of a plumb-line, hung likewise within the cell, near the dividing Ruler,
find exactly the positions of all those bodies you take notice of to the
Perpendicular or Horizon, which may be easily enough done, if together with a
Plumb-line or Perpendicular placed within the glass you have also a small
Diagonal thread fastened to a ring, whose circumference is divided into 360
degrees, and moveable so as by the finger easily to be turned any way, by which
means this Diagonal thread may be made to cross over any two of the bodies you
observe, and by observing what division of this divided limb the Perpendicular
cuts, it will be easy to determine the exact position of those Stars to the
Horizon; this same may be done by the dividing Scale also, if that be fixed in a
divided Circle which is movable, in the same manner as the thread is supposed to
be. This Observation, with all other circumstances of it is likewise to be
repeated at the setting or rising of the Planet or Comet, and again the next
night when it comes to the Meridian, and in each of those observations the
exact time is to be noted by a time-keeper, and the altitude by some of those I
have before described, for by comparing these three observations together it
will be very easy to find what irregularity in its motion is ascribable to its
Parallax. And this will be so much the easier because the examination and
reduction of it may be done (with as great exactness as the observation can be
made,) by the help only of Ruler and Compasses, for all the distances will be
set off by equal divisions of straight lines, the line also of the periodick
motion, whether of the Comet or Planet, especially if the observations be made
when the body is near an opposition with the Sun, which is much the best time,
will be with sufficient exactness taken for a straight line, and the motion in
that line may be supposed by equal spaces in equal times; for the difference
between the Tangents of the centesms of a degree to two degrees is not
increased much more then 2/1745 that is not a quarter of a centesm of the
hundredth part of a degree, which is much more exact than I fear our
observations will ever be.

Another way of finding the Parallax may be by the help of exact observations
made by several persons at the same time, in places much differing in Latitude,
though as near as may be under the same Meridian (because of saving the trouble
of Calculation, and for being assured that the observations were both made
exactly at the same time) each person by the help of very long Telescopes
observing the exact distance of the body from the small fixed Stars next
adjoining.

A third way of finding the Parallax of Comets is wholly new, and though
hypothetical (as supposing the annual motion of the Earth, and the motion of
the Comet in a right line through equal spaces in equal times) yet it is founded
upon a Problem in Geometry (invented by the incomparable Mathematician, Doctor
C. Wren) which is truly noble and wholly new, and though it had been of no use
in Astronomy, deserves none of the meanest places in Geometry, by the help of
which (which is much more than either of the other ways is capable of) one may
easily find the true parallax of the Comet, from any four exact observations of
it, made at differing times in the same place: Nor does it require so nice and
accurate Instruments and Observators as are altogether necessary in the other
ways. The Problem as I received it, is this.

Problema.
Datis quatuor lineis utcunque ductis (quarum nec tres sunt parallelae neque ab
eodem puncto ductae) quintam ducere quae a quatuor primo datis in tres parts
secetur ratione and positione datas.

Sint in Figuris 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, and 18, quatuor rectae ADC, BEC, AE, BD,
productae versus K, g ph,M, oportet quintam ducere ut KM, quae secetur a primo
datis in segmenta KN, NO, OM, secundum datas rations R, S, T. Fiat ut Rad S,
T, simul sumptas ita CD, ad CF. Rursus ut Tad S, R, simul sumptas, ita EC, ad
CG, ductis autem AGH, BFH, a mutua intersectione H, ducantur H g K, H ph M,
parallelae nimirum lineis AC, BC, quae mediae interjacent inter extremas, BD,
AE. Denique inter puncta extremarum KM, ducatur Recta secans medias in NO. Dico
segmenta KN, NO, OM, esse in Data ratione RST.

Quoniam FD, parallela est ipsi HK, ergo ut CD, ad CF, ita K g, ad g H, and
quoniam g N, parallela est ipsi HM, ergo, ut K g ad g H, ita KN, ad NM, ergo ut
KN, ad NM, ita CD, ad CF; sed CD, ad CF, est ut Rad S, T, simul sumptas, ergo
KN, est ad NM, ut R, ad ST, simul sumptas. Similiter quoniam EG, parallela est
ipsi MH, and ph O, ipsi HK, demonstratur MO, esse ad OK, ut T ad S, R, simul
sumptas* Quare tres KN, NO, OM, erunt ad invicem ut R, S, T, ergo ducitur linea
K M, cujus tria segmenta a quatuor lineis datis intercepta sunt in data Ratione
R, S, T, and servata quidem positione sive rationum ordine R, S, T, quod erat
faciendum.



From the invention of which Problem 'twill be very easy by any four
observations Graphically to describe, or Geometrically to calculate the true
distance of the line of the trajection of the Comet, and consequently to answer
all those questions that can be demanded concerning the bigness of the body and
head, and concerning the bigness and length of the blaze, and concerning the
distance of it from the Earth in every part of its way when it was nearest the
Earth, when nearest the Sun, where it cuts the Plain of the Ecliptic, seen
from the Sun, and where seen from the Earth, with what Angle it was inclined to
the said Plain, how swift the motion was, that is, what length it passed, in
what time, when it must appear Stationary, when Retrograde, when disappear, and
the like.

According to this method I received at the same time, (whilst it yet appeared
very visible to the Eye, and was not Retrograde,) the way of the first Comet
delineated by the said person, which did very near solve all the appearances
preceding and subsequent, which I have therefore here annexed in the Table
expressed in the 19. 20. and 21. figures, where in the 19. is delineated the
Place of the Sun in the Center of the Circle, N, D, I,, which represents the
annual Orb of the Earth about the Sun, the points between N and D represent the
places of the Earth in that Orbit in the days of November, and the lines drawn
from them to the points in the straight line, represent the lines in which the
Comet appeared in respect to the Sun; in like manner the points between D and
I, the places of the Earth in December, and the lines drawn from them to the
straight line, as before the visible places of the Comet at those times, etc.
The 20. figure represents singly the several Longitudes of the Comet at several
times seen from the Earth. And the 21. represents the several Latitudes, at the
several times, together with the true distances of the Comet at those times,
both which are made out of the 19. figure, where E at the end of the line
represents the Center of the Earth, from which to the figures in the pricked
curve-line, are the true distances of the Comet, the Perpendiculars from those
figures to the line EC are the signs of the Latitude of the Comet from the
plane of the Ecliptic EC, the aforesaid distances being made the Radii.

Now though according to my former Delineation the Comet seemed to take a
circuit, as if it would within three years return to its former position, yet I
am not wholly convinced that it moves in a circle or Ellipse, but I rather
incline to the incomparable Keplers opinion, that its natural motion tends
toward a straight line, though in some other suppositions I differ from him.

As first that the Comet perseveres exactly in a straight line. Secondly, that
after it has past its Perige it accelerates its motion in proportion to
Tangents of equal Angles. Thirdly, that it either is extinguished dissipated,
broken in pieces, or burnt out into ashes. Fourthly, that it receives all its
light from the Sun. Fifthly, that if the blaze were not made by the beams of
the Sun passing through the head of the Comet, and so carrying the parts along
with them, the blaze would not be opposite to the Sun. Sixthly, that the cause
of the bending of the blaze is the refraction of the Suns rays in the body,
and their being bent by the Ether as with a wind (which is the opinion that
the Ingenious Descartes follows also.) To these I cannot consent, and I have
many objections to several other of his opinions concerning this matter, which
would be too tedious to insert; only I shall add, that having traced several of
the Comets according to the best observations I could get, I found it very
difficult to make their motion fall in a straight line, unless it be granted
that their motions are really accelerated and retarded in that line, which
seems not so probable, at least not in those parts of their transit where he
places them. And particularly by tracing the way of this Comet of 1664. it is
very evident that either the observations are false, or its appearances cannot
be solved by that supposition, without supposing the way of it a little
incurvated by the attractive power of the Sun, through whose system it was
passing, though it were not wholly stayed and circumflected into a Circle, as I
have already mentioned.

That it is not extinguished or quite burnt out, when it ceases to appear, I
argue from this, that I was able to see it with a Telescope above a month after
it disappeared to the naked Eye, as may be seen by the observations I have
annexed in Fig. 4. and had not the cloudy weather and the light of the Moon, and
nearness of the Crepusculum hindered, I suppose I might have seen it much
longer, as I am apt to believe the great one in 1618. might have been seen
several months longer, if it had been diligently followed with Telescopes, it
disappearing in such a part of the Heavens as might have been seen every clear
night between the Crepusculum and Dawning.

Nor can I suppose it to receive all its light from the Sun, since if so it
would follow, that the Nucleus in the head, would have a dark shadow opposite
to the Sun, the contrary of which has always been observed. Nor can I well
understand that the Sun beams are like a stream of water, carrying the parts of
the Comet along with them so as to make its blaze, since no such effect is
found of them here with us upon the Earth: Nor how they should come to be
bended like smoke, since we observe no such property of light in a uniform
medium, such as in probability the Ether is.

These were my thoughts about those Comets which appeared in 1664. and 1665.
which I have found in several loose papers of Lectures, read in the beginning
of 1665. And I have not had the opportunity of making many observations since,
concerning Comets, save these two last, in which I had not the convenience of
observing any thing certain concerning its motion or Parallax. And therefore I
applied my self to mark as near as I could the true figure of it, through a six
foot Telescope, and to take notice of as many circumstances as the short time I
had would permit, which though they were very short and transitory
observations, and I wanted time to repeat them so often as I could have
desired, yet even from them I was sufficiently satisfied, that I had reason to
adhere to my former conjecture, that the light of the Comet did not depend
wholly from the reflection of the Sun beams, from the parts thereof, but rather
from its own light, for upon well considering of the form of this Comet, I
manifestly saw that the middle of the blaze was brighter than the side parts
thereof, and especially that part which was immediately opposite to the Sun, was
the brightest of all, which would have been otherwise if the light had depended
wholly from the deflection of the rays of the Sun, for one might rationally
conclude that the Nucleus or Star in the middle, which reflected so great a
quantity of light should have caused a darkness in the parts behind it, as we
see all strong reflecting bodies do, and consequently that the middle part of
the stream or blaze, especially that which was next the body should not have
been so bright as those other parts to which the light of the Sun had a more
free access, unless it may be said that even the Star it self, though it seem
so bright, is notwithstanding not so Dense, but that it admits rays enough to
pass through it unreflected, to inlighten the parts behind it. But this seems
not so likely, since be the body of the Star supposed a thousand times thinner
than a Cloud (which yet it is hard to suppose, since it gives so considerable a
reflection,) yet it being in all probability ten thousand times bigger in bulk,
the rays in passing through so great a bulk, must needs meet with more
obstruction than in the thinnest Cloud, and yet we find that there is no Cloud
so thin, but casts shadow opposite to the Sun, and therefore in probability
this would do the like, but I diligently observed that there was no such
appearance here, but the contrary, that is, that where the shadow should have
been, there was the lightest part of all the blaze, and consequently in
probability it did depend upon some other cause than a reflection of light.

It is a hard matter to assign the particular cause of its light, but it seems
from these circumstances to be very probable that it was (in part at least)
from its own nature, whether that might be somewhat of that of the Sun and
Stars, or of that of our fire, or of that of decaying fish, rotten wood,
glowworms, etc. or of that of the Ignis Fatuus, at Land or Sea, or like that
of Seawater, or a Diamond, or like that of the falling meteors, or
Star-shoots, it will be very hard to determine, unless one had a much greater
stock of observations to build upon. But it may possibly be somewhat of the
nature of them all, though it agree not in all particulars with any one of
them. All these ways that I have named seeming to agree in one particular, and
that is an internal motion of the parts which shine, whether that motion be
caused by some external menstruum dissolving it as in fire, and Ignes fatui, or
an external motion, stroke, or impulse as in a Diamond, Seawater, and possibly
some Ignes fatui, or from the parts of the bodies working and dissolving one
another, as in decaying fish, rotten wood, glowworms, or whether it be
susceptible of a much more subtle impulse, even from light it self, as the
Bononian stone, and Bladwines Phsophorus, which seems to be so harmonious (as I
may so speak) to the motion of light, that a new motion is thereby raised in
it, and continues for some time to move of it self after the impulse or
influence ceases, not much unlike the unison string, or other sounding body,
which in Music receives a tremulation and sound from the motion and sound of
the unison body, or string that is struck.

To me It seems most probable that the body and parts of the Comet are in a
state of dissolution, whether that dissolution be caused by the parts of the
Ether through which it passes, after the manner as a Torch is dissolved by the
air, or whether by the internal working of the constituent parts one upon the
other, as in Gunpowder, shining Fish and rotten Wood, I cannot determine; but
I rather guess it to be in some things analogous to the one, and somewhat to
the other, though not exactly the same with either. And this I conceive from
the figure and make of the shining parts, for if it had been of the same nature
with a Torch, the blaze would have resembled that of the flame of a Torch or
Candle, that is, the sides would have been brighter, and the middle darker, as
I have shown in my Lampas; whereas it was very manifest that the middle of the
blaze was brightest, and of that blaze that which was next the Star or Nucleus
was brighter than that which was further off: whereas in flame the contrary is
very observable, as I have in the said Treatise shown.

From the shape of the figure, the manner of its dissolution seems to be thus.
The Star or Nucleus in the middle, seems to be the fomes or source from whence
all the light proceeds: this we suppose to be a dense body encompast with a
very fluid body (such as the Ether seems to be) but of such a loose and spongy
nature, as that the Ether does cause those parts which are contiguous to it,
to be dissolved and expanded into it self. This dissolution and expansion I
conceive does generate or cause the light that seems to proceed from it, that
dissolution causing such a motion of the Ether, as is necessary to produce the
appearance of light; now so long as any part thereof remains in dissolution, so
long does it continue to shine, as is also observable in the flame of any body
burning in the air, but when the part separated from the body is quite
dissolved into the Ether, the effect of shining ceases, as it does also in the
parts of flame. Now I have observed that the blaze is so very much rarefied,
that first the Ether I conceive comes very freely to every particle of the
body after it is separated from it, but especially to the outermost, and
continues to be encompassed with it so long as till it be quite dissolved into
it, which I conceive to be at a little farther distance from the head than the
greatest length of the blaze seems to be to our sight. And further I conceive
that the outward parts being thus encompassed more perfectly with the free and
undisturbed Ether, are sooner dissolved into it than those of the middle, and
consequently the sides seem first to disappear, and the middle parts continue
their shining to a much greater distance from the Star in the head, though
somewhat also of that appearance may be ascribed to the dispersing and rarity
of the parts near the sides.

The Nucleus or Ball in the middle of the head, which I have called the Star, I
conceive to be dissolved equally on all sides, and the parts which are
dissolved or separated from it, I conceive to fly every way from the center of
it, with pretty near equal celerity or power, like so many blazing Grenades or
Fireballs, these continue their motion so far toward the way they are shot,
till the Levitation from the body of the Sun deflect them upwards, or in
opposition to the Sun into a Parabolick curve, in which Parabolick curve, every
single particle continues its motion till it be wholly burnt out, or dissolved
into the Ether. These are continually succeeded by new separations from the
aforesaid body in the same manner as it is observable in a burning, steaming, or
smoking body in our air, or a dissolving body encompassed with its proper
menstruum, as I before mentioned, and will so continue until the whole be at
length dissolved into the Ether, through which it passes.

It has been demonstrated by Torricellius, of bullets or other bodies cast or
shot upwards, that the same or equal bullets discharged or shot out from the
same point, with the same degree of strength, but with differing degrees of
inclination to the Horizon, each of them shall be moved in a parabolical line,
and every one of those parabolical lines shall touch a parabolical line, whose
axis is the perpendicular, and whose apex is distant from the said point, the
full altitude of the perpendicular shot: So that supposing in the twenty second
figure, A to be the point from whence all the shots are made with equal
velocity, AC the greatest height of the perpendicular shot, and AD the greatest
Horizontal random at 45 degrees of inclination, and suppose EDCDE a parabola
passing through those points DCD, all the shots made with equal bullets, with
equal velocity from A, but with all variety of inclination between the
perpendicular upwards, and the perpendicular downwards that touch the said
parabolical line, and consequently if there be an indefinite number of such
balls continually flowing out of the point A, with equal degrees of celerity
every way dispersing themselves equally in orbem, the whole aggregate of such
an emanation will make a solid parabolical conoeid EDCDE. Now about the point
A, if we suppose a Sphere as BBBB, and from this Sphere an indefinite number of
such equal Balls be thrown off perpendicularly to the superficies of it, from
every point thereof, with equal celerity at their leaving it, those emanations
will form also a conoeid, which will be very near the same with the former: And
if this Ball in the middle be supposed a burning and shining body, and that all
these emanations have every one of them equal light in proportion to the Globe
BBBBA, the effect produced hereby will perfectly resemble the appearance and
figure of Comets, if at least the Parabolical conoeid be inverted; which will
somewhat explain the manner how I conceive the figure of the Cometical body is
naturally, and most proportionably formed; for if the effect of such an
emanation of shining bodies be examined, it will very plainly exhibit the exact
and true apparent figure of Comets, as they may be seen through a good
Telescope, which is to me a very great argument, that it is the genuine cause of
its shape and figure: Now though the Comets appearance be this way caused, and
so a man might conceive the Globous body would in a little time (by so copious
an emanation) be consumed, yet I do not believe that it does in a short time
wast and disperse the whole Ball, nor can I conceive that the disappearing of
those blazing bodies toward the latter end, does depend upon their dissolution
(though possibly that may somewhat diminish them) but that rather is to be
ascribed to their distance and position in respect of us: Though this I
remember I observed very manifestly in that of 1664. that the body toward the
latter end of its appearing was very much less in proportion to the radiations
about it, than it seemed to be at the beginning, but whether that might not be
partly ascribed to the great distance it then was from us, and the turning of
the head pretty near toward us, and thence the spreading of the Tail
(appearing beyond it,) might add to the breadth of the radiation about the
Nucleus, I will not positively determine. Now though for explication sake, I
have compared the parts separated from the body of the Comet to blazing
Grenades or Fireballs, yet I would not be understood to suppose these parts
so separated to be of any very large bulk, for I see no necessity to suppose
them bigger than the Atoms of smoke, or the particles of any other steaming
body, or than the parts of the Air, which make the body of it appear thick and
hazy; nor do I believe that all the light of the Star, head, and blaze, does
depend only upon the shining of the dissolving body and particles thereof: but
I do suppose that it does proceed both from the reflection of the Sunbeams
from those parts, and also from an innate and momentaneous light produced by
the action of dissolution wrought on the parts by the incompassing Ether.

It may possibly seem very difficult to suppose that the dissolution of the
parts of the Nucleus, by the incompassing Ether, should cause or impress so
violent a motion into the separated parts, as to make them depart from it to
the space of four or five Diameters, before it be overpowered by the power of
Levitation from the body of the Sun, and so deflected into a parabolical line
upwards. It may likewise seem strange to suppose that the Ether should have
such power in it, as first to dissolve a body into it self, and secondly to
cause a shining, and thirdly to cause a Levitation of the dissolved parts
upwards; whereas I supposed before (and I think it is very manifest) that they
cause a gravitation downwards, toward the Center of the Sun: But to these for
explication, I answer that we need not go far for instances to make these
things probable, the Atmosphere about the Earth, as I have formerly mentioned
in my Micrographia, I take to be nothing else but the dissolution of the parts
of the Earth into the incompassing Ether; for the proof of which, I could
bring many arguments, were it here a proper place, by which I could most
evidently demonstrate the thing to be as I have asserted. It is here evident
that this Ether does take up the particles of bodies to a very great distance
from the surface from which they were separated, and it does not only raise
them but susteins them at those heights, nor is this peculiar only to the
Ether when a menstruum, but to all dissolving menstruums in general.

As to give one instance, in stead of many, we find that Gold (the heaviest of
all Terrestrial bodies we yet know,) being dissolved by Aqua Regis, is taken up
into it, and kept suspended therein, though the parts of the Gold be fifteen
times heavier than the parts of the Aqua Regis. So Pit-coal though very heavy,
is yet taken up into the Air, and kept suspended therein, though it will be
found to be some thousands of times more ponderous than the menstruum of the
Air that keeps it suspended.

Many reasons I could produce to show the great power of the Ether, and the
universality of its activity almost in all sensible motions, but reserving them
for another Discourse hereafter, I shall at present, only mention those
suppositions which seem to have the greatest difficulty, in this Theory, viz.
how the dissolution of the parts of the Star by the incompassing Ether should
cause light, and secondly how it should cause an actual Levitation of the
dissolving particles upwards. For the explication of these two difficulties, I
must at present crave favor to explain them by examples taken from operations
of Nature in the Atmosphere wherein we live, very similar and analogous to
them. First, for the production of light, we find that the Air incompassing the
steams of bodies prepared by heat or otherwise, and made fit for dissolution,
does so operate upon them, as to make them fly and part asunder with a very
impetuous motion, insomuch that the small particles or Atoms of the dissolved
bodies, do not only leave one another, but depart and dart out with so great an
impetuosity, as to drive off all the incompassing Air from their Center from
whence they flew, and this I take to be the cause not only of their Light, but
also of their Levity upwards, this may be seen very plainly by the small parts
of crackling Char-coal, which upon the blowing them with Bellows, and so
crowding a great quantity of the fresh menstruum on them, fly and dart asunder
with great celerity and noise, but is abundantly more evident in the kindling
of Gunpowder, where the impetuosity is so very great as to drive away not only
all the incompassing Air but all other bodies, though never so solid, that
hinder its expansion, in the performing of which operation the Ether has a
great share, as I may hereafter show, it is very probable that the Ether in the
same manner dissolving the particles of the Star, causes the Atoms thereof to
fly asunder with so great an impetuosity as to leave a vacuity even of the
parts of the Ether, which flying asunder does not only cause light by
impressing on the Ether a stroke or pulse which propagates every way in Orbem,
but makes such an agitation of the the Ether, as causes a rarefaction in the
parts thereof, whilst the parts that are once actually separated, by continual
rebounding one against another before they come to be at rest and quietly to
touch each other, prolong that first separation or vacuity between them.

This Explication, though it be somewhat difficult, yet I hope it is
intelligible, and may be, with probability enough, supposed to be the true
cause of the appearance, whilst there is nothing therein supposed which is not
manifestly the method of Nature in other operations; and though the supposition
even of the Ether, may seem to be a Chimera and groundless; yet had I now
time, I could by many very sensible and undeniable experiments, prove the
existence and reality thereof, and that it does actually produce not only as
sensible effects as these I have named, but very much the same, and many others
much more cosiderable, which by Philosophers have hitherto been ascribed to
quite different causes.

Had I been able to have made some other observations (which I designed, if I
had had the opportunity of seeing it, some of the succeeding Nights,) I should
have hoped to have explained several other difficulties concerning the nature
of the body and blaze of Comets, but being therein prevented, I must leave them
till I can make some further observations on some Comets that may hereafter
appear.

In the mean time that what I have discoursed concerning the light of Comets,
may not seem so altogether paradoxical and unintelligible as some may imagine,
I have here added an account of some trials and observations made on shining
substances of natures exceedingly differing from those that are commonly to be
met withal. And this I the rather do, not only because it affords an instance
of shining where there is no Air, but that hereby I may enlarge the limits of
their imagination, who shall consider of this subject. For nothing is more apt
to misguide our reasoning than a narrow and limited knowledge of causes, we are
not to conclude the body of a Comet a sulphurous vapor exhaled from the Earth
and kindled above, because here are such vapors observed and such effects
produced, nor a collection of Sun beams made by a Lentiformed vapor, after the
manner of a Burning-glass (as some eminent Writers have lately done,) because
some such appearances may be Artificially produced in a smoaky or thickened Air;
since if we diligently inquire, we may find that light which is the most
sensible quality of Comets that affects our senses, may be, and really is
produced by very many, and those very differing ways. In Nitre and Sulphur
kindling each other by heat, we have one way; in a body burning in the Air a
second, in a heated Iron or Glass a third, in a piece of Iron hammered till red
hot a fourth, in rotten Wood and decayed Fish a fifth, in Glowworms,
Scolopondras, and other living Worms, and in the sweat and excrements of other
living creatures a sixth, in a Diamond rubbed a seventh, in Dews Ignes fatui,
etc. an eighth, in Seawater a ninth, in the Bononian stone, and in the
Phosphorus Baldwini (which I take to be much of the same nature) a tenth, in
the Phosphorus of Mr. Kraft an eleventh, and possibly wholly differing from all
these, may be the light of the Sun, a twelfth, and that of the Star may differ
from that of Sun, and the Comet may be differing from all the rest. Whether
they be so or not, the being acquainted with the several proprieties of them
will the better enable one to judge of what is pertinent to be observed in
Comets, in order to find out which is concerned.

The Phenomenon of most of these shining bodies are very common and obvious,
and therefore needless to be added; but that of the Bononian stone prepared,
and that of the Phosphorus Baldwini (lately discovered by Mr. Baldwine) are
rare and hard to be got, and the effects of them are wholly differing from all
the ways I have yet met with, and will therefore prove Experimenta Crucis,
highly instructive in the Theory of Light, of which more hereafter. As for the
Phosphoros Fulgurans of Mr. Kraft (more scarce and rare than the other) it is
wholly differing from any of the rest, and very strange and surprising, at
least it appeared so to me, who had the good fortune to be present at a good
part of the experiments made by the Author in the presence and at the Chamber
of the Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire that great Judge and Promoter of all curious
inquiries into Nature and Art, who at my earnest entreaty, was not only pleased
to commit to writing what he observed, but (for the information of Curious and
Inquisitive Naturalists,) to give me liberty here to publish it.

A short Memorial of some Observations made upon an Artificial Substance, that
shines without any precedent Illustration.
September, 1677.
ON Saturday the fifteenth of this month I was after supper visited by Mr.
Kraft, a famous German Chemist, who was pleased to come and show me a strange
rarity he has newly brought into England, to the sight whereof he allowed me
to invite several members of the Royal Society, he being desirous, because the
matter he imploys is very costly and of difficult preparation, to be a good
Husband of it, and by showing it to several curious persons at once, to exempt
himself from the need of showing it often. The Company being met, the Artist
took out of a pretty large box he had brought with him, diverse Glass Vessels
and laid them in order on the Table. The largest of them was a Sphere of Glass,
which I guessed to be four or five Inches in Diameter, being hollow and entire,
save that in one place there was a little hole, at that time stopped with sealing
wax, whereat to pour in the Liquor, which seemed to me to be about two
Spoonfuls or somewhat more, and to look like muddy water made a little reddish
with brick-dust or some other powder of that color, he also took out of his
Box three or four little pipes of Glass sealed, or otherwise stopped at both
ends, being each of them somewhat bigger than a Swans quill, and about five or
six Inches long, and having at one end a small fragment or two of that matter
that was to shine in the dark.

He likewise laid upon the Table three or four Vials of several sizes, but none
of them judged capable to hold above very few Ounces of water: in each of which
Vials there was some Liquor or other, that was neither transparent nor well
colored, which Liquors I confess upon his making no particular mention of what
they were to do, I was not curious to compare together, either as to quantity
or as to color. Besides all these substances which were fluid, he had in a
small Crystalline button Bottle, a little lump of matter, of which he seemed to
make much more account than of all the Liquors, and which he took out for a few
moments to let us look upon it, whereby I saw that it was a consistent body,
that appeared of a whitish color, and seemed not to exceed a couple of
ordinary Pease, or the kernel of a Hasel Nut in bigness, some other things it is
possible Mr. Kraft took out of his Box, but neither I or (for ought I know)
others of the Company took notice of them, partly because of his have, and
partly because the confused curiosity of many spectators in a narrow compass,
kept me from being able to observe things as particularly and deliberately as I
would gladly have done, and as the occasion deserved. Which Advertisement may I
fear be but too applicable to a great part of the following Narrative.

The forementioned Glasses being laid in order upon the Table, the windows were
closed with woodenshuts, and the Candles were removed into another Room by that
we were in; being left in the dark we were entertained with the ensuing
Phenomenon.

I. Though I noted above that the hollow Sphere of Glass had in it but about
two Spoonfuls (or three at most) of matter, yet the whole Sphere was
illuminated by it, so that it seemed to be not unlike a Cannon bullet taken red
hot out of the fire, except that the light of our Sphere looked somewhat more
pale and faint. But when I took the liberty to hold this Glass in my hand and
shake it a little, the contained Liquor appeared to shine more vividly, and
sometimes as it were to flash.

II. I took one of the little pipes of Glass formerly mentioned, into my hand,
and observed that though the shining matter had been lodged but at one end, yet
the whole Glass was enlightened, so that it appeared a luminous Cylinder, whose
light yet I did not judge to be always uniform, nor did it last like that which
was included in the Vials.

III. In the largest of the Vials next the Spherical already mentioned, the
Liquor that lay in the bottom being shaken, I observed a kind of smoke to
asscend and almost to fill the cavity of the Vial, and near the same time there
manifestly appeared as it were a flash of lightning that was considerably
diffused, and pleasingly surprised me.

IV. After this I took up that small Crystaline Vial that I lately called (by a
name familiar in our Glass-shops) a Button-Bottle, wherein was contained the
dry substance which the Artist chiefly valued, as that which had continued
luminous about these two years, and having held that Vial long in my hand, in
the same position in reference to my eye, and looked attentively at it, I had
the opportunity to observe (what I think none of the Company did) that not only
this stuff did in proportion to its bulk, shine more vividly than the fluid
substances, but thaat which was the Phenomenon I chiefly attended) though I
could perceive no smoke or fumes ascend from the luminous matter, yet I could
plainly perceive by a new and brisker light that appeared from time to time in
a certain place near the top of the Glass, that there must be some kind of
flashy motion in the matter that lay at the bottom, which was the cause of
these little coruscations, if I may so call them.

V. The Artist having taken a very little of his consistent matter, and broken
it into parts so minute, that I judged the fragments to be between twenty and
thirty, he scattered them without any order about the Carpet, where it was very
delightful to see how vividly they shined; and that which made the spectacle
more taking, especially to me, was this, that not only in the darkness that
environed them, they seemed like fixed Stars of the sixth or least magnitude,
but twinkled also like them, discovering such a scintillation as that whereby
we distinguish the fixed Stars from most of the Planets. And these twinkling
sparks without doing any harm (that we took notice of) to the Turkey Carpet they
lay on, continued to shine for a good while, some of them remaining yet vivid
enough till the Candles being brought in again made them disappear.

VI. Mr. Kraft also calling for a sheet of Paper and taking some of his stuff
upon the tip of his finger, writ in large Characters two or three words,
whereof one being DOMINI, was made up of Capital Letters, which being large
enough to reach from one side of the page to the other, and being (at least as
I guessed) invigorated by the free contact of the external Air, shone so
briskly and looked so oddly, that the sight was extremely pleasing, having in it
a mixture of strangeness, beauty and frightfulness, wherein yet the last of
those qualities was far from being predominant. And this Phenomenon did in
more senses than one afford us the most of light, since not only the Characters
shone very vividly upon the white Paper, but approaching it to my Eyes and
Nostrils, I could discern that there ascended from them a fume, and could smell
that fume to be strong enough, and (as it seemed to me) to participate of the
odor of Sulphur and of that of Onions. And before I past from the mention of
these resplendent Characters, I must not forget that either by their light, or
that of the Globe, or both by the one and the other a man might discern those
of his fingers that were nearest the shining stuff, and that this being held to
the face though without touching it, some of the conspicuousest parts,
especially the Nose, were discoverable.

VII. After we had seen with pleasure, and not without some wonder, the
foregoing particulars, the Artist desired me to give him my hand, which when I
had done, he rubbed partly upon the back of it, and partly on my cuff, some of
his luminous matter, which as if it had been assisted by the warmth of my hand
shone very vividly, and though I took not notice of any thing upon my skin,
that was either unctuous or rough, yet I often times tried in vain by rubbing
it with my other hand to take it off, or manifestly diminish its splendour, and
when I diverse times blowed upon some of the smaller parts of it, though they
seemed at the instant that my breath beat upon it, to be blown out, yet the
tenacious parts were not really extinguished, but presently after recovered
their former splendour. And all this while this light that was so permanent, was
yet so mild and innocent that in that part of my hand where it was largely
enough spread, I felt no sensible heat produced by it.

By that time these things were done 'twas grown late, which made Mr. Kraft,
who had a great way to go home, take leave of the Company after he had received
our deserved thanks for the new and instructive Phenomenon, wherewith he had so
delightfully entertained us.

Because Mr. Kraft had twice attempted to fire heated Gunpowder with his
Phosphorus, but without success; probably because the powder was not very good
(as by some circumstances I conjected) and because it was not sufficiently
heated before the matter that should set it on fire was put upon it, he
promised me he would come another time to repair that unsuccesfulness: And
accordingly, On the two and twentieth of September in the Afternoon I recived a
visit from Mr. Kraft, who told me he came to make good his promise of letting
me see that his shining matter was able to kindle heated Gunpowder, and
because no strangers were present, I had the fairer opportunity to view it,
which I was able to do better by day light, than I had done by its own light,
for when he had taken it with a new Pen out of the liquor with which he kept it
covered to preserve it, I perceived it to be somewhat less than the nail of one
of my fingers, and not much thicker than a shilling, and I observed that when
it had lain a little while upon a piece of clean Paper and discharged it self
from its superfluous moisture, it began to emit whitish fumes which seemed to
be very ponderous, since for the most part they did not ascend but surrounding
the matter whence they issued, by their stagnation made as it were a little
Pond or small Atmosphere about it; so that lest it should wast too fast, he was
obliged as soon as he had cut off a little corner less than half a pins head,
to put the stuff nimbly back into the Vial out of which he he had taken it;
where I observed it for a very short time to send up exhalations into the
liquor that covered it, and quickly after, as it were, quenched it. This done
the Artist divided the little corner he had cut off into two parts, one of
which he spread as far as it would reach upon a piece of white Paper, which he
presently after held at a distance over a chafing dish of burning Coals, by
whose heat being excited it presently flasht and burnt away, and I having
perceived that there was another part of the Paper which though not heeded by
him, had been lightly besmeared by the same matter, I held it over the Coals,
but at a considerable distance from them, and yet this little matter nimbly
took fire and burnt a hole in the Paper. And to satisfy my self that the heat
did but excite the luminous matter, and that it was this its self that lighted
the Paper, I held the rest of the same piece of Paper far nearer the fire and
kept it there a pretty while without finding it at all scorched or discolored.
Lastly, the other part of the divided fragment of the hitherto mentioned
matter, Mr. Kraft put upon the tip of a quil, and having at a distance from the
fire, very well dried and warmed some Gunpowder upon another piece of Paper,
he laid that Paper upon the ground, and then holding his quill upon it, as if
it had been a match, within half a minute (by my guess) that powder took fire
and blew up.

'Twill not perhaps be impertinent to add that on occasion of the operation I
observed the Air to have on the shining substance when freely exposed to it. I
took a rise to tell Mr. Kraft that I presumed it might be worth while to try
whether his Phosphorus did shine by virtue of a kind of real or (if I may so
call it) living flame, which like almost all other flames required the presence
and concourse of the Air to maintain it, or whether it were of such a kind of
nature as the Phosphorus of the learned Baldwinus, which I suspected to shine
not like a flame or a truly kindled substance; but like a red hot Iron, or an
ignited piece of Glass, wherein the shining parts are not repaired by fuel, as
in other burning bodies, but are put by the action of the fire into so vehement
an agitation as whilst it lasts suffices to make the body appear luminous. This
conjecture Mr. Kraft seemed much to approve of when I told him that the way I
proposed to examine his noctiluca by, was to put a little of it into our
Pneumatick Engine, and Pump out the Air, whose absence, if it were of the
nature of other flames, would probably extinguish, or very much impair its
light, but yet since he offered not to have the trial made; probably because he
had but very little of his shining substance left, I thought it not civil to
press him. But to countenance what I said of the nature of Baldwinus
Phosphorus, I shall recite an Experiment that I purposely made, to examine
whether the presence of the Air were necessary to the shining of this
Phosphorus, as I had long since found it to that of some pieces of shining wood.

We exposed for a competent time to the beams of a vigorous light, a portion of
matter of about the breadth of the palm of ones hand, which we had prepared to
be made luminous by them. And then causing the Candles to be removed (for we
chose to make trial by night) we nimbly conveyed the matter into a receiver
that was kept in readiness for it, presuming (as the event showed we might)
that by using diligence the light would last as long as the experiment would
need to do; making have therefore to Pump out the Air, we heedfully watched
whether the withdrawing of it would, contrary to my conjecture, notably
diminish the light of the shining matter. And after we had thus withdrawn the
Air gradually, we tried whether by letting it return hastily, it would produce
a more sensible change in the matter (which had been purposely put in without
any thing to cover it, that it might be the more exposed to the Airs Action.)
But neither upon the gradual recess of the Air, nor yet upon its rushing in
when it was permitted to return, could we certainly observe any manifest
alteration in the luminousness of the Phosphorus, other than that slow
decrement that might well be imputed to the time during which the experiment
was making. It being well known that this luminous substance requires no long
time to make it decay, and by degrees to lose all its light; so that though
once there seemed to one or two of the bystanders, upon the return of the Air,
to be some recovery of part of the lost splendour, yet after repeated
experiments it was concluded that the presence of the Air was not at all
necessary to the shining of our matter, and it was judged most probable that
the absence or presence of the Air, had no manifest operation on it. I might
add to this that perhaps the presence of the Air is rather hurtful than
advantageous to this sort of lights, since for having had a large Phosphorus
that was much esteemed, and, whilst I kept it, exactly protected from the Air
did very well; a part of the Glass that covered it, having by mischance been
somewhat cracked, though none of the splinters appeared displaced, yet it seems
some of the Corpuscles of the Air made a shift to insinuate themselves at these
chinks (as narrow as they were) and in not many days made the matter cease to
be capable of being made luminous as before. I cannot stay to inquire whether
this unfitness or indisposition may be imputed to the bare moisture of the Air,
or to some other substance or quality that alone or in conjunction with the
moisture, may spoil that peculiar texture, or constitution that fits the matter
of the Phosphorus assisted by the impressions of external light to become
luminous. This, I say, I cannot stay to examine, though, That this Phosphorus
is of a nice and tender constitution, and easily alterable, I was induced to
think, by finding that the want of circumstances, seemingly slight enough,
would keep it from being made; and I guess that a convention of circumstances
did more contribute to the production than any peculiar and incommunicable
nature of the matter: Because having had the curiosity to make some trial upon
so obvious a material as quick Lime, though the success did not answer my
designs, yet, neither was it so bad, but that some luminous quality was
produced in the Lime by the action of the fire, and a saline Liquor; and I
scarce question but other materials will be found capable of being made
luminous by the same or the like operation, that is employed by Baldwinus, when
that learned man shall think fit to communicate his way to the Public. But to
return to what I was saying, that the contact of the Air might be rather
hurtful than advantageous to the Phosphorus, I shall only add here as matter of
fact, (for my conjectures about Light belong to my yet unpublisht Notes, of the
Origin of Qualities) that whereas the contact of the Air, though it were not
free, did in a few days destroy the luminousness of a good Phosphorus, yet
having included another in a Receiver, whence we afterward pumpt out the Air,
this matter though inferior to the other in vividness was so little spoiled by
lying open in our Vacuum, that at the end of not only some weeks, but some
months, I found that the beams of a Candle passing to it through the Receiver,
would notwithstanding the Vacuum it yet continues in, suffice to re-excite in
it a manifest light.

Thus far was the communication of this excellent person, who it is hoped may be
further prevailed with to communicate those other accurate observations, and
curious researches he has made concerning the light of the Bononian Stone, and
the Phosphoros Baldwini, which are indeed truly admirable, and very much
differing from the usual processes of Nature for the exhibiting of light.

Before I take leave of my Astronomical Readers, I shall here acquaint them
with some Collections I have made of other Astronomical matters and
discoveries, which I hope will not be less pleasing to them than they were at
first to me. The Discoveries are new, and not less significant. The first is,

A Letter from Johannes Carolus Gallet, L.L.D. and Provost of the Church of St.
Symphorean at Avignon, directed thus.
CLarissimo Eruditissimoque viro D. Johanni Dominico Cassino, Matheseos
Professori Celeberrimo, Astronomo praestantissimo and Academiae Regiae
scientiarum alumno meritissimo. Containing an account of his observation of
Mercury passing under the Sun.

Mr. Gallet then acquaints Mr. Cassini with his observation of sub and the
whole method and process of his observation. First, he fitted two excellent
Telescopes, the Glasses of which were given him by Mr. Jac. Borrellius, one of
the Academy Royal of Paris. The one of twenty three foot, he fitted with a
Glass covered with smooke, placed in the outward focus of the Eye-Glass: The
other of three foot he fixed to the Arm of his Quadrant of the same Radius, this
was so exquisite that compared with one of Divini, which was chosen by the care
of Honorato Fabri, and procured by Monsieur de Beauchamps, it was found to
represent the objects clearer: By this the figure of the Sun was cast on an
opposite Table, on which he had drawn a Circle of the bigness proper to the
Distance and Magnifying of the Glasses to contain the whole Face of the Sun,
and by Parallel Circles had subdivided the same into digits and Sexagesimals,
he had also placed three threads in the interior focus of the Glasses, that the
middlemost went through the Center, and the two outward touched the Limb of the
Sun by their shadow on the Table, he had also a Pendulum Clock that vibrated
thrice in a second. Thus accoutred he watched the fifth and sixth day, from Sun
rising to Sun setting, and the seventh after the Cloudy Sky had seemed to
delude his curiosity till Eleven a Clock almost, it then began to open and
discovered to him Mercury got within the Eastern Limb of the Sun, about 1/10 of
its Semidiameter; at length the Clouds being dispersed, the Sun being 27 45.
high, or at 10 h. 54 it self marked out its own place in the disk of the by its
own shadow cast on the Table by the shorter tube. Then he disposed the shadow
of the aforesaid thread so Parallel to the Equator, that this figure of the Sun
should move between the outward ones, and that the middle should mark out the
Parallel described by the Center of the Sun in motion, at the same time he took
the declination of from this middle Parallel and the right Ascension, by the
number of Vibrations of the Pendulum, from the Western Limb of the Sun, taken
by the shadow of a Perpendicular Cross-line to the other 3. by the same means,
also he measured the Diameter of the Sun and of Mercury.

Then to the end he might give less cause of doubt, according to his usual
custom, he procured several friends who were present and witnesses of all the
observations after the fourth mentioned in the Table. During the observation he
took notice of these remarkable accidents. First, that Mercury through the long
Tube was very black, and of an Elliptical figure whose longest Diameter was
Parallel to the Equator, but in the Species through the lesser Telecope, it
appeared round and of a dusky red (like a spot observed by him in the Sun from
the Ninth to the Fifteenth of April.) Secondly, that the Diameter of mercury
going out of the Disc of the Sun, when it touched the periphery seemed to be of
four times the Diameter it appeared of through the whole Phase, so that Mr.
Beauchamp, who watched the exit with the longer Tube, whilst he himself minded
the Quadrant in order to take the Altitude of the Sun, at the time of the exit
cried out, O how large do I see the Diameter of Mercury now, it does not only
leave the Sun, but is confused with it, or as it were melts into it, and
presently it vanished, the Sun being then 13. 23. high.

He further adds that before he leaves to speak of the Sun, he will here insert
an observation that he had made of four spots he had seen in the Sun in the
first of October last (St. No.) with this his longer Telescope, one only of
which was visible by the Species cast with the lesser Glass.

October. Die. hora Decinat. maculae principalis a paral. Centri. Differentia
temp. inter limbus Occident. and maculam. Tempus transitus disci Sonlaris. 1 10
0 4 44 austr. 1 4 20 2 10 0 2 10 0 2 43 aust. 49 0 2 10 20 3 10 30 1 21 aust.
34 40 2 10 20 4 10 35 0 40 aust. 24 40 2 10 30 6 10 0 3 0 boreal. 3 20 2 10 4

Thus submitting his method to the judgment of the Learned Cassini, and
earnestly desiring his thoughts thereon, he ends his Letter, and Dates it from
Avignon, Nov. 21. 1677.

To this Letter he subjoins the observation it self, Entitled,

Mercurius sub Sole visus Avenione die 7. November. 1677. Observante me Joanne
Carolo Gallet, J. V. D. Praeposito Ecclesiae Sancti Symphoriani Avenionensis.

The Contents of which are,

That designing to observe this passage of under he with his Tube watchfully
looked for it in the Suns place, from the 5th to the 7th. day, with a Telescope
of 23 foot (as above) he observed a spot of an elliptical figure which had
already gotten a 16th. part of the semidiameter of the Sun within the limb, and
declined a little to the South in respect of the parallel of the Equator drawn
through the Suns center, at 10 hours 26 min. but the Clouds hindering he could
not observe its motion till it had ascended as high as the parallel: when the
Suns altitude was 27. 45. or 10 a Clock 54 minutes. From the quickness of its
motion he soon found it to be and not a spot, and therefore he forsook not his
Quadrant to which was fitted his three foot Telescope and Table to receive the
figure of the but observed the times of the Immersions and the Emersion of by
the help thereof, being assisted by several of his friends who were witnesses
of what passed, and particularly by the Illustrious Monsieur De Beauchamp, who
with the twenty three foot Glass determined the Exit of Mercury, whilst he
himself took the Altitude of the Sun with his Quadrant, as in the tenth
Observation.

The Order of the Observations of Mercury seen under the Sun.
The number of the Phases observed. The north Declination of from the Parallel
of the equat. through the Center. The difference of the time between the
Transit of West Limb of the Sun, and the body of under the same Meridian
collected from the Pendulum Vibrating 1/^ of a second. The distant of from the
Center of the Sun. The apparent altitude of the Sun. The hour Collected by the
Altitude. M. S. vib. Pend. M. S. T. M. S. T. G. M. H. M. S. 1 0 0 345 1 55 ^ 1
20 37 2^ 45 10 53 58 2 2 3 276 1 32 0 6 0 55 29 36 12 0 0 3 2 45 258 1 26 0 5 9
20 29 34 0 9 55 4 3 40 224 1 14 40 4 7 30 29 03 0 35 50 5 5 30 164 0 54 40 7 13
7 25 0 1 44 1^ 6 6 30 148 0 49 20 8 15 0 24 5 1 55 22 7 6 53 132 0 44 00 9 16
45 22 30 2 11 58 8 8 14 100 0 33 20 12 1 45 19 30 2 39 14 9 8 55 80 0 26 40 14
5 30 17 17 2 57 28 10 9 28 29 0 13 00 16 20 0 13 23 3 26 56 The time of the
Transitus. The Diameter in the Parallel. The Diameter in a great Circle. of the
Sun. 414 2 18 34 30 0 43 0 0 of Mercury. 3 0 1 10 0 17 30

From this Observation he had the Declination of Mercury in respect of the
Parallel through the Center of the Sun, and thence its absolute Declination
from the Equator, supposing the place of the Sun according to Hecker, and the
obliquity of the Ecliptic, 23, 30 the right Ascension also of appeared by the
difference of time between the Transit of and the West limb of the Sun by the
same meridian. Then from the Declination and right Ascension of given by
Trigonometrical Calculation, he found out the Longitude and Latitude of it in
every* Observation, and the time of its true Conjunction.

The time of the phases observed. Heckers place of the in The Decl. of South
ascen. The right Ascension of Mercury. The N. Lat. of ascen. The Long. of
Mercury in H. M. S. G. M. S. G. M. S. G. M. S. M. S. G. M. S. 1 10 53 58 15 33
55 16 32 33 223 16 40 3 10 15 44 48 2 12 0 0 15 36 41 16 31 38 223 13 43 3 14
15 40 40 3 0 9 55 15 37 6 16 30 43 223 12 37 3 53 14 40 30 4 0 35 50 15 38 11
16 30 7 223 10 51 3 55 15 38 27 5 1 44 10 15 41 3 16 29 7 223 8 54 4 15 15 36 3
6 1 55 22 15 41 31 16 28 12 223 7 59 4 55 15 35 6 7 2 11 58 15 42 13 16 28 4
223 7 36 4 56 15 34 40 8 2 39 14 15 43 22 16 27 4 223 7 4 5 48 15 34 5 9 2 57
58 15 44 8 16 26 36 223 6 10 5 57 15 33 0 10 3 26 56 15 45 23 16 26 15 223 5 50
6 12 15 32 37

Therefore the time of the true conjunction of the Sun and Mercury at Avignon,
was Nov. 7. Hor. 2. Min. 39. Sec. 14. Afternoon.

To this he has adjoined this ensuing Table, to show how much the Heavens do
differ from the Astronomical Tables.

Tempus datum ex Tabulis November. Differentia ab observata conjunctione. D. H.
M. D. H. M. Rudolphinis Reyneri. 7 8 3 9 7 24 excessus. Calculis Heckeri. 7 6 9
0 5 0 excessus. Lansbergianis. 6 1 12 0 23 27 defectus. Philolaicis Bullialdi 7
4 18 0 3 39 excessus. Riccilinis juxta calculum. R. admodum Patris Bonifa.
Societatis Jesu.
7 8 17 0 7 38 excessus.

These Observations are delineated in the 23. Figure.

Upon this Observation I find in the twenty third Journal de Scavans of the
Year 1677. Mr. Cassini made these Reflections.
THat having compared this Observation of Monsieur Gallet, of 1677. with that
of Mr. Gassendus, of 1631. the same day of the year, to wit the seventh of
November, he found that the Latitudes of at its leaving the Disc of the Sun,
determined by these two Astronomers were equal, even to the sixth part of a
minute. And by consequence that was both in the one and the other Observation
at the same distance from its North node, and that it traced in the Disc of the
Sun an equal line: And for that was here at the like distance from its Apoge;
as the Sun was also pretty near, the swiftness of its apparent motion in the
Sun was equal. By the Observation of Mr. Gallet it is found considerably more
slow than that which Mr. Gassendus has supposed from the Rudolphin Tables of
which he made use for the determining of it, not having been able to make
Observation immediately by reason of the Clouds. He believes then that spent
more then five hours in running through the Disc of the Sun, since by the
Observation of Mr. Gallet, it has spent 5 hours and 35 minutes, which may
serve for an Advertisement for determining more exactly the time of the true
conjunction of with the in the year 1631.

The same equality of Latitude at Mercury's leaving the Sun shows that the Sun
was equally distant from the Node of Mercury at the time of these two
Observations. And as the Sun was more advanced in that of this year from 63 to
64 minutes, than in that of the year 1631, So it follows that the septentrional
Node of is advanced from 63 to 64 minutes in the space of 46 years, as
precisely as by the Rudolphin Tables, which agree also exactly in the Epochas
of the Nodes: a matter of no small Importance in Astronomy, which has not a
little difficulty to determine with preciseness the Nodes of the Planets and
their motions.

But having compared the observation of Mr. Gallet, with that of Mr. Hevelius,
in 1661. which happened the third of May, in a place of the Zodiac opposite to
that of this year, he has found the septentrional Node of less advanced than
the Meridional was in the preceding Observation; so that if the Nodes of in
regard of the Sun are precisely opposite the one to the other, it appears that
they have gone backward since the year 1661. as do those of the Moon, and by
consequence their motion is sometimes direct, sometimes retrograde: But if
their motion is supposed uniform, it will follow that the Line of the Nodes of
does not pass at all through the center of the Sun, but that it is removed from
it toward the septentrional limit about a two hundredth part of the
Semidiameter of the Orb of Mercury.

Thus far this knowing and accurate Astronomer Monsieur Cassini, who we hear
has since farther discoursed concerning this matter, which we hope to procure
so soon as he shall make it public; and to add some other curious Observations
made by other hands, I have as yet been able to procure but one more; but that
is one so considerable, that it will excite the skilful Astronomers anew to ply
their Calculations, to see what the comparing of this with the rest will
produce; which as they come to my hands, I design to publish, as I shall also
somewhat of my own Observations thereupon: and therefore I omit to make any
reflections at present. This Letter is of Mr. Edmund Hally, now residing at St.
Helena, directed to Sir Jonas Moore, Surveyor of his Majesty's Ordnance; a
person to whom the Learned world is very much obliged for his patronizing and
promoting these Celestial enquiries; who has not been sparing of his own
pains and purse in providing the best apparatus of instruments and other
conveniences for such Observations the world ever had; from whom we may with
good reason hope a great advancement toward the perfecting thereof.

St. Helena, November. 22. 1677.
HOnored Sir, You may with reason wonder that I should so long be negligent to
write to your Worship, to give you an account of my proceedings since my
departure from you, seeing that in the business I am now engaged upon, the
Honorable Sir Joseph Williamson, his Majesty's Principal Secretary of State,
and your self are my only Patrons: but I have not been unmindful of my Duty in
this particular, only I delayed, that what I sent you might not be altogether
inconsiderable. I hoped still that we might have some clear weather when the
Sun came near our Zenith, that so I might give you an account that I had near
hand finished the Catalogue of the Southern Stars, which is my principal
concern; but such has been my ill fortune, that the Horizon of this Island is
almost always covered with a Cloud, which sometimes for some weeks together
has hid the Stars from us, and when it is clear, is of so small continuance,
that we cannot take any number of Observations at once; so that now, when I
expected to be returning, I have not finished above half my intended work; and
almost despair to accomplish what you ought to expect from me. I will yet try
two or three months more, and if it continue in the same constitution, I shall
then, I hope be excusable if in that time I cannot make an end. However it will
be a great grief to be so far frustrated in my first undertaking: I have
notwithstanding had the opportunity of observing the ingress and egress of on
the, which compared with the like Observations made in England, will give a
demonstration of the Suns Parallax, which hitherto was never proved, but by
probable arguments. Likewise I have seen those two Eclipses, one of the Sun,
the other of the Moon in May last, both which I send you, but the mighty winds,
and extraordinary swift motion of the Clouds hindered the exactness of the
Observations. That of the Moon may help for the difference of our Meridians,
which is about 7 degrees to the Westwards of London: but it may more curiously
be found by Mercury sub Sole. There are three Stars of the first Magnitude that
never appear in England, but none near the South Pole of any brightness, except
one of the third Magnitude, which is about ten degrees distant from it. The two
Nubeculae called by the Saylors the Magellanick Clouds, are both of them
exactly like the whiteness of the milky way lying within the Antartick Circle;
they are small, and in the Moon shine, scarce perceptible; yet in the dark the
bigger is very notable. I need not relate unto you the temperature of the
Weather for heat and cold here in the Torrid Zone, you your self having long
since had experience of a Latitude little different: only this I shall certify
you, that ever since I came to this Island, we have had no weather that is
hotter than the Summer of England is ordinarily. Mr. Clark is a person
wonderfully assistant to me, in whose company all the good fortune I have had
this Voyage consists, to me all other things having been cross: nevertheless
I despair not of his Honors and your Worships favor, which alone is sufficient
to encourage me to bear with patience these disappointments, and expect some
fitter opportunity.

I am your Worships most obliged Servant, and true Honorer, Edmund Halley.


St. Helenae, Latitudo Australis, 15. 55. Anno 1677.
Octobris 28. die mane apparuit intra.
h. m. s. 9 26 17 Pars aliqua corporis ii intrasset Solemn december gradus a nadir
ad dextram circiter. 9 27 30 Formabat angulum contactus totus scilicet. intus 2
38 39 Limbus ii proximus dissiti a limbo Solis sui Diametro. 2 40 8 Limbus ii
tetigit limbum. 2 41 0 Centrum exiit e Sole 30 grad. circiter a Nadir ad
dextram. 2 41 54 limbus integer factus.

Longitudo and Latitudo trium Stellarum illustrium prope polum austrinum.
Long. Latit. Canopus 11 3 75 49 Centauri pes 25 24 42 22 Alcarnar. 10 31 59 18
1/3.

The Period of the Revolution of Jupiter upon it Axis; verified by new
Observations made by Monsieur Cassini:
Extracted out of the Journal de Scavans.
THE Globe of Jupiter, whose Revolution about its Axis was determined by the
Observations of Monsieur Cassini, in the Year 1665. to be 9 hours, This
Revolution of the body of upon its Axis I first discovered in May 1664. and
published in the first Transaction, which was a considerable time before it was
discovered by Monsieur Cassini; but we are obliged to him for the perfecting
the Theory, as we are also for many other rare Discoveries and excellent
improvements in Astronomy.
and 56 minutes, is as it were a watch for visibly pointing the hours and
minutes to half the Earth at once; so that it shows the same time to all under
the same Meridian, and a different time to different Meridians, according as
they differ in Longitude.

It has for an Index of its motion one principal spot, which is very neatly
distinguished from the rest of its surface, and seems from its figure and
situation to have some resemblance to the Caspian Sea of the Terraqueous Globe.
By the help of good Glasses it may be seen passing the under Hemisphere of it,
from the East to the West, with a velocity so sensible, that one may determine
to one or two minutes, the time that it comes to the middle of the Disc, which
is the place the most fit for establishing of the Epochas, and for finding the
difference of Longitude. There may be a great number of such Revolutions
observed, since in one year of 365 days there are made 882 Revolutions. But it
does not appear in every year, but as if it were some kind of Marish which is
dried at certain times, and so disappears during two or 3000 Revolutions; and
after it has remained thus imperceptible for some years, it returns again to
its former state. After it had been observed the last six months of the year
1665. and some months of 1666. it became invisible till the beginning of the
year 1672. then being returned to its former appearance, Monsieur Cassini
compared the intervals of the six years, and limited the revolution to be made
in 9 hours, 55 minutes, 51 seconds; and continuing his Observations to the end
of the year 1674. he found by these two years that it was too slow by two
seconds and a half: so that it appeared to be in 9 hours, 55 minutes, 53
seconds.

This spot has been invisible in 1675. and 1676. during which space there
happened other very considerable changes in the body of Jupiter; for the clear
interstice which was between the two dark belts of Jupiter was separated into
many little parts, in the manner like so many Islands; as if the two obscure
belts had been two great Rivers broken one into the other, and had left these
parts which appeared like Islands, which yet were at last all effaced, and the
two dark belts, and the interjacent space at length all coalesced into one
large belt. But after the coming of Jupiter out of the Rays of the Sun in the
year 1677. the belts again took their form, and situation which they had
heretofore; to wit, the same which is described in the 24 figure. The principal
spot appeared anew after the beginning of July last. Monsieur Cassini found
this spot in the middle of Jupiter the night after the eighth of the said
month, at 13 minutes after one at night; and has hitherto ever since observed
it at the hours proper to its revolution. Having compared many Observations of
this year with as many others made the same days of the year 1665. for avoiding
the scruples which may arise from the inequality of times, he has found by the
intervals of twelve years that those revolutions compared the one with the
other, complete themselves in 9 hours, 55 minutes, 52 seconds, and 5 or 6
thirds. And because that in the years 1672, 1673. they appeared more slow by 2
seconds and a half, during the time that Jupiter was in its greatest elevation
from the Sun. Monsieur Cassini inclines to suppose that these revolutions have
some little inequality depending on the variation of the distance of from the,
and that they are a little slower when is more removed, and somewhat faster
when nearer approached that body; the same which several great Astronomers have
supposed to happen to the Diurnal Revolutions of the Earth in the Copernican
Hypothesis.

In this account he has separated the inequality which does result from the
variation of the two equations of Jupiter (as he has explained in diverse
Letters in 1665.) the which may amount to one half hour, besides the inequality
of natural days, which according to his Hypothesis may amount to 16 minutes.

For the finding then of the return of the principal spot to the middle of for
many years to half an hour or thereabout, there needs nothing but adding still
the time of the period to the Epoche of the 8. of July, 1677. and for the
finding precisely, even to some minutes, the two inequalities of Jupiter must
be observed according to the following Rule.

Differentiam inter medium locum Jovis and appar^ntem converte in tempus dando
singulis gradibus min. 1. hoc tempus add tempori restitutionis maculae
supputato, si locus apparens Jovis excesserit medium: subtrahe vero si
defecerit a medio.

We have then the mean time of the return of the spot, and to get the apparent
time the, equation of days according to the method of Monsieur Cassini (of
which a Table is inserted in the Ephemerides of Monsieur Flaminio de
Mezzavachi) must be made use of.

MICROSCOPIVM: OR, Some new Discoveries made with and concerning Microscopes.
A Letter of the Ingenious and Inquisitive Mr. Leeuwenhoeck of Delft, sent to
the Secretary fo the Royal Society, October 5. 1677.
IN this Letter after the Relation of many curious Observations made with his
Microscope, he adds,

By some of my former Letters I have related what an innumerable company of
little Animalcules, I have discovered in waters; of the truth of which
affirmations, that I might satisfy the Illustrious Philosophers of your
Society, I have here sent the Testimonials of eight credible persons; some of
which affirm they have seen 10000, others 30000, others 45000 little living
Creatures, in a quantity of water as big as a grain of Millet (92 of which go
to the making up the bigness of a green Pea, or the quanitty of a natural drop
of water) in the desiring of which Testimonials I made it my request that they
would only justify (that they might be within compass) half the number that
they believed each of them saw in the water, and even so the number of those
little creatures that would thereby be proved to be in one drop of water would
be so great, that it would exceed belief. Now whereas by my Letter of the 9th.
of October, 1676. I affirmed that there were more than 1000000 living Creatures
contained in one drop of Pepper-water. I should not have varied from the truth
of it, if I had asserted that there were 8000000; for if according to some of
the included testimonials there might be found in a quantity of water as big as
a millet seed, no less than 45000 animalcules. It would follow that in an
ordinary drop of this water there would be no less than 4140000 living
creatures, which number if doubled will make 8280000 living Creatures seen in
the quantity of one drop of water, which quantity I can with truth affirm I
have discerned.

This exceeds belief. But I do affirm, that if a larger grain of sand were
broken into 8000000 of equal parts, one of these would not exceed the bigness
of one of those little creatures; which being understood, it will not seem so
incredible to believe that there may be so great a number in the quantity of
one drop of water.

Upon the perusal of this Letter, being extremely desirous to examine this
matter farther, and to be ascertained by ocular inspection as well as from
testimonials. I put in order such remainders as I had of my former Microscopes
(having by reason of a weakness in my sight omitted the use of them for many
years) and steeped some black pepper in River water, but examining that water
about two or three days after, I could not by any means discover any of those
little creatures mentioned in the aforesaid Letter: though I had made use of
small glass canes drawn hollow for that purpose, and of a Microscope that I was
certain would discover things much smaller than such as the aforesaid Mr.
Leeuwenhoeck had affirmed these creatures to be; but whether it were that the
light was not convenient (the reason of which I shall show by and by) having
looked only against the clear sky, or that they were not yet generated, which I
rather suppose, I could not discover any. I concluded therefore either that my
Microscope was not so good as that he made use of, or that the time of the year
(which was in November) was not so fit for such generations, or else that there
might be somewhat ascribed to the difference of places; as that Holland might
be more proper for the production of such little creatures than England. I
omitted therefore farther to look after them, for about five or six days, when
finding it a warm day, I examined again the said water; and then much to wonder
I discovered vast multitudes of those exceeding small creatures, which Mr.
Leeuwenhoeck had described; and upon making use of other lights and glasses, as
I shall by and by show, I not only magnified those I had thus discovered to a
very great bigness, but I discovered many other sorts very much smaller than
those I first saw, and some of these so exceeding small, that millions of
millions might be contained in one drop of water. I was very much surprised at
this so wonderful a spectacle, having never seen any living creature comparable
to these for smallness: nor could I indeed imagine that nature had afforded
instances of so exceedingly minute animal productions. But nature is not to be
limited by our narrow apprehensions; future improvements of glasses may yet
further enlighten our understanding, and ocular inspection may demonstrate that
which as yet we may think too extravagant either to feign or suppose.

Of this, A later Discovery of Mr. Leeuwenhoeck does seem to give good
probabilities; for by a Letter of his since sent (the which is hereunto
annexed) it appears he has discovered a certain sort of Eels in Pepper-water,
which are not in breadth above one thousandth part of the breadth of a hair;
and not above a hundredth part of the length of a vinegar Eel.

Mr. Leeuwenhoecks Second Letter.
SIR, Yours of the thirtieth of November I received not till January, whereby
understanding the kind reception of my former by the R.S. I here return my
acknowledgment to that illustrious Company for their great civility: but I
wonder that in your Letter I find no mention made of my Observations of the
second of December, St. No. which makes me doubt whether the same came to your
hands.

Since you assure me that what I send of this nature will be acceptable to the
renowned Society, I have adventured again to send you some of my farther
Enquiries, to be communicated to that learned Philosophical Company. Since I
wrote of the Blood of Eels, and of young Eels, I have not been idle to view
Blood, but especially my own, which for some time I have indefatigably
examined, after that I had put it into all conceivable motions. Among which
Observations I well saw that the globuli of my own blood took the same figure
which I formerly mentioned, that the Globules of the blood of Eels appeared of
to the eye: upon seeing which I doubted again at the cause of the smart which
the blood of the Eels causes in the eye.

These my many times repeated Observations of my own blood I made to no other
end, than if it were possible, to observe the parts out of which the Globules
of the blood consisted: With observing this, I found the globulous blood much
more pliable than I did imagine the same before. I have at several times bended
these Globules before my eyes, that they were three times as long as broad,
without breaking the Vesicule of them: and besides I saw that the Globules of
blood in passing by and through one another, did by reason of their pliableness
receive many sorts of figures, and coming thence into a larger place, they
recovered their former globulosity which was a very great pleasure to observe:
and withal, that the Globules of blood coming many together, and growing cold
thereby, came to unite, and made a matter very smooth, wherein there were no
more parts distinct to be taken notice of, much after the same manner as if we
supposed a Dish filled with balls of wax set over a fire, by which they would
quickly be melted together, and united into one mass; by which uniting of the
Globules, I concluded this to be the reason of the accident which is called the
cold fire, and of that also which causes the hands or fingers to be lost by
cold: but I leave this to others. And I did very clearly also discover that
there were six other smaller Globules of blood contained within each of the
former and larger Globulous Vesicles: and withal, I took much pains to observe
the number of the same very small globules, out of which the greater Globules
do consist: that at last I strongly imagined, that every of the greater
Globules consisted of six smaller Globules, no less pliable than the aforesaid:
for oftentimes I saw very clearly how the small Globules joined and adapted
themselves according to the figure the Vesicle or larger Globule stretched at
length had taken, being themselves stretched after the same manner: and thus
made one of the larger Globules stretched out, to appear by the lesser within it
stretched also with it, as if it consisted of long threads. Moreover, I put the
greater Globules into so violent a motion, that their Vesicles burst in pieces,
and then the lesser Globules appeared plainly to be scattered. This first
Globule I can see as plainly and great, as with the naked eye one should look
upon the eggs or spawn of a Cod-fish.

About nine or ten years since Dr. Graff opened in my presence the vein of a
Dog, and let out so much blood that the Dog grew faint; then he opened the
Artery of another Dog, and by a pipe transfused the blood of this second into
the first, whereby the first was recovered, the second was faint. Then the said
Doctor injected back into the Artery of the second, a quantity of Cows milk,
supposing thereby to preserve the second dog alive, saying, milk was blood: but
no sooner was the milk put into the artery, but the dog died. And whereas it is
commonly said that milk is Blood, therefore I shall relate of what parts the
Milk consists, so far as I have hitherto discovered. I have said heretofore
that the Milk does consist of Globules swimming in a thin clear watery matter
which we call Whey: but as the great Globuli of Blood are all of the same
bigness, so in the Milk they are quite differing, being of as many sizes and
magnitudes as we can imagine, between the smallest sand, and a barely corn; all
of them being as clear as Crystal; save only that through and between the same
drive some irregular particles for the most part rounded: these had a fatty
substance, which I imagined to be the latter: their irregularity I imagined
came from the impression of the encompassing Globules made on them, in which
posture they grew cold.

Viewing the aforesaid differences of the Milk Globules, I supposed that the
Milk vessels have no other parts included but the matter out of which they are
all made; and that the same matter, so long as included in the vessels,
consisted of one uniform matter, so that one could not distinguish parts; and
that the same vessels discharging this uniform matter into other vessels,
containing a substance of a quite differing nature, which I suppose to be the
Whey, comes to be separated into these Globules of so differing magnitudes.
This may be represented by having two vessels filled, the one with Fat,
representing Whey; the other with Quicksilver, resembling the uniform matter of
the Milk: these blended together, the Quicksilver will be separated into small
Globules of differing magnitudes, and kept distinct by the fat.

Or further, it may be explained by a dissolution of some gums in Spirit of
Wine, a drop of which being put into rain water (which I compare to Whey) the
Gum becomes separated immediately into an incredible number of small clear
Globules, which makes it appear also as white as Milk it self: and thence I
suppose that the whiteness of Milk has the same cause.

I have been often minded by some, that flesh was nothing else but clodded
blood; yet for all my endeavors I was never able to find the first particles
of blood in the fibers of the flesh, but only such as are contained in the
first Globules.

The last Summer being sickly for some weeks, I voided much Phlegm, which was
green, tough, and acid in the throat, which yet continues; but nothing near so
much as before: and some of it which I voided in the morning was of so heavy a
matter, that it sunk in the water: the ponderosity of it I found to proceed
from its not being filled with airy bubbles, which most Flegms are mixed with.
By this means I observed my Phlegm very often, and found it to consist of tough
slimy moisture, mixed with many Globules; and the tougher the Phlegm was, the
greater was the quantity of Globules; and from them also proceeded the green
color of it. All these Globules were of one and the same bigness with the
first Globules of the blood; and indeed the blood is of the same make, but only
of a different color: for as I observed the greater blood Globules to consist
of six lesser, so here I could see them more plain; only they seemed more
slender and tender than in the blood: the reason whereof I suppose to be that
the vesicules of the Phlegm Globules had already received some kind of
corruption: besides, there was mixed with the tough part of the Phlegm great
quantity of very thin cuticles: and in the same manner as I have heretofore
explained how our cuticle is supplied underneath, as the upper part is rubbed
off in scurf, so I suppose the inner cuticles of the gullet aspera arteria, and
other vessels are taken off by the Phlegm. There drove also, through the Phlegm
some other particles, which from their smallness I could not assign them a
figure, but I conceived them rather cubical than round. I did last Summer shut
up some Caterpillars to spin Webs, and within these few days I broke some of
these Webs, when from each of them came out a fly, which from the cold were
very weak, and were unable to stand; by which I conceive that those which came
not out in the latter part of the year, remain the whole Winter in their Webs,
till the warmth makes them come out. I was pleased to understand that your self
and the Society had seen in so small a quantiy of water as a sand, so great a
number of Creatures; as also, that I shall be partaker of what you shall
observe, which I shall with longing desire expect. I cannot but mention that
that small sort of Creature which I heretofore could give no description of, I
now see their figure. And for the pleasure I take in the various pleasing
shapes, with their motions, which do now and then appear in the water, I have
the fourth of this month, when it froze hard, taken a third part of beaten
pepper, and 2/3 of high rain water in a clean glass, which I set the first
night in my Bedchamber; the next day, the weather being milder, I set it in my
Counting House, and in three times 24 hours discovered so great a number, and
so unexpressible small Creatures, that it is hard to be conceived; and according
to my judgment, the most of them were much less than a thousandth part of the
thickness of the hair of ones head, and three or four times as long as thick;
the which made, with the hinder part of their body, ofttimes so swift a
progress, as when we observe a Pike shooting through the water, and every shoot
was in length most times about half a hairs breadth; the other sorts or kind of
which were yet smaller, whose shape for brevity I omit; only I shall say, that
ofttimes times in pepper-water which has stood somewhat long, among the very
small Creatures, I have seen a sort of small Eels which had their shapes and
motions as perfect as great ones: these were to my appearance a thousand times
thinner than the hair of ones head, and that if 100 of these small Eels were
laid in length one behind another, the whole length would not extend to the
length of the Eel in vinegar: Whether you have also observed these small
Creatures with your Microscope, I shall be glad to understand. I would
willingly also be informed whether my Letter of the second of December
mentioned above be come to your hands, and how those Observations do please the
Gentlemen of your Society; and also to understand the receipt of this.


The manner how the said Mr. Leeuwenhoeck does make these discoveries, he does
as yet not think fit to impart, for reasons best known to himself; and
therefore I am not able to acquaint you with what it is: but as to the ways I
have made use of, I here freely discover that all such persons as have a desire
to make any enquiries into Nature this way, may be the better enabled so to do.

First, for the manner of holding the liquor, so as to examine it by the
Microscope, I find that the way prescribed by Mr. Leeuwenhoeck is to include
the same in a very fine pipe of glass, and then to view it by the help of the
Microscope; for by placing that at a due distance, whatever is contained in the
said liquor will most easily be discovered: The liquor will most easily
insinuate it self into the cavity of the said pipe, if the end thereof only be
just put within the liquor. This as it is exceedingly convenient for many
trials, so is it not very difficult to prepare; but because every one is not
instructed how to proceed in this matter, and it may cause him more trouble
than needs to procure them, I will here describe the way; and so much the
rather, because the same apparatus will serve for the preparing of Microscopes:
as I shall afterward show.

Provide then a box made of tin, with a flat bottom, and upright on all sides;
let this have fixed within it to the bottom a small piece of tin, hollowed like
a ridg tile, so that the wiek of the Lamp may lie and rest upon it, and let the
Tin-man fix on it a cover of tin, so that there may be only left one part of
the aforesaid box open, to wit, where the bent tin piece and the wiek do lie
and come above the sides: this cover may be turned back on its hinges when
there is occasion to raise the wiek, or put in more oil, etc. but for the most
part ought to lie flat and covered; for whilst it is using, it is necessary to
keep the flame from spreading too much, and taking fire all over. This box must
stand within another box of tin, made large enough to contain it; the use of
which is to keep the former Lamp Box from fowling the board or table on which
it stands: This stands upon a board about one foot square, into which is
fastened a standard or stick upright, cleft so as to pinch and hold the sodering
pipe between its clefts, which may be fastened with a screw, or a slipping ring;
through which pipe, blowing with your breath, the flame will be darted forward
with great swiftness and brightness: if then into this flame you hold a small
piece of a glass pipe, made of white glass, (for green glass, or coarser glass
will not be melted easily in this flame) and keep it turning round between your
fingers and thumbs, you shall find that the flame will in a very short time
melt the middle part of the said pipe; so that if you remove it out of the
flame, and draw your hands one from another, you may easily draw the former
pipe into a very small size, which will yet remain hollow, though drawn never
so small. The best Oil for this purpose is good clean Sallat Oil, or Oil Olive;
but high rectified Spirit of Wine is yet better, and cleanlier, but much more
chargeable; and for most uses the Oil Olive will serve. This I have set down,
because many who are far off in the Country cannot have the convenience of
going to a Lamp-blower as often as they have occasion for such pipes; which if
they provide themselves with small white glass pipes from the Potters, they may
accommodate themselves withal, though they have nothing but a large candle, and
a tobacco-pipe, instead of the aforesaid apparatus, though not altogether so
conveniently. But I would rather advise them to have a Lamp made, which most
Tin-men know how to fit and prepare; and so it will not need much more
description.

But this way of Mr. Leeuwenhoecks, of holding the liquors in small glass
pipes, though it be exceedingly ingenious, and very convenient for many
examinations, yet for diverse others it is not so well accommodated as this which
I contrived my self for my own trials, at least for those Microscopes I make
use of; what it may be for those which Mr. Leeuwenhoeck uses I know not.

I take then instead of a glass pipe a very thin plate of Muscovy glass, this
serves instead of the moveable plate which is usually put upon the pedestal of
Microscopes; but because the common pedestal hitherto made use of in
Microscopes is generally not so convenient for trials of this nature, I lay
those by, and instead thereof I fix into the bottom of the Tube of the
Microscope, a cylindrical rod of Brass or Iron. Upon this a little socket is
made to slide to and fro; and by means of a pretty stiff spring, will stand
fast in any place. This has fastened to it a joynted arm of three or four
joints, and at the end a plate about the bigness of a half crown, with a hole
in the middle of it about three quarters of an inch wide; upon this plate I lay
the Muscovy glass, and upon that I spread a very little of the liquor to be
examined; then looking against the flame of a Candle, or a Lamp, or a small
reflection of the Sun from a globular body; all such parts of the liquor as
have differing refraction will manifestly appear. By this means I examined the
water in which I had steeped the pepper I formerly mentioned; and as if I had
been looking upon a Sea, I saw infinite of small living Creatures swimming and
playing up and down in it, a thing indeed very wonderful to behold.

If the flame of the candle were directly before the Microscope, then all those
little Creatures appeared perfectly defined by a black line, and the bodies of
them somewhat darker than the water; but if the candle were removed a little
out of the axis of vision, all those little Creatures appeared like so many
small pearls, or little bubbles of air, and the liquor in which they swimmed
appeared dark; but when the water began to dry off, the bending of the
superficies of the liquor over their backs, and over the tops of other small
motes which were in the water made a confused appearance, which some not used
to these kind of examinations, took to be quite differing things from what they
were really; and the appearances here are so very strange, that to one not well
accustomed to the phenomenon of fluids of differing figures and refractions,
the examinations of substances this way will be very apt to mis-inform, rather
than instruct him; especially of such substances as are not perfectly fluid,
and will not readily and naturally smooth their own superficies, such as
Tallow, concreted Oils, Marrow, Brains, Fat, inspissated juyces, etc. for if
those substances be so examined by spreading them upon this plate, and be
looked upon against the candle, or other small defined light, all the
inequalities left on the surface by the spreading do by the refractions of the
rays of light render such odd appearances, that they will easily deceive the
examinator, and make him to conceive that to be in the texture of the part
which is really no where but in the make of the superficies of it. This
therefore as another great inconvenience to be met with in Microscopical
Observations, I prevent by these ensuing methods: First, all such bodies as
Fat, Oil, Brains, Rhobs, Pus, tough concreted Phlegm, and the like, whose
surfaces are irregular, and ought to be reduced to smoothness before they can
be well examined, I order in this manner: First, I provide a very clear and
thin piece of looking-glass plate very smooth and plain on both sides, and
clean from foulness: upon the surface of this I lay some of those substances I
last mentioned, then with such another piece of Looking-glass plate laid upon
the said substance I press it so thin as not only to make the surfaces of it
very smooth, but also to make the substance of it very thin; because otherwise,
if the substance be pretty thick, as suppose as thick as a piece of Venice
paper, if it be a whitish substance, the multitudes of parts lying one upon
another in such a thickness, do so confound the sight, that none of them all
can be distinctly seen: but if by squeezing the said plates hard, and close
together, it be reduced to a twentieth part perhaps of that thickness, the
substance may be well looked through, and the constituent parts may be very
plainly discovered. Thus also it is very visible in the Globules of milk and
blood, discovered by the ingenious Mr. Leeuwenhoeck, for when either of those
substances are thick, the multitude of those little Globules confound and
thicken the liquor so as one cannot perceive any thing until it be run very
thin; for then all the remaining Globules with their motions may very
distinctly be apprehended. This therefore is an expedient by which thousands of
substances may be examined; and therefore the more fit to be communicated, that
there may be the greater number of observers well accommodated for such trials.
These plates therefore may be contrived so as to be pinched together by the
help of screws, and a frame, that thereby they may be forced the closer and the
evener together, as there shall be occasion; and may be kept firm and steady in
that posture, and then, that it may some ways or other be conveniently fastened
to the former plate, so as to be moved this way or that way steadily, as there
shall be occasion.

But there are other substances which none of these ways I have yet mentioned
will examine, and those are such parts of animal or vegetable bodies as have a
peculiar form, figure, or shape, out of which if it be put, the principal thing
looked after is destroyed: such are the Nerves, Muscles, Tendons, Ligaments,
Membranes, Glandules, Parenchymas, etc. of the body of Animals, and the Pulps,
Piths, Woods, Barks, Leaves, Flowers, etc. of Vegetables. Some of these which
are not made by dissection or separation from other parts may be viewed alone;
but there are others which cannot be well examined unless they be made to swim
in a liquor proper and convenient for them: as for instance, the parts of
flesh, muscles and tendons: for if you view the fibers of a muscle encompassed
only with the air, you cannot discover the small parts out of which it is made:
but if the same be put into a liquor, as water, or very clear oil, you may
clearly see such a fabric as is truly very admirable, and such as none
hitherto has discovered that ever I could meet with; of which more hereafter,
when I show the true mechanical fabric thereof, and what causes its motion.
Thus if you view a thread of a Ligament, you shall plainly see it to be made up
of an infinite company of exceeding small threads smooth and round, lying close
together; each of which threads is not above a four hundredth part of the
bigness of a hair: for comparing those of Beef with a hair of my head, which
was very fine and small, viz. about a 640. part of an inch, I found the
Diameter thereof to be more than twenty times the Diameter of these threads; so
that no less than 163 millions, besides 840 thousands of these must be in a
ligament one inch square. I shall not here enlarge upon the admirable
contrivance of Nature in this particular, nor say any thing farther of the
reason of the greater strength of the same substance drawn into smaller than
into greater threads; but only this in general, that the mechanical operations
of these minute bodies are quite differing from those of bodies of greater
bulk, and the want of considering this one thing has been the cause of very
great absurdities in the Hypotheses of some of our more eminent modern
Philosophers: For he that imagines the actions of these lesser bodies the same
with those of the larger and tractable bodies, will indeed make but Aristotle's
wooden hand at best. This put me in mind likewise of advertising the
Experimenter that he provide himself with instruments, by which, to stretch and
pull in pieces any substance whilst the same is yet in view of the Microscope,
of which there may be many which any one will easily contrive, when he has
this hint given him of the usefulness thereof in the examination of the texture
of several substances; as of Tendons, Nerves, Muscles, etc. those I have made
use of were made to open like a pair of Tobacco Tongues, by two angular plates
of thin brass rivetted together, which by pinching the opposite end, would
either open or shut at the other, as I had occasion. These having a part
extended between the two tops, were fixed at a due distance from the
object-glass that the body extended between them might be distinctly seen; then
with my finger squeezing together the opposite ends, the other ends opened, by
which means how the parts stretched and shrunk might be plainly discovered. Now
as this is of use for some kind of substances, so the two glass plates are for
others, and particularly for squeezing of several substances between them, so
as to break them in pieces, as those little Creatures in pepper-water, or the
Globules in blood, milk, phlegm, etc. whereby the parts within them may yet
farther be enquired into, as Mr. Leeuwenhoeck I find has done by his latest
Observations. Whether he makes use of this way, or some other, I know not.

Having thus given a description of the appurtenances, it remains that I come
to the description of the Microscope it self, which is the principal
instrument, and without which all the rest are insignificant.

The Microscopes then I design here to describe, are only of two kinds, either
single or double.

The single Microscope I call that which consists only of one glass, though
it have a double refracting superficies; and the double one I call that which
is compounded of two glasses, though it has for the most part a quadruple
refraction of the Rays.

The single Microscope then consists of one small lens so fastened into a
cell, that the eye may come conveniently to look through the middle part or
Axis of it; of these there are various sorts, as double Convexes, or plain
Convexes, or perfectly spherical.

I shall not need to describe the common lenses which are every where made use
of for this purpose, being plano-convexes of Spheres about half an inch
Diameter, save only this, that it is best to turn the plain side toward the
object, and the unequal to the eye: nor shall I say much concerning those double
Unequal Glasses, there being no great difficulty in the making or using of them;
but that the smaller the sphere is in which they are made, the nearer do they
bring the object to the eye; and consequently the more is the object magnified,
and the better and truer they are polisht in the Tool, the more clear and
distinct does the object appear, but to make any of a Sphere less than 1/10 of
an inch in Diameter is exceeding difficult, by reason that the glass becomes
too small to be tractable; and it is very difficult to find a cement that will
hold it fast whilst it be completed; and when it is polisht, it is exceeding
difficult to handle and put into its cell: besides, I have found the use of
them offensive to my eye, and to have much strained and weakened the sight,
which was the reason why I omitted to make use of them, though in truth they do
make the object appear much more clear and distinct, and magnify as much as
the double Microscopes: nay, to those whose eyes can well endure it, it is
possible with a single Microscope to make discoveries much better than with a
double one, because the colors which do much disturb the clear vision in
double Microscopes is clearly avoided and prevented in the single. The single
Microscope therefore which I shall here describe, as it is exceeding easy to
make, so is it much more tractable than the double Unequal glasses made the
common way by working them in a hollow Hemisphere with water and sand; for
those, supposing them made with all the accurateness imaginable, will be far
short from being so well polisht as these; and wanting the stem or handle which
these have, they are infinitely troublesome to remove, or place, or to cleanse
when there shall be occasion.

Take then a small rod of the clearest and cleanest glass you can procure, free
if possible from blebbs, sands, or veins; then by melting it in the flame of a
Lamp made with Spirit of Wine, or the cleanest and purest Sallet Oil, draw it
out into exceeding fine and small threads; then take a small piece of these
threads, and in the same flame of the aforesaid Lamp melt the end of it, till
you perceive it to run into a little ball or globule of the bigness desired;
then suffer it to cool, and handling it by the aforesaid thread of glass, which
is as it were a handle to it, fix it with a little wax upon the side of a thin
plate of Brass, Silver, or the like, that the middle of it may lie directly
over the middle of a small hole pricked through the said thin plate with a
needle: then holding this plate close to the eye, look through the said little
hole, and thereby you may also see very clearly through the aforesaid Globule,
fixed with wax on the side that is from the eye: if then either by a little
joynted arm, or by a little soft wax, and a needle, or a thin plate of Muscovy
glass, you fix the object you would examine; so that it may be at a due
distance from the said little Globule, you will perceive the minute parts
thereof very distinct. The focus of a sphere looked on by the naked eye, is
about half the radius of the sphere, without the superficies of it; but this is
varied much by the age of the eye that looks through it, by the imagination
also of the person, and by the differing specifique refraction of the glass
made use of.

By this means I have prodigiously magnified some small bodies, insomuch that I
have been able to see and distinguish the particles of bodies, not only a
million of times smaller than a visible point, but even to make those visible,
whereof a million of millions of them would hardly make the bulk of the
smallest visible sand; so prodigiously do these exceeding the little Globules
of glass enlarge the prospect of humane sight into the more private recesses of
nature.

If the things to be viewed be liquors, they may be included either in those
little pipes of Mr Leeuwenhoeck I newly mentioned, or else they may be put upon
exceeding thin plates of Muscovy glass or Selenites, and the other side of the
plate may be made to touch the Globule, or at least be fixed at such distance,
as may make the parts of the liquor distinct: If you make use of a
Looking-glass plate to spread the liquor upon you would examine, you may turn
the liquor toward the Globule, and you may therein easily see all the parts
very distinctly, without at all hurting the prospect by the interposition of
the Muscovy glass; which though it be exceeding clear, especially if the plates
be very thin, yet has it some flaws, and some opacousnesses in it, which do
somewhat cloud the prospect.

If further, you would have a Microscope with one single refraction, and
consequently capable of the greatest clearness and brightness that any one kind
of Microscopes can possibly be imagined susceptible of, when you have fixed one
of these little Globules as I have directed, and spread a little of the liquor
upon a piece of Looking-glass plate, then apply the said plate with the liquor,
next to the Globule, and gently move it close to the Globule, till the liquor
touch; which done, you will find the liquor presently to adhere to the Globule,
and still to adhere to it though you move it back again a little; by which
means, this liquor being of a specifique refraction, not much differing from
glass, the second refraction is quite taken off, and little or none left but
that of the unequal side of the Globule next the eye; by which means as much of
the inconvenience of refraction as is possible is removed, and that by the
easiest and most practicable expedient that can be desired. I could add various
other ways of making these Globular bodies both of glass and other substances
which will yet farther advance our prospect into nature, and are pleasant to
admiration; but those I shall yet reserve till I see what effects the
publishing of these may produce, and to the end to excite other persons to be
inquisitive into this matter: for let me assure them, very much more may yet be
done by a way I know, than by this I have here published. And I confess I have
very often wondered that no farther improvement had been made of this
Principle, since I published it in the year 1664. in the 20. page of my Preface
to Micrographia: for though some other reasons discouraged me from prosecuting
those enquiries, yet I hoped that others might long before this have carried it
much farther.

The only inconvenience in these kinds of Microscopes, is, that the object is
necessarily brought so near the glass, that none but such as are transparent,
and to be viewed by a through light are capable of examination by them: such
therefore are to be examined by the double Microscope; which, as it is
abundantly more tractable, so does it much less strain the eye; and from the
easiness of its use, when well fitted, is much more pleasant: and if ordered as
it ought, will magnify as much more than the common ones hitherto made, as
those did more than the naked eye.

Both these Microscopes I have directed Mr. Christopher Cock, in Long-Acre, how
to prepare, that such as will not trouble themselves in the making of them, may
know where to be accommodated with such as are good.

And of the improvement of this kind of Microscope, I see no limits, especially
as to the augmenting the visible appearance of such objects as are capable of
enduring the increase of light; for since it is demonstrable that light may be
augmented upon any one object susceptible to any given degree, and that by the
double Microscope the image can be augmented to any assigned magnitude, what
but the difficulty of making all things correspondent should limit the power of
such an instrument. Now the making of this double Microscope, though it be
somewhat more difficult than of the single one, yet the tractableness thereof
when well fitted, and its easiness to be cleansed, and applied to use, makes
amends for the extraordinary charge, especially the situation of the object;
which being capable of any reasonable distance from the object glass, so as to
be fit for examination, makes it very desirable. Now as in all other mechanical
contrivances, that is best which is plainest, and most simple: so is it in
this, wherein nothing more is required, but two plano Unequal glasses, the one
for the object-glass, and the other for the eye-glass: the less the spheres of
the glasses be, the more do they magnify the object; and the thinner and
clearer the substance of them be, and the more exactly shaped, and the brighter
they are polisht, the clearer do they represent it; and the longer the glasses
are distant from each other, the more is the image magnified, caeteris paribus,
though indeed the same thing is performed by glasses of very differing
magnitudes, due proportions of all things about it being kept and observed. For
if as the distance of one object from the object-glass is to the distance of
another object from another object-glass, so the distance of the first image be
to the distance of the second image, the image in both must be equal: if
therefore this image be viewed with equal glasses the image must be equally
magnified at the bottom of the eye; so that in this way the object is capable
of a double way of augmenting, viz. first, the augmenting the figure in the
Tube, by the smallness of the object-Glass, and length of the Tube: and
secondly, by the augmenting that image in the bottom of the eye, and that is by
the Eye-glass; give therefore light enough to the object, and you may increase
the image at the bottom of the eye to what proportion you shall desire. And by
a way I shall shortly show, the objects may be perceived distinct, defined, and
colorless, as if seen by the naked eye. In all these ways the manner of
applying the light is very significant, and provided it be very strong, the
smaller the point be it proceeds from, the more distinctly does it exhibit
the difference of refraction in the transparent bodies viewed by it, and the
plainer will their parts be discovered: The light therefore of the Sun either
reflected from a Spherical Unequal body, or Spherical Concave body, the object
being placed beyond the focus, or Refracted through a Concave or through a
Unequal, if the object be placed beyond the focus, do exceedingly well. But
these with the help of a dark Room do yet better, the object being placed in a
Table against the Light, and all other Light screen'd from the Eye by the Dark
Room. Much the same thing is done by the Light of a Lamp or Candle in the
Night, which is indeed the most convenient Light, where Color is not so much
looked after.

Whilst this Discourse was Printing I casually met with a Treatise of P.
Cherubine, Printed at Paris, 1677. Entitled, LAVISION PERFAITE, ou les
concours des deux axes de la Vision en un sceul point de l' object; Wherein the
Author pretends amongst other things to have promoted Microscopes extremely by
so joining two together, as through them to see the same object distinct with
both the Eyes at once, and to see a large object all at one view, by which he
affirms to have discovered some mistakes and untruths in some of those figures
I have formerly published in my Micrography. But if he had pleased to have read
the Description as well as looked on the Figure, he might have been better
informed than by his Preface he would seem to be. I deny not but that there are
many failures in some of those draughts, some of my own and some of the gravers
committing. Humanum est. But those which he charges for such are not, as he
might have seen if he had made use of better glasses than those which he
describes, for they are so far short of equalling those I use, that I can
demonstrate from his own Description of them, that those I made use of did
magnify 10000 times more than that with which he pretends to have made these
great Discoveries. Nor is it any thing more than common to see as large an Area
as he mentions, with a glass that magnifies no more than his does. But I could
have showed him how he might see the whole Creature at once, and yet much more
magnify than that which I have described, nay though the Creature were twice
as big, and that with one Eye only, which is much to be preferred before that
with two. However I should be very glad to hear what Discoveries he does make
with his binocular Microscope more than was seen before. As also that he would
please to demonstrate the truth of Parallelogram prescribed for certain uses,
page of Dioptrique Oculaire, and in the Fourth Chapter of the Fourth Part of
this Book. But to digress no farther from what I was describing. I must add
that with both these kinds of Microscopes have I examined several substances;
as particularly the steepings of several grains and seeds in rainwater. And
though I have not yet found any one tincture more prolific than this of Pepper;
yet it is not the only tincture in which they do both breed and increase. I have
seen several sorts in the steeping of Wheat, Barley, Oats, Coffee, Anniseeds,
Pease, etc. some not above a third part of a hair in thickness; others not
above the twentieth part of the breadth of a hair, and some not more than a
thirtieth part of that breadth; so that no less than 900 of these least must go
to make an area as big as that of an hair cut transversly, and 27000 to make a
Cylinder as big as the hair of ones head, and of equal height with the Diameter
of that hair, which one may just call a visible point, and no more; few eyes
seeing things distinctly much smaller: Now the Diameter of a hair of my head
being by examination found but the 640 part of an inch, it follows that no less
than 19200 or to use a round sum about 20000 of them may lie in the length of
an inch, and consequently, that a circle an inch Diameter will be to the area
of one of these cut transversly as 400000000 to 1. four hundred millions to 1
and a Cylinder one inch Diameter, and one inch high, will be to one of these
mites, as 8000000000000 to one, eight millions of millions to one. If therefore
we compare the magnitude of one of these animals to the magnitude of other
creatures living in the water, we shall find that these will be found much
smaller in comparison to the body of an ordinary Whale, than the body of the
same Whale will be to the body of the whole Earth; which may prove an argument
for an anima mundi perhaps to some. But let every one make his own inferences,
and believe his own eyes, for they will make the best impression on his reason
and belief. Now if the Creature be so exceeding small, what must we think of
the Muscles, Joints, Bones, Shells, etc. certain it is, that the Mechanism by
which Nature performs the muscular motion is exceedingly small and curious, and
to the performance of every muscular motion in greater Animals at least, there
are not fewer distinct parts concerned than many millions of millions, and
these visible, as I shall hereafter show through a Microscope; and those that
conceive in the body of a muscle, little more curiosity of mechanism than in a
rope of the same bigness, have a very rude and false notion of it; and no
wonder if they have recourse to Spirits to make out the Phenomenon: but of this
hereafter more.

Further, I have examined the constitution of Blood, Milk, Phlegm, etc. and
found them much the same with what Mr. Leeuwenhock has declared. A little fat
laid upon the glass plate whilst warm, melts, and becomes transparent, but
observed in a convenient posture against the light of a candle, etc. till it
congeals, and shrinks, make a pleasant fluid, and shows how considerably a
fluid and solid body do vary, and may give us a good hint to conjecture at the
reason of the swelling and greater lightness of Ice than of Water. The first
beginnings also of the shooting or crystallising of Sugar into rectangular
parallelipipeds, Alum, Salt, Vitriol, etc. are strangely surprising and
instructive, I could enumerate multitudes of these.

But (that I may not detain the Reader toolong in the perusal of these
anatomical descriptions of the minute and invisible parts of animal substances)
to ease both his eyes and imagination I shall proceed to acquaint him with some
Anatomical Observations more sensible, and which do seem more nearly to concern
us. And those are contained in the ensuing Discourse, being

A Relation communicated to me in a Letter by that ingenious and experienced
Surgeon Mr. James Young of Plymouth, in the beginning of January last, of
the fatal Symptoms caused by a Bullet swallowed into the Lungs.
SIR, In the beginning of April, 1674. one Mr. Anthony Williamson of Liscard in
Cornwall, aged about 65 years, of a brisk, firm habit, became (after a too
liberal drinking of Cider) afflicted with the Colic, of which in four days he
cured himself, by swallowing two Musket Bullets, and receiving some Carminative
Clysters. On the 12. of the same month, his pain returning somewhat smarter
than before, he attempted to swallow three Pistol Shot, and supposing it the
easiest way, he lay on his back, and threw them all at once into his throat;
where they choking, had almost strangled him; constraining him to vomit, etc.
When they were past down, he became seized immediately with a violent Cough,
Wheasing, pain in the left side of his Breast, a great noise in respiration,
more especially after a fit of Coughing for then his Breast would hiss, like
the sucking of a Pump, when the Air descends through the boxes.

These accidents so suddenly occurring, without any manifest cause, did much
surprise him, and the more, because he was naturally of a sound breast; the
Colic was cured by Clysters, Potions of Manna, ol. amyg. d. etc. and two of
the Shot were soon ejected, ex ano, and maugre the other accidents, he became
indifferently well, and able to walk about house.

Five or six weeks after this, those symptoms became more fierce, depaupering
his spirits, prostrating his appetite, disquieting his sleep with dreams, a
Dyspnoea, and rutling violent Cough; a straitness and load in his Breast kept
him in bed, extenuated his body (which without help of Milk Clysters, was
costive) he frequently fainted with sweats, and a tickling sleepiness in both
legs.

Under the tyranny of this legion of symptoms, our Western Apollo, Dr. Bidgood
of Exeter was consulted, who affirmed them all to be caused by the remaining
Bullet, which passing through the Larynx, was fallen into one of the branches
of the Trachea, where it would abide, in despite of any endeavors to eject
it: yet to alleviate the violence of the accidents, he directed to the use of
emollient Eclegma's, temperate Cordials, etc. by help of which, and some other
propitious circumstances, he not only recovered his legs, becoming able to
walk, and ride a small Journey, but also consummated Marriage with a young
woman of 25 -- who afterward brought him two Children, whereof one is now
alive, and very lusty; and was seven months gone with a third, when he died:
the more wonderful if the woman were just to him (of which there appears no
reason to doubt) because a very little motion would so increase his difficulty
of breathing, as to make him faint.

After Matrimony he had diverse lucid Intervals, at times would be very brisk,
and at others very languid, and faint, like a dying man: he continually
expectorated, sometimes grumous coagulated Blood, otherwhiles very recent; now
purulent foetid matter, then laudable pus. His natural aversion to Medicine
caused him to reject what was advised by Dr. Bidgood, Dr. Lower, Dr. Sprage,
etc. saving a few of the more slight mixtures: And although Sack had been
formerly very familiar to him, he was now forced to shun it, and all strong
Drinks, because they would infallibly produce a Cardialgia, a pulsant throbbing
of the Heart, and laboring in his Breast: the first of these perhaps proceeded
from his Constitution, which inclined to Choler; but the latter undoubtedly,
from the effervescency, and warm motion, to which it enforced the Blood, which
the obstruction and pressure the Bullet occasioned in the Pneumatick organs,
could not peaceably admit of: wherefore he resolutely fixed to small Drink, and
shunned, as much as possible, all evitable Exercise, saving that of his hands,
which he frequently employed in making Network.

In the Year 1676. he applied himself to our ingenious and learned Countryman,
Dr Mayow of Bath, who agreed with Dr. Bidgood, that the remaining Bullet
lodging in the Lungs, was the occasion of all those ill symptoms under which
he labored; but seemed to dissent from his presage, by hoping he might
expectorate it: to atchieve which, he directed to have the body suspended head
downwards, and fumes of Storax, Benjamin, etc. to induce expulsive Coughing,
together with concussions of the body, and all preceded with an opening course,
to relax, and dilate the vessels of the Breast; all which were used to no
purpose, save to verify Dr. Bidgoods Prognostic, that no efflation, how
violent soever, would be able to extrude it, and inhaunce the Patients despair
of being ever cured; from which time he never attempted it: so that those
symptoms before mentioned, continuing until the Winter, and then gaining
considerably on him, especially the Haemoptysis, etc. he languished till the
ninth of December last, and then died.

The tenth Ditto (assisted by his Son-in-law) I opened the Thorax, in presence
of two other Chirurgions of the place, together with diverse persons of Quality,
whose curiosity led them to see the examination; because the Bullets being
there, was so much doubted by many, and disputed as impossible by others. In
the disfection the following particulars were observable,

The Body was extenuate and tabid,

The right lobes of the Lungs were replete, sound, and well colored.

The Serum in the Pericardium was almost all absumed,

The Heart strangely shrivelled and very small.

Under the Pericardium (the Body being supine) we found a lump of coagulated
Blood, as big as a Pigeons Egg; near which lay also a substance, shaped like an
obtuse headed muscle, having a Tendon-like tail, which insinuated to the
Pendant Lobe: Its body was above an half inch thick. Its other dimensions and
shape exactly like that of the figure X, of which A shows the head or upper
end, B the tail, which in drawing out of the rotten Lungs (being also
corrupted) broke asunder. Its Texture seemed fibrous, like that of the Kidneys,
being white one half way through, the rest of a dark red: it was very soft and
plum, having a firm smooth tegument, and felt very much like a Sheeps kidney.

The left Lobe of the Lungs was cadaverous, and hollow, by an abscess which had
discharged near a pint of very foetid and purulent matter, into that side of
the trunk where it lay immured up, by the adhesion of the Lungs on that side,
to the Pleura, which with the Diaphragima, as far as the matter extended, was
livid, and eroded.

We examined this rotten part of the Lungs, with what exactness and curiosity
we were capable of, amidst such a crowd as were present; and the more
troublesome stench of the Cadaver; and found though the whole Parenchyma were
rotten, and no firmer than coagulated Blood (with which it had very near
resemblance) yet the branches of the Trachea continued into it were incorrupt,
and sound; nor in any of them could we find what we very confidently presumed
to be there, viz. the Bullet.

Wherefore I resolved to seek it the way by which it must have entered; and
accordingly dividing the Trachea at its insertion to the Lungs, I thrust in a
bended Probe to the left branch, and there felt him, lying loose about two
inches within it, which with my fingers I easily expressed at the divided end
of the pipe: to do which, I laid it bare so far as where the Bullet had lodged;
and I protest, to my wonder, I found it not any way injured, or altered, by
hardness, erosion, etc. though the Bullet had diverse impressions from the later.

The sanguiferous vessels, though lacerated, and cut in the dissection, did
yield little or no Blood, either fluid or coagulate.

Thus far is true History, and matter of fact; I must now beg your pardon, if I
presume to give my sense, and apprehension of some of those Phenomenon here
related.

The extenuation of the body, the absumption of the serum in the Heart-bag, and
the contraction of the Heart, were the effects of the Tabes; and that
occasioned by the Bullets injuring the Lungs, and pectoral vessels.

The lump of coagulate blood found under the Heartbag was extravasate from the
rotted veins, and arteries of the Lungs.

That strange substance lodged between the Pericardium, and the Bullet, was
either a Polypus, and the excrescence of some part, or it was generated by
nature, and substituted for a cushion to defend the Heart from injury, by so
uneasy a neighbor. That Polypuses have been found in the Heart, is affirmed
by Nicolas Tulpius, Marcellus Malpighius, G. Garnarus, etc. but their shape and
texture differing vastly from that of ours, gives reason to believe this to be
none; especially considering that they all excrescing from the Heart, or some
carneous part, are inseparably united and radicated to their original, and are
spungy; whereas this was nothing less, having no root, nor so much as an
adhesion any where, saving at the tail; the small end of which, being rotted by
the Lungs, into which it continued, did easily divide upon my endeavor to draw
it out: the body of it also lay loose in the aforesaid interstice, and as
easily slipped out, as a Wen, or a Struma, when the containing parts are
opened. Its substance was not fungous, but of a soft firmness, like a Kidney;
and in what ever circumstances it may resemble a Polypus, as it does the figure
of that of the Nose, vide N. Tulpii ob. med. lib. 1. obs. 26. yet it also
differs from all other excrescences, besides, in what has been mentioned, in
that it was not rooted in any fleshy, bony, or muculous part; and such the
Lungs are well known not to be: it must therefore be the stupendous effect of
Natures industry, and laid as a cushion to defend the Heart, etc. Its
composition being so delicately soft, and yet firm enough for such a purpose:
Its magnitude, situation, etc. concurring also to confirm this opinion
concerning it; besides which, I do almost remember, and believe (though I
cannot be positive) that the pulsant pain he had so violently in his Breast,
toward the left side, decreased gradatim, from the time of the deglutition: if
that be true, whatever the substance were, or its cause, its effects were very
propitious, manifesting nature to be, not only a diligent supplier of her own
defects, but as industrious to produce strange and unaccountable relief, in
such emergencies as this before us: A resembling story we have from A Pareus,
lib. 8. cap. 15.

The abscess was without doubt from a Phlegmon of the Lungs; and because for
the most part it was below, or beyond the Bullet, it proceeded rather from its
obstructing, and so stagnating the Blood, and recrements in that Lobe, than
from extravasation. What occurred of the latter, was expectorated, or remained
in such Coagulums as that found under the Heart.

The cause of the Bullets falling, rather into the left than the right Ramus of
the Trachea, is obvious from the more supine and direct figure thereof,
corresponding with the trunk, as the figure does manifest: which consideration,
together with the Bullets being loose in the pipe, renders the unsuccessfulness
of Dr. Mayow's attempt very wonderful: I am inclined to believe it was so,
either for want of a more early trial, or a more skilful tryer, than him who
was employed about it. The way was ingeniously contrived, and (as the Doctor
himself told me) had been successfully experienced in the like occasion.
Certainly, had not the distance of the Doctors abode, and very important
avocations, denied his personal assistance: or had any other person skilled in
Anatomy, etc. been substituted, the Bullet from his own favorable shape, and
more propitious gravity, and particularly from the strong efflations they
provoked, together with the assistant posture of the body, would have been
extruded. Had they instead of hanging him perpendicular, made him incline a
little to the right side, to have made the left Ramus more prone; and at the
same time made him distend the pipes by sucking in as much breath as they could
contain, their other means might have been effectual; which I am induced to
presume from the prosperous effects of the like attempt, and yet wanting many
of their advantages; I mean the reversion of a Stone, when sticking, and not
able, to pass through the Urinary Channels. Let any Physicians seriously
perpend the difficulty of this, with the advantages for the former, and they
will justify my opinion.

The erosion of the Pleura, and Diaphragme, was from the acidity of the matter,
gnawing and corrupting them; for though the Trachea wonderfully escaped such
impressions, the Bullet discovered on its superficies, diverse marks of erosion,
which all acids produce with much facility, upon the saccharous or saline parts
of Lead; as is to be seen by immersing it in vinegar.

And now Sir, to relieve your patience (no less than my own) perhaps already
wearied with the prolixity of this Narrative, give me leave to conclude, with
suggesting, that I am of a belief (having perused most of the public accounts
of this kind) that scarcely a rarer accident, and accompanied with such
stupendous circumstances, has occurred to the present age than this: that an
extraneous body, so large, so heavy, so hard, should slip down that difficult,
and unusual way of the Weason, and abide so long in the organs of respiration,
in so aged a person, admitting after it such exercises, as he performed,
Riding, Marriage, etc. that nature should so unaccountably provide such a
pertinent sense against injuries accidentally accruing, and that even the
smallest Ramifications of the Trachea, though immersed in such a Cadaver,
should be preserved from injury thereby. I am sure in the voluminous
Observations of Schenckius, Horstius, Riverius, Bartholine, Burnet, etc. nor
among all the stories in Mr. Oldenburg's Transactions, or the Miscellanea
Curiosa of the Leipswick Doctors, has it a Parallel.

This, and whatever is else contained in this History, as my (...), I submit to
the better sense, and reason of the Learned, not presuming to be positive in
any thing, save in affirming my self, etc.JAMES YOUNG.
P. S.
For the plainer understanding where the Bullet lodged in the Windpipe, I have
drawn and sent you an exact figure of the Trachea, excarnified; as its to be be
found in Gerrard Blassius, Syntagma Anatomicum J. Veslingi. See figure Y in the
III. Table.

C points to the Trachea divided under the Larynx.

D the right Ramus of the Trachea. E the left.

F the place where the Lungs adhered to the Pleura.

g g g, etc. the extremities of those branches of the Aspera arteria,
divaricated into the rotten Lobe.

H the Bullet in the pipe where it was found.




ERRATA.
PAge 1. line 17. foot. p. 2. l. 6. joined, p. 8. l. 21. (...), p. 11. l. 5. is
diffused, p. 11. l. 17. Fostor, p. 12. l. 33. within the sphere of its
activity, p. 12. l. 34. dele as, p. 14. l. 8. either, p. 19. l. 7. common
sights, p. 22. l. 31. (...), p. 23. l. 19. been produced, p. 24. l. 27. add see
fig. 4. p. 27. l. 5. of this orb, p. 27. l. 21., p. 28. l. 27. sixth figure, p.
29. l. 18. and perige, p. 29. l. 25. B, B, E. ib. l. 26, 27. H, H, I p. 31. l.
9. for (.) put (,) p. 32. l. 28. stream of bu^bles, p. 35. l. 29. add fig. 9.
p. 38. l. 28. to get out of, l. 34. of finding the, p. 46. l. 31. Baldwines p.
49. l. 17. downwards shall touch, p. 54. l. 26. Scolopendra, p. 69 l. ult. Suns
phase, p. 71. l. 25. for 43 put 34, p. 83. l. 8. to my wonder, p. 93. l. 3.
blot out first, p 96. l. 14. plano c^nnexes, p. 101. l. 22. for table put tube,
p. 101. l. 30. Seul, p. 102. l. 17. magnified, l. 23. the paralellogram, l. 24.
page 241, p. 104. l. 6. for fluid put field.








