The seasonable CASE of Submission to the Church Government, As no^
re-established by Law, briefly stated and determined:

By a Lover of the peace of this CHURCH and KINGDOM.

1 Samuel Chap. 15. 22. Behold, to obey is better then sacrifice. Confess. Suec.
Cap. 14. Civilibus legibus, quae cum pietate non pugnant, eo quisque
Christianus paret promptius, quo fide Christi est imbutus before. Published by
Order.

EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
1662.

The Case anent submission to the present Church Government, re-established by
Law, stated and considered.
THe exceeding great bitterness of the continued and increasing sad
distractions amongst the people of God, to the hindrance of their edification
in faith and a godly life, with charity and peace amongst themselves, should
put all the Ministers of Christ to most serious thoughts, in considering how
far they may, under the present dispensations of God, without sin, accommodate
in following unquestionable duties, with, and under, the established Government
of the Church. And although, as to a cordial allowance of the present change,
they cannot yet attain, something remaining, whether of scruple or affection,
which makes it unpleasing, and their concurrence with it, to ly heavy upon
their spirits; yet, if there be found no manifest transgression in concurring
under the same, in matters of unquestionable duty, they would wisely put
difference between gravamen spiritus and ligamen conscientiae, something in the
will that renders them averse, and the prevailing clear light of a
well-informed conscience, (to which, how uneasy it is to attain in this point
of controversy, they can tell who have truly tried it) binding them up from
concurrence, as a thing in it self unlawful. Men, who walk in the fear of God*
and are zealous of His honor, had need to be very jealous of their own zeal,
that it carry them not to the rejecting of a real duty, which (to their
apprehension) sits too near a sin: Ministers, whom sober-mindedness does
greatly become, would look to it, that the censure of a grave Divine upon the
spirits of our contrymen ( praefervidum Scotorum ingenium) do not too much
touch them. It is their duty to advert, lest, at this time, too great animosity
contribute to the laying of the foundation of a woeful division, to be entailed
to the generations to come; the evil whereof will preponder all the good that
any one form of Church Government can, of it self, produce, viz. the dishonor
of God, the weakening of the cause of the true protestant Religion, against the
common adversaries thereof; the destroying of true charity and love amongst the
people of God, the hinderance of their profiting under the several Ministries
they live under, and the creating continual confusions and distractions in the
Commonwealth (the ordinary fruit of schism in the Church) as too lamentable
experience (whereof we carry the sad marks to this day) has taught us.

1. That there may, and ought to be, a brotherly accommodation and concurrence
in matters of practice, which are undoubted duty, (albeit Brethren be of
different judgments anent the constitution of Meetings, or capacity of persons
that act in these duties) grave and learned men have put it out of question. It
is well known, that in the Assembly of Divines at London, accommodation was
mainly labored for (and far carried on) between Presbyterians and
Independents, that they might concur in common Actings for regulating the
Church, with a reserve of liberty of their own several principles. The
Independents thought the Presbyterians had no judicial Authority in these
Meetings. The Presbyterians, though accounting this an error, yet, were
willing, in common unquestionable duties, to concur with them. Also, several of
the most eminent Presbyterians in England, as Mr. Viner, Mr. Baxter and others,
accounting of un-preaching Elders, as of an humane device (as now the Office of
a Bishop is accounted of by many Brethren) Yet, not being able to attain to the
exercise of presbyterial Government, without the intermixture of these; yea, of
them, double the number to preaching Presbyters in each Meeting, (which gave
them an overswaying power in the Government) notwithstanding they did concur
with them in matters of unquestionable duty. Is it not also well known, that
amongst our selves in this Church, Brethren did ordinarily concur in Synods and
Presbyteries, in doing their duties with these whom they charged with a sinful
schism? (a thing as much against the Covenant, as that which is now pretended
for withdrawing from the Meetings of Synods and Presbyteries.) And when
Brethren, thus charged, did withdraw their concurrence in some duties, by
several passages in that Paper, entitled, A Representation of the rise,
progress and state of the Divisions in the Church of Scotland, how that
practice of theirs was constructed of, page 21. it is affirmed that they
homologate with the tenet and practice of Separatisme, denying the lawfulness
of concurrence in a lawful necessary duty, because of the personal sin of
fellow-actors in it. And, page 28. speaking of their refusing to own the
Judicatories as lawful, because the men whom they judged to be in a course of
defection (the Commissioners of the Church they meant) were admitted to sit
there, it is said by the Representer, that it is a principle that draws very
deep: for, (says he) by parity of reason, they must not join with any
inferior Judicatories where they are, nor in any lawful act of Religion or
Worship, more then in an Assembly. May not much of this be applied to the
present Withdrawers from concurrence in necessary duties? Mutato nomine, de te,
etc. It will be said, there is a great disparity between those Commissioners
and the Bishops, who are looked on as new unwarranted Officers in the Church;
and therefore, albeit there may be now reason for withdrawing from Meetings
where they are, there was no reason for withdrawing from Assemblies where these
Commissioners sat. But, (not to divert to a dispute here, whether the Office
of a Bishop be new, or unwarrantable, or less warrantable then the Office of
these Commissioners, which wise men looked upon as very like episcopal) there
is herein a parity, that as these now are judged, so the other were judged by
the Excepters against them, to be in a course of defection, and unlawfully
officiating as members of the Assembly. And yet, were these Quarrellers
reproved for withdrawing from the general Assembly upon that account? Should
not that reproof be taken home in the present case, by such as withdraw from
Meetings of the Chruch? why should there be diverse weights, and diverse measures
used in such parity of cases? Again, it is asserted, (page 37.) to be a
divisive principle, that men will not concur in lawful duties, because these,
with whom they join, will not come up to their judgment in all other things:
Ibid. They challenge them for refusing to join in an uncontroverted duty,
because the direction to it flowed from the authority of an Assembly, which
they could not own: It were good that these former principles, were better
remembered and used in the present case. Further, the Presbytery of Edinburgh;
in their Paper, printed, October. 5. 1659. (page 8. of that Paper) speak very
soberly, disclaiming it as none of their principles, that no difference of
opinion can be suffered by them. We are (say they) clear, that in many things
of common practice in a Church, there may be agreement by accommodation, though
differences of judgment remain, etc. Again, say they, we readily yield, that,
as we prophecy but in part, men in a Church may compose debates by putting end
to contentions, though they be not all of one judgment; and therein we judge
the Apostle has set the rule before us, 1 Cor. 11. 16. A Golden Rule indeed,
the practice whereof, in its just sense, might bring us much sweet peace. But,
not to insist upon the judgments of learned men concerning the Case of
submission to, and acting in duties, with Meetings, anent the constitution
whereof, or members, there may be some difference in judgment. If we will
hearken to a man, greatly learned, and known to be no great friend to Bishops,
we shall hear him persuading to obedience and submission to them in things
lawful. Theodore Beza, being written to by some Ministers in England, who
excepted against some customs in the discipline and order of that Church
(their controversy had not then risen so high, as to strike at the Office of
Bishops; only some customs in discipline and ceremonies in external order, were
most stood upon.) He, ( Beza Epist. 12.) though disliking these things; yet,
plainly averres to them, that these customs are not tanti momenti, as that for
these they should leave their ministry, and by deserting their Churches, give
advantage to Satan, who seeks occasion to bring in greater and more
dangerous evils: He wishes them there to bear what they cannot amend, to
beware of all bitterness: And albeit they could not come to be of the same mind
with others; yet, with a godly concord to resist Satan, who seeks all
occasions of tumults and infinite calamities. And he does most gravely obtest
the Ministers (with tears* as he says) Vt Regiae Majestati* and omnibus
Praesulibus suis ex animo obsequantur. Beza pleads for hearty obedience (in
things lawful) to the Bishops, of whom he speaks honorably in that Epistle;
not hinting at the unlawfulness of their Office, nor offering to persuade the
Ministers to do against their Office: Sunt maximi viri (says he) qui singulari
Dei Opt. Max. beneficio papisticis Episcopis successere: He accounts not them
nor their Office popish; but says, By the singular mercy of the most great and
good God, they have succeeded the popish Bishops, or come in their place; even
as, by the singular mercy of God, protestant Ministers have come in the place
and room of popish Priests. And how well he esteems of the Office and of the
men in the Office (likely abating somewhat of his peremptoriness in the heat of
dispute with some, as he had cause) may appear not only by what he says in
that Epistle, exhorrescimus ut contra Regiae Majestatis and Episcoporum
voluntatem, ministri suo ministerio fungantur: But from his Epistles to Grindal
Bishop of London, Epist. 23. commending Grindals Christians patience and
lenity, adds, Majori posthac paena digni erunt qui authoritatem iuam
aspernabuntur, closing his Epistle, Deus te custodiat, and intan^^ commisso
tibi munere sancto suo spiritu regat, and magis a^ magis confirmet. And in his
58. Epistle, to that same Bishop, he says, Dominus te istic (at London)
speculatorem and judicem constituit. By all which, it may appear, that it would
have been far from Beza's mind, that Ministers should give no obedience to
Bishops established by the Laws of a Kingdom, not so much as in things
undoubtedly lawful, or that they should have refused concurrence with Bishops
in ordering the Church, and acting in unquestionable duties.

2. The present Question, concerns the case and carriage of two kind of
Ministers. 1. Some refuse to come to Synods (although called by the Kings
Majesty's command, signified by His most honorable privy Council) where
Bishops do preside. They refuse also to come to Presbyteries, where a
Moderator, pretending no more power then any of themselves, presides, being
nominated by the Bishop in the Synod, to continue till the next Meeting of the
Synod.

Such Meetings they withdraw from; albeit nothing be required of them, but to
act in unquestionable duties, for regulating the Church, and suppressing,
according to their power, of sinful disorder; albeit there be no imposition
upon their judgments, nor subscription required, nor declaration that they
allow any thing they count amiss in the constitution of these Meetings, or any
constituent members thereof; Yea, where it might be permitted to them (if they
entreated for this) to case their conscience by signifying their scruples
(which they cannot overcome) anent the constitution of these Meetings, or anent
the members thereof, so be they would do this with that inoffensive modesty,
humility and respect to the supreme Authority and the Laws of the Land, and to
such Meetings and the members thereof, that becomes; and after that, to concur
in their undoubted duties: Concerning such Ministers, the question is, whether
they may and ought to concur with such Meetings of their Brethren, in carrying
on their undoubted duties? or, if it be unlawful so to do? 2. The other rank of
Ministers are these, who, falling within the compass of the Act of Council at
Glasgow, and of Parliament whereto it relates, do rather choose to part with
their Ministry then to seek a Presentation from the Patron, and Collation
thereupon from the Bishop; yea, who will quit their Ministry, rather then that
they will once come in terms of treating with a Bishop, to try upon what
conditions they may have the liberty to enjoy their Ministry, and to serve God
therein for the good and salvation of his people.

3. As to the case of Brethren of the former sort, several things are worthy
their most serious consideration, which may render them somewhat jealous of the
unwarrantableness of their present way. 1. Has not the Supreme Magistrate
(even according to their own principles) an undoubted power to convocate Synods
when he sees it needful? Never were there any protestant Ministers (no nor
christian Ministers) before this time, who, being convocated to a Synod or
Church-meeting by the Sovereign Christian Magistrate, did refuse to come at his
command; Nor is there any rank or degree of Subjects that can, without the
stain of sinful disobedience, refuse to meet upon His Majesty's command; and
Ministers cannot plead exemption from the common duties of Subjects. 2.
Brethren would consider, whether it would prove a sufficient ground to justify
their not-coming to the Synod upon His Majesty's command by His Council,
because that command to come to the Synod, is joined with another, commanding
to concur dutifully, etc. And the command to come, is only in order to the
required concurrence, which they cannot give, as they say. Is this rational,
that where two commands of the Magistrate are joined, the one undoubtedly
lawful to be obeyed, the other doubted of, that Subjects should disobey the
Magistrate in that which is clearly lawful, because they have a doubt or
unclearness anent obeying him in the other command? Does it not become Subjects
to go as far on in obedience to lawful Authority, as they see they may without
sin against God? Then it is time to stop when any thing is put to them by
virtue of the Kings Command, which they clearly see they cannot do without sin.
Had they come to the place, it would, pro tanto, have showed their respect to
Authority, albeit they had humbly declared themselves bound up from acting by
their doubts. And yet, it may be, they will in end find, that they might
lawfully have concurred in unquestionable duty, that there was no ground to
refuse this; and that they might have sufficiently salved their Conscience by a
humble signification of their scruple, as was said, and yet not refused to
concur in undoubted duties, for the personal fault (as they apprehend) of any
member of the Assembly. 3. What ground could they have for separation from the
Synod? Is it the want of liberty to choose a Moderator? Or, Is it that he that
presides, is a Bishop, and claims more power then they can allow, more then
they think is due, as of a negative voice? Or, Is it the want of unpreaching
Elders in the Meeting? As to the, 1. Are they able to show that every
ecclesiastical Meeting or Judicatory has, by a dvine scriptural Right, a
privilege to choose their own Moderator? Where is there any Precept for this?
or any example of such election in Scripture? If all Meetings of ecclesiastical
Judicatories have this privilege, then also their Sessions (where they take
upon them to be constant Moderators) have this also, which, belike, will not
please them well, that any of the Meeting but themselves should be chosen there
to preside; or, can they say, that every ecclesiastical Meeting or Judicatory,
has this privilege by a divine natural right? If so, no civil Society or
Judicatory should want it; but all claim power to choose their own Presidents,
which were evil doctrine under a Monarchy, where power is in the Prince to
elect and name Presidents for Council, Session, etc. Or, are they able to
demonstrate, that it is not lawful for the Christian Magistrate, upon whom the
external ordering of all the Judicatories in his His Dominions depends, to
nominate out of a Meeting of Ministers, conveen'd by him, one grave and godly
Minister of the number, to order the actions of the Meeting, and by his
Authority to control the unruly? Can it be made evident, that the ancient
Christian Councils, general or provincial, (though they had ecclesiastic
Presidents) did always formerly choose their own President? Presides
ecclesiastici in vetustis Conciliis, nonnunquam nominati ab Imperatore, says
Zepperus, Eccles. Pol. p. 742,

As to the second, The great exception is at the power of the Presidents of the
Synods, they being Bishops, claim in undue power as if Authority solely resided
in them, at least they claim a negative voice.

Ans. 1. Were it so, and were this a fault; yet, it were not their fault who
concur: the personal fault of another cannot be any good ground for Brethrens
withdrawing from their necessary duty, especially it being considered what
might be allowed them, for easing the scruple of their Conscience, as was above
said. If I be only admitted to consult in regulating the affairs of the Church,
in a Meeting where I think I should have equal authority with any that sits
there, Can it be sin in me to go so far in my duty, as I am permitted to do, to
testify against sin, to give my best counsel for suppressing thereof, and for
advancement of holiness? If I be abridged and restrained as to that authority,
which I think is due to me, it is the sin (if there be any) of these who do
restrain me and not mine; shall I do no part of my duty, because I cannot do
all that I think I ought to do, being, as to some part of it, restrained by
another? But Secondly, Is it not granted by most judicious Divines, that
Presbyters (having a power in several cases to suspend the exercise of their
own just authority, when the suspension of it tenderh to a public good) may
for the peace of the Church, resolve to give to one person of their number a
negative voice in Government, so as to do nothing without him? Baxt. Church
gover. page 18. And excellent Mr. Vines (when at the Isle of Wight, the King
could not be brought off that, that in Meetings of Presbyters there should be
one, under the name of Bishop, with a negative voice) did counsel both
Presbyterians and Independents to accept of the concession, as they would not
have all the blood, miseries and confusions that after might ensue, laid at
their door. See his considerations on the Kings Concessions. Whatever may be
said of that negative voice; the law of the land putting Bishops into a stated
presidency, and yet Presbyters being admitted to rule with Bishops, judicious
and sober men would not lay so great weight on it, as to refuse their
concurrence in common and uncontroverted duties upon that account. But yet, one
thing would be remembered, that Brethren are at a very clear disadvantage in
withdrawing from presbyterial Meetings, where they know the Moderator does not,
nor can claim more power then any of themselves. All the ground of their not
concurring with these Meetings, must be, that they do not choose the Moderator
in their particular Presbyteries: But he is nominate by the Bishop (...) the
Synod; and yet, in all reason, the authority and consent of Bishop and Synod,
should conclude any particular Presbytery. Do not Brethren remember, that in
time of the Commission of the Kirks ruling, there were restraints laid upon
Presbyteries in matters far higher and weightier concernment then that, and
little dinn about the same?

But thirdly, if the Brethren refuse to concur with the Synods for want of
unpreaching Elders there, whose Office they account of divine institution, they
would remember, that great Divines of the presbyterian way, Blondel, Vines,
Baxter, and many others look upon these as an humane device (and their reasons
moving them, are weighty.) But let them be as they are imagined by the
Brethren; yet, can the removal of these, without out their fault, render it
unlawful for them to concur in a Synod of Ministers where these are not? Can
the absence, or removal of these (supposed) Church Officers, render a Synod of
Ministers, with their President, unlawful and not to be joined with? because
other men are debarred from their duty (they are supposed to have right to)
shall we run from our duty, especially this being done without our fault?

A fourth thing the Brethren would consider anent their refusal to concur in
Synods and Presbyteries, before it was hinted at, and it is this. They have,
for many years, concurred in doing common duties in Presbyteries and Synods,
with these, whom they looked upon as fixing a sinful schism (as the other,
they charged them with apostasic from former principles) yet, with these they
concurred in common duties, so far as they could get their concurrence, and
complained of their separating way when they refused. And were they not bound
against schism and the makers of it, by the Covenant and Word of God too, as
against any thing else that is now made the pretense of separation from the
Judicatories?

Fifthly, Brethren would consider, if in this their present practice, they do
not fall short of the moderation and wisdom of their worthy Ancestors, with
whom they pretend to be of of the same judgment, who choosed rather to concur
with such Meetings as these (though not satisfied with their constitution) in
governing the Church, and doing unquestionable duties, then altogether to
desert them, or make a schime and ruin the peace of the Church. Some say to
this, they were but men, and erred in so doing; but they are not angels that
say so, nor without danger of erring; they were men of conscience and learning,
and more unlike to have erred in this their way, then these who say they erred
and prove it not. Some allege a disparity between the case of Ministers then
and now, upon the account of clearer engagements against Episcopacy by
Ministers now, then by them who lived in these times, and upon the account of
the standing of Synods at the time when Bishops were brought in upon them, in
our Ancestors days; whereas now they were not standing, when Bishops are
brought in but raised, and sit now as holding and depending upon Episcopacy. It
shall not be denied there is some disparity and difference between the case of
Ministers now and then, simile non est idem; but any difference that is
observed, is impertinent and not material to this purpose, to make the
concurrence in these Synods now, to be unlawful, which was to our Ancestors
lawful* For, as to the former ground of disparity, it is certain, Ministers
then accounted themselves as really bound against the allowance of episcopal
Government, both by the Covenant and by the Word of God, as any do judge
themselves engaged against it by late Bonds: whether they did mistake in this
or nor, we say nothing; but, that they did so judge, it is out of question; and
yet, they thought their practice, in concurring in all lawful matters in
Synods and Presbyteries, consistent enough with their judgment, touching
Episcopacy and their Bonds against it. And as to the latter of these
differences, it can be nothing material, as the rendering concurrence with
Synods and Presbyteries now, unlawful, which then might be lawful: For, the
Meetings now and then are of the same constitution, nothing altered. Nor is
there any thing in these Meetings to affright from concurrence in them now,
more then at that time; nor any more holding of, or dependency on Bishops now,
when the King's Majesty has taken off the restraint which for a time He put
on, then if He had not at all restrained them, neither any more then was of
these Synods and Presbyteries, which of old did sit when Bishops were brought
in upon them. Neither is it likely, that Ministers, who now refuse concurrence,
would have given it, had their Judicatories not been restrained from meeting.
This seems a very bare pretext.

Sixthly, Brethren would consider well, if in refusing to concur with their
Brethren in undoubted duties (where they may salve their consciences by humble,
modest expressing what they judge amiss) they do not run themselves either upon
the rock of ecclesiastical Independency, in their several Congregations, in
administration of Discipline, (if they mind to have any Discipline at all) or,
to combine in clandestine Presbyteries of their own, which they may consider
how either it shall be taken by the christian Magistrate, or how it shall
relish of that spirit of unity and love that should be amongst Christ's
Ministers; and whereaway in end this principle of division from their Brethren,
in unquestioned duties, may lead them; whether to divide also from their
Brethren in the worship of God, and to teach people so to do, (somewhat of this
is already seen) and to endeavor the fixing of a perpetual schism, the seeds
whereof are sown with too much animosity.

4. Now comes to be considered, the case of such Brethren of the Ministry as
choose rather to quit their Ministry then once come in terms with these, upon
whom the Law has settled a power, to order them in the exercise of the same.
It would be most seriously thought of, whether it be right, that any Ministers
of Christ should set their Ministry, the service of God, the benefit which the
Lord's people might have by their good gifts, (to say nothing of the interest
of their families) at so low a rate, as not to have used all lawful means
(trying at least upon what terms they might enjoy their Ministry) before they
had fallen upon that extremity to desert it. If any man will say, it is no
lawful mean to speak with a Bishop in that matter, though it might tend to his
continuance in the Ministry (and perhaps might be, in some measure,
disappointed in his fears) he had need to examine well, whether conceit or
conscience rules most there; and to think of it, how he can justify the
deserting of his Ministry, without the utmost essay to hold it. It must be
confessed, that it is a new and rare Case, that men will rather embrace
suffering then once speak one word to persons entrusted with power, by the Law
of the Land, (whatever they be) to try at them, upon what terms they might be
permitted to preach the Gospel. The comfort (it is to be feared) of suffering,
upon such an account, will not run very clear. But, it will be said, the thing
that is stuck at, is the canonical Oath, enjoined by Law, and which the Bishops
will require: this, some say, they cannot take, conceiving it contradictory to
the Covenant and to the Word of God. But, 1. Such as have not so much as come
in terms with the Bishops, and of whom that Oath, or Promise, has not been
particularly required, seem to leap too soon to suffering, before it come to
them: and before they had tried, if possibly there might have been relevant
grounds for dispensing with the Law toward them. Had they been personally put
to take that Oath; and if so, there could be no dispensing with them, nor they
able to digest that Oath, then they had more clearness in their undergoing
suffering. 2. As to contradiction to the Covenant, if Timorcus (page 37.) may
be believed (and he seems tender in the matter of others) there is no
contradiction between the canonical Oath and the Covenant; he maintains, that
the Ministers, who of old took the canonical Oath, did not swear the
contradictory thereto when they took the Covenant: whence it will follow
necessarily, that they who have taken the Covenant do not contradict that Oath,
if they should take the Oath of canonical Obedience: and indeed it will be hard
to find out a contradiction, either in terms, or by necessary consequence.
But, if the obligation of the Covenant, as to that second article, shall be
found to cease, (whereof afterward) the lawfulness of the other Oath will be
clearer. 3. It would be considered, that the Reverened Persons, entrusted by
Law to call for that Promise from Ministers, do not search into men's
apprehensions concerning the grounds of their power; all they seek, is
obedience to them in things lawful and honest, as being presently in power,
being, by Law, ordinary Overseers of the Ministry in their duties, and chief
Ordainers of them who enter into the Ministry. But, it is said, where obedience
is promised, there is an acknowledgment of the lawfulness of their Power,
Office and Authority; because, obedience formally cannot be but to a lawful
Authority: therefore, he that in his conscience thinks a Bishops Office
unlawful, cannot so much as promise obedience to him in things lawful and
honest, lest, by his taking such an Oath, he make himself guilty of
establishing that which he accounts unlawful. But, 1. it is not obedience
under a reduplication, and as formally obedience, they call for; if it be
obedience materially, Ministers doing their duties in things really lawful,
they are satisfied. 2. Suppose it were so, that obedience, as formally
obedience, were required; yet, it were hard to say, it could not be promised,
or that it could not be acknowledged, that they have any lawful Authority:
for, waving the consideration of any ecclesiastical Office, wherein they may
pretend to be superior to other Ministers; and giving (but not granting) that
as Church-ministers, their Office and superiority were unlawful; yet, looking
upon them as the Kings Majesty's Commissioners in Causes ecclesiastical for
regulating the external order of the Church in their several bounds, and
empowered by the law of the land so to do (they being also Presbyters, and
having power with others in Ordination and Jurisdiction ecclesiastical) it will
be hard to say, that their power is not lawful, and that obedience is not due
to them. The strictest Presbyterians, will not find ground to disown their
Office in that consideration.

There are three things mainly, which bear off Brethren of both these sorts and
ranks, from submitting to, and concurring in their duties under the present
Government, 1. Their fears of future evils. 2. Their present thoughts of the
unlawfulness of the Office of a Bishop over Presbyters in the Church. 3. Their
former Engagements by the bond of the Covenant, which they conceive still binds
them. As to the first, their fears; there can be no sufficient ground in these
to bear them off from that, which, for the present, is found to be their duty:
If evils feared, should come, and Brethren, in conscience toward God, not able
to comply with them, then suffering might be the more comfortable; but the
gracious providence of God, watching over his Church, the goodness and wisdom
of our Sovereign, and of Rulers under him (considering the temper of this
Nation) may make all these fears vain, and disappoint them; and it is not for
us to be too thoughtful, or to torment our selves with fears, before the time.
In the mean time, it would be well considered by Brethren, that bear off from
concurrence, if they do well in withdrawing their counsels from their Brethren,
and in doing that which tends to the loss of their enterest in, and respect
with persons in present Authority; in regard whereof, they might be exceedingly
instrumental to prevent any thing that is feared. 2. As to their thoughts of
the unlawfulness of the Office of a Bishop, something has been said of the
lawfulness of their concurrence in unquestioned duties (even upon that
supposition) something also has been said of the acknowledgment of the
lawfulness of their Office, looking upon them as Presbyters, commissionated by
the King, for external ordering of Church Affairs in their several bounds; and
of the lawfulness of obedience to them, as in that capacity. It is not the
purpose of this Paper, to dispute much for their Church-capacity or Rule over
Presbyters, or anent the Office of Bishops, as an order of Church-ministers.
Only as to this, three things would be seriously pondred by Brethren. 1. Where
they are able to find in all Christ's Testament, any precept for mere
Presbyters, preaching and unpreaching, in a full equality of power, to rule the
Church of Christ; to give Ordination to Ministers, to judge in all
controversies of Religion ministerially, and do all acts of Government in the
Church, or where they can find any example of such a Presbytery, doing these
acts without some superior Officer acting with them, or directing them in
their actings, or where there is any inhibition (either express, or by
necessary consequence) that no Gospel-minister should in any case have
superiority in power over others in Church Affairs. 2. Let it be considered, if
(descending from the Scripture times) it can be found in any Writer, who lived
in the first two or three ages after Christ, or in any History or Record
relating to these times (not to speak of after-ages) it can be found, that
there was any such Church Officer as an unpreaching Elder, joined in full
equality of power with Preaching-elders in acts of Ordination of Ministers
(from which, if they be necessary parts and members of the Presbytery, they
cannot be excluded) and in all other acts of Jurisdiction; or, if there be any
mention of the names, or power of any such persons. Or, if it can be from these
Writers found, that there was ever any Ordination of Ministers, or exercise of
Jurisdiction ecclesiastical by Ministers, i. e. by mere Preaching-presbyters,
without some one, stated President over them, under the name of Bishop, who was
to go before them in these actions; and without whom, nothing was to be done in
these. Shall not the practice of that primitive Church, which followed the
Apostles, as it were, at the heels, be most able to show us which way they
went, and what was their practice? It is too horrid a thing to imagine, and
that which a modest Christian can hardly down with, that immediately, after the
Apostles times, the whole Church of Ch^^^t, should agree to so substantial an
alteration of the Government of the Church (supposed to be) instituted by
Christ and his Apostles, as to exclude one s^^t of Officers of his appointment,
and to take in another not appointed by him: And that it should be done so
early, Statim post tempora Apostolorum, aut eorum etiam tempore, says
Molinaeus, Epist. 3. ad Episcop. Winton. Bishops were set up in the time, when
some of them (especially John) were living, viventibus, videntibus, and non
contradicentibus; as is manifest by History in the successors of Mark at
Alexandria and others. Can it be imagined* that such a thing as the Office of a
Bishop, should have been set up so early in the times of the Apostles, and they
not contradicting it, had it been contrary to Christ's mind? How unlikely is it,
that in those times, when the piety and zeal of Christians was so great, and
knowledge too, there should have been no opposition to the Office of Bishops,
had it been judged a wronging of Christ's Ordinance? How unlikely is it, that in
times of such fiery persecution, Christ's Ministers should be carried with
ambition, to seek the superiority over others in an Office against his mind?
Or, that people would have yielded to the ambitious courses of Pastors? How can
it be thought, that the whole Church in these times (without any known
exception) should have taken up that way of Government by Bishops, without any
co-action to it by civil Power; without any advice or direction from General
Assemblies and Councils, which then were not in being; If this way had not been
universally judged lawful; yea, it may be supposed descending from a higher
warrant then voluntary agreements of men? We do never hear of any opposition to
the Office and dignity of a Bishop over Presbyters, till it was made by one
Aerius in the fourth age, (whom Epiphanius calls a frantic man) he being
enraged, that Eustathius, whom he undervalued in comparison of himself, was
preferred to him, and got the Bishopric, which he ambitiously aimed at, began
to talk against the dignity and order of Bishops, and is therefore counted by
Epiphanius and Augustine (no children in knowledge) an heretic, (in whatever
sense they mean) and also he is justly censured and condemned by Blondel, Gers.
Bucer, Molinaeus to Andrews, as a disturber of a lawful order in the Church,
albeit they cannot come up to think, that Episcopacy is a divine Institution or
apostolical.

Now, let Brethren in modesty consider, how unlike it is, that the Office of a
Bishop should be contrary to the institution of Christ in his Word, that began
so early, even in the Apostles times without their contradiction, that was so
universally submitted to by the primitive Christians in their most fiery trials,
that has continued in the christian Churches, (not only these infected with
the Roman apostasy, but the eastern Church that disclaimeth the Popes
supremacy) and that for 1500. years after Christ, without any contradiction,
save of one man, who never had a marrow; no not Jerome (whatever be said
concerning him by some) that is still owned by most of the reformed Churches,
who have rejected the Pope, not only by these of the Lutheran way, under the
name of Superintendents ( quid est Episcopus nisi Superintendens? says Jerome,
epist, ad Euagrum) but also by some of the Calvinean way, as may be seen by
Zepperus, Eccles. Pol. And formally, that is even owned as lawful (being
well-moderated) by the stoutest Disputers against the divine right of it.
Albeit men, in their passionat strains to popular auditories, sometimes cry out
upon the Office of a Bishop as an antichristian and popish domination; yet, in
the protestant Episcopacy that is owned, there is no more of the Pope then
there is of a Mass-priest in a Minister; or of a Conclave of
Cardinal-presbyters in a Commission of the Church or a Presbytery. The
Episcopacy that is now, is the very primitive Episcopacy, which Timorcus
descriving ( Ep. 10. Sect. 25.) affirms to be, that nothing in Ordination or
Jurisdiction be done by Brethren under the Bishop, without him, and he alone
doing nothing without them in these, and avowes the same not to be contrary to
the Covenant. The Episcopacy that now is* is that same Office for substance,
which Ignatius had at Antioch, Polycarp at Smyrna, ^orn^lius in Rome, Iraeneus
at Lions in France, Cyprian in Carthage, and many others had in other places
before the Niven Council; and which Chrysostom, Augustine and many others had
after: and it should be our desire to God, that our Bishops (as they hold the
same Office and Place, for substance, these did) so they may imitate their
virtues and graces; and be notable Instruments for advancing God's glory in
their stations. But, 3. it would be considered, that the holding of Episcopacy,
as a Government unlawful and contrary to the Word of God, will cast too great
an imputation upon this Reformed Church of Scotland: For, (laying aside the
times of war and confusion since the year, 1638. wherein, in the midst of the
noise of Arms and Armies, there has been small opportunity for a serious free
disquisition anent these matters) it will be found, that before that year,
Episcopacy had been for a far longer time owned by this Reformed Church then
Presbytery had been: For, until the year, 1580. Episcopacy was not abolished
in Scotland; the Office of Bishops was really used in Scotland till the year,
1580. in which the General Assembly at Dundee declared it unlawful: and yet,
they could not get their Presbyteries set up by the Authority of the Land, till
twelve years after in the year, 1592. But, evident it is, that at the time of
making that Act at Dundee, Bishops were in the Land (for so the Act it self, in
the body of it, imports) Forasmuch (say they) as the Office of Bishop is now
used in this Realm, etc. And is clear also from their Order they give to
process the several Bishops, if they lay not down their Office. Now, from the
time of general Reformation, from Popery to the time of that Act of Dundee,
there were full twenty years; (the Reformation being in the year, 1560.) during
all which time, the Church of Scotland was governed by some, singulares
personae, particular persons in several circuits in the Land; some under the
name of Superintendents, Commissioners or Visitors of Countries; some under the
name of Bishops; where popish Bishops embraced the Reformation, they had their
power continued, and Commission given to them for ordaining Ministers and using
Jurisdiction: and when the civil Magistrate presented any Orthodox to vacant
Bishoprics, they were accepted of by the Assembly, Edinburgh, Aug. 6. 1573.
where the Regent, promising to the Assembly that qualified persons shall be
presented to vacant Bishoprics, the Assembly concludes, that the jurisdiction
of Bishops in their ecclesiastical Function, shall not exceed the jurisdiction
of Superintendents. And the Superintendent of Lothian, is called by John Knox,
at his installing, anno, 1560. the Pastor of the Churches of Lothian; and
these, who represent that Country, promise to give obedience to him as becomes
the sheep to their Pastor. It is manifest then, that for twenty years after the
Reformation, Bishops, whether under that name, or other names, continued in
Scotland: and it is remarkable, that our Reformers were wiser men then to put a
Presbytery in their Creed: For, in the Confession registrated in Parliament,
anno, 1567. (which before had been presented) though they had zeal enough
against all things that favored of popery; yet, in their Confession, there is
nothing against Bishops, nor for a Presbytery. And, Act 24. the former civil
privileges of the spiritual State of the Realm are ratified; accordingly,
Bishops did sit in that Parliament: also, in the same Confession, they say, not
one Policy or Order can be for all Churches and all times. But, after the year,
1580. wherein the Office of Bishops was abrogated by the Assembly, albeit some
provincial Synods were set up in the place of the outed Bishops and
Superintendents in these Provinces; yet, was there no Presbytery before the
year, 1586. nor any of these Judicatories legally established before, 1592. and
within eighteen years after that, or twenty, Bishops are set up again by the
Act of Assembly, 1610. and ratified in Parliament, 1612. and continued so the
space of twenty eight years, till the Assembly at Glasgow, 1638. So it may be
easily seen, the Office of a Bishop is no great stranger to this Church, since
the Reformation of Religion; but has been longer owned then Presbytery in
times of peace: and, modesty would require, we should not be ready to condemn
this Reformed Church, as having in those times owned a Government unlawful and
against the Word of God, especially when the different fruits of Government, by
Presbytery and Episcopacy, have been, to our cost, sadly experienced.

But now, we come to the third difficulty anent the Oath of the Covenant: This
is popularly pleaded by such as do not penetrate into the controversy anent
the Office of a Bishop, in point of lawfulness or unlawfulness. Indeed, the
Bond of a lawful Covenant is so sacred a tie, that, without contempt of the
holy majesty of God, it cannot be violated, nor without great sin; no creature
can absolve us from it, nor dispense with it; nor are we to break it for any
temporal advantage, terror or trouble. Yet, (supposing the Covenant to be
lawful, which is not proven) it is sure, 1. That a lawful Oath may cease to
bind us, so that though we do not that which was under Oath promised to be
done; yet, there is no perjury: Semper perjurus est, qui non intendit quod
promittit; non semper perjurus est, qui non perficit q^od promisit sub
Juramento, say the Casuists. 2. It is certain that a lawful, although in the
interpretation of it, it be stricti juris, and is to be understood according to
the intention of the givers of it, and as the plain words bear; yet, it binds
not in the sense which any ignorant mind or overscrupulous conscience may put
upon it, or that some persons, upon partial designs, may put upon it, Videndum
est (say Casuists) ne stricta interpretatio abeat in nimis strictam and
rigidam. 3. It is certain, an unlawful Oath did never, nor does bind any
conscience to do according to it, though it binds to repentance for making of
it, and adhering to it.

In considering and applying these things: as to the first, It would be
remembered, that an Oath, howsoever in it self lawful; yet the case may be
such, that by something following after it, the Oath may cease to bind us to
the performing of what was sworn; yea, the case may be, that an Oath, lawfully
made, yet cannot be lawfully kept; it were sin to keep it in some cases: then,
and in that case, it is not we that loose our selves, but God loses us, when
an Oath, lawful at the making, cannot be kept without sin against him. Amongst
other cases, wherein the ceasing of an obligation of a lawful Oath may be
seen, these three Cases are worthy to be considered; and seriously is it to be
pondred whether they be applicable to the present Question anent a discharge
from the bond of the Covenant, as to the second Article of it, which is now
under question. 1. If the matter of an Oath be such, as a Superior has it in
his power to determine of it, the Oath of the inferior or subject person
cease to oblige him, and is loosed when the Superior consents not to what he
has sworn: this is both agreeable to reason; because no deed of a person
inferior or subject to others, should prejudge the right of the Superior* nor
take from him any power allowed to him by God in any thing: And also, all sound
Divines do acknowledge this upon the common equity of that law, Numb. 30. 4. If
it be said, that the matter of the second Article of the Cov^nant, being not of
indifferent nature, but determined by the Word of God, and so not under the
power of a Superior on earth to determine in it; it would be remembered, that
in all this part of the discourse, where the ceasing of the obligation of the
Covenant is spoken of (as to the second Article) they are dealt with, who plead
the obligation of the Covenant only, and upon that account do scruple. As for
the consideration of the lawfulness or unlawfulness of Episcopacy in it self, a
little of it was spoken to before; and the trial of that, is matter for longer
disquisisition: and men would not be too peremptory in condemning Episcopacy,
if they seriously consider, that the ablest Pens that ever engaged in this
Controversy, have found it a task too hard for them to demonstrate Episcopacy
to be in it self unlawful: and if we ask the judgments of the most eminent
reformed Divines, we shall find very few or none learned, sober and faithful
in the point, who do judge it to be forbidden by God. But in this point, when
these who allege the bond of the Covenant only for their scruple, there is a
necessity to abstract from that question, whether Presbytery be necessary by
divine law, and Episcopacy in it self unlawful? In this part of the discourse
(supposing the lawfulness or indifferency of it) we only enquire, whether
merely by virtue of the Covenant, we are bound to stand against it? If by Gods
Word it be found to be unlawful (which cannot be proved) then whether there
had been a Covenant made against it, or not, it cannot be allowed? If it be
said again, that the consent of our Superior has been obtained to that, to
which we have determined our selves by our Oath in the second Article; and
therefore our Oath, before God, is confirmed, and he has not power to revoke
his consent, according to that law, Numb. 30. 14. It would be be considered,
whether it was the Lords mind in that ^aw, that if children or wives, having
vowed, should by some means drive their parents or husbands out of the house,
deprived them of all their worldly comforts; and then, when they had put them
thus undurifully under sad tentations, bargain with them either to ratify
their vows, or never to enjoy these comforts they had deprived them of; whether
it was the Lords mind, that consent, so obtained, should be an irrevocable
confirmation of their vows, who had carried themselves so undutifully? There is
no evidence for that. And the application is easy, since it is known that the
Covenant was contrived and carried on, as if the design had been laid to
extirpate Episcopacy whether the King would consent or not, or whatever course
should be taken to force his consent, vi and armis, or by suspending Him from
the exercise of His royal Power; an unparalled way of usage from subjects to
their SOVEREIGN. Again it would be considered, whether this be, De jure
naturali, that a consent of a Superior once given to the vow of an inferior,
he has no power to revoke his consent upon reasonable causes, and to make void
the vow, albeit, if he do it rashly and unreasonably, he sins. Great
Scholars are of the mind, he may revoke his consent: Lessius, Tractat. de
Voto, dubio 13. It is thought by him and others, that the precept ea^enus is
judicial, as it makes an irrevocable confirmation of the vow once consented
to. If it be further said, if the Superior, under Oath, give his consent to
the inferiors Oath; or, if He himself swear the same thing, then there is no
power left of revoking his consent, or doing or putting his inferiors to do
contra^y to the Oath: This is granted, unless upon some other ground there be
a clear loosing of the Superiors Oath, and a ceasing of the obligation of it.
Leaving these things to be applied, let us look upon the second Case, wherein
the obligation and binding-power of an Oath cease, and the Oath is loosed; it
is this, When the matter concerning which the Oath is, continues not in the
same state it was in at the making of the Oath, when something in providence
before the accomplishment of the Oath occurreth, that makes the performance of
the Oath, either sinful, or importing some turpitude, and something against
moral honesty; or when the case comes to be that, that the plain end and
expectation of the Oath, upon which it was founded, appears frustrate:
according to the language of Divines, Res non permanet in eodem statu, ideo
cessat Juramenti obligatio: For example, if a man swear, that at such a certain
time, he shall deliver to such a man his sword, if in the mean time that man
turn mad, and, in probability, might kill himself or others with the sword, had
he it in his hand, there lies no obligation upon the swearer to deliver it to
him; Nay, it were a sin, and against charity, to perform what he had promised.
Again, if a man swear to marry such a woman at such a time, if before that time
he is made certain she is with child to his own brother, it were a grievous sin
of incest to to marry her (under pretense of keeping his promise;) Or, if she
should, before the marriage day, be found with child to another man (not so
related to him) yet, to marry her, as it could not but have something against
moral common honesty in it; so the plain end and expectation of his Oath, on
which it was founded, being frustrate by the woman's whoredom, ( viz. the
having of a loyal honest and comfortable yoke fellow) albeit he had made twenty
Oaths to her, they bind him not; God has loosed the man, Res non permanet in
eodem statu. Now, as to the present Case of the Covenanters, let it be
considered, whether the matter abides in that same state, i. e. whether there
do not something now occur, that puts us in that condition, that without sin
we cannot perform what we did promise, in that second Article of the Covenant.
It will be said, What is the sin? For answer, It must be still supposed (as
before we admonished) that in this part of the discourse concerning these who
plead the bond of the Covenant merely, that the matter of the second Article of
the Covenant (about which the debate is) is in it self indifferent; and that
Episcopacy in it self, or by any law of God, is not unlawful, or prohibited.
If it were this way unlawful there needed little question be made about the
bond of the Covenant, (for, what is unlawful, must never be allowed, be it
sworn against or not) but, supposing the indifferency and lawfulness of
Episcopacy in it self, I say the Covenant cannot now oblige against it, there
being so notable an alteration of the case and state of matters, that whoever
now do think themselves bound to stand to the Covenant, as to that second
Article (for there are other matters in that Covenant, from which we can never
be disobliged or loosed, they being necessary by divine and moral Law) do think
themselves bound to a perpetual disobedience to the Magistrate, in a matter
wherein he has power to command them; and this is a perpetual sin. Perkins, of
Oaths, says well, No Oath can bind against the wholesome Laws of the
Commonwealth: because every soul is subject to superior powers, Romans 13.
Neither is it material whether the Laws be made before or after the Oath; both
ways the matter of the Oath becomes impossible, de jure, as Casuists speak:
And now we are to think, the matter remains not in the same state, when the
doing of what we did swear, imports sin.

I know Timor^us (page 19.) ple^deth, that even upon supposition, that it is in
the power of the Magistrate to set up the episcopal form of Government, that
yet we cannot own it, but must suffer under it: because (faith he) upon that
supposition, that the matter of the Oath, was res indifferens and libera in it
self; yet, it is no more free to us, Juramentum (says he) tell it libertatem:
But, by his favor, albeit in indifferent things of private concernment,
wherein private persons bind themselves, and wherewith the Magistrate medleth
not, an Oath may take away our liberty; yet, a subjects Oath cannot take away
the power of the Magistrate, in commanding things which he sees for public
good, and the matters not being in themselves unlawful: Neither can it take
away or hinder the liberty, or rather duty of subjects, in obeying what is
lawfully commanded; otherwise, subjects, by their Oaths, might find a way to
plead themselves free from obedience to Magistrates in all things indifferent
which they should command them; which is absurd. But, 3. It would be remembered,
that when the keeping of an Oath is certainly a hindrance of some greater good,
(especially if other circumstances concur, that render the Oath non-obligeing)
the obligation of it, in some cases, may cease. This anent the loosing of
Oaths, because of the obstacle put to some greater good, which might be
attained by not doing what is sworn, is indeed a very ticklish and tender
question, and all had need to look to it, lest, under pretense that the keeping
of an Oath is an obstacle to a greater good attainable, by not keeping the Oath
there be a wide gap opened to all perjury; and the popish Casuists are herein
too lax for laying that ground, that it is de jure naturali, that every one
should do that which is best; they conclude, that where the performance of what
is sworn is like to hinder a greater good that might be attained by not keeping
the Oath, that in that case an Oath binds not at all. Protestant Casuists, as
Bishop Sanderson, do deny this principle without limitation thus expressed; yet
do grant, that it is true when there concurreth some other thing (as usually
there does) which may render the Oath void, or the keeping of it unlawful, or
loses from it, the impeditiveness of greater good there has weight. But, we
may say, albeit other things did not concur to the nulling or voiding of an
Oath; yet, if the standing to it be found impeditive of a greater good, to
which we are bound by a prior obligation, then the Oath, being an obstacle of
such a greater good, cease to bind the swearer. If a man should swear never
to go near such a river or water, having once been in hazard there; yet, where
he sees at some distance from it his brother like to perish in the water, and
it is probable to him, that he could be able to save his life, the prior and
greater bond of char^ty, and of God's Law commanding, that binds him to go
help his brother, and loses him from his Oath. And as to our case, besides
what has been said for the clearing, upon other grounds, of the non-obligation
of the Covenant in that second Article (the matter thereof still supposed as
indifferent, and Episcopacy not forbidden by any divine Law) may we not clearly
see, that there is (by adhering to that Oath as still binding) an obstacle put
to the attainment of a greater good and of greater necessity, and to the
seeking after that greater good which we are pre-obliged, by former Bonds, to
labor after? Is not that great duty of preaching the Gospel of peace, lying
upon Ministers, ( woe to us if we preach not) and lying upon many Ministers
antecedently to the ^aking of this Covenant; and upon adhering to that Covenant
in the second Article, proves a hindrance to that greater duty whereto we are
pre-obliged; shall it still be thlought to bind so, that rather then we will
acknowledge God's loosing us by a former obligation to a greater duty, we will,
by adhering to it, put our selves in incapacity (according to Law) to serve any
longer in the Ministry? Do there not also ly upon us all pre-obligations to
obey the Magistrate in things not against God's Law, (such as now Episcopacy is
supposed to be) to procure the public peace and good of Church and State, and
prevent horrid confusions, which (as matters go) cannot be avoided by sticking
at that Article in the Covenant? Shall not the peace of conscience, that shall
arise from tendering these great interests, be as much, and more then any peace
of conscience pretended to be in keeping the Oath, which (though we should not
be ready to judge any) may perhaps, upon examination, be found rather a piece
of satisfaction to the will, then peace of the conscience, God having loosed
and set free conscience from that Bond, in hoc rerum statu?

But, to the second thing which we observed anent Oaths, or Covenants, it would
be remembered, that a Covenant or Oath, though lawful and binding, even in the
strict interpretation of it; yet, does not bind in the rigid interpretation,
which some, either through weakness, or scruples or design, may put upon it.
Sometimes souls may make snares of Oaths to themselves by overstretching them,
and so do run themselves into the perplexities they needed not. Concerning the
Covenant, different interpretations and senses have been given of it, according
to the several interests of persons of contrary judgments, combined in it. But,
as to the second Article now in question, it may be doubted, if it be broken by
submission to, or owning the present Episcopacy established by Law in Scotland;
or, whether it be not an overrigid straining of that Covenant, to bend it
against the present Episcopacy established in Scotland. For clearing of which,
it would be considered, first, that at the time of the taking of that solemn
League and Covenant, there were no such Church-offices in Scotland, as are
mentioned in that Article; there needed not, as to Scotland, a swearing to
extirpat Offices that were not in it at that time; and some Offices there
mentioned, never were in it. 2. It would be remembered, that an Oath is to be
interpreted according to the sense of the givers of it. Timorcus ( page 16.)
gives us assurance, that the Parliament of England, intended nothing less in
imposing the Covenant, then the extirpation of all kinds of Prelacy and Bishops
in the Church; and that it was resolved in Parliament, with consent of the
Brethren of Scotland, that it was only intended against Episcopacy as then
established in England: and ( Pr^f. p. 23.) we do not (says he) think the
Covenant to be against the primitive Episcopacy, which there he descrives to be
a presidency of one Minister over others, so that without him nothing is to be
done in matters of Ordination and Jurisdiction: and when he explaineth the
second Article of the Covenant, he says, it is only tyrannical Bishops that
are covenanted against: which Baxter also calls the sinful species of Prelacy,
in his Preface to the Disputations of Church Government; which he says was
abjured only, and not Episcopacy. And in that same dispute ( page 4.) he
declares, that most of the godly Ministers, since the Reformation, did judge
Episcopacy, some of them, lawful, and some of them most fit; and adds, that
almost all of these that are of the late Ass^ at Westminster, and most
throughout the Land, did conform to Episcopal Government, as not contrary to
the Word of God; and that he believes, that many of them are yet so far
reconciliable to it, (moderated) that if it were only established, they would
submit to it as they did: for, he hears (as he says) but of few of them who
have made recantation of their former conformity; and contrarily, has known
diverse of them professing a reconciliableness, as aforesaid, as Mr. Gataker
does, in one of his Books, profess his judgment. Thus Mr* Baxter, by whom we
may see their error or folly, who think there can be no godly Ministers owning
Episcopacy; and also how reconciliable godly Divines in the Ass. were to a
regulated Episcopacy; So that it seems, the great grievance aimed at in the
Covenant to be redressed, was, the Bishops claim of a sole Ordination and
Jurisdiction; and the multitudes of Courts of lay Chancellors, etc. set over
Ministers in matters of Government, and not the Office of Bishops, concurring
with Synods of Ministers and their presiding and being Superiors in
Church-meetings. If it be said, that every one of the particular Offices,
mentioned under the name of Prelacy in the Covenant, are abjured; and therefore
Bishops are abjured: Mr. Vines, in his Considerations upon the Kings
Concessions at the Isle of Wight, will (for loosing this) tell us of a sense of
the Covenant, which he inclines to, viz. that, as to that Article, the Covenant
is not to be understood in sensu diviso, but composito, (which sureth to Mr.
Baxters complex frame) And therefore asserts, that continuing of Bishops with a
negative voice in Ordination and ministerial Meetings, might be permitted
without breach of Covenant. And if it be so, as this learned man and others
mentioned, concede, What reason is there to bend the Covenant against the
present Episcopacy of Scotland, which is established to govern the Church (not
excluding,) but with consent of Presbyters, with as great moderation as any was
in the primitive Episcopacy. But it will be said, then we stand bound against
the English Prelacy, as it is explained in the Covenant. Ans. It will be time
to dispute that, when we are called to live under that frame of Prelacy: In the
mean time let it be granted, that the Church establishment amongst us, is not
that which the Covenant describes to be renounced: neither are we rashly to
judge the way of other Churches, which we are not called to own; they are to
give an account of their own way to God and the King, and will allow us a
discharge from meddling in their affairs; and they are not like in have, to
give us any place or calling in modelling their Church Government, to which all
protestant Churches ought to pay reverence.

But again, it will be said, was not the form of Episcopacy that was in
Scotland before (from which the present is nothing different) abjured in the
National Covenant, before we had any dealing with England anent change of their
Church Government. Ans. If we will believe the Ministers who reasoned with the
Doctors of Aberdeen (and they were the prime promoters of the Covenant, and
carried with them the sense of the body of the Covenanters) they who subscribed
that Covenant, might, with great liberty, voice in an Assembly, concerning
Episcopacy without prejudice, notwithstanding their Oath: And upon this ground,
would persuade the Doctors to subscribe the Covenant, because in so doing they
should not be taken as abjuring Episcopacy (as the Doctors thought) But,
notwithstanding their Oath and subscription, had their liberty remaining entire
to voice for Episcopacy in an Assembly: See their answer to the Doctors their
fourth and tenth demands. And the truth is, that as in the explication added,
anno. 1638. Episcopacy is not mentioned as abjured; so neither was it abjured
by the National Covenant as it was enjoined to be subscribed, anno. 1580. It is
alleged, that under the name of the Popes wicked Hierarchy, the Office of
Episcopacy was abjured; But they who say so, would consider, that the abjuring
of the Popes wicked Hierarchy, imports not an abjuration of the Office of a
Bishop, more then the Office of a Presbyter or a Deacon, which are parts of
that Hierarchy (so called by the Council of Trent, Canon. Sess. 7.) as well as
the Office of a Bishop. If the Covenant do not under that expression abjure
these Offices, neither does it abjure the Office of a Bishop, seeing these are
parts of that which the Papists call Hierarchy, as well as this. The intent of
that Covenant, was not to abjure the Office of Bishops, more then of Presbyters
or Deacons, but to abjure the Hierarchy, so far as it was the Popes, (his
wicked Hierarchy) as it also abjureth his five bastard sacraments, so far as he
makes them Sacraments, (for sure, Orders or Ordination of Ministers and
Marriage, which he makes two Sacraments, are not abjured in the Covenant as to
the matter of them, but only as to the relation of being Sacraments, which the
Pope puts on them) even so the Popes Hierarchy is abjured, counted and called
wicked, not as to the matter of these Offices comprehended under the
ecclesiastical word Hierarchy, (for then the Office of Presbyters and Deacons,
should be also counted wicked and abjured) but as to the dependence of all
these Offices on him, as the fountain and head of the Church under Christ, and
the corruption adhereing to these Offices, and flowing from him, so far as they
are his, depending on him, corrupted by him, there is wickedness in them or
joined to them, and so they are abjured (as in another word of that Covenant,
his blasphemous Priesthood is abjured, yet in that the Office of Presbyter is
not abjured.) But, mean time, the Offices themselves, which are said to make up
that Hierarchy, are not abjured, nor are to be rejected, but purged from what
is his, or any dependence on him, or corruption flowing from him. And so the
Office of a Bishop, amongst Protestants (Bishops now being loosed from that
dependence from the Sea of Rome and the Pope, who as head of the Church claimed
a plenitude of power over the whole Church, and made all Christian Bishops and
Ministers but as his slaves and vassals, portioning out to them such measure of
jurisdiction as he thought fit; as their styles in this Country imported of
old; Ego N. Dei apostolicae sedis gratia Episcopus) I say the Office of the
protestant Bishop is no more a part now of the Popes wicked Hierarchy, then is
the Office of a Minister or Deacon.

But further it may appear, that under the name of the Popes wicked Hierarchy,
the Office of Bishops was not abjured in the National Covenant. 1. The enjoyner
of that Covenant to be taken by the subjects, was King James, of blessed
memory; He, having himself with His family subscribed that Oath and Covenant,
gave charge to all Commissioners and Ministers within the Realm to crave the
same Confession from their parishoners, and proceed against the refusers, as
the words of the charge bear, March, 2. 1580. This was the first injunction for
taking the Covenant, which was mainly intended for securing the Religion, and
the King who favored it and professed it, from Papists, who were sound
practicing with forraigners against him and it, and for clearing the King and
his Court from aspersions. But that the King by that Covenant intended the
abjuration of the Office of protestant Episcopacy, it is most improbable, and
by many things the contrary appears. 1. The instrument in penning that
Covenant at the Kings command, was Mr. John Craig, His Minister, a very learned
man, who but nine years before, ( Jan, 12. anno. 1571.) had given his consent
in the Assembly of the Church, which then did meet at Leith, that Commissioners
might be appointed to join with these whom the Council should appoint for
settling the policy of the Church: of these Commissioners he himself was one,
and with him Dun the Superintendent of Angus, Winrame Superintendent of Fyfe
and others: the resolution they came to, was that there should be of the most
qualified of the Ministry some chosen by the Chapters of the cathedral
Churches, to whom vacant Arch-bishopricks and Bishoprics might be dispon'd,
and they to have power of Ordination, and to exerce spiritual Jurisdiction in
their several Diocesses; and at the Ordination of Ministers to exact an Oath of
them for acknowledging His Majesty's Authority, and for obedience to their
Ordinary in all things lawful. And accordingly some were provided to
Bishoprics at that time; neither did the Church in the following Assembly at
St. Andrews, (March, 1571.) take exception at these Articles of agreement. It
is true at Perth (August, 1572.) they received the same, but with a
protestation, it was only for an interim, etc. But this we may say, that the
learned Penner of the National Covenant, allowed of Bishops a few years before
this Covenant: Nor is there any evidence that he changed his mind, or that he
did in that draught of the Confession, mean protestant Bishops (which then he
approved) by the Popes wicked Hierarchy which is abjured. 2. As for the King
himself, that He minded no abjuration of the Office of a protestant Bishop by
that Covenant, may be evident by this, that when He and His family took that
Covenant, and when he enjoined it to the subjects, there was no such thing
known in this Church as a Government by Presbyteries (the whole Government
consisting in Ordination and Jurisdiction, exerced in the several parts of the
land, being in the hands of some under the name of Bishops, some under the name
of Superintendents, or under the name of Commissioners of Countries, who
exercised the same in their several precincts) other Government there was not,
but by some single persons, having power in their several bounds. It is true,
the Assembly quarreled what they did amiss, but yet they were then really
Bishops: And it is not like the King did swear himself, or put others to swear
against the Church Government that was then in the Country, and was not
rejected by the Church, till July, 12, 1580. Yea, it is evident, that the King
and His Council, minded not to swear down protestant Episcopacy by that
Covenant: For, suppose the General Assembly in that same year, 1580, July 12.
did pass an Act against Episcopacy (the like whereof had not been done in this
Church before) yet, the very year following, 1581. though the King and Council
had presented the Confession to the Assembly, to be subscribed by them and the
people in several Parishes at their order, or by their persuasion; yet, that
very same year, an Act of Council is made, confirming expressly that agreement,
1571. at Leith concerning Archbishops and Bishops: And this was done six months
after the sending the Confession to the Assembly and the Councils Act for
subscribing; this being in October, that in March, 1581. Now is it any way
probable, that the King and Council (had they intended to abjure Episcopacy in
the Confession) should within six months make an Act for confirming a former
agreement for establishing Episcopacy? And this Act of Council was no secret:
For, the King openly avowed it in the business concerning Montgomery, Bishop of
Glasgow, whom the King would not suffer to be processed upon the account of his
accepting a Bishopric; because, as he said, he had so lately ratified the
agreement at Leith, 1571. Neither did the Assembly or any Ministers speak of
that deed of the Kings and Councils, as contrary to the Covenant (albeit in
these days they had a way of using liberty enough, and more then was sitting.)
And it being plain, that the Covenant (in the intention of King and Council who
enjoined it first, and transmitted it to the Assembly and subjects) does not
abjure Episcopacy; Why should the subjects take themselves bound as swearing
down Episcopacy by that Oath, seeing every Oath is to be taken in the declared
sense of the Imposers, which is consistent with the words of it? But it will be
yet said, that the General Assembly at Glasgow, 1638. have declared, that in
that National Covenant, Episcopacy was abjured in the year, 1580, and they
enjoined, that all should subscribe according to the determination of that
Assembly; and many have done so. Ans. 1. It seems very strange, that any
Assembly, or Company of men, should take upon them to declare what was the
sense of the Church in taking a Covenant, or Oath, when few or none of the men
were living, who took that Covenant; or, if living, few or none of them were
members of that Assembly at Glasgow, 1638. As juramentum est vinculum
personale, (so say the Casuists) So no man, or company of men can take upon
them to define what was the sense of dead men in taking an Oath or Covenant
while they were alive, unless they can produce some authentic express
evidence, that such was their meaning in taking the Oath and Covenant in their
lifetime. Now, all that the Assembly of Glasgow has produced in their large
Act, ( Sess. 16.) declaring Episcopacy to be abjured, anno, 1580. amounts to
nothing more, but this, that before Jul. 1580. (at which time, some months
after the Covenant was enjoined by the King to be taken by the subjects) the
Church was, and had been some years laboring against Bishops (who
notwithstanding continued, till after the Act at Dundee, 1580.) And that after
the year, 1580. there was much opposition to that Office by the Assemblies: But
all their citations of Acts, come not to this point, to prove that Episcopacy
was abjured by the Covenant or any words in it; nor do these ancient Assemblies
after, 1580. ever assert any such thing (men being then living who knew the
sense of the Covenant, that it was against Covenant to admit of Episcopacy; but
they go upon other grounds in oppugning that Office. How strange is it that
Assemblies of Ministers, who had taken that Covenant, are never heard to plead
against Episcopacy (though they loved it not) upon that ground? And that fifty
eight years after, when most, or all of these first takers of it, are worn out,
a generation rises, that will plead, that their Ancestors took that Covenant
in that sense (abjuring Episcopacy) whereas there is in no Act of these ancient
Assemblies (after the Covenant was taken, or at the taking of it) any
assertion, that it was their mind in taking that Covenant, to abjure
Episcopacy? And that Episcopacy was not (in the intention of the takers of the
National Covenant of old) abjured by the Covenant; no, nor unlawful in it
self, even in the judgment of the Assembly of the Church of Scotland, may
appear, in that within six years after that year, 1580. a General Assembly at
Edinburgh do declare, that the name of Bishop has a special charge and
function thereto annexed by the Word of God; and that it is lawful for the
General Assembly, to admit a Bishop to a Benefice preferred by the Kings
Majesty, with power to admit, visit and deprive Ministers, and to be Moderators
of Presbyteries where they are resident and subject only to the sentence of the
General Assemblies. It seems within six years, the General Assembly at
Edinburgh retracted the Act of Dundee, 1581. But, 3. Strange it was that the
Company met at Glasgow (an Assembly against which as much is said, and upon
good grounds, as against any other in our Church) had power to bind others to
their determination of the sense of the Covenant. Certain it is, no Assembly
nor Company of men, can put an obligation upon persons who have taken an Oath
personally to accept of their sense of the Oath which they put upon it. It is
true, the Assembly of Glasgow could declare their own sense of the Oath taken
by themselves, but could not impose their sense upon the takers of the Oath
before, that sense not having been given to the takers of the Oath by the
imposers of the same; and the takers of the Oath not having empowered the
Commissioners at Glasgow to declare their sense of that Oath they had taken. So
then, whatever was done at Glasgow after the Covenant was taken by the body of
the Land, could not oblige all the takers of it to own their declaration of the
sense of the Covenant (which was not at first imposing the Oath, declared to
them) And the body of the people of this land, have not indeed abjured
Episcopacy by that National Covenant they entered in; neither the Covenant, nor
added interpretation imports any such thing: Nor has the body of the people
of the land, by any after deeds, owned that Assemblies sensing of the Covenant;
Nor was there any Act in that Assembly, that all should own their determination
of the sense thereof. It is true, there is an Act ( Sess. 26.) that these who
had not already subscribed, should subscribe with an allowance of the
Assemblies determination concerning the sense of the Covenant: But few did so.
If any did so, they are to consider, whether they have not been too rashly
carried on in the current of that time without a just examination of matters,

But finally, Now (that we are got out of the noise of Arms and Confusions of
the bypast times) it concerns the Ministers of Christ, to ponder if there
was any thing unlawful in that Covenant (we speak now of the solemn League and
Covenant, which seems most express against Prelacy, and which almost
swallowed up the memory of the other.) That there are great duties engaged to
in the same, relating to true Religion and an holy life, from which no power on
earth can loose, and to which we are indispensably tied, is not to be doubted.
Neither is it to be doubted, that many godly Ministers and people, were engaged
in that Covenant, who designed no evil, nor minded any injury to the Sovereign;
Yet, several things, as to that Covenant, are worthy to be seriously examined,
that we may see how they can be justified before God; Or, if they are to be
confessed as faults, especially if any evil or unlawful thing be found in the
substance or matter of the Covenant; it would be remembered, Malum est ex
singulis defectibus.

1. The warrantableness of entering into that public Oath or Bond, without the
supreme Authority of the land, and against the mind of the Sovereign. Can there
be any example showed amongst the people of God of old, either Jews or
Christians, of carrying on a public Oath or League and Bond without their
Sovereign Powers, that were over them, going before them; or, they not
consenting or contradicting? Is it not so special a Royalty of the King, to
have power of imposing a public Oath on all his subjects, especially when the
Oath has a direct aim for raising and taking Arms, for invasion of any in
foreign Nations (such was the aim of the solemn League as to us in Scotland)
that if this can be done without the King, What is there that may not be done
without him? Who can have a lawful power to swear all the Kings subjects to
such a purpose, without his consent? Much less can any have power to swear
them to a War against the Sovereign, while he is no way injuring them, but
heaping favors upon them; the War, in that respect, not being defensive on
their part, no^ admitting of apology upon that ground (supposing that to be a
good ground.) Is it not certain, that several just laws of this land, clearly
inhibit all Leagues of subjects under whatsoever color or pretense, without
the Kings consent had and obtained thereto? Jam. 6. Parl. 10. Act. 1^. Mary,
Parl. 9. Act 75. It is well known, that when the National Covenant was carried
on, that the people might be moved to concur in it and to take it, it was
pretended, that it was not without Authority; and that the warrant it had from
King James his Authority, still continued (albeit neither He nor His Successor
gave any authoriy to the additional explication and application) and, at that
time, it was ingenuosly professed by the Promoters of that Covenant, (as may
also be cleared by Writings they have left to the world) that had it been a new
Covenant or League, they would not, they could not have entered in it without
the King's Authority warranding them; But, when the solemn League and Covenant
(which had no shadow of the King's Authority) comes upon the stage, this
Doctrine was forgotten utterly; for, it was carried on in England by a Meeting
of Parliament, excluding one of the Estates, and the King proclaiming against
it in Scotland by a Committee of Estates, which, if they had power to engage
the Land in a Foreign war, intended in that Covenant, may be doubted. Now,
although this could not nullify the obligation of the Covenant, were the
matter of it undoubtedly lawful and otherwise still obliging; yet, it were
well if unlawfulness, in regard of this defect and want of a lawful Authority
warranding it, were acknowledged; this were some piece of self-denial: Casuists
say, that res jurata may be licita, when Juramentum est illicitum. Let the
matter of the Oath be lawful, and suppose it also to oblige; yet, they who
appear so afraid of sin in breaking that Oath, would, for proof of their
sincerity, give as public testimony against the sinful way of entering into
that Bond, as they do against that sin (as they suppose) in breaking it; if
they say factum valet, let them consider if they have no better reason to say
fieri non debuit.

2. It is most seriously to be considered, if there be not in the intrinsical
frame of the Covenant that with which God was not well-pleased. Such a solemn
Oath and Covenant, being a most solemn profession before God of what men did
own in Religion, and professedly intended for the greatest mutual assurance of
men entering in it, (one to another) should have been framed in most strict,
plain and specifical terms. But, this solemn League, etc. was purposely framed
in general and homonymous terms, such as (by the expressions) leaves room for
all the Sectaries in the Isle (if they will but profess to own the Word of God)
to lurk under the lap of the Covenant, to own each one their own way, and yet
plead their keeping of the Covenant, such is the generality of the terms of
it; that several sorts of Sectaries may fight in their several factions one
against another, all pretending the Covenant, there being no distinct
specifical terms in the Covenant, whereupon some could implead others as
guilty of breach; and did not the Sectarian Army, when they invaded Scotland,
pretend the Covenant and keeping of it, and thereupon there were high appeals
made to heaven? Will not all, or most of them, own the letter of the Covenant,
which only seems clear against Popery and Prelacy, and for a violent
extirpation of this? Then there was no security in that Covenant for preserving
Presbytery in Scotland; the Presbytery not being once named, only the matter is
wrapped up in a general, We shall preserve the Reformed Religion in the Church
of Scotland in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government against our common
enemies; reformed Religion, and against common enemies: No Independent or
Separatist, but might say, he would preserve the Reformed Religion, etc. in
Scotland, albeit he thought not Presbytery to be any part of Reformed Religion
or Government, and although he minded to do against it himself; only, if he
would preserve it, it should be to hold off what he apprehended worser, he
would preserve it against the common enemies. Neither is there security in that
Covenant for reforming England, according to the pattern as was desired by us.
Was there not more policy then piety in this, to endeavor the soldering and
holding fast of so many several parties united against Episcopacy? yet, sorting
amongst themselves, like the iron and clay toe^ of Nebuchadnezar's image, and
ready to break one upon another (all under pretense of the Covenant) as it
clearly came to pass and is still like to be, such is the vanity of humane
policies, unsound ways of uniting, tending to the begetting, in end, of
greater distractions. And the Covenant being of purpose framed in general
terms, for the most part, that several parties might be fast united against
Prelacy owned by the King; if it should be still owned, would prove no better
then a perpetual seminary of diverse Parties, all pleading their keeping of
their Covenant, and yet no party agreeing one with another in the specifical
sense thereof and some of the ways of these several parties, might be found
much worse (in the judgment of right discerners) then Prelacy is, or may be
thought to be by some. It would be seriously pondred, whether this way of a
studied indistinctness, generality and homonymie in the terms of the Covenant,
for strengthening a party against some one thing, was acceptable to God? And
whether the blood of our Contrymen, should have been cast away in such
uncertain terms? It will be said, The Covenant is clear enough against
Episcopacy, let us keep it in the clear and true sense of it, whatever
doubtfulness be otherwise. But to say nothing of this that we have showed
above, how unclear it is against the Episcopacy established now in Scotland
(however clear it be as intended against the English frame) were it not better
to lay aside (when now it is disclaimed by King and Parliament and all persons
of trust in the Land) an humane form, which, in respect of the Composure of it,
is apt to be, has been, and is like to be a seminary of varieties of parties
(all pleading it) and worse evils then Prelacy is imagined to be, then still to
own it, when as authentic exponers of the sense of it, who might reprove false
pretenders to the keeping of it, cannot be had; neither while they were in
being, could agree amongst themselves anent the sense of it; as may be seen in
the Parliament of Englands ba^ling the Scottish Commissioners Declaration, anno.
1647. and other Papers. God has given the children of men work enough to be
exercised in his holy Word, which certainly, in his intendment, has but one
true sense (howbeit man's blindness often perceives it not) It is a needless
labor to be taken up with humane forms (purposely contrived in general terms
for taking in parties of known contrary sense and judgment) which will (if
owned) prove apples of contention in the present and succeeding Generations.

But, 3. Let sober and godly men consider, if it was dutifully done, to swear
the preservation of the Kings person and Authority conditionally and with a
limitation, In the preservation and defense of the true Religion. Mr. Crofton
indeed denies, that in that third Article of the Covenant, there is any
limitation of our loyalty in defending the King, or that this is the sense,
that we are only bound to defend Him while He defends Religion; he asserts,
that clause to be only a predication of their present capacity who engage to
defend the King's Person, to this sense, we being in defense of Religion, etc.
shall defend the King's Person. But, (to say nothing how strain'd-like this
looks, the words, in the sense of judicious men, looking as a clear
limitation of our duty to Him; as if otherwise we owed Him no duty of that
sort) Belike, the General Ass. of the Church of Scotland should understand the
sense of the Covenant somewhat better then Mr. Crofton, (to say nothing of
their stating their opposition to Authority of Parliament in the matter of the
Engagment, 1648. upon this as the main hinge, ^. our conditional duty to the
King). They in their Declaration, 1649. declare, that the King was not to be
admitted to the exercise of His royal Power, before satisfaction, as to the
matter of Religion (they meant mainly that particular mode of Church Government
by Presbytery; for, that was it that went under the name of Religion, the
substance of the protestant Religion being never under question between the
King and them) they plead for a ground the Covenant, where their duty, in
defending the King's Person and Authority, is said to be subordinate to
Religion; and therefore it is concluded, that without manifest breach of
Covenant, they cannot admit Him to reign, till in that they be satisfied: It is
clear, they looked on it as a limitation of their duty, and that His owning of
Presbytery, etc. was conditio sine qua non, of His reigning amongst them, and
of their paying duty to Him; and so indeed the transactions in the Treaties at
Breda and the Hague, and what followed thereupon, expounded their mind. Now,
was this right, that (where our Alleagiance binds us to duty in a greater
latitude) this should be held out to people as the only standard of their
loyalty, and duty to the King? Was it sound Doctrine to insinuat (to the sense
of intelligent men) that we were not otherwise bound to defend Him? Was it well
by such a clause to giv^ occasion to wicked men (as the Sectaries take it in
their Declaration before the late King's death) to think they were no further
obliged to Him then* He should defend that which, they accounted Religion* yea,
that they were obliged by Covenant to destroy Hi^ Person, they finding (as they
say, in that Declaration) that His Safety and Religions are inconsistent* And,
was it the duty of th^se who were Commissioners from this at London then, to
profess in their Paper, they were not in^^^s^^d to (...) in their guilt, when
they knew the (...) would take their meaning to ^e of the King* Does difference
in Religion, or in these inferior and lower points, about Church Government,
loose a people from their duty in defending His Person, and obeying His
Authority? How may foreign Princes (who have Protestants in their Dominions)
take it, if that might pass for an approved opinion amongst their protestant
Subjects, that their loyalty is to be limited to His being of their Religion;
and if He be not, they may either cease to defend, Him or inv^d^ Him? It may be
remembered, that those who owned the western Remonstrance, did justify their
seditious Engagments and renting proceedings (which few of them have dis^laim'd
to this day) upon then sensing the obligation of the Covenant, as is said, and
that in conformity to the constant tenor of the published Declarations and
Testimonies of Church judicatories, since the taking of the Covenant * and if
s^, sure it concerns the Ministers of this Church, to vindicate the Doctrine
it hereof, in the point of that respect and obedience, to the Civil, Magistrate
(which the Confessions of all Protestant Churches do own) which has been
stained, by these corrupt principles and positions, and the undutifull
practices, slowing from the same in these years past.

But to say no more it would be in the fear of God considered, if in the solemn
Covenant, the engagers therein have bound themselves, to (...) act unlawful,
that may render the Covenant in some part of the matter of it sinful; the act
which in the second Article (now under question*) they have engaged themselves
in, is the voting out of Prelacy, or the Offices* etc. There was no such
Offices in Scotland at that time, so they needed not to swear extirpation of
what was not there, In England their Church Government being warranted by the
Laws of the King and Land, it may be questioned if the swearing the
extirpation, or endeavoring to extirpate the same, without and against the
consent of the Sovereign Law giver of the land, was a lawful Act. The question
is not now, whether Episcopacy be lawful or not, But supposing Episcopacy to
be unlawful in it self, albeit in that case the Lawgivers were indeed bound
to remove it, and to annull Laws favoring it; Yet, it were unlawful to people
to bandy for forcing or frighting the Law givers to an alteration of these
Laws, and to tie themselves to a mutual defense, with lives and fortunes for
overturning what the Law allows (agree the Sovereign or not) which is the
clear meaning of the Covenant, Artic. 2, 3, 5. If once that Principle prevail,
that subjects may (when they apprehend Laws unlawful) use forcible endeavors
to obtain alteration thereof, What security can there be for the best Printes
in maintaining the best Laws? or what peace for people? When an evil spirit
rusheth upon people, or some Sheba blows the trumper, they will be ready to
think it is their place and calling, being soldiers and men at arms (however
called thereto) to offer violence to Magistrates and Laws, even the best: It is
in vain, some defenders of the Covenant say, forcible endeavors are not meant;
Compare second Article and third, that make mention of lives and estates, and
relates to the former and the fifth Article. It is clearly enough seen, violent
endeavors are meant, where less will not do. And when the cause of the
Covenant was managed in the field, were not people upon account of that
Article, hunted out either to kill or die, and terrified with the charge of
Covenant Breaking if they went not? Did not people conceive themselves, (or
were taught so) that it was their place and calling to take arms without and
against the consent of the Sovereign Lawgiver? And in that calling, they were
to endeavor forcibly, consent the King or not, to carry that abolition of
Prelacy. Let it be considered, whether engageing to such endeavors were
lawful, quoad nos; or whether it can be a lawful bond; that ties to such
violent endeavors against the supreme Magistrate and Laws (be what they will
be) And let it be seriously pondred, that if they who hold themselves obliged
in no way to yield unto, acknowledge, obey nor act under the Government, which
the King and Law have set over them, and by thus withdrawing their subjection,
encourage and lead others to do the like after their example, thereby designing
to weaken the Government (which in the fairest construction, cannot be judged
to live peaceably) If, I say, these will speak and act consequentially to
former principles and practices, not yet by them disclaimed, they must also
hold themselves by the same Covenant obliged to resist and fight against the
Laws fencing Episcopacy, if occasion were offered; and not only to vent their
animosities and discontents in their prayers and discourses in private, but
also to take all occasions to revile and curse that Government and their
Superiors, commissionated by the King, in Prayers, Sermons and discourses in
public; and, in effect, to do what in them lies, to bring it and them under,
the scandal and odium of the people, and make them the Butt of their malice and
revenge; let wise men judge how far this is from the tenor of our lawful Oaths
of Allegiance, Supremacy, yea and Christianity, and what an inlet this will
give to disturb the peace and rekindle that fire which had almost consumed us
to ashes. To close, 1. If Episcopacy be of Apostolic Institution (as many
learned godly men judge, and it is hard to say many swearers of the Covenant
had ground of clear persuasion to the contrary) it would not be so banded
against without grievous sin and scandal. 2. If Episcopacy be of indifferent
nature, and only by humane constitution, it would be considered, what
Protestants write against Papists, That vows of perpetual abstinence in all
cases from things in their nature indifferent, are utterly unlawful; and let
it be thought, whether it be lawful for any subjects to bind up themselves by
Oath, never to be subject to the Magistrates laws in things God has put under
the determination of his power. 3. Let Episcopacy be unlawful, (which is not
proven by any) yet it shall be unlawful for-subjects to attempt the abrogation
of the Laws favoring it, by any force to be used on the Lawgiver, which is
indeed the intent of the Covenant, and the proceedings thereupon were
answerable.

The Lord give us humble and peaceable spirits, to see at last, and lay to
heart the sin and folly of those Bonds and Combinations against the Kings
Ecclesiastical Government, and his will expressed in the Laws of the land,
which are inconsistent with that duty and loyalty, which Churchmen, above
other subjects, should pay to that Supremacy in all causes and over all
persons, declared by the law to be an inherent right to the Crown: It is high
time for us in this day of our tranquillity and calm which God has wrought, to
consider what belongs to our peace, and to discern the way of our duty, from
which we have been too long transported by the tempestuous Agitations and
diverse winds of Doctrines, Engagements and professions in the years past:
Reason and Scripture, Divine and Natural law, seem to point out as with a
Sunbeam, the way we should hold, namely, that for public security, order and
peace, Ministers and people do acquiesce in the present establishment, and obey
every Ordinance of man, whether the King as Supreme, or those who are
commissionated by Him, and that not only for wrath but conscience sake. Let it
be far from Ministers of the Gospel of peace, to head and lead the people into
divisions and offenses, and by their carriage and way, to dispose them into
disaffection and discontent with the King and his Laws, as if in the account of
some, (whether of corrupt and weak minds) he were a Tyrant not a Father to the
Church, who makes such Laws, which His conscientious subjects cannot obey for
fear of sin against God; if this way of disobedience be persisted in, it is
easy to see what evils will follow, (since it must be expected, that the King
and Parliament, will in honor and justice, maintain the laws) And how the
whole Nation may be exposed to the reproach of a troublesome, disquiet,
factious people, delighting still in sedition and turbulency; It becomes us
rather to cut off occasions of stumbling in the way of Gods people, and to be
patterns of love to, and zeal for the Honor and tranquillity of our King and
Country, of this Church and State, and to show so much tenderness for the
interest of Religion, Order and Unity, as to put forth our selves to the utmost
in our stations, to promote all these, which will prove the most effectual way
of crushing that spirit of Athelsm and profaneness, so much complained of by
those who flee from the only remedy thereof; Ministers are not to employ
themselves so much in considering how to maintain and uphold the interest of a
party or cause they have espoused, as how far they may go, what they may
without sin do in the practice of what the law injoyneth. The God of peace and
truth direct and stablish us in the way of peace and truth, Amen.

FINIS
ERRATA.
Page 15. Line 6. for others read Oaths. Page 18. Line 2. for sect read sort.


