ANIMADVERSIONS On the first part of the MACHINA COELESTIS Of the Honorable,
Learned, and deservedly Famous Astronomer JOHANNES HEVELIUS CONSUL OF DANTZICK;
Together with an Explication of some INSTRUMENTS MADE BY ROBERT HOOK,
Professor of Geometry in Gresham College, and Fellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for John Martyn Printer to the Royal Society, at the
Bell in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1674.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Reason of the present Animadversions. page 1. How far Hevelius has
proceeded. That his Instruments do not much exceed Ticho. The bigness, Sights
and Divisions, not considerably differing. Ticho not ignorant of his new way of
Division. p. 2. Proved by several passages out of his Works. p. 3, 4. That so
great curiosity as Hevelius strives for is needless without the use of
Telescopical Sights, the power of the naked eye being limited. That no one part
of an Instrument should be more perfect then another. p. 4, 5. Hevelius his
Letter of 1665. with his opinion of Telescopical Sights. p. 5, 6. That if
Hevelius could have been prevailed on by the Author to have used Telescope
Sights, his Observations might have been 40 times more exact then they are. p.
6, 7. That Hevelius his Objections against Telescope Sights are of no validity;
but that Sights without Telescopes cannot distinguish a less Angle then half a
Minute. p. 7. That an Instrument of 3 foot Radius with Telescopes, will do more
then one of 3 score foot Raedius with common Sights, the eye being unable to
distinguish. This is proved by the undiscernableness of spots in the Moon, and
by an Experiment with Lines on a paper, by which a Standard is made of the
power of the eye. p. 8. That it had been much to be wished that Ticho and
Hevelius had, and that Observators for the future would, well consider this. p.
9. That Altitudes of the Sun and some of the Moon may have been taken to
greater exactness, but still short of what may be done with Telescopes. ibid.
The Author's Engagement for describing an Instrument more perfect in 7
particulars. p. 10. A more particular Examination of Hevelius his Instruments,
and first of his first Instrument, being a brass Quadrant. Hevelius having a
very great aversion to Glass-Sights, used common. p. 11. Took great pains in
the dividing it himself. p. 12. Of which he might have spared almost 80/90, if
he had known either the first way of Diagonal Divisions, described in p. 12,
13. or the second way described and exemplified. p. 14, 15. Some inconveniences
in the Contrivances about his first Instrument. p. 16. A Description of his
second, third, fourth, fifth, and sixth Instruments, and some of their
conveniences and inconveniences noted. p. 16, 17. Hevelius wholly rejecting all
wooden Instruments, made better of Brass and Iron. p. 18. That notwithstanding
there may be a good use made of Wood for the material of Instruments. Proved by
the Experiment of an Instrument made long since by Sr. Chapter Wren. ibid. Hevelius
his Reason for rejecting the use of wood-Instruments, not without some
exceptions. p. 19. Animadversions on the Description of three smaller metalline
Instruments, one of 24, a second of 18, and a third of 12 inches, and
particularly about the new way of Division, which he ascribes to Benedictus
Hedreus. p. 20. That Hevelius was mistaken in supposing Hedreus his way more
capable of Demonstration then Ticho's by Diagonals. p. 21. Ticho Brahe's
Calculation of the quantity of Angles, made by Diagonals and equidistant
parallel Circles. p 21, 22. It Is strange that Ticho and Hevelius should not
think of putting the parallel Circles at unequal Distances. ibid. How to
calculate, and what those unequal Distances are. p. 23. Dr. Wallis his Letter
to Hevelius about the same Subject, wherein that Doctrine is largely and fully
handled. p. 23, 24, 25, 26 The Diagonal Divisions more easy to be seen then
those of Hedreus or Nonnius. Ticho's Description of Nonnius his way of
Division. p. 27. Hevelius his Description of the way of Hedreus. p. 28. That
this way of Hedreus is subject to great inequalities, proved by the Divisions
on the Plate T. of Hevelius his Book. A practicable way of enlarging the small
Divisions. p. 29. That Hedreus was not the first inventer of this way of
Division, but Pierre Vernier was before him. p. 30. A second, third, and fourth
Objection against this way of Divisions, drawn from a supposed unequal poise of
the Plumb-Rule, caused by its unequal make or dust, or from the unpracticable
way of hanging it either on a smaller or bigger Pin or Hole. ibid. Hevelius his
invention for steadying the Quadrant ingenious, but the convertible Frame more
easy for use. p. 31. Some Remarks in the Description of his large brass
Quadrant, wherewith he took many Meridian Altitudes of the Sun. ibid. A new way
hinted for making a Table of the fixed Stars, and regulating their places, by
the help of a Mural Quadrant, some parts whereof are described as the way of
Dividing, and of the Sights, and of poysing the Tube and Observator, and of
keeping the Tube from bending, etc. p. 32, 33. Some Difficulties therein now
obviated, and some Objections answered. ibid. That this Subject deserves to be
better enquired into, and to be promoted by some Prince. p. 34. Some
Animadversions on the Description of Hevelius his large Quadrant of Brass. That
the Instrument is good in its kind, but yet far short of what it might have
been, if Glasses had been used for the Sights. ibid. How very small Seconds are
even upon large Instruments, and how uncertain the Penumbra of the Sun's light
is, contrary to the general Principles of Optical Writers, being sometimes
bigger, sometimes less, according to the smalness and bigness of the hole
through which it is trajected. p. 35. The curiosity of this Instrument further
expressed by Hevelius, in the multitude of its parts and Contrivances, in the
proper Turret for it, in the make and great use of Screws, for moving, fixing
and dividing the Quadrant. p. 36. Some Objections and Emendations propounded,
and a Conclusion on the whole Instrument and Apparatus. p. 36, 37. Some
Animadversions on the large Sextant, and the way of using it, and on the
difficulty acknowledged of taking Stars Distances from the Moon and Sun, and a
way promised of doing them with more case. p. 38. The seeming difficulty and
even impossibility of taking 8 several Distances in the Heavens, without
failing one Second, and the reason why it is more likely that there could not be
a greater certainty then of 4 Minutes in the whole. ibid. Hevelius his Letter
concerning my Animadversions, and about Telescopical Sights. p. 39, 40, 41. An
Answer to it. p. 41, 42, 43. A Conclusion of the Animadversions. That the
learned World is obliged to Hevelius for what he has done, but would have been
more, if he had used other Instruments. p. 43, 44. That the Animadvertor has
contrived some hundreds of Instruments, each of very great accurateness for
taking Angles, Levels, etc. and a particular Arithmetical Instrument for
performing all Operations in Arithmetic, with the greatest ease, swiftness and
certainty imaginable. p.44,45. That the Reader may be the more certain of this,
the Author describes an Instrument for taking Angles in the Heavens, whose
perfection more then common consists, 1. In the manife sting of the Sights. 2.
In the Divisions. 3. In the reflective construction of the Sights. 4. In its
exact Perpendicularity. 5. In its fixation and motion fit for Observations. 6.
In its facility for make; and 7. In its cheapness. p. 45, 46. An Explication of
the make and singular conveniences of these new Sights. p. 46, 47, 48. An
Explication of the new way of Dividing, and the great advantages of it above
others. p. 48, 49, 50. Made more easy by the Explication of the Delineation in
the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, and 11th. Figures, expressing the Frame, hollow
Center, Moveable arm, Screw-Frame, and Screw for the Divisions. The Obliquity
of it to the Plain of the Quadrant, and the reason thereof. p. 51, 52. The way
of certainly aetermining the Obliquity, and the resolving the whole Quadrant
thereby into one grand Diagonal, and the magnifying thereof in a duple, triple,
decuple, etc. Proportion. p. 53. Then follows a more particular Description of
the Screw-Frame, its Collers, Centers, Screws, Handles, Indices, Pinnion,
Divisions, etc. p. 53, 54. How by these Indices is pointed out the Measure of
the angle, in Degrees, Minutes, Seconds, etc. p. 55. The great advantage of
these new ways of ordering Sights taken notice of. ibid. And the whole
Contrivance more particularly described. p. 56. And explained by a Delineation,
and the manner how they are applicable to a Quadrant or other Instrument. p.
57. How they are made use of for taking an angle bigger then a Quadrant, is
farther described, and made more intelligible by a Delineation. p. 58. The way
of adjusting the two fixed Sights, so as to look forwards and backwards exactly
in a right Line, and how to adjust and fix the Sight-Threads in the Tubes, with
the reason thereof. p. 59, 60. A Description of the Water-Level, for setting
the Instrument exactly Horizontal. Some Difficulties, and the way of preventing
them proposed. p. 61, 62. This Instrument farther explained by a Delineation,
and the reason of its accurateness manifested. p. 63. Some Difficulties about
the make of the Glasses for these Levels, and some Expedients propounded,
together with other ways and forms of Levels. p. 64, 65. After the Difficulties
of Observations made the old ways are taken notice of, follows the Description
of a new Method of moving and fixing Instruments for Observations, so as to
prevent and obviate them. p. 66, 67, 68. This is made more plain by a
Delineation and Explication. p. 69. When the Circular Pendulum was first
invented and published. p. 69, 70. Here by the way is published a Description of
Wheel work, which may be called the perfection of Wheel-work, having the
perfectest Idea that toothed Wheel-work is capable of, performing the same
effect as if the Wheel and Pinnion had an indefinite number of Teeth. p. 70,
71. A farther Explanation of the Pole or Conical hole of the axis. p. 72. A
Description of the Frame for keeping the Instrument in its Perpendicularity,
and yet always in the azimuth of the celestial Object, with a Digression of the
great use of this Principle in Dialling, equalling Time, Clock-work, etc. p.
73. The way of finding an exact right angle or Quadrant, more particularly
described and explained. An Objection about the inequality of the Divisions
answered. p. 74, 75. Some Uses of this Instrument hinted: 1. For measuring the
Refraction of the air. 2. For regulating the place of the sixth Stars. 3. Of the
Planets. 4. For stating the Latitude of places. 5. For examining the influence
of the Planets on the Earth. 6. For measuring a Degree, which was the cause of
its Contrivance. 7. For measuring seen Distances. 8. For taking the Diameters
of the Sun, Moon and Planets. p. 77. Where by the By are mentioned two other
Instruments; one for taking Diameters to Seconds; and a second for looking on
the Body of the Sun, without harming the eyes. p. 78. A ninth Use for
Levelling, etc. with a short Conclusion. ibid.


SOME ANIMADVERSIONS On the first Part of HEVELIUS His MACHINA COELESTIS, etc.
HAVING lately perused a Discourse of Hevelius, newly published, entitled,
Johannis Hevelii Machina Coelestis, pars prior Organographiam sive
instrumentorum Astronomicorum omnium quibus Author hactenus sidera rimatus and
dimensus est accuratam delineationem and descriptionem, plurimis Iconibus aeri
incisis illustratam and exornatam exhibens, etc. and finding it a Discourse
about practical and mechanical Knowledge, and of that kind wherein Geometry
seems to be more then ordinarily concerned; I thought it might not be
ungrateful to my Auditory, ( nor improper to the Subject of Sr. JOHN CUTLER' s
Lecture, which is partly Mechanical and partly Physical) to consider a little
the Contents thereof: And somewhat the rather too, because having heretofore
communicated to him somewhat of this Subject, which I had occasion to read in
this place in one of my former CUTLERIAN Lectures, I find he has made some
Animadversions and reflections thereupon.

I find then that this excellent Person has been for the most part exceedingly
circumspect, to find out the inconveniences and difficulties that do accrue to
the best Observators, even with the best instruments, and has not been less
industrious to find out ways to obviate and overcome them; In the doing of
which, he seems not to have spared either for labor and vigilance, or for any
cost and charges that might effect his purpose, for which he has highly
merited the esteem of all such as are lovers of that Science: But yet if he had
prosecuted that way of improving Astronomical instruments, which I long since
communicated to him, I am of opinion he would have done himself and the learned
World a much greater piece of service, by saving himself more then 1/10 of the
charge and trouble, and by publishing a Catalogue ten times more accurate. For
though I doubt not in the least but that he has by his own extraordinary
diligence, care and cost, corrected several mistakes and errors committed by
the assistants of the Noble Ticho: yet I am not satisfied that his Instruments
are capable of making Observations more accurately then those of Ticho, though
it is possible they may do it with somewhat less trouble and inconvenience. For
first, I find that those of Ticho were as large as those of Hevelius, and
consequently were capable of as accurate and minute divisions, and of as long
and convenient Sights. Secondly, I find that the Sights made use of by Hevelius
are the very same, at least not at all materially differing from those of
Ticho, being only naked Sights, made by a slit and edge, serving only to
regulate the direction of the naked eye, but no ways capable of assisting the
eye to distinguish more accurately the object. Thirdly, I find that though the
way of Division made use of by Hevelius, be a very ingenious invention, and
that which is Geometrically true and certain, yet if we consider the great
difficulty there is in Mechanically performing it, we shall find it not much
preferrable, if altogether as good as that of Ticho. And it is plain enough that
Ticho himself was not ignorant of it, though his particular reasons why he made
no more use of it, we certainly know not: It Is very probable, because he
thought it not altogether so accurate, as that he did make use of. For somewhat
to this purpose he says himself, in the second Book of his Observations of the
Comet of 1577. page 461. Hanc graduum in singula minuta, meaning the Division
by Diagonal Lines; and etiam horum in dena scrupula secunda subdivisionem in
omnibus meis machinis Astronomicis usurpo, eo quod illam multis ab hinc annis
exquisitissimam expertus sum. Licet enim ejus demonstratio in Rectilineis
parallelogrammis proprie conveniat, nihilominus arcualibus etiam in tam exili
interstitio quod a recta linea insensibiliter differt, citra omne erroris
vestigium convenienter applicatur. It Is true, Ticho's Objection against this
way of Division by Diagonals is material, as to a Geometrical accurateness, but
his Answer to it is altogether as material, that though it be not exactly true,
yet it does insensibiliter differ, and so long as the error is not discovered
by sense, there can be no error committed in observation; and indeed the whole
matter both one way and the other is insignificant, and but a vain curiosity to
endeavor to divide an instrument into seconds, or parts smaller then a minute,
for I shall by and by show that the eye can hardly distinguish minutes in the
object: But were such niceness of Division of any use, it is easily enough to be
done to Mathematical truth; for as I shall anon show, there is a certain
distance of each of the parallel Circles, which being given, the straight
Diagonal Lines will divide the degree, by the intersection with those parallel
Circles, into exactly equal parts, which would have better answered Ticho's
Objection, had he known it, which I wonder, I confess, how he could over-see,
since he seems to have spent many thoughts on the matter; but this only by the
By, because I shall speak more at large of it afterward. But he proceeds to
this other way of Divisions, which he, as well as Hevelius, ascribes to
Nonnius, whereas the other that he approves of came first from England, as it
appears by a passage in another Book of his, where he discourses somewhat of
the same Subject.

Altera Divisio ad clarissimi Mathematici Petri Nonnii in Libello de
crepusculis propositione tertia imitationem per plures quadrantis arcus
introrsum descriptos, and diversimode subdivisos procedit; etsi autem in hac
ipsa apprime ingeniosa Nonnii inventione aliquid Auctuarii loco expeditius a
nobis additum est, ita ut exterior arcus in plurimas partiunculas dividatur,
neque is ordo aut numerus arcuum sese introrsum concomitantium quem ille
praefinivit sed multo expeditior and perfectior observetur; (I am apt to think
he knew this very way, and here hints it:) Tamen quia haec subtilitas cum ad
praxin deventum est plus habeat laboris quam fructus, neque id in recessu
praestet quod prima front pollicetur, ut alibi before ostendemus, idcirco
apud nos dudum in usu esse desiit. From which words, and also from what he says
in his first Book of the new Star in 1572. page 671. speaking of the comparison
between these two ways of Divisions, to wit, Sit cujuscunque velit ingeniosa
certe and apprime utilis est distributio, quam and ego postea arcualibus
graduum divisionibus in quadrantibus sextantibus and armillis, non inconcinne
aut infrugifere applicui. Licet enim demonstratio ejus in solis rectilineis
superficiebus ad unguem se habeat; tamen cum quinorum vel denorum minutorum
spatium in circumferentiis majusculis a rectilineo insensibiliter differat, hic
quoque ejus usus satis commodus and ratus esse poterit, multoque Nonniana
plurimorum arcuum intricata and difficili subdivisione expeditior aptiorque
deprehenditur. From his Discourse I say in these two places, and from several
others dispersed up and down his Works, which 'twould be too long now to quote,
it is evident that Ticho was not ignorant of this way of Sub-division, so much
applauded by Hevelius, invented by Petrus Nonnius, and promoted by Ticho
himself; and yet we see he preferred that way of Diagonals, first made use of in
England by the most skilful Mathematician Richard Cantzler, before it,
rejecting the one and making use of the other in all his Instruments. But
either of them will do well enough if the Divisions be done with great
circumspection and care, and instruments of the size of those larger ones both
of Hevelius and Ticho, are capable of Divisions ten times more accurate then
are needful for common Sights, be they never so long, without making use of
either Ticho's or Hevelius's way of Division, the eye being unable to
distinguish a smaller Angle. To what purpose therefore is it to make the
Divisions so fine, or any one part of the instrument or observation more
accurate then another? since the power of distinguishing by the naked eye is
that which bounds and limits all the other niceness, and whatever part is more
curious then that can equalize, is of no significancy. For instance, in taking
the altitude of a Star, it would be but labor lost to distinguish by the
Diagonals, or otherwise to Seconds, whilst in the mean time you are not certain
that the Plumb-line is true to a minute, or whilst you are not able to direct
the Ruler, bearing the Sights to a greater certainty then to that of a minute.
And the like might be said of the extraordinary curiosity in any two parts, and
the failure in any third, that is essential to an observation; as fruitless it
is to calculate to seconds, when the observations are not true to minutes, or
to be certain by the Sights and Divisions to seconds, and uncertain in the
Plumb-line to minutes.

There is therefore one thing in Hevelius his Instruments, that though they be
never so large, never so accurately divided, of never so choice and convenient
materials, and never so tractable for use, and never so skilfully and
industriously used, will notwithstanding make them all equal as to use, with
one of about two or three foot radius of metal with Ticho's Sights and
Diagonal Divisions, which is occasioned by the limited power of distinguishing
by the naked eye.

Something to this purpose I communicated to Hevelius in the year 65. and hoped
that I might have thereby somewhat assisted him in his great and laborious
Work, first by easing the eye, and next by making it capable of distinguishing
more exactly, I having hinted to him the way how to reform and obviate that
inconvenience by Telescopical or Perspective Sights, as also the way of making
instruments of much less bulk, to do ten times more then 'twas possible to do
with the largest instruments made the common way. In answer to which he returns
me this Discourse, in a Letter to the Royal Society, in the year 65.

MODUS ille observandi per Telescopia adminiculo Sextantis vel Quadrantis,
videtur mihi vix adeo tutus, quam vulgaris, si pinnacidia recte ac just sint
affixa. Haec enim sunt immobilia; Telescopia vero nulla ratione adeo firmiter
affigi possunt ut loco haud dimoveantur; etiamsi omni diligentia juxta methodum
descriptum per totum Horizontem experiundo sint semel collocata. Adhuc quam
arduum fit, ea ratione verum eorum locum indagare, satis superque expertus sum;
sic ut vix videam, an alicui circa restitutionem Fixarum Planetarumque
adminiculo esse possint; in majoribus scilicet illis distantiis capiendis: In
minoribus, largior, posse aliquid praestari; sed an Instrumenta, unius
Spithamae radio instructa, elaborari possint multo exactius, quam optima
quoevis, vulgares Dioptras habentia, licet 60 pedum radio elaborata, nollem
adhuc asseverare. Multa namque in Theoria videntur certissima, quae in praxi
satis long nonnunquam a vero recedunt. Si quis mihi certas observationes
quarundam distantiarum and quidem Fixarum, circa Eclipticam and Aequatorem
existentium, illis ipsis Instrumentis, Dioptris Telescopicis-instructis habitas
exhiberet: (utpote distantiam Lucidae a Palilicio; Palilicii a Polluce;
Pollucis a Regulo; Reguli a Spica; Spicae a Boreal. sinist. manus Serpentarii;
Boreal. sinist. manus Serpentarii ab Aquila; Aquila a Marcab; and Marcab a
Lucida Arietis) vellem protinus de rei illius certitudine and meum quale quale
judicium far; sed antequam eas observationes obtineam, judicium suspendo.
Interea utiq. fateor; si quis adminiculo minoris cujusdam Instrumenti
observationes corporum Coelestium peragere potest, multo sane illum esse
feliciorem, variis de causis, eo, qui per majora id praestare allaborat.
Rations dividendi Instrumenta, diversae quidem mihi probe cognitae sunt;
easque etiam in usum transtuli; number autem sint eaedem quas Clarissimus Dominus
Hookius novit, ac invenit, me prorsus latet: Si illi non adversum est, rogo, ut
praecipuas communicet, ego ut meas intelligat rursus studebo.

Since which time I have not sent any other description of instruments, save
that of the manner of making and using a Tube for a 60 foot Glass, which I am
much pleased to find he makes use of, and should gladly have communicated any
thing further, if I had not found they were esteemed insignificant. It did much
trouble me, I confess, that I could not prevail with him to make use of
Telescopical Sights at least, since with less trouble he would have afforded
the World Observations, and a Catalogue of the Stars, ten times more exact. And
I am the more sorry to find that he has proceeded to finish his Machina
Coelestis, by instruments not more accurate then those of Ticho, and that he
still remains in the same opinion of Telescopical Sights, and other
improvements of instruments. For page 293. of this first Part of his Machina
Coelestis, speaking concerning Sights, he says, Possibly some may wonder that I
do not make use of Telescopical Sights, since they are by some accounted better
and more accurate, insomuch that there is one in the World has proceeded so
far, as to suppose Telescopical Sights to be ten, twenty, thirty, nay forty
times more accurate then the common Sights; and that it is possible to make an
instrument of a Span Radius to do more with Telescopical Sights, then an
instrument of 60 foot with the common Sights. 'Twould be a thing of much moment
could it be done, and not to be valued by money, but many things do seem true
in the Theory, which do not answer upon Experience. You may perceive by
comparing this slender Resutation with his Letter before, who he means by the
Assertor of Telescopical Sights. But I am troubled he should think them so
slight as not to deserve one trial in seven years time, especially since by
explaining the manner of making use of them much in the same sense with that
which I sent him, he seems to have understood enough of the way to have made
use of it if he would. As to his Objection, That the Glasses are apt to be
broke, and the Pins or Threads are apt to be bent and broke, there is not the
least color for it, for they cannot without much labor and design be broken
or put out of order, but if they were, it might as well be said, that the
Plumb-line of any of his instruments may be broken, or his Sights bended, and
the like, and therefore those instruments were not to be used. But these
Objections I shall not urge against his instruments, nor a great many other I
could produce of lesser moment, but only this one which is very fundamental,
and cannot any ways be helped but by the help of Glasses, and that is, It Is
impossible with Sights made after Ticho's or Hevelius his way, to distinguish
any distance in the Heavens less then half a minute, or thirty Seconds, and
hardly one of a hundred can distinguish a minute.

And this being proved, what will become of all the machinations and
contrivances for greater instruments, to show the Divisions of single or double
Seconds? May not single minutes, nay half minutes, by the help of Diagonal
Divisions, be sufficiently distinguished in an instrument of three foot Radius?
What need is there then of all the other cumber? Certainly any one that will
but try with the one and the other instrument, will find himself able to do as
much with an instrument of three foot, as with one of threescore, since the eye
cannot distinguish a less Angle, at least none that I have yet met with
hitherto. Who is there that by his bare eye can distinguish any of the
Telescopical spots in the Moon, though some of them are above a minute in
Diameter? As for instance, Who can see Mount Sinai, so called by Hevelius,
which is a bright spot in a dark field, and consequently must appear near two
minutes in Diameter to the naked eye? Or who can see the Palus Mareotis, or the
Lacus niger, which are two dark spots in light fields, and each more then a
minute in Diameter? Now if the eye cannot distinguish a smaller object then
appears within the angle of half a minute, it is not possible to make any
observation more accurate, be the instrument never so large.

Now that any one may presently satisfy himself of the truth of what I assert,
concerning the limited power of the naked eye, as to the distinguishing of
Angles; Let him take a sheet of white Paper, and thereon draw two parallel
Lines, as OO, and P P, in the 28th. Figure, at four or five inches distance,
then draw as many other small lines between them at right angles to them, and
parallel one with another, as he thinks convenient, as aa, bb, cc, dd, ee, ff,
gg, hh, ii, etc. and let them be drawn distant from each other an inch, then
let him alternately blacken or shadow the spaces between them, as between aa
and bb, between cc and dd, between ee and ff, between gg and hh, between ii and
kk, between ll and mm, etc. leaving the other alternately white, then let him
expose this Paper against a Wall open to the light, and if it may be so that
the Sun may shine on it, and removing himself backwards for the space of 287
feet, let him try whether he can distinguish it, and number the dark and light
spaces, and if his eyes be so good that he can, then let him still go further
backwards and backwards from the same, till he finds his eyes unable any longer
to distinguish those Divisions, there let him make a stand, and measure the
distance from his eye to the aforesaid Paper, and try by calculation under what
Angle each of those black and white spaces appears to his eye, for by that
means it will be manifest how small an Angle his eye is capable of
distinguishing, and beyond which it cannot reach: Which being once known, he
has a Standard, by which he is able to limit the bigness and exactness of his
Instruments, if he make use of common Sights, beyond which all magnitude and
curiosity is not only useless, but of much detriment upon many accounts.

This is that Consideration which I could wish had occurred both to Ticho Brahe
and to Hevelius, especially to the latter, who has so earnestly endeavored to
outdo the former, and for the accomplishment thereof, seems to have spared no
charge, labor, or endeavor he was able to expend. I hope at least that this
public notice will for the future engage all such as shall attempt this Work,
to be as sollicitous about assisting the Eye in the discovery of the parts of
the Object, as of distinguishing the Divisions of the Instrument, for the doing
of the one without being able to reach the other, will avail nothing.

Those therefore that desire or need Instruments to make Observations to
Seconds, must take another course then any that I know yet described. It Is true
indeed, That Altitudes of the Sun may be taken, with the Sights commonly used
for that purpose, to what accurateness is desired, if the Instrument be large
enough, because the Image of the Sun being transmitted by the upper Sight
through a small round hole, is represented within a Circle upon the lower
Sight, and by means of the eyes approaching near that Sight, it is possible by
Instruments large enough, to arrive at the accurateness of a Second, in
Observations made of that kind. And somewhat of this may be done also by the
Moon, when very bright and clear, but in all the other celestial Bodies it has
never yet been done.

But then if we compare even this way with that of Telescopes, caeteris
paribus, we shall find it much short, both as to clearness and distinctness,
and therefore even here also Telescopical Sights are to be preferred, as I
shall sufficiently manifest hereafter more at large, when I come to describe my
own Instruments for this purpose; for I doubt not but to make it sufficiently
plain, That by the help of an Instrument I have contrived, of three foot
Radius, I will be able to make all Observations whatsoever, ten times more
accurate, excepting those of the Sun, then any one can make with the largest
Instrument, described either by Ticho or Hevelius, and to manage the same with
a quarter the trouble, clutter, and Apparatus necessary to either of theirs,
and to make the Divisions as accurate and sensible as can be desired.

For the doing of which, I will show, First, How to make the Plain of the
Instrument, that it shall not be subject to bending or warping, and yet be so
light as to be easily manageable. Secondly, How to make the Divisions on that
Instrument, so as to distinguish certainly and exactly to Seconds, without any
trouble, or wearying the sight. Thirdly, I will show how to make the Sights of
that Instrument, so as to distinguish the parts of the Object to Seconds, if
need be, even by those who cannot distinguish to Minutes with common Sights,
certainly, and without fallacy or error. Fourthly, How to make the Sights, so
as to see two Objects, though never so far distant, with one glance of the eye.
And Fifthly, I will show how to adjust the Perpendicular, so as to set it
exactly upright and plain to a Second, so that if it meets with a diligent,
accurate, and experienced Observator, it will serve to make as curious
Observations as are hitherto desirable. Sixthly, I will show a way how to fix
this Instrument, either for taking Altitudes or Azimiths, so as to be
manageable with the least trouble imaginable, for Observations of that kind,
and to be always steady and fixed in any Perpendicular posture, to whatever
Azimith it be applied. Seventhly, I will explain an exact way for fixing the
Instrument, so as to take the Distances of any two Stars, or celestial Object,
and several other contrivances of the like nature. But of each of these
hereafter, after I have examined over the several particulars mentioned by
Hevelius, in his Descriptions of the Instruments and Contrivances made use of
by himself.

To pass by then his long Preface, and the Discourse of Instruments in general,
which he has premised in the first Chapter; I shall proceed to an examination
of those Instruments of his own, which he does more fully and particularly
describe.

The first of which kind I find to be a Quadrant of Brass, which he describes
in the second Chapter, and begins with that first, as being an Instrument which
he least esteemed, and which at length he made no use of, though for many
Reasons I think of a quantity big enough, to be as good, nay better, then any
he made use of. But of that anon.

This Brass Quadrant was of three foot Radius, and so well fitted with cross
Bars, and strengthened, that it was not subject to warp or bend; it had also a
convenient Pedestal, and was made easy to be removed from place to place; it
was suspended by a Cylinder placed on the backside, in the Center of Gravity
of the Quadrant, and could by this means more easily be moved to and fro to
take any Altitude, then that way of Ticho's, who fixed his Cylinder at the upper
corner: But it has this of inconvenience that Ticho's has not, namely, That
the Plumb-Line or Perpendicular will be longer before it settle, and the
Instrument somewhat more apt to warp. The Sights of it are the same with that
of Ticho, and indeed the best of Common Sights, now commonly every where made
use of in Instruments of that bigness, but far inferior to those which are made
of Glasses, as I shall afterward prove.

The way of Sights which he describes, page 98. for taking the Altitude of the
Sun, is very good, but yet far inferior to one fitted with the Object-Glass of
a Telescope, though he had omitted the Tube, for he might thereby have enlarged
the hole of the upper Sight to what bigness he pleased, and consequently have
made the image of the Sun as bright as it should be thought convenient, and
that without any manner of Penumbra, if the lower Sight were placed at the due
distance of the Focus of that Object-Glass. And therefore I do wonder at his
carefulness to inform his Reader aright, for fear he should understand a
Telescope by the Tube he made use of, to keep off the adventitious light from
the lower Sight, saying, page 99 Per Tubum autem mi Lector non intelligo
Telescopium aliquod lentibus instructum, sed plane nudum ex charta constructum
Tubulum, as if he had some dread of making use of Glasses in any of his Sights.
Whether it were, that he supposed Glasses to have some hidden, un-intelligible,
and mysterious way of representing the Object, or whether from their fragility,
or from their uncertain refraction, or from a supposed impossibility of fixing
them to the Sights, or whether from some other mysterious cause, which I am not
able to think of or imagine, I cannot tell. Sure I am, that none of these I
have named, are any thing at all considerable Objections against their use, and
I have been so fully satisfied of the exceeding great use, nay absolute
necessity of them in curious and exact Observations, that I do assure him there
is not, nor can be any considerable Objection against them, which cannot easily
be answered, nor any inconvenience, which cannot with ease be obviated and
rectified; of which I shall say more hereafter.

The Divisions of it were made wholly by himself, with extraordinary labor and
curiosity, insomuch that he says, he could not only distinguish each minute of
a Degree, but almost every quarter of a minute, sufficiently accurate for his
Common Sights, if he could have only distinguished every half minute, and
indeed much more then most men's eyes are able to reach. He seems to have been
at infinite trouble and pains, to perform the Divisions made by the help of
Diagonals, cutting parallel Circles, a way made use of by Ticho, and now so
commonly known, that I think I need not spend time in the Explication thereof;
only I must take notice, That whereas he supposes these Circles to be equally
distant, he ought to have placed their Distances according to the Proportions
of the differences of the Secants of some ten minutes, next successively
following one another in some Degree of the Quadrant, which is easy to
determine, from the Distance of the two extreme or bounding Circles; of which
more hereafter.

Now though the Circles ought not according to the strict Rules of Geometry, to
be equally distant from each other, as Hevelius seems to suppose, yet I
confess, unless the space wherein these Circles lie be very large, and the
parts of a Degree that are to be distinguished, very small, there is no
necessity of so curiously distinguishing those unequal Distances, but they may
serve well enough for use, if they be taken equal, as Hevelius supposes, and
indeed much more accurate, then it is possible to distinguish the Object by the
bare eye; and therefore I shall not need to insist upon the further Explication
thereof, especially because when I come to show a more accurate way of Sights,
I shall also show a much more accurate way of Division, then either of those
two of Ticho Brahe, or this set down by Hevelius, which is much the same with
one of those which was 100 years since made use of by Ticho, and described, and
is by him attributed to an English Mathematicians.

But because this industrious and careful Person put himself to the trouble, of
making and examining the Divisions himself, I could heartily have wished he had
thought upon some such way as this, which I here describe, and call a
Compendium of Diagonal Divisions, it being a way, whereby as ^9/90 of the
trouble is saved, in performing the manual operation thereof, so I judge it to
be much more certain, exact and plain, then the other way of Diagonals. My
Reason for the first is plain, The Division of one Degree serving for the whole
ninety: And my Reasons for the second are, First, Because it is much plainer to
be distinguished, then by the help of the edge of a Ruler, lying over the
Diagonals, one being able to see but one part of the Diagonal. And Secondly, I
think it much better then a small fiducial Thread, which is very apt to be
bended and broken, if it lies close to the Superficies of the Diagonal, and if
it lies at a distance, a skew glance of the eye will much alter the seeming
intersection of the Diagonals, which in this way are both prevented. The way
then in short is nothing but this; Take a thin piece of clear Looking-glass
Plate, well smoothed and polished on bothsides, and large enough one way to
cover the whole breadth of the Rim of the Quadrant, on which the Diagonals were
to be made, and the other way to cover two or three Degrees, (this I do the
bigger, that the sides of the Arm may not shadow or darken the Divisions and
numbrings.) Suppose a a a a in the 29th. Figure, Plate 2. to represent such a
Plate, upon this Plate describe with great care a Degree of the Quadrant you
would have divided, and complete it with all its parallel Circles and
Diagonals, as you would have done any one Degree upon the Quadrant, and if the
Rim of the Quadrant be very broad in proportion to its Radius, you may by the
Table of natural Secants or Tangents, set the parallels at their due Distances,
but if the Rim be narrow, 'twill be sufficiently accurate to make their
Distances equal. These Divisions must be done with Compasses, pointed with
small Diamant Points, in the manner of those wherewith Glasiers cut their
Glass. The Glass being thus divided and lined, number the Diagonals, and place
it in the Frame of the Ruler, with the lined side next the Quadrant, so that
moving it to and fro, the side of the Glass may immediately touch the Brass Rim
of the Quadrant. This Brass Rim must be divided into 90 equal parts or Degrees*
and at each Division straight Lines drawn from the Circumference toward the
Center, the whole breadth of the Limb, (at least as much as is made use of for
the Glass-Plate, for the breadth of the Diagonals) the Frame to carry this
Plate is a convenient Cavity, left in the moveable Arm of the Quadrant, the
whole manner of which will be better understood by the Delineation thereof, to
which I shall therefore refer the Reader. The Distances of the parallel Circle;
if unequal, may be easily set down true, according to the numbers of natural
Tangents or Secants, with a pair of Compasses, contrived like Beam-Compasses,
but having its Points to be set at any distance, desired by the help of a
Screw, moving upon one side of the Beam, which I may have occasion to describe
elsewhere more properly, and therefore will here omit it.

Next, If this way had not pleased, I could have wished he had known this
following, which is altogether as easy, and as Geometrically true, which I
have contrived, and have made small Instruments thereby to show very minute
Divisions, very easily and very plainly. I strike then upon the Limb of the
Quadrant I would divide, being first made exceeding smooth and plain, a Circu^e
very fine, and as lightly as possibly I can, so it be but discernable, and by
the help of a very large Quadrantal Dividing Plate of ten foot Radius, I divide
the said Quadrant in the faint Circle abovementioned, into 90 parts or
Degrees, then by a peculiar contrivance of a very curious Point that strikes
with a Spring, which I describe in another Discourse, the said Degrees are
marked upon the Plate by curious, small, round and deep holes, these are by
another Line without it, which is divided and figured the Common way,
distinguished and numbered by Figures, according to the Common manner. Then for
the sub-Divisions, I make a small Hold-fast by a Screw, which is fixed on to
the moveable Arm of the Quadrant, this serves to hold the end of a Diagonal
Hair, the other end of which is strained over the Supplementary Degree, till it
lies directly over some prickt-Hole of the curious Divisions, on the Limb of
the Quadrant, this gives me the sub-Divisions of the Quadrant, to what
accurateness I desire. The Supplementary Degree is a Degree of a very large
Circle, put on upon a small Rule, fixed on to the side of the moveable Arm,
whose Magnitude and Distance is found by this Proportion, as the Distance
between the end of the small Hold-fast and the pointed Circle, is to the Radius
of that Circle, so make the Distance between the said End and the Supplementary
Circle to the Radius of that Circle. This will be more plain by a Scheme.

Let aaa in the 30th. Figure represent a Quadrant, bbb a very fine Circle,
struck on the Limb of the Quadrant, from the Center l, which by a large
Quadrant of 10 foot Radius, I divide into Degrees, and by a springing Point
strike so many small Points, and number them to 90. beginning at m, and
numbering toward i. Let dd represent the moveable Arm, cc the hold-fast, fixed
upon the side of that Arm, which by a small Screw pincheth and holds fast a
very fine Hair at k, ee the small Ruler fixed at right Angles, with the Line
lkf, in this Line (through the Points l and k) I take a Point, as f, and
through f I strike a part of a Circle fg, whose Center is somewhere in the Line
fkl produced, which I find by resolving this Proportion, as ki is to li, so
will kf be to the Radius of the Supplementary Circle fg, which will fall
somewhere in fkl produced, toward l, then take a Degree of that Circle, which
will extend from f to g, and divide it into as minute Divisions as are
necessary, and number them from f to g. Now to find what Angle the Sight dd
makes with the Sight mm, I strain the Hair hk, till I find it lie over the
next Division Point toward the right hand, and observe in the Ruler ee, what
part of a Degree is there marked, and on the Circle bbb, what Degree is marked,
the sum of both which gives me the true Measure of the Angle ddlm. But this
only by the By, and I will not now further enlarge on the Explication thereof,
designing it for another Discourse, where I shall describe various, Mechanical
and Practical ways, of accurately dividing Lines, into any assignable number of
equal or proportional parts.

To proceed then where I left off, to the examination of the Instruments of
Hevelius, I find that together with the Brass Quadrant I was speaking of, he
describes two Contrivances about it; The first is, How to set it presently to
an upright, without the trouble of turning the Screws in the Pedestal, which is
plain enough, and so much the better; but it has this of inconvenience, that
it must be altered for every Azimith, which is a very great one, and which by
another way altogether as easy and plain, may be avoided; of which more
hereafter.

Another Contrivance about this Instrument, is a small Screw, for moving it and
keeping it steady in any posture in the same Azimith, which is convenient
enough, but will not perform what he afterward supposes it capable of, as I
shall afterward show.

The second Instrument, which in the third Chapter, page 102, 103, etc. 108. he
describes, is a Sextant of Brass, of three foot Radius, carefully made, and
divided with the same care and after the same way as the former. The Sights
also are much the same, only whereas in the Quadrant he makes use of a Plate,
with parallel edges for the Sight that is at the center, and furthest from the
eye; in this he makes use of a Cylinder, which way also Ticho made use of 100
years ago, and has been ever since made use of. The other Sights next the eye
are the same with the former: There is nothing singular in the Pedestal, nor in
the Ball and Socket, only it is somewhat bigger then ordinary. His way of moving
and fixing the Rule of it is convenient enough, and the same with his
Instrument for moving and fixing his Quadrant, but it is not capable of
performing what he promises for it.

The third Instrument, which in the fourth Chapter he describes, is a Sextant
of Iron, of four foot Radius, to be managed only by one Observator, by putting
the Center next the eye. The whole Instrument is little differing from the
former, save only that the Cylinder at the Center which is here next the eye,
is covered with another hollow Cylinder, which is voluble and convertible about
the former, and carries two small Slits for the Sights, which performs the
same as the other Sights, but nothing more, and as the Author himself affirms,
is not so accurate for use as the other Sextant, where there are two
Observators, and therefore was seldom made use of by him. But I shall anon show
a way by which one Observator alone shall be able to take any Distance to a
Semicircle with much more accurateness and convenience then any two Observators
can; and therefore will be an Instrument of the best use for Astronomical and
Nautical affairs, for the perfecting both which I design it.

The fourth Instrument, which in the fifth Chapter, from page 114, etc. to 123.
he describes, is a Quadrant of six foot Radius, whose Frame was all made of dry
Oak, but the Limb, Sights, Sockets, etc. were made of Brass, divided so as to
see every quarter of a Minute distinctly, the Sights the same as in the first
Quadrant, and the way of suspending it not much differing, save only, whereas
in the former the Pedestal was moveable, in this it is fixed, which is much
better. And the Instrument is kept in an Aequilibrium, by the help of
counterpoises hung at the end of a string, and cast over a Pully, as is more
visible by his Description. But this (as all other wooden Instruments do) he
found to shrink and warp, and consequently to lose its exactness, and therefore
he made little or no use thereof, but laid it aside, and made himself better of
Brass.

The fifth Instrument described in the sixth Chapter, from page 123. to 132. is
a Sextant of Wood of six foot Radius, made in all particulars like the former
Sextant of Brass of three foot; nor has it any other contrivance about it
considerable, save only a rest made to slip up and down for the Observators to
rest their Elbows upon. But this Instrument also he found to be vitiated by the
shrinking and warping of the Wood, and therefore he laid that by also, and
seldom made use of it.

The sixth Instrument is a large Octant of Wood of eight foot Radius; this is
made exactly according to the Form of Ticho's Octant, and serves for taking any
Distance not exceeding 45 degrees. The Sights near the eye are made exactly as
the former, but moveable, so as to slip upon the Limbs of the Octant; the
Divisions of it are performed by Diagonals as before, and gives a greater
niceness of Division then the Eye is capable of distinguishing in the Object,
and therefore of little use.

And thus far the Author proceeded in Ticho's way. But finding these
Instruments which were made for the most part of Wood to be subject to faileur,
he aspired to get better Instruments made all of Brass or Iron, and wholly laid
aside the rest as altogether useless. And I cannot but very much approve of his
Judgment in so doing, for certainly caeteris paribus Instruments, well made of
Brass or Iron, are much to be preferred before the best of Wood. But yet
neither are all manner of Wooden Instruments to be rejected; nor are all sorts
of Metalline Instruments free from error, though it is confessed, if they be
made and used with skill, they suffer not any considerable or sensible
variation. First, I say, Wooden Instruments may be so contrived as very near to
equalize those of Metal, the Joints and Plates for Divisions only being made of
Metal, they being very easy to be rectified before, and examined after every
time of using. Such a one was contrived by Sir Christopher Wren, being two
square Wooden Tubes or Telescopes, joined together at the end next the Object
by a Joint of Brass, and the Angle made by the opening of them, measured by a
straight Rule equal to half the Radius, divided by Diagonals into 5000 equal
parts, which will by the help of a Table of natural Signs or Subtenses, show
the parts in Degrees, Minutes, and Seconds, of which I think I acquainted
Hevelius some years since. Next Brass and Metalline Instruments, if they be not
very carefully fortified against it, are more apt to bend then even those of
Wood. And the best way I have found to secure them true and plain in all
postures, is to lay them on a Table or Frame of Wood, well fortified underneath
against bending, and by the help of small Screws in several parts of the
Instrument to adjust it upon that Frame; the whole Table and Quadrant being so
counterpois'd, as to be easily moveable and fixed in any posture. But Hevelius
is pleased, as I said before, wholly to lay aside all manner of Wooden
Instruments as useless, and to endeavor the obtaining of Instruments of Brass
or Iron. Nam (says he page 136.) cum longa experientia probe tandem didicerim,
multo securius esse ex solido prorsus metal^o obtinere Instrumenta, tum quo
majora and ampliora eo esse accuratiora and absolutiora, adhaec prioribus
admodum Tichonicum constructis plurima deesse quibus ditari merito deberent,
and quod iisdem de causis omnino necessum sit, ut part corrigerentur and
meliorentur, tam qua eorum materiam fructuram commotionem facilitandam
divisionem quam alia diversa subsidia and adminicula, quo sic aptius,
exquisitius, promptius, minorique labor, etc. ac temporis dispendio possent
Astris exponi observationesque peragi. Idcirco omnem curam atque operam pro
tenui ingenii mei facultatumque mearum modulo a Deo concesso (reliqua
sublimioribus ingeniis atque ampliori fortuna Viris, sive posteritati nostrae
relinquens) adhibui: quo minora, tam lignea universa ab Astris plane removerem,
atque in ejus locum ex puro solidoque metallo, organa mihi compararem: and
quidem ejusmodi, quae insigni amplitudine essent conspicua, simul commoditate
regendi, simul aliquanto accuratioribus adhuc divisionibus, ad paulo
subtiliores observationes obtinendas gauderent. His Reasoning indeed is very
good, that since he had from much and long experience learned, that Instruments
of Wood after Ticho's manner, were not to be trusted to by reason of their
warping and shrinking, and consequently that Instruments of solid Metal were
much to be preferred before them, and also that the larger the Instruments
were, the more exactly they could be made and divided, and that the more easy
they were to be moved, and the more steady and sure they were to be fixed in any
position, the more convenient they were for use, he had therefore rejected all
those Instruments which he had made after Ticho's way; and had endeavored to
procure for his own use such as were complete, both for their matter and form,
having caused them to be made of Metal that which could not be subject to the
inconvenience of warping, swelling, or shrinking, with the variety of Weather,
or length of Time: And likewise of such a bigness as was capable of receiving
more nice and curious Divisions; and in the dividing them had found such
contrivances, and used such diligence, that they were more then ordinarily true
and exact. As far as he has gone on with these Designs, he seems to have been
even profuse in his expenses, and exceeding bountiful of his own care, labor,
and diligence; but I could have wished heartily that it had been some other way
employed. Those Instruments which he chiefly labored to perfect, he professes
to be Quadrants, Sectants, and Octants, after Ticho's manner, rejecting all
other Instruments of whatsoever Figures, whether Radii, Astrolabs, Zodiacal or
Aequinoctial Rings, Parallactical Instruments or Hoops, as more troublesome,
and less accurate. But whether he has in this his choice been rightly advised,
I shall hereafter have more occa sion to examine when I come to describe an
Apparatus of Instruments necessary for such a one as designs to promote and
perfect the knowledge of the Celestial Bodies and their motions; wherein I
shall show that of some Instruments rejected by him, there is a use absolutely
necessary.

The Instruments therefore that he begins with are three small Quadrants of
Brass; the first of two foot, the second of eighteen inches, and the third of
one foot Radius. Each of these Instruments, he says, were made somewhat larger
then common Quadrants, to wit, of an arch of 110 degrees, which is to no other
end, but only in order to show the subdivisions of each degree of the Quadrant,
by the help of a new invented Perpendicular of Brass wherewith each of them was
furnished. This Invention is by him highly extolled for most excellent and
useful; and to that end is made use of for the division of all his other
Instruments, both great and small. Hear what he says of it: Quiscunque hujus
rei (to wit, the new way of subdividing the degrees of the Quadrant) primus
fuerit repertor, sublimes profecto cogitationes exercuit, hoc ipso ad
congruentem effectum dedu^endo, and inter praestantissima inventa meritissimo
refertur, quod etiam minora Instrumenta remotis omnibus transversalibus Lineis,
in singula minuta eorumque particulas minimas subdividi liceat. He seems indeed
both here, and elsewhere in many other places of his Book to be highly possessed
with admiration of the sublimity, subtilty, and extreme usefulness of this
invention, and seems very much concerned that the Author thereof should not
certainly be known, but dares not father it upon any one positively. He says
that one Benedictus Hedreus in a Work of his which he published Anno 1643.
about the new and accurate Structure of the Geometrical Astrolab, describes it;
but he gathers that he was not the Inventor himself, but rather that he got
both this Invention and the whole Quadrant, which he describes out of the
Observatory, or rather Repository of Ticho Brahes Instruments, for that it
seems Ticho was the Inventor of this way of division; and yet, as I noted
before, he preferred the way by Diagonals much before it, whatever Reason
Hevelius had to be of a contrary Judgment. What this way is I shall by and by
explain. But in the mean time I am sorry to find Hevelius joining with Hedreus
in the Opinion or Demonstration, as Hevelius calls it, that the Sub-divisions
by Diagonals is not capable of a Geometrical demonstration, especially in
lesser Instruments, which have need of many Circles. I confess I understand not
their meaning nor reasoning, nor why it should be less demonstrable in lesser
then in greater Instruments; since it is very easily demonstrable both in
greater and lesser Instruments, and as Geometrical as any other way of Division
whatsoever: the Diagonal Line being always a piece of a Tangent Line, that is
to say, the spaces between the Parallel Circles upon the Diagonals are always
to be in proportion to the difference of some Tangent Lines, and the different
distance of those Circles from the Center are always in proportion of some
Secants: And the way of finding what those Tangents or Secants are, and
consequently what must be those Distances of the Parallel Circles I mentioned
briefly before, and shall now more fully demonstrate. From which I will make it
evident, that the Theory was not as Hedreus and Hevelius have supposed,
incapable of Calculation or Mechanical Demonstration.

But first give me leave to show you what way Ticho Brahe made use of to
demonstrate, or rather to find out the true Angle unto each equal Distance,
which I find set down at the latter end of his Mechanics, as a Supplement to
the rest. Divisionis puncta habentis transversalia modus talis est, ut 34
exprimit figura in qua singula denominata per Lincolas in december interstitia
aequalia discriminatum punctis notata sunt, sicque regula fiduciae quodcunque
horum inter observandum transiens ipsum minutum gradus, quod quaerebatur promit
aut aliquotam ejus partem, prout ab hoc vel illo puncto removeri discernitur.
Ut vero hoc etiam demonstratum hic addam ob sciolos forte quosdam qui ea quae
non satis capiunt carpunt sic habe.

In Figura 34. Sit A centrum Instrumenti ejusque Semidiamiter AO, assumitur
autem OI, Particula in qua divisio ista per lineas transversas fit ea
proportione quae est 1 ad 48. qualis in meis Instrumentis ut plurimum
usurpatur. Cumque AI ponatur partium 10000000000. integri canonis majoris
Rhetici, erit earundem OI 208333333 utpote pars quadragesima octava radii Arcus
^E sit 20. and IV. 10. horum sinus 29088779 YI. Sinus autem secundus eorundem
42308. VY. qui additus NV quod aequale est OI facit NY 208375641. In triangulo
igitur NYI ad Y rectangulo nota sunt duo Latera NY and YI. quare datur basis IN
210396208. una cum angulo NIY 82. 3. 10. 47. cui additus YIA 89. 50. conficit
NIA. 171. 53. 10. 47. Basis vero NI in triangulo rectangulo NVI dividatur in
december parts aequales ut conveniant uni minuto 21039621 representatae per IB.
Moxque in triangulo obliquengulo BIA. dantur duo latera IB and IA. radius, una
cum angulo BIA, qui idem est cum NIA 171. 53. 10. 47. prius reperto: quare
innotescit angulus IAB 1. 1. 7. qui tantummodo 1. esse deberet, ita ut major
sit saltem 1. 7. differentia sane insensibili: similiter si FI assumatur, noven
particularum erunt eae 189356587 habebimusque rursus triangulum FIA in quo
dantur duo latera FI modo dictum una cum radio IA. and angulo FIA ab iisdem
comprehenso velut antea exurgitque angulus IAF 9. 1* 6. qui debebat esse 9
exact deficiente in ultimo minuto FN. 1. 6. Porro ut circa medium idem
tentetur quod nunc apud extremitates fecimus inveniuntur eadem qua antea primo
Angulus IAH 5. 3. 6. abundans 3. 6. Secundo Angulus NAH 4. 56. 55. deficiens 3.
5. Patet itaque quod maxima differentia, sive adjectiva, sive ablativa in hac
pragmatia proveniat minimum quid ultra 3. quam subtilitatem visus acumen
discernere in quocunque tandem instrumento nullatenus sustinet, quae etiam per
se otiosa est, quare frustra nodum in Scirpo quaerunt, si qui hanc nostram
satis accuratam distributionis formam cavillari praesumant. By which it is
evident that Ticho understood an inequality, and what it was, and that it was
insensible, and so not to be regarded. Now it is to me very wonderful indeed
that Ticho having thought of a way of calculating this inequality, should not
think of an easy expedient of reforming it by putting the Parallel Circles at
unequal, but their due proportionate distances. And it is much more strange that
Hevelius should still affirm it to be a way not Geometrical: For to any one
that considers this proportion, the inclination of a Diagonal Line being given
to find the true distances of the Parallel Circles that shall divide any
assignable part thereof in any proportion assigned: Nothing can be more easy:
and for more expedition use may be made of the Table of Natural Tangents which
is ready calculated to hand. For instance: Let BC represent a Diagonal Line
subtending an angul of 10. at the Center A, produce the said Line BC to F, and
let fall a Perpendicular, from the Center A to E. Suppose then the Angle at B
to be one Degree, then is BE the Tangent of 89. to the Radius AE. and EC is the
Tangent of 88. 50. and the differences between the Tangents of 88 50, 88, 51.
88, 52. 88, 53. 88, 54. 88, 55. 88, 56. 88, 57. 88, 58. 88, 59. and 89. gives
the Distances of the several Circles, C. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 B. desired.

Since the Reading of this Lecture, Dr. Wallis has also described another way
of finding these Distances, which he has communicated in a Letter to Hevelius,
and I have prevailed with the said Doctor to permit it to be here printed,
being very ingenious and accurate, and proceeding by a differing method.

Dr. Wallis his Letter to Hevelius.
-- SED and est cur communi omnium Literatorum nomine rebus praesertim caelicis
addictorum reddam gratias, tum ob immensos in tanto apparatu sumptos erogatos,
tam praetiosum conquirendo supellectilem Astronomicam, graphice hic descriptam,
tum ob indefessos labores, insomnes noctes diesque occupatissimos coelestis
acquirendis observationibus impensos; quarum vim ingentem, Thesauram supra
aurum and margaritus praetiosum erudito orbi jam ante dederis, plura daturus
indies, verum non est ut sperem me verbis aequare posse tua merita, qui ex
privato penu sumptos plane Regios erogasti; onusque suscepisti non infeliciter,
Herculeis Humeris (ne Atlanteis dicam) formidandum.

Operis partem maximam jam evolvi, miratus inibi tanta molis Instrumentorum
ingeniosissimum regimen, and subtilissimam divisionum administrationem, cum
pari diligentia conjunctam in Regulis and Dioptris solicit curandis, and
quidem si hoc deesset reliquus in cassum caederet labor; quippe exiguus and vix
evitabilis in Regulis aut Dioptris error, totum Instrumentum vitiaret, omnesque
inficeret observationes, sed singulis immorari non licet, unum tamen est quod
attingam breviter, nempe divisiones per Lineas Diagonales, circulos in limbo
concentricos oblique secantes. Hanc dividendi methodum jam diu receptam, ipse
retines and quidem merito, circulosque hos concentricos aequalibus intervallis
disjunctos habes, quod quamvis in exiguorum aut etiam mediocrium Instrumentorum
limbis latioribus aliquid erroris possit inducere in tuis tamen tantae
amplitudinis Instrumentis cum limbis exiguae latitudinis (quod and tu recte
mones) nihil quicquam erit discriminis quod in sensus occurrere possit. Hac
tamen occasine libet hic subjicere, quod ea de re jam olim (circa A. 1650. aut
1651.) meditatus sum, atque apud adversaria mea nunc reperio: nempe si quis
vellet minoris Instrumenti limbum latiorem Lineis Diagonalibus sic dividere,
quibus intervallis oporteat concentricos illos circulos disponere ut angulos
invicem aequales designarent illae cum tranversali intersectiones calculo
Trigonometrico determinare.

Divisio arcus in limbo quadrantis (aliusve ejusmodi Instrumenti) per circulos
concentricos and rectam Diagonalem, sit latitudo limbi (RL=) L, Radius circuli
intimi (AR=) R, extimi (AZ=AL=) LR=Z continentes angulum (RAZ=) A. dividendum
in parts quotlibet aequales (quarum numerus n) rectis a, b, c, etc. (quarum
longitudo quaeritur) facientibus ad RZ diagonalem, angulus a, b, g, d, etc.
adeoque angulus ^ etc. sitque ARZ=O and AZR=V. Datis ergo crucibus R, Z cum
angulo contento A. (adeoque reliquorum summa O + V) inveniuntur reliqui O
obtusus V accutus.) Nam Z + R. Z-R:: Ita tangens ^ tangentem ^ and ^ deinde
cognitis angulis O and ^ (adeoque reliquo a) cum trajecto* latere R habetur
latus a. nempe sin a. R:: sinus O. a. and pari ^

Praxis sit R=1. L=0, 2. Z=1, 2. A=10. ergo ^ 55. tum Z + R=2, 2. ^ cui
respondet angulus 89. 5. 0. 17. proxime. Ergo ^ fere cujus sinus 0, 0174511.
nempe idem qui sinus 0. 59. 59. 43.

Deinde secandus sit A in 10 parts quarum quaelibet sit 1. quaeruntur igitur
a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, 'nempe.

^Praxis altera sit R=1. L=0, 1. Z=1, 1. A=10. ergo ^ cujus tangens 687,
5488693, and 2, 1. 0, 1:: 687, 5488693.32, 7404223=tang. 18. 15. 1. ^ ergo ^
cujus complementum ad semicirculum ^ cujus sinus 0, 0319827. ergo

^ Hactenus adversaria, ubi duos casus expendimus, nempe cum latitudo limbi
ponetur pars quin a and pars decima Radii brevioris, and angulus dividendus 10
minuta prima tanta fere (...), quantum feret vulgaris canon Trigonometricus:
and quidem ultima unitas in ambiguo est nunc justo major nunc justo minor.
Radium autem (ut ego soleo) facio L (non ut plerumque fit 10000000.) quo omnes
multiplicationes and Divisiones per Radium faciendae praecidantur: Adeoq* sinus
habeo pro partibus decimalibus, quibus itaque cum opus est, ciphras praemitto
quo de unius integri loco constet.

Simili processu utendum erit mutatis mutandis si latitudo limbi sumatur in
alia quavis proportione ad Radii longitudinem. Sed commodius erit (ad vitandam
molestiam toties quaerendi partem proportionalem) ut sumatur angulus O commodae
magnitudinis (justis minutis primis determinandae absque annexis secundis
tertiisve) atque ita quaeratur Radii maximi Z longitudo, eodem modo quae
Reliquorum a, b, c, etc. puta si in praxi posteriori sumpto ut prius R=1* and
angulo A=10 sumatur angulus O non qui illic prodit 178, 10, 1, ^ sed potius
178. 10. cujus complementum ad duos Rectos est 10. 50. hujus sinus in ipso
canone habetur 0, 0319922 and reliquorum item a, b, g, d, etc. sinus similiter
ibidem habebuntur, ut una tantum divisione opus sit pro singulis exhibendis
ipsaque Radii Z Longitudo habetur non quidem precise ut prius* 1, 1; sed
proxima (quae itaque sumenda erit) 109996 nempe.

^ similiter omnino res succedit si sumptis Radiis RL cum angulo A quaeramus V
and Radios intermedios, aut sumpto Radio L cum angulis AV quaerantur R and
Radii intermedii.

Verum si limbi latitudo sit Radii non nisi pars trigessima quadragessima,
quinquagessima aut adhuc minor, atque angulus dividendus non quidem 10 minuta
prima sed totidem secunda, aut minor adhuc, subtilior res est quam ut canon
vulgaris Trigonometrious hic adhibeatur; and quae omnem sensum fugit, ipsique
circuli concentrici distantris aequalibus quantum sensu possumus distinguere
invicem disjuncti: quippe unius pollucis pars millesima nedum decies aut
centies millesima minor est discrepantia quam ut sensu: percipi possit. Sed
nimius sum in re levi felicem itaque exeuntem annum tibi comprecatus longa
sequentium serie contrivandum, valere jubeo.


But to proceed. In the next place I think it will be suffiicently plain, to
any one that shall try both the ways, that the Divisions are by Diagonals much
easier distinguished by the eye, then by this way so applauded by Hevelius, and
therefore I cannot choose but conclude with Hevelius, (page 140.) though to a
quite differing end and sense: Sunt igitur splendidissimae tantum speculationes
mentisque ideae quaecunque de Nonianis vel Hedrianis Divisionibus proferuntur.
But because perhaps there may be several persons that have not yet perused this
Book of Hevelius, nor that of Benedictus Hedreus, printed in 1643. nor Ticho's
Mechanics, of a much longer standing, and thence may perhaps not so well
understand what this way of sub-dividing is; give me leave a little to
explicate it, and show you plainly what it is.

The way then as it is described by Ticho Brahe, and ascribed by him to Petrus
Nonius, that excellent Spanish Mathematician, who published it in his learned
Book, de Crepusculis, supposing it also to have been heretofore used by
Ptolomy, but (as Ticho is of opinion) without much reason, is this; Ut ducantur
intra extremum quadrantem alii minores numero 44. successive sese comitantes,
quorum extimus in 89. sequens in 88. tertius in 87. and sic deinceps donec ad
ultimum and intimum perventum fuerit qui 46. portiones habebit. To which
Description published in his Mechanica, he adds in the second Book, de Mundi
Aetherei recensioribus Phenomenis, page 461. Altera Divisio ad Clarissimi
Mathematici Petri Nonii -- imitationem per plures quadrantis arcus introrsum
descriptos and diversimode subdivisos procedit. Etsi autem in hac ipsa imprimis
ingeniosa Nonii inventione, aliquid auctuarii loco expeditius a nobis additum
est, ita ut exterior arcus in plurimas portiunculas dividatur; neque is ordo
aut numerus arcuum sese introrsum concomitantium, quem ille praefinivit sed
multo expeditior and perfectior observetur, tamen quia haec subtilitas cum ad
praxin deventum est plus habeat laboris quam fructus, neque id in recessu
praestet quod prima front pollicetur, ut alibi before ostendemus, idcirco
apud nos dudum in usu esse desiit. [See more of this, page 62. Epistolarum
Astronomicarum.]

From which way of Division, this of Hevelius (which he ascribes to Hedreus,
but is more properly ascribable to Pierre Vernier, as I shall afterward show)
is somewhat different, and possibly might be the same that Ticho Brahe
contrived to compendifie that of Nonius.

The way then is this, described by Hevelius, page 141* Quadrantes
contractiores ita a me sunt adornati, ut limbos eorum tantum in integros and
semigradus distinxerim; quae ut haec distinctio non nemini admodum rudis
videatur, sufficit tamen affatim commonst andis singulis minutis primis;
dummodo perpendiculi ex centro appensi extremitas limbum stringens in certas
particulas sit subdivisa, imo quod magis de quo non nemo sane mirabitur, non
solum haec rudior limbi subdivisio sufficiens exhibendis singulis minutis
primis sed etiam pro denis quinis quinetiam singulis secundis in majoribus
organis si videlicet nostrum Instrumentum directorium adhibeas. Oportet ut
inferior illius pars curiosissime and levissime sit limata and levigata, ut
limbum totum aequabilissime quidem tangat, sed nullibi nimis adhaereat; tum
quovis loco liberrime pendeat atque divisionis tam quadrantis quam perpendiculi
observator rite discernere valeat. Dividitur autem istud perpendiculum hac
ratione, si videlicet spatium 31 semigraduum in limbo perpendiculi
accuratissime denotes; idque primum in tres aequales parts, rursum quamlibet
trientem in december dividas; atque ita obtinebis spatiola paulo admodum ampliora
quam spatiola unius semigradus, quia intercapedo 31 partium in 30 transmutata
necessario fiunt modice ampliores. Attamen si divisiones perpendiculi ad limbum
quadrantis accedant circa extremitates perpendiculi, discrepantiola illa
divisionum ab invicem vix ac ne vix cognoscitur; circa medietatem vero
perpendiculi satis evidenter. In medio limbo perpendiculi and divisionum
parvulus index and quidem inter 15 and 16 spaciolum constituitur pro
discernendis integris and semi gradibus; quos accurate dictus index indicat,
quando totum spatium perpendiculi in 30 partibus divisum in ipso limbo
quadrantis spatium 31 partium exquisite subtendit. Ea tamen expressa lege si
totum Instrumentum absolute ab omni part sit constructum; quando vero iste
index pauxillum promotior existit integro aliquo vel semigradu certissimum est
indicium, observation iminuta quidem adhaerere aut integro aut semigradui
adnumeranda, si index huic vel illi vicinior est. Cognoscitur autem minutorum
numerus ex eo, quando lineola aliqua divisionum in perpendiculo cum una aliqua
in limbo quadrantis prorsus in unam eandemque coincidit rectam. Nunquam enim
nisi unica lineola in perpendiculo cum altera in quadrante, si exquisite
peracta sunt omnia omnino concurrit. In isto igitur utriusque lineolae concursu
ubi una eademque videlicet constituitur linea est terminus ipsorum minutorum
vel integro gradui vel semi gradui adhaerentium.

This same way is also made use of by Hevelius, for the Division of all his
larger Instruments, as well as for the Division of this smaller, by fixing it
upon the Perpendicular, as he afterward mentions, cap. 15. page 307* where he
also gives a fuller description of it, to which I refer the Reader.

The way indeed is exceeding ingenious, and very much improved by Hevelius, but
yet at the very best it is very difficult, both to make the Divisions, and much
more difficult to distinguish them, as may be plainly enough seen even by that
very Specimen published by Hevelius, in the first and second Figure of the
Plate T. especially if it be viewed with a magnifying Glass or Lens; and I do
wonder that Hevelius did not all this while think of making use of a Lens, to
make the Divisions and Distinctions appear more plain, without which Seconds
are not to be distinguished, by those kinds of Divisions even in an Instrument
of 10 foot Radius, and by the help of it they may be made and distinguished, in
Instruments of a quarter that bulk, as he may find, if he please to make use of
the shallowest Object-Glass of that Microscope which he had from London; he
may, I say, by looking upon the Divisions of the first and second Figures of
the Table T. with his Microscope, plainly detect how far those Divisions are
short of accurateness, and how many faults and inequalities the naked eye and
unmachined hand do commit.

It is therefore one of my ways for dividing and distinguishing Divisions, to
make use of one, two, or three Lenses, whereby not only the eye is very much
eased, but the judgment is very much augmented, and the hand directed, as I
shall afterward explain, when I come to show some particular ways of making
Divisions.

But because this Benedictus Hedreus, from whom Hevelius affirms he received
this invention of dividing the Limb of the Quadrant, was not so ingenuous as to
confess that he received this invention from another, and because perhaps the
Book being small, may have been long since lost and forgotten, having
accidentally met with one, I shall acquaint Hevelius, that one Pierre Vernier
(as he calls himself) Capitain and Chastelain pour sa Majeste au Chasteau*
Dornans, Conseiller, and General de ses Monnoies au Conte de Bourgongne,
printed at Brussels, by Francis Vivien, 1631. (to wit 12 years before Hedreus)
a Treatise in French, which he calls, La construction l'Usage and les
Proprietes du quadrant nouveau Mathematique, comme aussi la construction de la
table des sinus de minute en minutes successivement par un seul maxim. De plus
un abrege desdicts tables en une petite demi page avec son usage: and
finallement la method de trouver les angles d'un triangle par la cognoissance
des costez and les costs par les angles sans l'ayde d'aucune table. In which
he has at large and very plainly described this way of dividing the Quadrant,
to what accurateness is desired, and pretends it to be, as possibly it was, an
invention of his own.

But to return where I left to Hevelius his Division on the Quadrant by the
help of the Brass-arm, I say, against this way, besides what I have already
mentioned, I have a second Objection, and that is, that it requires a most
exceeding great curiosity and care to make that Metal Pendulum or Plumb of
Brass, so as to be exactly of equal weight and make on both sides of the
supposed middle Line, for if it be not so, it may easily vary not only some
Seconds, but even some Minutes from its exact Perpendicularity, and if so, it is
to little purpose all the former curiosity about Subdivisions.

Thirdly, The Perpendicular ought always to be kept very clean from Dust, for
if a little more Dust settle on the one side then on the other, the
Perpendicularity will be vitiated, and all the curiosity else about the
Observation will be lost.

Fourthly, If the Pin on which this Brass Perpendicular hangs be not of some
bigness, it may easily warp, or bend; and if it be of a considerable bigness,
it will not move easily, and consequently the Plumb will not hang tender, but
stiff; in both which cases it can be of no use in the World for Astronomical
Observations. Further, if it hang loose upon the Center, which it must do to
hang tender, then there will lie as material an Objection against it, for its
not moving true upon the Center of the Instrument; and therefore upon the whole
matter I conclude it to be an Invention indeed of great sublimity and
subtleness, but of little or no use for Astronomy, to which Hevelius applies
it. He had much better therefore have been content to have followed Ticho
Brahe; and made use of a common Plumb Line and Diagonal Divisions, where there
is occasion for them, for that is true and practicably capable of exhibiting
the Subdivisions of a Degree, as Minute, as are necessary to common Sights.

In the next place, before he leaves the Descriptions of these three smaller
Quadrants, he mentions an Invention of his whereby he fixes the Quadrant in any
altitude, and easily moves it steadily into any posture desired by the help of
Screws. This Invention of his own contrivance he does indeed very highly
applaud, insomuch that he believes no good Astronomical Observations can be
made without it. But he must pardon me if I am not altogether of his mind; I
grant indeed the thing is exceedingly convenient, in comparison with any yet
used, if it be well made, and that the way of applying it to the Quadrant be
very facil and easy. But it is not always so necessary, but that Observations
may be as conveniently made without it, as I shall afterward show, in the
Description of the moveable Axis, for continuing the Instrument in the Plain of
the Object, whether a Distance or an Altitude be to be taken.

In the next place he proceeds to describe his large Quadrant of Brass adjusted
so as to take Altitudes and Azimuths, of which he makes a full and particular
description; but the most considerable thing that is new in it is, that instead
of a Screw used by Ticho for lifting and moving the Arm with Sights, he makes
use of two Lines poys'd with Plumbets, by the pulling of this or that of which
he is able to raise or sink the Ruler with Sights, all the rest of the
contrivance being to make it stand perpendicularly in any Azimuth, which I
think may be done to greater certainty with less trouble, by a way I shall
afterward show: As an Essential part of this Instrument, he takes occasion to
give the description of the Turret or Observatory which he built for it, and
the several contrivances about it, which I now omit.

The use he made of this Instrument was for the taking the Meridian Altitudes
of the Sun, of which he affirms to have taken a very great number, especially
such as were of principal use for the regulating the motion of the Sun: Such as
the Solstitial and Aequinoctial Altitudes, of which I hope we may expect an
account in the second and third Part of his Machina Caelestis. I know not to
what exactness he has proceeded in taking his Meridian Altitudes of the Sun;
but had he proceeded in the way by Telescopes, he might have taken all his
Altitudes of that kind to a single Second, with great ease and certainty.

And upon this occasion I hope it will not be unacceptable to my Astronomical
Reader to hint a very expeditious and exceeding accurate way of making a
Catalogue of all the visible, as well as the most considerable Telescopical
Stars of the Heaven. For the doing of which there will not need a tenth part so
much time as for the other ways that have already been made use of, and yet
will very much exceed them all in accurateness and certainty. The way then in
short is nothing but this: Let there be made a very large mural Quadrant, or
rather Semicircle, of 30 foot Radius, fixed exactly in the Meridian against a
Wall made of squared Stones, well joynted and cramped together, and settled on a
foundation very firm and solid, to prevent all manner of slaking and swarving.
Let the rim of this be made of Brass Plates, stayed in their due posture by
cramps or bars of Iron fixed in the Wall, by running them with Lead: then
having divided this Semicircle into 180 Degrees, and subdivided each Degree by
the help of Diagonals, on a flat and well polisht Plate of Glass, according to
the way I before described into Minutes and Seconds: adapt to it a 30 foot
Telescope, so that the Tube shall not warp, nor the Glasses deviate out of
their true posture; the Focus of the Object Glass make to be exactly upon the
edge of the Brass Limb, so that by the help of the Eye-glass, which is a deep
Unequal, the punctual place or altitude of a Star to a quarter of a hairs
breadth, even to Seconds of a Minute, may be discovered: the trouble of
dividing this Quadrant will be no more then of one of an ordinary size, the
subdivision of one Degree subdividing and examining all the rest. The way of
making the Tube of the Telescope so as not considerably to bend, may be done
somewhat after that way of stiffning the Tubes of very long Telescopes, which I
communicated to Hevelius, and you will find at large described in this Treatise
of Hevelius: Save only, that instead of Ropes which I first made use of, I
rather commend so many Braces of Wood. Now though notwithstanding all the
Diligence that can be this way used, the Tube do somewhat bend in the middle,
yet it can be of no manner of significancy as to the vitiating the Observation;
since first, the Object Glass always stands in the same posture as to the
Center, and secondly, the Focas thereof is exactly in the edge of the Limb.

Further, to prevent the inconvenience of looking up or in any other uneasy
posture by the help of a reflex Metal one may always look Horizontally, that
is, perpendicularly to the plain of the Wall or Mural Quadrant. And to prevent
the trouble and labor of moving or lifting the Tube by the help of a long yard
poysed upon Centers on a Frame before the said Instrument, both the Tube and
Arm for the Sight, and the Seat on which the Observator sits, may be
counterpoised, so that by turning a Windle, he may easily raise himself with
the Tube to any posture desired. The Object Glass is just before the Center,
and the Eye Glass looks directly on the Divisions of the Limb, and there is
nothing to strain or stir the Instrument it self, nor can the warping of the
Tube, if there should be any, have any effect on the Observation: Of this I may
say more on another occasion. By this means (in one Nights Observation) the
Declinations of some hundreds of Stars may be taken to a Second by one single
Observator, having only one or two Assistants to write down the Observations as
fast as made. And at the same time the right Ascension of every one of them may
be taken by the help of a very accurate Compound-circular Pendulum Clock, which
I shall elsewhere describe, denoting even to ^f a Second of time the appulse of
the Star to the Meridian: There needs indeed great exactness in every part of
this Apparatus, and 'twill not be done without a considerable charge, and much
labor and diligence in the performance thereof; but if we compare it with the
methods and ways that have been hitherto used, we shall certainly find that
the Observations will be near 30 times more accurate, the charge not a quarter,
and the labor not near a tenth part so much as in other ways made use of by
Ticho and Hevelius. And though it may be objected against this way (which
indeed may be much more so against any other) that the refraction of the Air
will considerably vary the Declination of such Stars as are very far South, yet
since the same Instrument affords a way beyond any in the World for the
discovering the several Refractions of the Air at several Altitudes above the
Horizon, to the accurateness of a Second, by taking the Altitude of such Stars
as never set in the North, in the greatest and least Altitude above the
Horizon; a Table of such Refractions will easily rectify the Declination of
the other Stars to as great accurateness. This Subject does deserve a much
larger and more particular Description of every Branch thereof, and the
Encouragement of some Prince, whose Name and Honor will thereby be Registered
among those glorious Celestial Bodies to all Posterity, and the succeeding
Learned World will be obliged to celebrate his memory. But I fear this Age will
hardly yield another Alphonsus, another Ticho, or another Hevelius, who have
not spared to expend their utmost Endeavors in performing this task, though by
other methods. But leaving this for another time, I shall proceed.

In the third place then he goes on to describe his great Horizontal voluble
Brass Quadrant, of which he says, he does not believe that ever the like was
made by any, if the splendid Apparatus and the whole Fabric thereof be
considered. It is in Diameter six foot and an half, and serves, as he affirms,
to take Altitudes to Seconds; but yet he is necessitated to allow, that it is
short both of Ticho's large wooden Quadrant, and of his large mural Quadrant;
nor do I see any reason why Ticho's mural Quadrant should not take Meridian
Altitudes somewhat more accurately, since I believe his Sights every whit as
good, and his Divisions altogether as exact; what he might fail in diligence, I
cannot say. I do believe this Instrument to be an exceeding good one of the
kind, and that he has from much practice and experience found out many
contrivances, in order to the making it convenient to make Observations, and he
has not spared for cost, pains, study and industry, for the completing
thereof; but still whether he be arrived to the greatest perfection, or to so
great as to take Altitudes to Seconds, seems to me very dubious, and if he made
use of the Sights before-described, wholly impossible. For first, a Degree upon
the Limb is but about 6/^ of an inch, and consequently a Minute is but the
50th. part of an inch, and a Second but the 3000th. part of an inch, which he
that can distinguish with his naked eye, has better then I, or I fear, any man
now living. Shortsighted men, I grant, can do much toward the distinguishing
very minute Divisions, by being able to bring the Object very near the eye, but
the most short-sighted must be yet very much shortened by Glasses, before he
will be able to distinguish the 3000th. part of an inch, and when he has
distinguished it, which he may possibly do with a Microscope, how will he
distinguish of the Penumbra, which is not certain even to a Minute? And though
it may be said, it is the same, round the Circle, and the Circle is the true
bigness of the Sun, so that if a Circle of a bigness, answering to the Diameter
of the Sun, and the Distance of the lower Sight from the upper be described on
the lower Sight, it must bound the Limb of the Sun, and that consequently it
will be easy to distinguish when that Circle is perfectly filled with the
figure of the Sun, admitted through the hole in the upper Sight. I answer, That
this seems very probable and easy, and is indeed believed and asserted so by
Optical Writers: But yet it is quite otherwise; for not to mention that there is
confessed by all, that the Penumbra of this Circle must be as big at least as
the Diameter of the hole above, through which it is trajected, which cannot be
less then a Minute; I say, that experience does demonstrate that it is quite
otherways, and that the Limb of this Image painted on the lower Sight is
terminated with a Penumbra, which is sometimes five or six times bigger then
the Diameter of the hole, and which is yet stranger, the smaller the hole be,
the bigger is the Penumbra, and the bigger (to a certain Degree) the less, but
there is no bigness which will take it off quite, and the Diameter of the Sun
that way taken, is sometimes bigger and sometimes less then it ought, and that
to a very considerable quantity: Of which, and several other very strange
proprieties of Light, I shall hereafter say more on another Subject.

But to proceed. That he has made this Instrument his chiefest, you may
perceive by his pathetical describing thereof; for he says of it, page 184. Ad
commodiorem hujus quadrantis usum, tot ac tot adminicula recens excogitata
atque huic organo applicata fuere, ut nesciam a quibus primum inchoare debeam.
Imo etiamsi vel* maxim velim, nullo tamen modo omnia and singula adeo
perspicue vel delineare vel describere potero, ut universi praeprimis qui
similia haud ipsimet oculis usurparunt quaevis recte ac plane intelligant,
quinetiam credas velim utut aliis sunt attentiores atque hujus rei been gnaros,
aliquoties sane hocce Instrumentum visuros antequam dimidiam tantam partem
debite animadvertant ac plenissime comprehendant. Quippe and verum fateor nec
ipse ego, licet singula ex meo solo cerebro prodierint ac confecta fuerint,
possem adeo distinct tibi eum sub aspectum ponere nisi mihi hocce organum sub
oculis assidue versaretur. Nihilotamen minus dabo operam, ut quantum fieri
poterit, dilucide omnia proponam, reliqua very exercitatis caeli metaloribus
ulterius rimanda and perquirenda commit am, etc.

And so he proceeds with the Description of this Quadrant, and the Apparatus
about it, and first, he tells us of the weight of this Instrument, that it was
80 l. Next, of the shape of the Turret in which it was fixed, which is indeed
very convenient and ingenious, it being so contrived, as to be voluble or
convertible upon Truckles, having one only side open, and enclosed on all sides
else, so that neither the Observator nor the Quadrant was much exposed to the
injury of the weather, which is indeed of no small use in Astronomical
Observations. But this may be done many other ways also. He tells us further of
the admirable and prodigious use of Screws, in order to the setting and fixing
the Quadrant. Next, As to the giving a motion to it, in order to follow the Sun
and fixed Stars in their diurnal motion. Thirdly, As to perform all the
Subdivisions of a Degree, not only into Minutes but into single Seconds. To all
which I say first, As to the use of the small Hand-screws, I do grant, that in
some cases they may have their convenience, as to the moving and staying the
Instrument. But then since he is fain to make use of two Screws, whereby both
the hands must be employed to manage these Screws, I judge them too troublesome
for that use, and that there is a much better way, whereby the Quadrant being
once set into the Azimuth of the Stars, it shall continue to be so, and to move
along with it, without any trouble to the Observator, so long as the Observator
has occasion to have it remain so, which (that I may hint that only now by the
By) is a small Automaton, which shall continue it for many hours exactly, in
the Azimuth of the Star desired, of which more hereafter.

Next, Whereas he affirms this way capable to show Seconds as well as Minutes,
I grant it may be capable; but then I must further affirm, that he has not at
all showed how that can be done, nor is it indeed feasible in his way, for he
shows us not any way how to set it, that is, fix it certainly to any Degree:
Now if he be not sure in the fixing it exactly to a Second, upon that Degree
where he would begin his Division, it is a vain thing to be so accurate in the
other Dimension, for he cannot be more certain, (let him be never so curious in
the Subdivision with his Screw) then he is certain in the first fixing of his
Screw to the Degree, for whatever he varies from the Degree in the setting, he
varies at least as much in the Subdivisions, and consequently unless that be
some ways taken care of, which I do not find, it is a nicety without use.

To conclude therefore, I say, the Frame of this Instrument is extraordinary
good, and by the help of some additions, as to the Sights, Divisions,
Perpendicular and Erection, might be made as good as need be desired for any
use in Astronomy, and 40 times better then what it is now made and described by
Hevelius, or then any I have yet heard of to be made in the World. But as it
is, it is not more exact then the large Instruments of the Noble Ticho Brahe,
which he used 100 years since, and much short of his mural Quadrant, for taking
Meridional Heights.

He proceeds to the Description of his new and large Brass Sextant of six foot
Radius: The Sights and the Divisions thereof are in nothing differing from
those of the Quadrant, nor do I find any thing very considerable in the
Description thereof; it was made use of by two persons in the same manner as
the former Sextant, and like that of Ticho; but what grand inconveniences do
attend that way of Observation, I shall afterward show, when I come to explain
how one person alone may be able to do it with less trouble by half, and ten
times more exactness.

But by the way, I cannot but take notice of what Hevelius ingeniously
confesses, of the great difficulty there is in taking the Distance of fixed
Stars from the Moon, which is from nothing else but the imperfections of his
Common Sights, and all that difficulty vanishes, if the Sights be made another
way. Next, He seems to make it a much more difficult business, to take the
Distance of the Sun from Venus, when she is seen in the daytime; but by a way
I shall hereafter show, it will not only be easy to take the Distance of the
Sun in the daytime from Venus, but from Mars, from Jupiter, nay, from several
of the fixed Stars.

I shall pass by therefore his Apparatus, which seems very great and
chargeable, since I shall elsewhere show a single, plain way, without any
trouble or perplexity, how the matter may be quite otherwise ordered, much to
the advantage of the Observator.

As to what he asserts of his extraordinary care, diligence and pains, in
dividing and examining the truth of his Instrument, I do no ways doubt it, but
that he has proceeded as far as it was possible for one to do in that way he
made use of, but might have saved much of it, if he had thought of the way by
Diagonals on Glass, which I have already described. Yet I should have been very
glad to have seen the Distances, which he mentions to have taken of eight fixed
Stars near the Ecliptic, to wit, Lucidae Arietis and Palilicii, Palilicii and
Pollucis, Pollucis and Reguli, Reguli and Spicae, Spicae and in manu
Serpentarii, in manu Serpentarii and Aquilae, Aquilae and Marchab, Marchab and
Lucidae Arietis, and that to so great exactness, as not to miss one single
Second in the whole Circle of the Heavens, taken at eight Observations. For to
me indeed it seems one of the greatest affirmations I ever met withal, and not
less then humanely impossible, were there no Refraction in the Air* and did all
the Objects stand still in the Horizon, but the Refraction of the Air, were it
much less then it is granted by all, would necessarily cause a variety of a
great number of Seconds. And I durst undertake to demonstrate it to any, as
plainly as any Geometrical Proposition, that it was wholly impossible for him,
with all or any of the Instruments he has described, to make any one of these
Observations, to the certainty of 30 Seconds, whence if that uncertainty be 8
times multiplied, it will follow, he cannot be certain in the whole Circle to
240 Seconds, or 4 Minutes, which how much it is differing from one single
Second, any one may judge.

I had many other things to have added, which have occurred to me in the
perusing of Hevelius his Book, but I will say no more at present by way of
Objection, having, I fear, wearied the Reader, with showing him my doubts and
scruples, especially about the imperfection of that way of Sights and Divisions
made use of by him: Only, to make my Reader some mends for his patience, I
shall describe a short Apparatus, which I have contrived for this purpose, and
in the doing thereof, shall be as plain and brief as possible the matter will
bear.

Since the reading these Lectures, the Author having been acquainted, that some
considerable Objections had been made against the certainty and accurateness of
his Instruments, and that I had affirmed it impossible to perform what he had
promised in his Book, he returns his Sentiments thereof in a Letter to Mr.
Oldenburg, to this effect:

-- Caeterum percipio vestrates non omnes mihi adstipulari in isto Dioptrarum
negotio, de quibus in machinae meae coelestis Organographia tractavi, verum
etiamsi Cla. Hookius and Cla. Flamstedius aliique plane aliter sentiant,
experientia tamen quotidiana me edocuit atque etiamnum docet, rem long aliter
se habere in magnis illis organis, quadrantibus scilicet sextantibus and
octantibus imprimis quadrantibus Azimuthalibus aliisq, quadrantibus regulis
constructis, quae nempe adeo procliviter commoveri and inverti (dum Dioptrae
Telescopicae examinantur) imo nullo modo possunt, ut quidem Instrumenta illa
trium quatuorve pedum perpendiculo constructa. Rei cum primis in eo consistit,
quod nullam plane observationem suscipere possint suis Dioptris Telescopicis
nisi prius denuo eas examinent ac rectificent; in quo tamen examine varia via,
tum jugiter utut studiosissime illud suscipiatur hallucinari datur. Adhaec in
quadrantibus Azimuthalibus, octantibus and sextantibus, qua ratione examen
istud adeo accurate nunquam non haud magno negotio temporisque dispendio
institui possit, profecto nondum capio, vix mihi persuadeo ullibi adhuc ullum
aliquem magnum quoddam Instrumentum 6 vel 9 pedum utpote sext. octant. vel
quadrantem cum regula vel quadrant. Azim. cum pinnacidiis Dioptricis
construisse, eumque ad coelum felici aliquo successu adhibuisse, and quicquam
solid observasse; si tentasset ac per annos aliquot observationibus continuo
invigilasset sine dubio aliter sentiret. Hoc negotium enim non solum in eo
consistit quod stellae aliquanto distinctius conspiciantur (quanquam fixae ab
eo qui visu pollet and exercitatus est aeque been nudis oculis discernantur)
sed an Instrumenta ab omni part correct commonstrent, an pinnacidia
Telescopica Instrumentis toties ad quasvis observationes rite imponi and tuto
conservari queant; de quibus quidem id omni tempore aeque praecise fieri posse
valde dubito. Quare Clarissimos illos viros humanissime rogatos volo nisi jam
possideant ejusmodi vastissima organa utpote sext. octant and quadrant. Azim.
Dioptris Telescopicis munita, eaque coelo continuo admoneant, suspendant
judicium paululum, donec longa annorum serie experti fuerint haud fuisse
multoties egregie elusos. Nam ex una alterave observatione quadrant. aliquo
leviori perpendiculo gaudenti obtenta, res haec non est decidenda, sed si quis
per 10 and amplius annos assidue observaverint, tum ab ovo seriam stellarum
restitutionem per distantias susciperit, poterit quaedam certiora in medium hac
de re proferre. De reliquo satis mirari nequeo, eas omnes qui ejusmodi Dioptris
Telescopicis gaudent, nondum locorum suorum, elevationem poli ubi degunt and
observationes peragunt, quantum sciam recte and omnino praecise determinasse
and stabilivisse. Hucusque enim ad aliquot minuta integra Parisiis elevatio
poli nondum est definita, alii quippe eandem observationem 48. 49 alii 50. alii
51, alii 52, alii 53, alii 54, 55 imo ampliorem adhuc statuerunt: sicuti legere
est ex discertatione Petri Petiti de latitudine Lutetiae, sed nolo in his
prolixius esse; ad observationes ipsas provoco, tempus aliquando docebit quoru^
observationes universas accuratiores fuerint, si modo nonnulli censuram suam eo
usque rejicere possent. Nam video aliquos inter quos etiam Cl. Flamstedius
invenitur, prout ex Epistola ad Cassinum apparet, jam judicium de nostris
qualibus observationibus tulisse* priusquam illas adhuc viderunt examinarunt
vel quicquam de iis cognoverunt. Nolo quidem vanus esse rerum mearum jactator,
nec unquam mihi imaginatus sum rem in omni isto negotio circa scilicet
restitutionem stellarum fixarum acu omnino tetigisse vel tangere posse. Sed
hocce penitus mihi imaginor si totum istud negotium Dioptris Telescopicis
suscepissem, quod non solum plurimos annos examinibus trivissem, sed spe sine
dubio varia via (de qua hic non est discerendi locus) cecidissem. Exinde
gratulor mihi me ad eam sententiam nondum trans^sse, ac me mea methodo universa
perfecisse se quicquid praestitum Dei beneficio erit: an nihil amplius (ut
putat Claris. Flamstedius) quam hactenus and quousque progressum fuerit,
liberum erit cuique cum deinde viderit judicium suum exponere quinetiam
integrum erit alium novum integrum catalogum super additis tot ac tot centenis
nonis fixis, hactenus neglectis alia ratione construere: Verum nondum video an
cura haec molestissima, taediosissima ac laboriosissima, quae non nisi multorum
annorum vigiliis suscipi and peragi potest, aliquem adhuc serio tangat. Unam
aut alteram stellam open Telescopii vel Dioptrarum Telescopicarum, dum
praecipuas ac majores fixas earumque intercapedines supponimus correctas ad
debitum locum deducere, tum nonnunquam distantias nonnullas stellarum capere
haec ludicra sunt; sed omnes conjunctim secundum longum and latum restituere,
tum ductu continuo singulis serenis diebus ac noctibus, tam altitudinum
solarium quam reliquarum stellarum observationibus operam dare, easque orbi
exponere ut pateat motuum harmonia atque Instrumentorum certitudo, hoc artis
hoc laboris est. Quando observationes 20 vel 30 annorum spatio continuatas ab
utraque part aliquando habebimus, nimirum tam quae Dioptris Telescopicis quam
quae solummodo nostris ex coelo deprompta sunt res omnino clarior erit. Interea
quilibet fruatur suo ingenio, ac sua ratione pro libitu rem tentet. Honorificum
nobis omnibus erit pro modulo nostro a Deo concesso, rei literariae incrementum
varia via promovere.

To this Letter of Hevelius I have this to answer, That the Author neither
has, had, nor can have any experience, to show Telescopical Sights not to be
as good as the Common, or that they are less applicable to large Quadrants,
Sextants, Octants, or Azimuth Quadrants, or to any other Quadrants furnished
with Rules, and so fixed, that they cannot be easily inverted, or turned, then
they are to Quadrants or Instruments of 3 or 4 foot Radius. Nor is his Reason
against them of any validity, that no Observation can be made, without a
repeated previous examination and rectification of the Sights, in which, says
he, notwithstanding all the care and diligence, there is a Reason of failure
and mistake. For first, I say, There is less need of rectifying the Instruments
or Sights, after they have been once adjusted, then of Instruments with Common
Sights, all things being perfectly fixed, and so strong as not easily to be
stirred or removed. I now begin to fear, that he has not a true notion of the
manner of performing the same, otherwise he would never have propounded such an
Objection; and indeed he seems to say as much in the following words, Qua
ratione examen illud omni tempore commode and sine magno temporis dispendio
institui possit profecto nondum capio. Though I am very sorry that he should be
so: for first, I thought I had about 9 years since, explained to him the way,
when I exhorted him by all means to the use thereof; at least if he had not
understood it thereby, I should, upon his desire, have sent him a more ample
and particular Description thereof, or have procured an Instrument of that kind
made and fitted for him here. But I fear, he had been some ways or other
prepossest or prejudiced against them, before I writ first unto him concerning
them, at least before he writ that Answer, which I have before printed in the 5
and 6 Pages, for thereby it appears, that he was then of the same opinion he
seems now to continue of. And whereas he thinks, that no trial has ever been
made of Telescopical Sights, to a large Instrument of 6 or 9 foot, I do assure
him, (and I mis-remember, if I did not then acquaint him with as much) that I
had then by me several, and particularly one of Sr. Christopher Wren's
invention, furnished with two Perspective Sights of 6 foot long each, which I
made use of for examining the motions of the Comet, in the year 1665. And if
the same thing can be better done with a Quadrant of 6 inches Radius, then he
can perform with one of 6 foot the common way, I think he might have concluded
at least, that the same thing would be 10 times better done in one of 6 foot
Radius, made after the same manner; of this, I am sure, I gave him then an
account. Now it is not with these kinds of Instruments, as it is with Common
Instruments, where it is not possible to make any better then one may be made of
3 foot Radius, because that is capable of Divisions, accurate enough to reach
the power of the naked eye; but Instruments with Telescopical Sights, are
capable to be made to distinguish minutes, seconds, nay single thirds, if they
be proportionably augmented. Nor is there any need that a man must make 7 years
trial of an Instrument, before he can be certain of the greater excellency
thereof, for I can be as certain with 3 or 4 times viewing an Object through a
Telescope, and with my naked eye, that I can see it better, and distinguish
many more and much smaller parts in it through the Telescope, then I can with
my naked eye, as I could be, supposing I had been viewing it 20 years together.
But yet I must assure Hevelius, my experience has not depended upon 3 or 4
trials only; I cannot choose but wonder why he should be of that opinion, who
has not been less exercised in the use of the Telescope, then any at present
in Europe: Possibly indeed his Telescopes were not altogether so good as now
they are made, yet sure I am, he saw more with them then any one can see
without them, as will sufficiently appear by his Phases of the Moon, Jupiter
and Saturn. But I hope he will not wonder at me, though I do now venture to
affirm, without staying 10 years or more to make Observations, that I can do
more with a Quadrant, Sextant or Octant, of 1 foot Radius, furnished with
Telescopical Sights and Screws, then can possibly be done with any other
Instrument, furnished only with Common Sights, though 10, 20, 30, nay
threescore foot Radius; nor does it at all follow, that the Latitude of Paris
is not yet exactly known, because Monsieur Petit was ignorant of it; but it
rather shows, that Observations made with Common Sights, (such as I suppose
Monsieur Petit's Instruments and others, before the publishing of his Book
were) are no ways capable of certainty to a minute or two.

But I have done, and am sorry I have been forced to say so much in vindication
of Telescopical Sights; and that in the doing thereof, I have been necessitated
to take notice of the imperfections, that are the inseparable concomitants of
Instruments made with Common Sights. Nor should I have published these my
thoughts, had I not found them so highy decryed by a person of so great
Authority, fearing that thereby other Observators might have been deterred from
making any use of them, and so the further progress of Astronomy might have
been hindered. Nor would I willingly be thought to depretiate or undervalue the
Works and performances of a person, so highly meriting the thanks of all the
learned World, both for his great and liberal expense, and for his vast pains,
care and diligence, in the performing a Work so highly useful to Astronomy and
Navigation, and of such infinite tedium, trouble, labor and cost, to the
undertaker. I do not in the least doubt, but that it will be a Work worthy so
excellent a person, of perpetual esteem and fame, and much preferrable to any
thing yet done of the like kind in the World, and that he has gone as far as
it was possible for humane industry to go with Instruments of that kind, and
that his Instruments were as exact, and complete, and fit for use, as such
Instruments with Common Sights could be made, and that he has calculated them
with all the skill and care imaginable, and delivered them with all the candor
and integrity. But yet I would not have the World to look upon these as the
bound or non ultra of humane industry, nor be persuaded from the use and
improvement of Telescopical Sights, nor from contriving other ways of dividing,
fixing, managing and using Instruments for celestial Observations, then what
are here prescribed by Hevelius. For I can assure them, that I have my self
thought of, and in small modules tried some scores of ways, for perfecting
Instruments for taking of Angles, Distances, Altitudes, Levels, and the like,
very convenient and manageable, all of which may be used at Land, and some at
Sea, and could describe 2 or 3 hundred sorts, each of which should be every
whit as accurate as the largest of Hevelius here described, and some of them
40, 50, nay 60 times more accurate, and yet everyone differing one from another
in some or other circumstantial and essential part. And that this may not seem
altogether so strange, I will assure them, that I have contrived above 20 ways
for dividing the Instrument, each of them as much distinct from each other as
this of Hevelius, and that of Diagonals, and yet everyone capable of as great
certainty and exactness at least, and some of them 100 times more. I have above
a dozen several ways of adjusting the Perpendicularity or Horizontality of
Instruments, all as exact as the common Perpendicular, and some of them very
much more, even to what accurateness shall be desired, and yet each of these
very differing one from another. I have as many differing kinds of Sights, for
improving, directing, adjusting and ascertaining the Sight, some of which are
applicable to some particular uses, but some for all, by means of which that
part also may be improved to what accurateness is desired. I have various ways
of fixing those Instruments, and appropriating them for this, that, or the
other particular use. I have various mechanical ways for making and working the
several parts of them with great expedition and certainty, which is a knowledge
not less useful then the knowledge of the theory and use of them when made,
there being so very few to be found in the World that can or will perform it. I
have a mechanical way of calculating and performing Arithmetical operations,
much quicker and more certainly then can be done by the help of Logarithms,
which compleats the whole business of measuring Angles. These I mention, that I
may excite the World to enquire a little farther into the improvement of
Sciences, and not think that either they or their predecessors have attained
the utmost perfections of any one part of knowledge, and to throw off that lazy
and pernicious principle, of being contented to know as much as their Fathers,
Grandfathers, or great Grandfathers ever did, and to think they know enough,
because they know somewhat more then the generality of the World besides:
Reptat humi quicunque vult, Caelo restat itur, Caelo tentabimus ire. Let us see
what the improvement of Instruments can produce.

And now to make my Reader some amends for his patience, I shall give a
Specimen or two, of each of the several parts that belong to the perfecting of
celestial Instruments: And this I shall do, in the Description of an Instrument
for taking all manner of Angles and Distances in the Heavens, which if
increased in bulk, is capable of as great accurateness, as the Air or
Atmosphere will ever permit celestial Observations to be made. Its perfection
consists in seven several particulars. 1. In the Sights, which are such as may
be made to discover the minutest part discoverable in an Object, they do no
ways strain the eye, and are fit for all Sights, whether short-sighted or old,
etc. 2. In the Divisions, which are such as will distinguish the Angle, as
minutely as the Sights will distinguish the parts or Objects. 3. In the Sights,
being so contrived, that with one glance of the eye, both the Objects though a
Semicircle distant, are at once distinguished and seen together. 4. In the
method of setting it exactly perpendicular to a Second, if need be. 5. In its
fixation and motion, it being so fixed and moved, that if once set to the
Objects, it continues to move along with them, so long as it is necessary to
continue, or be very certain of any Observation. 6. In its not being difficult
to be made and adjusted, and its not being without industry and design put out
of order, and its being presently, and with all imaginable ease rectified and
again adjusted. 7. In its not being very chargeable. First, For the Sights,
They are no other then plain Telescopes, made with two unequal Glasses, an
Object and an Eye-Glass, of what length and charge shall be thought most
convenient, fixed into square Boxes or Tubes of Iron or Brass, and having cross
Clews at the Focus, made with very fine Hair, or Silkworms Clews. One of these
is fixed upon the side of the moveable Bar or Plate of the Quadrant, the
Object-Glass of which is next the Rim, and the Eye-Glass is next the Center.
The other of these is fixed upon the side of the Quadrant by several Screws,
and care is taken to keep it from bending or sagging. This Tube is made of
twice the length of the former, and has at each end an Object-Glass, each of
them of the same length with the former, and has two Eye-Glasses in the
middle, the manner of ordering which I shall show by and by under the third
head.

But first I shall explain the manner of fitting a Telescope for a Sight. Let a
a b b in the 12th. Figure represent a Tube, in which let p represent the part
toward the Object-Glass, whose Focus is at o, and let n represent the
Eye-Glass, whose Focus also is at o, let s represent the point, where the eye
being placed, the whole Eye-Glass n will be enlightened and filled with the
Object, then make a small Tube about an inch in length, and of such bigness as
it will just slice within the hollow of the Tube a a b b, and cross the Cavity
of that strain two very fine Hairs or Silkworms Clews, which may cross each
other in the Center of the Cavity, by the means of which Box, the said crossing
Clews or Hairs may be moved to and fro, till they are exactly placed in the
very Focus both of the Object-Glass and Eye-Glass, for if they be not there,
the moving of the eye to and fro over the hole at s, will make the Threads seem
to move upon the Objects, but if they be exactly in both the aforesaid Focus's,
the moving of the eye will not at all make the said Threads seem to move upon
the Object, but they will appear as steady and fixed to the Object, as if they
were strained and fastened to it. And though they are exceeding small, even as
small as the Web of a Spider or Silkworm, they will appear very big and
distinct, and much plainer and bigger then a Thread in the Common Sights, at
the further end thereof, will to the naked eye, though above 100, nay 1000
times the bigness, which at the first glance will sufficiently discover the
vast advantage these kind of Sights have above the Common ones. Nor is this way
of Sights at all confined, but may be made to distinguish the smallest part of
the Object desirable, even the parts appearing to the naked eye, under the
Angle of a single second or third of a Degree, which is some hundred of times
more curious then the naked eye can distinguish, without the help of them, for
the Telescope can be made longer, and the Eye-Glass can be made deeper, and
according as the Telescope is longer, and the Eye-Glass deeper, so will the
Object appear bigger, and more minute parts be distinguished, the power of the
eye being increased proportionably to the length of the Object Glass, and the
charge of the Eye-Glass, and the goodness of them both. Now as Sights this way
made, are capable of the greatest accurateness desirable, so they are so
appropriated to the eye, that they no ways strain it, for they may be so
ordered, as to make all those parts that are to be distinguished, to appear to
the eye under the Angle of 3 or 4 minutes, which most eyes are able well to
distinguish, without using too much attention or straining to discover them.
This is no small convenience, to one that is to make many Observations one
after another, for the eye by too much attention is apt to be suddenly wearied,
and it does very much harm and weaken the Sight, to endeavor to distinguish
parts so small, as appear to the eye under the Angle of a minute, very few eyes
being able to reach it at all, and most others not without much difficulty and
endeavor. It Is further considerable upon this account, that it is fitted for
all kinds of Sights: For a short-sighted person, the Eye-Glass may be made to
slide a little nearer the Cross in the Focus; and for an old or decayed Sight,
the Eye-Glass may be moved a little longer or further off from the said Cross
or Focus; for a dim Eye, the aperture of the Object-Glass may be augmented, and
the Eye-Glass made shallower, or of a less charge; and for a weak, tender and
curious Eye, the charge of the Eye-Glass may be augmented, and the aperture of
the Object-Glass made less. And according to the several constitution of the
Observators eyes, the manner of Sights may be accommodated, which the other
Common Sights without the help of Glasses, are no ways capable of.

The second thing wherein the perfection of this Instrument consists, is the
way of making the Divisions, which I think, is far beyond the Common way, both
for the certainty and ease of making, and secondly, for the plainness and
certainty of it, in being distinguished; nor is it capable of less accurateness
for measuring, then the Sights are for distinguishing. And it excels all the
Common ways of Division in these particulars: 1. That it is made certain and
not by guess, we being not at all to depend upon the care, credit and diligence
of the Instrument-maker, in dividing, graving or numbering his Divisions, for
the same Screw makes it from end to end, as you will see by and by. 2. That the
Divisions are not at all difficult to be distinguished, and there is no
uncertainty in the Fabric, nor can there be any reason of mistake, there being
nothing to be looked after, but the Numbers expressed in Figures at large,
sufficiently plain to any one that can read the Print of a large Church-Bible.
It excels the Common ways thirdly, upon the account of its Compendium; for
whereas by Ticho's or Hevelius's way, the Instrument must be made of 150 foot
Radius at least, easily and certainly to discover and distinguish Seconds, in
this way it may be made to do it within the compass of 3 foot Radius. And
whereas in either of their ways, even in an Instrument of 150 foot Radius, the
Divisions are not easily distinguished and discovered without the help of
Glasses, in this way they are made so easy and plain, that a man cannot
mistake, that is able by his naked eye to distinguish Decimals of an inch. Now
that this is so, as I affirm, the Reader will easily understand, if he
considers, first, that the bigness of a minute is hardly half an inch, in an
Instrument of 150 foot Radins, and consequently the bigness of a second is but
^/120 of an inch, which to a good eye is but barely a visible point at the best
advantage, and to most eyes is not distinguishable without much difficulty, and
to very many not at all without the help of Glasses. Now though Hevelius
pretends to be able to do much by the help of the new way of Nonnius, Vernier,
or Hedreus, yet if he considers what I have now said, he will be of much
another mind, a Radius of 10 foot being but a 15th. part of one of 150, and
consequently every 120th. part of an inch, being no less then 15 whole Seconds.
At least, I am sure, he will be convinced that his own is not true, if he look
upon that Specimen of it which he has printed in his Machina Coelestis, in the
Plate T. with a moderately magnifying Glass, as I hinted to him before. He will
further understand the truth of my Assertion, if he considers in the next
place, that by the help of the Screw, I am able to make the bigness of a Minute
as much as I please; for since in an Instrument of 5 foot Radius, a Degree is
somewhat better then an inch, it is easy enough to understand, that there may
be 30 Threads of a Screw in the length of an inch, and consequently there will
be but 2 Minutes to fill up the whole Circle of the Index-Plate, and
consequently if the Circle be 7 inches Diameter, the Circumference will be
almost 22 inches about, and consequently the bigness of a Minute not less then
11, and the bigness of a Second not much less then the 5th. part of an inch.
Now the Index-Plate e in the first and 11th. Figures, shows exactly the number
of Revolutions, and the Hand 8 in the same Figures, shows the parts of a
Revolution, and both these in Characters large and distinct enough; and
therefore the certainty and truth of this Assertion cannot be further doubted.

The way then for these Divisions is this: Make a Frame of a Quadrant of
hammered Iron, after the manner expressed in the first Figure, and in the
Center thereof fix or raise a hollow Cylinder, whose hollow may be about a
40th. part of its Radius, and whose unequal part may be about a 30th; leave this
standing above the Plain of the Quadrant about 1/^^ part of the Radius, let the
outside of this Cylinder be made as exactly round as it is possible to be
turned or wrought, then make a Ruler or Plate, with a round hole in it at one
end, turned, groun'd and fitted exactly about the abovementioned Cylinder, and
as long as you design the Telescope for the Sights of the Quadrant, this by a
Screw on the top thereof must be kept close and steady upon the said Cylinder:
Upon the end next the Limb is to be fitted a Socket or Frame with Screws, to
carry the Screw-Frame steady and firm, according to the contrivance expressed in
the first and 11 Figures; this Plate must be filed or bended at that part of it
which touches the Limb of the Quadrant, so as to lie obliquely to the Plain of
the Quadrant, and to be parallel to the Plain of the Frame which carries the
Screw, and upon the part beyond the Limb must be fixed with a Screw k, the Frame
h h h, which carries the Screw 9 9 9, and the Index-Plate t t; the contrivance
of this Frame h h, is to keep the Screw 9 9 9 close against, and very steady to
the Limb of the Quadrant, and is moved to and fro upon the Limb of the Quadrant
b b b, by the help of the Screw turning upon and against the edge of the
Quadrant; and this Screw by reason of its distance from the center and eye,
(the reason of the placing of which in that place you will understand by and
by) being too far off to be reached by the hand, is turned by a small Rod of
Iron, 0 0 0 in the first and 11 Figures lying by the side of the Ruler or
Plate, which has a small Wheel q q, at the end next the Limb, by which the
Screw is turned round with it, and has a small Handle or Windle p p next the
Center, by which it is made convenient to be so turned round. Upon the end of
the abovementioned Screw-Frame h h, is fixed a round Plate t t, which is
divided into 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5 hundred equal parts, according as it is in
bigness, and as it shall be thought convenient, which Divisions are numbered and
marked accordingly, serving to show what part of a Revolution is made of the
aforesaid Screw; for the end of the Screw 9 9 9 coming out through the middle
thereof, and a Hand 8 being fastened upon the said end, every turn of the Screw
does make a Revolution of the Index upon the said Plate; and consequently the
motion of the arm made by one turn of the Screw, is actually and sensibly
divided into 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5 hundred equal parts, which is so exceeding exact,
and withal so Mathematically and Mechanically true, that it is hardly to be
equallized by any other way of proceeding. This Description will be much better
understood by the Explication of the Figure, and the several parts thereof.

Let a a a a a, etc. represent the Frame of the Quadrant, consisting of 5 Bars,
radiating from the Center, steadyed all of them by a Quadrantal Limb, and a
straight subtending Chord Bar; this whole Frame is to be made of very good
Iron, partly welded and partly sodered together with Brass; the breadth of the
Bars may keep the same Proportions expressed in the Figure, and the thickness
may be about 180 part of the Radius in large Instruments. In the Center of
this, out of the solid Bar, is to be raised a Cylinder, as d d, expressed above
more plainly in the 2d. Figure; the outside of this Cylinder is to be turned
and wrought, as Founders do their Stopcocks, as exactly as possibly it can be,
and the end of the Iron Plate or moveable arm c c c c, shaped as is expressed
in the 3d. and first Figure, must be bored and wrought upon it very well, so as
they may turn exactly true, evenly and smoothly, without any manner of sticking
or shaking, which a good Workman will easily perform. This arm being put on the
Cylinder, is screwed down fast by the help of a Screw-Plate, expressed in the
4th. and first Figures by e e, which has two notches in it f f, by means
whereof a Handle g g in the 6th. Figure, does readily screw and unscrew it, as
there is occasion. Between this screwed Plate and the hole of the Plate c c c
c, is a thin Brass Plate, let on upon an 8 sided part of the Cylinder, that so
the turning of the Plate c c c c, may not have any power to unscrew the Plate e
e, which otherwise it is very apt to do. Why this Center is thus made, and a
hole left in the middle thereof, you will shortly understand more plainly. Upon
the Iron Limb of the Quadrant last mentioned, is screwed and rivetted a Limb of
fine Brass, first cast into that shape, and then very well hammer-hardned and
filed, represented in the Figure by b b b b: This, as I said, by many holes
drilled through the Iron and the Brass, is screwed and rivetted upon the iron
Limb, so as about half an inch in a Quadrant of 5 foot Radius does over-hang
the iron Limb, and the ends thereof extend a considerable deal longer then the
Quadrant, the reason and use of which you will by and by understand, when I
give the Description of the Screw-Frame. The edge of this Brass Limb must be,
by the help of the Plate cccc, and a File or Plain, cut very exactly round, to
answer the Center of the Quadrant, and the upper side thereof must be plained
exactly smooth and flat, upon which Plain-side the Loop-holed Plate cccc must
move, as is visible in the Figure. This Plate at ii must be wrenched or
wreithed, so that the Plain thereof must stand parallel to the Plain of the
Index-Frame, and by the wreithing of it at ii, as aforesaid, there is room left
for the Screw to lie obliquely, without the Screws touching the aforesaid
Plate, or grating against it. The reason why I put the Screw obliquely to the
Plain of the Quadrant is, that that part of the Thread which touches the edge
of the Limb, may be exactly at right Angles, or perpendicular to that Plain,
and consequently that the Teeth upon the said edge, may likewise be exactly
cross or perpendicular also, and consequently that no bending of the Rule cccc,
(to the end of which the Frame of the Screw is fastened) may at all vary the
Angle, nor any unequal thickness in the Limb of the Quadrant, but that the
turning only of the Screw shall produce a variation, and that exactly
proportionate to the number of Revolutions, and the parts thereof, showed by
the Index.

The way to know exactly what the obliquity of the Screw ought to be, to make
the Teeth upon the Limb perpendicular, is to number how many Threads of the
Screw there are in a known length, and what the Compass of the said Screw, or
the Cylinder out of which it is made is, and multiplying the said Compass by
the number of Revolutions into a Product, the Proportions of that Product to
the known length, will give the obliquity of the Screw, the Product being the
Radius, and the known length the Tangent of obliquity, thus; Suppose in the
length of 4 inches, there be 83 Threads of the Screw, and that the Compass of
the Cylinder of the Screw be ^ Centesms of an inch, I multiply the ^ by 83, the
number of Revolutions, and it gives me ^, that is 76 inches, and 36 Centesms
of an inch, making this Product the Radius, and the known length, viz. 4
inches, the Tangent of the obliquity of the Thread of the Screw to the Axis
thereof, or of the Axis of the Screw to the Plain of the Quadrant. The
demonstration of this is so plain, that I need not insist upon it, for the
length of the Thread of the Screw is the Secant, the Compass of the Cylinder is
the Radius, and the bigness of the Thread, or the Distance between two Threads,
is the Tangent, in a right angled Triangle, and the Screw is such a right
angled Triangle, wound about a Cylinder, putting the Tangent thereof parallel
to the Axis of the Cylinder, and consequently in the Mechanical trial of these
Proportions, the more Threads are taken to make that comparison or measurement,
the more exact is the inclination found. The consideration of which does
plainly show, how exact a way of Division this by the help of the Screw is, for
the whole Quadrant is thereby resolved into one grand Diagonal, the same with
the Triangle, the length of the Thread upon the Compass of the Cylinder being
the Diagonal, and the Distance of the two ends of those Threads, in a Line
parallel to the Axis, being the space to be divided by it, and consequently by
augmenting the bigness or Compass of the Cylinder, and diminishing the Thread,
you may augment the Diagonal in any Proportion assigned. Or by making the Hand
or Index upon the end thereof, of double, treble, quadruple, decuple, etc. of
the semi-Diameter of the Cylinder, out of which the Screw is made, you may
duplicate, triplicate, quadruplicate, decuplicate, etc. the said length of the
Diagonal, in Proportion to the space to be divided.

The next thing then to be described is the Screw-Frame, made of Iron, much of
the shape represented by h h h, in the first and 11 Figures: This Frame, by the
help of a Screw through the aforesaid Plate, whose head is expressed by the
round head k, is fixed on to the long Plate from the center, and by the help of
the Screw l, is forced and kept down very close, upon the edge of the Limb of
the Quadrant; the Frame has 4 Collers for the Screw-Pin to run against, which
are indeed but half Collers, serving only to keep the Screw steady; two of
these are made with most care, marked with m m, in the 11th. Figure against m
i, does rest the Shoulder of the Screw-Pin 3, which is kept close home against
it, by the Cylinder g g, in the 10 and 11 Figures; the sharp Conical Point of
this Screw 99, goes into the Conical hole, at the end of the said Cylinder g g
g. The shape of this Cylinder, and the Screw by which it is forced against the
end of the Screw 99, is represented in the 10th. Figure; 7 in the 9th* Figure
represents the Conical Point; 3 the place lying against the Collar m i; 6 the
Screw that moves upon the edge of the Limb of the Quadrant; 5 the Nut or
Pinnion by which the Screw is turned by a Rod from the Center, expressed alone in
the 8th. Figure, but the manner how it lies in the Frame, is expressed by ppooo
in Fig. 1.000 representing the Rod; pp the Handle by which it is turned; qq the
Nut or Pinnion that turns the Pinnion 5 of the Screw; sr the Collers or Holes
that hold it fast to the moveable Plate or arm of the Quadrant; s^ represents
two small pieces that clip the edge of the Limb, and serve to keep the
Screw-Frame steady and true in its oblique posture, and move equally on the
Limb, by a strong springing of one side of it; tt represents the Index-Plate,
which is divided into what number of parts are thought necessary, 1, 2, 3, 4,
or 5 hundred parts, according to the bigness of the Thread of the Screw at 6, a
greater Thread requiring a more minute Division, and a smaller Thread requiring
a more gross. These Divisions are pointed at by the Index 8 at the end of the
Screw, and the number of Revolutions or Threads are marked on the Limb of the
Quadrant, and pointed at by the Tongue ee, upon the which is fastened a small
Pin f, serving to carry a Lens over the Point of the Tongue, which makes the
number of Threads appear more plain and big: The manner of doing which upon the
Frame of the Screw, is so easy, that I shall not spend more time in the
Explication thereof, and the manner of making the whole Instrument, will be
easy enough to any ingenious Workman; but if any person desire one of them to
be made, without troubling himself to direct and oversee a Workman, he may
employ Mr. Tompion, a Watchmaker in Water-Lane near Fleetstreet; this person I
recommend, as having employed him to make that which I have; whereby he has
seen and experienced the Difficulties that do occur therein, and finding him to
be very careful and curious to observe and follow Directions, and to complete
and perfect his Work, so as to make it accurate and fit for use.

By the help of these Indices, 'twill be easy and plain to see how many
Revolutions of the Screw, and what parts of a Revolution make a Quadrant of a
Circle, and consequently 'twill be easy to make a small Table, which shall
show what parts of a Quadrant, divided into Degrees, Minutes and Seconds, will
be designed by the Revolutions, and parts of the Revolutions of the Screw. As
for instance, If I find that 1600 Revolutions and ^ make a Quadrant, then ^
Revolutions make a Degree, and ^ Millesms of a Revolution make a Minute, and
about 5 Millesms make a Second, thence 'twill be easy to find (if you observe)
an Angle to contain ^, that is, 294 Revolutions, and 358 Millesms of a
Revolution, that the Content of that Angle in Degrees, Minutes and Seconds, is
16 Degrees, 32 Minutes, and 47 Seconds, which is plain enough, and much less
subject to mistake, then the common way made use of. I shall therefore proceed
to

The third particular, wherein this Instrument excels all others, and that, is,
That one Observator with a single glance of his eye, at the same moment does
distinctly see, that both the Sights of the Instrument are exactly directed to
the desired Points of the two Objects, and this, though they be removed by
never so great an Angle, nay, though they are opposite to each other directly
in a Line. This, I question not, will by all that know any thing of
Instruments, or celestial Observations, be accounted one of the greatest helps
to such Observations, that was ever found out. For whereas other Instruments
require two Observators, for taking a Distance in the Heavens, and Ticho
generally made use of four, amongst which there was necessary so unanimous a
concurrence in their readiness and certainty, that the failure of any one
spoiled all the rest, and made the Observation become uncertain and of no use;
and such Instruments as were contrived for one Observator, were accompanied
with so great difficulty, in the adjusting to both the Objects, being both in a
continual and swift motion, and but one to be seen at once, that they were
generally left off and dis-used, there being so vast a trouble and fatigue of
looking now upon one, then upon another, by many repeated trials, and so many
new settings of the Instrument to the Objects in motion, before the Sights
could be adjusted, besides the great uncertainty at the best, of several
Minutes of the truth In this way, the Observator has no farther trouble, then
first, to set the Plain of the Quadrant in the Plain of the Objects, and by the
Screw to move the arm of his Instrument, till he perceive both the Objects to
touch each other, in those Points he would measure the Distance between. That
this is so, he will easily perceive, when he understands the method of so
adapting two Telescopes, that by looking in at one small hole in the side of
one of them, he will be able to see both those Objects distinctly to which they
are directed, how much soever separated. The way then of doing it is in short
this.

Join them together at one end, by a hollow Joint that has a hole through it,
about 1/4 of the hollow of the Tubes, prepare two square Tubes of Wood, Brass,
Iron, etc. of what length you please, and directly against the Center of this
hole in the Joint, make a small hole, about the bigness of the blackest part or
pupil of the eye, so as the eye looking in at that hole, may see
perpendicularly into the lower Tube, then obliquely place two pieces of
reflecting Metal, very well and truly polisht, so as to reflect the Axis of
both those Tubes, perpendicular or at right Angles, which is by fixing the
Plain of the Plates, inclined to the said Axis, in an Angle of 45 Degrees, let
the upper reflex Plate reach from the upper side of the Tube, so low as to
touch the Axis or middle of the Tube, and let the lower extend over the whole
Tube, from the top to the bottom, and from one side to the other. These will be
known to be duly placed, if looking in at the small hole against the Center of
the Joint, the two round holes of the Tube do appear to the eye to coallesce
into one, and that the eye sees directly through the lengths of them both
alike. Then into these Tubes fit two Telescopes, with unequal Eye-Glasses, and
cross Threads for Sights in their Foci, that they may be both of them at due
distance from the eye, looking in at the sidehole, then opening those Tubes
upon the said Joint to any Angle, and looking in at the side hole, you shall
plainly distinguish at once both the Objects, that are brought into the Tubes
directly, and reflected up to the eye.

That this may be the plainer understood, I shall add a Delineation thereof in
plano.

Let a a b b in the 12th. Figure represent the upper Tube, and c c c c the
lower Tube, and let d d represent that part of the Joint, which belongs to the
lower Tube, at one end, by which they are joined together, and can be opened in
the manner of a Sector. Let i represent the hollow or center of this Joint,
which communicates the Cavities of the two Tubes. Let e e represent that part
of the said Joint which belongs to the upper Tube, being only a hole through
the lower side, big enough to incompass the Cylinder d d of the lower Tube; and
let r r represent a Plate screwed or pinned on, to keep the parts of the Joint
together instead of rivetting. Let s represent the hole in the side, by which
the Eye h is to look in, and f the reflex Metal in the upper Tube, reaching
only half way the Tube, and g g the reflex Metal in the under Tube, reaching
over the whole Cavity; then will n o and p represent the Eye-Glass,
Sight-Threads, and Object-Glass of the upper Tube, and k l and m the same parts
in the lower, and whatever Angle the Tubes make to each other, whilst they open
upon the beforementioned Joint, the Eye h looking in at s, will see directly
by the Axis of them both, and see the Sight-Threads distinctly crossing the
Points of the Objects, whose Distances are to be measured.

These being thus explained, I suppose, it will be no difficult matter for any
man to conceive, how these may be applied to the above-described Quadrant; for
it is but supposing c c, the upper side of the under Tube in this Figure, to
represent a p a p, the fixed side arm of the Quadrant, and d d the Joint of
this, to represent d d the Joint of the Quadrant, and b b the under side of the
upper Tube, to represent c c c the moveable arm of the Quadrant, and applying
two Tubes to these parts, and fitting them with reflecting Plates, Eye-Glasses,
Sight-Threads, and Object-Glasses, at due Distances, the whole will be
performed.

These Tubes thus fitted, will serve to take any Angle less then a Quadrant, to
what exactness i desired, but for bigger Angles, the Contrivance must be
somewhat varied, the Description of which I shall now add.

Let either of the two Tubes for the Sights, be made of double the length of
the other, that is, let it be as long behind the Center as before it, and make
the Reflex-Glass, that it may be turned round, and reflect the Ray exactly
backwards, as before it did forward, then fix into this other half of the Tube
a Telescope-Sight, in all things fitted, adjusted, and like the other two, then
adjust them, that they may look forwards and backwards in the same like, which
being done, the Reader will easily understand how any Angle may be taken, even
to the extent of two right ones: For it is plain enough, that the two Tubes I
first described, applied to the Quadrant, will measure any Angle to a Quadrant
or right Angle; and 'twill be as easy to understand, how by the help of the
Reverse-Tube, any Angle between a Quadrant and two right Angles may be measured.

To make this a little plainer to the Reader, let c c c c c in the 12th. Figure
represent the under Tube or fixed Sight, s the hole or Eye-cell, t r a round
piece carrying the reflex Metal g g; this is made to turn round, and the
reflecting Metal g g being fixed to it within the Tube, is carried round also
with it. Let s i k l m x represent the Ray passing forwards by the Eye-Glass,
Thread-Sight, and Object-Glass; then this round piece t r being turned and made
r t, as in the 13th. Figure, is represented, and with it the reflecting Metal
g g; here marked q q, being turned also: the Line s q k l m y will represent
the Ray reflected, and passing backwards by the reflex-Mettal q q, Eye-Glass k,
Thread-Sight l, and Object-Glass y.

The measure of the Angle is found by the same Apparatus or Screw-Plate; for as
much as the Screw-Plate would show the Angle less then a Quadrant, if the
forepart of the Tube were used, by so much is the Angle more then a Quadrant,
if the reverse or back part of the Tube be used; and the same reason of the
accurateness and certainty for the one, is good for the other, without being
liable to any manner of Objection or Inconvenience.

It remains therefore now only to show, First, How these two Perspective or
Telescope Sights, placed within the same Tube, may be made to look exactly
forwards or backwards in the same Line. And secondly, How they shall be
adjusted to the Telescope, fixed upon the moveable arm of the Quadrant, so as to
know when the Division-Angle begins, and when they are opened to a Quadrant,
right Angle, or 90 Degrees; for unless these be ascertained, and fixed to as
great a measure of accurateness, as the contrivance of the Screw is capable of
dividing, or the Telescope-Sights are capable of distinguishing, or the
Perpendicularity ascertained, all the pains, care, industry, and curiosity,
bestowed about the other, are of no use.

First then, For fixing the Thread-Sights of the two Telescopes within the same
Tube, so as to look directly forward and backwards, care must be taken, that
every one of the four Glasses, that is to say, the two Object-Glasses, and the
two Eye-Glasses, must be so steadily and securely fixed into the Tube, that they
cannot by any means be stirred or removed; the manner of doing which, I
suppose, so exceeding easy, that I need not spend time in describing a way to
do it. Next, Sufficient care must be taken of the stiffness of the Tubes, that
they may not warp or bend. Thirdly, One of the Thread-Sights must be fixed as
firmly and securely as the Glasses, and so, that the crossing of the Threads
may be, as near as possible, in the Axis of the Object and Eye-Glass, the other
Thread-Sight must be left free, till by several trials it be found to stand
exactly in the same Line with the first; the manner of doing which, I shall now
describe.

There being two Threads which cross each other, the one Perpendicular and the
other Horizontal, care must be taken, that both these lie exactly in the same
Lines with the Horizontal and Perpendicular Threads in the other Sights; and in
order thereunto, there must be two Frames of Brass, represented in the 29 and
30 Figures of the 2d. Plate, of the bigness of the hollow of the Tube; these
must have groves made in the Tube fit to receive them, in which they may by the
help of Screws be moved, and made to slide to and fro, as there is occasion,
for their adjusting. Next, They must lie so close together, that the Hairs may
touch each other. And thirdly, They must cross exactly in the Focus of the
Object and Eye-Glass. One of these Frames must carry the Perpendicular Thread,
and by a Screw in the side of the Tube, must be moveable to the right or left
side, as there is occasion; the other Frame must carry the Horizontal Thread,
and by a Screw in the top of the Tube, must be made to rise or fall in the
Tube, as there is need. The Mechanical Fabric of which is so easy, that, I
hope, I need not spend time in the further Description thereof, but refer the
Reader to the 29 and 30 Figures.

These things being thus done, from the top of some Turret, or any other
Station, where two opposite places at a considerable distance, as half a mile,
or a mile or two, can be plainly seen, find out two Points, which, at the first
looking through your Glasses, you find to be shown out by the Crosses of the
Thread-Sights, then note those Points very diligently, that you may be sure to
find them and know them again, when you have removed the Glasses; this done,
turn the ends of the Tube, and (if you were looking Eastwards and Westwards)
turn that part toward the East which before looked Westwards, and vice versa,
and find out, the two Points you saw in the former Observation, then directing
that part that has the fixed Threads, to the Point that was seen before by the
moveable Threads, find out the other Point, which you will be sure to see
within the compass of your Eye-Glass, and observe how far the cross Threads are
now removed from it, either Northwards or Southwards, upwards or downwards,
then, as near as you can, by your judgment half that Difference, and by the
Screws move the Frames, that the Threads may stand in the middle between the
two Points, then take notice again of the Points shown by the Threads, and turn
the Tube again: Do this so many times, till you find upon converting the Tubes,
that you see the same Points to be marked by the Crosses of the Thread-Sights,
with which end soever you look on them, and then the Tube will be exact and fit
for use.

The reason of this adjusting will be sufficiently plain, to any one that shall
consider the 14th. Figure: Where let v represent the middle of the Tube tub, or
the place of the Eye, and let w represent the Object seen Westwards, and e the
Object Eastwards, at the first view; then keeping the middle of the Tube
exactly upon the same Point u, turn the end of the Tube t* toward the East,
and the end b* toward the West, and find out first the Eastern Object e, and
finding the other Cross to direct now to the Point p, and not to w, divide the
Distance between the Point w, and the Point p, as exactly as you can, in half,
which if you chance to hit exactly at first, it will be the middle Point m, but
if you do not, but you rectify it only to r, then by the next turning of your
Tube you will find s, where you must again rectify to half the Difference
between s and r; now the Difference being grown yet less, you will a 3d. or
4th. time set it so exactly, as to see the Points m and e, which lie in the
straight Line with the Center of the double Tube.

The 4th. thing wherein this Quadrant exceeds the Common, is for its
accurateness for taking Altitudes; and this is done by the help of a
Water-Level, for adjusting the exact Perpendicularity thereof. This Level may
be made and fixed so exactly, that any Observator may be sure of the Level of
his Instrument to a Second or two. The Level it self is nothing but a short
Tube of Glass, about 6 or 8 inches long, Hermetically sealed at each end, and
filled with a Liquor that will not freeze nor grow foul with standing.

The Glass, as near as can be gotten, should be Cylindrical and straight, it
being the better the nearer it be to a straight, provided it have a sensible
bending or swelling in the middle, the gibbous part of which should be set
upwards, and a proper Cell and Box made for it of Brass.

This Glass is to be filled almost full of distilled Water, to which about a
3d. part of good Aquafortis or spirit of Niter has been put* to keep the same
from freezing, and also from growing foul, then carefully sealed up
Hermetically, and placed in its Box of Brass, and with hard Cement fixed into
the same, which by Screws is fixed to that side of the Quadrant, that is to lie
Horizontal.

The Brass Box being thus fixed to the right side of the long fixed Tube ap ap
ap, and underneath the Quadrant, so as not to hinder the free movement of the
arm c c c, as at x x; the next thing to be done, is by it to set the Quadrant
truly Horizontal, which is thus performed.

Setting the side a p a p a p Horizontal, and the Limb of the Quadrant upwards,
and looking in at the Center, take notice of two Objects in the Horizon
opposite to each other, observe the limits of the bubble of Air on the top of
the Liquor* on each side of the middle of the Level, and make a mark, then
turning the ends of the Quadrant, set it, till the ends of the bubble stand as
in the former Observation; then look again at those Objects in the Horizon, and
find what the difference is between these opposite Objects, and those in the
former Observation; then halve the difference between them as near as you can,
and by your eye set the Sights to the middle between them, by inclining the
Quadrant, then by the Screw that rectifies the Level, set the Glass-Level so,
that the ends of the bubble may be equally distant from the middle, and convert
the Quadrant again, and see if the ends of the bubble standing at the same
marks, the two opposite Telescope-Sights do see the same Objects, for if so,
you are assured of the perfect Horizontality of the Sights, upon the fixed arm
of a p a p; but if you do not find it to direct to the same Objects, continue
examining and converting, till you find it perfect.

Now this way of Perpendicular being subject to the inconvenience of heat and
cold, which does rarifie and condense the Liquor, and consequently make the
bubble of Air less or more, care must be taken, to mark all the varieties of
those kinds of the bubble, that are caused by the degrees of heat and cold,
which you may thus easily effect.

Reduce the Liquor in the Tube of the 24th. Figure, by the help of Ice and
Salt, to as great a degree of cold as you can, then by the method newly
directed, set the Quadrant Horizontal, and mark the two ends of the bubble with
44, then by gently applying heat to the ambient Air, warm likewise the Water,
and observe the expansion thereof at both its ends, and mark them on the Glass
with the point of a Diamant, as 33. 22. 11. 00. which being done, it will be
exceeding easy at any time, to adjust the Quadrant to any accurateness
desired, by being careful to see, that the two ends of the bubble be
proportionably extended, as to 00* 11* 22. 33. 44, etc. or to any intermediate
space.

The Contrivance of fastening and adjusting this Level to the Quadrant or other
Instrument, will be very easily understood, by the Delineation thereof in the
24th* Figure.

Let a a a a represent the Frame or Plate of Brass, which by four Screws d d d
d, is fixed to the Tube, as before. This Plate has 4 upright Cheeks, b b, c c,
between which the Brass Box e e e e, (into which the Cylindrical Glass-Level f
f, is fixed with hard Cement) is held steady, without any manner of shaking.
This Brass Box, at the end of it near the right hand, has a Pevots, which are
fitted exactly into 2 small holes in the Cheeks c c, and at the other end next
the left hand, has a small Screw-Pin g, which holds it down fast to the bottom
Plate, and keeps it from rising out from between the Cheeks b b, which a very
strong Spring lying underneath it, between the Plate a a, and the Box e e,
would otherwise force it to do. By this Screw the Level is to be adjusted to
the Sights of the Quadrant, by the way I just now described, and being once
thus adjusted and fixed, it is not easily put out of order, without moving or
altering the*Screw g, which may easily be prevented by 100 Contrivances.

The Reason of the accurateness of this kind of Level, will be easily
discovered, if we consider, that the upper part of the Tube being very near to
a straight Line, is consequently either a part of a Circle of a very great
Radius, or of some irregular Curve, very near of the same nature with a Circle,
as to this business of Levelling, and consequently a Degree of the same will be
proportionably large, and the flexure of the Tube may be made of a Curve of so
large a Radius, that every Second of Inclination may cause a change in the
Level of a very sensible length.

This can hardly be performed by the ordinary way of Plumbets, without hanging
from a vast height, which is not practicably to be performed, without almost
infinite trouble, expense and difficulty, and when done, can be of no use in
the World, as any one will grant, that considers the vast Apparatus that is
requisite to obviate the great unsteadiness of Buildings, the motion of the
Air, and a multitude of other encumbrances.

Now the Curvature this way made may be a portion of a Sphere of 1000 foot
Radius, or more, if it be desired, and consequently a Minute of the same will
not be less then 2^/100 of a foot, and every Second will be almost half a
Centesm of a foot, which is sufficiently distinguishable to the naked eye. So
if the Glass Cylinder be 9 inches long, it may contain two whole Minutes of
such a Circle between f and f, and one between 4 and 4, and consequently the
said Glass may be set Horizontal to the certainty of a Second, which is hardly
to be ascertained any other way.

But there remains yet one great Difficulty, how to be able to make such a
Curviture, for though the thing be true in theory, yet is it not without some
trouble, put in practice. Very few Glass Canes are so conveniently bent, as is
desirable, and it is as difficult to find them true straight.

To prevent this, If Glass Canes be used, there must be much care taken, and
many trials made, for the finding what pieces, and what side of those pieces
will be most fit for this purpose, for our Glass-House Workmen know not yet a
way, certainly to draw them of this or that curviture or straightness, nor are
they easily ground into a straightness or curviture by the Glassgrinder
afterward, though that can be done with some trouble. But diligence and trial
will quickly find some piece or other, that will be sufficiently exact for any
trial, among those which are only drawn at the Glass-House. I made use of one
of another form, such as is described in the 25th. Figure, which I found to do
exceeding well, the dark part representing the Water, and the lighter part the
Air. This was made of two Glasses, drawn in distinct Pipes at the Glass-House,
but joined together in the Lamp, and the upper part of the larger or under
Tube, was incurvated with its convexity downwards, so that the Water touched
the middle part, and the bubbles of Air at each end thereof, communicated
together by the small Pipe above. I tried also another way, by which I was more
certain of the truth of the Curvity, and could make the Curvity of a greater
Circle: This was by a long piece of a Looking-Glass-Plate, ground very smooth
and polished, which by the help of Screws I bent upon the circular edges of a
brass prismatical Box, and cemented the same very tight, with hard and soft
Cement; this Plate had a hollow Channel ground in it the length thereof; which
served to keep the bubble in the middle. By this means, it is not difficult to
bend such a Plate, into the Curviture of a Circle of 50, 60, 100, 1000 foot
Radius, and the Brass Box can easily be made to fill or empty, as there shall
be occasion for the use thereof, so that the Bubble may be at any time left, of
what bigness shall be desired. It will be convenient also to varnish the
inside of this Brass Box with Lacker-Varnish, very thick and close, both to
keep it from rusting, and also to preserve it from being corroded by
Aquafortis, whenever there shall be occasion to put it in, for the cleansing
the inward tarnish and foulness of the Glass-Plate. This Curvity of the upper
side of the Level may be made, by grinding the under side of such a long Plate
of Looking Glass, upon a Unequal Glass-Tool of 50, 60, 100, 1000 foot Radius,
and polishing the same accordingly of that Figure: The Curvity of the said
Plate is expressed in the 26th. Figure. Now what by this way may be done with
Water and Bubbles of Air, the same may be done with the same Glasses turned
upside-down, by the help of an exactly round and polisht Cylinder or Globule of
Glass, Crystal, Cornelian, Agate, or other exceedingly hard and close Stone,
after the manner represented in the 27th. Figure, for the Ball or Cylinder will
naturally roll to the lowest part of the Concavity, and there stand. But in the
doing of this, great care must be taken, that the Globule be exactly round and
polisht, and that the Concavity of the Plate be as smooth and well polisht, and
that they be both very clean and free from dust, otherwise the Cylinder or
Globule will be apt to stand in a place where it should not, and consequently
produce considerable errors.

And here I cannot omit to take notice of a very curious Level, invented by Sr.
Chr. Wren, for the taking the Horizon every way in a Circle. Which is done by a
large Concave* ground and polisht on a very large Sphere, and the Limb of it
ground and polisht on a flat, for by placing the same Horizontal, and
rectifying it by a small quantity of Quicksilver, poured into the Concavity
thereof, 'twill be easy, by looking by the flat polisht Limb, to discover the
true Horizon. The only inconvenience I find in it is, that the has some kind
of sticking to the Glass, but a small Crystal Bowl, I suppose, may remedy that
inconvenience, and make it fit for use.

The 5th. thing wherein this Instrument is made to excel others, is in its
easinesses to be adjusted to the Objects, and in this, that being once
adjusted, the whole Instrument is so ordered, as that it will remain constant
to those Objects, though they are moved. The want of this is so great an
inconvenience, in all other Instruments hitherto made use of, that almost all
Observations have been thereby vitiated. And Hevelius, to prevent and obviate
this, has found out many Contrivances, but they are such, as though they do it
in part, yet it is but in part, and that with much trouble and inconvenience. I
need not spend time to show, how many inconveniences his way by 4 several
Hand-Screws, to be managed by 2 Observators at the least, is subject to; they
are indeed so many and so great, that it was not without very good reason, that
he so often appeals to experience, for the truth is, there was great need of
long practice and much experience, to be able to make an Observation in that
way well, the removal of every one of those Screws, having an influence upon
every one of the other, so as no Screw could be turned, but the whole
Instrument was put out of its due situation, and both the Objects being
continually in motion, the whole Instrument was to be rectified every moment.
There was therefore necessary so great a judgment and dexterity, to manage
every one of those Screws, that without an acquired habitude and handiness by
long practice and experience, nothing could be done to any certainty, nay, not
even to that little accurateness that the common Sights are able to reach. But
this, though it were a very great unhappiness to Hevelius, that he was not
furnished with better Contrivances, yet it no ways tends to his dispraise, for
his most extraordinary and indefatigable care, pains and industry, is so much
the more to be admired, esteemed and honored, and will be so much the more, by
such as have by experience found the difficulty, of making any one Observation
certain in that way.

But that he or any other, that has a mind to make further Trials and
Observations, may be freed from this intolerable trouble and difficulty, I
have thought of this following Instrument, by means whereof the Quadrant being
once adjusted, and set to the Objects, will continue to be so, for as long a
time as shall be desired, without at all requiring the help of any one hand of
the Observator, though he be but one.

My way then in short is this: I make an Axis of very dry and strong Dram-Fir,
of a bigness thick enough for its length, to defend it from bending; at the
lower end of this, I fix into the middle of it, (well bound and hoop'd about
with Iron) a Center or Point of Steel, very well turned, hardened and sharp,
which is to move in a conical hole fit to receive it, of as good and well
hardened Steel; at the other end of this Rod, I fix another piece of Steel into
the middle thereof, that, immediately contiguous to the Wood, has a Neck very
well turned and hardened, a little tapering from the Wood outward, which is to
be moved in a Collar fit for it, as I shall show by and by; and at a convenient
Distance from the said Neck, as at somewhat more then half the Radius of the
Instrument, is made a Cylindrical Neck, fitted with a Collar of Brass, with a
Joint, and other Apparatus, large enough to carry the Table and Instrument firm
and true, without sliding or yielding in its Socket, after it be once set. This
Axis by the Collar and conical hole below, I place parallel to the Axis, which
by some trials is easily enough adjusted; about the Cylindrical Neck, at the
upper end of this Axis, is a Socket of Brass fastened with a Screw, which Socket
claspeth in a Joint, a short Arm, which has at one end a Ball that is fitted
into a Socket, that is fixed under the Table and Frame of the Quadrant, and at
the other end a Counterpoise of Lead, to balance the weight of the whole
Apparatus, about the Quadrant, upon the middle Line of the long Axis, then the
Table and Quadrant is rectified, so as to lie in the Plain of the two celestial
Objects, whether Planets or fixed Stars, and by the small Screws in the Sockets
it is fixed in that Plain. What further adjusting is requisite, is done by the
help of small Screws in the Quadrant it self, which are easily enough conceived
without Description. The Table being adjusted to the Plain of the Objects, with
the Quadrant on it, and all counterpois'd pretty near by the poises underneath
the Table, and the fixed Sight directed to one of the said Objects, the said
Table and Instrument continues to be in that Plain, so long as is desired,
without any farther trouble to the Observer, though the Objects continually
change their places, and the fixed Sight remains directed at one of the Object,
till the other can be found by the moveable Sight. To effect which motion of
the Table and Instrument, a Watch* work is fitted to the Axis, so as to make it
move round in the same time, with a diurnal revolution of the Earth, and
consequently to keep even pace with the seeming motion of the fixed Stars; the
manner of doing which is thus: About some part of the Axis, where it is most
convenient for the Room in which it is to be used, six an Octant of a Wheel of 3
foot Radius, let the Rim of this be turned true to the Centers of the Axis, and
cut the edge thereof into 360 Teeth, there being so many half minutes of an
hour in the 8th. part of a whole Revolution, though these minutes and hours
which respect the fixed Stars, will be considerably shorter then the solar
hours; then fit a Worm or Screw to these Teeth, that one revolution of the Worm
being made in 1/^, a minute may move one Tooth forward; the revolution of the
Worm is adjusted by a circular Pendulum, which is carried round by a Fly,
moved in the form of a one wheeled Jack, from a swash toothed Wheel, fastened
upon the shank of the Worm or Screw abovementioned; the weight that carries
round this Wheel must hang upon the shank of the Worm, and must be of about a
3d. or 4th. part of the weight of the Quadrant and Table, that it may carry it
round steadily and strongly; and the circular Pendulum must be so ordered, that
the Observator may at any time of his Observation either shorten or produce the
length thereof, so as to make it move quicker or slower, as there shall be
occasion, which is done, by sliding the hole upon which the Pendulum makes its
conical motion, a little higher or lower, without lifting up or letting down
the Pendulum, or else by winding up the Thread of the Pendulum a little
shorter, or letting it down a little longer, by the help of a Cylinder, above
the hole or apex of the Cone, in which the Pendulum is moved.

This whole Contrivance will be somewhat better understood by a Delineation.
Let ab then in the 15th. Figure represent the Axis of Fir or Iron, c the
conical Point at the bottom, d the conical center or hole in which it is to
move, e the Collar above, in which the tapering Neck of the iron far f is to be
moved. The Axis of this is to be placed as exactly as may be, parallel to the
Axis of the Earth: at the end or head of the Iron fg, is fitted a Socket hh,
with a Screw 4, which will fix it to the head in any posture. This Socket hh in
the 15 and 16 Figures, has a large Joint to be stiffned by a Screw 5, in which
Joint is moved a strong Bar of Iron, about 4 foot in length, to wit, 2 foot on
each side of the Joint, the one end 6 has a large weight or counterpoise of
Lead 8, which serves to counter-ballance the whole weight of the Frame and
Instrument upon the other, and can be screwed either nearer to or farther from
the Joint, as there shall be occasion for poising; at the other end of the Iron
is a large Ball of Iron 7, to which is fitted also a Socket of Brass 9, with a
Screw to fix it and move it, as there shall be occasion. This Socket is fastened
under the middle of a Table ss, upon the plain side of which the Quadrant is to
lie. Upon some convenient part of this Axis is fixed an Octant or Sextant of a
Circle, represented in the 15th. Figure edge-ways, and in the 17th. Figure
broadways, by 33 ii, whose circular edge 33 is cut into Teeth, as before is
directed; unto these is adjusted a Worm or Screw k, which is the Axis or Arbor
of the Wheel lll; this Wheel is moved round by the weight x, whose Line is
coiled round the Barrel uu, and with it it turns round the Fly nn, by the
help of a Screw m, fixed upon the Arbor oo, in the manner of the Fly of a one
wheeled Jack; this Fly moves circularly the Pendulum pp, in the 15th. and
29th. Figures, which is shortened or lengthned, by slipping up and down the
Cylinder qq, the Thread of the Pendulum being fastened at r.

I shall not now spend any more time in the Explication of the making or
contriving the circular Pendulum, reserving it for another opportunity and
Discourse, wherein I shall show several useful Contrivances and Inventions
about the same, and particularly about this and some other Experiments of
motion, which was the cause of the Invention thereof by me long since, in the
year 65. Upon which occasion, I cannot but take notice of a Publication, made
by Christianus Hugenius Zulichemius Constable. F. in his Book called, Horologium
Oscillatorium sive demotu Pendulorum ad Horologia aptato demonstrationes Geome
tricae; containing a short Description of a circular Pendulumwith somewhat
about the Explication of it, without naming, me at all, as concerned therein,
though I invented it, and brought it into use in the year 1665, and in the year
1666, I communicated it to the Royal Society, at their public Meetings, both
as to the Theory and Practick thereof, and did more particularly explain the
Isocrone motion of the Ball of a Pendulum, in a parabolical Superficies, and
the Geometrical and Mechanical way of making the same move in such a
Superficies, by the help of a Paraboloeid, which I caused also to be made and
showed before the same Society, upon several days of their public Meeting,
where besides many of the Society, were diverse strangers of foreign parts.
This many of the Royal Society can bear me witness, and the public Registers
thereof do testify and make appear, and I was told by Sr. Robert Moray, that
he did then write to Monsieur Zulichem concerning the same. But of this more
hereafter, when I examine some other things in that Book, about finding the
descent of heavy Bodies, and of finding the Longitude of places, and publish
some more certain and practicable ways of doing them.

This puts me in mind of publishing an Invention, which I made and produced
before the Royal Society, in the same year 1666, much about the same time that
I produced the Theory and Experiment of the circular Pendulum complete, which I
called the perfection of Wheel-work, as being indeed founded on a principle
capable of the greatest perfection can be imagined. It is in short, First, To
make a piece of Wheelwork so, that both the Wheel and Pinnion, though of never
so small a size, shall have as great a number of Teeth as shall be desired, and
yet neither weaken the Work, nor make the Teeth so small, as not to be
practicable by any ordinary Workman. Next, That the motion shall be so equally
communicated from the Wheel to the Pinnion, that the Work being well made,
there can be no inequality of force or motion communicated. Thirdly, That the
Point of touching and bearing, shall be always in the Line that joins the 2
Centers together. Fourthly, That it shall have no manner of rubbing, nor be
more difficult to be made then the common way of Wheel-work, save only that
Workmen have not been accustomed to make it.

First then, If there be a certain number, and no more of Teeth required to be
made in a small Wheel, then must the Wheel and Pinnion consist of several
Plates or Wheels, lying one besides the other, in the manner they appear in the
20th. Figure. Where suppose it be required, that the Wheel shall have 1000
Teeth, and the Pinnion 100, and yet that the Teeth both of the Wheel and
Pinnion have sufficient strength; take 10 Plates all of equal bigness and
thickness, and by 2 or more Screws fix them firmly together, as if one Wheel,
cut this Wheel into 100 Teeth, and complete it, then fit the middle hole upon
the round neck of an Arbor, then unscrew the Plates, and place them in such
order, that the Teeth may gradually follow each other, much after the manner as
is expressed in the 20th. Figure, (though it be there very ill expressed, by reason
of the mistake and failure of the Graver) and with such steps, that the last
Tooth of one Degree, may within one step answer to the first Tooth of the next
Degree. I call the 10 Teeth comprehended within the lighter part, abcd, or
efgh, or iklm, a Degree of Teeth in steps, and dcfe, or hgki, are Degrees of
Notches between the Teeth, and the Tooth bc, which is the last toward the
right hand, should have been placed within one step as low as eh, the first of
the next Degree on the left side, (though it be much otherwise here graven)
whence all the inequality in the touching, bearing or rubbing, in a Wheel-work
thus well made, would be no more then what could be between the 2 next Teeth in
one of the Degrees, which would be much less then a 10th. part, of what must
necessarily happen in a Wheel of one Plate of 100 Teeth only.

Secondly, If it be desired, that the Wheel and Pinnion should have infinite
Teeth, all the ends of the Teeth in the Degrees of the 20th. Figure, must by a
Diagonal slope be filed off, and reduced to a straight, as in the 21, which may
indeed be best made by one Plate of a convenient thickness, which thickness
must be more or less according to the bigness of the sloped Tooth. And this is
to be always observed in the cutting thereof, (though it be otherwise and very
falsely expressed in the 21 Figure) that the end of one slope Tooth on the one
side, be full as forward as the beginning of the next Tooth on the other, that
is, that the end bc of one Tooth on the right side, be full as low as eh, the
beginning of the next Tooth on the left side, (though by the Gravers mistake it
be here quite otherwise expressed.) I shall not spend more time in explicating
the Pinnions, rstu, rstu, of the 20 and 21 Figures, which are to answer the
Teeth of the Wheels, they being plain enough to any person a little versed in
Mechanics, and because the further and more full Explication of the form and
reason of this and other Wheel-work, is comprised in another Discourse, which I
may afterward publish.

But to proceed where I left at this Digression, to the finishing of the
Description of the Instrument for moving the Quadrant, so as always to respect
the Object. The conical hole, in which the end of the Axis is to move, may be
made after the form expressed in the 18th. Figure, where aaaa represents an
iron Frame screwed fast to the Floor, bbbb the iron piece, containing the
conical steel hole, cccc 4 long Screws, by which the piece is moved and fixed
in any part of the space, included within the Frame aaaa; this by a strong
springing Frame underneath, is kept down close to the Superficies of the Floor,
and cannot in any wise totter or shake. There is no great difficulty in the
Contrivance, and therefore I shall proceed.

In the next place then, having showed the way how to keep the Instrument, in
the Plain of two Objects that are to be observed, I shall show, by what means a
Quadrant may be kept always Perpendicular, and in the Azimuth of the celestial
Object. And this I do, by a small addition to the former Contrivance; that is,
Let ab in the 22 Figure, represent the Axis described in the former
Contrivance, accommodated with all the Contrivances of the moveable Center
below, of the Clock-work of the circular Pendulum, to keep it moving equally
round in the middle, and of the Collar e above. But unto the small Neck f must
be joined a semi-circular piece of Iron cd, with a Center-hole in each arm at c
and d, to receive the Pevots ii, of the circular piece of Iron x, in the 22 and
23 Figures; upon the second Floor oo, must be steadfastly fixed a Bow or Frame
of Iron hh, which must have a hole through it, exactly over the middle of the
Plate x, this is to be a Collar for the Neck k, of a perpendicular Axis lk,
which by means of a moveable Center fixed in the cieling, in which the Point l
moves, may be exactly adjusted to a Perpendicularity; to this Axis at right
Angles is fixed a Frame mm, steadied by the Brakets or Braces nn; upon this
Frame the fixed Sights of the Quadrant, are laid and adjusted to an exact
Horizontality, and the Plain of the Quadrant being once adjusted to the Plain
of the celestial Object, will by the circular Pendulum moving the Axis ab, in
an equal motion with that of the Object about the Axis of the Earth, be always
kept in the Plain of the Object, whose Azimuth and Altitude is to be observed.
Now the motion of the under or inclining Axis ab, is communicated to the
perpendicular Axis lk, by means of the circular Plate x, in the 22 and 23
Figures, for the semi-circular Arms cd of the lower Axis, taking hold of the
Points 11 of the Plate x, and the semi-circular Arms of the upper Axis, taking
hold of the Points 22 of the said Plate, the perpendicular Axis is moved in a
proportionate motion with the inclining Axis ab, which Proportion is
Geometrically and strictly such as it ought to be, to keep the Plain of the
Quadrant exactly in the Azimuth of the celestial Object, as any one never so
little versed in Geometry, will easily find; and I shall hereafter more at
large demonstrate, when I come to show, what use I have made of this Joint, for
a universal Instrument for Dialling, for equalling of Time, for making the Hand
of a Clock move in the Shadow of a Style, and for performing a multitude of
other Mechanical Operations.

The next thing I have to explain, is the way of finding how many Revolutions
of the Screw, and what parts of a Revolution go to make a right Angle, or 90
Degrees upon the Quadrant. For the doing of which, I must, in a place where I
can have a good Prospect for a Semicircle, first direct both the Sights of the
Telescopes directly at the same Object, and the same Point thereof, and then
rectify the Indices to o, or the beginning of the Divisions; then I turn the
Screw, till as near as I can measure with Compasses, the moveable Telescope
has moved a Quadrant, and through the three Telescopes take notice of three
Points in the Horizon, that is to say, two Points exactly opposite one to
another, in respect of the Center of the Quadrant, and a third pretty near the
middle between them, in the same respect, which I further adjust thus; I showed
before how I rectified the fixed Sights, so as to look exactly forwards and
backwards, which being accordingly done, I observe the supposed right Angle,
with the moveable Sight on the Quadrant, and with the Sight fixed on the
Quadrant looking forwards, and note diligently the two Objects pointed at; then
without moving the Screw, or moveable Arm upon the Quadrant, I find those
Objects through the moveable Sight, and the fixed Sight, looking backwards, and
directing one of the Sights exactly to one Point, I observe, how much the other
does vary from the other Object, either by being within it or without it; then
I half that Difference, as near as I can judge by my Sight, and move the
moveable Sight by the help of the Screw, so as to respect the middle Point:
Then I observe this second found Angle, by the fixed Sight looking forwards, and
by the moveable Sight, and see whether there be any Difference, and if I find
any, as near as possible, I adjust it again, to half this last Difference, and
so continue to examine and adjust, till I am certain, that the Angles on each
side of the moveable Tube, between the same and the Sights, looking forwards
and backwards, are equal to each other, and consequently are both right Angles,
or Quadrants of a Circle. Which when I have found, I observe, by the Indices on
the Screw-Plate and Limb, how many Revolutions, and what part of a Revolution,
the Screw has been turned to open that Angle; this Number I set, as the Number
answering to 90 Degrees, and dividing that Number into 90 equal parts, I have
the Numbers that belong to every Degree, and dividing the common Difference
between them into 60 parts, I find the Numbers answering to the Minutes of the
Quadrant, and dividing the common Difference between the Minutes into 60 parts,
I easily make the Numbers answering to the Seconds; but these will be needless,
for subducting the next Number, less then it in the Table from the Number
observed, you have the Degree and Minute, and some Number perhaps over, which
may presently be found by one small Table of the common Differences of Seconds.
See page 55.

Here me thinks I hear some object possibly, That the Divisions on the
Quadrant, do not exactly correspond to the Divisions made on the Plate. I
answer, That in part they do, and in part they do not. First, They concur, in
that all the Divisions made by whole Revolutions, show exactly the same by the
Indices, that they do upon the Quadrant. Secondly, I say, in part they do not,
that is, the parts of any single Revolution, are not exactly and Mathematically
the same pointed out by the Index, upon a Ring equally divided, that are made
upon the Limb of the Quadrant. But yet, I say, they are sensibly equal even to
the sense, assisted by a 60 foot Telescope, and consequently need no manner of
rectification; but yet if any one will be so curious and nice, he may make the
Divisions on the Index-Ring, according to the proportion of the Differences of
the Tangents, that are subtended within half the compass of the distance of the
two next Threads. As suppose in the abovementioned instance, half the Distance
of two Threads be the Tangent of three Minutes, or thereabout; if we examine
any large Table of Natural Tangents, we shall find the Differences between the
Minutes themselves, even till six Minutes, (which is much more then double
three) does not differ above one or two parts of a thousand thousand, which is
1000 times more nice, then our Sight, even with Glasses, can arrive to, much
less then will be the difference between the Differences of the Seconds; and
therefore it will be a niceness merely notional, and of no use, and as such,
ought to be omitted, and the plain and equal Divisions made use of, they being
as to all sense true and perfect, and proper Divisions, though as to curiosity
of Theory and Calculation, unequal.

Now I have done, possibly some may say, To what purpose all this curiosity? To
which I answer, That though possibly in many common cases it is of but little
value, yet I conceive in general, that it is of infinite value, to any that
shall design to improve Geography, Astronomy, Navigation, Philosophy, Physics,
etc. And to instance in some particulars, I conceive,

First, That one use of this Instrument, may be for taking the exact Refraction
of the Air, from the Horizon to the Zenith; by which we shall be able not only
to rectify all Observations, and clear them from Refractions, which in some
Observations, especially those of Parallax, is absolutely necessary, but it may
give us a new means to judge of the qualities and constitutions of the Air, as
to the seasons of the year, and the temperature of the weather, which are to
succeed. For it is most certain, that there is as great a variety in the
refractiveness of the Air, as there is in the heat and cold, gravity and
levity, dryness and moisture, rarefaction and condensation thereof, and
sometimes when none of those do seem at all to be sensibly altered, its
refractiveness has been very much varied, which change does seem to proceed
from some alterations in the upper Regions thereof, far removed from the
Superficies of the Earth, and is sometimes many days in descending and
fermenting, as it were deeper and deeper, into the lower Regions of the Air,
before it descend so low as the bottom thereof next the Earth. But of this much
more in another place.

A second use is for regulating the places of the fixed Stars, as to their
Longitudes and Latitudes, and Distances from one another, especially those
within the Zodiac, by which we shall in a short time be able to judge, whether
those Bodies that we account so fixed and constant, do not vary their Positions
one to another, which I have very good grounds to believe they do.

A third use of this Instrument, is for regulating the places of the Planets,
by their Appulses to those fixed Stars, so that not only Astronomy will be
perfected, but the Longitude of places upon the Earth, (a thing so highly
advantageous for Trade and Navigation) will of consequence follow, which
without such an Instrument as this, is in vain expected from the Heavens.

A fourth use of this may be for stating the exact Latitude of places to a
Second, whereby we shall quickly know, whether those Latitudes do vary, as well
as the variation of the Loadstone, which has been conjectured, not without
somewhat of probability, but is hardly to be determined, without some such
accurate way of Trial, as this Instrument is capable of performing.

A fifth use of it may be, for examining what influence the approach or recess
of the other Planets have upon the Earth, as to its Periodical motion, and what
influence the Earth has upon them as to theirs; for I have good ground to
believe, each of these to have influence upon one another, and to cause such
motions, as have hitherto much confounded all Astronomical Hypotheses and
Calculations: Of which I shall say more on another occasion.

A sixth use may be for measuring the quantity of a Degree upon the Earth; the
best Experiment of that kind, that is yet public to the World, is that of Mr.
Norwood, made between London and York: But if we examine with what Instruments
he made it, we shall find, that he was not certain in either of his Latitudes
to a Minute, and consequently could not be certain of the quantity of the
Earth, answering to his supposed mark to two miles, and consequently it could
not be made the common standard of all measure. But by the means of this
Quadrant, all Latitudes may be certainly taken to a Second, and consequently
the error in 150 miles, cannot be more then the 30th. part of a mile, and
consequently a foot, or yard, or red, this way stated, cannot vary above a 6000
part of its length, which is sufficiently accurate for a universal and common
standard of all measure and quantity, to which all other measures in the World
should be referred and proportioned. This was the occasion of the contriving
and making thereof; His Sacred Majesty having commanded me to see that
Experiment accurately performed, and to give Him a true Account thereof, which
had been before this performed, had not my indisposition of health prevented.

A seventh use may be for measuring the Distance between two places, exactly in
a straight Line. This it will perform to admiration, by the exactness of taking
the Angles, if some length be exactly measured at the place that is to be the
Object, insomuch that it is hardly possible, by any other means in the World, to
come to that exactness, nay, though there were a continued Plain extended
between the two places, whose Distances are to be found, and the same were
carefully measured with Chains, Rods, or Wheels. By this means the Distance of
a Ship on the Sea, can be found more exactly, then any other way whatsoever, by
one or two Stations, and a multitude of Philosophical Trials under this Head,
which are not practicably to be done with any tolerable accurateness, by other
ways.

An eight use may be for taking the exact Diameters of the Sun, Moon, and
Planets, even to a Second, and the Distance of the smaller appearing Planets
from the sixth Stars, near adjoining. Now because for this Design, it may
perhaps seem a little too cumbersom, and by reason of its short Tubes, somewhat
too small, I have therefore contrived an Instrument of 6 times the length or
radius, which will take in an Angle of about 5 Degrees, and yet take in the
whole Angle by one glance of the eye, and determine the measure thereof to less
then a Second. I have likewise invented and made a new Helioscope, by which the
Body of the Sun may be looked on as inoffensively to the eye, as a sheet of
white Paper; of great use for such, as will make Physical Observations of that
glorious Body. These I will in some ensuing Papers describe.

A ninth may be for exactly taking the Level, for the conveyance of a River or
Water from place to place; and under that Head of performing infinite of
Philosophical Experiments, which can hardly be tried by any other way in the
World, about the Refractiveness of the Air near the Earth, whereby distant
places sometimes appear, and sometimes disappear, under the Horizon. By this
means also the Rotundity of the Earth may be truly found, vastly surpassing
any thing performed by the best Levels yet known. To this we may add, the
height of Hills, if their distance be known, or their distance, if their height
be known.

I could have enlarged upon these, and have named diverse others; but designing
it only as an Answer to such, as may captiously put such a Question, I shall
rather leave the pleasure of finding them, to such as shall really seek them,
to be assisted thereby in their own undertakings.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 2. l. 13. r. 9/10 p. 6. l. 14. r. aquilae. p. 13. l. 3. r. Mathematician.
p. 15. l. 11. r. Fig. 32. p. 13. l. 28. r. Fig. 31. p. 18. l. 39. r.
structuram. p. 21. l. 26. r. dena minuta. p. 21. l. 27. r. discriminatim. p.
22. l. 3. r. Fig. 35. p. 28. l. 34. r. quaedam. p. 32. l. 21. r. shaking. p.
33. l. 8. r. focus. p. 39. l. 28. r. res. p. 40. l. 11. r. admoveant. p. 40. l.
39. dele se.


