Righteousness Rained from Heaven, OR A Serious and Seasonable DISCOURSE
Exciting all to an earnest enquiry after, and continued waiting for the
effusions of the Spirit, unto a communication and increase of Righteousness:
That Faith, Holiness and Obedience may yet abound among us, and the Wilderness
become a fruitful field, As it was Delivered in a SERMON Preached at Harford on
Connecticut in New England, May 10. 1677. Being the Day of ELECTION there.

By Mr. Samuel Hooker, Pastor of the Church of Christ in Farmington.

Isai. 44. 3, 4. For I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods
upon the dry ground: I will pour my spirit upon thy seed and my blessing upon
thine offspring. And they shall spring up as among the grass, as willows by
the watercourse.

Psalm 80.19. Turn us again O Lord God of Hosts, and cause thy face to shine
(...) shall be saved.

Lam. 5.21. Turn (...) unto thee O Lord and we shall be turned, (...) our days
a^ of old.

Cambridge: Printed by Samuel Green. 1677.

Christian Reader;
IT is an Observation certain and solemn, that Isreal's Holy one is none in a
peculiar manner to bare witness against the wantonness and sins of his Covenant
people, that have been singularly favored and privileged by him, Amos 3.2.
You only have I known of all the Families of the Earth, therefore I will punish
you for all your iniquities: The disobedient, regardless behavior of his Sons
and Daughters carries an excess of provocation, Deuteronomy. 32.19. When the Lord saw
it he abhorred them, because of the provok^ng of his Sons and of his Daughters:
In what awful and tremend^us manner the Lo^ds anger has been of late in
special, made to appear against his wilderness people, is not soon or easily to
be forgotten: such an Adnersary ( the worst of the Heathen, Ezekiel. 7.24.
brutish men, and skilful to destroy, Ezekiel. 21.31.) stirred up against u^^ the
sword gone through the land, and thereby wasting and terror, de^^ation and
death, carried up and down: how have the mighty fallen, blood and flames
abounded unto a fearful consumption in the midst of the earth? The Inhabitants
of so many Villages made to cease even in Israel, and some Candlesticks also
removed out of their places. Alas for the vineyard that his own right hand has
planted, how has he taken away the hedges thereof, that the Boar out of the
wood should waste, and the wild Beasts of the F^rrest devour it: w^ h^v^ been
delivered to the Sword, Cap^ivity and Spoil: That the Lord is righteous in all
his ways, and holy in all his works, is a truth always to be acknowledged,
however terribld he is in dispensations toward the sons of men. Sins more then
enough have been found with us to deserve all our sufferings, that we sin no
more least a worse thing come to us is the duty incumbent, and earnestly now
called for: however ready the Lord our God (whose compassions fail not) has
shown himself, in wrath to remember mercy, and repent him of the evil, yet will
our impeni^ency (if still continu^d) without fail make him weary of repenting:
Sin not forsaken, we may expect, will be followed with a renewal and increase
of judgment, for all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand stretched
out still, for the people tu^neth not to him that smites them, etc. Isai.
9.12, 13. He has further, sorer punishments to inflict on a people, that by a
progress in sin carry on the provocation, Lev 26.16. etc. for certain our
s^ff^rings will be greatned if our sins be not lessened, the former will rise
unless the latter fall: nor will any thing herein suffice, short of a through
work show will not (nor is it meet they should) be accepted without the inside
Spirit and life of conversion. It is laid to Judahs charge, as no little evil,
that she turned not with her whole heart, but feignedly, Jer. 3.10 when heart
circumcision becomes generally wanting among a professing people, they may look
for woe, Jer. 9.25, 26. And yet nothing less then an almighty power can perform
the thing that is needful for us herein: means have not been wanting (what
could have been done more) word and work, Law and Gospel, Mercies and
Judgments abundantly improved, to how little purpose and prevalenc^, with
many, very many, the observing eye may lawfully discover: our help and hope is
in heav^n; heart-su^ng thither for his salvation is eminently the work before
us: and therein Solomon's great request in behalf of the congregation of Israel
is exceedingly suited to our condition, 1 King. 8.57, 58: The Lord our God be
with us, as he was with our Fathers, let him not leave us nor forsake u^, tha^
^e may incline our hearts unto him, to walk in all his ways, and to keep his
commandments and his statutes, and his judgments which he commanded our
Fathers: protection all would have but conversion we must want, may this be
New-Englands mercy we shall live: the heart-inclining presence of the God of
our Fathers g^anted and continued to us: his Spirit poured out on the seed of
his people, and his blessing upon their offspring, that as we are (through
grace) the seed of the blessed of the Lord, we may also be a seed which the
Lord has blessed; This is of all the mercies we want, the most needful weighty
and desirable, and accordingly with utmost care, fear and faithfulness to be
groaned after and waited for.

To awaken, excite and encourage to this so necessary a work, is the design of
the Treatise following: the solemnity of the truth it self therein insisted on,
our concernment in it, with its peculiar seasonableness give it abundant
commendation. The judicious Author was by a compassionate hand toward us,
pointed to this Subject, and with an eminent assistance (some circumstances
attending him, in special considered) carried out in the handling of it, to the
great satisfaction of them that heard him That it may be not acceptable only
but sanctified and made effectually successful to the attainment of the end
therein aimed at, by a blessing from heaven, powerfully accompanying it to the
minds and hearts of them that read it (as it is here, after some considerable
throws of difficulty, delivered to a more public view) is the hearts desire
and prayer of him, who is

Thine sincerely in our blessed Savior, John Whiting.

HOSEA 10.12. For it is time to seek Jehovah until he come and rain
righteousness upon you.


IN the Words foregoing, the Prophet gives Israel a discovery of the
uncomfortable terms on which they stood at this time with God: they had been
disobedient, and undutiful in their behavior, as appears in the 1, 2, 3, 4,
and 5th verses he was grieved and angry with them, as in the tenth [It is in my
heart to chastise them.]

The way by which he was minded to do this was the Inrode of the Heathen [And
the People shall be gathered against them.] The God of Israel is the Lord of
Hosts. He does according to his will in the Army of Heaven, and among the
Inhabitants of the Earth. He hisseth for the flies that is in the utmost parts
of the Rivers of Egypt, and for the Be that is in the land of Assyria, and
makes them to rest in the place where he appoints, Isai. 7.18, 19. it became
Israel therefore when they saw the Nations gathering against them, to eye God
who in his anger had mustered and given them a charge so to do. The Assyrian is
the rod of his anger, and the staff in their hand is his indignation, they
move not till he sends, they make no spoil until he gives the word of
command, 2 King. 24.2, 3. And the Lord sent against him bands of the Caldeer,
and bands of the Syrians, and bands of the Moabites, and bands of the children
of Ammon, and s^nt them against Judah to destroy it. Surely at the commandment
of the Lord came this upon Judah.

The Prophet adds [When they shall hind them in their two furrows] here
Interpreters are variously minded: some take the words to signify the ground,
and some, the event of the ensuing War; those that incline to the former,
conceive the Prophet to compare the people to untamed Bullocks, impatient of
the yoke, and disused to plow, that will not keep the furrow, but turn, now on
the right hand, and then on the left; so this people, instead of going right
forward in the way of truth, which is but one halted betwixt two, balked in
their obedience, and perverted their way: their heart was divided, as in the
second verse of this chapter, they were crooked in their doings, and fix^d in
their frowardness, therefore God was purposed to chastise them. vide Zanch. in
locum.

Others carry the words to d^note the issue of the War, which was like to be
sad on Isreal's part; for though they did unite and bind themselves with utmost
resolu^ion, to abide in their trenches or furrows, for their own defense. yet
a^l in vain, Gods counsel should stand, and the Heathen ^aving a charge from
him would certainly tread them down. So Calvin, Their Enemies p^evailing
against them, would enfo^ce them to miserable bondage and slavery, mak^ng them
drudge like Oxen at plough. So Mercer. But why will God do thus by his people?
It is answered [Ephraim is a Heifer that is taught, and loves to tread out the
Corn] In those times they were wont to tread out the Corn with the trampling of
beasts: and God had commanded concerning the ox, while improved in that
service, that he should not be muzzled: this was pleasanter work then plowing:
and this Ephraim was for, a cheap Religion pleased him. They were grown
sensual, sluggish, remiss and wanton in their Profession, 1 Kin. 12 26, 27, 28.
Jeroboam said in his heart, now shall the kingdom return to the house of
David, if this people go no to do sacrifice in the house of the Lord at
Jerusalem: whereupon he took coursel and said unto them, It is too much for you
to go up to Jerusalem, Behold thy Gods O Israel. If they might pick and choose
among Gods Precepts, took and leave as they lifted, well and good: but to be at
so much pains as a conversation commensurate to all Gods commands required they
could not bear. Thus Pharaoh The Lord be so with you as I will let you go,
Exodus 10.10. I will order the matter, and let Jehovah comply and take up with
what I shall see cause to appoint; But God resists the proud.

It follows therefore [But I passed over upon her fair neck,] God had dealt
bountifully with Israel, made him ride on the high places of the Earth, that he
might eat the increase of the field, and he was grown fat, Deuteronomy. 32.13, 14. but
they abused his kindness, waxed proud and unruly, and would serve no further
then would serve their own turn, making their own pleasure not Gods the rule of
their obedience: wherefore God had already passed, over their neck, laid
afflictions upon them, and had made their glory then, and the fatness of their
flesh lean, if thereby they might have been tamed and reduced unto a thorough
subjection to his will: but this did not do; wherefore he adds [I will make
Ephraim to ride] inasmuch as lesser chastisements did not avail, God threatn^th
to deal more roughly with them, with a stronger hand, violently to break in
upon them, and fend them into Captivity. So the word [Ride] sometimes
imports, Job 30.21, 22. With thy strong hand thou opposest thy self against
me, thou l^ftest me up to the wind, thou causest me to ride, and dissolvest my
substance. Judah shall plough, and Jacob shall break his clods the rest who
went not into captivity should see a great deal of hardship and abasement,
though not so much as those that rode and were scattered among the nations.

Upon this in the 12th verse, He exhorts them unto reformation and amendment
of their ways [Sowe to your selves in righteousness] that their reformation
might be sound, and such as would hold, he counsels to bottom it on
repentance, [Break up your fallow ground] whatever men may pretend at present,
or promise for the future, unless they repent, and sorrow after a godly sort
for sin past, their reformation proves like seed scattered on Land that never
was broken up, which comes to nothing in the issue.

Reap in mercy] Though their Repentance and Reformation could merit nothing:
yet if they would sow in righteousness, and break up their fallow ground.
Mourn aright for sins past thorough the forbearance of God, and amend their
doings: then they should reap a blessing and inherit prosperity, through the
benignity and kindness of God: denoting that they must be beholding to mercy
when they had done all they could, Ephesians. 2.8. By Grace ye are saved thorough
Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. So we are come to
the Text.

For it is time to seek the Lord till he come and rain righteousness upon you.
In which words the Prophet amplifieth on his former Exhortation, partly
directing in it, and partly exhorting to it.

1. He directs in it, Seek ye Jehovah; set not about this great work of
Reformation in your own strength. Take God along with you, engage him in it;
your plowing and sowing will signify nothing unless he rain down a blessing on
your endeavors. 2. He exciteth to it, and encourages in it. It is true, that
the way of man is not in himself, neither is it in him that walks to direct
his own steps. You can do nothing without him, but he can do all for you.
Although judgment rises not out of the dust nor does righteousness spring out
of the ground, yet he that rides in his excellency on the sky can rain it
down, Isai. 45.8. Drop down ye heavens from above, and let the skies pour down
righteousness, let the Earth open, and let them bring forth salvation, and let
righteousness spring up together, I the Lord create it. He can by the power of
his spirit mightily change; when that is poured out from on high, Judgment
shall dwell in the wilderness, and righteousness remain in the fruitful field,
Isai. 32.15, 16. Therefore in the sense of our own nothingness, and believing
Gods power and grace: it becomes us suitably to apply our selves unto him. So
much for the scope of the words: More particularly for their meaning.
For it is time] The season calls hard: If the Husbandman loses his season,
he loses all, now is your opportunity; you are chastened but not destroyed,
you have a breathing time yet left: two things seem to be employed in it. 1.
Matter of encouragement, there was yet hope in Israel concerning this thing, in
as much as God was willing to be entreated for their help, therefore let them
be encouraged: it was not altogether too late. 2. Matter of awakening; It was
high time to look about them, no allowance left for sloth or security: now is
the acceptable time, now is the day of salvation; to day if ye will hear his
voice harden not your hearts.


To seek Jehovah] Seeking is the use of meet endeavors to find, Mat. 7.7. Ask
and it shall be given you, seek and ye shall find. Prove 8 34, 35. Blessed is
the man that hears me, waiting at the posts of my doors, for whosoever finds me
finds life. So that when the Text says, it is time to seek the Lord, the
meaning is, that it is time to wait on God in the use of all suitable means
until he come] He is the most glorious agent, none can do like God, He
[Performeth] all things for me, Psalm. 57.2. you may speak fair, resolve and
promise much, when under the dint of some signal providence, Ier 2.20. Thou
said, I will not transgress, when upon every high hill, and under every green
Tree, thou wanderest, playing the Harlot. Others may wish you well strive and
labor for your betterment, and yet righteousness not be wrought, Hos. 11.7.
They called them to the most high, but none at all would exalt him: but if
Jehovah come, he will make work with you, he will do the thing.

Raine] This implies, that in Jehovah our righteousness there dwells all
fullness. He has abundance of righteousness with him, and he can shed it forth
upon us abundantly, Tit. 3.5, 6. according to his mercy he saved us, by the
washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on us
abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Righteousness] This in Scripture Phrase signifies variously, sometimes it is
put for commutative justice, or strict, honest dealing, as opposed to goodness,
Romans 5.7. scarcely for a righteous man will one die, peradventure, for a good
man some would even dare to die. Sometimes it imports conformity to the
second Table, especially when joined with, and yet distinguished from holiness,
Luke 1.75. That we might serve him without fear in holiness and righteousness
before him all the days of our life. Sometimes it is put more largely, and
signifies the same with Godliness, implying a heart and life evangellically
conformable to Gods holy Law, Luke 1.6. and they were both righteous before
Gods, walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameless:
Thus it familiarly passes when put in opposition to wickedness, and iniquity,
Psalm. 45.7. Thou love righteousness, and hate wickedness, Psalm. 11 5. The
Lord tries the righteous, but the wicked his soul hates. This sense seems
to suit here, as opposed to wickedness and iniquity in the words immediately
following, ye have ploughed wickedness, ye have reaped iniquity, ver. 13.

On you] The posterity of righteous Abraham, Isaac, and Iacoh, the Lords
portion, the lot of his inheritance, least you degenerate into the plant of a
strange vine, and be laid wast at last.

The series therefore of the words runs thus, you have sinned and God has
afflicted you [He has passed over your neck] moreover you are still threatened
[it is in his desire to chastise you] But you are not destroyed; he has not
stirred up all his anger, you have yet a space to consider your selves and
recover your strength: now therefore it is time to seek Jehovah; O that the
Heavens would now drop down from above, and that the skies would pourdown
righteousness: that which you need, and without which the land is desolate, is
the rain of Gods power. The effusion of his holy spirit, to accompany and
influence word and ordinances, providence, mercies and afflictions unto
righteousness. That you may be a repenting, reformed, religious, holy people.
That is, 1. That you may cast out the love of all known sin, renounce
confidence in your own righteousness and strength, and be righteous by faith,
having the merits of Christ's active and passive obedience imputed to you, by
the efficacy of the infinite grace of God in the new covenant, Romans 4.6. Phil.
3.9. 2. That you may be inherently righteous, putting off the old man which is
corrupt, and put on the new, which is created after God in righteousness and
true holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. that the very God of peace may sanctify you wholly,
1 Thessalonians. 5 23. 3. That you may be practically righteous, denying all ungoliness
and worldly lusts, living soberly, godly and righteously, in this present
world; purging your selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting
holiness in the fear of God. These three go together, and in them consists
the righteousness commended to us in the Text.


The words thus opened afford us this Doctrinal Conclusion:

Doct. When a sinful People have been chastened, and are still threatened, but
not destroyed, it is time for them to seek Jehovah till he come and rain
righteousness upon them: that is, Till he by the efficacy of his almighty
spirit make them a believing, sanctified, obedient People.

Zeph. 2.2, 3. Before the decree bring forth, before the day pass as the
chafe, before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you, before the day of
the Lords anger came upon you. Seek ye the Lord, seek righteousness, seek
meekness: it may be you shall be hid in the day of the Lords anger. Ephraim at
length found this to be good counsel, Ier. 31.18. Thou have chastised me and I
was chastised, turn thou me and I shall be turned; Lord thou have made me to
know sorrow, to see and taste the bitterness of affliction; thou have taken
away my health, my peace, my pleasant things, O take away my sin too: make me
to see and know that it is an evil and bitter thing that I have forsaken thee.
Thus the Psalmist in behalf of the Church, when her shadow was departed, her
hedges broken down, and the Boar out of the Forest laid her waste, Psalm. 80.
for this he beseeched the Lord thrice, with growing importunity and
earnestness, like one in an agony, Turn us again, O God,

ver. 4. Turn us again O God of Hosts,

ver. 7. Turn us again O Lord God of Hosts,

ver. 19.

Daniel mentions it as matter of bitterness in the days of his solemn
mourning, that they had failed in this, Dan. 9.13. All this evil is come upon
us, yet made we not our Prayer before the Lord our God, that we might turn from
our iniquities, and understand thy truth. It is a lamentable thing, for a
person or a people to be in great affliction, and yet make little of
righteousness: This is that King Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 28.22.

Reas. 1. May be taken from the great necessity and precious excellency of
righteousness:

1. Its necessity: Righteousness is the one thing necessary. There is no living
for us without it, Prove. 10.2. Treasures of wickedness profit nothing, but
righteousness delivers from death. As Job said, we may all say, If I be
wicked woe be to me, Job 10.15. for so says God also, Isai, 3.10.11. Say to the
righteous, that it shall be well, but woe unto the wicked. The eyes of the Lord
are upon the righteous, and his ears are open unto their cry: but the face of
the Lord is against them that do evil, of cut off their remembrance from the
earth: Psalm. 34.15. The wicked are men of sorrows and death, many sorrows shall
be to the wicked. If therefore we be wicked, no wonder though Blasting and
Mildew, sickness and Sword come upon us.

The worst of miseries belong to such, Psalm. 9.17. The wicked shall be turned
to Hell, with all the Nations that forget God. And it is not parts or
parentage, or riches, or worldly bravery. It is not a form of godliness, a name
to live, or external Ecclesiastical privileges that can deliver* Nothing but
righteousness will do it, If we be godly in Christ Jesus; if we do
rightoousness and be righteous as he is righteous: this, this will stand us in
stead in a dark day, Isai. 38.3, 4 Remember now O Lord, I beseech thee, that I
have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that
which is good in thy sight: on the other hand, what is the hope of the wicked?
yet a little while and the wicked shall not be, thou shall diligently consider
his place and it shall not be, Psalm. 37.1^. What a necessity does this Text put
upon Righteousness.

1. Be Righteous, or you will be nothing: yet a little while and the wicked
shall not be. Such as take pleasure in unrighteousness drink in iniquity like
water, are in their element when sinning, live, walk, and love to live in the
commission of known sin, they are wicked, 2 Thessalonians. 2.12. and such shall perish
and consume away into smoke, Psalm 37.20. 2. Thou shall consider his place, and
it shall not be. O the distaste with which the holy God is carried against the
wicked. They are an abomination to him, his curse is in their house, Prove.
3.33. the very place in which they live is cursed for their sake, and in danger
to be desolate, Psalm. 107.33. When righteous Lot with his little company left
Sodom, and few or none but wicked were left there, you know what followed, Genesis
19.24, 28. Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrab Brimstone and Fire from
the Lord out of Heaven, and lo, the smoke of the Country went up as the smoke
of a furnace. And if Jerusalem will not be instructed unto Righteousness, she
may expect to be desolate, a land not inhabited, Jer. 6.8. 3. A little time
brings it to this; yet a little while and the wicked shall not be. The
triumphing of the wicked is short, and the joy of the Hypocrite for a moment,
Job 20.5, 6. He shall flee away as a Dream, yet a little while, and the
graceless, unbelieving sinner is damned, Mark 16.16. Yet a little while and a
p^opl^ having a form of Godliness, but denying the power of it, will in
likelihood come to nothing.
Moreover; Righteousness is an excellent thing, Prove. 12.26. the righteous is
more excellent then his neighbor. If God do persuade you to embrace and
receive Jesus Christ offered in the Gospel, to be your Lord and Savior, Joh.
1.12. If your hearts be clean and mingled not with any known sin, Mat. 5 8. If
you chose the way of Gods precepts, and walk in his fear, you shall be a
Treasure, Exodus 19.5. The excellent in the Earth, Psalm. 16.3.

But if wicked, you are little worth, Psalm. 10.20. Chaff and dross in Gods
account, and he will deal with you accordingly, Psalm. 1.4. The ungodly are not
so: but are like the chafe which the wind drives away, Psalm. 119.119. Thou
pu^test away all the wicked of the Earth like dross, therefore I love thy
testimonies. Yea the wicked are foolish and simple, vile, and loathsome, P^ov.
1.22. How long ye simple ones will ye love simplicity, and fools hate
knowledge: The foolish shall not stand in thy sight, thou hate all workers of
iniquity, Psalm. 4.5 a wicked man is loath^ome, and comes to shame, Prove. 13.5.
It is well for the land when such are kept down When the Righteous are in
Authority the people rejoice, but when the wicked bears rule, the people
mourn, Prove. 29.2. In a word our persons, our prayers, and all our works are by
God much, or little set by, as we have or want righteousness, Genesis 4.4, 5. God
had respect unto Abel and unto his offering, but unto Cain and to his offering,
God had no respect. The Author to the Hebrews renders the reason of this, Heb.
11.4 Abel was righteous but Cain wicked. The sacrifice of the wicked is an
abomination to the Lord, but the prayer of the righteous is his delight.

In further demonstration of the excellency of Righteousness, look upon it in
that one effect mentioned, Isai: 32: 17: And the work of Righteousness shall be
peace, and the effect of Righteousness, quietness and assurance for ever: Great
peace have they which love thy law, and nothing shall offend, Psalm: 119: 165:
Great peace, multiplied peace: (1) Peace with God: (2) Peace at home, in their
own bosoms: (3) Peace with men.


1. Peace with God, Rom: 5: 1: Being justified by faith, we have peace with
God: The righteous God loves Righteousness, his countenance does behold the
upright, Psalm: 11: 7: He and they are good friends; his secret is with the
righteous, Prove: 3: 32: But there is no peace to the wicked, says wy God:
Isai: 57: 21: He is far from them, Prove: 15: 29: and they may thank their own
naughtiness for it; He is the very God of peace, but the ungodliness, and
unrighteousness of men kindles his wrath, Rom: 1: 18: They will not meet him
in the thing that is right: And truly if Israel will none of him, Psalm: 8^: 11:
None of his wisdom to guide them, bu^ lean to their own understandings: None of
his Authority to rule them, but walk in the way of their own hearts: None of
his goodness to satisfy them, but go to broken cisterns, change him for husks,
carnal contentments: Slight his favor, despise his loving kindness, forget
him, put away the remembrance of him, say to him, depart from us, we desire not
the knowledge of thy name, like not to retain him in their knowledge; hate the
light, hold down the truth in unrighteousness; love pleasures more than God;
are studious to be seen of men, but careless to be accepted of Jehovah; seek
not his kingdom and righteousness, but worldly things and to suit their senses
in the first place: do not love, fear and obey him as God, but in their hearts
set up another as their chief good; rob him, break in upon his prerogative,
profane his Sabbaths, call not upon his name, do his work negligently, not as
they do their own; carry their hearts with them when they go into their shops;
and fields; leave them behind them when they go to his house and worship; fight
against him with his own goodness; turn the edge of his kindness against him,
not serving him with joyfulness and with gladness of heart in the abundance of
all things, (but as much as in them lies) make his power and providence, his
boun^y and care to serve with their iniquities; no wonder though on these
terms, the holy God will not be at peace with them. If thou do well shall
not thou be accepted, Gen: 4: 7: But these things are not well, they are not
right, they are iniquity, there is no fu^^ness, no equity in them: Wisdom and
truth will not, cannot own them, M^c. 2: 7: O thou that art named Jacob, is the
spirit of the Lord straitened, are these his doings? no, no, let the wicked
forsake his way, and the unrighteous his thoughts, let him turn to the Lord.
Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings, cease to do evil,
learn to do well, seek judgment and God will reason with you, Isai: 1: 17, 18:

It is true, there is not a just man upon earth that deeth good and sins
not. The best at their best fall exceedingly short of that love and obedience
which the Law in its perfection requires: But yet the deliberate fixed desire
and choice of their hearts; the settled bent of their endeavors is to be
righteous, Psalm. 1095, 30, 80 O that my ways were directed to keep thy
statutes. I have chosen the way of truth, thy judgment, have I laid before me,
let my heart be sound in thy statutes, Psalm: 139: 23, 24 Search me O God, and
know my heart, try me and know my thoughts and see if there be any wicked way
in me, and lead me in the way everlasting. How earnestly does Paul in his
desires and endeavors reach after righteousness, Phil. 3; 12, 13: Not as
though I were already perfect, But I follow after, reaching forth unto those
things that a^e before.

Now as a Father pittieth his child, so the Lord pittieth them that fear him,
owneth them weak, but knows they are not wicked, reckon^^h them according to
the better (which is also the rising, prevailing) part, and will in time drive
out the other, accepts them according to what they would and can do. They
having a glorious Advocate at his right hand, who makes their welfare his
business, Rom: 8: 34. Who is he that condemns? it is Christ that died, yea
rather, that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also
makes intercession for us.

It is his work, he is always at it, anticipating complaint^, ^upplying
defects, answering for, and rectifying what is amiss; so that as long as Jesus
lives, the p^ace of the righteous shall live also, Fph: 2: 14: He IS our peace
and as long as he IS their peace will be. This mon does the deed, Mich: 5: 5:
He holds the Father and all the Saints together, so that nothing can separate
them and the love of God, Rom: 8: 3^: They are complete in him, Col. 2: 30: so
that being considered on what Christ has done, and will do for and in them,
behold there is nothing wanting: but they are without spot or wrincle or any
such thing, Glory to God in the Highest.

2. Peace at home, inward contentment and quietness: This is an other fruit of
righteousness, Isai: 32: 17, 18: and the effect of righteousness shall be
quietness and ass^rance for ever: It is one of the woes of the wicked, to be
like the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, Isai 57 20 In the fullness of his
sufficiency to be in straits, Job 20 22 So that though he knows not well what
to desire more, yet he is not contented. It was wicked Haman^. complaint, when
he had told his Friends of the glory of his ^iches, and the multitude of his
children, and all the things where, (...) the King had promoted him, Esther 5
13 yet all this avails me nothing. Whereas godliness in the vigorous lively
exercise of it, leads the soul home to God the fountain of goodness, in whom
there is enough of that which is ad^quate and very suitable: Hence comet^
satisfaction, as with m^rrow and fatness. Godliness with contentment is great
gain, 1 Timothy: 6: 6. The Lord shall satisfy thy soul in drought, and make sat
thy bones and thou shall be like a watered garden, Isai. 58 11. But the
rebellious dwell in a dry land, Psalm. 68.6. they fall short of God in Christ,
who is all in all, and hence in the midst of all their Havings, indeed possess
nothing.

According to the method of the Gospel, Grace prepares the way to peace, Rom
17.1 Cor. 13. Grace be unto you, and peace. No grace no true peace; not but
that wicked men (while carnal contentments flow in upon them) may like Benhadad
and his accomplices, 1 King. 20.16 drink themselves drunk in their tents, and
ruffle awhile: But it is not peace for all that, while Conscience is asleep,
they may be secure to their cost: But God and an enlightened, awakened
Conscience that speaks after God, says, Peace only to the Righteous. The
truth is, when a wicked man's case is searched to the bottom, he will be found
not to be at peace with himself, or on good terms with his own heart: To the
wicked there is no peace, their own thoughts and hearts will fall out with
them, accuse and condemn them, in that day when God shall judge the secrets of
men by Jesus Christ, Romans 2.15, 16 Surely he shall not feel quietness in his
belly, terro^s are upon him, Job 20 20 But mark the perfect man, and behold the
upright, the end of that man is peace, Psalm 37 37 It is God that justifies
him, who is he that condemns. As soon therefore as the tumult is over, and
the righteous man can hear what God says, Psalm 85 8 his heart will be quiet,
and there is one anointed to preach gladtidings to the meek, who will not fail
in his trust, in whose hand it is to speak down all trouble, and create the
fruit of the lips, peace, peace.

3 Outward prosperity, peace one with another, Isai 32 17, 18 and the work of
righteousness shall be peace, and my people shall dwell in a p^aceable
Habitation, and in sure ^wellings, and in quiet resting places: Unrighteousness
is the great trouble of Israel, and indeed the Achan of the world, 2 Chronicles 15
3, 4, 5 When Israel had forsaken the true God, there was no peace to him that
went out, nor to him that came in, but great vexations were upon all the
Inhabitants of the countries, and Nation was destroyed of Nation, and City of
City, for God did vex them with all adversity. If God will vex a people they
shall be vexed. They therefore that vex his Holy Spirit, shall have trouble
enough. He can create darkness and evil for them: but if a peoples ways please
the Lord, he makes even their enemies t^ be at peace with them, Prove. 16.7.

There are two happy effects of the rain mentioned, Psalm. 69.9, 10. It settleth
the Earth, and inricheth the land, both these are eminently true of this
spiritual rain, Isai. 33.6. and wisdom and knowledge shall be the stability of
thy times, and the fear of the Lord his treasure. O how would a soaking shower
of righteousness settle our shaking times, repair our losses, and restore the
years which the Caterpillars, the Sword, and the Mildew have taken from us.
This would establish Sion, and make it a praise in the earth. We need not than
fear our enemies, God would soon subdue them: this would also mend out peace
one with another; Unrighteousness makes a c^^^ Isai. 5.7. He looked for
judgment and behold oppression, for righteousness but behold a cry: the less
righteousness the more complaining there will be in likelihood among us, and
until we can obey the truth in doing right each to other, is it to be expected
that contention will cease, Romans 2.8. To them that are contentious, and obey
not the truth, indignation and wrath.

Reas. 2. Because it is Gods prerogative to help in this case, Jer. 14.22. None
of the gods of the Heathen can cause this rain, neither can the Heavens give
it: Art not thou He O Lord our God, therefore we will wait on thee: Job 37.16.
Do thou know the ballancings of the Clouds, the wondrous works of him which
is perfect in knowledge. Godliness is a great mystery, 1 Timothy 3 18 the
foundation of it is laid in hidden wisdom, 1 Cor. 2 7. how great and costly a
work is it to make a generation of s^nners righteous. It is far easier to call
in the treasures of the snow, dissolve the ice, and renew the face of the
earth, then to make judgment dwell in the wilderness, and righteousness remain
in the fruitful field. The d^ffi^ulties which lie in the way of it, taken from
the strength of the law, and divine revenging justice, the subtilty, power and
rage of the Apostate Angels, the word? less, strengthless, dead estate in sins
and trespasses, in which we all lie naturally, are even to amazement. Hence
until infinite power set a work by free grace, influenced with the merit of the
precious blood and obedience of the Son of God steppeth in, it will not be
done. A mass of miracles meet together in it. The blind is made to see, the
deaf to hear, the leper is cleansed, and the dead quickened. Ephesians: 2.1, 2. and
1: 19, 20. He that raised up the World out of nothing by the word of his power,
must create it, or it will not be; you are his workmansh^p created in Christ
Jesus unto good works, Ephesians. 2.10. Isai 45.10. It is in the day of Gods power
that sinners are made willing to turn to Jesus Christ, Psalm. 110.3. and until
that day comes, Paul, Apollos and Cephas are nothing. Changes of men, and
gifts avail not, Jer. 7 25. Since the day that your fathers came out of Egypt
unto this day, I have sent unto you all my servants, the Prophet, rising early
and sending, yet they hearkened not unto me, nor inclined their ears.

2. Mercies melt not; Let favor be showed to the wicked, yet will he not learn
righteousness: that could have been more in this way then was done to Jeseron,
Deuteronomy 32.15. but he grew worse under all.

3. Corrections amend not Jer. 5.3. O Lord thou have smitten them but they have
not grieved, thou have consumed them, but they have refused to receive
correction, Dan 9 13 all this is come upon us, but we have not made our Prayer
before the Lord our God, that we might turn from our iniquities; their
captivity was almost ended, but the work of righteousness and reformation
needed to be begun.

3. Because the way which God in his wisdom and good pleasure has appointed
for us, to obtain his helping hand in this weighty case, is to seek him, Mat
7.7. Ask and have, seek and find, Zech 10.1 Ask ye of the Lord rain in the time
of the latter rain, so the Lord shall make bright Clouds, and give them showers
of rain. But he will be enquired of by the house of Israel to do this for them,
Ezekiel 36: 37: 1 Not that God needs to be told our indigent state; no, he
knows us quite through, and round about, Psalm 139.1, 2, 4.7. 2 Or that he is
slow to help: No, he is very pitiful, and of tender mercy, James 5.11. ready
to save, Isai: 38: 20. 3 Or that we can merit any good by our seeking and
striving, Rom: 9: 16: It is not of him that wills, or of him that runs,
but of God that shows mercy. 4 But he is minded that we in the sense of our
own weakness should acknowledge him in all our ways, and be trained up in a
constant dependence upon him, Prove: 3: 5, 6. 5 This honor also he is willing
to put upon man, to employ and improve him as far as may be in working out his
own welfare Phil: 2: 12, 13.


The Use that we should make of what has been said, is to Exhort, and Persuade
us to take the counsel given in the Text, Seek we Jehovah until be come and
rain righteousness upon us: Till he make us a religious, godly, righteous
people. That he would not only continu^, but powerfully influence the means of
grace, by his good spirit, for the turning of our hearts unto himself: that we
may be a God-omnifying, Christ-admiring, Sin-hating, Self-denying,
World-despising People.

That the Vine brought from far and planted here, may still retain its ancient
Nobility: even the same Spirit of Holiness which came after God into this
Wilderness when it was a land not sow^n. That we lose not our first love, our
first heavenly-mindedness, our first purity, our first peaceableness, humility
and seriousness; but may grow up in godliness and honesty as those to whom the
Gospel has come, not in word only, but in power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in
much assurance: That we may not only name the name of Jesus, but depart from
all iniquity, and converse as becomes the Gospel. The Lord God of our Fathers
even the God of all grace say so too: Seek him, O seek him, that it may be
thus: To persuade to this,

1 Consider whether it be not time to seek him on this account; this argument
is urged by the Prophet in the Text: does not the season ca^l aloud? what think
you, is it not time to ask this rain of God?

(1) Is not the old generation almost gone? when the old stock is sp^^^, unless
God v^sit the Earth and water it, sending a fresh supply, there is no living:
what a critical day was it with Israel of old, when Joshua and the Elders that
outlived Joshua and all that Generation, which had seen all the great works of
the Lord, were gathered unto their Fathers, Judges 2.7, 10: and [This rain
failing] there arose another generation that knew not Jehovah, and then how
soon did their prosperity and welfare sail also. They did evil in the sight of
the Lord, and they forsook the Lord God of their Fathers, and the anger of the
Lord was hot against Israel, Mich. 7.1. Woe is me, for I am a^ when they have
gathered the Summer fruits, as the grape gleanings of the vintage, there is no
cluster, the good man is perished: Time was, that good men grew in this land by
clusters, but now how thin: Lord visit the Earth, and water it.

2. Does not our ^^^d mourn for the want of this? how long shall the land
mourn, and the herbs of every field wither for the wickedness of them that
dwell therein, J^r. 12.2. How long shall we be smitten with Sickness, Drought,
Caterpillars, Blasting and Sword. How many Villages are already forsaken of
their Inhabitants, their High ways unoccupied? how many chosen young men are
fallen upon the high places of the field? how many Widows left solitary among
us, with their tears on their cheeks? how many mothers in Israel, weeping for
their children, and refuse to be comforted? because they are not: shall the
sword devour for ever, shall it not suffice? Is it not time therefore to seek
righteousness, that desolation and spoil may come to an end.

3. Has not a great deal of cost and precious pains been laid cut upon us,
that we might (if p^ssible) be righteous? When the principal Wheat is cast into
the Earth, and Seed-time over, Rain will soon be needed, and if it come not,
the Husbandman looks out earnestly; for alas, all is gone if God send not
rain. We have been instantly preached to for a long time: eminent favor also
bath been showed us; what a long day of bounty and patience have we enjoyed. At
sundry times also, and in diverse manners we have been afflicted, especially in
later years: now shall all this be in vain? truly, if there come no rain, if
God send not his spirit to water, word and Providence all will be lost. And if
we be preached to, but without profit, favored but not taught righteousness,
chastened but not amended, what shall we do in the end thereof?

If a man sets at a high Rent, and has no increase, but his crop fails
him year after year, be breaks at the last: truly unless the rain comes, and
righteousness springs up in the wilderness, considering at what a Rent we
se^, we cannot expect to hold it long: to be barren under so much bounty,
undutiful notwithstanding so many corrections and fatherly chastisem^nts: To
have so many Sabbaths, Counsels, Instructions, Warnings, the labor and lives
of so many of Gods p^ecious servants to answer for, will surely sink us at
last, Isai. 5 4, 5. therefore when I looked that in should bring forth grapes,
brought it forth wild grapes, and now go to, I will tell you what I will ^o ^o
my Vineyard, I will take away the Hedges thereof, and it shall be eaten up?

2. Consider your selves who you are, and of what consequence it is, that
righteousness be rained down on you;]

Have you not Abraham to you Father? are you not the offspring of the
righteous, and will you degenerate into a strange plant? dare you continue
wicked? will you not be like your Fathers? It is noted of Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.3.
that he was churlish, and evil in his doings, and he was of the house of Calth.
Alas, alas; of the house of Caleb; he was a man of an other, of an excellent
spirit; what a fool and of the house of Caleb; a son of Belial and of the house
of Caleb; Oh that such a branch should spring out of such a Stock: Shall the
faithful City become an Harlot, it was full of judgment, righteousness lodged
in it, now Murderers, Isai. 21.

It was an aggravation of their sin, Judge. 2.17. that they turned quickly out
of the way which their fathers walked in, obeying the commandments of the Lord;
but they did not SO; your Fathers were a humble, holy, obedient people, and
will not you be SO: your Fathers did Justice and Judgment, and will not you do
SO: Your Fathers walked with God, kept their seasons of reti^ement to their
close's, to pray and seek God, do you do SO? your Fathers called the Sabbath
honorable, the Holy of the Lord, and were conscientiously careful not to do
their own ways, nor find their own pleasure, not speak their own words,: are
you for any manner of talk when the Sabbath is come? do you say, what a
weariness is it? and account it the burden of the Lord of Host, did your
Fathers do SO? were the Sabbaths wonted to be spent in the houses where you
dwell as you spend them? shall the holy example of those that have beaten the
way to Sion before you, be of no account in your eyes, in a Land of
uprightness; will you deal unjustly and not behold the Majesty of the Lord,
Is^i. 26: 10: Verily, we had need to seek the Lord till he come and rain
righteousness on us, That when he shall look into our houses, he may not say,
what have I here? Isai. 52.5. Is this the house of such a precious godly man?
are these his children? is this the Nation that I gathered out of the midst of
a Nation, with a mighty hand, and a stretched out arm? Is this the people for
whose sake I rebuked the Heathen, saying, (when they were few in number, and
strangers in the land) Touch not mine Anointed, do my Prophets no harm. Were
they a proud, idle, intemperate, unmerciful Generation of men, were not their
faces set for Heaven, their language the language of Canaan? was not holiness
to the Lord written on their ways? and will you be worldly and profane, drink
and swear, riot and be wanton, deride Religion; scoff at the ways or servants
of God: O take heed, take heed, lest the names you bear, the houses you dwell
in, the estates you inherit, the places you sustain, rise up in judgment
against you, and increase your condemnation at the last.

Believe it sirs; it is a dangerous, a very dangerous thing to forsake the ways
of truth and holiness, when sweetened, and in a manner naturallized, by the
practice and example of godly Patents, 2 Chronicles. 21.12 and there Came a writing
to ^ehoram from Elijah the Prophet, saying, Thus says the Lord God of David
thy Father, because thou have not walked in the ways of Jebosaphat thy Father,
nor in the ways of Asa King of Judah, etc. Behold with a great Plague will the
Lord smite thy People, and thy Children, and thy Wives, and all thy Goods; and
thou shall have great sickness by disease of thy bowels, until thy bowels fall
out, by reason of the sickness day by day.

3. If God rain not righteousness on you, it may be expected that he will rain
something else: Se^k this gentle rain, that the storm of his wrath fall not on
you, Psalm. 11. Upon the wicked be shall rain Snares, Fire, Brimsione, and an
horrible tempest, this shall be the portion of their cup.

4. Weigh the advantage that comes by righteousness, that is much every way;
Godliness is profitable for all, 1 Timothy 4.8. having the promises of this life,
and that which is to come: it will stand you instead while you live, when you
dye, and to eternity.

(1.) While you liv^ Mat 6.33. First seek the Kingdom of God, and his
righteousness and all these things shall be added: If God give you
righteousness he will give you all, Romans 8 32. Psalm. 37.27. Depart from evil
and do good, and dwell for evermore, i. e. live as long as life is good, God
does not grudge, but delight in the prosperity of the righteous, Psalm. 35.27.
(2.) When ye dye; the sting of death is sia, when that is out there is no
danger. Hence Righteousness delivers from death, the death of the righteous
is scarce worthy the name of Death, Psalm. 22.26. they shall praise the Lord
that se^k him, your heart shall live for ever. Death (though a^ enemy to
nature) shall thorough grace in Jesus Christ do them no harm, but further their
good and welfare, lifting them home to their Fathers house, where there is
fullness of joy and pleasure for evermore, Rev. 14 13. Blessed are the dead
which die in the Lord, that they may rest from their labors and their work^
follow them. (3.) Righteousness is profitable to eternity, Mat. 25.46. These
shall go into everlasting punishmen^, but the righteo^^ into life eternal: God
will never a done showing kindness to the godly man.
How many are the good ways and the comfortable words which he has spoken
concerning such.

1. He loves them dearly, and that the world shall know before all be done,
Ioh. 17.23. That the world may know that thou have loved them as thou have
loved me: he loves to see their faces and hear their voice, Cant. 2.14. when
he speaks of righteous. Noah, how does he repeat his Name over and over, as
if it were sweet to him, and he loved to have it in his mouth, Genesis 6.8, 9.
Noah was a just man and perfect in his generation, and Noah walked with God,
and Noah, etc. why might not once naming of Noah have served thorough that
short discourse, but to declare that his name is sweet. Noah, Noah, O Noah, I
love Noah, Noah is a godly man, a good, holy man: God has set apart him that
is godly for himself, Psalm. 4.3. when he mak^th up his Jewels men shall return
and see a difference, Mal. 3.17, 18. 2. God will bless them greatly, Psalm. 5.12
For thou Lord wilt bless the righteous with favor, will thou compass him as
with a shield.
1. He will take care of their persons, Psalm. 121.7, 8. The Lord shall preserve
thee from all evil, he shall preserve thy soul, the Lord shall preserve thy
going ou^, and thy coming in, from this time forth and even for evermore. 2. He
will bless their substance: The curse of the Lord is in the house of the
wicked, but he blesses the habitation of the just, Prove. 3.33. A little that a
righteous man has is better then the riches of many wicked, Psalm. 37.16. 3. He
will not forget their names, Psalm. 112.6. The righteous shall be had in
everlasting remembrance. 4. He will show kindness to their relations also,
Psalm. 128.2, 3, 4. Blessed is every one that fears the Lord, it shall be well
with the^, thy wife shall be as a fruitful nine, thy children like olive
plants: the seed of the righteous shall be delivered, Prove. 11.21. The mercy of
the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting, upon them that f^a him, and his
righteousness unto childrens children. 5. He will shine on their endeavors,
Psalm. 1.3. All that be does shall prosper, but one sinner destroyed much good:
wicked Abah having a share in Ichosaphats ships spoiled the voyage, 1 King 22
48, 49. 6. He will make them blessings, Genesis 12.2. I will bless thee and thou
shall he a blessing. If you be righteous many shall be the better for you: your
counsel, your company, you example will now be all precious; your tongues shall
be as choice silver, and your lips feed many, Prove. 10.20, 21. your prayers
will avail very much, Iam. 5.16. your fellowship will now be desirable; a godly
man is a companion for a Prince. Psalm. 119.63. I am (says King David) a
companion of all them that fear thee, and of them that keep thy precepts, and
good reason, for their fellowship is with the Father and the Son, 1 John 1.3.
He withdraws not his eyes from the righteous, but with Kings are they on the
throne, Job 36.7. moreover righteousness will advantage you for places and
employment of trust, Neh 7.2. I gave my Brother Hanani charge over Jerusalem,
for be was a faithful man, and feared God above many. The integrity of David's
heart did greatly meliorate the skilfulness of his band, and was the main thing
in Gods eye, when he took him from the sheep-folds to be King in Israel, 1 Samuel
16 7. In a word, the only true foundation of universal blessedness is laid in
righteousness, Prove. 10.25. As the whirl. wind passes, so is the wicked no
more, but the righteous is an everlasting foundation.
5 Consider the sweet and inviting terms on which God stands with us in this
matter, Mat. 7.7. Ask and have, Jam 1.5. If any man lack w^sdom, let him ask it
of God, who giveth^ be^all, to to all, and it shall be given him, Luke 11 13.
How much more shall your heavenly Father give his Holy Spirit to those that ask.

Quest. But how may we so seek God as to find him, and a supply of
righteousnes^ from him?

Answ. 1. Seek him heartily and sincerely, Isai. 26 9. With my soul have I
desired thee in the night season, with my spirit within me will I seek thee,
Jer: 29.3. And ye shall seek me and find me, when you shall search for me
withal your heart. God will not be mocked in any case, much less in this which
is of such high importance. It was Isreal's folly of old, Psalm. 78.36.37. when
he slew them thou they sought him, they enquired early after God, nevertheless
they did flatter him with their mouth: they lied unto him with their tongues:
take we heed least we fail here. It is time to make righteousness our design,
to Preach for this, Pray for this, Hear for this sincerely, heartily; least
while in show we seek ^his, but with our hearts go after other things, we lose
this and other things too, Mat. 6.33. Blessed are those that hunger and thirst
after righteousnesi: for such will be beyond complement, and seek in truth.

2. Seek seasonably, early, speedily, 2 Cor: 6: 2: Behold now is the accepted
time, behold now is the day of salvation; to day if you will hear his voice
harden not your hearts. Lose not you day, while God calls, while his spirit
moves, while life la^teth, while you have liberty, means, helps and advantages
about you, before the decree come forth, seek righteousness least the Clou^s
return after rain; least your Sabbaths be again turned into days of labor,
and weatiness, hazard and hardship: lest instead of the voice of the Turtle,
you have the noise of War, least you come too late to be accepted, Numb. 14:6,
7. The Spirit of God strove earnestly by Joshua and Caleb, to persuade Israel
to go forward, but in vain, for In their frowardness and fit, they ^et up their
spirits, and would not hearken.

Wherefore in the 28: and 29: verses, God gives forth bis decree, As truly as
I live, says the Lord, as ye have spoken in mine ears, so will I do to you,
your carkases shall fall in the wilderness: after this they changed their mind,
ver: 39, 40: The People mourned greatly, and they rose up early in the morning,
and gat them up into the top of the mountain, saying, Lo we be here,, and we
will go up unto the place which the Lord has promised: but their motion take
not. Though they rose early, though they mourned, and went up to the mountain.

Obj. But has not God said that those that seek him early shall find him,
Prove. 8.17.

A. True: but man's early is many times Gods late, Prove. 1.28 Because I have
called, and ye refused, I have stretched out my band and no man regarded, but
ye have set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my reproof: I also will
laugh at your calamity, they shall seek me early but they shall not find me.

3. Seek him earnestly: Seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness,
with that intention and height of desires, which becomes the worth, excellency
and necessity of the thing sought. Righteousness is the principal thing life is
in it: win it and you win all, miss it and all is lost; O therefore seek
importunately, not only with your hearts sincerely, but with all your hearts
strongly. Warm your spirits with the consideration forementioned, reallize
them, mix them with faith, meditate much on them, that you may be suitably
raised in your desires and endeavors after righteousness.

4. Seek him humbly, with a heart broken down and abased in the sense of sin
and misery, weakness and unworthiness. The sacrifices of God are a broken
spirit, a broken and a contrite heart he will not despise, Psalm. 51.17. He
forgets not the cry of the humble, Psalm. 9.12. but until our fallow ground
be broken up, it will not be Gods time, to come and rain righteousness upon us.
It behooves us therefore, to remember the Wormwood and the Gall, and to have
our souls humbled within us: to sit alone and put out mouths in the dust, if
there may be hope for us, accepting the punishment of our iniquity: for our
destruction is of our selves, our own sword has devoured our children: we have
procured these things unto our selves: but our help is not in our own hand. Be
it that eternal salvation, the welfare of our whole man, the preservation of
the land, our lives, our little one^, our peace, our liberty, all good depend
upon our unfeigned ^urning to God in Christ, and being righteous; yet this is
wholly beyond our power, we have no might for it, Turn thou me, Jer. 31.18.
herein appears the ^etchedness of a natural man. Should God pass by all
former provocations, and say to him, do but this one thing and all shall be
well, love the fountain of goodness, who is also thy life: although nothing can
be more rational then this, yet he is unto nothing more impotent and averse,
Romans 8.7. The carnal mind is enmity unto God, is not subject nor can it be.

Moreover we cannot deserve that God should turn us, we are ungodly and enemies
as well as without strength, Romans 5.6, 10. If therefore after many other
judgments which have come upon us for our sins, God should now give us up to a
blind mind, and a hard heart, fill us with our own devices, leave us to a
reprobate sense, make the heavens over us to be brass, command the clouds that
they rain not on us, withhold his free spirit, send a dry wind not to fan, nor
to purge, but to blast all means, making his word and ordinances, changes of
mercy and affliction to be a savor of death unto death. He would be righteou^,
it is true, without righteousness we perish. It is as true that nothing but
infinite grace, working without, yea against deserts of ours can make us
righteous. When therefore we pray for righteousness, we may well take David's
words, Psalm. 9 1. Have mercy upon us O God of our righteousness, and hear our
prayer.

5. Seek him believingly, with a holy dependence upon the mercy, power, truth
and faithfulness of God in Jesus Christ. Remember James His BUT, Jam. 1.6. But
let him ask in Faith.

(1.) Our sins are indeed many, and our iniquities very great but there is
merit enough in the blood of Jesus to redeem them from all, 1 John 1.7. (2.)
Though all means are of themselves, weak, and utterly insufficient to subdue
our corrupt and rebellious wills, yet with the Lord Jehovah there is
everlasting strength; if he will he can convince, enlighten, humble, persuade,
sanctify, quicken and enlarge uncontroleably, when he will work none can let.
It is nothing with him to save, 2 Chronicles. 14.11. (3) You have the countenance of
Gods command to encourage in going to him for righteousness: so the Text before
us: thus Zeph. 2.2. Seek righteousness, Mat. 6.33. now let us improve this
word, not only to awe conscience, but to strengthen and annimate faith, Mark
10.49. Be of good comfort, arise, he ca^eth thee. (4.) You have the shadow of
the promise to sit in and wait Luk 11 13. how much more will he give his Spirit
to them that a^k him. (5.) Consider the example of poor needy sinners that have
gone before you: what happy welcome found Ephraim, Jer. 31 19 surely I have
heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus, Thou have chastised me and I was
chastised, turn thou me and I shall be turned, is Ephraim my dear child? It is
unto God a most acceptable request, to ask of him the rain of righteousness: He
had rather we should seek him for the meat which endures to eternal life than
for that which perishes.
Let it be to him for a name and a praise for ever. Oh the depth of the riches
of the wisdom and love of God, who knowing our frame, and how eager we are, in
our pursuit of inferior things, makes a bait of them, wherewith to draw us to
him for such as are infinitely better, even his Kingdom and Righteousnes^,
Mat. 6.33.

6. Seek him unanimously: The stress lies here, therefore lift together. We in
New England are a poor and an afflicted people: It is not for us to rejoice
with other Nations in our number or our strength; but that mattereth not, if
God be with us we shall do well enough, notwithstanding our poverty, our
littleness, and mean outward estate. Past experience proclaims it, that our
hazard lies not in these things. If the mun^tion of Rocks be our defense we
are safe: Can we desire greater serenity peace, and safety, then we have
enjoyed in years past. Jeko^ab^ arm is not shortened, there is no shadow of
turning with him. If we be righteous he will love us, and we shall dwell safely
by his side. If any thing undo us it will be sin, our unrighteousness our want
of the fear of God, our want of love to Jesus Christ, our forsaking the
fountain of living waters, our undutiful and provoking carringe to the Angel
that leads us by the way: but if righteousness be rained on us all will be
well. It is enough, O therefore let every one put in for that with all the
strength he can make.

1. Fathers, Ancient Christians, ye have been at the beginning of the work of
God in this Country, and you are greatly concerned in the progress of it: lose
not the things ye have wrought, for which ye have prayed, and wept, and
travel'ed, and ventured so much: you have in some measure experienced the worth
of Righteousness, labor as for life that it may live when you are dead: your
Glass is even out, you are almost at home, strengthen the feeble knees,
brighten your example, shine in the fear of God, let not your sun go down in a
cloud, your prayers avail very much, O sp^ak yet again unto God for this poor
land in which you so journe, least he bring evil upon it by slaying your Sons.

2. Young men, ye are strong, let not sin overcome you; consider the price that
is in your hands; Religion privileged as sometimes it has been, and thorough
grace still is in this Land, is a costly Legacy, take heed you do not forfeit
it: let not the fear of God dye as long as you live: shall it be said in time
to come, that godliness dwelt in the land until you arose, but then failed:
shall this ruin be under your hand; O seek the Lord till be come and rain
righteousness on you.

3. Ye Masters of Families, will not you and your houses serve the Lord? surely
it is time for you to seek him also: The fcundation of all societies is laid in
families; you therefore who are Leaders in them, and have the first seasoning
of young ones had need look to your selves. If the Foundations be destroyed,
what can the righteous do? If the Springs be corrupt what will the Streams be:
consider the great t^ust which God has committed to you, and command your
children and Household after you to keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and
judgment, that the Lord may bring upon them that which he has spoken of the
righteous: see that your example be good, that those who come after you, and
tread in your steps may walk safely. Let not your vain conversation be a
stumbling block in the way to Heaven, least your children rise up and call you
cursed at the last, for the irreligion and profaneness which you have taught
them.

4. Ye house of Aaron, this matter belongs in a special manner unto you; Ye
are the Lords Ministers, O weep betwixt the Porch and the Altar, and say, Rain
down Righteousness on thy People Lord; and give not thine Heritage to reproach;
wherefore should the Heathen say, where is their God?

It is your Office to teach Jacob Gods Judgments, and Israel his Law: Take
beed therefore to the Ministry which ye have received in the Lord that ye
fulfill it. Preach Righteousness ^o your Congregations, plainly declare and
powerfully p^ess that Grace of God which brings Salvation: Make it your work
to watch for Souls, as those that must give an account: Be instant in season
and out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long-suffering and
doctrine. Soke your Sermons in prayer, print them in your practice and
conversation. Follow the example of the Baptist, who was the voice of one
crying in the wilderness, Joh. 1.23. (all voice) his word and his works, his
language and his life spoke this, make strait the way of the Lord, go ye, and
do likewise.

5. Ye also who are Judges in the Land, the Lord make you higher then the rest
of the people from the shoulders and upward in wisdom and holiness: the Lord
give you an open mouth for righteousness, Prove. 31.8, 9. Let your eyes be upon
the righteous in the Land to encourage them, promote Religion, bear up against
sin, suppress iniquity; put life into your wholesome Laws by vigorour execution;
thus do in the fear of the Lord faithfully, and with a perfect heart. Be it
that the Battle is against you before and behind, yet be of good courage and
play the men for your people, and for the Cities of our God, and the Lord do
what seems him good.

7. Seek him perseveringly, mind the language of the Text Seek the Lord
(until) be come; then shall we know if ye follow on to know the Lord, Hos. 6.2.
pray always with this prayer, and do not faint, Luke 18.1. ye therefore which
make mention of the name of the Lord, give him no rest till he ^a^^ down
righteousness on the land.

To Conclude, Seek God by all means, in all his own ways: 1. Maintain a high
esteem of the Word and ^rdinances of God: woe be to you if your souls loathe the
Manna, or call it a light food 2 Take heed you be not overcharged with the love
of the world, and the cares of this life, these ^ho^k the Word. Be clothed
with the Sun, and let the Moon be under your feet. 3. Study the method of
conversion held forth in the Word and fall in with the good spirit of God
breathing in the same, to the wonderment of men and Angels, life and
immortality are come to light, thorough the Gospel. There is a sure way to save
sinners opened thorough Jesus Christ: admire it, study it, labor to know it:
set your hearts to it, and follow it: let wisdom enter, and understanding be
pleasant: love the light, but on a humble teachable frame of spirit, entertain
conviction kindly: Be content to know the worst of sin, look upon it in that
peculiar, direct opposition in which it stands to the wisdom and goodness,
authority and holiness of God in the command: see it in its sad effects; the
end of these things is death. Behold it thorough the bloody glass of Christ's
sufferings; look on it from a deathbed, and as it will look on you at the
last. Give that honor to God, to believe that he has good reason for all that
he has said against sin in his word, concluding that at length sin will prove
to be as he has spoken, and if God and you can be of one mind about sin, the
great difficulty is over Fall in love with Jesus Christ, let him have a name in
your hearts above every name that is named in this world or that which is to
come, Cant. 5.10, 16. Hate all the pleasures of sin, let all external
privileges, personal performances, and worldly employments, be dung and dross
in comparison of winning him, and being found of God in him. Do duty with
conscien^ious care and diligence, but say not to the works of your own hands,
Ye are our Gods. Go not about to establish a righteousness of your own, but
submit your selves to the righteousness of God. Abraham found by experience
that the Handmaid taken into Sarahs place brought with her great v^xation,
insomuch that at length he was put upon it to cast her and her Son quite out of
doors.


But least I be tedious let me shut up all with this word:

Be not discouraged: To the Lord belongs righteousness and salvation,
although to us confusion of face. The residue of the spirit is with him, who
knows but he may return and make his work appear to his servants, and his
glory to their children? Jerusalem was greatly fallen, Isai. 1.21. when of a
faithful City she was become a Harlot, and from being full of righteousness and
judgment to be full of Murderers: But God lifted her up again, Jer. 31.23.
Thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, as yet they shall use this
speech in the land of Judah, and in the Cities thereof, The Lord bless thee O
habitation of justice, and mountain of holiness. He can strengthen the things
that remain, which are ready to dye.

There was a time mentioned, Mark 9.14, 15. in which Christ being withdrawn to
the mount, his Disciples were hard put to it below. The poor man brought to
them his Son which had a dumb Spirit, but they could not cast him out, at
length Jesus came down, took to himself his mighty power, rebuked the fool
Spirit, healed the Child^ comforted the Father, and sent the multitude away
am^z^^, and wond^ing at all the things which he did. Truly we have (...) time
wherein to experience the naughtiness of our own hea^^^ how bent we are to
backslide and go off from God, as also (...) ^akeness and utter insufficiency
of all means in themselves ^^^dered to keep us with God, or reduce us to him
when tur^^^ ^^^y^^. But it may be Christ will shortly. come down, and then
(...) ^^ll ^^mended, Jer. 17: 14. Save as O Lord and we shall be (...), heal us
and we shall be healed, for thou art our praise. ^^^er us seek him therefore
till he come, for he loves Righteousness; and has not forsaken them that seek
him.

FINIS.

