Childrens Talk, ENGLISH and LATIN, divided into several Clauses: Wherein the
Propriety of both Languages is kept.

That Children by the help of their Mother Tongue may more easily learn to
discourse in good Latin amongst themselves.

There are also Numbers set down betwixt both, which do show the place and
natural use of any Word or Phrase.

By Charles Hoole Mr of Arts, L C. Oxon. Teacher of a Private Grammar-Schoole
betwixt Goldsmiths-Alley in Red-cross strert and Maiden head Court in
Aldersgate Street, LONDON.

M. Cord Lib. 3. Coll. 34. Latin it self does consist rather in Use and
Authority, then Reason or Rule.

LONDON, Printed for the Company of Stationers, 1659.

PUERILES CONFABULATIUNCULAE, ANGLO-LATINAE, in varias clausulas distributae:
Observato utriusque Linguae idiomate.

Quo sc. Colloquia sat been Latina facilius open vernaculi pueri conterant.

Positi sunt insuper utriusque confiniis Numeri, quibus uniuscujusque vocabuli
vel Phraseos indicatur locus and usus genuinus.

A CAROLO HOOL A. Mro e Col. Lin. Oxon. Privatae Scholae Grammaticae
Insti^utore inter Aurifabrorum diverticulum in Rubrae Crucis, and aream
Virginei Capitis in Alneae Portae vicis Apud Londinates.

M. Cord. Lib. 3. Col. 34. Ipsa Latinitas usu and autoritate magis quam ratione
constat.

LONDINI, Sumptibus Societatis Stationariorum.

MDCLIX

To his really respected good friends, Mr. Joseph and Mr. Humphrey Primate
Citizens of London.
YOur desires are (worthy Sirs) to have your Sons gain a faculty of speaking
Latin, as well as English; a thing which I observe many parents wish for, and
some Schoolmasters more studiously labor after; but the many difficulties
that attend the work (especially in a Mort Language, and with Children not
thoroughly grounded, many of whose Parents, being illiterate, or intending
something else, do not care, or afford any encouragement to have their Sons
brought up in a Scholar-like way) has made most of our Profession, either not
at all to undertake the task, or not till a perfect knowledge be had of the
Grammar Rules, which is very rare, (I had almost said impossible) before
discretion.

To help forward your good wishes herein, I have formerly furnished them with
store of words; and some necessary Rules, or directions, how to put them
together in form of Speech, imitating ever and anon the expressions of those
Authors, whereof they were then capable. And observing that Colloquies are most
suitable to children, (who like nothing serious long) and excellently
profitable to attain ability of discourse, by comparing Language with
language: I have purposely translated so many of the choicest Books of them,
and disposed them in such method, as may readiliest enable young learners (as
they pass the Grammar Rules, and lower Authors) to write or speak properly
upon any occasion, that so being acquainted with the Language aforehand, they
may more cheerfully Proceed in Authors truly Classical, and excerpt and note
from thence such Grammatical, Rhetorical, Moral, and other quaint passages,
as themselves are able to observe or their Masters bid them mind.

And because a man that keeps not the road, is likely many times to be left to
go alone, and Children must be led along by an easier (though perhaps it be not
a shorter) way then men may presume to take. I make use of such Books
especially, as are generally received in Grammar Schools; and have begun with
Pueriles Confabulatiunculae, writ heretofore (as is propable) in Dutch and
Latin by Evaldus Gallus, and with us commonly taught in Latin only, to
young-smatterers in that tongue, because it seems cheap and pleasant.

This therefore at present, I beseech you, be pleased to accept on your Sons
behalf, whom I thus study to benefit at a distance because I am engaged to you
by special favors here, whereof I ought not to be backward to let the world
take notice, however your selves account it enough to have done a courtesy.

And now the God of al goodness supply you and yours with meet gifts and graces
to do him service: and increase your comforts here and herefter: Let me
remain.

Yours most ready to profit yours, CH: HOOLE.
From my School in Goldsmiths alley. April 21. 1652,
Childrens Talk. English and Latin.
Puriles Confabulatiunculae Anglo La^in ae.
Certain Complements, and other more useful Forms of speaking. Sal.
Salutationes quaedam and aliae loquendi Formulae usitatiores. A general
Complement at any time. Generalis salutatio quocunque tempore. God save you. 1
SAlve, Sis Salvus. Jubeo te salvere, Ave. We speak to many in the plural
number, Ad multos loquimur pluraliter. The answer. 2 Responsio. I thank you,
Habeo tibi gratiam, Habetur tibi a me gratia. God save you also. Salve tu
quoque. And you too. 3 Et tu. In the departure at any time. 4 In dicessu quo
cunque tempore. Fare you well. 6 Vale. God be with you. Faeliciter vale, Been
vale. The Answer. Responsio. And God be with you too. Vale tu quoque. In the
morning we thus give one the time of the day. 7 Man fic salutamus. Good morrow.
8 Bonum mane. All the day long thus. Interdiu sic, God give you a good day. 9
Bonus dies. In the Evening thus. Vesperi sic. God give you good even. Bonus
vesper. Bonum serum, Within night thus, 10 Sub nectem sic. God give you good
night. 11 Precor tibi faelicem noct em. Sittibi haec nox fausta To one that
sneezeth we say, Sternutanti dicitur. God bless you. 12 Sit salvvm, Sit
faelix, Prosit. To one that is a doing any work. Facienti operis aliquid. God
speed you. 13 Profice. To one at dinner or supper. Prandenti, caenantive. Much
good do it you. 14 Sit faelix convivium. When one drinks to one. Quando
praebibitur alicui I drink a whole pot to you, 15 Praebibo tibi totum poculum.
Here Is to you half a glass. 16 Propino tibi dimidatum ciathum. The Answer.
Responsio. I pledge you heartity. 17 Accipio libenter. Sit s^luti. When we
refuse meat or drink. Quando recusamus eibum vel potum. Truly I cannot drink so
much. 18 Non possum hercle tantum potare. Now verily I am not able to pledge
you. 19 Certe non valeo tibi respondere. I beseech you to spare me. 20 Quaeso
te ut mihi parcas. I have no mind to eat any more. 21 Non mihi libet amplids
comesse. Truly I have eaten sufficiently. 22 Equidem comedi quantum satis est.
I have satisfied my appetite, or, I have stayed my stomach very well. 23
Sacisfactum est appetitui. I would have no more at this time. 24 Hoc tempore
nihil ultro requito. To one who is come home out of a strange country we say
Peregre redeuntur dicitur I am glad you are come well home again. 25 Gratulor
tibi adventu^ Salvum te venire gaudeo. Gaudeo te rediisse incolumem. The common
answer. Communis responsio. I am beholding to you for your kindness. 26
Benignus es. I thank you. 27 Gratias ago tibi. God requite you. 28 Dii tibi
been faciant. When the beer or wine is brought to the table. Quando ce^ visia,
aut vinum infertur mensae. Much good may this beer do you 29 Cervisia haec
sit vobis bona. wine Precor ut haec cervisia vobis prosits Vinum, quod portosit
vobis saluti. Faxit Deus, ut, fit vobis hoc vinu^ salutare. When one is invited
to a dinner or supper. Quando vocatur aliquis ad prandium vel coenam, My father
bade me to come hither, and entreat you, that you would please to be his guest
to day. 30 Pater me jussit huc rogatum te venire, ut hodie velis ejus esse
conviva. My master bade me to entreat you very earnestly that you would dine
with him to day. 31 Herus te magnopore jussit orare, ut apud se pra^dere velis
hodie. Sir, my host intrea's you, if you be not invited any whither eise, you
would come and sup with him at even. 32 Rogat te meus hospes, praeceptor
observande, si non alio vocatus, ut caenatum ad se venias vesperi. My Father
and Mother have bidden some friends to supper, and desire you to bear them
company: wherefore you shall do them a wonderful great kindness. If you please
to come. 33 Parents mei vocaveru^t amicos aliquot ad caenam, his cupiunt te
adesse: quare mi u^ in modum gratificaberis illis; Si non recuses venire. Then
you may answer thus. My child, I heartily thank your father: But I cannot he at
any feast by reason I am not well. 24 Tunc sic respondere licebit Ego patri
tuo, mi fili, magnam habeo gratiam. Verum ob adversam valetudinem non valeo
ulli convivo interesse. Do you likewise thank your master heartily from me.
35 Tu vicissim hero tuo, nomine meo, magnas ages gratias. But tell him I cannot
come at this time. Verum hoc tempore dices me non posse venire. I should not
need entreating if other occasions did not hinder me. 36 Haud paterer me
rogari, si non me detinerent alia negotia. I do not say nay, especially seeing
I can see nothing ready here. 37 Non abnuo, praesertim cum nihil hic paratu^
esse videam. Tell your father and mother, that I will come presently. 38
Renuntia parentibus tuis, me consestim esse venturum. How a guest is welcomed.
Quomodo excipitur conviva. You are welcome, 39 Gratus est mihi tuus adventus. I
am glad you are come. Gratum est mihi quod veneris. You are come at a wish.
Optatus advenis. How leave is to be asked. Quomodo petenda venia. I pray you
master, give me leave. 40 Magister, da mihi veniam quaeso. Praeceptor
observande, fac mihi, quaeso, potestatem. To do my business. 41 Ut purgem
alvum. Ut exoncrem ventie^ Ut came ad se cessum. To make water. 42 Ut vadam
mictum. Ut levem vesicam. To drive out the cowes. 43 Ut educam vaccas. To fetch
home the cowes. 44 Ut reducam vaccas. To say the catechism to the minister. 45
Ut catechizanti respon deam sacerdoti. To go home. 46 Ut came domum. To fetch
me some paper, books, etc. 47 Ut afferam papyrum, libros, etc. To buy quils. 48
Ut emam calamos. To look to the cloths. 49 Ut custodiam vestin e^. a. To keep
bogs, sheep, etc. 50 Ut pascam porcos, oves, etc. Manners of accusing any one.
Formulae accusandi quempiam. Andrew did not do his duty to the minister. 51
Andreas non honoravit sacerdotem. Peter cuft me. 52 Petr. cecidit me pugnis.
John spoke English. 53 Joannes usus est lingua vernacula. This boy did not put
off his bat, when he went by a magistrate. 54 Hic non detexit caput, cum
praeteriret magistratum. He cursed me. 55 Ille maledixit mihi. Yond boy
miscalled us. 56 Iste convitiatus est nobis. No body will say the lesson. 57
Nemo vult repetere lectionem. James never salutes his father and mother. 58
Jacobus nunquam salutat parents. He talks scurvily. 59 Fabulatur de re
scu^rill He will not get out of my place. 60 Non vult cedere de meo loco. He
has all to be pist my shoes. 61 Perminxit calceos meos. He has bemarred my
paper. 62 Conspurcavit papyrum meam. He will not let me mind my book. 63 Non
patitur me studere He jeeres me. 64 Deridet me. He farts at us 65 Oppedit
nobis. He will not let me write. 66 Non finet me scribere. He shows his
nakedness. 67 Ostentat pudenda. He pulled me by he hair. 68 Vulsit me
criminibus. Some questions. Interragationes aliquot. What is your name? Quod
est tibi nomen? What are you called? Qui vocaris? Petrus, Paulus, etc. Peter,
Paul, etc. 69 How old are you: One, two, three, six, eight, ten, eleven,
twelve, years old. 70 Quot annos natus es? Unu^, duo, tres, sex, octo, decim,
undecim, duodecim. Of what years are you? of one, two, ten, etc. 71 Quot
annorum es? unius, duorum, december, etc. What year are you going on? Quotum
annum agis? Primum, secundu^, etc. On my first second etc. What a clock is it?
Quota est hora? One, two, etc. Prima, secunda, etc.

Aemilia the mother, and Battus the son. Aemilia matter, Battus filius. Ae My
child Battus, my child, my Battus. Batte fili, mi fili, mi Batte. B. What would
you? Quid vis? Ae It is time to rise. Est tempus surgendi. B. I pray you let me
rest me a little longer. 5 Sine me obsecro, adhuc paululum requiescere. Ae You
have sleep euough Dormitum est satis. B. Get up my good boy. Surge, mi fili. Ae
How many hours have I slept. Quot horas dormivi? B Ae Almost ten, over long. 10
Ferme december, nimium diu B. I would I might sleep my belly full. Utinam liccat
ad satietatem dormire! Ae Do but open thy eyes. Aperi tantum o culos. B. I
cannot indeed. Non possum hercle^. Ae See what fine weather it is a broad. 15
Cerne, q^am sudum est foris. B. What is that to me, whether it be fair weather
or foul? Quid ad me attinet, sudum sit an nebulosum? Ae Look the sun too is
come to see how you do. En, sol te etiam invisit. B. Is it up already? Anortus
jam? Ae A pretty wail since. 20 Ia^di^dum. B. I can hardly get away this
drowsiness. Aegte possum proffligare soporem. Ae Rouse up your body, (man,)
and sleep will be gone presently. Erige corpus modo somnus abscesserit? B.
Where is my shirt? 25 Vbi est inducium? Ae Look you where it is, it lies under
the bolster. Eccum, sub cervicalijacet B. Go away, mother. Abscede, matter, ego
surgam illico. I Will rise by and by. Do not fall aslep again Noli redormiscere.
I will not, do but you go away. 30 Non faciam, abi modo. I go. Eo.

Col. 2. Cornelius the son, Dorothie the mother. Col. 2. Cornelius filius,
Dorothea matter. C. Mother: what a clock is it? Matter, quota est hora? D. What
do you say sir; are you taught no better manners? Quid tu ais? sicine doctus
es? C. What should I be taught? Quid sim edoctus? D. Should you not salute me
first? Non me salutare debeas antea? C. Good morrow. 5 Bonum mare. D. And to
you. Now ask what you would have. Et tibi, Nunc quaere, quid vis. C. I pray
you, good mother, tell me. Dic mihi, amabo, mea matter. D. What would you have
me tell you? Quid vis, ut dicam? C. What a clock it is Quota sit hora. D. Its
at the hand of six. Instat sexta. C. Has it struck, or not yet? 10 Sonuit an
nondum? D. I do not think it has struck. Non opinor sonuisse. C. I would
that were true. Vtinam id sit verum. D. Indeed I have not heard it strike.
Equidem non audivi tonitum. C. I am terribly afraid of my masters hand. 15
Male metuo praeceptoris manum. D. You may be before your master if you do not
loyter by the way. Potes praevertere magistrum, si non cesses, C. I think I
had best do so Ita mihi faciendum censeo. D. But so as you go not away hence
uncombd or unwash'd. 20 At ita, ut ne impexus hinc abeas, aut illotus. C. When
I come again, then I will wash me. Vbi rediere, tum lavabo. D. Nay, but wash
you now rather. Imo nunc lava pot? us. C. I besecch you good mother, let me go
now, lest I be whipped. Obsecro te, mea matter sine me nunc abire, ne vapulem. D.
Go at your peril. Vade tuo periculo.

Col. 3. Evaldus the master, Francis theschallar. Col. 3. Evaldus praeceptor,
Franciscus discipulus. E, Whence come you so late? ho you sirrah: Unde venis
tam sero? heus tu. F. From our house. Ex nostra domo. E. Heard you not the
sound of the bell? Annon audivisti sonitum campanae? F. I could not hear it,
worthy master. 5 Non potui audire, praeceptor observande. F. What? no? were you
deaf No. Quid? ne? nu obsurduisti E. Nequaquam. E. Why could you not hear the
bell then? 10 Qut non potuisti ergo audire campanam? F. I was fast asleep.
Altum dormiebam. E. What do I hear? Quid ego audio? F. And my mother did not
awake me. Nec matter expergefecerat me. E. Connot you awake unless you be
called up? 15 Non tu potes expergisci, ni susciteris? F. Will you not be angry,
if I confess the truth? Non indignaberis, si verum fatear. E. No, unless you
tell an untruth. Non, nisi falsum proferas. F. Unless some body call me up, I
should not awake, I think, before noon, I sleep so soundly. 20 Nisi qui squam
suscitet me non evigilem, credo, ante merdiemque, tam suaviter dormio. E. Will
you get up earlier hereafter? Surges posthac maturius. F. Truly I will do my
endeavor. Dabo equidem operam. E. Do so. I pardon you to day, because you told
the truth. Get you hence to your fellows. 25 Ita facito. Hodie ignoscitur tibi,
quia verum confessus es. Abi hinc ad sodales tuos. F. I give you immortal
thanks most reverend master. Ago tibi gratias immortales, reverendissime
praeceptor.

Col. 4. Gerard and Henry schoolfellowes. Col. 4. Gerardus, Henricus,
condiscipuli. G. Sit a little further. Cede paululum. H. Have you not room
enough there? No^ istic habes satis loci G. No. Minime. H. No. Nor can I make
any room. Nec ego quicquam cedere possum. G. But where shall I sit. 5 Ubi
secebo autem? H. Where thou will. ubi vis. G. I sit here vere well. Hi^ sedeo
percomode. H. But I advise you, get quickly out of my lap. A^egote admoneo, ut
abscedas prope de meo sinu. G. But do you show me, where else I may sit. 10 At
tu mihi demonstra, ubi alioqui sedeam. H. Sit, where the dogs sit. ubi sedent
canes, sedeta. G. And where do the dogs sit? Vbi vero sedent canes? H. Upon
their buttocks. 15 In clunibus, G. And so do I. Itidem ego sacio. H. But do
you know how you sit? Scis vero quomodo sedeas? G. Like a man. Humanitus. H.
And do you know where? Et scis ubi? G. In thy lap. 20 In tuo gremio. H. But
now thou lie me along thy back. At nunc mihi jaces supinus. G. Thou shall
never use me thus and escape with it. Hoc tu mihi impune nunquam seceris. H. I
care not a pin for thy threatenings. 25 Flocci non facio tua^ minas. G. Be not
too^ sauey. Ne scis nimium procax H. Begin what you will, you shall meet with
your match. Incepta quid vis, Virum invenies. G. God save you jolly pinder.
Salve pugil invicte. H. But you shall not box me and get nothing. I would have
you know this too. 30 At tu mihi pugnum impune non mpinges; hoc te scire etiam
volo. G Now verily, but that I am afraid of the master my fist should have
flown about your ears a good while ago. 35 Enimvero, nisipraeceptorem metuerem,
jamdudum, pugnus in mala haereret. H. If thou will any thing with me, call me
forth after eight a clock. Si quid vis, post horam octavam evoca. G. I dare you
forth, come away. Evoco, veni. H. I will take my brakefast first, that I may be
the stronger. Thou must tarry for me so long. 40 Jenta^culum volo antea sumere,
ut robustior sim* Tam diu te oportet expectare. G. I knew they were but brags
which you made or you did but crack. Scibam bullas esse, quas j^ctabas. H. You
mad man, should we stand to fight here, that are devoted to the same studies,
and instructed in the same precepts of virtue: Fie upon thee with such idle
tales. 45 Insane, nos hic pugnemus iisdem studiis conscerati, iisdem virtutu^
praeceptis imbuti: Apagate cum tam frivolis fabulis. G Now I conclude the to be
a gentleman indeed and one that will not be easily beaten. Nunc te virum judico
generosum, and invictum.

Col. 5. John the master, Lambert, Martin, Nicolas School-fellows. Col. 5.
Joannes praeceptor, La^bertus, Martinus, Nicolaus, Condiscipuli. J. What a
noise is there, boy, as though the master were away. Quis istic est strepitu'^,
puer, quasi dominus absit? L. These two fall out. Hi duo contendunt. J. About
what do you fall our, you youngsters? 5 De qua re contenditis, vos juvenes? L.
He will not give me my quil again, which he has snarcht from me. Non vult
mihi reddere calamum meum, quem eripuit. J. If he do not do it out of hand,
let him look for me with a rod. Si non actutum facit, expectet me cum virga.
L. He said he would run away. 10 Dixit se velle fugere. J. Do ye hold him,
and bring him to me. Vos cum retinete, and addticite ad me. L. See, he bits me
by the sleeve. Ecce mordicns apprehendit manicam mea^. J. And I Will knock out
all those teeth of his, if he do not let go presently. 15 Ego illi etiam
dentes istos omnes evellam, si non dimittit illico, L. He is a roguish boy, he
scratches with his nails too. Scelestus puer est, and scalpit unguibus. J. Why
are you such a wicked boy. 20 Curnam tu es tam sceleritus puer? N What have I
done? Quid feci? J. You have taken a pen away from that boy. Pennam eripuisti
illi putro, N Why did he likewise call me out of my name? 25 Cur etiam mihi
dedit nomen ignominiosum? J He will do so no more. Non faciet amplius. N Nor I.
Ne ego. J. You said you would run away. Dixisti te velle ausugert. N * He is a
fool that suffers himself to be beat, when he may run away. 30 * Stultus, est
qui se caedi patitur, dum liceat fugere. J. And you got hold of his sleeve with
your teeth, Et mordicus apprehendisti manicam illius. N I caught at his hand
and he pulled away his hand, and I caught hold of his sleeve. Manum captabam,
subduxit manum, cepi manicam. J. Are you so villainous and biting? 35
Adeoscelestus and mordax? N * The very mice make at the hands of them that hold
them. * Et mures tenentium se manus impetunt. May not I do the same, that the
little mice do? Non mihi idem liceat, quod musculis. L. But mice are oft-times
harmless, when they are taken. 40 At mures sapenumero innoxii sunt, quando
capiuntur. N. And I am harmless. For I presently restored, what I had taken
away. Et ego innoxius. Nam quod eripueram, confestim reddidi, L. For fear of a
rod forsooth. Metu virgarum scilicit. N. * He is not desperately bad, who
refraines from doing ill for fear of punishment. * Non est deplorate malus, qui
a maleficio metu mali abstinet. L. You are a talking boy Laluses. N. I am
content good master, so that I be not an ill talker. 50 Placet, bone
praeceptor, dum ne sim caco-lalus.

Col. 6. Otto, Peter, School-fellows. Col. 6 Otto, Petrus, Condiscipuli. O.
Have thou never a knif to lend me. Non babes cultellu^ que^ des mihi commodato
P. I have one indeed; but I have not one that I can lend you. Habeo equidem;
sed quem tibi accomodem non habeo. O. Why so? 5 Quamobrem? P. It is but a young
one, that I have; It will not come again, if I suffer it to straggle abroad.
Novitius est, quem habeo; non revertetur, si paetiar evagari. O. Be not afraid.
I will stand but here as long as I use it. 10 Noli timere. Ego tantisper hic
resistam dum utor. P. I will not let you have it. Non do. O. Perchance thou
have that which I lost lately. Forsan habes, quem nuper amisi. P. Have you lost
your knife then? 15 Amisisti scilicet cultellum? O. I have done so. Factum. P.
What a one was it? Qualis erat? O. Will you hear what a one it was? Vis audire
qualis fucrat? P. I will. Vo lo. O. It was a very little one, and dull. 20
Parvulus erat and hebes. P. I hear you. Audio. O. It had a blunt point. Obtusam
habebat cuspidem. P. What else? Quid praeterea? O. A red haft set with brass
studs. 25 Capulum rubrum aeneis distinctum claviculis. P. What do you say?
Quid narras? O It had a hole at the top. Superne foramen. P. Thine was for all
the world like that which I have 30 Tuus per omnia similis fuit ei, quem ego
habeo. O. I pray you let me see it Sine, quaeso, inspiciam. P. Look upon it.
Vide. O. Show me it all. Ostende totum. P. Well, look at it your belly full.
35 Age, contemplare ad satietatem. O. Tell me of all loves, where gotst thou
this knife? Dic amabo, ubi noctus e^ istum cultellum? P. Why do you ask such a
question. Curid quaeritas? O. I have a reason to ask Mihi opus est quaesito. P.
I have no reason to make answer. 40 Mihi non opus est responso. O Tell me
plainly whence had you it? Dic absolute unde habes? P. I found it. Reperi. O
Before it was lost, say Antequa^perderetur, add P. Before it was beshit, say
thou. 45 Ant equam permerderetur, tu inque. O You will allow me to guess it?
Jubes me conjectare tamen? P. I do allow you. Concedo. O Did you buy it?
Emisti? P. I did so, indeed, Ita est, revera. O Of whom, I pray thee? 50 De quo
amabo. P. Of a young fellow a peddler. De juvene quodam mercatore. O Surely it
is a stolen knife. Furtivus est mehercule. P. That is nothing to me. Nihil ad
me attinet. O But dare you buy stolen goods? 55 Audes tu vero mercari res
furtivas? P. Any without any difference. Sine discrimine quaslibet. O You are
as ill as a thief. Nihilo es melior quamfur. Put case I am not. Ne sim. P. But
why did you say this is a stolen knife? 60 Sed cur tu dicis hunc esse cultrum
furtivum? O It was mine. Meus suit. P. I believe, it was yours. Fuit, credo,
tuus. O But now it is mine. Sed nunc est meus. P. Therefore I persuade thee, to
give me mine again. 65 Ergo tibi suadeo, ut mihi reddas meum. O Thou shall not
carry it away from me so. Sic a me non auferes. P. Be quiet, I will make you by
and by to give me it again whether you will or no. Quiesce: Illico faxo, ut ut
reddas ingratiis. O. What will you do? 70 Quid facies? P. I Will go to the
master: and tell him the matter in order. He will make you restore it. Ad
proeceptorem ibo, illi rem pandam ordine. I^ te roget restituere. But I will
tarry at home when I have asked leave by and by; nor will I come to the school
to day. 75 At ego, mox petita venia manebo domi, nec in scholam venturus (...)
hodie.

Col. 7. Quirinus a scholar. Reynerus the master, Sebastian a scholar. Col.
7. Quirinus discipulus, Reynerus Praeceptor, Sebastianus discipulus. Q. Most
reverend master, I pray you bid this boy give me my knife again. 5
Colendissime praecepror, huic quaeso impera, ut mihi reddai cultrum meum. R. Ho
you firrha have you any thing that is this boys? Ecquid hobes, heus tu, quod
est hujus? S. I have not. Non habeo. R. How saucily do you answer me. Quam tu
mihi proterve respondes? S. How saucily, I pray you? 10 Quam proterve vero? R.
I say I have nothing. Nihil habere me dico. Have not thou another boys knife?
Non tu cultrum alienum habes? S. I have not truly. Non habeo sane. R. Nor have
you any knife at all; Nec habes ullum cultrum. S. I have a little one. It is my
own. 15 Habeo parvulum. Is meas est. R. Where is it. Vbi est? S. Look where it
is in my sheath. Eceum in vagina. R. Let me see it. Ostende mihi. S. I do not
refuse. Non abnuo. R Where got you this knife? 20 Vbi tu nactus es hunc
cultellum? S. I have had it this whole month almost. Posse di ferme totum
mensem. R. I do not ask you that question. But whence had you it? 25 Non istud
quaerito. Sed unde habes? S. Of a young Factor. He sold it me. Ab institore
juvene. Is vendidit mihi. R. For how much? Quanti? S. For a Brabant farthing.
30 Quadrante Brabantico. R. The knife is better then the money you gave for it.
Melius est culter quam pretium quod dedisti. S. I have made a good market, if
it be so as you say. 35 Bonum feci mercimoniu^ si ita est ut tu dicis. R. But
this boy maintains it to be his. At hic suum esse contendit. S. It is not so.
It is mine. Non est ita. Meus est. R. If he have lost any thing he may go seek
it Si quid perdidit, inquirat. S. I have taken nothing that is his or was his.
Ego nihil eripui quod illius sit aut fuerit. R. Will you refer your self to
me? 40 Vis mihi acquiescere? S. If I may have no wrong done me, I will. Si mihi
non fiat injuria, volo. R. I would have no falling out betwixt you Nolo
contentionem inter vos esse. S. But I fall out with no body. 45 Sed ego cum
nemine con tendo. R. Give this boy then his knfie again. Ergo restitue huic
cultrum suum. S. I do not refuse it, if he would give me my money again. Non
recuso, si mihi pecuniam meam restituat. R. He shall do it. Faciet. S. Let
him do it out of hand. 50 Ut illico faciat. R Give him his money again without
any delay. Read huic argentum suum actutum. S. Take your money. Accipe pe
cuniam. R. Take you your knife again. 51 Tu cultrum recipe. S. So it should be.
Of such beginnings oft-times great heart-burnings arise even amongst grown men.
Ita fieri decet. Ex talibus initiis saepe nascuntur magnae simultates, etiam
inter adultos.

Thomas the son, Vincence the moth r. Thoma filius, Vincentiae matter. T.
Mother, when shall I have my dinner? Matter, quando prandebitur? V. By and by,
if you can but tarry a little. Illico, paululum si expectes modo. T. I must be
gone out of band. Abeundum est mihi extemplo. V. Whither, O good Sir, so
hastily? 5 Quonam, O bone, tam propere? T. Whither is it fit for a scholar to
go? Quo scholasticum ire decet? V. To the school forsooth. Nempe ad ludum. T.
To the very place of execution, forsooth. Nempe ad ipsam carnificinam. V. It
has not struck one yet. 10 Nondum sonuit prima, T. But we must be there before
it strike. At nos sonitum pravertere decet. V. How often in a week? Qoties per
hebdo madem? T. Every day. Quotidie. V. At what a clock? Qua hora? T. Why do
you stand to ask? at every hour. 20 Quid quaeritas? omni hora. V. Why then
do you lie so long in a morning. Cur ergo tam secure requiescis mane? T. I
never do it but I smart for it. Id ego nunquam impune facio. V. Art thou more
afraid of blows after dinner, then after sleep. 25 Itane verbera magis times a
prandio, quam a somno. T. Look one that may make you answer. If you will not
give me any meat, I will go without my dinner. Quaere qui tibi respondeat, Si
mihi non vis dare cibum impransus abibo. V. Go where you will. There is no
body holds you. If you do eat no dinner you will have a better stomach to
your supper at night. 30 Abi quo vis. Nemo est qui detinet te. Si non prandes,
vesperi caenabis libentius.

Col. 9 Andrew the Master Bartholmew the scholar. Col 9. Andreas praeceptor
Bartholomaeus discipulus A. Why come you later then the test to the school?
Cur tu caeteris tardius venis ad ludum? B. My mother bad me tarry a little
whilst, she got the pottage ready. Matter jussit me paululum opperiri, dum
paret holus A. When does she use to make pottage? 5 Quando solet holus
decequere? B. About twelve a clock. Sub horam duodecimam. A. But now it is past
one At nunc est ultra prima^. B. This never did befall her before. Besides,
because she was somewhat long in getting it ready, I did not tarry upon her
slownesse because I stood in awe forsooth of your command. And therefore I came
hither without my dinner. 10 15 Nunquam hoc evenit illi ante hac. Quinetiam,
cum lentior esset in apparando, non sum illius lentitudinem remoratus veritus
nimirum tuum imperium. Itaque impransus horsum procurri. A. Say you so? Ain'
tu? B. I say so indeed. Dico enimvero. A. Truly I pity thee. But eat your
supper more plentifully at night. 20 Miseret me tui scilicet. Caeterum vesperi
coena liberalius. B. * Where one has had little or nothing to his dinner, he
cannot look for much plenty to his supper. * Ubi parce prandetur non coenatur
liberaliter.

Col. 10. Cornelia the sister Dionysius the brother. Col. 10. Cornelia soror,
Dyonysius fr^t^r. C. Get up you, errand sluggard. Surge ignavissime. D. Alas
trouble me not. Hei noli mihi molesta esse. C. Will you sleep all the day Get up
I say that I may make the bed. Vis totum diem stertere Surge, inquam, ut
reconcinnem lectum. D. What do you say now? 5 Quidais tandem? C. That you get
up. Vt surgas. D. Is it time. Number tempus est? C. Your master is gone into the
school: and do you ask whether it be time or no? 10 Prae ceptor tuus intravit
in ludum: tu rogas number fit tempus? D. How long is it since he went in? Quam
dudum intravit? C. A pretty while ago. Jamdudum. D. What a clock is it then?
Quota ergo est hora? C. It is about seven. 15 Est circa septimam. D. Alas, why
do you let me sleep so long? Eheu, quid sinis me tam diu dormire? C. Who should
raise you? Quis te suscitet? D. Either you, or any one else of the house. 20
Vel tu, vel quilibet e familia. C. But how can you be raised? Quomodo quaeas
vero suscitari? D. How? by calling or jogging. Quomodo? clamore, vel tactu. C.
But I my self have called loud upon you, above ten times to no purpose. 25 At
egomet ipsa, plusquam deci^s, te frustra inclamavi. D Did you call me then?
Vocasti me scilicet? C. I indeed, and so loud, that you might have heard I
think if you had been dead. 30 Et quidemica sortiter, ut si mortuus esses,
audires credo. D. I suppose it is a tale. Falsum a utumo. C. I called you, I
say. Vocavi, inquam. D. If you had called, I should have heard. Si vocavisses,
auderem. C. Unless you had made as though you did not you might hear. 35 Nisi
dissimulavisses, audire poteras. C. If I had heard I would have got up. Si
audissem surgerem, C. As readily indeed, as you use to do. Tam alcariter
hercle, quam soles. D. * I talk against a woman to no purpose. 40 * Frustra
obloquor saeminae. C. Make haste to get you ready unless you will be knocked.
Propera te induer'e, ni vis pulsari. D. Who shall do that? 45 Quis id faciet?
C. The master of the school. Magister phrontisterii. D. Hang the school and
the master too. Dii perdant phrontisterium una cum magistro. C. Is that the
beginning of your prayers? Istinccine deprecationis orsus. D. What should I
pray? I have more mind to curse. 50 Quid precar? imprecari libeat magis. C. O
most excellent principles of honesty! Egregia probitatis rudimenta! D. I pray
you get you gone and mind your kitchin-businesse. 55 Abi, quaeso te, and rem
cua c u^liariam. C. That shall be looked too well enough when you are dead and
rotten. Illa curabitur recte vel te extincto. D. I pray you get you gone
presently, I cannot put on my cloths, whilst you are by. 60 Abi, quaeso te,
denuo, non me possum induere re praesente. G. Are you become so bashful on a
sudden. Adeone verecundus de repent factus? D. In the mean time, whilst you
prattle here. the time passes: I must undergo jerks which you will not feel.
65 Interea dum tu hic garris, abit hora; mihi parantur piagae, quas tu non
senties. G. In good truth you deserve to be sharply corrected, Dignus meherele
acri castigatione. D. Why so? Quamobrem? C. I know not. 70 Nescio. D. But I
know what to answer the master. At ego scio quid praeceptori respondeam. C.
What else I pray you then, that you are as sleepy as a dormous? 75 Quid aliud,
quaeso quam te nihil esse inertius, nihil somniculosius? D. Yes something else.
Imo aliud. C. Forsooth that you sleep so soundly that one may throw the house
over your head, so far are you from waking of your self, either out of love to
your book, or for fear of your master, or respect to your Parents. 80 Nempe,
quod ita secure dormias, ut nullo clamore possis excitati, tantum abest ut
evigiles tuapte sponte, vel amore l^^erarum, vel praeceptoris metu vel
reverentia parentum. D. You begin your wonted and old kind of preaching.
Inceptas praedicationem solitam, ac veterem. C. I preach indeed, but to one
that is deaf. 85 Praedico quidem, sed surdo. D. If you were a stranger, I know
what I would do. Si fores aliena, scio quid facerem. C. You would beat us
forsooth. Get you gone and be whipped. Verberares nos scilicet. Abi quo dignus
es. D. I beseech you, for Gods sake, give over prattling at the last. 90 Obsecro
te, per omnes deos ut garrire tandem definas. C. I will not give over till you
get up. Non quiesca^ donec surgas. D. I cannot sister, unless you be gone. Non
possum, ni tu abeas, sorer. C. Ill go call my father. 95 Ego patrem accerso.
D. I, and my mother too, so you be but gone, sister. Vel matrem, dum tu abeas
soror. C. I will be gone and some body else shall come. 100 Ego abeo, redibit
alter.

Col. 11. Erasm 9 the scholar, Frederic 9 the master. Col. 11. Erasmus
discipul 9, Fredericus praeceptor. E. Come you hither too with your staring
head of hair. Horsum tu quoque cum hirto capite. F. I am here. Hic sum. E. I
see it. But whence come you so late and so nastie? 5 Video. Sed unde venis tam
sero, tamque incultus. F. First out of my bed, and then out of our house
Estrato, primum, deinde ex nostris aedibus. E. That you come late, I now let
this pass. Quod sero, hoc nunc omitto. F. Ought you not to comb your head
before you come to school? 10 Non tu debeas caput pectere, entequam venires ad
ludum? E. We have no comb. Non habemus pectinem. F. Why do you not buy one?
Cur non emitis? E. My parents say they want money. Parents dicunt sibi deesse
pecuniam. F. Sell some corn that you may have money. Vendito frumentum, ut
pecunia suppetat. E. We have none. 15 Non est. F. But why do you not ask to
borrow a comb some where else then? Quin rogetis utendum aliunde pectinem? E.
No body will lend us one. Nemo vult nobis dare commodaio. E. Why so? Quamobrem?
F. We have almost all of us scabbed heads; and (I think) people avoid that. 25
Plerique omnes habemus capita scabiosa: id vitant (credo) homines. E. Do your
parents drink so many jugs of beer, and can they not spare so much from their
throat, as to buy a comb? 30 Tot cyathos cervisiae tui parents exhauriuns: non
tantum possunt detrahere gutturi suo, ut emant pectinem? F. Truly I know not.
Nescio hercle. E. Either come me more handsome the school, or come not at all.
Aut tu mihi compitor redi ad ludum, aut ne prorsus redi. E. I will tell them
so. 35 Dicam.

Col. 12. Godfrey the master, Hermanus the monitor. Col. 12. Godfridus
praeceptor, Hermanus custos. G. I see here are a great many away, ho Moni tor,
look about you. Permultos abesse video. heus custos, circumspecta. H. It is so
master. Sic est praeceptor. G. See that you have the names of al set down that
are away now. 5 Vide ut omnium qui nunc absunt, nomina descripta habeas. H. In
a little book? In libello? G. Nay rather in a little paper which you may give
me in my hand. Imo in chartula, quam mihi tradas in manum. H. When? Quando? G.
As soon as I shall come again to the school. 10 Vt primum rediero ad ludum.
H. It shall be done, Fiet. G. In the mean time you shall take order, that I
have some gentle rods provided. 15 Interea curabis, ut mihi lent a rum virgarum
sint parati fasciculi. H. If god bless me to day, I will make them come
together more diligently. Si sim salvus hodie, efficiam ut studiosius
conveniatur. G. I wish you take no thought for the rods, 20 Securu esse jubeo,
quantum ad virgas attinet. H. You say honestly. Dicis probe.

Col. 13. James and Laurence schoolefellows. Col. 13. Laurentius, Jacobus
condiscipuli. J. You must be whip't you sluggard. Plagae te manent, somniator.
L. What have I done? Quid seci? J. Because you were not there. 5 Quod non
adsueris. L. Where? Vbi? J. In the school. In ludo literario. L. I was going
thither as fast as I could. Illuc properabam. J. You haste too late. Sero
properas. L. Why so? Qui sic? J. The hour is past. Hora abiit. L. The master
has given us leave to be gone. 10 Nos dimissi sumus a praeceptore. J. So
early? Tam mane? L. How early indeed? Is has struck eight a good while ago.
15 Qua^m mane veros Jamdudum sonuit octava. J. Do you mock me? Number dil udis me.
L. No indeed. Minime vero. Ho, tell me, did any body mention me? Ebeu, dic mihi,
c^qua suit mentio mei. J. I, indeed, very much. 20 Et quidem per magnae: L. I
pray thee tell me. Dic amabo. J. So it is. The master bade every one to be set
down. Sic est. praeceptor universos conscribi jussit. L. Which? those that were
present, or those that were absent. 25 Vtros? Praesentesne, an absentes. J.
Surely those that were absent. Absentes nimirum. L. That is not well. For if he
had bidden those that were there to be set down, I could have alleged that I
was left out. 30 Male habet. Nam si praesentes, conscribi jussisset, ego me
praeteritum este contenderem. J. But who set them down. Verum quis notav it? L.
Venantius Gallus. Venantius Gallus. J. Ho, I am well enough if you say true.
Eho, salvus sum, si verum dicis. L. Why do you skip so? Quid gestis? J. He is
beholding to me. 35 Ille mihi obnoxious est. L. I will go to him, and entreat
him to put out my name. Adibo, ac deprecabor, ut nomen meum dispungat. J. He
will not dare to deny me. Non audebit negare. L. He will not be hired to it. 40
Nullo faciet inductus praemio. J. Say not so. I know what he promised me. Ne
dixeris. Scio quid mihi pollicitus sit. L. Ye shall both be whipped if the master
know it. Pendebetis ambo, si resciscitat magister. J. I leave that to God
Almighties care. 45 Istud ego diis superis committo.

Col. 14. Matthew the master, Nestorius the monitor, Andrew, Peter, and John,
scholars. Col. 14. Mathaus praece^ptor. Nestotius custos, Andreas, Petrus and
Ioannes discipuli. M. Set me some rods, and the ferula ready monitor. Expedito
virgas and ferulam custos. N They are ready. Sunt in promptu. M. Where are the
names of them that are away? Vbi nomina absentium? N. They are here. 5 Hic
sunt. M. Read them all aloud severally. Recita sigillatim omnes. N. Andrew
Faber. Andraeas Faber. M. Come hither, why was you not here to day. Ades. Cur
non adfuisti hodie? A. My father bad me to go into the field; to see whether
the ditchers were there or no. 10 Pater jussti me abire in agrum, ut
recognoscer em an fossores ibi adessent. M You should have came to me to ask
leave to go into the field. Venisses ad me petitum copiam abeundi in agrum. A.
I could not come hitherward, my father was so earnest. 15 Non mihi licuit
horsum ire, sic instabat pater. M. You should have told him you could not be
away from the school with out my leave. Dixisses, te non posse abesse a schola
sine meo favere. A. I told him indeed, but I could not get leave of him to step
to you: he is so strait in his commands. 20 Dixi quidem, sed non impetravi ab
eo facultatem transcurrendi ad te, ita imperiosus est. M. * Your father has
command at home, and I in the school. * Domi habet imperium pater, ego in
ludo. A. But my father bade me at home. 25 At domi jussit pater. M. But I
forbade any one to do otherwise, then I will and command here. At ego vetui
quenquam secus facere, quam hic volo and jubeo. A. Would you not have us to
obey our parents? 30 Non tu vis ut parentibus obsequamur? M. By all means.
Omnino. A. Why then am I now blamed for having done so? Cur igitur nunc hoc
secisse arguor? N. Away, away, we prolong the time with this bafling. Obey them
both, as much as may be. 35 Abi, abi, tempus extrahimus hac concertatione.
Vtrisque pareto, quoad fieri potest. M. Call another. Cita alium. N. Peter
Pistor. Petrus Pistor. M. Pistor, come on, tell me what hindered you. 40 Pistor,
age, dic quid te detinuerit. P. Truly I rose soon after four a clock, bu:
presently I was to bolt the meal: that labor lasted me almost an hour and a
half. And afterward whilst I was a washing and drying my self, and getting
on my stockings, and making my self ready, the time slipped a way. 45 Equidem
surrexi statim post horam quartam, sed illico debui farinam subigere: is labor
duravit fere sesqui horam. Postea vero dum lavor, dum aresco, dum induo
caligas, and comparo me, abit tempus, M. Whilst you stand so to repeat those
things in order to me, you lose time. 50 Dum tu mihi ista sic refer: ordine,
perdis tempus. P. But, most learned master, unless I should lose time on this
fashion, I should gain my self blows. Atqui, praeceptor doctissime, ni
tempus hoc pacto perderem, lucrifacerem mihi plagas. M Ye are al pretty nimble
in excusing your selves, but not so in learning. Go your way. Call the rest. 55
Omnes est is in excusando argutuii, discendo non item. Abi, recita caeteros. N.
John Horn. Joannes hornius. M. What every day thus forsooth? you bring
sometimes one thing and sometimes another, but what have you now to say for
your self? 60 Nempe hoc assidue? alias aliud adfers; Quid vero nunc profers in
excusationem tui? J. Good master we had a many guests yesternight. 65 Heri
vesperi, praeceptor optime, multos convivas excepimus. These sat up till
midnight, and I might not stir one jot from them and therefore I could not
awake sooner. I have no more to say. 70 Hi desiderunt usque ad mediam noctem,
nec mihi licuit batum unguem ab eis discedere. Propcerea non potui evigilare
maturius. Dixi. M. Why did not you invite me too amongst the guests. Cur me
quoque inter cateros convivas, non vocasti? J. I will work with my parents,
that you may be bidden now and then if you will so. 75 Transigam apud parents,
uti voceris non nunquam, si ita vis. N. Do you promise you will do that so for
me? Spondes id mihi sic facturum? J. I promise you in good deed. Spondeo
hercle. M. See you do not deceive me. 80 Vide ne fallas. J. It shall not be
long of me, if you be not invited. Per me quinem non stabit, quo minus
vocaberis. M. You are a good honest young man, see you be diligent at your
book too. Frugi es adolescens, cura ut sis item studiosus. J. So I will do:
85 Ita faciam. M. Get you hence into your place. Abscede hinc in locum tuum. N.
Do you bid me call the rest. lubes me caeteros recitare? M. Not at this time.
I will not beguile the whole company of their lesson, for the slothfullnesse of
a few. But remember this boys, hereafter you shall not at all excuse your
absence? Whosoever shall he a way, without my leave shall be whip't. 90 95
Minime hoc tempore. Nolo universum gregem fraudare sua praelectione ob paucorum
inertiam. Vetum hoc memineritis pueri, posthac nequicquam excusabitis
absentiam, Quisquis sine meo favore abfuerit, vapulabit.

Col. 15. Oswald the master Paulus a scholar and the company of boys. Col.
15. Osvaldus praeceptor Paulus discipulus, puerorum grex. O. Think upon these
things seriously which we now read, Meditamini diligen er ea, quae nunc
praelegimus. P. We will be sure to do it. Sedulo faciemus. P. Master if you
know not it has struck eight. 5 Praeceptor, si nescis, fonui octava. O. Did
any body hear it? Est audita? P. Yes indeed. Est sane. O. How long ago?
Quamdudum? P. Not very long ago. Haud ita dudum. O. Be quiet a little boys
after I have ask't ^his boy what I will I will presently dismiss you all Do you
answer me. 10 Quie^cite pusillum, pueri, Postquam hunc interrogavero, quae
volo, illico dimittam, omnes vos. Tu mihi responde. P. What I? 15 Egone? O. Do
you know what you ought to do? Tu scis quidte facere opo? teat? P. When?
Quando? O. By and by when you come home. Mox ubi veneris domum. P. Am I to do
any thing besides what I am wont. 20 Nunquid faciendum est, praeter solitum? O.
What are you wont to do? Quid assoles facere? P. If I be uncomb'd or unwash'd,
I combed me and wash me. Si impexus sim aut illetus pecto, lavoque. O. Well.
What do you after? 25 Recte. Quid postea facis? P. I get my breakfast, and
come again to the school as soon as possibly can be. Jento, revertor
quamprimum and ludm. O. Well, but nothing else. Probe, nihil amplius vero, P.
Nothing indeed. If any thing else should be done, I pray you put me in mind. 30
Nihil sane. Si quid praeterea fieri decet, admone, quaeso. O. So I will. Hark
thou. Ita faciam. Ausculta. P. I hearken. Say on. Ausculto. Dic O. Whenever
you go into the house, you should never go in without saying something. 35
Quocunque tempore demum ingrederis, nunqua^ debes domum tacitus introire. P.
Neither do I do it. Nec id facio. O. What do you say when you go in? Quid
loqueris ingrediens. P. I salute my mother. Saluto matrem. O. Very good reason.
But if your mother be away, whom do you salute? 40 Meritissin e. Sinmater ab
est, quem salutas? P. If I see her no where, I salute the folks of the house.
Si illam nusquam conspicor, saluto familiam. O. But if your father shall come
in after do you not salute him? Sin pater postea ingredietur, non salutas? P.
No For I thought I had discharged my duty, if I saluted once. 45 Minime.
Credidi me persunctum officio, si salutem semel. O Nay but, such respect is
especially due to your father. Imo, patri talis honor debetur imprimis. P. I
did not know so much. 50 Nesciebam. What if my father do neither see me, nor
speak to me? Quid si me pater nec videat, nec alloquatur? O. Nevertheles, you
should come to him of your own accord, and put of your hat and make a leg, and
give him an honorable complement. 55 Nihilominus ultr odebes tu eum acced re,
detectoque capite flectere poplitem and honorifice salutare. P. In other words,
then we use to salute other men? Aliisne verbis, quam quibus caeteros homines
salutare solemus? O. Altogether in others. Prorsus aliis. P. In what? 60
Quitus? O. God save you most dear father, or thus, God speed you father. Salve,
patet charissime; vel sic, Salvus fis, mi pater. P. I understand you. Teneo. O.
If he ask you any thing. answer him freely like a man, what you know 65 Si quid
interrogabit, respondebis, quod scis, humaniter. P. I will think on it.
Meminero. O. Take heed you take no distaste at any thing that he says or does.
70 Cave tibi quicquam displictat eorum, quae vel dicit vel facit. P. I am not
so squeamish, that my fathers doings or words should displease me. Non sum tam
fastidiosus ut patris mibi facta displicant, aut verba. O. Be ready to obey
him at every command. 75 Ad quodvis imperatum sis obsequibilis. P. So I am. Sic
sum. O. See you never offend him. Vide ne unquam offendas. P. I will not do it
that I know on. Sciens non faciam. O. Moreover, if, when he is angry he shall
talk aloud, endure his chiding and say nothing. 80 Porro, si quando offensus
detonabit, perferto tacitus increpationem ipsius. P. What? If I have deserved
nothing. Quid? si nihil sim promeritus. O. * Learn to bear even a unjust
chiding, especially from a parent. 85 *Etiam injustam objurgationem disce
sustinere, praesertion a parente. P. I will end about the best I can. Pro
virili conabor. O. * You ought to reverence and respect both your parents
alike. 90 * Utrumque parentem debts colere ac venerari pari observantia. P. So
I do, though no body bid me. Ita facio, etsi nullus admonuerit. O. If you do
it, do it still: but if not, be sure to do it. 100 Si quidem facis, perge
fa^cere: sin minus, sedulo facito. P. I will omit nothing with my good will
Nihil praetermittam volens. O. You say honestly. Boys what I have taught this
one boy, I would have you all taught the same. 100 Honest dicis. Pueri, quae
unum hunc edocui, omnes eadem edoctos volo. P. We understand you.
Intelligimus. O. Now get you to breakfast, and come again about nine a clock.
Nunc ite jentatum and redite sub horam nona^.

Col. 16. Quintine the master, Robert the monitor, Servat^us a scholar. Col.
16. Quintus praeceptor, Robertus monitor, Servatius discipulus. Q. Who has the
bill for speaking english. Quis babet signum vernaculi sermonis? R. I. Ego. Q.
Whom have you set down? Quem notasti? R. Servatius. Servatium. S. Have you set
me down? 5 Tu me notaveris? R. Yes. Etiam. S. Why so? Quam ab causam? R.
Because you spoke English. Quod usus sis lingua vernacula. S. To whom have I
spoken? 10 Adversus quem locutus? R. To me, Adversus me. S. To you, you errant
lier? Erga te, mendacissime? Q. Why do you speak so loud? Quid vociferaris? S.
Should I not speak aloud when he dare be bold to say such things openly? 15 Non
vociferer, quum hic talia audeat praedicare. R. Why should I not be bold to
say it when it is true? Quid ni audeam, cum sit verum. S. Thou liar! but when
did you hear me speak English? 20 O falcide! Quando vero audivisti me
loquentem Anglice? R. Would you know; Vis scire? S. I would indeed. Volo
enimvero. R, Lately somewhere. Nuper alicubi. S. Do but hear. Audito. I pray
you tell me. On what day; or in what place? 20 Die sodes, quo die? aut ubi
gentium; R. I have forgotten the day, I do not remember the place, Dies excidit
mihi, Locum non commemini. S. Say, who was there by? Dic, quo praesente? R. I
and thou. 25 Me and te. S. It is a lie. Falsum est. R. It is a true tale. Verum
est. S. that which I say. Scilicet, quod ego dico. R. Nay, that which I say.
Imo, quod ego dico. Q. Truly I doubt whether I should believe. 30 Vtri credam,
equidem ambigo. S. Good master, I beseech you, if any one say the truth, that
he may be believed. Si quis verum dicit, quaeso ut credatur, bone magister. R.
I maintain that you spoke English. 35 Ego te assero dixisse vernaculum. S.
Prove that I spoke it. Preba me dixisse. R. Nay rather do you prove that you
did not speak it. Imo tu proba te non dixisse. S. I cannot. IF it were lawful
for me to take my oath, I would not stick to sweat by all the saints in the
Calendar. 40 Non possum. Si mihi liceat jusjurandum interponere, nihil dubitem
per omnes adjurare divos. Q. That yo forsooth spoke English. Te videlicet
locictum vernaculum. S. I have very great wrong done me, most worthy master. 45
Insignis mihi fit injuria, praecepter optime. Q. Did you never speak English
before? Nunquam antehac protulis^t vernaculu^ sermonem? S. Very often, I
confess. Persaepo, fateor. Q. It is credible then that you spoke English too,
when he set you down. 55 Credibile est tum quoque dixiss^e verna ulum, cum hic
te notaret. S. He lies like a rogue; I neither spoke English when he was by,
nor did he set me down. 60 Mentitur surcifer nece. go vernacalum locutus sum,
hoc praefente, nec iste-notavit. Q Now verily, I cannot but laugh. And I know
not whether I should believe. This boy never told me a lie before this day, you
have once or twice, which now indeed mak's your caus^ the worse. 65 Rideo
mehercu'e. Nec ufri credam scio. Hic mihi nunqua^ mentitus est ante hunc diem,
tu semel at que iteru^, quod nunc sane tuam causam reddit deteriorem. S. I
acknowledge I have done amiss in lying aforetime, but now indeed I speak the
truth I have not offended master. 70 Agnosco peccasse olim mentiendo at nunc
profecto verum dico, nihil deliqui praeceptor. Q. Would you have me believe
you? Vis ut credam tibi? S. You may safely belive me, worthy master. 75 Credas
mihi secure, magister observande. R. Good master either believe both, or
believe neither. Praeceptor bone, vel creed utrique, vel creed neutri. Q. I
have light upon a couple of wranglers for ought that I see. Get you both hence
with a mischief. Do you keep the note. 80 In disceptatores incidi, ut video.
Auserte vos hinc ambos in malam rem. Tu signum retine. R. Withal my heart,
seeing you will have it so. Perquam lubens, quando ita vis.

Col. 17. Theodore an old man, and Venantius a scholar. Col. 17. Theodorus
senex, and Venantius discipulus. T. Have you a pen and ink child? Habes the
came pennariam sili? V. Yes sir. If you will have any thing I will furnish you.
Euam domine. Si quid vis suppeditabo. T. I would write two or three words. 5
Duo verba volo exarare. V. Yea, write ten if you will Vel december. T. Stand still
whilst I write, Subsiste tantisper dum scribo. V. I will go no whither write
as much as you will. Nusquam digrediar, scribe, quantum vis prolixe. T. Tak
your pen and ink again, child, I have set down what I had a mind to set down.
I thank you. Recipe, fili, calamarium tuum, notavi quae volui. Habetur tibi
gratin. V. Why should you thank me? should an old man thank a boy especially
for no service? 15 Quid mihi, gratiam habeas? senex adolescentulo praesertim ob
nullum officium? T. Your manuerly saying sets me on, child, so that I have a
mind to talk with you a little, if you be content. 20 Honest a oration tua, mi
fili, (...), ut tecum colloqui velim paulifper, si annuis. V I am not unwilling
indeed to talk with you Sir: but I wonder what the matter is that you would
speak with me. Non abnuo quidem tecum loqui, domine: sed quid sit miror, quod
mecum loqui velis. T. I would first know of you, who is your father and mother.
5 Scire ex te primum volo, qui sint parents tui. V. They dwell not here, and
therefore I should name them to you but in vain Non hic habitant, proinde
frustra eos nominem tibi. T. No? where then? Non? ubi igitur? V. At Were. 30
Guerte. T That is a place altogether unknown to me. Iste locus perquam ignotus
mihi. V. I believe you Sir. It is not so much frequented as this. Credo domine.
Non est tam celeber, quam hic est. T. Is that, that Were, a good town or a
countrey-village? 35 Oppidum est, an pagus Guerteum istud? V. A good town,
indeed, and that very populous. It is commonly called Were. Oppidum sare, and
quidem populosissimum. Vulgo vocatur Were. T. Now I know it: There is great
store of clothing in that place. 40 Nunc scio: magnum exercetur lanificium in
eo loco. V. Now you hit it. Jam tenes. T. I thaught you had been a scholar.
Scholasticum te esse credidi. V. Indeed I am a scholar 45 Sum equidem
scholasticus. T. How falls it out then, that you come hither to learn. Quid
igitur accidit, ut huc studendi causa advenias? V. I do not learn here. but in
my own country. Now I came hither for my minds sake with my father to the
Mart. 50 Non hic studeo sed in patria. Nunc huc animi causa cum patre profectus
sum ad mercatum T. Now have you brought me into my way again. Nunc me redux
sti in viam. V. By whom then art thou taught? A quo igitur es institutus? T. By
the schoolmasters of that place where I was born. 55 A ludimagistris istius
loci ubi natus sum. V. What like masters have you there? Cujusmodi Praeceptores
habes illic? T. The one lean, the other fat. Alterum macrum, ping^m alterum.
V. Are they batchelours or married men? 60 Caelibes sunt an mariti? T. Both
married men. Ambo mariti. V. Are they men of great learning, i e. great
scholars? Magna sunt eruditione? T. I do not know truly. I think indifferent.
65 Nescio hercle. Tolerabili opinor. T. How many scholars have they? Quot
discipulos habent? T. A great company indeed Magnum sane gregem. V. What do
they teach you Quid docent vos? T. Truly that which we do not know It is a fond
answer sir, but I hope you will pardon it. 70 Hercle quod nescimus. Ridicula
est responsio, Domine, sed ignoscenda. T. I like it well enough. Is any of your
school fellows a very good scholar? placet. Ecquis inter condiscipulos tuos
est insigniter doctus? V. Herein I am not able to answer you. 75 Hic nihil
habeo quod respondeam. T. Can they say any thing what one will in Latin?
Possunt quidvis Latin dicere? V. I think so. I am sure they prattle every day
in Latin. Opinor, certe garrium assidue Latin. T. What do you learn? Tu quid
discis? V. The Grammar rules. 80 Grammatices paecepta. T. Have you done any
good at your learning? Ecquid operae pretium fecisti in literis? V. I am not
able to judge of my learning. Ego meam eruditionem non possum aestimare. T.
Shall I make trial of you? 85 Licet periculum tui facere? V. I do not say
nay. If you will you may. Non recuso. Si libet, licet. T. Can you say any verse
by heart? Ecquem versiculum tenes memoriter? V. A great many. 90 Permultos. T.
Reapeate some one. Proser unum quempiam. V. To please great men deserves no
little praise. Princibus placuisse viris, non ultima laus est. T. Construe it,
Collige constructionem. V. It is not the last praise, to please chief men. 95
Non est ultima laus, Placuisse principibus viris. T. What means that
sentence? Quid ea oratie sibi vult? It is not the last praise. Non est ultima
laus. V. That it is exceeding great praise; expressed by the contrary, like as
we say a boy is not unlearned, whom we would say is learned. 100 Quod sit laus
eximia; per contrarium expressa, sicut dicimus, pu^rum quempiam non esse
indectum, quem doctum volumus dicere. T. What signifies the last? Ultimum quid
significat? V. That which is last in order, but here, as often other-where it is
put for the least, or very little, or the lowest, as the first is put for the
chief and most excellent 110 Quod est ordine postremum, verum hic, ut and alias
saepe pro minimo aut exiguo, aut insimo ponitur, quemadmodum primus ponitur pro
summo and eximio. T. What part of speech is Ultima? 115 Quae Pars orationis est
Ultima? V. My master reckoned it amongst the Nounes ordinal. For he is not wont
to dispute curiously about such matters. 120 Meus magister retulit inter nomina
ordinalia. Nam de talibus rebus non soles anixe disputare. T. And he had rather
have such scholars as can tell how to use words then how to wrangle about
them. Et ipse discipulos habere mavult, qui sciant vocibus ut, quam qui de
illis degladiari noverint. V. Whence is the infinitive Mood, placuisse
governed, or upon what does it depend? 125 Infinitum placuisse unde regitur,
aut a quo pendet. T. I think this may be spoken two ways: first that it
depends on the Verb est, so that an Accusative case may be understood; as the
old fashion is for Verbs to have an accusative case after them with an
Infinitive mood, as this may be the construction: It is not the last praise
(understand) for a man to pleas great men: that it may be like this speech * It
is fit for a scholar to love his master. Again it may be said that the
Infinitive mood placuisse is put instead of a nominative case, as it is for the
most part; that it may be like this speech. To love is a most hurtful thing;
or this, to play at dice is a most hurtful thing. 130 135 Duplicit'r hoc posse
dici existimo: Primum, quod pendeat a verbo est, ut subaudiatur Accusativus,
sicut mos est verb is pristinus accusativum post se regere cum infinito; ut sit
ista constructio: Non est ultima laus (subaudi) hominem placuisse vitis
principibus: ut sit similis huic orationi. 140 145 150 * Est aequum discipulum
amare praeceptorem. Deinde, potest dici, quod infinitum placuisse ponatur vice
Nominativi, si cut plerunqueut sit, huic orationi similis, A mare est res
damnosissima; vel huic. Ludere alca non est honestum. T. What means chief
men? Quid sibi vult principibus viris? V. By chief men I think are meant men
that are mighty, Noble, rich and the like, that chief may be put here instead
of a noune Adjective, as it is used in Lucius Florus, the chief people. 155 Per
principes viros puto significari viros praepotentes, nobiles, divites, and
similes: ut princeps hic ponatur loco nominis Adjectior, sicut apud Lucium
Florum usurpatur Princeps populus. Nor is that any strange thing; For Terence
also said an old Merchant. And an old wife as cunning as a fox is to be found
in Erasmus. 160 Nec id novum est; Nam and senex mereator dixit Terentius. Anus
vulpes extat apud Erasmum: T. What kind of verse is this? 165 Cujusmodi versic
ulus est iste? V. An Heroic Hexameter Heroicus Hexameter. T. Whereof does it
consist? Vnae constat ille? V. In the first four feet of a Spondie, and Dactyle
indifferently: in the fifth of a dactyle only; in the sixth of a Spondie or
Trochie. 170 In quatuor primis pedibus indifferenter ex Dactylo, vel Spondaeo:
in quinto e solo Dactylo; in sexto, Spondaeo: vel Trochaeo. T. How many
sylables has a Dactile foot? 175 Dactylus quot syllabas recipit? V. Three.
Ternas. T. Of what sort? Cujusmodi? V. The first long, and the latter two
short. Primam longam, duas posteriores breves. T. Do your masters teach you
these things? 180 Haeccine docent vos magistrivestri? V. I beseech you, from
whence else should I learn them? Obsecro, unde ego alioqui hauserim? T. He must
needs be a rich man. 185 Oportet illum esse virum opulentum. V. How so? Qui? T.
Because they get a great deal of money, that teach boys so. Quia magnum
quaestum faciunt, qui sic erudiunt adolescentes. V. But our master has much
ado to live. 190 At noster vix sese a penuria tuetur. T. Is he so poor? Ita
pauper est? V. Verily he is not rich. Certe non est opulentus. T. Truly, he
deserves a better fortune. 195 Dignus hercle meliore fortuna. V. So he does
indeed: but he cannot make fortune his friend. Ita est quidem: sed non petest
fortunae litare. T. How does he and the citizens agree? Quomodo civibus and
ipsi convenit? V. Well, I think. Opinor been. T. They all strive to do him
any kindness. 200 Favent illi certatim omnes. V. This I am sure on. Hoc scio.
T. Do they give him nothing? Nihil dant? V. He is no asker. Non est petax. T.
He does so much the more deserve their baunty. 205 Hocmagis promeretur
munificentiam. V. Your commonwealths are able, but ours are not so. Vestrae
Respublicae potentes sunt, at nostrae non item. T. What ones are your
school-fellowes? Quales sunt tui condiscipuli? V. Good and diligent at their
books. 210 Boni ac studiost. T. Do they love you? Amant hi te? V. As a
brother. Tanquam fratrem. T. Do you love your master? Ecquid praeceptorem tuum
amas? V. Passing well. 215 Mirifice. T. You do well. But can you tell me
readily, why you love him. Honest facis. At vero potes mihi expedire, cur
ames? V. First, because he is a good scholar. Primum, quod sit vir doctus. T.
He is worthily beloved of all good men for his learning. 220 Ob eruditionem
amatur merito ab omnibus bonis. V. And then because he is so diligent in
teaching us. Delnde, quod in docendis nobis tam diligens sit. T. In this
respect ^e owe him a great deal of honor and love too. 225 Hoc nomine vos
illi potissimum debetis honorem pariter and amorem. V. And also because he
chides no body but gently. Tum quod neminem nisi clementer objurget. T. Truly
he deserves to be a Tutor to a Prince. 230 Dignus hercle, qui regum liberos
doceat. V. Nor does he ever beat any unless he be admonished a fore.
Necunquam caedit quenquam nisi admonitum antca. T. He is a good man, as far as
I can bear. 235 Vir bonus est, quantum audio. V. Besides all this. He does so
provoke all to follow their books, and to live well, that a Mother cannot more
kindly win her child to suck or eat. 240 Ad haec universos sic provocat ad
literarum studium and honestatem, ut non possit matter benignius provocare suum
infantem ad sugendum, aut edendum. T. He must needs be a naughty boy that lovs
not such a master. Juvenis sit improbus, qui praeceptorem talem non amer. V.
Therefore I said I did love him, lest I should be thought a naughty boy. 245
Ergo me dixi amare, njuvenis censear improbus. T. I have asked you my child,
what I had a mind to, now I let you go. 255 Percontatus sum, fili, quae volui.
Nunc te dimitio. V. Fare you well, Sir. Been vale, Domine. T. Farewell
heartily. Vale faeliciter. And when you come to your master, comend me kindly
to him. Et praeceptorem tuum meo nomine fac officiose salutes adveniens, V. I
will do it indeed with all my heart. 260 Faciam ac lubens quidem.

Col. 18 Arnold the master, Bernard the scholar. Col. 18. Arnoldus praeceptor,
Bernardus discipulus. A. Is there any among you that has a good mind to play?
Ecquis inter vos est ludendi cupidus? B. We all of us indeed desire that.
Vniversi hercle id cupimus. A. What will you give me if I grant you leave to
play? 5 Quid da^bitis mihi si vobis saciam ludendi copiam. B. We will all love
you most dearly. Omnes amabimus te plurimum. A. In what will you show that
love. Qua in re declarabitis istum amorem; B. We will constantly obey your
commands. 10 Obtemperabimustuis praeceplis usque. We will never displease you;
we will ply our books as fast as we can Nunquam offendemus: summam operam
impendemus in studendo. A. What punishment shall I instict upon you, in case you
deceive me? Si fefelleritis, quam poenam irrogabo? B. Impose what punishment
you will, or keep us here perpetually hereafter bound in this prison, like a
company of melefactors. 20 Quamvis p^nam ir^og^^to, aut nos ^ic perpetu^
deinceps, tanquam maleficos, de^ineto vinc^o^ in h^c carcere. A. I yield to
what you say, I like the motion. Sententiae vest ^ae accedo Place^ conditio. B.
Play al; but so as to behave your selves civi^y. 25 Ludi^e universis; sed
honest.

Col. 19. Conrade and Dydymus, Schoolfellowes. Col. 19. Conradus and Didymus,
condiscipuli. C. I would some ill chance or other might light upon our master.
Vt o^nes dii, d^aeque praeceptorem nostrum magno ^onent infortunio. D. What
harm has the master done you that you so storm against him? 5 Quid magister
malefecit tibi, ut sic in ^um destomacheris? C. Because he lets us sit drowsing
here in such fair weathrr. Quod nos hic ^am ser^no coelo desidere patiatur. At
other times when it is either rain or stormmy weather, he will suffer himself
to be over*intreated* but now there is no entreating of him. 10 Alias, quando
v^l pluvi^ est, vel procella, patietur se exorari; nunc inexorabilis est. D*
Why, what would you do? Quid enim ^^cere velis? C. I had a good mind to play a
good why ^^nce 15 Ludere jamdudum gestio. D. You wax sottish. We played but
the day before yesterday; and have you forgot it already. 15 Desipis nudius
tertius lusimus; an id excidit tibi? C. But the winds and showers were so
boisterous that day, that I had no mind to look out of the doors. 20 Verum
illo die sic venti saeviebant, and imbres, ut mihi non libe. et prospectare
domo. D. Could our master foreknow what weather would happen? An magister
potuit praescire quid ^venturum esset. I am sure on it, when we were dismissed,
it was fair. 25 Certe, cum dimitteremur, sudum erat. C. But a little after we
were gone from the school (O wonderful!) what a mighty tempest there arose on
a sudden! At paulo post quam sumus ludum egr^ssi, (Deum immortalem!) quanta
tempestas subito coorta est! D. Seeing you are so desirous to play what, I pray
you, have you a mind to do? 30 Cum ludendi tam sis cupidus, quid quaeso, tibi
libet actitare? C. That which I might not do of late. Quod nuper minus licuit.
D. And what is that I pray you? Quid is it ud tandem? C. To run up and down the
fields, to leap in the meadows, and to fill the air with shouting 35 In
campis currere, in pr^is exul a^e, magnis clamoribus vacuum impl^te coe^um. D.
O strange I what a fine sport is that? Dii beni! quanta est ea voluptas! C. Do
you not know? I had rather have this sport then eat honey, or sugar. 40 Non
scis? Ego prae hac voluptate, ne mel quidem esitare velim aut saccharum. D. I
remember our masters spoke of some other exercises. 45 Ego magistros nostros
alia quaedam exercitia memorare commemmi. C. There cannot be better found in my
judgment. Non possunt meliora reperiri, meo quidem judicio. D. What do you
think of the handball. 50 Quid tibi videtur pila palmaria? C. I never used my
self to that kind of play: and besides, my strength will not abide it, nor have
I the trick of it 55 Nunquam exercui me isto ludendi genere: deinde, nec vires
supperunt, nec artem casteo. D. What, does fishing please you? Quid, piscasio
placet? C. Whether? Angling, or fishing with the net? Vtra? Hamatilis, an
reticula ia? D. Both. Vtraque? C. Truly I am delighted with neither. 60 Neutra
hercle trahor. D. Why so? Quam ob causam? C. The one makes ut slo^hfull, the
other makes us wet. Altera segnes; alt ra reddit uvidos. D. What? does not
wrestling like you? 65 Quid? number te lucta delectat? C. Not at all. M nime. D.
Why not? Cur non? C. I am afraid of falling. or, breaking a limb. Metuo casum,
fract^iramve. D. Have you not a mind to ride? 70 Non tibi libet equtiare? C. I
never came on a horses back. Nunquam ascendi equum D. Have you not a mind to
hunt? Non venari; C. We want nets, hunting poles and dogs. Desunt casses,
venabula, canes. D. Have you not a mind to swim? 75 Non natare; C. It is an
unprofitable and a dangerous skill, and whereof we have no leave given us. Ars
est inutilis and periculosa, and nobis inconcessa. D. Have you not a mind to
shoot? Non jaculari? C. I brake my bow lately. 80 Nuper fregi arcum. D. You
should have got it mended, Reparares. C. I have not a string. Non habeo nervum.
D. You should buy one. Emeres. C. Where? 80 Vbi? D. Of the bowyers. De
arcuariis. C. If I had money enough I would buy me such books as I want. Si
pecunia suppeteret, emerem libros, quibus opus est. D. Have you learned music.
85 Didicisti musicam? C. I would never give me my mind to it Haud unquam volui
applicore animum. D. That Is strange, seeing it is both an ingenious thing, and
very pleasant. 90 Mirum, quum and liberale sit, and perquam jucusdum. C. I
believe it. But I from a child could never abide to sing. Credo. Sed ego a
pueritia semper abhorrui a canendo. D. Now seeing no liberal exercise
delights you I wonder that any body can endure to play with you. 95 Cum vero
nulla te-liberalis exercit atio detectet, demiror si quis tecum ludere
sustineat. C. O you mad boy, do you think that all are so testy as you are? 100
O insane, credis universo; tam tetricos esse quam tu et? Indeed I would (play)
if I could. Equidem si possem vellem. D. Hold your peace, the master is here:
if he should catch us talking, and ask us, what answer should we make? 105
Tace, magister adest, si nos confabulantes deprehendat, and perconte ur quid
respondeamus? C. I can easily find what to answer. Ego reperiam facile quod
respondeam.

Col. 20. Giles the Father, Frederick the Son. Col. 20. Aegidius pater,
Fredericus filius. Ae Take this letter. Cape tabellas has. F. What needs any
letter? Quid opus est tabellis? Ae Carry it to your master. Defer ad magistrum
tuum. F. Where should I find him. Vbi inveniam cum. Ae At his house. 5 Domi
suae. F. What if he be not at home? Quid si non sit domi? Ae Give him it in the
school Trade illi in ludo literario. F. Shall I say nothing? Nihil dicam, Ae
That he would do what the letters mention. 10 Vt id faciat quod istae
loquuntur literae. F. Must I come again quickly, after I have delivered them?
Jubes me statim recurrere, postquam reddidi. Ae If your master think oo d. 15
Si praeceptori tuo sic visum fuerit. F. What if he neither say I, nor nay? Quid
si neque annuat, neque renuat. Ae He will do the one of the two Dve not fear
it. Alterutrum faciet. Ne me tue.

Col. 21. Gilbert and Hubert, schoolfellowes. Col. 21. Gilbertus and Hubertus
condiscipuli. G. Ho, Ho, Hubert, the best of my companions. Heus, heus,
Huberte, sodalium optime. H. Who call's me? Quis me vocat? G. I. You come to me
in very good time. 5 Ego. Peropportune te mihi offers. H. What is the
business? tell me quickly. Quid negotii? dic ci o. G. Whither go you so fast
Quo properas? H. To the Wi^e tavern. Ad oenopolium. G. What will you do there?
Quid ibi facturus? H. I am going to fetch the master^h me. 10 Accerso
praeceptorem domum. G. Is he at the Teverne? Est in oenopolio? H We believe he
is there. Credimus ibi esse. G. With whom did he go thither? Quicum abivit
illuc? H I know not. You busy your self about trifles. 15 Nihil scio. Nugae
sunt, quas agis. G. Nay but, I desire a serious piece of husiness of you. Imo,
abs te seriam operam expero. H. I would not say nay to it if I had leisure: but
I am not at leisure now. Non a nuam, si vacet: sed non vacat modo. G. It will
not be long. I pray thee, do not go a way any whither. Non eri: langum.
Quaeso, ne quo abeas. H. What is your will; say in a word. Quid vi^? dic verbo.
G. That you would tell me the meaning of this letter. 25 Vt mihi has tabellas
interpreteris. H. Give it me, that I may quickly peruse it. Da, ut percurram
ci. o. G. Take it. Accipe. H. This letter is sealed. Hae sunt sigra ae. G. I
know that. Unseale it. Scio. Resigna. H. Do you bid me to break open another
man's letter? 30 Tu me jubes alienas literas resignare? G. It is not another
man's. My father wrote it. Non sunt alienae. Pater meus scripsit. H. And what
then? Quid tum postea? G. And he bade me carry it to my master. 35 Et ad
mogistrum jussit perferre. H. I hear you. Audio. G. Now I much fear me lest
this letter should complain of me. Nunc ego mihi male metuo, ne me criminentur
hae literae. H. What have you done? 40 Quid fecisti? G. Nothing, that I know
on. Nihil, quod sciam. H. Why then do you say you fear, lest it should
complain of you? Cur ergo timere te dicis, ne te criminentur? G. Because my
father said it was a letter of commendations. Where I suspect there is some
trechecy underhand. 45 Quoniam pater dicit esse commendatitias. Vhi suspicor
subesse fraudem. H. You say that which is likely to be true. Verisimile d cis.
G. L^os upon the letter quickly, it will resolve us of all the matter. 50
Inspice literas cito. Illae nobis rem omnem expedient. H. Hearken. 50 Ausculta.
Herman Ceratine sends commendations to Evaldus Gallus. 55 Hermanus Ceratinus
Evaldo Gallo salutem dicit. He that delivers you this letter is very tender
to me, because he is my son: I pray you strive to mend him, lest I begin to
hate him for his naughtiness. 60 Qui tibi has tradit literas charissimus mihi
est, quia filius: hunc, quaeso ne proptey improbitatem odisse inciptam,
emendare stude. Words, or rating, or chiding, will do no good upon him. Verbis
nihil proficitur, aut increpatione, aut jurgio. I have made trial. Expertus
sum. Wherefore I entreat you that you would do the fear with tods. 65 Quare te
deprecor, ut virgis rem peragas. Take heed you hurt not his bones. Ossa ne quid
laedas, caveto I can easily endure you to beat his skin and flesh. Pellem and
carnem facile patior ut diverberes. Farewell. Valeto. G. Truip I did guess so.
70 Divinaram hercle. H. This is Bellerophons letter (i. e. against ones self)
Bellerophontis hae sunt literae. G. I shall not be so long. Non erunt diu. H,
What will you do? Quid facies? G. I will alter it. 75 Mutabo. H. Will not your
master find that out. Non istud subolebi: praeceptori? G. Not at all. He
knows not my fathers hand. 80 Minime. Non novit manum patris. H. But how will
you change it? Quomodo mutabis autem? G. Will you hear? audire? H. If you will
speak it briefly. Si brevi ter dixeris. Herman Ceratine sends commendations to
Evaldus Gallus. 80 Hermanus Ceratinus Evalda Gallo S. D. * He that delivers
you this letter is most dear to me, because he is my son: I pray you do not
begin to dislike him, for the naughtiness of others. 90 Qui tibi has tradit
literas, charissimus mihi est quia filius: hunc, quaeso ne propter aliorum
fraudem odisse incipta^. If he shall do any thing amiss, labor to amend him
with words. Si quid peccabit, emendare stude verbis. One may do much good upon
him with blaming: and chiding. Mulium Increpatione proficitur and jurgio. I
have had experience. 95 Ego expertus sum. Wherefore I entreat you that you
would not do it with rods. Quare te deprecor ut ne vergis rem peragas. I am so
far off from having his bones to be hurt, that I cannot well abide his skin or
flesh to be beaten. 100 Ossa tantum abest, ut ve lim laedi, ut ne facile quidem
paetiar pellem illius, aut carnem diverberari. Farewell. Valeto. G. A fine
change indeed. Artificiosa, ita me dii been ament, mutatio, H. But take heed,
that neither of them understand the knavery. 105 Sed cave, ne resciscat uter
vis eorum imposturam. H. I will have a care of these things. Ista mihi curae
erunt. G. you have held me too long. Nimis diu detinuisti me H. Run so much the
faster now. 110 Tanto nunc ocyus curre.

Col. 21. Joyce a boy, Lydia a girl. Col. 21 Jodocus puer, Lydia puella. J.
God save you, pretty lass. Salve, puella venustissima. L. And you, pretty lad.
Et tu, formosissime adolescens. J. Will you tell me what I ask you? 5 Vis mihi
diee: e quod te interrogo? L. If you ask me a wise question. Si prudenter
interroges. J. Is the Schoolmaster at your house? Est ludi-magister in vestra
domo? L. He is: he fits within by the fireside. Est: intus sedet apud focum.
J. What does he? Quid agit; L. What should he do! He is drinking. 10 Quid agat!
potat. J. Who is with him? Quid adest illi? L. No stranger at all. Nemo
alienus. J. May not I go to him? An mihi non licet eum adire? L. I do not
know indeed. 15 Nescio profecto. J. I pray you, tell him, that I stand here at
the door. Obsecro te, ut annuncies illi, quod hic adstem prae foribus. L. Whom
should I say you are? 20 Quem te dicem esse? J. Joyce Cock. Jodocum Gallum. L.
I will do so. Come in, tarry here a little, whilst I go to him. Fae iam.
Ingredere, Opperitor hic pau ulum, du mad illum adeo J. Run and make have back
again as soon as may be. 25 Cu^re and recurre quamp imum.

Col. 22. Michael the master, and Nychasius the boy. Col. 22 Michael
praeceptor, and Nychasius puer. M. Do you enquire for me, Nych sius? Men'
quaetis, Nichasi? N Yes, reverend master. Etiam venera^de praeceptor M. What do
you bring me. Quid affert mihi? N Truly I bring nothing. Equidem nihil affero.
M. What do you say then? 5 Quid au igitur? N A youth taries for you at home: if
it be no trouble to you, he desires to speak with you. Adolescens quidam te
expectat domi: si non est molestum, is te cupit convenire. M. Cannot you resolv
me what he would with me? 10 Non tu mihi potes expedire, quid nos velit? N. N^.
He has something under his clothes, which he brings you. Minime. Habet quid
sub vest, quod affert tibi. M. Run before, and tell him I will be with him
presently. Praecurre, and dic me confestim affore. N. I am gone. 15 Ab^o.

Col. 23. Orpheus, Phillip, the guests, Placida, the woman that keeps the
tavern. Col. 23, Orpheus, Philippus, Compotatores, Placida vinaeria. O. We have
sat here long enough sirs. Sessum est hie satis, viri. Why do we not call a
reckoning presently? Quin mox ratiunculam subducimus? P. Even just now, if you
please, we will not hinder you. Your business calls you away, and is earnest. 5
J am nunc modo si tu ita vis, non tibi erimus in mora. Te tua negotia vocant
and urgent. O. You guess right. Recte autumatis. Come hither woman. 10 Ades
mulier. What is the reckoning Quanti bibimus. P. You see your selves how many
pintes you have drunk, and you know the rate of the wine. Videtis ipsi quot
sextarios biberitis, and pretium vini scitis. Now let us consider how many you
are in the company. 15 Nunc potatorum numerum consideremus. O. Do you it. That
is a part of your office. Tu facito. Tuum istud est officii. There is no body
gone away: as many as we came in at the beginning, so many are we here present.
20 Nemo discessit. Quot intravimus initio, totidem hic sumus praesentes. P.
Here are five men, and seven pintes: if every one pay three half pintes, you
will have one half pint to come in: and truly I will fill you out this very
neatly. 25 Capita hic sunt quinque, sextarii septem: si solvant singuli heminas
ternas, accedet vobis cotyla una: hanc ego vobis convenienter admetiar. P. Let
us have the eight part of a pint, and make it up a whole pint. 30 Accedat tuum
acet^bulum, and fac uti sextarius fiat. P. I do not refuse, that you may come
see us again another time. Non recuso, uti nos denuo revisatis alias. P. We
will do so. Ita faciemas. O. Most merry comrades do you jovelize it here and
fare you well. 35 Contubernales festivissimi vos hic vivite and valete. P. I am
called away. Ego avocor. Stay till you drink once more. Subsiste, donec adhuc
semel bibas. O. Truly I have drunk ofener then once, and that one draught will
not make me merrier. Therefore my dearest friends fare you well. 40 Equidem
saepius bibi quam semel, nec ille me unius haustus faciet laetiorem, proinde
vos valete, charissima mihi capita. P. And you alsomost sweet merry companion.
45 Tu quoque congerro suavissime.

Col. 24. Richard a scholar, Strabo the master. Col. 24. Richardus discipulus,
Strabo praeceptor. R. God save you, master. Ave, Praeceptor. S. And you. Et tu.
R. My father has sent you these small fishes. Pisciculos hosce tibi smisit
pater. S. Fishes? Truly this is a rarity. 5 Pisces? Sane hoc novum. R. It is a
small present. Exignum est mnnusculum. S. But I esteem it as a very great
present. At mihi maximi muneri est instar. R. My father entreats you that you
would take it in good part. 10 Rogat pater, ut boni consulas. S. You shall tell
him it is as we come to me, as any thing can be. Sic gratum esse renunciabis,
ut gratius esse nihil possit. Especially at this time. For toward the evening
(God willing) we expect two strangers here. 15 Hoc praesertim tempore. Siquidem
in vespera (Deo volente) duos convivas hic expectamus. We will make them merry
with these fishes. Eos his piscicu' is exhilat abimus. R. I will tell him so.
Dicam. S. Stay a little, ill I make the Basket be emptied for you. 20 Resist
paulisper, dum tibi sporiulam hanc evacuari jubeo. R. Conten, I will tarry.
Placet: resistam. S. Take your basket again child, and thank your father
heartily from me. 25 Recipe sportulam, mi fili, and age patri tuo maximas
gratias meo nomine. R. I will not forget it. Non praetermittam. S. Entreat him
over and above from me, that he would daign to come to me at six a clock, to
partake of what he has sent. 30 Roga insuper meis verbis, ut ad horam sextam
ad me venire dignetur, fruiturus iisdem quos misit. R. There is no need you
should be at any charges for him. Non est necesse, te facere ullos sumptus
propter eum. S. Do as you are bidden 35 Fac quod jussus. R. Seeing you will
bave it so, I will do it. Quando ita vis, faciam. S. Farewell heartily. Vale
foelicissime.

Col. 25. Titus a boy Vitus the master. Col. 25. Titus puer, Vitus herus. T. My
mistress would have him sit down, if any body be hungry. Jubet, hera ut
accumbat, si quis esurit. V. Are all things ready? 5 Sunt paraia omnia? T. A
good while since. Jamdudum. V. We sit down. Do you bring the meat in the mean
time: Nos accumbimus. Tu cibos affer interea. T. What would you have first?
Quid vis primum? V. The Gammon of Bacon and the hanged Beef. Petasonem cum
carne solsa bubula. T. What next? 10 Quid deinde? V. Two bunches of nettles. A
pox take thee with the question? Urticae fasciculos duos. Dii te perdant cum
ista qiaestione! T. Straitway fall into passion? Statim adiram? V. Why do you
not ask her, who dressed the meat? 15 Quin eam interroges, quae cibos coxit? T
But she badelme, that I should ask you? At illa me justit, ut rogitem te. V.
You have asked once; hereafter leave asking. 20 Rogasti semel; posthacrogare
desine. T. I will think on it. Meminero.

Col. 26. Anthony the father, Beatus the Son. Col. 26. Antonius Pater, Beatus
filius. A. Say grace for us boys what do you stick on? Consecrate nobis mensam
pueri, Vbi haeretis? B. My brother is not at home, father. 5 Frater non est
domi, pater. A. Where is he then? Ubi est ergo? B. He is not come again yet
with the beer. Nec dum rediit cum cervisia. A. Do you say grace in the mean
time. Tu consecra cibos interea. B. I cannot say a grace yet by heart. 10
Nondum scio consecrationem memoriter. A. When will you learn one at last? Quando
disces tandem? B. As soon as I can. Utprimum potero. A. Be sure you get one
within this three days. 15 Cura ut scias intra triduum. B. Truly I will do my
utmost. 15 Equidem dabo summam operam.

Col. 27. Christian the Master, Dionyse the boy. Col. 27. Christianus herus
Dionysius puer. C. Who covered this table Quis hanc mensam adornavit? D. I,
sir. Ego, domine. C. Bring a ladder hither. Adfer huc scalas. D. You talk
idely master Deliras here. What need is there of any ladders? 5 Quid opus
scalis? Why do you not ask rather for meat or drink? Quin tu cibum petis, aut
potum? C. Do as I command you. Fac quod impero. D. Leave trifling. I pray you,
and speak to the purpose, 10 Mitte nugari, quaeso and dic rem ipsam. C. I would
know what is awanting here. Scire volo quid hic desit. D. I know not. Nescio.
C. Look over all the table. Perspice totam mensam. D. Me thinks I have missed
nothing. 15 Nihil videor praetermisissie. C. I will make you see, what you do
not see. Efficiam ut videas quod vides minus. D. Do so I pray you, but without
a jeer. Fac amabo sed citra contumeliam. C. Tell me after what order you
furnish the Table. 20 Dic quo ordine mensam instru^s. D. First, I lay on the
table cloth. Primum, insterno mappam. C. I see the Table cloth. Mappam video.
D. Then I say the Trenchers, or plates in order. 25 Dispono deinde quadras, vel
orbs. C. Every one has his plate forsooth. Qrbem quisque suum habet scilicet.
D. Then I set on the wreath with the Saltseller. Deinde impono circulu^ cum
salino. C. I do not disallow of your fashion in ordering. 30 Non refuto
ordinis modum. D. After this I place the Household bread. Hinc, pancra cibarium
appono. For concerning the white bread you gave order apart. 35 Nam de pane
triticeo seorsum dedisti mandatum. C. Go on. Prosequere. D. Afterward I wash
the Cups, and set them down empty as you bade. Postea proluo pocula, and depono
vacua, sicut jussisti. C. That you have remembered right 40 Istud meministi
recte. D. Last of all, when ye are set, the meat is brought; the Cups are
filled. For every one of you sets himself a stool. 45 Postremo quando
acc^buistis, affertur cibus; implenter pocula. Nam sellam sibi quisque vestrum
disponit. C. Do you see none of those things awanting here, which you have
reckoned up? Nihil hic vides deesse eorum, quae recensuisti. D. Let me consider
them again. Sine ut percenseam denuo. C. Away with your considering Cap. 50
Abi cum tua ceusura. Bring hither a Trencher, and another Saltseller too. Affer
quadram and alterum salinum insuper. D. Could I tell beforehand. how many there
would be at the Table? 55 An ego divinare poteram, quot essent futuri convivae?
C. What do you stand here still, you russian-rogue. Etiam hic stas, ganeo.

Col. 28. Everard the Boy, Flaccus the Master. Col. 28. Everardus puer, Flaccus
herus. E. Wash that same Gallonflagon. Prolue amphoram illam semimodialem. F.
Suppose it done. Factum puta. What is your command? Quid imperas? E. That you
bring better Beer. 5 Ut adferas meliorem cervisiam. F. Whence would you have me
fetch it. Unde me jubes afferre? E. Where the best is. Ubi est omnium optima.
F. I hear it is good no where. Ego nusquam audio probari. E. What is at the
Rose? 10 Qualis est in Rosa? F. It is not pure. Non est sincera. E What is it
at the Star? Qualis in Stella? F. It is pure indeed, but thin Sincera quidem,
sed tenuis. E. What is at the Moore? In Mauro qualis? F. At the bottom of the
Barrel. 15 Exhausta. E. Is there none at the helmet? In Galea, nulla? F. Not
any. Nulla. E. What does the Goldenhead draw? Chrysocephalus quid promit? F.
Vinegar. 20 Acetum: E. What has the Hollander brewed? Quid coxit Batavus? F.
That which he has brewed, is not stale enough. Quod coxit, nec dum maturuit.
E. It has not yet done working, you would have said. Deserbuit, voluisti
dicere. F. The very same. Istud ipsum. E. What do they sell at the King? 25
Quid vendit Rex? F. Red water. Aquam rufam. E. What do they sell at the budget?
Quid Ascopera? F. To their friends beer, to others stale. 30 Amicis servisiam,
aliis lotium. E. A pox take all the Brewers? Dii perdant omnes cervisiarios! F.
God bless them rather, unless you will drink water. Dii servent potius, nisi
vultis potare aquam. E. Why do they not brew good beer then? 35 Curetiam non
coquant bonam cer visiam? F. If they wanted nothing. they would do it. Si
nihil illis deesset, sacerent. E. What is awanting then? Quid deest igitur? F.
Sometimes the Malt is weak, sometimes they put in too much water, sometimes
they do not give it leave to work. 40 Alias est polenta lenis, alias affundunt
plus satis aquae, alias non sinunt deservere. E. You have hit the nail on the
head. Rem acu tetigisti. Go where you will, but bring that which is pure good.
45 Vade quocunque vis, sed affer sinceram. F. Give me money. Da mihi pecuniam.
E. Take it. Cape. F. How much is this? Quanti valet haec? E. Two pence
farthing. 50 Duobus assibus and quadrante. F. How much must I have again of it?
Quantum red ibit hinc mibi? E. Do you reckon. Tu supputato. F. I will do it as
I go, when I have leisure. Inter cundum faciam, ubi vacat. E. Go run. Vade
curriculo. F. I will be here again by and by. 55 Mox lic adero. E. Have a care
that you bring me back good money. Ut mihi reports bonam pecuniam, vide. F. I
will have as great a care, as I can. Adhibedo curam maximam. E. And I would
have you use your eyes too. For your care is very little. 60 Et oculos volo, ut
adhibeas. Nam cura tua perquam exigua est.

Col. 29. Gregory the boy, Hermes the master. Col. 29. Gregorius puer, Hermes
herus. G. Much good may this Beer do you. Cervisia haec sit vobis salutaris. H.
You come at a wish. Optatus ades. Whence do you bring it? Unde adfers istam?
G. From Herrius. 5 Ab Herrio. H. Who led you thither? Quis te deduxit illuc.
G. I followed the Kans. Sectatus su cantharos. H. Has it any custom? Ecquam
habet cursuram? G. Very throng. Satis frequentem. H. Fill us some, that we may
try the worth of it. 10 Insunde nobis, ut probemus quid valeat. G. Reach ye
every man his cup. Porrigite suum quisque poculum. H. It is clear, I see.
Sincera est video. G. Now try it. Nunc proba. H. In very deed it is good 15
Mehercule bona est. G. Drink iustily. Bibite strenue. The brewing is yet whole.
Est plena etiamnum coctura. H. I am glad of it. Gaudeo.

Col, 30. Josse the waiter, Lawrence the Master. Col. 30. Jodocus Minister
Laurentius Magister. L. These big bellied pots do not satisfy me. Non mihi
satisfaciunt hae ampullae, Bid them bring us a bigger cup. Jubeto nobis afferri
poculum grandius. Ho Josse. 5 Heus Jodoce. I. Did you call me? Tu me vocasti?
what is your pleasure? Quid placet tibi? L. That you bring me hither two cups
somewhat larger then these Gally-pots. Ut mihi huc afferas duo pocula paulo
capaciora quam hi cuculli. I. It is done. Here they be. 10 Factum. Hic sunt. L.
Out upon you with, that idleness! Apage te cum ista segnitie. I. Why do you
grin? Cur ringeris? L. Because you offer us them so cleanly. 15 Quia tam
purificata nobis proponas. I. Are they not cleanly enough? Non sunt satis pura?
L. Do you look upon them. Tute inspice. I. Truly I washed them for all that.
Equidem prolueram tamen. L. Where? Ubi? J. Within and without. 20 Intus and
foris. L. Would you have me believe you? Vis ut credam? J. I desire it indeed.
Cupio sane. L. Wash them again. Ablue denuo. J. This foulness cannot be wash
ed off with water. Istae sordes ablui non possunt aqua. L. Scrape it off then.
25 Abrade igitur. J. Bring them not again, but very cleanly. Nisi nitidissima
noli reportare. L. What if I break them, when I begin to scrape them? Quid si
frangam, ubi occepi radere? J. Look to yourselfe. For unless the Cups remain
whole to day, your buttocks shall not remain whole to morrow. 30 Tibi
prospices. Nam nisi pocula integra permanserint hodie, tuae nates integrae non
permanebunt crastino. L. A bitter threat. 35 Acerba comminatio. J. Therefore
take heed to your self. Proinde cave tibi.

Col. 31. Melchior the waiter, Nichasius the Master. Col. 31. Melchior
minister, Nichasius. Magister. M. I desire to be taught but without chiding.
Doceri cupio, sed citra jurgium. N. Whatsoever savours not of a jest is
chiding to you. Quicquid non sapit jocum, tibi jurgium est. M. Yet truly I will
remember those things which you commanded me. 5 Equidem illa, quae mihi
praecepisti, recte memini tamen. N. To wit concerning meetings. Nempe de
congressibus. M. I, the very same. Nor am I such a blockhead, as you make me.
10 Nempe istud ipsum: Nec sum tam hebes, quam tu me facis. N. It remains
therefore that you learn what manners he must use, that is a waiter at a Table.
Superest igitur ut discas, quibus moribus utendum sit illi, qui convivii
minister est. M. This I would know. 15 Hoc volo scire. For in this matter there
is much mis-taking Nam hdc in re multum peccatur. N. First therefore I would
have you remember this, that you are a servitor at the Feast. 20 Principio hoc
volo ut memineris, ministrum te esse convivii. M. I will remember it, Meminero.
N. And therefore think that you are not to layter after the guests are ser.
Proinde cogita, non cessandum tibi, postquam accubuere convivae. M. I know
that. Id scio. N. But as I would not have you be slow, so I would not have you
too hasty, remembering that Proverb, which you learned, when you were a novice.
30 Verum ut tardum esse te nolo, it a nolo esse praecipitem, sed proverbii
memorem, quod, cum esses novitius, edidicisti. What is that Proverb, I pray
you? For amongst so many things which I have learned, I can hardly guess;
unless you mean this; make speed leasurely. i. e. No more have then good
speed; or, not too fast. 35 Quid istud est, quaeso, proverbium? naminter tam
multa, quae didici, difficulter possum conjectare; nisi hoc vis; Festina lent.
N. That is the very same. I stud ipsum. M. But that very same I will remember.
Verum istud ipsum recte memini. N. See therefore you stand mannerly at the
table always (but when you take any thing away, or set it on) not sullen or
pouting, but with a lively and cheerful count enance, not with your eyes
looking down upon the ground, nor fastened upon any of the guests, but gently
ready to move at every ones back, especially at the Masters of the feast; and
then with a mouth not gaping, but with your lips lightly joined together. 40 45
50 Fac igitur (nisi dum tollis quid, vel apponis) mensae reverentur assistas
usque non tristis ac putidus, sed vultu renidenti, ac hilari, non oculis humi
dejectis, nec in quenquam convivarum defixis, sed placide mobilibus ad omnes
omnium nutus convivatoris; maxim tum ore neutiquam biante, sed labris leviter
conjunctis, M. I will take order that I be blameless as concerning the mouth,
and eyes. 55 Efficiam ut sim inculpatus, quantum ad os attinet and oculos. N.
You promise well. Been spondes, M. I will perform it indeed you shall see. 60
Reipsa praestabo, videbis. N. Neither take notice of it, if the guests speak
any thing inconsiderately; nor heed it, if they speak any thing uncivily. 65
Nec, si quid a convivis dicitur inconsideratius, adverte, nec si quid
inurbanius, observa. M. You forbide me the same lately. Idem vetuisti nuper. N.
For I would have you to be quite deaf to filthy talk. 70 Nam ad obscoenos
sermones prorsus volo sis surdus. A thing which I have often told you of. Id
quod saepenumero admonui. Moreover, If any man would have any thing, supply him
out of hand. Porro, si quis quid vult, actutum suppedita. Set away the empty
dishes, fill the cups again, but not to the brim. 75 Evacuatos catinos amove,
pocula reple, sed non ad summum labrum. M. I will make them to be a little
less then full. Paulo minus faxo fint quam plena. N. So it should be. Sic
decet. Look about you. Circumspecta. Take away the platters and set on others,
and again look about you. 80 Toll patinas, and appone; item circumspecta. M.
Forsooth, lest I should spill the pottoge upon any bodies clothes. Videlicit,
ne cui vestem jure perfundam. N. So indeed. You shall neither taste the meat
aforehand, nor, if any dainty bit be left, shall you gobble it up. 85 Ita sane.
Cibum neque praegustabis, neque si quid lautius superfuerit, abliguries. M.
Peace I beseech you: the Cook-maid has untaught me that lately. 90 Tace,
obsecro. Istud me nuper coqua dedocuit. N. If the strangers offer you any
thing, refuse it modestly; but if they press it upon you, take it: and going
aside a little, you shall either eat it, or set it up. 95 Siquid a convivis
offertur verecunde reculabis; sin institerint, recipies; and paululum
digressus, vel comedes, vel sepones. M. The guests offer me meat seldom, but
drink ever and anon. Cibos raro, potum subinde, offerunt convivae. N. If that
be done at any time, drink a little and having filled the Cup again, restore
it. 101 Id si quando sit, paululum bibet; and repleto poculo, denuo restitue.
M. Will you not have me wash it? Non me jubes abluere? N. It is not always
requisite. See you he very sparing of words. 105 Non est semper necesse.
Verborum vide ut sis parcissimus. If you be to answer any thing, speak in
short; say nothing of your self without asking. Si quid respondendum fuerit,
paucis orationem absolve; ultro verbum nullum proferas. M. Our Giles taught me
of late to avoid babbling; whom the strangers (because they saw him all tittle
tattle,) set on a prating, and flouted him when he was gone aside. 110 115
Multiloquium ut vitem, documento mihi nuper fuit Aegidius noster; quem hospites
(quoniam loquaculum esse perspexerant) ad garriendum provocare; digressum
perstringebant. N. When any body sends you any whither upon an errant, do not
go away, unless you first understand what is your errant. 120 Missus a
quoquam ad conficiendum negotium, abire noli, ni prius intellexer is quid sit
imperatum. M. What If I ask one again when I have not well understood him?
Quid si denuo rogitem, cum intellexi minus? N. You should offend less, if you
enquire twice, then if you do your errant the wrong way. 125 Minus peccabis si
bis quaeras, quam si perverse negotium conficias. M. What remains after so
many instructions? Quid superest post tot praecepta? N. That you be free from
filth all over your body, but espccially on your face and hands. 130 Ur
sordibus vaces toto quidem corpore, sed maxim facie and manibus. I will make
my self a pretty neat, and hansome little fellow. Sci ulus sim faxo, and
formosulus.

Col. 23. Orasius, Phillip, boys. Col. 32. Orasius, Philippus, pueri. O. Do I
find you here? Hiccine te reperio? P. Scarce any where else but here truly.
Haud alibi sane quam hic. O. I pray you tell me, do you practice any trade
^ere? 5 Dic sodes, ecquam hic ex erces artem? P. Yes. Etiam. O. What, I pray
you? Quam quaeso? P. The Servilian. Servilianam. O. I do not understand what
trade that should be. Non intelligo quaenam sit ea. P. I sweep my Masters House
and chamber. 10 Verro domum, and cubiculum heri. O. What do you else? Quid
facis amplius? P. I make the bed, I make the fire, I fetch water, I wait upon
my Master, forth and home again. 15 Concinno lectum, struo ignem, apporto
aquam, abduco herum, and reduco. O. I hear you. Audio. P. I make ready the
table. Adorno mensam. O. Tell the rest. Dic caetera. P. Waiting on my master
whilst he is at dinner, I read over a chapter in the Bible. 20 Prandenti
adstans, recito sacram lectionem. O. When do you dine your self? Tu quando
prandes? P. When he has got his dinner. Ubi ipse prand erit. O. What do you
use to eat? Quid esitas? P. Whatsoever I have taken away. 25 Quicquid sustuli.
O. How can you lay up so much meat in one belly? Quomodo pote tantum cibi
condere in unam alvum? P. Nay rather I take what serves my turn of what I have
a mind to? Imo de quocunque lubet, sumo quantum satis est. O. Who spends the
other that is left? 30 Quis reliquias caeteras absumit? P. They are bestowed
upon the poor. In pauperes erogantur. O. What all? Omnesne? P. All. Omnes. C.
The Gammons of Bacon too, and the powdered meat. 35 Etiam petasones, and caro
salita? P He has none of these things in his house. Nihil horum habet in
aedibus suis. O. What do you live on then? or what is your daily sustenance?
40 Vnde vivitis autem? Quaeve sunt quotidiana alimenta? P. All fresh. Omnia
recentia. O. Who gets his meat ready for him? Quis parat ei cibos? P. What do
you think of me? Quid me censes? O. I know not what you are now. Once verily
thou wast as dull as a Beetle. 45 Quales nunc sis, nescio. Olim certe non fuit
quicquam hebetius. P. This man has sharpened me and informed me? Hic me
exacuit, se erudivit. O. On free cost? 50 Gratis? P. Yes. But on this
condition, that I should never leave him. Omnino. Sed hac lege, ut ab illo
nunquam discedam. O. Art thou such a fool, that thou would yield thy self
perpetually to serve any man for no reward? 55 Adeone stulius es, ut alicui te
in perpetuam servitutem tradas nullo praemio? P. Can you desire any greater
reward then I have? 60 Ecquid magis praemium expetas, quam ego fero? O. Tell
me, what reward do you receive. Expone, quod praemium feras. P. He will give
me my meat and drink as long as I live. Quoad vivam, suppeditabit hic mihi
alimoniam. O. Do you serve for meat and drink only? where is your apparel in
the mean time? 65 Tune servis pro alimonia tantum? ubi vestitus interim? P. He
allows me such clothes as you see. Idem praebet, qualem vides, vestitum. O. A
fine suit indeed. 70 Elegans mehercle vestitus. P. If I dye before him, I shall
want nothing that is necessary, especially with so wealthy a master. But if he
dye before me, what ever he has will be mine. 75 Si mortnus fuero ante ipsum,
nihil mihi desuerit rerum necessariarum, praesertim apud tam opulentum herum.
Sin ipse ante moriatur, meum fuerit quicquid habet. O. What if you should lie
lingering on a long disease? 80 Quid si longus te morbus excoxerit? P. He will
never put me away. Nunquam submovebit. O. How do you know? Qui scis? P. He is
an honest man, he has put me in a good surety. Vir bonus est, bonum dedit
fide jussorem. O Whom I pray you? 85 Quem, quaeso? P. Him that will render to
every man according to his works. Eum qui reddet unicuique secundum opera sua.
O. Does he fear him? Eum timet? P. It any body else do. Si quisquam alius. O.
In the mean time you must sit there perpetually, as if you were in a dungeon.
90 Interim istic, tanquam in carcere, perpetuo sessitare debes. P. We sometimes
go abroad. Nonnunquam prodimus. O. To whom? Ad quos? P. To a Sermon, to a
conference of good men. Ad concionem sacram, ad Colloqniam doctorum virerum. O.
Have thou no leave given thee to gad abroad sometimes? 95 Non tibi facultas
evagandi datur aliquando? P. Now I do not desire it. At the first it was
somewhat sharp. 100 Non cupio modo. Initio erat subacerbum. O In the mean time
you enjoy not the liberty to do what you will. Interim non frueris liberate
faciendi quod libet. P. That which you call liberty is mere licentiousness.
105 Quam tu voces libertatem, mera licentia est For here I want no iiberty to
do well. Non bic mihi benefaciendi deest ulla libertas. O. But you must do
every thing by a rule. Sed ad proescriptum debes omniafacere. P. VVhither else
should I run to my own ruin, unless I were kept in as it were by these
senses? especially since we are all prone to evil from out youth. 110 Quo
alioqui ruerem nisi his tanquam septis coercerer? Maxim cum simus ad m^lum
proclives omnes ab adolescentia. O. But how do you spend the whole day without
tediousness? 115 Quomodo vero totum diem cousumis citra taedium? P. I would
have you to hear that. Istud volo ut audias. O. Nay rather I entreat you if it
be no trouble to you, that you would tell it me at large. 120 Imo ego te oro,
si non est molestum, ut mihi exponas. P. Being awake in the morning, I get up
the first. Experrectus mane, surgo prior. O. At what a clock? Quota hora? P.
Commonly about five. Fere circa quintam. Being stirred then, as I said, I
presently rous up my Corpse, and step quickly out of my bed. 125 Excitatus
igitur, sicut dixi, sine mora corpus erigo; e lecto statim me subduco. Having
first spoken these words. Haec verba prolocutus. Almighty God the Father, Son,
and holy Ghost be here. Amen. 130 Adsit Deus omnipotens pater, and Filius, and
Spiritus Sanctus. Amen.

A Prayer. Oration. I thank thee, O Father of Heaven and earth, for that thou
have kept me safe this night. 135 Gratias tibi ago, Pater coeli and terrae,
quod me hac nocte servaris incolumem. Grant, I beseech thee, that I may so
pass over this day in thy fear, that I may never swerve from thy
commandments. 140 Da, quaeso, ut totum hunc diem in timore tuo sic transigam,
ut a praeceptis tuis nunquam deflectam.

Amen.
Amen.
A Prayer. Oration. Bestow upon us, O Lord Jesus Christ, thy holy Spirit, which
may restrain our idle thoughts, which may frame our words and amend our lives;
that we may be found worthy of thy heavenly inheritance, unto which thou (being
made man) have vouchsafed to come and call us. 145 105 Impertire nobis, Domine
Jesu Christ, Spiritum sanctum tuum, qui vanas nostras cogitationes cohibeat
verba formet, emendet opera; ut digni inveniamur haereditate tua coelesti, ad
quam nos (factus homo) veniens vocare dignatuses.

Amen.
Amen.
Our Father, etc. I believe in God, etc. 155 Pater noster, etc. Credo in Deum
Patrem etc. O. I would have you let me have those short Prayers. Preculas istas
volo communices. P. I do not refuse. Non recuso. What do you think of them?
160 Quid tibi videntur? Q. They seem very pious and effectual, if you utter
them from your heart. Piae sane and efficaces, si proferas ex animo. P. My
Master teaches me such as these. Tales herus meus edocet me. O. I commend you
both; him, because he teaches you so diligently, and you, because you so
greedily entertain his doctrine into your mind. 165 Laudo utrumque; illum,
quod te sedulo doceat; te, quod illius doctri^iam tam avide demittas in animum.
P. After I have thus commended my self to Christ, I go out of my chamber, I
do my easement, I wash my hands mouth and face, I comb my head; and then I
take a book in my hands. 170 175 Postquam sic me commendavi Christo, progredior
e cubiculo, exonero alvum, abluo manus, os; faciem, pecto caput; deinde sumitur
mihi liber in manus. O. What a one first? Qualis primum? P. A holy one. In this
for a quarter of an hour I rather meditate then read: and then I shut it
again. 180 Sacer. In hoc, ad quartam partem horae magis meditor, quam lego:
deinde recluditur. O. Then at the length I read any books; but especially
those from whence I may learn good language, together with discretion. 185 Tum
demum lego quoscunque libros; sed illos potissimum, undecl* quentiam cum
prudentia simul hauriam. How long are you employed in that reading? Quamdiu
versatis in ealectione? Till my master be awake; for I attend him. whilst he
gets himself ready. 190 Quoad herus expergiscitur; nam huic, dum vestitur,
operam do. By and by I fall to my Book again, till he has finished the task of
his hours. Mox rursus ad libros, donec horarum pensum absolverit. When he
says Mass I serve him, I pray. In the mean while, time requires, that we have
a care also of our belly. 195 Cum sacra facit, ministro precor. Interim tempus
appetit, ut and ventri prospiciatur. I take money and go to the market. 200 Ego
sumpta pecunia ad forum prodeo. I buy either what he bade me, or what present
plenty may afford. I make it ready; We get our dinner. 205 Emo, vel quae
jussit, vel quae praesens copi^ suppeditet. Paro; prandetur. After dinner we
walk abroad, if there be any need. A prandio deambulamus for as, siqua
necestita^ est. But if not, our garden affords us room enough to walk in. 120
Sin minus, noster hortus satis amplum spatian^ praebet locum. After those
things, I have leisure to attend my Books or Business, though those very
seldom call me away. Post illa, rursus vaco libris, vel negotiis, qua^ quam
illa perquam raro avocant me. About supper time I return to the kitchen. 215
Sub coenae tempus repe^o culinam. All things are provided in a trice. Momento
temporis parantur omnia. We sup, we talk, but indeed nothing but holy
discourse. 220 Coenamus, fabulamur sed ecastor non nisi sacras fabulas. And
thus our minds and bodies being refreshed we go to our chamber. Sicque
refectis animis pariter atque corporibus, ad cubiculum progredimur. He truly,
just as if he was to depart out of the world that night, strives so with
prayers, sighs, and tears. 225 Ipse quidem, haud aliter quam si ea nocte sit
emigrandum, sic certat precibus, singultu, lacrymis. I because I am so much
employed, do bethink me of that days offenses, with as much devotion as I can,
I ask forgiveness, and I beseech God my Father, that he would spare me through
his mercy, who gave himself for us. 230 235 Ego, quoniam tam excitatus sum,
quanta possum devotione, illius dici admissa reputo, veniam peto, and ut
parcat, per illius qui se pro nobis impendet miserecordiam, Deum Patrem
obtestor. Then afterward I add a short prayer. 240 Postea precatiunculam
subjicio. A Prayer. Oration. O Lord Jesus Christ, have mercy upon me, because I
have sinned against thee. Domine Jesu Christ, miserere mei, quaeso, quia
peccavi tibi. Save me hence forth from all evill^, strengthen me in every good
work, and do not then cast me off as a reprobate, when thou shall render to
every man according to his works. Amen. 245 250 Serva me deinceps ab omni malo,
confirma me in omni opere bono, and noli me tunc reprobare, quando reddes
unicuique secundum opera sua. Amen. A Prayer. Oration. O Lord Jesus Christ,
cause that our enemy and deceiver Satan may never come near to this place. 255
Domine noster Jesus Christ, sac ut inimicus and insidiator Satan hunc locum
nunquam accedat. Then at the last, I lie down quietly. Tunc demum quiet corpus
depono. O. I like that course of life passing well; and if I could I would
feign imitate it. 260 Vehementer mihi arridet ista vivendi ratio, and si
possim, cupiam imitari. P. You may indeed, but be not awanting to your self,
if any opportunity to live well be given you. Possis quidem, sed ne desis tibi,
siqua been vivendi dabitur opportunitas. Especially since we do not know how
long we are to live here. 265 Praesertim quum sit in dubio, quam diu simus hic
victuri. O. You speak very truly. Verissime loqueris. Fare you well, I am
called. Tu been valebis, ego vocor. P. I wish you well to fare, honest youth.
270 Opto tibi been valere, optime juvenis.

Col. 33. Quadratus, Robert, boys. Col. 33. Quadtatus, Robertus, Pueri. Q. Is
there any one dare dispute with me? Ecquis mecum audet disputare? R. I dare.
Ego audeo. Q. Therefore provide your self quickly, that you may answer me. 5
Ergo para te ocyus, ut mihi respondeas. R. Here I am, begin if thou will any
thing. Hic sum, incipe, si quid vis. Q. Where do Foxes fart? Uib pedunt
vulpes? R. A little above their hams. Paululum supra poplites. Q. Which is the
strongest Letter? 10 Quae est litera robustissima. R. O, because it stays
horses and Carts. O, quoniam equos sistit and plaustra. Q. Where is the earth
the narrowest? Ubi est terra angustissima? R. Where the Sea is the widest. Ubi
mare est amplissimum. Q Where are all women good? 15 Ubi sunt omnes mulieres
bonae? R. Where none is bad. Ubi nulla est mala. Q When is the day the longest?
Quando est dies longissimus? R. When the night is the shortest. 20 Quando nox
est brevissima. Q. From what trees do the leaves never fall? Quibus arboribus
nunquam desluunt solia? R. From painted ones. Depictis. Q. Why does a dog,
being to piss, hold up one leg? 25 Canis micturus cur pedem levat altetum? R.
Lest he should be-pisse his stockings. Ne permingat caligas. Q. Why do dogs
bark? Cur latrant canes? R. Because they cannot sing. Quod cantare nesciant. Q
Truly you guess well enough. 30 Conjectas hercle sat been. R. Correct me, if I
be mistaken in any thing. Corrige, si quid fallor. Q what sort of men is the
j^stest? Quod hominum genus est justissimum? R. Good fellows. ^otatores. Q
Where do the rivers meet? 35 Ubi coeunt flumina? R In the sea. In ma^i. Q.
Which ground is the best? Quis ager optimus? R That which is fruitful without
tilling. Sine cultura ferax. Q. What comodity is the most necessary? 40 Quae
merx maxim necessaria? R. Salt. Sal. Q. What enticeth a wolf out of a
Forest? Quid lupum e faltu prolicit? R. Hunger. Fames. Q. Where is Gods help
the most ready? 45 Ubi est divinum adjutorium praesentissimum? R. In times of
danger. In periculis. Q. Who is most hateful to women? Quis mulieribus maxim
invisus? R. He that finds fault with their beauty. 50 Qui formam illarum
carpit? Q. Which is the first word from the beginning of the world? Quod est a
condito mundo verbum primum? R. Let there be made. Fiat. Q. Why do fishes
swim? Cur natant pisces? R. Let them have wings too, and they will fly. 55
Add alas, volabunt. Q. What fruit is the most hurtful? Quis fructus
perniciosissimus? R. The Apple which Adam tasted on. Pomum quod gustavit Adam.
Q. What speech is most delightful to be heard? 60 Quis sermo auditu
gratissimus? R. Come ye blessed. Venite benedicti. Q. Why are Geese pulled?
Cur vesluntur anseres? R. If they bare wool, they should be shorn. Si lanigerae
essent, tonderentur. Q. Which is the comliest suite? 65 Quae vestis
honestissima; R. That which covers our filthiness. Que turpitudinem tegit. Q
Which is the best garment? Quod vestimentum optimum? R. That which keeps out
cold. 70 Quod frigus areet. Q. Where do candles give the greatest light? Ubi
praebent maximum lumen candelae? R. Where there is the thickest darkness. Ubi
sunt ^enebrae densissimae. Q. You are a very good Scholar. 75 Edoctus es. I
will not strive with you any longer. Noli tecum certare diutius. R. You have
not all the wit you see that, I suppose. Non sapis solus: Id videt, opinor.

Col. 34. Simon a scholar, Timothy the Master, and a company of boys. Call.
34. Simon discipulus, Timothaeus Praeceptor, grex puerorum. S. Does it please
you good master, to teach us manners now? Ecquid placet, praeceptor observande,
ut nostros mores jam forms? T. Truly you put me in mind of it in very good
time. 5 Peropportune mehercule admones. For now I am quiet in my mind. Nam
animo jam sum tranquillo; And the opportunity of time and place does persuade
me. Et temporis opportunitas hortatnr and loci. S. Would you have me sit down
again? 10 Jubes me residere? T. Nay rather stand still here by me, whilst I
shall speak what I intend. Imo resist bic prope me, dum quae volo, dixero. Be
quiet boys let none of you stir. Quiescite, pueri, nemo vestrum commoveat se.
S. Do you not hear what the Master commands. 15 Non auditis, quid praeceptor
imperet? T. Do you see this youth, boys? Videtis hunc adolescentem, pueri? C.
Yes. Etiam. T. Do you know what he has done? 20 Scitis, quid fecerit? C. No.
Minime. T. He has been very unmannerly here of late, when any body spoke to
him. I will now correct them. 25 Nuper pravos mores habuit, quum vir quispia^
alloquoretur cum. Hos ego nunc corrigam. Do you understand? Intellxistis? C.
Yes, very fully. Callid^. T. What I said to this boy, I would have the same
said to you all. Quod huic dicitur, idem vobis omnibus dictum volo. C. We
apprehend you. Tenemus. T. I will talk with you, answer me in due fashion. 30
Tecum loquar, responde mihi rite. S. As well as I can. Prout potero. T. Did you
know the man that spoke with you of late in the market place? 35 Noras virum,
qui te nuper alloquebatur in foro? S. I do not remember that ever I saw him
before. Antehac non memini me vidisse T. What did he say to you. Quid dicebat
tibi? S. He questioned me about diverse things. 40 Percontabatur me de variis
rebus. T. About what? De quibus? S. About my parents, about my studies, and
about my fellows which I have in the School. De parentibus meis, de studiis,
de sodalibus quos in ludo habeo. T. What did you answer? 45 Quid respondebas?
S. Truly that which then came into my mind. Sane quod mihi tum suggessit
animus. T. I could wish you had used other manners. Aliu moribus vellem ie
fuisse usum. S. When? Quando? T. Whilst you were answering. 50 Inter
respondendum. S. Yet he did not find fault with my manners. Ille meos mores
tamen non carpsit. T. I know it. He is an honest man. S cio. Virest honestus.
He knew that was nothing to him. 55 Sciebat illam rem ad se nihil pertinere. S.
If you find any thing faulty in me, I pray you mend it. Si quid in me
deprehen. disti vitiosum, emenda, quaeso. T. So I will: Do you attend. Ita
faciam, Tu aures adhibe. S. I do that already. 60 Istud jamdudum facio. T. As
often as you go by an old man, a Magistrate, a Minister, a Noble man, or a
Scholar, put off your ^at presantly. 65 Quoties praeterieris senem,
magistratum, sacerdotem, virum nobilem, virum doctum, nuda caput illico. S. I
will do so. Faciam. T. But if you sit any where, and such a one come by you,
rise up to him too, and make a leg also. 70 Sin in sedeas alicubi, teque talis
praeterear, assurgito quoque, and genu insuper flectito. S. I will remember it.
Meminero. T. Moreover if you perceive he has a mind to speak with you, then
stepping forward a little your self, stand straight just before him. 75 Porro
si tecum etiam loqui velle sensetis, tum paululum ipse progressus, ex adver so
consiste rectus. S. Yes forsooth. Scilicet. T. Hold your bat betwixt your
hands. Pileum inter manus contine. S. I conceive you. Teneo. T. Set your feet
even together. Compone pedes quoque, S. I will do as you bid. 80 Faciam ut
jubes. T. Cast your eyes now and then upon him that talks with you. Intend
oculos subinde in eum qui tecum loquitur. S. Now and then? Subinde? T So I say.
Sic aio. S. Why may I not look upon him constantly? 85 Quare non est mihi
continue aspiciendus? T. Because it would be a sign of impudence. Quod sit
impudentiae signum. S. I understand you. Intelligo. T. Besides that you should
make a leg. 90 Praeterea debes flectera alterum genu. S. One or both. Alterumne
an utrumque T. One. Alterum. S. Whether the right or the left? Vtrum?
dexterumne, an sinistrum? T. The right. 95 Dextrum. S. How often would you have
me make a leg? Quoties me jubes flectere genu? T. Ever and anon. Identidem. S.
I do not understand what that means? Istud quid sit non intelligo. T. As often
as you shall finish your answer. 100 Quotiescunque responsum absolveris. S. Now
I know. Nune scio. T. Answer boldly. Ask ^ashfully. Audacter responde: roga
pudenter. S. I apprehend you. 105 Tenco. T. Moreover, you must utter all your
words plainly leisurely, and distinctly. Porro verba omnia proferenda sunt tibi
express, lent, and articulate. S. What if bashfulnesse hinder me, as it falls
out often times, whereby I dare not spoke out, what I would say? 110 Quid si
pudor me praepediat, ut fit saepe, quo minu^s aufim, quae volo, proloqui? T.
You should not be bashful in this case. But if at any time, naughtiness set
you on, then you should blush. 115 Nunc non decet esse verecundum. Sed si
quando nequ^tia stimulat, tam debes erubescere. S. You say truly. Recte tu
quidem. But I can scarce moderate my self, but that I blush, especially if any
grave man offer to speak to me. 120 At ego mihi moderari vix possum, quin
erubescam: praesertim, si vir gravis quispiam alloquatur me. T. Such shame is
honest, if it do not degenerate into a naughty bashfulnesse. Honestus est
talis pudor si non degeneret in verecundiam vitiosam. Whereof we will then
speak, when I shall have leisure to do so. De qua tum fabulabimur, quando per
otium licebit. S. Whatsoever pleases you the same should content us. 125
Quicquid placet tibi, idem debet nobis placere. What do you think boys? Quid
vobis videtur pueri? C. What about? Qua de re? T. Are you sufficiently taught?
130 Number satis estis instructi? C. Abundantly. Abunde. T. What remains then?
Quid restat igitur? C. That we be always mindful of these things. 135 Ut
horum femper simus memores. T. And that you be thankful also to your master.
Ut and praeceptori vestro grariam habeatis. C. We give you immortal thanks,
most worthy Master. 140 Gratias tibi agimus immortales, collaudatissime
praeceptor. T. Well done. Been factum.

Eras. Epist. ad Lectorem. De utilitate Colloquiorum.
I matter not how I play the Boy, so it be for their profit. Nihil moror quam
pueriliter, modo utiliter. And I cannot tell whether any thing be better
learned then that which is learned by play. Et haud scio, an quicquam discitur
foelicius, quam quod ludendo discitur.

FINIS.

