THE Honorable State OF Matrimony MADE COMFORTABLE, OR AN ANTIDOTE Against
DISCORD Betwixt MAN and WIFE: BEING Special Directions for the Procuring and
Preserving of Family Peace.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Pearse at the Blew-Anchor at the West end of St.
Paul's. 1685.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THe Author of this following Discourse (observing the hot contests that are
too frequently between the nearest Relations, yea, between such as profess
Relation to Christ; and observing the strange effects of their dissentions
influencing them to do such things as tend greatly to dishonor God,) was very
much pressed in his spirit to seek out some Antidotes that were proper to cure
the fiery Distempers of their Spirits, that they might cease affronting God by
their furious actings: And indeed God has directed him to very proper methods
for the accomplishing thereof, if those choleric Relations would condescend to
make use of the Physic here prescribed. I never heart of any Treatise that was
wholly on this subject before. I am confident there was never a Discourse of
this nature in this method; none adventuring to deal so particularly and fully
with such passionate Relations as he has done. The great reason that it is so
difficult to make up breaches between Men and their Wives is, because they are
all averse to the acknowledging of their faultiness; every one conceits him or
her self to be wronged. Therefore this Author has endeavored to discover
which of those Relations is most in fault when Discord does arise between them,
and that so the most faulty may be convinced thereof, and thereby influenced to
a faithful endeavor of reformation. These Antidotes are not only proper to
cure, but also to prevent Discord between such near Relations: So it will be of
general use to all married persons. I could heartily wish that every professing
Family had one of these little Books, there being in the Appendix laid down
special directions for the right ordering of Family-concerns both in relation
to Children and Servants, as a special means to preserve the peace of Families.
O you Husbands and Wives that have felt the smart of your furious contentions,
be willing to use the means to make your lives more comfortable. In this Book
you will find helps by the blessing of God to enable you to take more
complacency in each other, and to live more peaceably and lovingly together. Be
not distasted with the Author for demonstrating the evil of your passionate
wranglings for every trifle. Do not any of you lavish out reviling speeches
against him, because by his characters you appear most faulty when there is
Discord betwixt you and your conjugal Relation. What the Author has done in
this respect, is wholly designed to put a stop to your dissentions, and to help
you to live more peaceably and sweetly together; And if you would seriously
peruse the Book, you would find it so. I need not enlarge in the commendation
of the Book. When once you have read the Book, you will see cause to commend it
your selves, and to thank the Author for the pains he has taken therein to so
good an end. Reader, that thou may by the perusal of this Book be helped to a
more peaceable living with thy conjugal Relation, is my hearty prayer: Farewell.

D. B.

THE PREFACE.
THe Author of this following Discourse has ventured farther than any that I
have yet met with have gone before him. It Is dangerous interposing in the
differences between Man and Wife, lest both fall foul upon him for his fair
endeavors: the Man being ready to be over-careful of his Freehold Tenure, the
Woman of her Copyhold; and it is a venturous act to intermeddle on either side.
Hence Divines have been satisfied mostly to discover the general Duties in
their Writings, and Preachers have undertaken little farther in their Sermons:
each Sex being too ready to take offense, or scorn or ridicule any thing that
comes very close upon this subject. But, illi robur and aestriplex circa pectus
erat. -- Our Author fearing neither One nor the Other, as if he had been made
of Oak, and treble Brass about his heart, has ventured his paper Pinnace
amidst the Waves where two great Seas meet in such violent contentions as are
stirred up in those miserable Families where they have shut the Fear of God out
of doors.

Such unnatural heats make the life bitter; and, as an Ancient asserts, Proxime
ad ignis Infernalis cruciatus, acceder. dolores illos quos sentiunt quibus
dispar conjugium contiget: That is in plain English, The evil effects of
disparity in the Marriagestate, is next to the torments in Hellfire; which
every person would be willing to prevent if he could, or at least to make the
best of a bad Market. I would advise those that are under the temptation of
Family-discords, if Scripture-precepts and examples are nothing with them, and
the Divine authority of the Commands of the great God impress nothing upon
them, (which would be very sad and dreadful in the account against them at the
great Day) to consider but the brutish policy of a couple of Goats, that
meeting in the midst of a narrow Bridge they were to pass over, had they
contended which should give way, they had both fallen into the water; but one
of them fairly lies down, and suffers the other to go over him, and so they
were both preserved: And remember how excellent the Moral is of the two empty
earthen Pots that were swimming upon the water with this Motto, Si colledimur,
frangimur; If we chance to clash, we ruin our selves, and break one another
all to pieces.

But if the be Families pretending at least to the fear of God, and that have
any sense or respect for their Redeemer that died for them, let them consider
that Commission given to his Disciples at their mission into the wide world,
Luke 10.5. Into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, Peace be to this house;
and if the Son of Peace be there, your peace shall be upon it; if not, it shall
turn to you again. We are to wish you peace, and pray for it; invite, exhort,
command all Families to keep the peace: and if there be a Son of peace there,
or a Son of the God of peace, our counsel will stick upon you; but if not, you
are but where you were, unsubjected Children of Belial, and the peace we wished
you will return to us again, to tender it to some other Family that will better
regard the authority of our counsel. And upon this account this little Book is
come abroad, and what entertainment it shall meet with in its travels, the
event will soon discover.

It is too evident that the disorders in the more subordinate parts of the
Family, as the undutifulness of Children and disobedience of Servants, are
occasioned and fomented by the distempers in the head and vital parts. Hence
this skilful and learned Family-Physician has endeavored the cure and repair
of the head and heart of those Families, not troubling himself so much with the
small scratches found upon the inferior members. Through the wisdom (of the
Head) the house is built, and with understanding it is established, Prove. 24.3.
where this is wanting, that house is nigh to desolation, according to that of
our Savior, Mat. 12.25. A house divided against it self cannot stand.

It were to be wished that Christians (especially under the ties of conjugal
Relation) could learn to bear with one another infirmities, and so fulfill the
Law of Christ. A choleric Couple being asked, how he and his Wife lived so
comfortably and sweetly together? The man answered, When my Wifes fit is upon
her, I yield to her; and the woman said, When my Husbands fit is upon him, I
yield to him, and so we are never angry both at once. It were well if the one
were as David's Harp to appease the fury of the other: It seldom proves an
unhappy Conjunction, when the one is deaf, and the other blind: the Man must
not always hear, nor the Wife always see. Love covers a multitude of sins,
Prove. 10.2. Neither can the Man's not doing his duty discharge the Wife from
doing hers. A soft answer pacifieth wrath on both sides.

But the Author being large in these things, I only shall commend to you the
practice of Domestic affairs. And first, there is a sinful quietness, a mere
piece of Stoicism, when persons concern themselves with nothing, let things go
how they will, having the use of no passions at all; for even the evenest
weights are easily put into some unevenness, though they tend at last to a
settlement in an even poise; and so the most even and sedate tempers are
naturally prone to some little exorbitances, though they soon return to their
quieted center. Paul, a very still man after his Conversion, and became all
things to all men, that he might gain some, (though he was a rough piece before)
exhorting them all to meekness of Spirit, Col. 3.12. That they should put it on
as a Garment; implying, that they had as good go without their Garments, as
suffer themselves to be stripped of this Grace of Meekness: yet he could be in a
flame, and stands up in the University of Athens, and in the open street
reproves their Idolatry. So Moses the meekest man, yet he showed he could be
moved upon a just cause, and at the sight of the Calf he fumes and flies out as
if he had been a man made up of Salt and Gunpowder, rashly throws down the
Tables of the Law, and breaks them all in pieces: And Christ himself, as meek
as he was, could take a scourge of small cords, and whip the buyers and sellers
out of his Fathers house. Stilness in not Stoicism.

Secondly, There Is a holy stilness or quietness of spirit, in all conditions,
bearing that quietly which we cannot help possibly. This is my affliction, and
I must bear it: It is a Grace of Gods Spirit, Dove-like, like himself. Nature
cannot reach it, Philosophy cannot teach it; Nature is a tetchy piece, full of
cholar. Saul, a turbulent Fellow, no body that feared God could be at quiet for
him: But when the Spirit of God came upon him, it made him as tame as a Lamb;
and so 'twas prophesied, When the Spirit should be powered forth, the Lion shall
lie down with the Lamb, Isa. 11.6. And it is made the Character of an
nunderstanding man, He should be of an excellent Spirit, of a cool Spirit: so
the Hebrew, Prove. 7.27. A cool spirit in opposition to a hot spirit, is an
excellent spirit, and an excellent spirit is a cool spirit. Indeed some new
spirits are naturally cool without Grace, as many Heathens were, that had made
a conquest over their natural tempers by improving their reasons, and fixing
their resolutions; yet not being from the Holy Ghost, it can but pass for a
natural Virtue in them, but never for a spiritual Grace. This mystery is not
learned at Athens, but at Jerusalem. None but God can give it, none but Christ
can still the wind, and the waves of the turbulent Sea of unruly passions:
therefore we must pray heartily, if we mean to live quietly.

Moreover, It Is not the quieting of the tongue only, if the mind be still
unquiet. Some can pinch in their passion, when yet their minds are like the
troubled Sea, and burn inwardly like fire put up, and this is more immediately
the work of God. We say to a discontented person, Set your heart at rest, but
it is God only can set the heart at rest: Nor would I have such fiery natures
shelter themselves under Religious Privileges. What! a Religion that cannot
bridle the passions, and bring the Soul to the foot of God! That is a poor
Religion indeed! It Is a sad thing that God cannot lay a cross upon a man's
shoulders, but the proud worm must show himself displeased, and the Almighty
must look to himself: the Arrows of bitter words flying from him so thick and
fast against the Providence of Heaven, God must know he will not bear it, he
will not take it at his hands, he will not put it up.

Finally, I could wish this following Treatise might have entertainment in all
sorts of Families; Quiet Families that enjoy the warm Sun and the serene Air in
pure Love and Peace, how should they bless God for the ornaments of a meek and
quiet spirit, while others are staked down in the Suburbs of Hell, restless
Spirits, like the Inhabitants of tormenting Tophet! Unquiet Families, let them
read and consider, and read it over and over again, if peradventure God may be
merciful unto them, and still the unruly waves, having sent the means of it
into their houses, and put it into their hands. If in any thing it prove
distastful, and makes thee winch, attribute it not to the ill-preparedness of
the Medicine, but the incurableness of the Distemper. If thou throw'st it away
because it makes the wound smart, Fare well; Live in love and peace, and the God
of love and peace shall be with you.

I should greatly rejoice if any thing in the ensuing Treatise prove
instrumental to establish Peace in Families, and be helpful to make up breaches
between Men and their Wives. I know the Authors design is principally to
promote this end, That would make this Discourse effectual to beget and
maintain Love and Peace between Men and their Wives, is the hearty Prayer of,

READER, Thy real Well-wisher, J. R.

THE Introduction.
IT is observed, That many Husbands and Wives that are eminent Professors of
Religion, yea, such as are truly gracious as well as Professors, through the
weakness of their Graces, and strength of their Corruptions, do live together
in much discontent, and that there are often manifestations of Wrath and
Discord between them; yea, and many times their passions grow to such an
height, that in their anger they speak and do such things as do very much
disparage their Professions, and discredit Religion, and cause the Enemies of
Religion to speak evil of the ways of God, because of their disorderly
carriages: Therefore I have endeavored in the ensuing Discourse to show the
causes whence usually Wrath and Discord does arise between them, and have shown
which of them is most faulty when Wrath and discord happens. Also I have opened
the evil of Wrath and Discord between such near Relations, and have laid down
some Rules and Directions how they may prevent it for the time to come, and
diverse motives to persuade them to use those Directions.

Indeed it has very much troubled me to observe the hot contests that have
been between such relations, about very trifles; how some will be offended, and
cannot tell wherefore: They have been of such choleric constitutions, that
they have enquired after occasions to feed their anger: Alas! how much are such
carriages unbecoming the Gospel! how much do such persons dishonor God, and
prejudice their own Souls! The consideration thereof has put me upon using my
weak endeavors to gather such means out of the Word of God as may prevent
their continuance in such disorderly carriages; that they may not any longer
drink the Waters of Meriba, that is of Strife, (their common drink) lest they
find them prove Waters of Mara, that is Waters of Bitterness, at last: I shall
pray them to suspend their passions so long, as seriously to consider what I
have written, that what they find agreeable to Gods Word they would endeavor
faithfully to observe.

AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST DISCORD BETWEEN MAN and WIFE.
I. Whence is it that Wrath and Discord between Husband and Wife does arise?
1. ANger and Contention between Husband and Wife does arise from a prevailing
principle of flesh in the heart: a fleshly mind produces much strife, and
violent passionate disturbances, 1 Cor. 3.3. For ye are yet carnal; for whereas
there is among you envying, and strife, and divisions, are ye not carnal, and
walk as men? The meaning is, the flesh prevails in them more than the spirit;
the remainders of old Adam are very strong in them: that party that is touchy,
and takes distaste at every trifle, does evidence, that much unmortified
corruption remains in that heart; and I say, when distaste is taken at that
which is not positive sin, then distaste is taken at a trifle. Now when
corruption prevails in the heart, it will break forth, and blister upon the
tongue, it is because a person is rotten in heart that he is rotten in language,
as in Mat. 12.34. you may smell the filth of some men's hearts by their breath;
and it is from this root, from this ground, that some persons are all for
strife and debate: hereby strife is the very element wherein they live, and
they live, and love to live, in troubled waters, yea also in the fire of
trouble; they are persons of contentions. If their fleshly principle was not so
prevalent, their passions would not be so violent: and it is sad when the
strongest bent of some people are for strife, that they can discover the
boisterousness of their spirits upon every frivolous occasion; and certain it
is, that either Husband or Wife that is soonest angry with the other, is most
carnal, for anger, wrath, variance, strife, contentions and hatred, are fruits
of the flesh, and they are seldom separated, Gal. 5.20. So that a persisting in
this disorder is a contrivance to fulfill the inordinate motions of inbred
corruption. Now passion and contention is usually accompanied with carnal
emulations, litigious strivings for trifling matters, enmity, variance, a
muttering of disgraceful and opprobrious words: These usually go together, and
raise a tempest of wrath, and by that violent commotion the person is
transformed into a very beast; and these must needs be the fruits of the flesh,
because they are directly opposite to the fruits of the spirit, which are love,
peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, meekness, etc. and those that
bring forth the fruits of the spirit are able to moderate their anger, and can
patiently bear, and forgive even many real injuries, and will not be provoked
but for such just causes, and not more or longer than the word of God allows.
So that it is evident that one ground of Wrath and Discord between such near
Relations as Husband and Wife, is the prevailing of a fleshly principle in the
party that is more passionate.

2. Self-love is a cause of Wrath and Discord between Husband and Wife, whereby
the one party so inordinately loves it self, that it has no true conjugal love
for the other, that he or she never thinks of the injuries and indignities
which he or she offers to the other, or else will suppose them to be none, or
else lightly esteem of them as not worthy the recital, on the other side makes
the party guilty of this self love or defect of conjugal love, heinously to
agravate the injuries offered to its self, and so make huge Mountains of small
Molehills, and causes its heart easily to apprehend the wrong, and to be busy
in meditating of it, being apprehended, and then longs for revenge one way or
other, wishing some disaster to fall upon person, or name, or both of the
other, and are glad to be freed any way from the relation, thinking nothing
sufficient to make amends for so great an indignity offered one of such worth
as the party fondly and falsely conceits it self to be. And if the self-lover
has not so much respect given as is expected, is presently provoked to a
furious rage. When a Wife is mastered by self love, she over values her self,
and under-values her Husband: she can wink at the injuries she offers her
Husband, and put on spectacles of affection when she looks on those wrongs
which are offered to her, whereby it comes to pass that every small matter
seems a great injury, and provokes her to great anger; whereas if she
thought meanly of her self, and loved her Husband as her self, she would not
have suffered her self to be over-ballanced with the weight of self-affection
in judging of the injury, nor in giving the reins to her anger to rise to such
an h^ight. If the Wife had an endeared love for her Husband, her love would
have more force to restrain her from reproaching and reviling her Husband, then
any injury or seeming contempt of her could have to provoke her to anger. For
love suffers long, yea suffers all things, and is not provoked to anger, 1
Cor. 13.4, 7. The prevailing of self-love, and the cooling and decay of
conjugal love, is the fundamental cause of all disturbances that are between
Husband and Wife; and that party that is most passionate, has least conjugal
affection; and by want of this love, small matters do exasperate, and breed
distaste: and he or she that is most furious, is most faulty: For an Husband or
Wife cannot have a bitter mind upon small provocations against one another, if
they dearly love one another, and every thing that provokes is a small
provocation, which is not a breach of Gods Law: And as they ought not to have a
bitter mind, so where love is prevalent they cannot proceed to reviling words,
or to averseness, or estrangedness, or any abuse of one another. And if a
breach or wound be unhappily made, the balsamic quality of love will heal it:
so that here you see that too much self-love, and too little conjugal love, is
another cause of discord between Husband and Wife, and that party that is first
provoked, and grows most furious, is most defective in Love.

3. Pride is another cause of Wrath and Discord between Husband and Wife: for
it is the diseased temper of the heart that causes dissentions, more than
occasions or matters of offense do. A proud heart is troubled and provoked by
every word or carriage that seems to tend to its undervaluing. A proud Woman is
always jealous of her Honor and Reputation, is also very suspicious of
contempt, so that the least seeming injury provokes her to choler and disdain,
because she is ready to imagine that thereby she is exposed to contempt.
Solomon says, Only by pride comes contention, Prove. 13.10. The meaning is,
that Pride is good for nothing but to cause brawling, strife and contention.
Pride alone of it self, without the aid of any other thing, is sufficient to
kindle contention; yea, the wise man observed so much Strife and anger to come
from Pride, as that he seems to speak as if Pride was the only cause of all
brawlings: so that the least spark of anger kindled with the smallest occasion,
bursteth out into a raging flame of fire, if it be blown with the wind of pride
or self-conceitedness. A proud humor that would have all stoop to it, if it
meet with the least seeming slight, is presently hurried with unquiet and
turbulent thoughts, which are fit Harbingers to prepare a lodging in the heart
to entertain anger: And this is clear from the nature of Pride; for it is a
fountain-sin, a root-sin, productive of many other sins; it nurseth,
nourishes, and brings up many other sins, and it is the mother of these
three very bad Children: First, It makes men and women boast of Themselves, of
their Wisdom, Parts, Accomplishments, and their Pedigree, as the proud Jews did
when they were contending with Christ: Say they, We have Abraham to our Father:
So some will say, I am the Child of such a godly Father: I was such a man's Son
or Daughter, or such a worthy man's Wife, and shall I be slighted now? and so
brings forth the second Daughter Contention, and be wrangling with any one that
crosses the proud humor, fret at any thing that looks like an undervaluing,
fume at, rage at, and revile any person that will not be observant of their
wills, and cannot endure to be hindered from insulting and commanding: And this
being the humor of many Husbands and Wives, it produces and nourishes their
passions. But the third Daughter of Pride is Contempt. Proud persons do despise
and vilify all whom they converse with: for some Wives despise their Husbands
in their hearts, as Michal did David, that let Husbands carry it as obligingly
as they can, yet because their Wives do despise their persons, they will
despise their actions, and so be angry with every thing that they do; they do
despise their actions and company too with abhorrency, as the stomach does meat
which is offensive to it, and so like their Husbands like ill-savour'd meat.
From this ground every thing that their Husbands say or do is offensive to
them: so fly at them with bitter and reproachful words; but the truly humble
woman is not provoked to anger, though she be neglected, because her lowly
conceit of her self makes her to think that she is not worthy to be much
esteemed, nor yet is she angry, though she has received an injury, because she
thinks she has deserved it, either by like faults committed against her
Husband, or more heinous sins against God: so that it is clear that another
great cause of that Wrath and Discord that is between Husband and Wife, is the
pride of that party that is most passionate; And it is evident from the
Scripture, that Pride is the chief ground of sinful anger, if we read Prove.
21.24. Proud and haughty scorner is his name who deals in proud wrath. So
much inordinate passion as one has, so much pride he or she has; for pride is
as much seen in frowardness and passion as in any thing, and there is a
proportion between sinful passion and pride in every ones heart; and that man
or woman that has a passionate spirit, has a proud spirit, let them seem to
be never so humble in other things; for the truly humble Soul is of a meek
spirit, for Christ joins meekness and humility together, Mat. 11.29. Learn of
me, for I am meek and lowly. I shall evidence to you in these following
particulars how passionate and angry persons are proud persons, and how pride
raises their angry passions.

First, Proud persons are impatient of being contradicted in their speeches, be
they right or wrong: You must say as they do, and not gainsay them. So if
passionate persons be opposed in what they say or do, they are in a flame
presently. An angry person cannot bear the least contradiction.

Secondly, Pride makes persons uncharitable and censorious: They extenuate
other persons Virtues and good Works, and suspect ungroundedly their sincerity:
They will vilify others, and give them disgraceful terms. Thus will passionate
persons do: They will judge the party that they are angry with, as a vile,
base, unworthy person, and censure him for an Hypocrite, void of all inward and
real good.

Thirdly, Pride causes men and women to hate reproof. Those that are proud are
forward in finding fault with others, but love not a plain reprover of
themselves, as in Prove. 15.12. A scorner loves not one that reproves him.
They can easily endure to be evil, and do evil, but not to hear of it. So
passionate persons impatient of admonition, they will not endure to be told of
their faults: They storm and rail at every reproof that is given them; their
spirits are too hot to be told of their faults.

Fourthly, Proud self-conceited persons are ever talkative persons, and more
desirous to speak than to hear: They will suffer none to speak but themselves,
because such think always highly of their own understandings. So angry persons
rage if any offer to discourse in their presence; if any presume to speak, they
take exceptions at every word. If their passions are high, their first word of
command is, Hold your peace, and say no more, or be gone out of the Room. They
cannot endure the company of those that will adventure to reply to any thing
they say: They are too high to be answered again, though by their Equals and
Superiors, and this kind of passionate rage is the effect of Pride.

Fifthly, If proud persons be wronged, they look for great submission before
they will forgive: you must lie down at their feet, make very full confession,
and behave your selves with very great submission, or they will never pardon
the offense you have done them: But if they have wronged others, they are
hardly brought to confess that they have wronged them, and more hardly brought
to be so humble as to desire a reconciliation. Thus it is with angry persons:
while anger lasts, no persuading them to pass by a wrong, but if ever they do
forgive, it must be upon the humblest submission that may be, but never
acknowledge any wrong that they do: Whatever abuse they do offer to another, is
justified as well done. Such do think that they can do nothing. amiss, and thus
you see how pride, passion and frowardness do go together, that a contentious
person is a proud person, and cannot put up injuries, and foul words. He that
is of a proud spirit stirs up strife, Prove. 28.25. What is peoples wrath?
what are their scorns, their railings, and endeavoring to vilify those that
have offended them, but the some and vomit of their Pride? It is so contentious
a sin, that it makes Men and Women firebrands in the Societies where they live:
There is no quiet living with them longer than they have their own saying,
will, and way. They must bear the sway, and not be crossed; and when all is
done, there is no pleasing them; for the missing of a word, or a look, or a
complement, will catch on their hearts, and raise their fury. As a little spark
on Gunpowder will make it flame, so the least conceit of a disrespect offered,
does disturb their peace, break their sleep, and cast them into a Fever of
passion. There are seldom any hot contests between Husband and Wife, but Pride
does occasion them. All the passionate, angry, irreverent, insulting, and
insolent carriages of a Wife to an Husband, are from the pride of her heart,
and hence it is that Pride makes Men and Women angry: Pride makes them think
themselves superior in worth and goodness to any; so they think that they are
too high to have their wills crossed by any; and say, Shall I bear such a thing
from thee, poor pitiful Creature? And then proud persons think themselves so
good, as they can never deserve any cross from another, and that whatever they
do, deserves not contradiction at all; whereas they are ready to make
mis-interpretations of any thing that another does, but think that they can
justify every thing that they do: So that whatever is done by another that
suits not with their proud humor, puts them into a fiery passion presently;
for proud spirits make their wills to be the rule of their actions, and they
would have it to be a rule of all other men's actions too: and such when their
wills are opposed, cannot but be froward, and highly displeased. Also proud
persons think nothing too mean for others to do, and so would fain put their
Equals, yea their Superiors, to do such things as they scorn to touch; and if
they be not complied with presently, they are in a flame of passion, and are
froward and contentious presently: and thus you see how Pride does bring forth
anger, frowardness and contention.

IV. Foolish niceness breeds choler: for if you come into the house of one
who is nice and curious, you shall easily perceive how soon she is incited to
great anger upon a little cause. I instance in the Female Sex, because they are
more influenced by niceness and curiosity than men, and therefore by it they
are mostly provoked to fretting discontent. If the decking and adorning,
ordering and cleansing of their house, be not fully answerable to their minds;
if a spot or wrincle be upon their Garments, they are enraged with anger, that
the house will scarce hold them, or at least not contain their clamorous
voices. Those curious folks are not only offended with injuries, but also with
shadows and appearances. Such can carp at Gestures of the Body that they do not
like, and fret at the words of their Husbands because they do not think them
respectful enough to them. They judge their language rustic, and their
carriages clownish, so are in no way genteel enough to please their humors,
and upon this account fall into such a rage of passion, as if they had received
some mortal wound. They are so prying and quick-sighted, that they will espy
some things amiss, by which they will alarm the whole Family and break their
Husbands and their own Peace: If a failing be ever so little, they cannot
overlook it. and be more enraged that some small Family-concern is neglected,
then that their Family Worship is omitted, whereby they can strain at Gnats,
and swallow Camels, Mat. 23.24. They can storm at small offenses committed
against themselves, and take no notice of great wrongs done to God. Whereas
others, who have not their minds effeminated with this nice curiosity, can
easily pass over such trifling imperfections, and repel anger in far more
violent assaults: So that a Wifes niceness in finding great fault with every
frivolous matter, does occasion much jarring and hot contests betwixt her self
and Husband, whereby a small spark of distaste does kindle a flame of a violent
passions.

V. Lightness in believing what comes to the ear, and listening to tale-bearers,
does raise. Discord and Strife between Husband and Wife. Prove. 26.20. Without
wood the fire is quenched, and without a talebearer strife cease. So that as
wood is the fires fit nourishment, so is a talebearer fit to beget and nourish
anger between Husband and Wife; yea, a talebearer does raise contention so
high, as to make a Separation between Husband and Wife, as Solomon says, A
whisperer separateth chief friends. When an Husband or Wife gives a credulous
ear to the lying suggestions of a pickthank talebearer, they will be incensed
to such rageing anger, that a great matter will not be sufficient to quench the
heat thereof. There have been manifold experiences of great evils which have
followed credulity, and listening after tale-bearers. David giving ear to the
false report of Ziba, was moved to unjust anger against innocent Mephibesheth.
There is no greater firebrand in the world than a talebearer. One Neighbor
comes to a Wife, and says, Your Husband was at such a place, spent so much
money there, spoke such and such words there, did such and such actions there.
The Wife presently believes it, and is in a rage presently. Some Servants will
tell their Mistress, My Master did thus and thus, and said so and so of you.
Credit is presently given to the information, and the flame of passion is
presently kindled, though if the matter were rightly enquired into, the
information would prove false. Some Wives will search and enquire after matter
to feed their passions, and enquire of their Servants What is your Master
doing? what did he say of such a business? and if they be informed that he said
or did any thing cross to their humors, or contrary to their approbations,
their Spirits are hot presently, and you may see violence and fury in their
eyes. If an Husband or Wife will give credit to every story that a talebearer
brings them, they shall never live at peace with one another.

VI. A peevish, froward, humorous constitution is another cause of Anger and
Discord between Husband and Wife, and so they will be angry at bare surmizes,
when it is nothing but a surmize or fancy that they make and propound to
themselves, and thereupon let out their anger, like the Dog that barketh at the
shining of the Moon. Hence many are angry at their own fancy. A pettish froward
heart will create causes of anger to it self, when there are none; nay, the
power of their peevish and pettish humors is such, that they are angry for
every thing. Every trifle, every toy, any thing in the world that falls out in
the least manner against their minds, puts them into an anger. And indeed when
Husbands or Wifes anger comes to be common upon every trifle, it makes their
anger contemptible, and no one cares for it. Some think to gain more Authority
in their Family by their anger, and make others more conformable to them by it;
but in truth it makes themselves the more despised. You shall find your froward
furious persons, that they will be angry with irrational insensible Creatures,
and a pettish and froward Wife will be angry with one for the fault of another:
If a Child displease her, she will be angry with her Husband. Some persons have
such froward and fretful natures, that they have Gunpowder-Spirits, that as
soon as any thing displeases them they fly in the faces of their nearest
Relations: They are like dry wood that have all the Sap and Juice out of it, as
soon as ever the fire comes to it is all on a flame: So Husband and Wives that
have hasty natures, Sapless, and void of true Wisdom, as soon as ever they have
any occasion, but a little fire, a little occasion, they are all on a fire
presently. Persons that are of froward and peevish dispositions will manifest
their anger before any body, never considerihg whether it be a convenient
season. The Husband will vent his anger against his Wife, and the Wife vent her
anger against her Husband, though in the presence of Children or Servants, and
through the violence of their passions they care not what time they vent their
revilings and reproaches: And such furious persons will upbraid one another
with their failings, whoever be present; they will not allow time to confider
inconveniences, they are of such hasty Spirits, and so will belch forth their
passionate expressions in have. Also persons of choleric Spirits they have no
command of their Spirits to get them down when they are once up. Though the
winds be still, the waves of the Sea are up and down a great while after: So it
is with Husbands and Wives, when there is occasion to stir up their hearts to
anger by reason of their froward peevish natures. Though they have that which
satisfies them, yet they cannot be quiet for all that, but they are (like
Salamanders) in the fire continually. There are many Husbands and Wives that
have Dog Days all the year long. You know we have Dog Days in one time of the
year, but they last but a little while; but indeed such Husbands and Wives that
have humoursome natures and dogged dispositions, have always Dogdays: there is
nothing but frowardness, wrangling and jangling between them all the year long;
so that in many the heat of anger is in their hearts like the fire of Hell,
that is unquenchable: If once their passion is up, they will never have done,
as if the fire of Hell were in their hearts; and though there may be yielding
to them, and a forbearing of all words that may feed their passions, yet
nothing will quench them: And it is certain, that many that have suffered their
passion and anger to arise unjustly and foolishly, and are convinced in their
own consciences that there is no sufficient cause for their anger, yet they
will continue in their anger, and abide in it, that they might not seem to
others to be angry without a cause, and they are loath that the distemper of
their hearts should be discovered. And also it appears that an Husband and Wife
is swayed by a peevish, froward, choleric nature, when they can let their
anger rise to its utmost height for a very little offense, that which would not
be taken amiss at all by a person of meek Spirit. Also persons are swayed by a
choleric nature, when they do manifest bitterness of Spirit in their anger:
This bitterness of Spirit consists in this, when one is provoked, and passion
is up against another, they care not what provoking speeches they use toward
others, grating upon their Spirits such things as they know before, or at least
hope will provoke them, and this they do very eagerly: Whereas one of a meek
Spirit will be very loath to provoke any one; and if there be any means to
reform another without manifesting the passion of anger, he will do it* he will
try all means of reformation before he will be angry. I say, though a meek
person be justly offended by another, yet if he can reform him with sweetness
of carriage he will do it: but the hearts of many Husbands and Wives are like a
Sponge filled with Gall and Vinegar; if you do not touch it nothing will come
out, but nip it between your fingers and it will presently come out in
abundance: so many hearts, if you do but nip them as it were between your
fingers, the Gall will presently drop down, they will presently be angry, as it
is with many bodies, a choleric stomach will turn all meats, and make them to
be bitter to them; and so it is with such Husbands and Wives that have
choleric Spirits, the distemper of their hearts turn every thing into
bitterness, and if any thing be done unto them that does displease them,
they will go and chew upon it; and so imbitter their own Spirits by thinking what
wrong the other has done him or her. A bitter Pill must not be chewed, but
swallowed down whole: so when there is any thing done amiss to Husband or Wife,
the wrong indeed is a bitter Pill, and should be swallowed down. No marvel if
every cross is so bitter if it be chewed and meditated on. Again, it is evident
that an Husband or Wife is mastered by a choleric distemper, if either of them
be of a fierce disposition, and indeed we may call such harebrain'd Christians,
that are fierce and furious upon every occasion. An angry person is more
furious when only a seeming injury is done to him or her, than when a real
injury is done to God: so that many times some peoples passions makes them like
a furious mad Dog, that when it sets on an object it cannot be called back. Oh!
the anger of froward peevish Spirits is very unruly: so that such angry persons
have not only their passions grow to bitterness, fierceness and unruliness, but
to Cruelty: they have passion without compassion; and many times the rage is so
great, that the Wife (that is so much inferior to her Husband in strength)
will not only give provoking speeches, but blows also. She will fly at his
head, pluck him by the hair, strike him on the face, and throw any thing that
she has in her hand at his head: Indeed here is an evidence of a choleric
temper. But certainly all the anger of an Husband or Wife that does not aim at
the good of the party that he or she is angry with, is sinful anger, and is the
effect of a furious disposition. And thus I have shown you as brief as I might
the usual grounds that occasion wrath and discord between Husband and Wife.

II. I come now to show the evil of Wrath and Discord between Husband and Wife,
in these following particulars.
1. THe gratifying an angry passionate humor produces abundance of evil
effects. All other passions do but draw men and women to evil, but anger does
precipitate them. If any thing be the principle of evil, it is a froward Spirit
which is the principle of anger: And therefore let us consider the essects of
frowardness and passion, to see how much hurt it does to the Souls of men and
women.

1. W^^n an Husband or Wife is angry, it does mightily blind the judgment of
that party that is so, and blind reason exceeding much. The heart of passion,
the fire of passion, when it is kindled, causes a great smoke to come up to
the understanding and judgment, and even extinguish reason: Other Passions
stray from Reason, but this treads it under feet, and leads it as it were in
triumph. When once such near Relations as Husband and Wife are stirred, are
froward, and in anger, they do things so irrationally, that one can hardly
think them the same men and women that they are at other times, it does so take
away their reason. The man or woman that is froward cannot have any counsel,
but run headlong, yea, run in a rage to such and such things, and know not what
he or she says or does, because while passion is prevalent he or she has no
use of reason or understanding. Passionate persons are rash and inconsiderate,
they act without deliberation, they run headlong, Job 5.14. That is, they go
too fast forward; and they who will not take time to consult of what they are
about to do, may have time to repent of what they have done, and all this
happens because the passion of anger causes a cessation of the exercise of
reason. Other things may dazzle the sight of reason, but this makes it stark
blind, and for a time makes men and women as it were distracted, and out of
their wits. Anger having obtained the sover^ignty over their minds, takes away
all judgment, counsel, and reason, and over-swayeth all by foolish affection
and raging passion, and by darkening reason. It is a kind of short madness,
saving that here it is far worse, in that the person that is possessed with
madness is necessarily (will he, nill he) forced to be subject to that fury;
but a sinful angry passion is entered into wittingly and willingly. Madness is
the evil of Punishment, but Anger is the evil of Sin. Madness as it were
thrusts Reason from its Imperial Throne, but Anger abuses Reason, by forcing
it with all violence to be a slave to Passion, so fit to execute those works of
darkness in which Rage imployeth it. Well then, O Husband! or thou, O Wife!
seeing thy immoderate anger is an injury to humanity, and a Rebel against the
Government of Reason, that it is without Reason, and against Reason; Remember
then that thou art a Man, or Woman, and do thou scorn to subject thy self to
such bestial fury. O with how much attentive care should st thou avoid anger:
and notwithstanding provocations offered thee, do not disturb the quiet of
thine own mind. Therefore give not way to anger, seeing it blinds reason,
which is the light and guide of the Soul. If men abhor Drunkenness, and that
worthily, because it makes them differ from bruit Beasts only in shape of
body: why should thou not for the same cause hate this Vice of Anger, which
like a burning Ague does so disturb thy mind, and while the fit lasts it
utters nothing but raving? Do not then nourish thy froward humor, nor give
way to thy wrath. Be not of an hasty Spirit, whereby thou art guilty of such
rashness and fierceness in all thy actions, because those furious actings are
so contrary to right Reason.

2. Another effect of Anger and Discord between Husband and Wife is, that they
are great enemies to the quiet of their own hearts. An angry passion is a great
disturber of a man or woman's own peace. That we may say of it as the wise man
says of Cruelty. Prove. 11.17. He that is cruel troubles his own flesh. So
those that are of froward Spirits, they trouble their own flesh, and trouble
their Spirits too: It does macerate and vex the Soul with fury; for what
greater torment can we imagine, than to have the mind distracted upon the Rack
of Rage? As therefore we would account him a mad man, who with his own hands
should set his house on fire, and consume it, alike mad is that person to be
thought, who will set his or her Soul on fire with the rageing flame of anger,
wherein it is not only tormented in this life, but also (without Repentance) in
the life to come it shall be tormented everlastingly. Rage and fury tortureth
more than wrong or injury! Hereby men and women prove burdens to themselves,
and hence it is that an angry Husband or Wife cries out, No one is so plagued
as I am, I know no body so crossed as I am, because indeed they are plagues to
themselves and crosses to themselves, they having no quiet in their own
Spirits, nothing without is quiet to them. If we could look into the bofom of
an angry person we should find that there is no such discontented Spirit as an
angry Spirit is; such an one would fain have his or her own will; but sailing
herein, in spite of his or her heart there will be nothing but confusion and
trouble in his or her Spirit. Immoderate anger has proved an enemy to the body
it self: it inflameth the blood, stirs up diseases, and breeds such a
bitter displeasedness in the mind as tends to consume the strength of Nature,
and has cast many into accute, and many into chronical sicknesses, which have
proved their death. And how uncomfortable kind of death is this? Well then, let
the party that is most overcome by this passion say, What good do I get by this
passion? What! had it not been better for me to have put up this wrong, than
endure such vexation to my self, and be guilty of doing my body so much
prejudice as to cause me (if I continue my anger) to fall into the Diseases of
Melancholy, Frenzy, Madness, Apoplexy, Palsy, and Falling Sickness, which are
the usual effects of this prevailing Distemper of furious passion? O then shall
I be angry upon every trifling occasion, and offer my body and spirit such
great injuries? No, I will not; for I cannot pretend to hope for any inward or
outward comfort by my anger; nay, my passion does not only impair the health of
my body, but mightily deform my body: it deforms my countenance, and takes away
the amiable sweetness of it, which appears in a calm and loving temper. I
should loath my self, should I view my Picture while I was in my fury, before
the frowning wrincles and inflamed blood had returned to their place, and had
left my visage to its natural comeliness. Is it not then better to forget
injuries, pass by wrongs, bear with some opposition, and deny the gratifying of
my will, than do my Body and Spirit so much prejudice, and lose that
contentment and sweetness, that by meekness I might enjoy, and lose that inward
peace and satisfaction of mind that otherwise I might have, or deprive my self
of that beauty and comeliness, that otherwise I might preserve? O then, God
forbid that I should gratify my angry humor.

3. An angry person is very troublesome to others, even to the whole Family
wherein that angry person dwells, and all those that do converse with him or
her, When the Husband or Wife is angry or froward, O how extremely burdensome is
he or she to that Family; that Solomon says in two places, Prove. 21.9, 19.
that it is better to dwell on the housetop, or in the Wilderness, than to
dwell with a brawling woman in a wide house. She is such a vexation to all
those with whom she dwells. He instanceth in a woman, because that Sex is most
subject to this brawling kind of life: They are most apt to be angry and
contentious. An angry Husband or an angry Wife is a torment to all those that
live in Family; and therefore the Holy Ghost by Solomon says, in Prove. 22.24.
Make no friendship with an angry man, and with a furious man thou shall not go.
There is no good to be gotten by the company of one that is usually angry upon
every trifling occasion: There is no peace to be enjoyed in angry persons
company. A froward Spirit troubles his own house; and consider what is said of
such an one in Prove. 11.29. He that troubles his own house, shall inherit the
wind: that is, as he or she has been a trouble to his or her own house, so God
should blast that person in all his or her ways. Indeed passion is so
troublesome between Man and Wife, as they can hardly dwell together under one
Roof, because they spend a great part of their life in troubling one another.
By their passions they are vexatious to one another, and in their house it is
stormy weather all the year long, that it is a very rare thing to enjoy any
calm weather in the Family where angry persons dwell. Hence it is that Husband
and Wife can seldom eat their meat together at one Table without quarrelling,
because their lives are so uncomfortable one to another, their company is very
uncomfortable to others. Passion is an unruly thing, and therefore troublesome
wherever it comes. And will thou then, O Husband or Wife! cherish that evil
humor in thee, that will make thee a burden to all that converse with thee? If
thou continuest to be angry upon every slight opposition or contradiction, thou will be had in contempt of all that are near thee: they will despise thy
person, because thou do break their peace, and depriv^ them of their quiet.
So then if thou have any desire to preserve the peace and quiet of thy house,
and have any esteem of those that live with thee, do thy utmost endeavor (by
the assistance of the Spirit) to mortify thy angry passions.

4. The prevailing of anger and contention between Husband and Wife does
destroy their love: there is thereby a great decay of the affection of love,
and an augmentation of the passion of hatred. Anger makes persons guilty of
slighting, despising, disrespecting and undervaluing those they should highly
value, love and esteem; and this appears in the following particulars:

1. When persons are enraged that Gods Providence do thwart their humors,
they are offended and displeased with God, and their love to God does very much
abate; for where love to God is ardent and prevailing, there every Providential
act of God is kindly accepted, and taken in good part. Such persons as love
God, are well pleased with every dispensation of God, and are contented with
every condition God puts them in: but when they are offended that God does not
give them every thing according to their own will, when they do not like of
Gods disposing of them in this relation, or in this condition of life, and in
this place of habitation; and begin to vex and fret themselves, be angry, and
in a furious passion, that God does not order things to their liking. Then
their murmurings and repinings, their vexing and fretting, their disgust and
discontent, their anger and displeasedness of mind, does exceedingly abate
their affections to God. They begin to disrespect God more and more; they
entertain conceits as if God did do them wrong in not ordering all things
according to their humor; in their anger murmur that God yoked them to such
Consorts, wishing that God had otherwise disposed of them. And knowing that all
conjugal Relations are of Gods ordering and appointment, they complain highly
as if he had dealt injuriously with them in appointing such a Relation for
them; and hereupon their love to God declines, and they care not for Gods
company, slight those duties and services wherein they ^ight converse with God,
and are more displeased with the seeming offenses they pretend are done them by
their Husbands and Wives, than for the neglect of Gods worship, and indeed love
grows cold to one whose company is not delighted in, for all persons take
delight to be much in company of their beloved, and when Gods company is not
prized, he is not loved.

Now, seeing anger and discord does lessen peoples love to God, it must needs
be the greatest evil, as it does cause a decay of love to the chiefest good.
The want of love to God is the most comprehensive and odious sin, it is the
life of all particular sins. To be defective in love to the God of love, the
fountain of love, the felicity of the Soul, is a sin not to be pardoned to any
till it be repented of, and partly cured. Therefore stay, O man, or O Woman! to
what an height does thy angry passion make thee to ascend? Do thou not
tremble to think how much thou do provoke God, when thou do in thine anger
slight and disrespect God, and art angry with God because thou art displeased
with thy Husband or with thy Wife, and because Gods Providence do not suit thy
humor. If his anger be dreadful when kindled but a little, what is it then
when kindled very much? Here is the sad effect of thy being angry with thy
Husband or Wife: thou then ventest thy froward humor upon God, and beginnest
to quarrel with God for ordering such a Relation for thee, and beginnest to
abate thy respects to God, and carest not to exercise thy self in those
exercises wherein thou may enjoy Gods company. Do not then feed thy angry
passions, whereby thy heart is so much estranged from God, and whereby you
thrust God from your hearts. Oh how should thou loath thy violent passions
and contentions, when thou considerest how they deaden thy affections to God!
May not God justly thrust thee from his presence, when by thy wrath and fury
thou do thrust him frrom thy heart? If thou would preserve in thee a
principle of prevailing love to God, endeavor after meekness and quietness of
Spirit. As Husband and Wife are the nearest Relations, let them not be jarring
and quarrelling one with another.

2. The prevailing of furious angry passion in a person does abate true and
real love to it self, By the rashness and inconsiderateness of peoples wrath,
they manifest no pity to themselves: Through the violence of anger how many
have been cruel to themselves! they wound themselves, and must not that be
dreadful that makes persons offer violence to themselves? Persons in their
anger are not sensible how much mischief they do themselves: They will not
allow themselves time to deliberate or consider of the prejudice that comes to
themselves, by giving way to their anger, by neglecting to endeavor to
suppress it. O what cruelty is this for persons to vex and torture themselves!
O then what an heinous evil is it for people to let anger to rest in their
bosoms. Bethink thy self, O Man, or O Woman, of the danger of letting thy
Spirit^ to be enraged with passion against thy nearest Relation for every
trifle; Thou think only to manifest the height of thy displeasure against
thy Husband or against thy Wife, but indeed thou do hurt thy self, and do
evidence that thou have so little love to thy self, as thou have no tender
regard of thine own good. If thou did really love thy self, thou would
carefully avoid whatever did prejudice thy self; thou would faithfully watch
against every thing that would break thy peace, or deprive thee of thy
amiableness, or deform thee with a tart, s^^ire, and furious countenance. And
as hereby thou do make it appear that thou do not love thy self, by
undervaluing a calm and quiet spirit, so thereby no body will love thee. Thy
passions do cause others to cease manifesting respects to thee; they make
others to slight thee, and shun thee. If thou can not live in quiet with thy
Husband or Wife, no body will esteem thee: so then passion and contention
between Husband and Wife must needs be a very great evil.

3. Anger will abate thy love to the person that thou art angry with. The decay
of thy love to the party with whom thou art angry, does appear in
mis-interpreting his actions in the worst sense, raising contention from
suspicion or imagination, inventing causes of displeasure where none are. Thus
by anger charity is notably violated, for love suffers all things, therefore
their love is small that will suffer nothing. Love covers a multitude of
sins, they therefore that find faults where they are not, rather than cover
them where they are, do plainly show their want of love to the party with whom
they are angry. It is the nature of love to make great faults seem little, and
little faults none at all: but when a persons anger makes every slip in his or
her Friend or Relation a capital offense, then there appears a great decay of
love. When a person apprehending it self highly wronged by another, does
presently begin to slight that party, that person does manifest more
displeasure against the person he or she is angry with, than the offense, and
has no love at all for him. Such is the violence of passion, that there is
scarce any other affection so strong, which it does not easily subdue. Love is
said to be stronger than Death; yet anger, if it be once admitted to rage,
easily overcomes it: Persons then forget the love of the Relation that they
are in. In anger Wives speak to their Husbands as if they had no kind of
superiority at all, or as if God had not set them over them any way; so own
neither subjection or reverence to be due unto them, and so causes them,
instead of the duties of love, to bring forth the fruits of hatred. When the
furious flame of anger is kindled in the hearts of some people, they care not
what reproach they cast upon, or any other prejudice that they do unto those
that they should love as themselves. Indeed this is the evil effect of anger,
that it inclines persons to hurt them that make them angry, that it puts
hurting thoughts into their minds, and hurting words into their mouth, and
inclines them to think, or do some mischief. And will thou favor that passion
that tends to extinguish thy love to thy nearest and dearest Relation, that
makes thee neglect to manifest those respects that be long to thy Husband or to
thy Wife? If thou art a Wife, anger will put thee upon usurping authority over
thy Husband, denying subjection to him that the w^r^ of God requires; make thee
insolent and in^verent, and herein it makes thee oppose the word of God, which
commands thee in all things to acknowledge thy Husbands superiority, by being
obedient to him in all things in the Lord, that is in all things that are not
positively sinful. If thou were humble and meek, thou would not be of such a
captious, contentious and wrangling disposition, but overlook those failings
that provoke proud spirits.

Thus it is evident how anger has a tendency to extinguish the love of God,
for the love of God will not kindle and flame in an unquiet breast. It makes
men and women fret against God, and murmur at his Providence, and makes them
discontented with that state, and Relation he has put them into, and that it
abates peoples love to themselves, and makes them desperate in their ways,
makes them ready to mischief themselves, that is, makes them run upon such ways
and courses as are likely to prove mischievous to them, without all love or
pity to themselves. Be not then such an enemy to thy self, as to nourish such
fiery passions in thee, as will do thy self the greatest prejudice. Also anger
abates peoples love to their nearest Relations, makes them entertain jealousies
and suspicions which feed their anger, makes them take in ill part every light
action, and so their hearts grow estranged from their dearest friends, and have
their nearest Relation in contempt. Thou then that d^st find thy self by nature
pr^ne to anger, labor earnestly with thy self that thou may contain thine
anger for a longer time. Enter into a resolve in the strength of divine
assistance, that whatever occasions may be offered thee, yet thou will refrain
to manifest thy wrath and displeasure, and so by little and little thou shall
attain an habit of patience and meekness.

5. In those that are guilty of much furious passion, their anger does cause
abundance of sin, as in Prove. 29.22. An angry man stirs up strife, and a
furious man abounds in transgression. Anger is the door and gate of Vice, and
therefore the Psalmist says, Psalm. 37.8. Cease from anger, leave off wrath,
fret not thy self to do evil; as if he would imply that to abound in anger is
to abound in sin, and it cannot be but a person must be guilty of much sin,
that lives in fretting passion and inward unrest. More sin is committed by a
person in a fit of passion in one quarter of an hour, than a meek-spirited man
commits in a quarter of a year. Moses in his zeal for God broke the two Tables
of Stone whereon the Law was written, and sometimes passionate and angry people
in their wicked heats of spirit break all the ten Commandments, and in most
fits of passion they break in pieces most of the Commandments of the second
Table. Peoples vile, wicked and sinful lusts, when they are pleased, stir not.
But when once the heat of anger does arise, that warms these lusts; they then
(like Snakes warmed with the Sun) hiss and spit upon those that are about them.
When there is a Land-flood that the Brooks get over the banks, and overflow
the Meadows, they carry with them a great deal of soil, and a great deal of
filth.

Thus it is in an overflowing of all affections, but especially in the
over-flowings of the affection of anger there comes a great deal of filth along
with it; for when once by rage the eye of reason is blinded, the angry person
is easily led into a gulf of all wickedness. He that is of an hasty spirit
exalts Folly, Prove. 14.29. that is, exalts wickedness. When persons are
quick, and short of spirit, they are transported into many indecencies, which
dishonor God, and wound their consciences. If men and women do not check their
precipitant motions, by delay and due recourse to reason, they will be guilty
of abundance of wickedness. For motions vehement, and of sudden eruption, run
away without a rule, and end in folly and inconveniency. Prove. 14.17. He that
is soon angry deals foolishly. By frequent fits of passion anger is concocted
into malice, which does evidence a very wicked disposition, and is found only
in the most depraved natures. James says, cap. 1.20. The wrath of man works
not the righteousness of God; Intimating that it is so far from working
righteousness, that it works all manner of evil. There is in a persons anger
somewhat of rage and violence, which vehemently exciteth the person to act, and
takes away the rule according to which he or she ought to act: So anger
causes peoples conscience to be stanied with the impurities of their lives.

1. Violent passions cause Men and Women even to fly in the very face of God,
and walk frowardly toward him, which God complains of in Isa. 57.17. And went
on frowardly in the way of his own heart. When every Providence does not suit
with persons humors, or if their Husbands or Wives do cross them, they will be
in a pettish humor against God, fall out with God for permitting such things
to befall them; and so out of a pettish humor they lay aside, and have no mind
to set upon any duty that they owe to God. And when Gods dealings are at any
time opposite to thy will, and permits any to molest thee, thou complainest
that God has dealt hardly with thee. Certainly there must needs be a very
malignant humor in thee that makes thee act thus frowardly against God; and
how sad is it for men and women by the violence of their passions against their
nearest Relations, to act frowardly against God? O thou Husband or Wife! thou
art angry with thy Husband or with thy Wife, and will thou manifest thy
frowardness against God? and because thy Husband provokes thee, will thou
provoke God? because he injures or wrongs thee, will thou injure and wrong God?
What infinite unreasonableness is this? What boldness and presumption is this?
There is so much evil in it as is impossible for any to utter, it is so
abominable.

2. When men men or women are in fits of anger one with another, when the Wife
falls out with the Husband, the fear of the great and dreadful Majesty of
God, the infinite God, and the dreadfulness of the fear of God is all gone, and
she is bold upon sin, she cares not what she says or what she does, she fears
not Gods displeasures while the fit of passion and contention lasts, for the
fear of God is to depart from evil, and there can be no restraint from sin when
that is gone. In peoples fits of angry passions their reproachful and reviling
speeches do much dishonor God, and their actions flatly oppose his will. While
they are angry they do not stand in awe of God, and thereby their unruly Lusts
are let loose, running up and down doing mischief, sinning against God and
their Brethren. Indeed the gratifying of passionate humors does make persons
cease fearing God; in fearlesness of God is a mighty provoking sin. See what
Almighty God says in Jer. 5.22. Fear ye not me, says the Lord? will ye not
tremble at my presence? And in verse 24. Neither say they in their hearts, Let
us now fear the Lord our God. And in verse 29. Shall I not visit for these
things, says the Lord? shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as this?
O then be sensible what great provoking sins anger and contention do occasion?

6. Husbands and Wives by the frequency of their angry passionate fits make
themselves all their lives contemptible to others. Some Husbands and Wives
think to be terrible to others in their passion, but they discover so much
folly, as that they make those that they are angry with to despise them: They
may think to gain the more authority, and make others stand more in awe of
them, by their being angry with them; but they see so much rashness and
distemper in their passion, that nothing deprives them of their authority and
respect more than this constant passion of anger, when small matters puts them
into a fiery sit. Indeed if persons did but observe their shameful carriages
when they are in passion after they were come to their right minds, and in a
calm frame of spirit did but consider how much they were disdained and
contemned for it, it would make them ashamed of their anger. However, many are
angry because they would not be despised, but keep others in subjection to
them; yet nothing in truth does work base esteem and disregard in the minds of
those that they are angry and displeased with, than immoderate and common
anger. Frequency of Husbands and Wives passionate fits mightily blazeth abroad,
and discovers their shame and folly, which occasioneth their contempt, as
Wisdom causes Honor and Respect. When Husbands and Wives anger, and (the
effects thereof) clamorous brawling, and sometimes fighting, are usual and
common, as well for trifles as weighty matters, persons do desperately contemn
both, when they have no hope to prevent either. If thou, O Husband, or O Wife,
would have the better'dness of thy displeasure, have any effectual operation
upon the mind of the party with whom thou art displeased for the purging away
faults and vices, thou must manifest thy displeasure as the Physicians
administer strong Physic, only upon extraordinary cases; for if Physic be
commonly taken, it will have no extraordinary effect. If thou do habituate
thy self to the use of Physic in a common way, as thou do thy food, it will
not benefit thee in times of sickness; so if thy anger be frequent and common,
it will neither do good to thy self or another; it will not be regarded. The
frequent brawlings of an angry person do but make him the scorn of others. That
person that will not let pass any rumor or report that is spread of him or
her, without reasonings and stir, does expose him or her self to the more
reproach: for they that cannot rule their own spirits, deserve no respect,
because (as Solomon says, Prove. 25.28.) He that has no rule over his own
spirit, is like a City broken down, and without walls; who is able to defend
himself against no assaults, therefore every one slights him.

7. If an Husband or Wife does manifest much passion, frowardness, and
discontent against the other, the prevailing of such corrupt humors will
hinder the angry, froward, and discontented, contentious, wrangling person from
doing any good. A person in a froward temper is exceedingly indisposed to any
good work. When thou will seem to aim at the glory of God, and yet wilt show
thy self very passionate, know God has no need of thy wrath: It is true he
has need of thy Zeal, but that is not thy wrath and passion, to break out in
outrageous speeches, or railing bitter language; God has no need of this wrath
of man. Let persons have never such excellent parts, yet they will not be able
to do any good almost, if they be froward; but they are like unto a Candle wet
with salt Brine, they spit up and down, and are very unuseful in the places
where they live.

1. The prevailing of anger in any persons, the indulging and gratifying an
humorous spirit, indisposeth them to do good to themselves. Angry persons will
be averse to commune with their own hearts, and to consider their own ways, or
to search out their own disorders of life. The Wife is so transported with
disgust against her Husband, that she apprehends to have displeased her, that
she can think of nothing, or talk of nothing, but what may vilify or reproach
her Husband; she will not do so much good to her self as to try whether those
carriages correspond with the Divine rule, whether she can justify what she
says or does to her Husband by a warrant from Gods word. She will not consider
whether she has not been transported into indiscreet and indecent excesses, or
whether she would not have condemned such violent heats in another as she has
manifested. What I speak of one Sex here, I intend of both; so I proceed.
Peoples frowardness and passion hinders them from doing good to themselves, as
to farther the convincing themselves of the evil that they have done, and
bringing them to repentance for it. And will thou then dare indulge thy angry
passions, that make thee incapable of doing thy self good? Most men aim at
self-interest, self-advantage, and self-applause; but thou by thy passions do
disable thy self from doing any act advantageous to thy self, either to promote
thy spiritual good, present profit, or present credit. Surely that temper of
spirit must needs be very evil, that hinders thee from doing good to thy self.

2. Thy frowardness and angry passion, thy contentious wrangling spirit hinders
from doing any spiritual good; it indisposeth thee for performance of any
spiritual duty to God; it makes thee averse to converse with God, and unfit to
serve God in a right manner; it is an hindrance of holy Prayer. Angry persons
cannot call upon God in a serious spiritual manner, because their hearts are
carnal, earthy, and poisoned with self-love; nor will God hear them if they
call upon him. Anger hinders persons in all ordinances, it makes them the most
unfit persons in the world for to pray: therefore the Apostle says in the 1 Timothy 2.8. I will therefore that men pray every where. How? lifting up holy
hands, but without wrath. O Husband! or O Wife! thou must be sure when thou
liftest up thine hands to prayer, that there be no wrath in thy spirit, that
thou do not go to prayer in a passion. Angry passionate Prayers are vain
Prayers. The Lord loves zeal, and much warmth of affection in prayer, but he
cannot abide wrath or the least spark of passion in prayer; a peaceable heart
is as necessary in prayer, as a pure hand. When a Wife coming to God in prayer,
has I know not what wrathful disputes within her self against her Husband, how
can she look for a gracious acceptance with God? the like may be said of the
Husband. Will the Lord be pleased with those that nourish secret displeasure
against their nearest Relation? No, no, furious and unquiet thoughts must be
laid down by those that would have favor with God, and compassions from God.
If persons would compass Gods Altar, and there offer up the Sacrifice of Prayer
and Thanksgiving, they must first wash their hands in innocence, Ps. 26.6. And
our Savior Christ commands, that before persons offer any gift unto the
Lord, that they seek to be reconciled to the party with whom they are
displeased, Mat. 5.23. So long therefore as any continue in their anger, they
are unfit to pray; and this appears most manifestly in the fifth Petition of
the Lords Prayer, where we desire to be forgiven as we forgive, Mat. 6.12. And
again, our Savior Christ does single this out of all the other Petitions; but
if you will not forgive men their trespasses, no more will your Father forgive
your trespasses. They who are suing for and expecting favor and mercy from
God, have need to discharge themselves of all wrath and displeasure toward
men. And the Apostle Peter in the 1 Ep. 3.7: exhorts Man and Wife to live
together in love, that their prayers be not interrupted. Jarrings between such
Relations do hinder their praying together to any good purpose; therefore if
you would be fit to go to God together for mercy and favor, beware that you
carry no wrath in your hearts toward one another, for then you will be sent
empty away: And is not that a very great evil, and too bad to be harbored in
the hearts of Husbands and Wives, that will hinder them from enjoying
fellowship and acceptance with God in prayer, that will either make them cease
to pray together, or if they do pray will make their Prayers vain and
fruitless, as passion and discord usually does? Also anger and discord is a
very great evil in hindering Husbands and Wives to do good, by unfitting them
to come together to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. I question not but many
angry Husbands and Wives are convinced in their own consciences that they ought
not to come to the Sacrament in a passion, when they are angry with one
another; they know they must lay aside wrath and malice then, and be in charity
with all persons. Hence many Husbands and Wives will rather lose a Sacrament,
than come in a passion. Many will say, I could not come to the Sacrament
because my Husband and I fell out, or my Wife and I fell out: Now this is a
vile thing, that when there is a Sacrament that Men and their Wives are
convinced that they ought to come unto, but the breaches that are between them
hinder them. So many men and women by giving way unto their passions are unfit
to hear and read the word, unfit for any act of obedience of the Divine Will,
unfit for any act that has a tendency to promote the Glory of God. So that the
violence of passion does hinder Men and Women from doing of any spiritual good.

3. Passion and frowardness does hinder Husbands and Wives from doing good to
one another, in disables them from admonishing one another of any fault,
because an admonition is to be administered in a spirit of meekness. A furious
person is very unlikely to convince another of sin, neither has such an one
any heart to give another whom he or she is disgusted with, any spiritual
counsel. That secret prejudice which is harbored in the angry persons breast,
hinders him or her from doing any offices of love for his or her nearest
Relation; but instead of doing such a Relation good, will do him or her the
greatest prejudice that may be done. Angry persons are no way servicable to the
good of others, rather offering indignities than kindnesses to them. Here is a
sore evil indeed, that angry Husbands and angry Wives are neither serviceable
to God, themselves, nor one another. O then do not let thy passion rage for
every trifle: thou then make thy self unfit either for the service of God or
man; and what a sad thing is it to be a useless Creature, not capable of doing
any good! Oh then it is a sad and sore evil to be an angry, passionate,
froward, and contentious person.

8. Anger, passion and frowardness of spirit hinders persons from receiving any
good. A froward spirit is unfit to take in any good; there is no dealing with
angry and froward Spirits when they are in their fits, as there is no Physic
to be given to a man when he is in the heat of his Fever, so there is no
meddling with angry persons when they are in a flame: You must come to them
when they are quiet, or else you will not be able to do them any good; and
indeed this is the horrible distemper of this passion, that God and man must
stay till it be down, that God should not only wait on persons to do them good,
but also wait upon their wicked, vile, base Lusts, that he must stay till they
are over before they are fit to hear him speak to them. Now it is a meaner
thing to wait upon a persons humor, than to wait upon the meanest Creature in
the world. When the fire of anger is kindled in peoples hearts, they are fit to
hearken to nothing; their souls are on fire, and not fit to hear any thing:
thus men's angry passions hinder them from receiving good. And angry person is
impatient of admonition, which is ordained of God as a means of their recovery
from sin. Angry persons will fly in the face of a reprover; they cannot endure
to have their ways and actions found fault withal; the more you endeavor to
convince them of their sin, the more they are exasperated; the more you
persuade them from their evil course, they grow the more furious in their
passion, they are not fit to receive any good counsel; while they are angry
they are obstinate and resolute; if you smite with a Reproof, it is as if you
had struck upon an Anvil, it makes no impression on them. And also anger is the
cause that the word of God becomes unprofitable. Anger causes men to
entertain the truths of the word of Life, as wind in the stomach does wholesome
meat, that will not suffer it to enter. Those that will benefit by hearing Gods
word, must be slow to wrath, James 1.19. For anger hardens the heart, that the
Seed of Life cannot take root, or leave impression, yea it makes resistance to
the Work of Grace. Those Spirits in whom there is a wrathful fierceness, rise
up in rage against the Word of God. Angry Spirits think that the Minister
raileth, when he does but discover their guilt to them; so peoples passions
stir them up many times to a fierce opposition of the Truth; but let such
consider, that their perverse opposition with be their ruin, as in Luke 7.30.
they rejected the counsel of God against themselves, that is, to their own
loss. Though anger may not altogether hinder or keep them back from hearing,
yet it will fully hinder them from practice; for then only persons receive good
by the Word, when they practice what they hear, when they are doers of the
word, and not hearers only. O Husband! or O Wife, do thou observe what an
hindrance thy froward and passionate spirit is to thy receiving good? Indeed it
is a sore evil to indulge thy self in that humor, which resists those means
that should do thee good, whereby tho receivest no benefit by any means that is
used for thy good; yea, the allowing thy self in thy passions does deprive thee
of the good thou had before; thou art not only hindered from receiving more
good, but thou shall lose even what thou have.

It is reported that some Pearls may be dissolved by Vinegar; so there are many
excellent things in men and women, but they are dissolved by the Vinegar of
passion: the Vinegar of passion does stain the spirits of men and women, and
causes them to lose that Beauty that they had before, yea, to lose much of the
sweetness of the enjoyments of God himself, yea, it makes them lose the sense
of Divine Love. As we cannot discern the Sun when we are near a scorching fire,
so the Heavenly heat of Divine Love is not felt, if the furious flame of anger
be kindled in peoples hearts. Froward Christians have little sense of Gods love
toward them. O then, O Husband! or O Wife! Do thy continual brawling hinder
thee from receiving good by admonitions, counsels, and all ordinances, and make
the means of Grace ineffectual to thee? Do they deprive thee of the good thou
have, and deprive thee of the light of Gods countenance? Do they cause the
withdrawing of the light of Gods countenance? O then, what an evil thing is it
for thee to be angry with thy Husband or thy Wife upon every trifle! Thus I
have opened the great evil of contentions between Husband and Wife, in showing
the evil effect of their anger and discord between each other.

2. Consider, O Husband! or O Wife! Anger is a sore evil, because thy angry
fits of passion do grieve the spirit of God. Though by venting the froth of thy
froward passionate spirit thou may please thy self, yet thou grievest the
Holy Spirit. It is an ill thing to grieve thy friend; and indeed none are more
grievous to their dearest Friends and nearest Relations, than froward and
passionate people. When thy Friend comes to thy Family, and sees thee in a
froward and passionate temper, it grieves him, and thou grievest the heart of
thy Husband: It may be also he goes and complains of it to God, and thou
grievest thy Friend, and he complains of it: but this is worst of all, thou
grievest the spirit of God. When thou art in a fit of passion, the Spirit of
God goes away to Heaven sadly, as it is in Ephesians. 4.30, 31. And grieve not the
holy Spirit of God. Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and
evil speaking, be put away from you, with all malice. The Apostle unto that
command, grieve not the Spirit, immediately subjoyneth this, let all
bitterness, etc. be put away; intimating that otherwise they could not cease
from grieving the Holy Spirit.

Here are mentioned various degrees of anger, and every one of them does grieve
the Spirit. By bitterness of Spirit is understood the lowest degree of sinfui
anger, and also by Bitterness is understood all secret smothered displeasure,
and alienation of affection, which has more of discontent and grudge than of
revenge. The next degree is wrath, or fierceness of Spirit, which is an
impetuous rage, and passionate commotion of the heart and affections, upon the
sense of an apprehended injury, preventing and obstructing the use of reason;
and in some it grows to a desire of revenge, and a fixed resolution after
deliberation to have that desire satisfied. In some anger breaks out into
boisterous words, loud menaces, and other inordinate speeches, which are the
black smoke whereby the fire of anger and wrath, kindled within, first
manifests it self, and then anger proceeds to evil speaking, uttering
disgraceful and contumelious speeches, by which the party incensed does
endeavor to stain the reputation of him who has seemed to have offered him or
her a wrong: Of this sort was Readiness anger, 1 Samuel 20.30. Now all and every
degree of anger does grieve the Holy Spirit of God, and darken much the Work of
Grace in the heart; there being no sins more opposite to the fruits of the
spirit mentioned in Gal. 5.22. Then those sins are so, that where such sins are
given way, Grace must needs be on the decaying hand. O the prevalency of sinful
passion is very injurious to the Spirit of God! it grieves the Spirit so much,
that he will withdraw his motions, his guidance, assistance, and comforts from
angry persons. O then, if thou would not grieve the Spirit of God, lay aside
all bitteresns, wrath, and anger, etc. Consider what an heinous evil anger,
wrath, and frowardness of Spirit is. Thou do not only by thy passion grieve
thy Friend or near Relation, but also the Spirit of God: and will thou be so
ungrateful as to grieve that Spirit that has done thee so much good, that is
appointed by the Father and by Jesus Christ to be thy Comforter, even the
Comforter of thy Spirit. If thou had an ingenious Spirit, thou would think
it an ill thing to grieve thy Friend, and if thou hear thou have done that
which has grieved him, in will grieve thee exceedingly. O then, how should it
tr^uble thee and grieve thee, that when thou art in an angry passion thou do
grieve the dearest Friend thou have in the world, thou do grieve the holy
Spirit of God.

3. O Husband! or O wife! by thy giving way to excessive anger, thou do give
place to the Devil, Ephesians. 4.27. Thou do cast open the doors to Satan, the
capital enemy of thy Soul, to enter thy heart, and incite thee by his uncessant
suggestions to act some mischief. As Satan is dethroned and shut out of the
hearts of all true believers, and though he shall never reign over them at his
pleasure, yet he is daily watching and searching out, if it were but the
narrowest passage, and least opportunity, whereby he may again re-enter his old
possession, and exercise his former Tyranny: and where excessive or sinful
anger is not only given way to, but also continued in, there does Satan get an
open door to settle himself in the heart, and exercise his power, by inciting
the person guilty to commit more wickedness. A furious angry person is the prey
of Satan: for this raging passion having put out the eye of an angry persons
reason, Satan makes him a fit instrument for his own business: so that
unadvised anger is a notable means that Satan uses to work some persons
destruction; for when once rage has blinded the eye of reason, he can easily
lead a person into a gulf of all wickedness. O then, if thou do permit anger
to rage in thy Spirit, if thou do nourish thy froward humor, and art so
often contending with thy Husband or with thy Wife, thou do gratify thy self
exceedingly, thou do do as he would have thee, thou do give him a welcome
entertainment in thy heart. Alas! how can thou fancy such a monstrous Fiend.
as to comply with his suggestions! Be not so vile a wretch, as to be kind to
the mortal enemy of thy Soul. His design is to have thee angry, and so
contentious, that he may hinder the exercise of thy reason, and so make thee
unreasonable in thy actions. O then, when thy anger begins to rise, suppress it
with this consideration, If I give way to my anger, I please no one but the
Devil, all others except the Devil are displeased with my anger and
frowardness. That act must needs be dreadfully evil which the Devil does
rejoice in the doing of. What a sad wretch will thou evidence thy self to be,
in despising the counsel of God, and following the Devils! God bids thee not to
be of an hasty spirit, but to forgive the trespasses of thy Brother; and the
Devil tells thee, Be not such a fool as to pass by such wrongs, or suffer such
opposition: and will thou slight God, to hearken to the Devil? shall the Devil
prevail more with thee than God? Will thou shut the door of thy heart against
God, and open it to let in Satan? Then thou make thy self a Child of the
Devil, and not a Child of God; and in thy rage and fury do resemble the
Devil, who g es about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour.

4. Persons by their sinful anger, their contentious wrangling and frowardness
of spirit, do subject themselves to the wrath of God, and bring his curse upon
them; yea, their anger brings upon them even in this life the dreadful effects
of Gods anger. O thou angry Husband, or angry Wife! if thou do not repent
thee of thy sinful anger, frowardness, hastiness, and touchiness of spirit upon
every trivial occasion, God will deal with thee in his anger, as thou would
deal with thy Husband or Wife in thy anger: for as we forgive others, so does
God forgive us. If therefore thou retain thine anger toward thine Husband, God
will retain his anger toward thee. The Lord acts the part of an Umpire, to
make up breaches, heal differences, and make reconciliation between Relations;
but if either of them be so stiff and contentious, that he or she will not be
reconciled, what does that party else, but by froward behavior and obstinate
stiffness refusing the Lords arbitrament and determination, make God his enemy?
Eliphaz tells Job, cap. 5.2. Wrath kills the foolish man: That may be taken
two ways very true; the wrath of God kills or destroys the wrathful, rash, and
inconsiderate man, that has no true government of himself; for anger rests
in the bosom of fools, Eccles. 7.9. or the angry man kills himself; his own
wrath is as a Knife to his throat, and as a Sword in his own bowels. Wrath
properly is anger inveterate; Wrath is a long anger. When a man or woman is set
upon it, when the Spirit is steeped or soaked in anger, then it is wrath: but
in this place I conceive it notes a fervent heat, and distemper of Spirit
presently breaking forth, or an extreme vexation, fretting or disquieting
within, as in Psalm. 112.10. The wicked shall see it, and be grieved. That is,
he shall have secret indignation in himself to see matters go so; he shall
gnash with his teeth, and melt away. Gnashing of the teeth is caused by the
vexing of the heart, and therefore said he shall melt away, which notes an
extreme heat within; so that a persons wrath makes him or her melt away, as we
say of a person furiously vexed, it melos his (or her) grease with chafing.
This is an effect of Divine displeasure, whereby God in judgment does suffer
peoples wrath to be so vexatious to them, that it makes their lives a continual
death to them, and at last so weary and wast their spirits, that they die for
very grief; and except the Lord be merciful to them, and the death of Christ
heal the wounds that their anger and impatiency have made, they will murder
their own Souls; for ever frowardness and anger is a persons sin and torment.
For People tare themselves in their anger, Job 18.4. The more fretful people
are, the more miserable do they make themselves. Those that are of wrathful
spirits will certainly feel some degrees of the wrath of God either in this
life, or in the life to come. That must needs be hurtful, yea mortal to men,
that carries in it a resistance to the immortal God. Some anger is not only
grief for the opposition that persons meet with, but a kind of stomacking at
God who permits them to be opposed or crossed, and though they do not confess it
to be so, yet the spirit of God knows it to be so.

Now know that the wrath of man against man is a sin which God will punish with
further wrath. God will power out wrath upon wrathful persons: and it appears
that the wrath of man stirs up God to punish man, if we observe what the
Apostle says in Gal. 5.15. If ye bite and devour one another. What is this
biting and devouring? that is, every act which is opposite to that love which
God commands us to exercise toward our Neighbor, or our near and dear
Relation, is a biting and devouring. We bite and devour one another when we are
unkind, wrathful and vexatious one to another. See what follows as the effect
of their passionate and froward carriages one to another. Take heed ye be not
consumed one of another. Take heed lest by walking so unlike Christians, and so
unanswerable to the Law of Gospel-love, you provoke God to kindle such a fire
among you, and in you, as may prove an utter consumption. When Husbands and
Wives are not careful to walk together in love, as Christ has loved us, God
sometimes (as an evidence of his wrath and displeasure) gives them up to a
spirit of contention; and their breaches are like the Sea which cannot be
healed. Their cruel and harsh dealings (which are yet but to the vexing and
healing of one another spirits, or to devouring and eating one another
credit) may provoke such Judgments as shall destroy their Persons, Families and
Estates, until nothing be left. Thus peoples peevish, froward and angry
carriages to such as are their nearest Relations, provoke God to execute
revenges on them. When an Husband or Wife is fierce toward the other, God is
angry with that person, and will not suffer that person to live in peace, who
has so much love to dissension; and this Judgment of God upon persons, is both
the forerunner and demonstration of further, yea, the final Judgment: And so
says Solomon, in Prove. 19.19. A man of great wrath shall suffer punishment.
And Christ denounces great Judgment against unadvised anger, in Mat. 5.22. He
that is angry with his brother without cause, is in danger of judgment;
intimating, that rash anger is a capital offense, and does bring a person under
the severe sentence of Gods Judgment. In the latter part of the verse Christ
says, That if a persons anger break out in disrespectful speeches the sin is
the more capital, because such an one gives words of disdain. Whosoever shall
say to his brother, Racha, shall be in danger of the Council: but if anger and
disdain proceed so far as to reproach a brother yet more despightfully, and
call him Fool, then that person shall be in danger of Hellfire. Consider then,
O Husband, or O Wife! the dreadful effects of thine anger, wrath, and
frowardness. It subjects thee to the wrath of God, and Oh! what punishments,
what consuming judgments does Gods wrath bring forth! The wrath of God may be
specificated into any Judgment, it produces every evil. If Gods wrath be
kindled but a little, if it be but as a spark, it will quickly grow up to a
flame and consume all, as in Numb. 16.46. Moses bids Aaron have to make the
Atonement, for (says he) wrath is gone out from the Lord, the Plague is
begun. But know, the wrath of God is not a passion in him, but an action
toward man: He acts as men when they are angry, but he suffers nothing by his
anger: He smites, and wounds, and pulls down, and destroys, like a wrathful
man, yea, an enraged man, yet he does this in the exactest frame and sweetest
composure of his Spirit. But the wrath of God is only his holy and most blessed
will burning with hatred against sin, especially the wrath and dis^entions of
such near Relations as Husband and Wife; and so he turns away from such in his
high displeasure. And as the wrath of God draws out punishments, so thy angry,
froward, pettish humors, draws out the wrath of God. The wrath of God is
terrible, and that must needs be a terrible evil that provokes God to power it
out. Will it not then be grievous to thee to behold the appearances of the
wrath of God against thee, and smart under the kindlings of Divine displeasure?
O who can abide the coming of the Lord with consuming fire! A fire kindled only
to consume, is dreadful, as in Isa. 10.17. The light of Israel shall be for a
fire, and his holy One for a flame, and it shall burn and devour his thorns and
his briars in one day. That is, the fury of the Lord shall appear against
those, that like briars and thorns in their anger and contention do prick and
scratch one another, though in a strict sense it relates unto Gods consuming
the Assyrians who plagued the Jews. Should not then the terrible wrath of God
(that thy furious spirit brings upon thee) scare thee from cherishing thy
passionate and froward humor? If thou retain thine anger against thy Husband
or against thy Wife, God will settle his wrath upon thee. O think upon this, O
Husband, or O Wife* when thy choler begins to rise, If I give way to mine
anger, I do but call upon God to power down his wrath upon me.

Before I proceed to give directions for the subduing, bridling, and preventing
wrath and dissension between Husband and Wife, I shall endeavor to manifest
which of them is most principally faulty in causing heats and dissentions
between them, which of them is most faulty in being angry and froward; and that
in these following particulars:
1. THat person that in his or her anger does by expressions manifest a
contempt or undervaluing, or a want of affection to the others person, is
principally faulty in being angry, and is indeed angry immoderately, and
without cause; for a well-grounded anger does manifest displeasure against
another offense and sin, but not against the persons offending, endeavors to
make faulty persons ashamed, but not a shame. That Husband that does in his
anger and furiousness of spirit call his Wife Where, does indeed evidence a
contempt and hatred of her person; and that Wife that does call her Husband
Rogue, Knave, and cheating Fellow, or other opprobrious terms, does really hate
her Husband, and is principally in fault when a difference does arise between
them. Also that person that does obstinately refuse to give due conjugal
respects to the other, does evidence a contempt of the others person, and is
guilty of its own anger, and of the strife that is stirred up between them.

2. That party that keeps in memory, and repeateth over old things that have
been the occasion of contention a long time before, is guilty of sinful anger,
is the promoter of new passions, and is the cause of the present discord; for
such a party does deliberately endeavor to raise new strife and contention:
for as former provocations ought to be forgiven, so they ought to be forgotten.
Prove. 17.9. He that covers a transgression, seeks love; but he that
repeateth a matter, separateth very friends, even such near Friends as Husband
and Wife: And usually that person that frequently repeateth former
transactions, has a prejudice against the party of whom and to whom he or she
repeateth the matter, and by additions and passionate perversions aggravateth
the things that are so repeated. So either the Husband or the Wife that makes a
fresh rehearsal of old matters, does but increase his or her own fury, and
fully evidence his or her own faultiness.

3. That party that does in anger upbraid the other with natural Infirmities,
or with such failings as he or she was (through the power of temptation)
overtaken in, by a surprise, and does it in a vexatious way to cast a slur or
disgrace upon the other, is chiefly faulty in raising discord between them, and
is guilty of sinful anger, being the duty of Husband and Wife to forbear every
thing that may cause any breaches between them.

4. That Wife that does divulge her Husbands miscarriages to any third person,
and talk in company what evil he has done, is really and principally the
kindler of her own causeless anger, and the only occasion of discord between
her and her Husband; for that Husband that does manifest anger against his Wife
before others, or that Wife that is discovering her fiery disgust of spirit
against her Husband when others are present, that she cares not at what time
she vents her self, though it be at such a time that she is like to do no good
with it. This thy viol^nce of passion does evidence, that thou art the alone
cause of thine own anger, because such near Relations are bound not to divulge
the dishonorable failings of each other. The Reputation of thy Husband or thy
Wife must be as dear to thee as thine own. It is a sinful and unfaithful
practice of many, both Husbands and Wives, who among their Companions, and also
amongst their Servants, are opening the faults and infirmities of each other,
which they are bound in tenderness to cover, as if they perceived not that by
dishonouring one another they dishonor themselves. They twain being but one
flesh, the dishonor of one is the disgrace of the other. Love will cover a
multitude of faults, 1 Pet. 4.8. Nay, many disaffected peevish persons will
aggravate one another faults behind their backs to strangers, and sometimes
slander them, and speak more than is truth, and this is the effect of that
persons sinful anger and displeasure against the other. Many a man has been
put to it to vindicate himself in a public way, to clear his good name from
the slanders of a jealous and passionate Wife. An open enemy is not capable of
doing so much wrong to him, as she that is in his bosom, because she is easily
to be believed, as being supposed to know him better than any other: therefore
that Wife that is not tender of the Reputation of her Husband, but in her anger
will speak things before others that tends to his disgrace and reproach is
certainly guilty of sinful anger, and the cause of all the discord that is
between them.

But perhaps she will say, My Husband has spoken words to others in his anger,
that tended to my disparagement; and why may not I speak words to others that
are dishonorable to him?

In answer to this, Know, that the sin of thy Husband cannot justify thine own
sin, neither is that a good Argument to justify thy offending God, because thy
Husband offended God likewise. It may be thy Husband in his have did once
unadvisedly speak something to thy dishonor, but thou make it a frequent
practice upon every slight occasion of thy disgust: Thy Husband may have
desisted such a practice, but thou continuest it; and in excuse of the
continuance of thy sinful practice in reproaching thy Husband, thou do
upbraid him with that single act of speaking something that was not honorable
to thee, which perhaps by thy untoward carriages thou might give him great
provocations to do. So that notwithstanding all that thou can plead for thy
self, thou art the alone cause of thine own anger, and of all the strife that
happens between thy self and Husband.

5. That party is truly guilty of sinful anger, that takes distaste at every
frivolous matter, or any thing done unadvisedly, and through indiscretion,
which the party offending does acknowledge; that does rage for a trifle, or
things not worth taking notice of, that are not at all offensive to God, but
only not correspondent to his or her corrupt and imperious will. That party
that does this, is the sole cause of all contentions that do arise between them.

6. That party is guilty of sinful anger, that when contentions do arise at any
time between Husband and Wife, that does first of all give railing, reviling,
filthy, and reproachful language; for no persons anger can be lawful and holy,
that does not observe Christian modesty in abstaining from malicious and wicked
speeches, and unjust and spightful actions, in expressing his or her anger; for
such as justify themselves with spightful and bitter speeches, are not at all
guided by the spirit of God. It is usual when an Husband or Wife is causelessly
angry, and cannot convince the other of any particular offense against God, to
rail at the other for some contempt that he or she apprehends to have received
from the other. And indeed none are more injurious to others, than those who
rail at others in reproachful speeches for pretended injuries to have received
from others, that revilers pride has occasioned his or her own anger, and
promoted the discord between them.

7. That party that does most justify his or her anger, that like Jonah says,
I do well to be angry, and will not be convinced of the evil of his or her
anger, but will make vain and frivolous pretenses to excuse it, is principally
guilty of sinful anger, and is principal causer of the difference that happens
between them, as Husband and Wife.

8. That person, either Husband or Wife, that after some heats and differences
between them, is most backward to the performance of Family Worship, and will
order, or set about any unnecessary business or lawful employment to interrupt
it, is guilty of sinful anger, and the only occasion of difference between
them. For whatever a person has done that indisposeth him or her, or makes
him or her averse to the service of God, is sinful. When the rage of one is
grown so high, as not to pray with the other, or join in Sacraments together,
at least not willingly, or with complacency, but after has joined in prayer
will quarrel at the matter of Prayer, carp at expressions used in Prayer, and
censure the party praying guilty of hypocrisy, or if the party praying vent
his own passions in Prayer, that party that is guilty in any of these respects,
is guilty of sinful and causeless anger, and was the only cause of the
difference that happened between them.

9. That person is the most faulty person, and most guilty to sinful anger,
which is not willing to be reconciled again when once displeased, but will
retain anger a great while; that person does manifest much stoutness and
proudness of spirit. When vain trifles have stirred up an Husband or Wife to
wrath, his or her perseverance in it, does evidence that it did seem to begin
without a cause; and so against all reason the injustice of his or her anger
makes him or her to persist in it with the greater obstinacy; and therefore
thou do retain it, yea increase it, because thou may not seem to others to
be angry without a cause, and that the greatness of thine anger may make others
believe that it could not choose but arise from a weighty occasion and just
cause, and so thou do choose rather to seem just, than be just. But the
continuance of anger must needs be sinful, because the Apostles injunction is,
that we must not let the Sun go down upon our wrath, Ephesians. 4.26. That person
that can lie down and sleep, and awake in an angry fit, is very faulty in being
angry, and is the principal cause of the difference that is continued between
him and his Wife, or her and her Husband.

That party, either Husband or Wife, in whose bosom anger is permitted to rest,
is guilty of the greatest folly, Eccles. 7.9. That woman that is in a burning
feverish fit of anger for a long time, is certainly sinfully angry, because
there is a great evil in this abiding of anger. Indeed the longer anger
continues, the more it grows, and the longer time anger is drawn out, the
greater distance thou will be at from thy Husband, with whom thou art angry,
and thou art one that delightest to drink of no other waters but of Massah,
Meribah, of the waters of strife and anger long retained, is in danger of
receiving some sowerness of malice from the dregs of thy corruption.

The continuance of this inhumane fury has dissolved even the most sacred
friendship upon very frivolous occasions.

I come now to give some Directions for the preventing, moderating, and
suppressing angry fits that usually arise between Husband and Wife.
1. Endeavor in the way of God the mortification of that prevailing principle
of flesh that is in thee, if thou would be restrained from thy violent
passions. So long as the flesh is deeply rooted in thee, it will bring forth
its fruits; and anger, wrath, malice and contention are the fruits of the
flesh. If thou would not have such ill fruits come forth from thy flesh,
endeavor always to destroy the root of thy corruptions; for the weaker thy
fleshly principle is, the seldomer will thou be moved to anger. The
mortification of in-dwelling sin remaining in our mortal bodies, that it may
not have life and power to bring forth the deeds and works of the flesh, is the
constant duty of believers. In-dwelling sin is the same which I mean by a
fleshly principle. Now the more powerful thy corruptions are, the more violent
will thy passions be, which are the offspring of thy inbred corruption: Thou
can not (while in the body) utterly destroy in-dwelling sin, that it should
have no more hold at all, no residence in thy heart; but this thou must aim at,
and earnestly desire: thou must with thy heart really desire that in-dwelling
sin should leave neither root or fruit in thy heart or life. Therefore the
mortification that I press thee to set upon, is an habitual weakening of
in-dwelling sin, that thou may not be so much under the power of a strong
bent and inclination unto sin, that it may not have such life, power, vigor,
promptness and readiness to be stirring. This mortification that I here intend,
is a daily endeavor after the weakening and abolishing of in-dwelling sin by
little and little, that it might not incline thee and employ thee with such
efficacy to make thee a servant to it, as heretofore. If thou let the root of
thy corruption abide in strength and vigor, it will be still bringing forth
new fruits of the flesh, and thou will be hurried into violent passions upon
every slight occasion. Ane if we see persons raging in wrath and fury, we may
conclude that in-dwelling sin is in its full power and vigor in them.

Now, thou can not carry on this work of Mortification, except thou art
ingrafted into Christ by Faith. I do not say, Except thou art assured of it,
but Thou must be indeed a true believer, because mortification is not done
without the aid of Gods Spirit, who is promised to do it, and all other means
are vain without him. Now the Spirits aid for the work of mortification is not
gained except we are in Christ by Faith, and when we are in Christ we have the
Spirit, and so have power for mortification. All attempts then for
mortification of in-dwelling sin without an interest in Christ, are vain; for
there must be first Conversion and Faith in Christ, then mortification will
ensue. Know then, that sin cannot be killed without an interest in the death of
Christ, or mortified without the Spirit. Thou then being a believer, make daily
and sincere opposition of in-dwelling sin; rise then mightily against the first
movings and acting of thy corruption, against its first conceptions; let it not
have allowance from thee for one step, for it is impossible to fix bounds to
it. If thou find thy corruption to begin to entangle thy thoughts, rise up
with all thy strength against it, with no less indignation than if it had fully
accomplished what it aimed at, else it will get ground in the affections to
delight in it; and if thou find it too powerful an enemy for thee, set Faith
on work in Christ for the killing of thy sin. His blood is the great sovereign
remedy for sin-sick Souls. Fill thy Soul with the due consideration of that
provision which is laid up in Christ for this end, that thy corruptions may be
mortified. Behold the Lord Christ that has all fullness of Grace in his heart,
all fullness of Power in his hand: He is able to slay all thy corruptions, there
is provision enough in him for thy relief and assistance. Then raise up thy
heart by faith to an expectation of relief from Christ, and thy Soul shall be
satisfied with the relief it expects, he will assuredly deliver thee, he will
slay thy corruptions. Mortification of sin is one peculiar end of the death of
Christ, which shall assuredly be accomplished by it. And this whole work that I
am pressing thee to endeavor after, is effected, carried on, and accomplished
by the power of the Spirit in all the parts and degrees of it; and that thou
may have more power to oppose and weaken the power of thy corruptions, beg
of God earnestly for Christ's sake to give thee his Spirit. O then, is it from
the corruption in thy heart that thy passions break out against thy Husband or
against thy Wife in thy life? Is it thy corruption that makes thee froward and
contentious, that makes discord between thee and thy Husband? Then bend all thy
strength against thy corruptions, by the aid of the Spirit endeavor the
mortification of the deeds of the flesh, Romans 8.13. Before the strength of thy
corruption is weakened, thy anger and frowardness will not be prevented; for as
the motions of original sin are permanent, thou will not be rid of the body of
Death, until the death of thy body; so they are exceeding violent and impetuous
in their operations, and puts people into violent passions upon small
occasions. If thou do not oppose thy corruptions, thou do not endeavor to
prevent ti^y breaking out into furiousness of Spirit. Keep down then thy
in-dwelling sin, and thou will not have such hot contests with thy Husband or
with thy Wife, for quarrelling and contention come from the Lusts that are
within, James 4 1. Consider then when ever any thing displeases thee, If I be
angry, I gratify my corruptions, which I am bound to mortify, Col. 3.5.
Certainly thy froward carriages to thy Husband do arise more from the evil that
is within thee than the displeasure that is done thee. Thou have just cause to
say, It is not my temptation, but my corruption, that makes me froward; and so
do thou fall a studying to mortify thy corruptions if ever thou will prevent
thy passions.

2. Consider, O Husband, and O Wife! if you will prevent fallings out with one
another, keep up your conjugal love in a constant heat and vigor. Love will
suppress wrath, as well as prevent it, you cannot have a bitter mind upon small
provocations against those that you dearly love, much less can you proceed to
reviling words, or to averseness and estrangedness, or any abuse of one
another; or or if a breach or wound be unhappily made, the balsamic quality of
Love will heal it; but when Love once cools, small matters will exasperate
and breed distaste: Therefore I shall give some directions how conjugal love may
be maintained and preserved.

1. Take more notice of the good that is in one another, than the evil. Le^ not
the observation of one another faults make you overlook or forget one
another Virtues. Love is kindled and preserved by the sight of Love and
Goodness. If you will observe nothing in one another but your infirmities, and
some indiscreet, inconsiderate, and unadvised actings: You neither preserve
Love, nor keep Peace with one another. If you will magnify faults in one
another, and flight and despise any good qualities, you take the readiest
course to destroy conjugal love, and beget hatred to one another: therefore
turn away your eyes from one another humane frailties, and prize what you can
see of God in one another, and put a charitable construction upon words and
actions; and this is an excellent way to cherish conjugal love, and prevent
dissentions between you.

2. Stir up that most in one another into exercises which is best, and stir not
up that which is worst. Avoid that which will move your corruptions to violent
operations; use such actions as may provoke one another unto love and good
works, and then the good that is in you will most appear, and the evil will be
as buried. There is some uncleanness in the best on Earth, and if you will be
daily stirring the filth, no wonder if you have the annoyance, and for that you
may thank your selves. Draw out the fragrancy of that which is good and
delectable in one another, and do not by your imprudence or peevishness stir up
the worst, and then you will find that the most faulty of you will appear more
amiable to you, and then conjugal love will be increased, and strife prevented.

3. Make not one another froward by froward carriages one to another: behave
your selves to one another in all gentleness and mildness of Spirit. A mild
Christian is an healing person, who is skilful to cure the Diseases of the
mind, and very instrumental to preserve love and unity. A mild Christian is
loving in all carriages, and Love will cause Love as Fire kindles Fire; and
the stronger your love is to one another, the better agreement there will be
one with another.

4. Take much delight in the love, company and converse of each other, this is
the way to perpetuate conjugal love to each other; there is nothing that a
persons heart is so inordinately set upon as delight, yet the lawful delight
allowed them by God they can turn into disdain: the delight that would entangle
persons in sin, and turn them from their duty, and from God, is that which is
forbidden them, but this is a delight that is helpful to you in your duty, and
would keep you from sin. When Husband and Wife take pleasure in one another, it
uniteth them in duty, and helps them with ease to do the work that relates to
each other, and bear their burdens. Avoid therefore all things that may
represent you unpleasant and unlovely to each other, and use all lawful means
to cherish complacency and delight. All unseemly carriage and foolish speech
which favor of contempt must be shunned, as temptations which would hinder you
from that love, pleasure and content which Husband and Wife should have in one
another. This is the way to preserve conjugal love, and restrain from anger.

5. To preserve conjugal love between each other, be faithful in rendering all
due conjugal respects to each other, that the ends of lawful marriage may not
be neglected: The neglect of those duties, as it is a sin forbidden of God, so
it breeds a contempt of each other, as it may be a means of provoking one
another to sin, so it does abundantly destroy love to each other. Read what the
Apostle says in 1 Cor. 7.23. 4, 5. It is good for a man not to touch a woman;
nevertheless, to avoid fornication, let every man have his own Wife, and every
Woman her own Husband. Let the Husband render unto the Wife due benevolence,
and likewise also the Wife unto the Husband. The Wife has not power over her
own body, but the Husband: likewise also the Husband has not power over his
own body, but the Wife. Defraud you not one another, except it be with consent
for a time, that ye may give your selves to Fasting and Prayer, and come
together again, that Satan tempt you not for your incontinency. Therefore
those persons live contrary to the nature of their Relation, who withdraw from
one another in this respect: and a faithful discharge of these conjugal duties,
does very much establish love to each other, and very much prevent anger and
discord.

6. Beware you do not neglect the worship of God in your families, for if in
your families you give not God so much service as he requires, he will permit
you to withdraw respects from each other; and this God will do, because you
neglect to pay the respects that you owe to him. Faithfulness and delight in
Gods service is the way to make you faithful to, and to delight in each other.
When any breaches do arise between you, consider whether you have not neglected
Family Worship, for God expects if you will have him bless you with a permanent
love to each other, that you and your house do serve him. This is the way to
procure Gods blessing on you and yours, and preserve peace and constant
friendship between you, and to restrain you from doing any thing in passion,
roughness, and sowerness of spirit.

7. If thou art an Husband that read this subject, do thou so unite
authority and love, that neither of them be omitted or concealed, but let both
be exercised and maintained. Love must not be exercised so imprudently, as to
destroy the exercise of Authority; and Authority must not be exercised so
mysteriously, as to destroy the exercise of Love. As thy Love must be a
governing Love, so thy Commands must be all loving Commands. Lose not thy
Authority, for that will but disable thee from doing the office of an Husband
to a Wife, or of a Master to thy Servants: yet it must not be maintained by
fierceness and cruelty, because not consistent with conjugal love. For there is
no case of inequality so great, in which conjugal Love is not to be exercised.
Observe but this rule, and Love will grow exceedingly between thee and thy Wife.

8. If thou art a Wife, and would preserve fervent conjugal love between
thee and thy Husband, live in a voluntary obedience and subjection to him, 1
Pet. 3.1. Col. 3.18. Ephesians. 5.22. If his softness or yieldingness cause him to
relinquish his Authority, and for peace he is fain to let thee have thy will,
yet remember that it is God that has appointed him to be thy Head and
Governor; and thou having chosen him as such, thou must carry it toward him
in a submissive, and not in a ruling and masterly way, and do not deceive thy
self to think it enough to give the bare title of Government to thy Husband,
when yet thou will in all things have th^ne own will, for this is but mockery,
and not obedience; and self-willedness is contrary to subjection and obedience.
Now a neglect of giving due subjection to thy Husband, and thy usurping
authority over him, and behaving thy self insolently and imperiously toward
him, does cause conjugal love to decay, and cause a breach of friendship and
peace between thee and thy Husband. But an humble, submissive and obedient
carriage of thy self to thy Husband, does increase love between you, and keep
you both in a moderate, calm and quiet frame of spirit.

9. As thou art a Wife, so honor thy Husband according to his superiority,
behave not thy self toward him with irreverence and contempt in titles,
speeches, or behavior. If the worth of his person deserves not Honor, yet
his place deserves it, Ephesians. 5.33. And the Wife see that she reverence her
Husband; that is, that she inwardly acknowledge that degree of Honor which God
has put upon him, 1 Cor. 11.3. and give evident testimonies of thy inward
esteem in words, actions, and whole carriage, 1 Pet 3.6. especially in thy
lothness to offend him. That Wife that cares not what contempt she casts upon
her Husband, will not preserve conjugal love long. Nothing more distasts an
Husband, than to be slighted and despised by one that is bound to honor and
reverence him: Indeed it begets great distractions between them: But if thou
desire a continuation of conjugal love, if ever thou desire to prevent
anger and furious passi^n in thy self or Husband, and as ever thou desire
peace to be kept between thy self and Husband, do not affront him with contempt
of his superiority.

10. As thou art a Wife, if thou have a desire to maintain conjugal love
between thy self and Husband, and prevent discord between you, then live in a
cheerful contentedness with thy condition, take heed of a froward, impatient,
and murmuring spirit. It is a continual burden to a man to have an impatient
and discontented Wife. Many a man can bear great afflictions, that yet is not
able to bear his Wifes impatiency. It must needs trouble him to hear his Wife
vexing, fretting, and murmuring at the Works and Providence of God; t^ hear
her night and day complaining and speaking distrustfully, and to see her live
disquietly, is far heavier than any affliction; for thereby she refuses to
submit to the will of God, and is not willing that God should choose her
conditions for her, but is dissatisfied with Gods dealings with her. O then! as
thou desire to prevent the decay of conjugal love, if thou will prevent the
disturbing by self with angry passions, as thou desire to live in peace and
quietness, strive to keep a cheerful spirit under all thy disappointments,
submit to the will of God under all his dispensations, beware of muttering, and
manifesting discontent when Gods Providence do not suit thy humor. Thus thou
see the way to preserve conjugal love. Follow those directions, that you may
walk sweetly and lovingly together. If you had more love one to another, you
would have less discord between one another, and you would not be so soon angry
one with another. Where passion is violent, love is weak. Were your love
stronger, your angry passions would be-weaker. You cannot carry it frowardly to
one whom you dearly love. You can have but little esteem of that person that
you are angry with upon every trifle. Indeed that woman that carries it
imperiously and furiously toward her Husband, had never any real love for him,
she married him before she loved him. O then! put an high price upon the
quietness of your spirits, and be not easily deprived of the sweetness of it.
Do not let your frowardness, caused by a defect of love to each other, destroy
your calmness and serenity of spirit for a trifle. Where conjugal love is
defective, the Husband and Wife never knew what the sweetness of a quiet, meek
and patient spirit meant. O then! keep warm your conjugal love, that will make
you prize a quiet spirit at an high rate, and be willing to suffer much for it,
and follow after it, because there is so much good in it. Love will make great
crosses and provocations easy to be born. Do then nothing that may occasion a
decay of love between you.

3. If you would prevent the occasions of wrath and discord, you must mortify
your pride, which is the cause of anger and impatiency. A proud and contentious
spirit always go together. You that are Wives are most subject to this sin.
Your Pride will make you turbulent and unquiet with your Husbands, and
contentious with all your Neighbors. Your frowardness, anger and discontent,
are the only effects of the height of your Spirits. Except you can (as the
Apostle advises, Col. 3.12.) put on humblene^s of mind, you will never have
meekness of spirit: for proud spirits are usually fiery spirits; but humility
is patient, and does not aggravate injuries. If then you would keep a quiet
frame of Spirit, free from anger and impatiency, be sure that you keep an
humbled Soul, that over-valueth not it self. Such as think meanly of
themselves, think meanly of all that is said or done against them; but such as
magnify themselves, do magnify their Provocations. Pride is the most
impatient sin; it is the Devils bellows to kindle peoples corruptions, and set
the hearts of near Relations and whole Families in a flame: for that without
mortifying of Pride there is no possibility of preventing anger, impatiency,
and hot contests between Husband and Wife. That party that is proud will take
every thing amiss that is spoken or done by the other. It Is humbleness of mind
in Husband or Wife that will keep all things quiet between them: therefore I
shall endeavor to give some Directions to help you to mortify the pride of
your hearts.

1. Labor to set the excellency of the grace of Humility before your Souls,
and (...) the beauty and excellency of this Grace, and by being convinced of
the excellency of this grace, you will abhor the pride of your hearts, and come
to be adorned with humility. None so submissive to the will of God; none so
contented in the condition that God puts them; none so prevalent in Prayer,
none so quiet, and free from disturbances; none so serviceable to God; none
receive more grace and favor from God, than humble Souls: None do more
patiently bear crosses, and imitate Christ, than humble Souls: None so thankful
for mercies as such as are sensible of their unworthiness of mercies. O how
beautiful does humility make a Soul! O then, how desirous should all be to be
clothed with humility! This would preserve peace and unity, and endeared love
between Husband and Wife. For this would prevent your giving offense to each
other, or taking offense at each other. If you were convinced of the excellency
of this grace, you would be fond of no other excellency, you would not think
better of your selves than others, you would not boast of what you have, but be
humbled for what you want. If you did not ever-value your selves for some
seeming worth or excellency that you apprehend to be in you, you would not so
much storm at every thing that opposes you.

2. Press much after a clearer knowledge and fuller discovery of God. The more
you do converse with God, the more humble you will be, and the more will the
pride of your hearts be mortified. If you consider Gods infinite glorious
perfections, and the immensity and infinite greatness of God, what a distance
there is between God and You, it must needs make you have a mean esteem of your
selves. When you compare your selves with God, you are nothing, yea, less than
nothing. Did you see more of the power, more of the sovereignty, more of the
holiness of God in Himself, and more of his goodness to You, you would have no
heart to exalt your self, but rather abhor your selves. The Prophet Isaiah,
cap. 6.5. cries out, He was undone, because such a polluted creature as he was
had seen the King, the Lord of Hosts: His bodily eyes had seen the signs of his
presence, and the eyes of his Soul were so over-prest with the present weight
of his Glory, that in this his frail condition he could not bear it, but cries
out, He was undone. As he had never seen so much of God before, so he was never
so deeply humbled before; he never cried out before, I am undone; which word
impliet^ the greatest sense of his own vileness, nothingness, and wretchedness.
The true reason why people at any time carry it so high with God, that they
have a good opinion of themselves, is, because their notions and apprehensions
of God are so infinitely below him. Did they know God more, how would they fear
before him, and stand as persons astonished at the presence of his Majesty! It
is peoples darkness about God which emboldens them beyond their bounds, or the
line of Creatures: and the reason why carnal persons and hypocrites carry it so
stoutly before God, is, because they know not God aright; They may b^ast of
their knowledge, when they know nothing as they ought, 1 Cor. 8.2. Persons
never see how imperfect they are, till they see themselves in the light of Gods
Perfection: when they duly see themselves in that Glass, they greatly abhor
themselves, because they see no beauty nor comeliness in themselves, for they
cannot but see much deformity in themselves, when they behold the Beauty and
Glory of God. As when we behold that Beauty, we shall abhor our selves for our
deformities and defilements, so we shall be daily mending and cleansing our
selves from them. That sight of God Job had, cap. 42.5, 6. humbled him so
deeply, as to work in himself abhorrency: But now mine eye sees thee,
wherefore I abhor my self.

1. An abhorrency of a sinful self, or loathing of self for sin and evil done,
Ezekiel 36.31.

2. It signifies an abhorrency of righteous self, or a loathing our selves in
the good, yea, even in the best that we have done, Isa. 64.6. So that a truly
humble Soul abhors his righteousness, as never to trust in it at all. This
the Apostle says, Philip. 3 7, 8 Self righteousness is Gold, and to be
embraced in conversation; but it is Dung, and to be abhorred in justification.
An humble Soul does abhor self-righteousness, because he is convinced that
self-righteousness is a weak and imperfect thing even in sanctification:
therefore he is so far from boasting of it, or trusting to it, that he has a
kind of abhorrency of it, that as to justification he looks on it as
abominable. And as he abhors it because it is unfit and incompetent in it self
for justification, so also because it is utterly inconsistent with the tenor of
the Gospel, wherein God has removed all man's Righteousness, how pure soever it
may be, from that use, and directed us to look only to the Righteousness of
Christ for that use, which the Apostle calls, the Righteousness of God, Romans
10.3. because it is that which the Wisdom of God the Father has provided for
us, and which the Worthiness of God the Son has wrought and procured for us.
Pardon this digression, I have reason for what I do. O then! would you get your
pride mortified, that begets and feeds your angry passions? endeavor after
fuller manifestations of God, seriously consider God as revealed in his Word,
converse more with God, get more acquaintance with God, know and consider how
much God is above, and the meaner you will be in your own eyes, the fuller
discoveries you have of God, the more sensible you will be of your own
unworthiness, and the more calmness will you have in your own spirits, and the
more able you will be to resist provocations unto anger. We have no cause to
wonder to see persons in the world that do not know God, to have bold and
presumptious spirits, and have their spirits lifted up in vanity. But it is a
wonder that a Soul that ever had any sight of God should have any rising of
spirit, that any sinful heights of spirit should be in that Soul that knows
what an infinite God he is to deal with. O converse much with God, and then you
will be humble Souls! That Soul that never goes from duty without experiencing
communion with God, is very humble, and nothing has that excellency in it, as
that which comes from conversing with God, and upon the sight of his excellency.

3. Consider that the more you see and know your selves, the more you shall be
abased, and lie low in your selves. A right knowledge of your selves is that
which should bring your hearts low. Do but seriously consider what you are in
your selves, what abundance of filth and vileness there is in your selves, and
you will not have any high thoughts of your selves. O then study your selves
more, converse with your selves, and endeavor to know your selves more, and
that noxious wind of ostentation by which proud persons are vainly pu^^t up in
their fleshly minds, will be let out and avoided. Let every proud person
consider what he is, let the question be put to his or her own Soul thus. Who
am I? or what am I, that I should have a proud thought? shall dust and ashes,
shall one that is but a shadow, a vapor, but as grass, a flower of the field,
and in his best estate altogether vanity, be pr^ud? O consider, whatever thou
art as to this world, thou can not be long what thou art; in thy highest
perfections attainable in this world, thou art very mutable, and the higher
thou art, the more mutable thou art, and what have thou to be proud of? Shall
perish^ng things be proud things? will thou be lif^ed ^p^ with what thou have,
which as (...) the w^rld) is of ^o little being, as thou can ha^lly be said
to be? Consider all these things, which are as fuel and occasions of thy pri^e:
Thou must shortly give an account for them to God, and the more thou ha^^
received in any kind whatsoever, the stricter will thy account be, for thy
Acc^unt will be proportionable to what thy R^ceipt is. Luke 12.48. To
whomsoever much is given, of him shall much be required. Consider what thou art
by Nature, and whiles ^n thy unconverted state thou were a Child of Wrath, as
bad as the basest and vilest wretch in the world, thou were full of sin, the
seeds of all kind of sin; there is no s^n in Hell it self, but the seeds of it
were in thy heart; thy heart and life was full of sin, all the faculties of thy
Soul were full of sin, all the members of thy body were instruments of sin, thy
Soul and Body was polluted and loathsome, and in that condition thou were
succourless and helpless; thou could never deliver thy self, thou were
wandering from God, and would have wandered eter^a^ly, if God had not looked
upon thee in mercy: There was such a breach made between God and thy Soul that
had all the Angels n Heaven, or Creatures in the world, laid down their lives
for thee, thou could not by their deaths have helped to make up that breach.
Look back to this condition, and thou will see cause enough to be low in thine
own eyes. Consider what thou might now have been, if the Lord had taken
advantage against thee: Thou art now in a comfortable condition, thou now
come among the people of God into the assemblies of the Saints, but thou
might have been amongst the damned Reprobates, thou might have been
roaring in Hell, and sweltring under the wrath of the infinite God, and if God
has made any change in thy state, consider what trouble it put Heaven and
Earth unto, that the Son of God must take thy nature upon him, and die, and be
made a Curse, to deliver thee from that condition. Now these things should be
mighty humbling considerations. Also consider what thou should be if God
should leave thee, though he has done great things for thee, showed thee
himself, Christ, the evil of sin, and, the excellency of eternal life, yet, for
all this, if God should but leave thee to thy self for one quarter of an hour,
Oh! if God should but withdraw his Spirit from thee one moment, thou would
depart from him, and lose all that thou have, and be brought into as miserable
a condition as ever thou were, thou would be plunged into the depth of all
evil. O certainly serious considerations of these things will very much subdue
the pride of thy heart, and keep down the risings of thy Spirit! O then in the
midst of thy fullness do thou think of thy emptiness, and in the mid^^ of thy
perfections think of thy deficiencies. Think how much, and in how many things,
thou art wanting, when any thought of Pride arises, concerning what thou do
enjoy, and wherein thou do abound. Indeed thy wantings being a great deal
more than thy aboundings, and thy imperfections more than thy perfections,
should be to thee a greater matter of humbling, than thy abounding or
perfection can be an occasion of Pride. Consider the deficiencies in thy self,
how low thou art in knowledge, how low in grace, how much thou art behind
others, how much thou art below what thou might be; and have attained to,
both in the light of Knowledge, and in the strength of Grace, and this will
mightily humble thee; then consider how much thou come short of what others
have attained; as it is an excellent means to keep thy Soul from murmuring and
discontent, to consider how many are below thee in the enjoyments of the
comforts of this life, so it is an excellent means to keep thee from pride to
consider how many others are above thee in spiritual endowments so far above
thee, as thy knowledge is but ignorance compared with their knowledge, thy
strength weakness, thy faith unbelief, thy patience unquietness of spirit, thy
very fruitfulness barrenness compared with theirs. Such considerations are
mighty humbling considerations. Again, consider and reflect upon thine own
sinfulness. Thy defects in good may keep thy heart low, but thy abundance of
sinful evils may keep it much lower. Thou have yet a body of sin and death,
that thou carriest about with thee. O abundance of sin and corruption remains
in thy Soul! Then consider thy sin as acted and brought forth by thee, consider
thy unthankfulness to God, and all thy unworthy walkings before God,
notwithstanding what he has done for thee. Look on sin, and thy heart must
needs come down. The remembrance of sin abiding in thee, and acted by thee, is
an excellent means to put a stop to the further a ^tings, as of all other sins,
so of this sin of Pride also. The reason why thou art so proud of thy self, is,
because thou art so art so ignorant of thy self. Did thou know thine own
ignorance and misunderstandings, did thou know all those abominations that
are in thy heart, what earthly-mindedness, what inordinate Creature-love, what
passions, what envy lie there; did thou know how deceitful and false thy
heart is toward God, thy self, and others, such knowledge would make thee
strike sail, and come lower, and make thee abhor thy self exceedingly: Did
thou once know thy self aright, what a frail, blind, and sinful Creature thou
art, how humble and heavenly would thou be! Did thou rightly know that
thou art a Creature, it would cause thee to live more like a new Creature.
Did thou remember that thou art but a Creature, the work of Gods hand, this
would keep thee low and humble; but did thou know what a sinful polluted
Creature thou art, thou would soon come not only to a lower estimate, but an
utter abhorrency of thy self. Thou do over-think thy self, because thou do
not know thy self: Thou do over-rate thy self, because thou do not rightly
understand thy self. O then, endeavor to understand thy self better; and
endeavor to make use of those considerations that I have here hinted. This is
the way to make thee sensible of thine own nothingness: This is the way to
mortify thy pride, and keep thee humble; and if thou were more humble, thou
would be more peaceable with thy Wife or Husband.

4. Be much in the meditation of Christ's humbling and abasing himself for thee.
What can kill pride, if the humblings of Christ do not? How may thou school
and chastise thy proud Soul with the remembrance of Christ in his abasements!
What! was Christ an humble Christ, and shall I be a proud Christian? was he an
humble Master, and shall I be a proud Disciple? Did Christ empty himself, and
make himself of no Reputation, and shall I, that am but emptiness, be lifted up
with a Reputation of my self, or with a Reputation that others have of me? Did
Christ abuse himself to the form of a Servant, and shall I lift up my self as
if I did reign as a King? Christ humbled himself, and became obedient to death,
even the death of the Cross, and what have I to glory in but the Cross of
Christ? Gal. 6.14. O then, if thou have any thing to be proud of, it is the
Cross of Christ. Think then often and much of the humblings of Christ, and then
thou will think of thy self as a mere nothing: This is the most effectual means
through the Spirit to bring down the swellings of thy heart, and to make thee
truly humble. And thus I have ended what I have to say in directing thee how to
get thy pride mortified and thy spirit humbled. O then, if thou would be
restrained from sinful anger, and if ever thou would have any quiet in thine
own spirit, and carry it peaceably and quietly to thy Husband or to thy Wife,
endeavor to be of a more lowly spirit, and to be clothed with humility. As
long as thou do nourish thy proud humor, thou will fall out with thy nearest
Relation for every trifle, but a lowly spirit does its utmost to preserve peace
and unity. Such a one is so tender of others, as that he or she is not willing
to grieve any one in the world, much less an Husband or a Wife. Therefore the
Apostle says, Philip. 2.3. Let nothing be done through strife and vainglory,
but in lowliness of mind let each esteem others better than themselves. The
lust of vainglory, whereby a person endeavors more to gain esteem from men,
than to honor God, is the mother of contention and strife, and a great enemy
to union and peace; and here the Apostle prescribes humility as an Antidote
against strife and contention, and a sovereign mean for attaining unto and
entertaining of union and peace. But where pride is predominant, men and women
walk so, as that they care not to give content to any body but themselves in
the Family; they must have all the content, and no body else be pleased.
Certainly an humble Spirit is much freer from angry passions than any other,
because as an humble person is not willing to give offense to any, so is not
ready to take offense from others: for it is pride of spirit to be ready to
take offense from others upon every trifle, and by this means persons prove to
be very burdensome to others. The ground of a proud persons taking offense is
this, because they think that every body must say as they say, and do as they
do, else they cry out that they are always opposed, and because they think
their own judgments best, and such a thing is better, therefore others must do
it, and if they do not, then they are lofty, then they are proud and stout, and
break out into unseemly speeches, be inflamed with passion, evidencing that
they are under the tyranny of their pride. So that there is no preventing of
anger and contention between Husband and Wife, without the mortification of
their Pride.

4. Another direction to prevent si^ful anger and hot contests between Husband
and Wife, is, that thou do consider that God is merciful and gracious, slow
to anger, and abundant in kindness, Exodus 34.6. And as he is not easily
provoked to anger, so being provoked, his anger lasts not long; for he will
not always chide, nor keep his anger for ever, Psalm. 103. 8, 9. The Lord with
much lenity suffers the vessels ordained to destruction: how long did he
suffer the old world! how loath was he to strike^ if in and hundred and twenty
years he could have reclaimed them, he would have forborne them, 1 Pet. 3.20.
The measure of his grace and mercy toward us is daily, boundless, and
exceeding all measure: He forgiveth us every moment much more than we can
possibly be wronged of men; yea, he forgiveth that person that injureth us,
much more than we can forgive him. O then, if thou will evidence thy self to be
a Child of God, must thou not labor to express his Virtues? This is that the
Apostle exhorts, Col. 3.12, 13. Put on therefore as the elect of God, holy and
beloved, bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
long-suffering, forbearing one another: If any man have a quarrel against any,
even as Christ forgave you, even so do ye. He recommendeth the practice of
meekness and long-suffering; which consists in bearing with, and pardoning of
even real injuries done by others, and persuadeth to it from Christ's example in
pardoning us. The example of God and Christ is a most convincing pattern for
exciting us to pardon and forgive on another, if we consider either the
greatness of those wrongs which he pardons, Isa. 1.18. or our baseness who do
injure him, Isa. 40.17, 22. or his omnipotency to right himself of the wrongs
done unto him, Mat. 10.28. Do thou, O Husband, or O Wife, stand in need of
forgiveness, and will thou not forgive thy Husband or thy Wife? shall God
forgive thee infinite sins, and will thou not pass by one offense? do th^n
stand in deed of a sea of mercy for the washing away thy many foul offenses,
and will thou not let one drop fall upon thy Husband or thy Wife, to forbear or
forgive in trifling wrongs? Certainly if Husbands and Wives would but seriously
consider these things, it would make all quarrellings and contentions between
them to cease. O what little cause have thou then to manifest a furious spirit
against thy Husband or thy Wife for every trifle, seeing God does not deal
furiously with thee for great offenses! O that these considerations might
prevent Husbands and Wives raging against, and falling out one with another for
the time to come!

5. If thou would keep thy spirit quiet, and free from furious passions,
when any thing is done by thy Husband or thy Wife that is contrary to thy mind,
and does much displease, look up to the hand of God, and acknowledge the
Providence of God, without which not the least grief or injury could befall
thee; for even the least is a portion of that Cup which the hand of God
reaches out to thee to drink of. Job looked not at the Sabeans and Thieves
that took away his Goods, but at the hand of God: The Lord has taken away,
blessed be his name, Job 1.21, 22. He was satisfied that God willed that in
righteousness and justice, which they acted with so much cruelty and injustice.
David's looking up to God when Shimei cursed him, quieted his spirit, and
restrained his anger. So in Psalm. 39.9. I was dumb, and opened not my mouth, O
Lord, because thou did it. He does neither manifest forwardness nor
discontent, because he took notice of the hand of God. Joseph did not vent his
passion against his Brethren for selling him to the Ishmeelites, but kept
himself in a calm frame of spirit, by considering this, it was God that sent me
hither. A godly man cannot be angry at the doing or speaking of that which
pleases God to order the speaking or doing of, because he knows he is bound to
submit to the will of God. And thy only observing of the person that does in
any way displease thee, and not considering that God has an hand in all things
that befall thee, is the cause that thou art so often transported with furious
passions. An observation that God has an hand in all things that befall thee,
is as water to quench the inflammation of thy angry passions. This persuasion,
That God sees cause for all the wrongs that thou do suffer, is many ways
forceable to move thee unto patience. For, 1. If thou do look to the hand of
God in those things that distaste thee, it will constrain thee to confess that
all thy chastisements are just, far less than thy sins have deserved; for
indeed all the opposition that thou have from thy Husband or thy Wife, is in
some measure a rebuke of God against some miscarriage of thine. And God in
permitting thee to be exercised with such things as do very much distaste thy
spirit, does do thee no wrong, because it is not commensurate to the merit of
thy sin. For indeed such crosses and provocations as thou do meet with from
thy Husband or thy Wife, are but light to a gracious heart; and if not so light
to thee as to others, yet but momentory: but thy sins have deserved infinite
and eternal punishments. If therefore the Lord use those earthly rods to
correct thy sins, thou should rather admire his mercy, than be angry at so
gentle chastisements. If thou did but consider, that the hand of God is in
every thing whereby thy Husband or thy Wife displeases thee, thou would see
that the manner of the Lords dealing with thee is tender and compassionate.
Psalm. 25.10. All the ways of the Lord are Mercy and Truth, to them that fear
him, and keep his Testimonies. When thou deservest to be cut down root and
branch, and cast into unquenchable fire, he does only lop and prune thee, to
make thee more fruitful: Therefore, if the matter be well weighted, thou have
more cause to be thankful, than to be offended Consider with thy self, when any
word is spoken, or any act done, by thy Husband, or by thy Wife, that has a
tendency to discompose thee, and say, It is the will of God to afflict me in my
Wife, or in my Husband: O but this is not the full desert of my sin, this is
not Hell, I deserve severer dealings from God than these, and this will
suppress thine anger that it break not out. 3. Consider when thou do meet
with any matter of provocation from thy Husband or thy Wife, that God in his
infinite Wisdom will dispose of every thing for thy good, if thou do love
God. Romans 8.28. Why then should thou vex thy self with anger, seeing God
will turn the injuries, wrongs, crossings, and slightings of thy Husband or thy
Wife into blessings. Therefore when any wrong is offered thee which thou can
not by any just and lawful means avoid. Do thou say with our Savior Christ,
John 18.11. Should I not drink of the Cup that my Father has provided for me?
should I be angry with the Cup, because the Physic is bitter; or with the hand
whereby it is conveyed to me? My Heavenly Father corrects me for my good and
amendment, I will not therefore be angry with whom I am beaten, but rather look
to the principal hand that lays the chastisement upon me, and the happy fruit
that brings with it; and thus thou may keep down the risings of thine anger,
when thy Husband or thy Wife, does distaste thee. 1. If thou did observe the
hand of God in any contradiction that thou have from thy Husband or Wife, which
might make thee angry, thou would acknowledge that the present course that
God takes with thee to be best; for that is always best, which is ordered by
God, who is infinitely good, and in all his dispensations is communicating of
some good one way or other to his Creatures. As God is most wise, so his
prescriptions are most safe and healthful. Now, (2.) there is good cause why
thou should cease to be angry for crosses, wrongs and injuries, for
otherwise thou will be angry with Gods disposing of his Providence, resist
thine own profit, and choose rather to please thy pallat, though to thy greater
torment aftewards, than to preserve thy health and peace. O then say to thy
self, Has God an hand in permitting my Wife to show me such disrespect, or in
permitting my Husband to be unkind to me? Is it then my fretting or raging
against my Husband or my Wife, an evidence that I am displeased with God for
permitting such an act. When thou art vexed that thou art related to such an
one as an Husband, thou art offended with Gods appointment. And when thou do
wish that thou had never been related to him as thy Husband, thou do in
truth desire God to break thy Relation to him by his death: but know that God
seldom gratifies the desires of such humoursom persons, and commonly those that
long for the death of another, do die first themselves Such considerations as
these well settled on thy heart, cannot but quiet and pacify thy Soul in the
midst of manifold provocations.

6. I thou would keep peace and amity between thy self and Husband, or
between thy self and Wife, turn thine anger upon thy self; not to tear thy
self, but to consider and reprove thy self for thine own miscarriages: a just
indignation against the sin of thine own Soul restrains carnal anger from
breaking forth against another: For whosoever is zealous against the errors and
disorders of his or her own life, shall not find time to jar and contend with
others for petty injuries and wrongs. Experience shows, that the greatest
heat abroad is accompanied with the least at home. A true sight of thine own
faults will show thee so much cause to be displeased with thy self, that thou will have little leisure, and less cause, to be displeased with thy Husband or
with thy Wife. Thou think thy self ill dealt with by thy Husband, but if
thou considerest thine own sins, thou will find that thou have dealt worse with
God, than thy Husband has dealt with thee; and this is an excellent means to
prevent thy being angry with thy Husband, and make thee angry with thy self. My
Husband has offended me, and I have offended God; God forbears manifesting
anger against me, and why should not I forbear mine anger against my Husband? O
then, when thou have received any seeming injuries from thy. Husband before
thou do let forth thine anger against him, ask thine own conscience, Am I
clear from offering the like injuries, or greater, to my Husband? and how many
times have I offended God much more? If thou would thus speak to thine own
conscience in the presence of God, thou would not be so easily incited to
anger, seeing thou thy self do many things that need pardon. And thy greater
faults might serve to excuse those that are less in thy Husband, if thou
would but look upon them: for thou could not without blushing be angry
with those faults in thy Husband, for which thou shall need to crave pardon thy
self. If thou did truly judge that by thy sins committed against God, thou
have deserved not only contumelies and wrongs, but also the eternal death of
thy Body and Soul, thou could not be easily provoked to anger upon every
trifling occasion, nor think it any great disparagement to endure lesser
injuries, seeing thou have deserved greater.

7. If thou would suppress thine anger, and live in a sweet harmony and
peace with thy Husband or with thy Wife, endeavor to get thy heart more
desirous of, and affected with spiritual and heavenly things, that thou may
have thy conversation in Heaven, and have thy heart always in a spiritual
frame. Such a conversation, and such a frame of spirit, will make thee tread
under-feet all vain and transitory things, which concern this life, because the
Treasures that the Faith of an heavenly Christian discovers, are more excellent
and durable than any thing this world affords: the preferment it longs
after, is not of an earthly nature; the riches it coveteth, are above, as for
the things of this life, an heavenly Christian does not desire much, delights
not in much, and consequently is not much disturbed with unquietness, nor
incensed with anger when crossed in them, for by living in Heaven by Faith, a
persons spirit is well ballasted, and made steady, and Heaven is above all
storms and tempests, and the more thou do converse there, the less stormy is
thy heart; thou would not then trouble thy self needlessly, or be concerned
for every domestic trifle, and if any thing miscarry thou will not so much
look to the means, as to the supreme cause, the Providence of God: O, if thou
were an heavenly Christian, thou would be lifted up far above these
sublunary things, and would not be afflicted when crossed in them. Consider
then when thou art jarring and contending with thy Husband or with thy Wife,
when thou art venting thy self in passion for every trifle, for every unadvised
word, for every unsuitable gesture, or for things that are no way sinful, thou
do evidence that thou art a stranger to an heavenly frame, thy heart is
drossy and earthly, thy heart is too much set upon the pleasing of thy humor,
and do prefer thine own will before GOD's will. If thou would be more free
from disturbances of spirit by earthly things, and by the carriages of thy
Husband or Wife, be more in the contemplation of heavenly things, than in the
vanity and emptiness of earthly things, and then thou will not think it much to
be crossed in things that are of so little worth, and in things that thou do
so little value. Why art thou so much for the pleasing thy self in the things
of this life? will thou be contented with such things for thy portion? If thou
do look for an Inheritance in Heaven, do not disquiet thy self with every
trifle that thou do meet with in thy way thither. If thou do think to enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven without passing through many tribulations, thou art
mistaken: Do not then vex thy self with those things that are usual attendants
of a journey to Heaven. Consider with thy self thus; Why shall I fret my self
with a little opposition, or contradiction from my Husband or Wife now? It will
not be long before I come home to my Fathers house, where I shall be above all
opposition; and shall not I bear a little disquiet for an eternal rest? O! were
thou an heavenly Christian, thou would live in more sweetness, amity,
content, and satisfaction with thy Husband or with thy Wife.

8. If thou would keep down the risings of thine anger against thy Husband
or thy Wife, be exceedingly humbled for thy former breakings out into anger.
They that resolve to set upon a duty, and are not humbled for their former
neglect of it, are like to do little good by their resolutions: Physicians use
to purge out choler by bitter things, and those that would tame wild Creatures
keep them in the dark: So humiliation for the distemper of passion is a special
means to purge out passion, and to tame and quiet the Spirits of men and women.
It may be thou have been overcome with passion in froward fits, and thou have
seen the inconveniency of them, and it may be afterward thou had thoughts,
O, this is ill, and thou hop'st thou shall do so no more: But although thou
think that thou will do so no more, yet except thou be humbled for what thou
have done, thou will fall to it again upon the next occasion. O then, thou that
art often and soon angry with thy Husband or thy Wife for trifles, I appeal to
thy conscience, Can thou affirm that thou have been under deep humiliation
for thy former passions? have thou smarted in spirit for thy former anger? have
thou mourned and been afflicted for thy former hastiness of spirit, and
causeless ventings of thy passion? what can thou answer to this question? O
never expect to be restrained from future miscarriages, except thou art truly
humbled for former miscarriages of this nature. O therefore, thou that have
such a froward spirit, O get alone, and apply the salt tear of humiliation unto
the choler of thy heart, and see what this will do. Humiliation for that which
is past, will be a special help to keep thee from barking, snarling at, and
biting thy Husband or thy Wife. I use such expressions, because angry persons
are very dogged in their carriages one to another.

9. If thou would live in peace and quietness with thy Husband or thy Wife,
thou should be offended with nothing in thy Husband or in thy Wife, but what
God is offended with. Such of thy Husbands actions as do displease God, should
displease thee. What authority or right have thou to be offended with thy
Husband, when God is not? or what reason can give why thou should be
distasted with any of his actions that God is not? Yea, certainly thou ought
not to find fault with that in thy Husband, which God does not. If you would
both of you more faithfully endeavor to conform to Gods will, your wills would
be more united, and there would not be such differences between you. But if
your wills do oppose Gods will, it is no wonder if there be heats and contests
between you. Sin is the greatest makebate in the world: if you are not afraid
of displeasing God, you will not be afraid of displeasing one another. O then,
if thou could so far govern thine own spirit as to take offense at nothing
in thy Husband but what is sinful, thou would not be so angry with him as
thou art. The Apostle says, Ephesians. 4.26. Be angry, and sin not: or, be angry
with nothing, or for nothing, but what is sinful; for I find the learned
Interpreters rendering the meaning thus: Be not angry with the Person of one
another, but his Sin, and be angry as much against that sin in thy self, as
another. Observe^ but this rule, and it will prevent abundance of contention
that usually arises between such near Relations.

10. If thou would prevent the raging of thine anger against thy Husband or
thy Wife, take heed of the first beginnings of thy passion. We know when a fire
is begun in an house, we do not stay quenching of it, till the house be all on
h flame; but if there be but a little fire kindled in any part of the house, if
it be but a smoke, thou will say where is it, and thou art not quiet till thou
have found it out: so it should be when passions begin to rise, thy Soul begins
to be on fire, and thou should be as much for quenching it at first rising,
as thou would when thou see fire break out in thine house at the very
first. Perhaps a Dish of water may quench that now, that if thou stay'st till
half an hour hence, it may take hold of such solid matter, as that it passes
all thy labor and industry to quench, and makes a pitiful ruin. So if thou
observest thy choler from the beginning, seeing it begin to fume or kindle for
some light or small offense, it is easy for thee to suppress it, and stay the
course; but if it be once settled, and begin to swell, and thou stir it up, and
inflame it, it will be hard for thee afterward to quench it. A small spark, if
nourished, will increase to a furious flame; so there have been most fearful
distempers of passion from very small beginnings, which have broken out into
most fearful outrages. How often is it in a Family, that a little spark does
kindle a great fire. At first there may be but a word spoken amiss, that might
easily have been past over; but that word begets another, and another, and so
grows to a most hideous flame. Sometimes it is between the nearest Relations,
as Husband and Wife, that a contention does arise between them for a very small
matter, sometimes for the very gesture of the hand, or some spots on the
apparel. Oh! a very slight ground for distaste, and it argues very little or no
Grace in that heart that is displeased with such inconsiderable things with
which God is not displeased at all. Sometimes it begins in the very
countenance: the Wife thinks that her Husband looks not upon her with so
pleasant a countenance as he was wont to do, and from thence she begins to have
surmizes and suspicions, and then comes to make misinterpretations, and from
thence there comes a strangeness, and from being strange she begins to hearken
to tales that are carried to her against her Husband, and to believe them, and
to aggravate them: Then she begins to speak some hard words against him, and
then to do him some ill offices, then break out into violent and eminent
passions and actings against him, reviling him, casting false aspersions upon
him, endeavoring to represent him to others as the vilest wretch living,
laying such things to his charge as he is altogether innocent of, and then to
deny all conjugal respects to him, and then wish she had never been related to
him; and some go so far, as to use indirect means to extinguish the Relation.
Others grow fond of other men, and so come to have unlawful intimacy with them:
whereas had there been care taken by her at the beginning, all this might have
been prevented, as the wise man says, Prove. 17.14. The beginning of strife is
as one lets out water; therefore leave off contention before it be meddled
with: or before the breach be made so great as not to be repaired. So then when
thy heart is first set on fire with anger, do thou presently endeavor to
quench it with the water of the Spirit; for after thou art thoroughly inflamed,
it will be too late to apply any remedy till the flame has spent it self. But
thou may say, I fall into anger many times when I never meant it, and it
has overcome me before I am aware: how therefore should I prevent that which I
did not foresee, or free my self from it when it violently over-ruleth me? To
which I answer,

1. If thou do carefully watch over thy self, thou shall easily perceive when
thou art inclining to anger; for there are many signs which go before a storm,
and many symptoms which discover Diseases before persons do fall into them: So
thou may easily discern in thy self many notes and signs of this furious and
tempestuous storm, and raging fever of mind, unjust anger, before it break
forth and show it self. Much pain, swelling of heart, discontent, and
bitterness of spirit appear before it.

2. Anger does not presently, as soon as entered into thy heart, overruled thee,
before (by increase of fuel) it be grown to a greater height than it had at
first. The most furious anger attaineth not its full strength at first
entrance, but by little and little increases like a flame, by taking hold of
new matter; and the fire in the beginning thereof is easily suppressed: First,
by not yielding obedience to an angry passion, nor bolieving her in any thing
that she says or does, to prompt thee to furious actions. Therefore if thou
observest thy self like to be transported with choler, endeavor to retain thy
self, and strive to moderate thy passions, and divert the infirmity that seeks
to seize upon thee: give no ear to any incitements unto anger.

3. If thou would timely subdue thy anger, withdraw the food wherewith it is
nourished. The most furious anger will soon be mitigated, if it be not
continually nourished with a new supply of matter: the fuel of anger is the
multiplying of words. As nothing sooner than the wind causes a small spark to
burst out into a furious flame. so nothing sooner does cause a small spark of
anger to increase into a furious raging flame, than the wind of words. Do not
then think to disgorge thy stomach of anger by vomiting out spleen in bitter
words, for they only aggravate things for the continuing of anger. Do thou
therefore use most modesty. Mildness of speech and lowness of voice does so
withdraw nourishment from the fire of anger, that it will soon of it self be
extinguished.

4. If thine anger begin to arise, make some delay before thou speak or do
any thing. Give not place to wrath, let it not have vent by sudden or unadvised
words. Anger smothered will languish, but let out will flame into further
mischief. It Is some cure of passion to delay it; therefore Solomon says, Prove.
19.11. The discretion of a man deferreth his anger, and it is wisdom so to do;
so it is thine honor, it is the glory of a man to pass by a transgression, not
to take distaste at every offense. Therefore it is good to check thy precipitant
motions by delay, and due recourse to reason, lest by following thy passion too
close, thou run thy self into great inconveniences. O by thy quickness and
shortness of Spirit thou art transported into many indecencies, which dishonor
God, and wound thy conscience: therefore do what thou can to suppress thine
anger as soon as it does appear. If this course were taken by Husbands and
Wives, it would be an excellent means to prevent and suppress anger and discord
between them.

11. If thou would not be angry with thy Husband or thy Wife, take heed of
too much curiosity in observing every little thing or every trifle in thy
Husbands or Wifes words or actions: If thou would not be angry, thou must
past over a great many things and take no notice of them; thou must have a kind
of holy negligence of a great many things, and pass over, and see and not see,
and turn away thine ears from many things; as in Eccles. 7.21. Also take no
heed unto all words that are spoken. Many things that are spoken thou must let
pass unregarded, many times hard sayings, or ill speeches, vain and
undervaluing speeches, speeches spoken at random without occasion, without
consideration, and without any real detriment to us, must not be taken notice
of, to make them occasions of enmity and discord, or to break our own peace and
tranquillity. Thus Mr. Cotton on this wise. Therefore, I say, do not take notice
of hard or slight speeches spoken against thy self, or vain impertinent words
that do thee no personal prejudice. Paul took little notice of words spoken
against him. 1 Cor. 3.4. But with me it is a very small thing that I should be
judged of you. Never keep empty impertinent words in thy memory, for thy memory
is not to be filled with trash, and all occasions of enmity and discord should
be put out of thy mind; as in Levit. 19.18. When things done by thy Husband or
Wife are not of any consequence, rather let him or her know that thou do not
take notice of them. But if thou will be taking notice of, or offended with
every thing that is done or spoken, it is impossible but there will be a great
deal of disturbance between thy self and Husband.

12. If thou have an angry Husband or an angry Wife, and yet after all the
means thou have used to prevent his or her angry passions; yet if he or she
remain froward and contentious upon every trifle, then observe this rule, That
thou resolve to walk before thy Husband or thy Wife in a convincing way. Thy
Wife is of a troublesome Spirit, and wrests every word that thou speak, and
gives thee railing and reviling speeches; thou can not in any way meddle with
her, but thou do foul thy fingers: yet resolve with thy self that thou will
not render her reviling for reviling; and though she be froward, yet thou will
not deal frowardly with her. Say within thy self, I will do what I can to
convince her in a constant way of Good, of Holiness, Justice and Righteousness;
it may be I may melt her heart that way: I am resolved whatever evil she does
to me, I will do good to her. Here is a peaceable Spirit indeed, and this is
the way to keep peace between thy self and Wife. When means have been tried to
quiet her Spirit, yet it cannot be done; yet walk convincingly before her, and
a convincing conversation in a few months may prevail with her heart more than
all the means that thou have used. Take but this course, and thou will find in
some time that the bitterness of her Spirit will be allayed. O then wait on the
Lord, keep his way, walk strictly and inoffensively, and commit thy cause to
God, and in time all the stirs and clamours of thy Wife will vanish away, and
come to nothing, and she will be at last convinced, and say that thou art a
faithful Servant of God.

13. If thou would live in peace with thy Husband or thy Wife, be much in
secret prayer, earnestly importuning God that he would mortify thy angry
passions. Prayer is an excellent spiritual help to prevent frowardness and
discord between Husband and Wife. Thou may cry out of the contentions that
are between thy self and Husband, of the bitterness of his Spirit, and that he
is an offense to thee: but I appeal this day in the name of God to thy
conscience, what time have thou spent in secret prayer to make thy moan to God,
to complain to God in secret between God and thy Soul? Perhaps when thou art in
more public Prayer, thou may pray God to heal the breaches betwixt thee and
thy Husband, or thy Wife: but when thou have been in secret, have thou powered
out thy heart with earnest prayer, that God would find out means of
reconciliation. Say unto the Lord. There is a great distance between my self
and Wife, or between my self and Husband, and I find all means that I use
ineffectual to make up the breaches between us: But, Lord, thou know how to
still the rage of my Wifes spirit, thou know how to compose differences
between us. Do it, Lord, I humbly pray thee. Oh I pray thee, O gracious God, to
vouchsafe the assistance of thy Spirit to subdue mine anger, or my Wifes anger,
that both our affections may be so ruled and sanctified, that they being freed
from natural corruption, may be made fit and serviceable for the setting forth
of thy glory, and the mutual good, peace and comfort of each other, and the
furthering one another Salvation. This is the most excellent means to prevent
frowardness and contention between Husband and Wife; for it is only the water
of the Spirit, and the Shield of Faith, which is able to quench the fury of our
passions, of which Prayer is the chief means of obtaining, and then we shall
find that what cannot be done at all by our strength and skill, may be easily
done by Gods assistance and direction.

Thus, O Husband, and O Wife, I have given several directions how you may
prevent anger and discord between each other: And O that the Lord would give
you hearts to follow them. And therefore let me give you some arguments to
press you to use those helps and directions for the restraining and suppressing
your angry passions; and that very briefly.

1. Thou should take care to use means to suppress and prevent thy angry
passions, because the furiousness and disquiet of a persons spirit hinders that
person from Communion with God; it keeps him or her from intimacy with, and
comfortable enjoyments of God. As God forbids men, Prove. 22.24. to make any
friendship with an angry person, neither to go with a furious man, lest they
learn his ways, and receive destruction to their Souls. That is, avoid the
company of those who are angry and choleric, lest by a certain contagion they
poison thee with their passions. Indeed so will God withdraw from such as he
commands us to withdraw from, and should thou not watch against evil, that
will make thee to be without God in the world? It Is sad indeed to do any thing
to cause the withdrawments of God; for as soon as God departs from a Soul, the
Devil visits it: therefore it is said, That a giving way to wrath, is a giving
place to the Devil. Oh what a miserable exchange is this! and what a sad loss
is it to lose God! and when God is driven away by the excess of angry passions,
there is a loss of that sweet and holy disposition of Soul which ought to be in
every Christian, and is in every one that walks in peace and fellowship with
God, in true peace of conscience. As there is required reconciliation with God,
and a sense of his love, so likewise a freedom from the hurry of boisterous
passions, and a calmness of spirit, which is a necessary qualification in the
subject capable to hold Communion with God, and receive the beams of his
favor. O consider this seriously, Do thou think it nothing to be without the
blessing of God? Alas! then thou losest Gods protection and guidance in times
of danger, who then shall help thee in thy streights, or direct thee in times
of darkness and doubtings, when the Original of all Power and the Fountain of
all Wisdom has left thee? Indeed if thou let thy angry passions to rage upon
every trifling occasion, thou do not only provoke God to be gone from thee,
but to be gone in distaste. It Is sad when God conceals himself but a little
while from a poor Soul, and clouds his presence a little while. A gracious Soul
cannot bear a little withholding of God from it, when he lets out no
intimations of displeasure: but how terrible are the withdrawments of God, when
he withdraws in high displeasure, and thou know not whether he will ever
return again in mercy, or not? And it is said in 2 Samuel 22.27. And with the
froward thou will show thy self unsavory. The Hebrew has it, With the perverse
thou behavest thy self as one turned about; and that the very thoughts of God
will be unsavory and unpleasant thoughts to them. Angry froward persons shall
not have the least discovery or sense of Gods love while they are in their
fits, nor much at other times, because an angry froward frame of spirit is an
abomination to the Lord, Prove. 3.32. and chap. 8.13. and 11.20. 'As frowardness
causes strife between the nearest Relations, so it makes contention between
God and the Soul. The angry froward person opposes God, and God opposes that
person: So that hence it appears that thou have abundant cause and reason to
use all possible means to restrain and suppress thy angry passions, because
they hinder thee from enjoying the divine Presence, and the hlessed discoveries
of divine Favor.

2. Thou should take great care to restrain and suppress thy angry passions,
and hasty frowardness of spirit, because as they prevail, thy actings are as
contrary to true grace, as any thing almost that thou can think of, and truly
there may be a great deal of suspicion whether thou have true Grace, or no. I
conceive there may be some Analogy between a Nazarite and a gracious Soul. It
is said in Numb. 6.2. That the Nazarites were to separate themselves unto the
Lord. They were to be separated from the ordinary course of that they might
more freely and wholly dedicate themselves to the service of God, and to a more
strict and pure course of serving God, than other men used; and indeed God
confined them to strict rules: They were to abstain from any thing that did
belong to the Vine; hereby also signifying a full and perfect renouncing all
worldly pleasures, or any thing tending thoreunto; intimating, that they were
not only to abstain from all evil, but all appearances of evil, 1 These. 5.22.
All the outward Ceremonies enjoined them, were but Types of inward Holiness. I
take notice of one thing enjoined them, which is most especially to my purpose,
which is, That they should drink no Vinegar of Wine, or any other strong
Liquor; that was to signify, that they must not be of Vinegar Spirits, of
sower and eager Spirits, but of of quiet Spirits, of loving and meek Spirits.
Now all the Saints of God they are Nazarites. As Christ was a Nazarite, so all
that are Christ's are Nazarites separated from others to be the Lords people.
The Lord separates the godly man for himself, as in Psalm. 4.3 But know that the
Lord has set apart him that is godly for himself; and they must not be of
harsh and hot Spirits, but should be adorned with this lovely amiable grace of
meekness: so that a hasty, froward and passionate Spirit is directly opposite
to a meek, patient, and quie^ Spirit; and if there be any grace in a furious
person, it is raked up under a great deal of ashes of corruption, that it is
not easily discerned. Now the opposition that anger and frowardness bears to
Grace appears,

1. If thou do consider what it is that Grace does in the heart when it first
comes, the first thing is to show unto the Soul its own vileness, its own
wretchedness and baseness by sin, and the danger that it is in through sin. Now
a froward passionate heart is very contrary to the sight of its own baseness
and vileness; for thou can not see thy self to be a base, vile, sinful worm,
and yet bear nothing that is against thee, but presently thy heart is in a
flame if any thing does cross thee; for thou could not be so angry, if thou
did not think thy self too great and too good to be crossed.

2. When Grace comes into the heart, it brings the heart into subjection unto
God, and unto another rule than it walked by before. That Is a principal work of
Grace, to subdue the heart of a sinner unto God. The hearts of sinners are
naturally stout, and rebellious against God, and goes on in a stubborn way,
till Grace comes, and lays them under; but a froward and passionate heart would
be indeed above God, and any of his rules. It cannot keep it self under, and
lie in subjection unto rule; and hence is the reason that froward and
passionate people use to have such expressions, I will, nay but I will, and I
care not, their hearts are subdued to the authority of God. But the heart that
is subdued to the Lord, bring it but a Scripture, and it yields presently; but
a froward Spirit is not so. How contrary then is frowardness to Grace? I might
instance in many other particulars, but I shall be too large then. O then, is
passion and frowardness so opposite to Grace? does it either hinder the working
of grace in the heart, or at least weaken, yea, smother grace, that it is
almost extinguished, though not totally, yet so as it is not easily discernable?
Do thou not then see great reason to use all means to mortify thy passions.

3. Thou should use thy utmost endeavors to mortify thy passions, and live
in peace with thy Husband or thy Wife, because thou do manifest a truly noble
and generous Spirit, if thou would pass by offenses without manifesting
anger and frowardness of Spirit. To this effect speaks Solomon, Prove. 19.11. It
is the Glory of a man to pass by a transgression; that is, not to manifest an
angry displeasure for an offense that another does him. And so we say when we
restrain our anger against another for any thing done amiss, I will pass you by
for this time, I will not take any severe notice of what you have done. O it is
an honorable thing to bridle anger when a person is offended, to wink at
smaller infirmities, and remit greater wrongs. Generous Spirits are (as it
were) impenetrable by offenses; yea, a Spirit truly elevated, a generous and
noble Soul, is always quiet, moderate, and grave, never suffering it self to be
transported with the violent motions of choler. Certainly a meek person has a
magnanimous and heroic Spirit. See what the wise man says in Prove. 16.32. He
that is slow to anger, is better than the mighty; and he that rules his
Spirit, than he that takes a City. He that overcomes himself, is stronger
than one that overcomes a City. Now it is a glorious thing for a Soldier to
overcome a City, but one that can overcome his own passion, is more valiant,
and has a more excellent Spirit, than one that overcomes a great City. And so
some Creatures that are more heroical, are more meek and gentle than others
are; The Lion is of a more generous Spirit than the Wolf is. The more
honorable any one is, the more he is of a peaceable disposition, and his anger
is sooner pacified. It is enough to fall down before a Lion, a Lion is pacified
if you fall before him: but fot the Wolf and Tiger, and other baser Creatures,
they will tare those that fall down before them. Hence observe, such as are
soon moved to violent passions, that will not pass by a slight offense, but
will be furious for every trifle, they are of ignoble, base, sordid tempers, of
vile, wretched, and dunghill dispositions. O then, what care should thou take
to watch against the first risings of anger, and faithfully endeavor to
suppress thy violent passions when risen, to wink and connive at many offenses!
If ever thou will evidence a noble Spirit, it is thy true glory so to do; but
it is thy ignominy and disgrace to be of a Gunpowder-Spirit, to be transported
into a flame of fury by every little spark of distaste given. Nay, a furious
Spirit is a devilish Spirit, and therefore the Devils are very often called
Furies. O let this consideration stir thee up to endeavor after meekness,
calmness, and peaceablenss of Spirit.

4. Thou should be careful to abstain from anger and frowardness of Spirit,
because there is nothing that thou can do in anger, but thou may do it
better out of anger. Thou can have thy mind or thy will in nothing in anger,
but thou may have thy mind and will better out of an angry fit. And
wherefore then should thou be angry? Consider when thou have thine anger
stirring, what thou would do in thine anger. Thou may it say, I would
reprove my Wife or my Husband that has done amiss. I say, thou must reprove
without anger, thou must restore with a spirit of meekness, Gal. 6.1. There is
no recovering a fallen Relation from sin in a boisterous way. There are gentle
means, that are most influential. Thy reproof should be as Physic: thou do
not use to give Physic scalding hot. Thou may reprove thy Wife, Husband,
Child, or Servant, without anger, as well as with anger; and if thou would
give correction, thou may do it best without anger. If thou do correct in
anger, or reprove in anger, thy Servant or any other Relation will think it is
rather from thy fury than his fault that thou do it. Perhaps thou would
do some special service for God, and thou say that anger will quicken thee:
But James says, cap. 1.20. The wrath of man accomplisheth not the
righteousness of God. God will not be beholding to the wrath of man for any
thing. An Heathen could say, That Fortitude had no need of wrath, no need of
gall, bitterness and choler, but it may be well enough without it. Perhaps thou
would make thine Husband sensible of the wrong he had done thee: That thou
may do without anger. If he has wronged thee, show him the more respect and
kindness; this way thou shall make him sensible of the wrong he has done thee,
as well as any way in the world, that it will either melt his heart, or trouble
his Spirit, till he has made thee restitution, or confessed his fault. I say,
every thing can be better done in a calm and quiet frame, than in an angry fit;
for in thine anger thou can not sol well exercise thy reason as at another
time; for the fire of passion, when it is kindled, causes a great smoke to
come up to the Understanding and Judgment, and even puts out thy Reason. So
that is very great reason why thou should use all means to prevent and
suppress thine angry passions.

5. Thou should do thy utmost to refrain from anger, and attain meekness of
spirit, because meekness is that grace whereby men and women come to have fair
weather all the year long. It is a comfortable thing to have fair weather to
continue but two or three weeks together, and thou know that rainy weather
and dropping weather is very tedious and irksom to us, and we say, It is pity
fair weather should do any hurt: But when Husband and Wife are both meek, there
is fair weather in that Family every day, all the week long. But where they are
froward and passionate, there is rainy weather all the week long. Solomon sets
out passion and frowardness by a continual dropping, Prove. 19.13. And the
contentions of a Wife are a continual dropping; her scolding and brawling may
occasion much sadness, trouble, and hurt in the Family. And so in Prove. 27.15.
A continual dropping in a very rainy day, and a contentious woman, are alike.
The Hebrew renders it, A continual dropping in a day of a great shower of rain,
and a Wife of brawlings and contentions, are alike. Where the rain drops into
an house, it is very troublesome; but when the Sun comes in at the window, there
is a sweet and pleasant dwelling, that is comfortable. Many times thou know
that the Sun rises very fair in the morning, but it rains mightily before
night: So in many Families, though there is a great deal of quietness in the
morning, and there seems to be a great deal of love between Husband and Wife,
yet what a storm is there before night! and the reason is, because a passionate
person looks on that as a great crime, which a meek person can see no evil at
all in. Where there is meekness, there fair weather continues always. Now, though
passion and frowardness be uncomely amongst all, and meekness is lovely in all.
But passion is more uncomely, and meekness is more sweet and lovely between Man
and Wife: they should walk sweetly and lovingly together when God by such an
Ordinance of his has so united them in such a way of Communion as they are
united. Such God has joined by the holy Ordinance of Marriage, that indeed is
a greater bond than the bond of Nature; for a man and woman must forsake all
Relations, and cleave to one another, and of twain become one flesh. And should
they not be of one mind? O then, how careful should Husband and Wife be to
avoid those angry passions that hinder that sweetness, comfort, and delight
which they might enjoy, were they of patient and meek Spirits! Meekness of
Spirit makes them very careful in discharging mutual duties to each other, and
that keeps fair weather between them: but passion makes them oppose the
commands of the Gospel, and that makes tempestuous weather between them. The
Scripture says, Wives, see that you reverence your Husbands: when then thou
do provoke thy Husband, and speak it to him in a froward way, I appeal to thy
conscience, Do thou reverence thy Husband? Thou may say, he does not
deserve it. Whether he deserve it or no, thou art to reverence him; thou must
reverence him in words, gestures, actions, and in thy very heart, and not give
him insolent and reflecting language, or like Zepora, Exodus 24 25. call him a
bloody Husband. God has made Marriage a union for communion, for love, for
help, for peace, for delight; and thou do by thy angry passions do what in
thee lies to frustrate the very Ordinance of God. Know, that God will not bear
it at thine hands, to frustrate that great Ordinance of his. Let the Wife then
consider the Husband as one that God commands that she should reverence and
obey in all things that are not sinful; and let the Husband consider the Wife
as the weaker Vessel, and bear with her sinless infirmities: This is the way to
keep fair and comfortable weather always between them. But the Wife may come
under the first head of Inferiors. God has put her in an inferior condition,
and therefore frowardness and passion is very uncomely in her. O then, as ever
you would prevent tempestuous weather between you, as ever you would maintain
love, comfort, and quietness between you, strive to refrain from angry
passions, endeavor to get your selves adorned with the grace of meekness.
Remember still you are one flesh, and therefore be no more offended with the
words and failings of each other, than you would if they were your own, for you
cannot be free from failings till you have attained full perfection, which is
not to be gotten in this life. Fall out no more with your Husbands or with your
Wives for their words or faulty actions, than you would with your selves for
your own faults, or your own words of common and ordinary discourse. This will
allow you such an anger or displeasure against a fault, as tends to heal it,
but not such as tends to vex and fester the diseased part. This will turn
anger into compassion, and a speedy diligence for the cure. Consider this, I
pray, and avoid all occasions of wrath and falling out: Do not do any thing to
contract a discontented peevish habit; do not in your impatiency wrangle and
disquiet one another, speak not reproachful and provoking words, talking hotly
does blow the fire, and increase the flame. Be but silent, and you will sooner
return to your serenity and peace. Some calm and condescending words of reason
may stop the torrent, and revive the reason which passion had overcome. Foul
words, as they tend to disgrace and displease one another, so they produce many
evil effects. After Thunder comes Rain. Do not then cast on Oil or Fuel, by
answering one another provokingly or sharply, or by multiplying words, or by
answering wrath with wrath. You must endeavor to molifie, and not exasperate
one another. O that arguments might prevail with you to take this course! O
then in how much sweetness, amity, and peace might you live with one another!

6. Consider that no excuse or pretense whatsoever can justify your being
angry with one another. Thou may say perhaps, O Husband, or O wife, I am of
a very hasty and choleric nature, and cannot leave it, but shall be soon angry
when occasion is given. This vain excuse is no better than Adam's fig leaves to
hide the nakedness of sin, and will not justify thy furious passions; for if
thou art of a passionate nature, thou have a nature that is abominable to God.
Prove. 3.32. For the froward is an abomination to the Lord; that is, which God
esteems and accounts an abomination; for when the heart is froward, the
person devises mischief continually; and sows discord, cap. 6.14. This
frowardness in the heart, as it intimates perverseness of the heart, so also a
passionate nature: So none are more obstinate and perverse than angry persons,
and are the causers of great dissentions and disagreements; and therefore such
God hates, because he loves transgression that loves strife, cap. 17.19. An
angry nature is always brawling, and contention is the original cause of many
sins, which the contentious person by his actings seems to love: therefore do
not plead thy nature by way of excuse. If thy nature be choleric, it is not
the nature that God created thee in, for God made man upright, after his own
Image, like himself, who is slow to anger. It is the glory of God to be slow to
wrath, and thy froward nature is not Gods nature, it is but thy original
corruption. Thou art froward, and thy original corruption is in the strength of
it. Is this any lessening of the evil of the root, because it has corrupt
branches? or will it lessen the evil of a Child, because it had a wicked
Father? And therefore thou art not to excuse one sin with another, but rather
earnestly labor that this pollution may be washed away with the water of Gods
Spirit, who by his Grace does reform Nature. If thou art of such a wicked
disposition that thou can not but be angry, thy sin is the more heinous, and
thy state the more dangerous; for rooted sickness is worse than new-bred, an
old sore than a green wound. The fins that are set most deep in nature, are
most hateful and dangerous: therefore thy being of a choleric nature should be
thy humiliation, not thy excuse; for if thou have nothing but nature, nothing
to overcome thy nature, thou shall never go to Heaven; for every man and woman
in the world, that has the least degree of grace, is made partaker of the
Divine Nature, Now the Divine Nature, that prevails reigns, and rules in the
heart; therefore to plead Nature to excuse Anger, is as much as to say, I am
yet the child of wrath, therefore I cannot cease to be angry. O thou may
say, I am flesh and blood, and how can I be able to be of such a quiet and meek
spirit when I am wronged? indeed it is very difficult. It Is true, all good
things are difficult, and meekness would not be so excellent a grace, were it
not difficult to attain: but it is difficult only to those that have no
gracious principles in them. An endeavor to conquer thy passions may seem
difficult at first; but try once or twice, and thou wi^t find so much sweetness
in thy spirit, that it will not appear so difficult, but find this yoke of
Christ very easy: and though thou art flesh and blood, yet thou have Reason to
rule flesh and blood. If thou art but flesh and blood, shall vile flesh and
blood take so much upon it, as (if it be crossed in any thing) to fly in the
face of God, and revile thy dearest Relation, and cross Gods will. It Is sad
that flesh and blood should do this. And I tell thee, if ever thou be saved,
thou must be more than flesh and blood, for flesh and blood shall never enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven. But thou may say, I am greatly provoked, I
should live quietly with my Husband, and in my Family, except I be provoked;
and it is his fault who provokes me, rather than mine who am angry. I answer,
There was no need indeed of the grace of meekness, if there was nothing to
provoke thee. The Devil's meek when he is pleased: but for thee to say that thou
art meek, whereas thou art meek only when thou art pleased, that is no
meekness. Now is the time for thee to exercise meekness when thou art provoked,
to forbear angry passions when thou art crossed. To say thou art froward only
when thou art provoked, is as much as to say, I am not froward, but when God
calls upon me to exercise meekness: For whenever thou art provoked, that is the
proper time to exercise meekness. And it is a sign of a very carnal heart, to
put off thy sin to the temptation; that when thou have done evil, thou say,
Such an one did provoke me to it, or this wicked Devil did tempt me to it:
whereas 'twere only thy corruptions that made thee furious; whereas those that
are truly gracious, and are of tender spirits, are ready to charge themselves
to the uttermost for any evil. They judge that all the evil of their lives does
arise from the wicked corruptions of their hearts: but a carnal heart will
charge temptation with all, and would free himself, and discharge his
corruptions from that which does arise wholly from corruption, and from no
other principle. So that it is more of inward corruption than outward
provocation that thou art so passionate. A little occasion may provoke thee to
passion, but a great matter will not provoke thee to good works. Why should any
thing provoke thee do thy self a mischief? Thou can not provoke a Beast (with
all the blows thou can give him) to leap into the fire: and why art thou so
easily provoked to mischief thy self in the fire of passion? O consider how
thou do provoke God continually, and thou should labor to be as God is.
He is not so angry upon all thy provocations as to fly upon thee: He can bear,
though thou provoke him, and why should thou not bear when thy
Fellow Creatures provoke thee? Perhaps thou may say, There was never any one
so abused as I am; never any one had such an Husband as I have. I answer,
Certainly this is the pride of thy heart to think or say so. A proud heart
being great it self, makes every little affliction, every little cross seem
great. By reason of thy pride of heart thou think it a great matter to
suffer any little thing. Had thou an humble heart, thou would not think it
a great matter to suffer, and know that God is more abused every day, than thou
art, or ever could be. An humble heart says, Does the Lord send such
afflictions upon me more than on any other? The Lord sees I have a more vile
heart than any other, and therefore I deserve more afflictions than another.
And certainly if thou art more froward than others, therefore thou do meet
with more evil than others, because thou art a froward person. The Lord sees
thy heart so vile in thy frowardness, that thou tendrest not Gods glory,
therefore he tenders not thy good. There is no person in the world that does
meet with so much occasion of vexation, as a froward person does: and if thou
did but pass a right judgment, thou would find that others suffer as much
as thou do, nay more, yea, it may be they suffer more by thee than thou do
by them: thou art more an afflicter to them, than they are to thee. So that it
is clear that no pretense or excuse that thou can make can justify thy angry
passions with thy Husband or with thy Wife, but still thy passions will be
sinful. And should thou not then do thy utmost to restrain and suppress thy
violent passions? should not such a consideration make thee cease contending
with so near a Relation as an Husband or a Wife? Pray then mind the directions
given thee to prevent thy furiousness of spirit.

7. Thou should be very watchful against thy anger and frowardness of
spirit, because nothing in the world does more discover thy shame and folly,
than thy angry passion. Therefore it is observable how many times the Scripture
couples anger and folly together, and makes passionate people the foolishest
people in the world. When thou art provoked, thy passion does discover what is
in thee, which is not discovered until then. Whatever shameful thing is in
thee, will quickly discover it self in thine anger. Indeed thy carriage is so
foul and vile in thy passion, that thy nearest Relation is ashamed of thee.
Certainly one would wonder to see the shameful carriage of some men and women
in their passions. I have heard of a Wife that fell out with her Husband for a
trifle, only for the moving of his hand in ordinary discourse; and because by
her bitter provoking speeches she could not move him to the like furiousness of
spirit, she told him, He was of a gangrene spirit, and that he was of so sordid
and base dunghill spirit, that nothing would move him; and fretted the more
exceedingly, that he did bear her railings so patiently: For he knowing that
the Scripture forbad him to render reviling for reviling, bore all her
provocations with admirable patience. Also I have heard of a Wife, when her
Husband would not do such things as she would have him, (which he did judge not
convenient to be done) she would pluck him by the hair, sometimes strike him on
the face, sometimes on the head. At diverse other times in her rage (which she
would be often in, she knew not why her self,) she would give him such
insulting, bitter, reviling, reproachful, disdainful, and imperious speeches,
as are not fit to be mentioned. Both these persons I knew my self, and do know
what I have written to be true; and I have mentioned this instance to show the
shameful acts that persons are guilty of in their passions. Some Wives are so
proud and passionate, that nothing but a submissive obedience to their insolent
and unreasonable commands will gratify them; and if their Husbands think it
too much to be subject to the commands of an inferior, they shall not be
permitted to live in quiet. And I know one Wife that told her Husband, for not
gratifying her perverse humor, that it was no matter if he had been buried
alive, rather than have married her. And also I have known an Husband who in
his furious passion said, that he did wish the Devil would come and fetch away
his Wife, who was a serious, holy, and meek woman. And should thou not be
ashamed of thy passions, that make thee guilty of such shameful carriages?
Indeed in such shameful carriages passionate people discover the greatest folly
imaginable. O then it is great folly to give way to anger, therefore Solomon in
Eccles. 7.9. says, that anger rests in the bosom of fools; and in Prove.
12.16. A fools wrath is presently known, but a prudent man covers his shame.
A fools wrath is known by his words, actions, and gestures; his wrath is vented
in rash and ill-advised speeches, which hurt his Neighbor, whereby the folly
of the angry person is discovered, and so discovers his or her shame. But a
prudent man (that is, a meek man) by his forbearing to be angry covers his
shame. And in Prove. 14.17. it is said, He that is soon angry deals foolishly:
and in ver. 29. He that is slow to wrath, is of great understanding: but he
that is hasty of spirit, exalts folly. The meek person has much
understanding, which he discovers by this, in that he knows how to bear
wrongs and injuries patiently, and can beware of doing any thing that does
truly oppose Honor and Virtue: But he or she that is hasty of mind, or short
of spirit, that is soon angry, exalts folly; that is, brings his folly to
open light, to be seen of all men* forasmuch as he or she does in his or her
anger those things which cannot consist with Honor and Virtue. Thus
continually the Scripture does befool passionate people, and it is to check
froward people, because there are none that think themselves wiser than angry
people do, especially in the time of their fit. Certainly, because angry
persons discover great folly in opening their shame, they make evident what
filthy trash was closetted up in their hearts, which was not known before.
Alas! of what ridiculous, rude, and indiscreet actions are angry persons daily
guilty of; they will reverence no Superior, respect no Equal, but contemn all
that oppose their humor. Their chief work is railing and vilifying others much
superior to themselves in real worth: They are exceeding talkative, all others
must hold their peace but themselves: and in the multitude of their words there
wants not folly. But in all these insolent, imperious, and insulting
carriages of a Wife to her Husband, where is the reverence and observance that
God requires her to give him? for reverence is due to a man as he is an
Husband; to the bad Husband, as well as to the good; to the poor Husband, as
well as to the rich: So that no defect of the Husband can excuse the Wife from
giving him due reverence and subjection to his superiority. So that all the
irreverent speeches she gives her Husband in her passion, are but the
discoveries of her shame and folly.

I have now ended my Arguments and Motives which I have laid before you to
persuade you to use the directions that I have here given to prevent Wrath and
Discord between Husband and Wife. Pray then let those considerations influence
you to watch against your angry passions; do not allow your selves in that
which discovers so much of your shame and folly, that such near Relations by
their furoius carriages one to another should make themselves ridiculous to all
that know them, is very sad. You are one flesh, be of one spirit and one heart,
be faithful to discharge the duty you owe to one another. Be not too curious in
observing every look or gesture of one another. Wink at every thing that
crosses you, so long as it does not cross the will of God. Let each of you
keep in your own station. Let not the Wife look for superiority, when God has
appointed her subjection. Let her not be ambitious of teaching, when her place
is to be a learner. A cheerful subjection to Gods Ordinances, and a ready
delightful submission to Gods providential appointments, is an excellent means
to keep peace, and prevent contentions between Man and Wife. It is a great
occasion of strife, when that party will prescribe rules to the other, that
ought to be ruled by the other. Do not discover your folly by your insolent
carriages one to another. Do not allow your passions, that will make you utter
such expressions that will prove your shame. Be willing to live in peace one
with another. And therefore be persuaded by the Arguments and Motives that I
have here given, to use the direction now laid before you, to prevent Wrath
and Discord between you.

Soli Deo Gloria.
FINIS.
THE APPENDIX.
SOme Wives plead in excuse of their froward carriages to their Husbands thus:
None ought to account my zeal for Gods glory in a smart reprehension of my
Husbands miscarriages, to be sinful anger; for I must not let my Husband alone
to dishonor God, because my not appearing for God when my Husband offends him,
will intimate an approbation of his sinful ways. I cannot be faithful to God,
except I do oppose him in such actions as I conceive are not good: and in this
respect I judge not my self blameworthy in contending with him. Is it not my
duty to reprove my Husband when he offends God, and deals injuriously with me?

Meeting with this Plea since I composed the foregoing Treatise, I have added
this following Answer, as an Appendix to the former discourse; which is, That I
do acknowledge that some endeavoars may be used by Wives to convince their
Husbands of their sins, and to reform their conversations. But by an
explanation of the nature of Reproof it will appear what method is proper to be
used by Wives to reclaim their Husbands from their disorderly walkings. -- To
Reprove in a strict sense denotes an authority in the Reprover over the
Reproved; for reproving is an act of authority, which a person has by virtue
of Office or Relation; as in Tit. 2.15. Rebuke with all authority: In this
sense a superior is not to be reproved. Therefore the Apostle says, 1 Timothy
5.1. Rebuke not an Elder. I understand it not only of the Aged, but of all
Superiors in Place and Dignity; a tart reprehension, or a direct reproof, is
not to be given them by Inferiors: they are to be dealt with as Fathers are to
be dealt with by their Children, they may be desired, but not rebuked. Entreat
them as a Father. -- Admonitions are given by such as are Equals of the same
Degree and Quality, of the same Ecclesiastical Corporation, or Christian
Society, which are either finding fault with each other for sins committed, or
persuading or exhorting unto duties which have been omitted: And I look on
admonitions to be of a more inferior quality than the rebukes which Superiors
give to their Inferiors; for although an admonition be given as an act of Duty,
yet not as an act of Authority, as the other is. But that way which I conceive
an Inferior may take to reclaim a Superior from sin, and yet not go out of
his place, or usurp authority which belongs not to him, is by an humble,
earnest, and respectful entreating the Superior to forbear his sinful acts,
which God has prohibited him to concern himself with, and to engage in those
Christian duties which God requires him to perform. So that I acknowledge that
there is a time when in a limited sense inferiors may use means to hinder
their superiors going on in a way of sin. Job. 31.13. Superiors are not above
instruction or humble advice, their authority does not give them a toleration
to persevere in sin, nor a liberty to trample their inferiors under their
feet. Though we are under our Superiors Power, yet we are not under their Lusts;
though we are to be governed by them, yet not to be despised by them. As we ought
to serve, so they ought to govern, in the fear of God; and Superiors
irregularities are to be hinted to them in an humble manner, and Superiors
ought to act as men accomptable to an Higher Power; and those which are above
others on Earth, are to be informed when they offend God in Heaven. He which is
Superior in one respect, is Inferior in another. The Husband which has
Dominion over his Wife, is under Gods Dominion. Though he is above his Wife, yet
he is not above Gods Law. Gods Law must oblige the Husband as well as the Wife;
and when the Husband breaks Gods Law, he may be lawfully told of it by his Wife
in a regular and humble manner, so that she does always manifest a reverence to
the superiority God has placed in her Husband.

But many Wives think that they are not at all inferior to their Husbands.
They conclude that they are equal with them in all things, because by the
Marriage-relation they become one flesh. Other Wives are not satisfied, except
their Husbands carry it toward them as persons subordinate to them, and in the
pride of their spirits speak to their Husbands in such masterly language as to
their Inferiors, and will revile their Husbands if they do not in every thing
subject themselves to their cross, perverse, and froward humors, and bear with
all their insolent carriages; and this they will do under pretense of reproving
their Husbands miscarriages; and they will be always contending with their
Husbands, if their Husbands will not submit to be in subjection to them,
whereby they seldom live in peace with each other.

In order to the reformation of this great disorder in Wives carriages to their
Husbands;

1. I shall endeavor to convince them that their Husbands have a right of
superiority over them.

2. I shall give some cautions to Wives to prevent their insulting over their
Husbands under a pretense of reproving their faults, that they may not presume
to exercise any kind of authority over them, that God requires them to be
subject unto, and therein acquaint them with the proper method God allows them
to take in admonishing their Husbands.

3. I shall direct them both how to carry themselves to those that are
subordinate to them both; for their proper carriage to their inferiors in
their Families will be a special help to preserve peace between them.

1. To prove the Husbands right of superiority over the Wife.

1. Consider, that the titles given the Husband in Scripture does prove his
superiority and the Wives subjection. The Husband is called the Wifes Lord, 1
Pet. 3.5, 6. Being in subjection to their own Husbands, even as Sarah obeyed
Abraham, calling him Lord. So in Genesis 18.12. He is her Master, Est. 1.17, 22.
Her Head, 1 Cor. 11.3. Her Guide, Prove. 2.17. She forsakes the guide of her
youth; which is meant of her Husband, whom she married in her youth, and whom
by marriage she received as the guide of her youth under God, who is to be her
guide both in youth and old age, and by forsaking the government of her Husband
in his commands, directions and counsels, she forgets the Covenant of God
made in marriage. All these expressions do evince the Husbands superiority and
the Wives subordination and orderly subjection.

2. The Wife was made after man, therefore she should not go before man. 1 Timothy
2.12, 13. Adam was first formed, then Eve; therefore she must not usurp
authority over the man; she must not be a Teacher, but a Learner in silence
with all subjection; Teaching and reproving is taking an authority upon her
which belongs not to her. The Woman was made of Man, 1 Cor. 11.8. she received
her being (under God) from man: now the Effect is ever less noble, and
inferior to the Cause. The woman was made for man, 1 Cor. 11.9. that which
serves to any end, is less than the end to which it serves. And the woman is
the glory of the man, 1 Cor. 11.7. as he has so excellent a Creature as a
Woman endued with reason, as himself, subject to him. Dominion in this case
being man's privilege, Genesis 3.16. Thy desire shall be to thy Husband, and he
shall rule over thee. The superiority that God has given man to enjoy, shall
he not enjoy it as God has given it. Ephesians. 5.22, 23, 24. Wives submit your
selves unto your own Husbands, as to the Lord. Some Wives are not convinced
that they owe this subjection to their Husbands as the Scripture requires, but
in truth every Wife owes it to her own Husband, though he comes short of others
in Knowledge, Wisdom, Education, Estate, and every other thing which does
deserve it. For the great and main duty which a Wife (as a Wife) ought to
learn, and so learn as to practice, is, to be subject to her Husband; and Paul
holds it forth as the sum of all other duties. And there is no Wife, whatever
be her Birth, Parts, Portion, Breeding, or any other Privilege, who is
exempted from this tie of subjection to her own Husband: The Law of Nature,
Gods Ordinance, and her own voluntary Covenant, binds her to it; and there is
not any Husband to whom this honor of subjection is not due; no personal
infirmities, frowardness of nature, no nor error in point of Religion, does
deprive him of it, provided her submission be in those things which are
consistent with her love to Christ. And the Wifes subjection ought to flow from
the conscience of, and respect to that state and dignity wherein God has
placed her Husband above her, which ought to engage her to reverence, and obey
him. For, as I said before, the Husband is the Head of the Wife, and this
subjection to the Husband ought to be in every thing ( Ephesians. 5.24.) which is
not forbidden in the word of God, though it cross the humor of the Wife, and
argue little discretion in the Husband that commands it.

3. Wives are obliged to be in subjection to their Husbands by their
Marriage-Covenants, wherein they have promised Obedience to their Husbands: and
Marriage-promises must be performed. Now, Obedience is an act of subjection,
and an evidence of inferiority: so that such Wives as are not willing to
consent to their Husbands superiority, are not willing to be faithful to their
own engagements. Indeed God will be very severe against such women as make no
conscience of observing their Marriage-covenant, for it is Gods Covenant made
in his name. God is the Author of it, as he is the Ordainer of that state of
Marriage: and it is made in Gods presence, so he is a witness to it. Mal. 2.14.
And this Covenant is Gods Covenant, because he will avenge the breach of it.
God will certainly severely avenge the quarrel of his Covenant, when men and
women are the only expressed parties in the Covenant; and God made Zedekiah
smart sorely for breaking his Covenant with the King of Babylon. Ezekiel. 17.16,
19. Zedekiah gave his band to confirm his Covenant made to the King of Babylon,
that he would be subject to him: so Wives give their hands to their Husbands in
Marriage, that they will be obedient to them: They cannot look upon their own
hands, and not remember how they were engaged. So that God swears, As sure as I
am God, you shall feel the weight of my displeasure for your perfideousness.
The King of Heaven does regard his Oath, and if the Lord once swear, he will
perform, and there shall be no escaping of what he has threatened. Indeed, as
I said before, Oaths and Covenants made with men are Divine things, and not to
be slighted. The Covenant that was made with an Heathenish King, and an
Idolater, God owns as made with himself, because his sacred and dreadful Name
was used therein: therefore God said, Mine Oath that he has despised, and
Covenant that he has broken. Violating of Covenants falsifying of promises,
and perfideous doings, are exceeding evil, and God will make such as violate
their own word exemplary to all the world, and they shall live in perpetual
infamy So if Wives forget the Covenant of their God made in Marriage, God will
remember their forgetfulness, and recompense their Perjury upon their own
heads; for every disobedient Wife is in a sense a perjured Wife, and if they
think to loose the bonds of this Oath, and Marriage-Covenant, they will find
and feel the blow of the Curse mentioned in Deuteronomy. 29.20, 21, 25. O what a
fearful fire and fury, what dreadful death and damnation, is here threatened by
the God of truth against them that break his Covenant! By which it is fully
evident, that it is the duty of Wives to manifest their subjection to their
Husbands, according to their Marriage-Covenant.

4. If Wives are not willing to subject themselves to the authority of their
Husbands, it is because they do not really love them as God commands them. Tit.
2.4, 5. That they may teach the young women to be sober, to love their
Husbands, etc. to be obedient to their own Husbands, that the word of God be
not blasphemed. God gives this injunction, that the Wifes love must proceed
from the obedience of the Scripture: And where the Wife loves her Husband in
sincerity, there will be an orderly subjection of the Wife to the superiority
of her Husband. When the Wife questions the Husbands right of superiority, she
has little love to his person; for Obedience is the evidence of love, and such
Wives will hononour their Husbands authority, who always look upon their
persons and actions through the spectacles of love. But the Wife does
practically disown her Husbands authority over her, that neglects to observe
the lawful commands of her Husband, or does oppose him in doing lawful actions,
or gives him imperious and insulting language. If a Wife does really love her
Husband, her yoke of subjection will not be grievous to her. As love to God
does exceedingly sweeten his service, and make it not only more acceptable to
him, but also more delightful to us, as the Apostle says, 1 John 5.3. So the
Wifes love to her Husband will abundantly sweeten her subjection to him. But if
a Wife refuses to give subjection to her Husband, and would be equal with him,
or superior to him, she loves him not at all. Let the Wife pretend what she
will for neglecting the manifestations of her love to her Husband, by
submission to his authority over her by Gods institution, as the want of
discretion, breeding, and other good qualities, which other Husbands have, or
had: I must tell such a Wife, That not the good disposition of Husbands, or
their excellent accomplishments, but the good pleasure of God, ought to be the
ground of Wives love to their Husbands, which they must evidence by an
observance of all their lawful injunctions, and then they will do them good and
not evil all the days of their lives, as in Prove. 31.12. By performing the
several duties of their places, by honoring their persons, and submitting to
their lawful pleasure. Some Wives murmur at the yoke of subjection, but truly
they have more cause to complain of their want of affection; for women that
love their Husbands will count their moderate commands, and whatsoever they do
for them, both easy and delightful. If then, O Wife, thou can say, That thou
have chosen thy Husband for thy Love, then love thy choice, and grudge not to
submit thy self to his authority. Now this being granted, That the Husband is
the Wifes superior, I shall give Wives those following cautions in admonishing
their Husbands of their sins and miscarriages.

1. Let Wives beware they do not pretend cause to reprove their Husbands out of
a desire to usurp that authority to themselves which is due to their Husbands.
Many think their Husbands deserve reproof for not carefully observing their
wills: They look for obedience in every thing from their Husbands, and think
them guilty of a great crime if they do in any wise neglect to gratify their
perverse humors. But I say, it is not the crossing of the Wifes pettish humor,
but Gods will, that deserves reproof. Some Wives account their Husbands denying
them the liberty of disposing all Family-concerns according to their own
pleasure, to be a crime that deserves a smart reproof: They must rule all
things, and manage all things themselves, or else the house will be too hot for
their Husbands to abide in. Such Husbands deserve to be pitied whose outward
beings by such Wives have been made as miserable as possible on this side Hell.
The true ground of many Wives exclamations against their Husbands is a conceit
that they do not rule enough, they think they are too much opposed in their
wills. O they cry out of such as vile Husbands as will not le^ them say what
they will, and do what they will. Many Women are noted for questioning and
quarrelling at their Husbands power, but few are noted for obeying their
Husbands pleasure. Therefore you Wives that may read this Treatise, consider
with your selves, whether you have not been offended with your Husbands, and
pretended cause to manifest your displeasure against your Husbands, because
your proud spirits are not willing to be in that subjection God has placed
you, and because you would exercise an authority above your places, and so will
pretend faults in your Husbands to justify your own presumptions reprehensions
of them, that so you might make them stoop to your humors; and if they do not,
they shall have no quiet in their Families. Indeed this is a very great evil in
Wives, and highly provoking to God, and they sin in reproving their Husbands on
such an account. Therefore I would caution Wives to beware that they do not
find fault with their Husbands upon such a ground: And to enforce this caution,
I pray observe, 1. That a commanding insulting Wife, who says to her Husband,
you shall do this, or you shall not do it, inverts the Order of Nature, as well
as that of the Creator. 2. That a Family is infamous where the Wife like
Jezabel rules all, and the Husband like Ahab lets her do what she list without
contradiction. Where the Wife gets the upper-hand of the Husband, the next
thing that is to be expected is an eclipse of the honor of that house. 3.
Consider if you pretend cause to reprove your Husbands because they would keep
you in subjection to them, according to Gods command, you do not make
conscience of rendering obedience to God. It Is not a sufficient excuse for a
Wife to say, He does not love me, therefore I will not obey him; for not the
Husbands affections to her, but her affection to God, must be her great motive
to subjection. If the Husband fails in his duty, the Wife suffers by it: but if
she fails in her duty to him, she sins in it; the former is a Cross to the
Wife, but the latter is a Curse to her. Indeed when women pretend reason to
reprove their Husbands because they do not willingly submit to their insulting
over them, they do provoke God exceedingly; for God does not in the least
approve of such fond foolish Husbands, who deliver up that dominion which God
has given them, and suffer their Wives to trample over it, and trample upon
it. In suffering themselves thus to be trampled upon, they suffer the Image and
Glory of God to be trampled upon; their submission to their Wives insulting is
not kindness but baseness, not humility but iniquity. He unmans himself, who
consents to be ruled by one whom he should rule, and he must expect to be
accountable for it to God. Therefore, I say, you that are Wives look well to
the ground that moves you to acquaint your Husband of any miscarriage, see that
it be not the effect of a proud insulting humor, out of a desire to exercise
dominion over them, nor the effect of a passionate, peevish humor, by way of
revenge, because your wills are crossed, or that your corrupt fancies are not
indulged.


2. Beware you do not chide your Husbands, instead of admonishing them, for, I
say, it is always unlawful for a Wife to chide her Husband at any time, for any
thing, for the person chiding, according to the nature of the act, takes
superiority over the party chided, whereby the Wife breaks Gods order, and
contradicts his Word, thereby showing only the sad effects of a furious spirit,
manifesting that fire of pride rages in her, which is always accompanied with
fire of contention. Therefore the Wife when she speaks to her Husband of
miscarriages, she must do it in the most humble manner that she can, she must
always do it by way of entreaty and humble desire. When you would admonish your
Husbands of their sins, or advise them about their spiritual estates, first beg
Gods direction in, and blessing on, what you are about to do, then in the
particular close, dealing with an Husband about the evil of his way, humbly,
meekly, and mildly ^^ll him, that such a particular practice is against such a
particular Scripture: Then entreat him humbly, persuade him affectionately,
beseech him earnestly, woe him as for your life, that if possible (through Gods
blessing) you prevail with him to alter his practice. But many women, instead
of taking this course, scold at their Husbands, speak harshly, frowardly, and
revilingly to them: Yet assuredly nothing more raises the passions of an
Husband, than the irreverent, rude, audacious carriage, and chiding language of
a Wife, whereby she usurps authority over him. Thus Ziporah carried it to her
Husband Moses, who was a man of God, the meekest man on earth, she gave him
harsh, chiding, and reviling language, for observing what God commanded, Exodus
4.25. Surely a bloody Husband thou art to me. Truly such Wives ^s presume to
chide their Husbands, are of an Ethiopian spirit. Chiding words are a great
offense to an Husband, and if continued by the Wife upon every trifling
occasion, will have a mighty tendency to abate affection. For such an
unbecoming carriage of a Wife, under a pretense of admonition, does but deny
reverence and subjection to the Husband; for if Wives tell their Husbands of
their faults in an insolent way, using hard and bitter words, and a sower
fretting countenance, they may provoke them, but not reform them Therefore, O
Wives, be not so arrogant as to chide your Husbands, who by their superiority
have right to chide you when you miscarry. And chiding can never be termed
admonishing, when it is done by an inferior to a superior, but rather an
arrogant insulting. Indeed when inferiors chide their superiors, they are not
like by so doing to effect a work of conviction on them, they may be
instrumental of raising their passions, but not of prevailing with them to
acknowledge their sins. Let not Wives then presume to chide their Husbands whom
they are bound humbly to entreat. But when they speak to their Husbands, or of
their Husbands, let it be with a great deal of respect.

3. Beware you do not ground your admonitions upon false interpretations of
your Husbands actions, and judging them to perform good actions from an evil
principle, to a sinful end. By this means many Wives have reviled and
reproached their Husbands exceedingly. This was Michals fault, she irreverently
rebuked David, or rather reviled him, for rejoicing before the Lord at the
bringing home of the Ark. She charge him for carrying of himself like a vain
fellow, undervaluing himself, and doing that which was beneath his quality,
doing as fools use to do when they are hired to make sport. David might seem to
some to be very tart in his reply to his Wife, in 2 Samuel 2.21. Inded David had
just cause to be thus sharp, not only because the flouts and insolences of a
Wife are most unsufferable, but especially because it was his Zeal and Devotion
in the service of God which she derided. I have heard of a woman that was so
vile as to censure her Husband, that when he had set a day apart to humble
himself before the Lord in the sense of his sin, she told him, (without any
thing done or said by him to raise her choler) That he had kept a Fast to the
Devil. And what is the reason that Michal and other Women thus misinterpret
their Husbands actions, and revile their persons, under a pretense of reproving
their faults? They did not enter into the conjugal relation purely out of love
to their persons: there was something else that influenced them thereunto,
which they were frustrated in, and so they do as Michal did, 1 Chronicles. 15.29.
she despised him in her heart. This is the great cause of women^ unbecoming
carriages to their Husbands, and indeed God will deal severely with such Wives,
as he did with Michal: She had no child until the day of her death. Because of
this wickedness, God adjudged her to perpetual barenness, which was a great
reproach at that time. Such as have their Husbands contemptible in their eyes,
God will make them contemtible in every eye: God will either by barenness
deprive them of having Children, or (that which is a greater affliction) let
them have weak and sickly children, which he will quickly take from them by
death or let their Children prove a scurge or curse to them. O Wives! you will
first charge your Husbands falsely with faults from a rash, envious and wicked
misinterpreting* their actions, and then pretend cause to reprove them, when
the fault you charge them with is of your own forging, Therefore, O Wives! you
must carefully beware that you do not charge your Husbands with any
miscarriages from your own malicious wresting of the sense of their words or
actions; for in this you offend God highly. There are few Wives but will
pretend reasons for finding fault with their Husbands, when they can evidence
none; and their contentions wranglings are the effects of putting false
constructions upon their words and actions, conceiting things to be otherwise
than in truth they are, and upon this ground they have presumed to carry it
irreverently to their Husbands. I say, they must take care of miscarrying in
this respect.

4. You must not presume to admonish your Husbands for any thing but that which
tends to destroy his Soul, or impoverish his Family: that is, for that which is
a dishonor to God, a breach of his Law, a straying from the Divine Rule, or a
neglect of the duty that God requires from them; or ( 2dly.) a wasting of their
Estates by misemploying or extravagantly consuming them, thereby not providing
for the necessaries of their families. For lesser matters than these you are
not to find fault with your Husbands at all: as, for gestures of the body, for
sometimes using the vulgar dialect of the Country in discourse, not keeping
their apparel in that excellent order as some do, or the fashion requires, for
not complementing, for not manifesting a fond carriage to you, for not telling
you every thing they are about to do before they act it, for not observing your
times for staying at home or going abroad, for discoursing with persons of an
inferior quality, you thinking it too much beneath them, some innocent actions
of the hand in talking, or such inconsiderable trifles that are not in their
own nature sinful. I say, such things you are not to take notice of in your
Husbands, nor manifest your selves angry with your Husbands for them. A truly
gracious Soul can very well bear with such trifles in an Husband without being
distasted with him, and such Wives as cannot do either evidence the weakness of
their grace, or their want of grace. But there are some Wives of such wrangling
spirits, as that they will use more violent expressions in finding fault with
such trifles, than at any time they will do when their Husbands sin against God
Though they ought in a limited sense and due manner to admonish them of the sins
that they do commit, yet the Wife may not at any time lawfully reprove the
Husband for that which is not sinful, yet she may humbly desire him to comply
with her in things indifferent if he think fit. But for a Wife to contend with
an Husband about inconsiderable toys, is very unbecoming her, and the cause of
much disquiet in a Family. Many Wives are apt to censure that to be sin in an
Husband, which is not; as I can instance in one, that looked upon the sighs and
groans of her Husband, and the rising and falling of his voice in Prayer, to be
hypocrisy, affectation, and self-conceitedness; when, for ought she knew, they
might be the effects and evidences of fervency in spirit: as in Romans 8.26. We
know not what we should pray for, but the Spirit it self makes intercession
for us with groanings which cannot be uttered: that is, the Spirit helps us
to make us earnest and fervent in prayer, which is evidenced by groanings,
beyond what can be evidenced by the bare expression of the mouth; yea,
groanings do evidence an ardent desire of mind, even when we are not able to
speak; and indeed that prayer which is breathed in and out by the Spirit of
God, cannot be without some external evidences, either of voice countenance, or
sighs. Do not then condemn that prayer which may be of the spirits working, and
indeed were we more fervent in prayer, we should manifest more sighings and
groanings in it. Prayer is not to be measured by the multitude and fineness of
words, but by the earnest groans of the heart. Sighs and groans evidence more
of the heart in prayer, than words alone; for words alone may be but babbling,
and as the drawing nigh of the hypocrite. Considering this, let no woman find
fault with that in an Husband, which the word of God does not condemn in him.
Though many of his carriages may not please her humor, yet she must patiently
bear with them, and not speak against them, except they be sinful, and she can
prove them so by Scripture. It is better by much to be silent, than to cry out
against that which we cannot prove to be sin by Gods word. No good is done by
reproving a deed, except by Scripture the doer can be convinced of sin.

5. Be careful that under pretense of reproving your Husbands, you do not utter
any expressions that tend to the undervaluing and contempt of your Husbands
persons, parts or education; for reproachful and disgraceful words given to an
Husband, will cause conjugal affections to decay very much. If you reproach
your Husbands when you pretend to reprove their sins, you will break their
heads instead of their hearts, and make them fly in your faces, instead of
falling down at Gods feet. Some are apt to manifest their dislike of being
related to their Husbands as their Wives, and this is very sinful, nay it is
sinful to wish so in their hearts, for therein they quarrel at the providence,
and dislike the appointments of God. Some will say to their Husbands when they
are at any time crossed in their humors, If I had known this and this by thee
before, as well as I do now, I would never have had thee for my Husband. Some
Wives will drop expressions as if they deserved a better Husband than they had,
one richer and better than they had. Some will tell their Husbands, They had
better married some inferior person which would have better suited their
clownish breeding than with them who were better educated. All which
expressions tend to the undervaluing their Husbands persons and education, and
such Wives who by their carriages and expressions do thus slight their
Husbands, are never like to convince them of sin; they may perplex and afflict
them, but not do them good. Some men are more troubled with what is said to
them, than what is done to them. Unfriendly and undervaluing speeches have lain
heavier upon them, than the heaviest of pressures. Job was broken in pieces
with words, chap. 19.2. Indeed reproachful and reviling language has
occasioned many sad effects, for cruel words many times provoke to cruel
actions. Hard words are numbered amongst the hardest trials. If then, O Wife,
under a pretense of reproving thy Husbands sin, thou do reproach him, and
speak undervaluingly of him, thou endeavourest to make him a shame and reproach
to evil men, but not make him ashamed of any sin: and indeed such repreachings
will make and increase breaches between you; and such Husbands must have their
senses stupefied, that can bear such carriages from a Wife. When offenders are
reproved, it is to make them ashamed, not to shame them; but those are
reproaches, and not rebukes, that make men a shame, and not ashamed. But indeed
if thou do endeavor to cast contempt on thy Husband, notwithstanding thou
may be a Professor, it is an evidence that he is gracious, and thou art
carnal, for none receive more contempt on earth, than they whose names are
written in Heaven. Such as are wicked cannot but despise those who are in
esteem with God. I knew a professor of Religion, that when her Husband was
speaking something of no great concern, he speaking but one word more than she
thought fit or seasonable, she fell into such a rage, that she said he was
worse than the Devil of Hell, and yet pleaded in her justification, She must
speak against sin, and that he was a vile fellow and she could not make him
worse than he was; and yet she could not say that any thing he spoke was
sinful. But though some Wives in their passions speak to and of their Husbands as
if they were the vilest of men, yet when God does visit them with a violent fit
of sickness, or any other sore affliction, they will sometimes acknowledge that
they have wronged them, and desire them to pardon their unbecoming carriage
toward them. It Is sad when such as are no relations do revile and reproach a
man, and speak contemptibly of him: but it is more sad to be reviled and
reproached by a Wife, and no reason or pretense that she can bring can possibly
excuse her so doing. It Is a grief to hear those that are vile revile and throw
dirt in their faces, whose faces shine through that beauty and comeliness which
God has put upon them: but to see a Wife throw dirt in the face of her Husband
who is gracious, and bespatter and bemire his credit, is very sad and
lamentable, neither can the vileness that the Wife may pretend to be in her
Husband, if he were really as bad as she asserts him to be, justify her in
reviling of him; for the Husbands faultiness is no good plea for the Wifes
miscarriage. God does permit many gracious Husbands to be thus reviled by their
Wives, to exercise their graces, that their patience may have its perfect work,
and that they may not idolize such Relations. Indeed such Wives as drop
expressions tending to the undervaluing of their Husbands, by speaking
contemptibly of them, they loath their very persons. I heard of one, (and I
suppose I knew her) that said to her Husband, Thou art a stinking fellow, I
cannot bear the smell of thy breath it is so offensive, unpleasant, noisome, and
ill-savoury to me. So her Husband might complain as Job did, chap 19.17. My
breath was strange to my Wife: that is, did seem loathsome to my Wife. First,
that which moved upon his breath, his word or voice, his speech or complaint.
Words are nothing but breath formed and shaped to express our minds by: so then
my breath was strange (that is, my words, my complaints) to her; my discourses
with her are strange, she will not hear me speak, my voice is offensive and
unpleasant to her. 2dly. Take breath for that which we respire or breath forth
while we live, that is loathsome and unsavory to her, as unsavory meat which
the stomach loatheth, and cannot digest. Yet I must tell you the virtue of some
Wives have appeared gloriously, that when diseases have made all others loath
their Husbands, they have delighted in them; and while true conjugal love
lives, there will be no contempt of one another persons, no loathing one
another for any bodily imperfections. But indeed this same woman that loathed
Husbands breath, did in Job 2.9 bid him curse God, and die. Truly then her
breath was strange to him, because 'twas a sinful breath. And such as by any
^^ys manifest a contempt of their Husbands have such a principle in them as
Job's Wife had; therefore beware that under pretense of reproving your Husbands
you do not speak revilingly to them.

6. Be careful that under pretense of finding fault with your Husbands
miscarriages, you do not reveal your Husbands weaknesses unto others, but hide
their infirmities as much as you can. Whatever right you have to admonishing
your Husbands, certainly you have no right to do it before others: for then you
will divulge their failings to others, which by no means you ought to do;
neither would you ever presume to do it, if you had dear love for them, for
charity covers many infirmities, 1 Pet. 4.8. And so in Prove. 11.13. A
talebearer reveals secrets, but he that is of a faithful spirit concealeth
the matter. So in Prove. 10.12. True charity has a garment long and large
enough to cover many, yea, a multitude of sins. Charity ought to cover the sins
of others as to the preservation of their credit amongst men. So then while you
are admonishing or wisely reproving your Husbands, you ought to conceal their
faults from others, and not to publish and blaze them abroad to their shame, or
to the Provocation of Passion in them and it is a great piece of Christiam
Wisdom so to do, and may be a means of recovering them from the Power and
practice of their Sins. O Wives! you many times talk of the Actions of your
Husbands, to make sport for your Company, and say you meant no hurt, you did it
only in jest, and by way of diversion, or to make him ashamed of his indiscreet
Actions, I say such discoverings of your Husbands Actions are directly sinful
and your relating of any failings or hasty inconsiderate expressions of your
Husbands unto others, will make all your just and lawful Admonitions
ineffectual. You must be careful therefore not to utter any thing of your
Hurbands unto others that may blemish their Reputations, prejudice or
undervalue their Persons. But if your Husbands are obstinate or pervers in
their sins; or continue in such Actions as the Scripture asserts to be sinful,
so that your lawful endeavors cannot reclaim them, or that their carriages to
you, are unchristian-like, that you are in a kind of bondage and slavery with
them that they do oppress you, take Vicious Courses; Consume their Estates, and
neglect to provide necessaries for you contrary to the Gospel Rule, then you
may acquaint your Godly Minister or Pastor, or some prudent judicious Christian
Friend, that will keep your Counsel, whom you may desire to confer with your
Husbands, and endeavor to convince them of the evil of their ways, and
persuade them to carry it more affectionately toward you. But you must divulge
their failings in a common way, you may as soon undergo Gods Curss for
discovering your Husbands nakedness as your Parents, for your Husbands are
nearer Relations to you, then your Parents. Therefore if you would do good to
your Husbands by any advice and counsel that you do respectfully give them, do
not publish their failings unto others.

7. If you would reclaim your Husbands from any evil way to a faithful walking
in the ways of God, your orderly and regular Conversation is the most effectual
means of gaining them, and winning upon them, 1 Pet. 3.1, 2. Likewise ye wives
be in subjection to your own husbands, that if any obey not the word, they also
may without the word be won by the conversation of the wives, which they behold
your chaste conversation coupled with fear^ By this means they might by Gods
blessing prevail with their Husbands to conform to the Gospel Rule, when they
can mark nothing but chastity and holiness to their Wives Conversations. Now
winning Conversation does consist,

1. In a Reverend Esteem of the Husband, as one placed by the Lord in a degree
of Superiority above her. Likewise ye Wives be in Subjection to your own
Husbands, for know that the Sin of an Husband does not exempt the Wife from her
duty, but rather tie her the more strictly to the duty of Subjection. Wicked
Husbands observing the dutiful carriage of their Wives to them, notwithstanding
they have been very unkind to their Wives, will be brought to believe some
excellency in Religion, that does enable them so to do, so by degrees attain a
liking of Religion, and endeavor to be Religious.

2. A chaist Conversation coupled with Fear, as in the second Verse, there is
no part of a Christians Conversation so prevalent to gain others to fall in
love with Religion, as that wherein the duties we owe to others in the Relation
we have to them do shine; for these two; first, Chastity which is the main duty
in Reference to the manifesting of the faithfulness of the Wife to the Husband;
and fear which signifies the Reverence the Wife ows to the Husband as her
Superior, whereby she is afraid to displease him. These I say are the
qualities of a Christian Conversation which the spirit of God condiscends to
intimate, as most prevalent to gain Evil Husbands to fall in Love with
Religion. When an Husband observes the modesty, chastity and faithfulness of
his Wife, the care she has to please him in all lawful things, and her
watchfulness to avoid every thing that may distaste him. It will influence him
very much to like Religion, which prompts her to such an obliging Conversation.

3. In order to attaining this winning conversation, whereby Wives might
reclaim their Husbands from sin by their outward carriages, they should take
great care to attain a right frame of Spirit, to have their inward man adorned
with meekness and peaceableness of spirit, as in 1 Pet. 3.4. This is the way
for Wives to commend Religion unto their Husbands, and to win them to fall in
love with it by their outward carriages. Their prime care must be exercised to
manifest in me and practice that their hearts are adorned with the graces of
Gods Spirit, then their conversations cannot but be lovely to their Husbands.
This is the way of gaming such a conversation, as will gain their Husbands to
an holy life. Now those graces in a Wife, that have the most powerful Influence
to prevail upon her Husband are Meekness and Quietness of Spirit.

1. Meekness whereby she keeps down her passions from rising against her
Husband, though he wrongs her, or against the Lords dispensations in exercising
her more hardly than others, whereby she uses all amicable and loving ways to
reclaim her Husband from continuing to deal injuriously with her.

2. Quietness of Spirit whereby she does eschew all needless contradictions of
her Husband, all rashness in her Actions, all meddling with things not belonging
to her, all expressions of discontent with that lot which the Lord has carved
out to her, and such carriages of a Wife will work more upon an Husbands heart
then the strongest Arguments and sharpest Reproofs she can assault him with.
Now the Apostle does enforce this Exhortation to Wives with these two
Arguments. The first is taken from the example of holy believing Women, who
counted it their best Ornament to manifest their Holiness and Faith by their
dutifulness to their Husbands, and particularly of Sarah who testified her
Obedience and Subjection to her Husband, by her Respectful and Reverend
carriage toward him, and language to him. She obeyed him and called him Lord,
1 Pet. 3.6. The second Argument is from the advantage of such a carriage, and
such a winning Conversation, that if they did immitate these Holy Women,
especially Sarah in dutifulness to her Husband, notwithstanding any wrongs they
might receive from them, they should prove themselves Heirs of Sarah,
blessedness (...) when we obtain Grace from the Lord to follow the Footstepts
of the Saints Registered in the Scripture, especially in the Faithful discharge
of the duties of our particular Stations and Relations, then do we prove our
selves to have a right to be made pertakers of the same spiritual privileges
with them; and Heirs of the same Eternal Blessedness which they now possess. So
Wives behaving themselves to their Husbands in a Dutiful, Respectful,
Reverential way, manifesting a chaste Conversation coupled with fear, having
their hearts in a gracious frame adorned with meekness and quietness of spirit,
they will clear up to themselves their right to Sarahs Blessedness, and enjoy
the sense of their interest in the spiritual privileges that she had; and by
their meek and quiet Conversations be very prevalent to win their Husbands from
the error of the^ ways. When God by the Spirit has hushed the storms and
tempests that usually arise in the Spirits of Wives, when he breaths upon them
with a favorable wind, and stills their Spirits, and restrains Satan the
master of misrule, that he does not kindle Jealousies and Animosities in their
Spirits, but that they have a spiritual quietness of heart and tranquillity of
mind wrought in them by the sweet breathings of the blessed spirit, which they
can retain when they have the highest Provocations from their Husbands to
unquietness; then they will have a mighty influence upon their Husbands, to
reclaim them from their Vicious Actions and violent passions. Although the
Children of the Lord be bound to deal with those with whom they live or
converse, that they observe to sin by discourse and conference, commending
Christ to them, and opening the evil of sin to them, and their dangerous State
if they remain impenitent, the necessity of reforming their lives and
entertaining Christ in their hearts by faith: Yet it is mainly a Conversation
suitable to the word of God, that God uses to bless to make men fall in love
with Religion, without which the best discourse will rather harden them in sin,
than reclaim them from their sinful ways. Then I say do Wives stop the mouths
of their Husbands, when their conversations for Piety unto God, and
Righteousness unto them is such as may discover unto their Husbands their
failings, and point out unto them that good way wherein they oug^t to walk, for
the Wifes sweet calmness of spirit, and pleasant serenity of mind prevails to
restrain her from all tart expressions and bitter words, and to forbear all
exasperating language, and enables her to bear reviling language with patience,
without rendering revi^ing for reviling; yea without answering again in a
froward way; which carriage does so convince a froward and unruly Husband, that
he is by the blessing of God powerfully influenced to comply with the counsels
of his Wife. O let Wives shine as lights in the world, holy, blameless, and
harmless, and by their practice hold forth the word of life unto their
Husbands, so that by a suitable practice joined with their professions, Wives
will be the same to their Husbands in order to their conviction, discovery of
their Sin, and manifesting the lovely beauty of the ways of holiness, as the
Sun and Moon is in the Firmament discovering things hidden by natural darkness
1 Pet. 2.15, 16. And indeed this is the principal way that wives can lawfully
take to help on the Reformation of their Husbands. This I say is their most
proper course, and will help on their Husbands amendment, when harsh biteing
and smart words will make them worse both to God and them. Indeed the Wife best
Counsel will signify nothing to the Husbands good without a regular, meek and
quiet Conversation. Therefore in order to the persuading of an Husband from sin
let the Wife take care to order her Conversation aright. Consider then O Wives:
have you cause to complain, that none of your endeavors have proved effectual
in order to your Husbands Reformation? But have you not taken a wrong Method to
effect it? Have you not manifested too much bitterness in speaking against your
Husbands failings? have you not manifested too much rage and violence when they
have crossed your humor in some domestic concerns? Have you not spoken to
them in a fierce, furious and irreverent manner? Then blame your own passions
as the cause of your Husbands Obstinacy, were you more mild and respectful in
your carriages to them, they would be more complying with you, if you would
then do them good by your advice, advise them in an humble and meek way.

8. If you would do your Husbands good by your Admonitions, be careful that you
never admonish them, but when they are in a good mood or very pleasant humor,
if a work be not done in a proper season, it were better not done at all, when
you find them in a good temper, as sometimes the worst of men will be, then
manifest the dear affection that you have for them, tell them what tender
regard you have for their Eternal good, their present Reputation and Comfort.
Then use such persuasive arguments, as may be most taking with their
Constitutions, still carrying your selves with all due respect and submission
to their Authority over you, and if you cannot prevail with them to Reform,
then when you find them alone; tell them once again of their faults in an
humble, modest and meek manner, even weeping, as the Apostle spoak to the
Philipians, Chap. 3.18. And now I tell you even weeping, this has proved a
most effectual and prevailing way when all other means have failed.

But it is strange to see what Violence and Fury of Spirit some do manifest
under pretense of reproving their Husbands miscarriages. If their Husbands do
but walk abroad about their lawful occassions, even such as concern the
providing for the maintenance of their Familys, if they have any frivolous
matters that they fancy to employ them about, which does not in the least
belong to them to be concerned in it must be done then, and only then, when
their honest and lawful occasions do call them abroad, and then if their
Husbands will not gratify them in laying aside their business to gratify
their peevish insulting humors they will censure their going forth to be
ungodly and devilish, and that they spend their time in ungodly Company, that
they hope God will stop their going forth in a short time, and wish that they
were some way smitten of God to be constrained to stay within, and continue
their reviling language as long as they abide in company with them, sometime
asserting them to be Hypocrites, at other times, assert them to be Profane,
and all this such Wives do because their Husbands will not be as Subject to
them as an Apprentice is to his Master, they will complain if they have not all
things according to their mind, and yet storm at their Husbands, using lawful
endeavors to provide them. If their Husbands have no business abroad, How are
they provided for? How have they a supply of all things necessary for their
maintenance? they cannot prove their Husbands keep bad Company, or that they
are frequenters of Taverns, or Alehouses, or concerned in extravigant
Expenses, yet talk to them, and of them no otherwise then as to, and of a Rogue
that is going from Newgate to Tyburne, I appeal to all the Professors of
Religion in the Kingdom, whether they can conceive any Grace to be in the
Hearts of such Wives, and whether they do not carry themselves as such as are
acted by some infernal Fury. Let them pretend what they will, and if in truth
their Husbands were as vile as their furious Tongues do declare, yet they
cannot Justify their present carriages, nor justify the Omission of
manifesting that Respect and Reverence which according to Gods word (...) owe
them, as they are their Husbands, so long as the Relation continues their
Relational Dutys continue, and they ought to submit to their Husbands
superiority, though it does not please them. Therefore let not Wives pretend
that to be done in Zeal for God, which is but disgorgeing the scum and froth a
furious Spirit.

But there are many gracious Wives who are not of this furious temper, but
abhor such furious carriages, who live very comfortably with their Husbands,
they are dutiful and respectful to their Husbands, and their Husbands are
loving and kind to them, and they have much content and satisfaction, delight
and complacency in each other. There are no contention between them; what the
Husband orders, the Wife cheerfully submits unto. She owns him for her head,
for her guide, for her governor, and presumes not to insult over him, or
contradict or control him, and by this means there is a sweet harmony between
them, and they are Comforts and Blessings to each other.

I come now to the last particular, wherein I shall speak to both Husbands and
Wives together, and persuade them to be more careful to carry themselves more
Christian like to their Children and Servants, which will be a special means to
preserve peace and concord amongst themselves. Certainly one reason why
Husbands and Wives do not live comfortably together, is their neglecting to
give their Children a Pious Education, which through Divine assistance might be
a special means to heal the vi^iosity of their depraved natures, and to master
and conquer their sinful propen^ions. God in judgment permits Husbands and
Wives to be plagues to each other, who neglect by education ^o refine and
reform their Children, and make them pliable to the Divine Will, who are rugged
and untoward by nature; for if an Husband be not tender of a regular carriage
to his inferiors, he will never be tender of a dutiful carriage to God. And if
the Wife does not carry her self as she ought to her Children and Servants, she
will never carry her self as she ought toward her Husband, nor have any tender
care to promote Gods honor. If Husbands and Wives did better discharge their
duties to their inferiors, they would live more peaceably with each other.
Therefore I shall give them some directions how they should carry themselves to
inferiors in general, and then give some particular directions how they ought
to carry themselves to their Children in respect of instruction and correction.

1. Concerning their carriage to inferiors in general.

1. Let Husbands and Wives be careful not to be too hasty or sudden in charging
faults on their Children, Servants, or other inferiors. For sudden surprises
do put them by all due consideration, that many times they speak what otherwise
they would not. Therefore give them time to consider what to answer, and advise
them to speak the truth though against themselves, telling them, That a lie will
double their fault, and greatly increase their guilt.

2. In reproving your inferiors, manage your reproofs so prudently that you
may manifest love to their persons when you evidence the dislike of their sins.
Begin gently to use all persuasive motives to reclaim them from sin, and allure
them to the ways of God. Never use severity but in cases of flat necessity,
lest the too frequent exercise of severity make them to despise you, and harden
them against you. When you mix some severe expressions of holy anger against
their sin, let it be done in a grave prudent way; for when you deal with them
in a boisterous way, you only put them into a slavish fear. Let them perceive
that you are more displeased with them for o^^ences committed directly against
God, than your selves. Pray let not your passions, like unruly torrents,
overflow the banks that are limited by Scripture and Reason. A grave carriage,
and a sober moderate anger, will procure reverence, and advance reformations;
but that which is mix^d with horrid noise and clamours, ^^oweth from the breast
of fools. A Child can never persuade himself that such anger proceeds from
love, when he is made the sink to receive the daily disgorgements of a
choleric stomach, when the unhappy necessity of his relation ties him to be
always in the way, where an angry disposition must vent and empty it self. If
you that rule be thus unruly, how can you expect your inferiors to be regular,
when your uncomely demeanor does almost convince them that love can hardly be
the genuine root of your anger, but that they are made the sad objects of your
native temper, and that your reprehensions are spic'd with hatred. If you have
cause to be angry, yet let not your storms run all upon the Rocks, but
endeavor speedily to cool the inflammation, to abate the fever, and slack the
fire of your anger.

3. Observe a prudent administration of your rebukes, gild those bitter Pills
with hopes of winning your favor upon their amendment, mix those unpleasant
potions with some sweet emollient Juices that such interwoven lenity may
procure access for your admonitions, and effect your desired (...): Great and
heinous faults, if repeated, deserve a greater ardency of spirit. Smaller
offenses of Wife, Children, and Servants, if they be not committed openly,
rebuke them a part and in private: Wink at infirmities and failings that are
not positively sinful in a plain breach of the known Law of God. Reserve your
severest and sharpest reprehensions for open and scandalous sins, that have
been reiterated, having a show of contempt and disdain, 1 Timothy 5.20.

4. Beware that you do not reprove your inferiors to gratify a froward and
perverse humor. Your aims and intentions must be upright in reproving. Take
heed of mingling any wildfire of price, vainglory, and ambitious humor of
contradicting and controuling others, with your zeal of reproving. Let your
rebukes be purely for Gods glory, out of hatred unto sin, and out of love to
the Salvation of your inferiors.

5. If you would reform the miscarriages of your inferiors; do it by way of
instruction and preceptive injunctions. Lay it as a charge upon their souls in
the name of God, That they hearken to and obey your institutions. Efficacious
words, rather than many, are to be sought, studied and used. There be some,
especially Wives, when they are displeased with their Children or Servants,
when they begin to speak against what they dislike, they are not willing to
give over, but keep thundering out their frivolous repetitions of the same
things for an hour together. Therefore beware when you reprove the faults of
inferiors, that you do not multiply words, for in a multitude of words, there
will be many impertinencies which nourish contentions, and rather bring
contempt upon the reprover, than reform the reproved. Therefore in few words
and insignificant terms, enjoin them to conform to your instructions that you
give them from Gods word, and say no more, but with a grave look (...) them.

6. Before your reprove your inferiors, or join corrections with your
reproofs, consider, Whither their faults proceed from imprudence and weakness,
or obstinacy and wilfulness? upon what grounds and occasions, upon what
provocations and seductions? and deal with them according to the circumstances
their faults are clothed with: If they appear to be truly sorrowful and deeply
humbled, and do readily beg forgiveness of God and you, with a promise of
amendment, and leading a new life, you ought to deal gently with them.

7. Take heed of exasperating and provoking Wives, Children and Servants by
rigid and severe courses, where less may effect your purpose. There are some
cruel Husbands and Wives that carry themselves more like raging Bruits, than
men and women, that take pleasure in tyrannical corrections. If they do not act
what they would have them, as they would have them, and as soon as they would
have them, they ^all upon those their inferiors, and tare them (...) ^^^ld
beasts. Such superiors are apt to ^^^pret (...) their inferiors actions in
the wo^^^ (...) and ^ay they are fauly in their actio^ (...) hate their
persons, and so dea^ (...) and ^ardly with them. Take heed of making your
Wives, Children and Servants vile in your eyes by too much severity, and know
that God will require such vile acts at your hands at the great day.

8. Though you ought to maintain the eminency of your places above your
inferiors, though you ought to order and manage your actions with such gravity
as may gain some awe and respect from their hearts, and though you ought to
uphold the honor and pre-eminence of that station wherein God has set you, by
all prudent means: yet you must not carry your selves toward your inferiors
with any proud, supercilious or fastuous deportment. As you need not indent
your cheeks with continual smiles, so neither plow your foreheads with rough
and f^wre wrincles. A sober affability and unaffected and amiable gravity, will
sufficiently chastise contempt, and nourish a reverend love. Rigid austerity in
words and actions will produce a slavish dis-spirited temper in Children and
Servants, that when they come to years they are so pusillanimous, that they are
rendered unfit to manage the work of their Generation. The dogged carriages of
your superiors, with a word and a blow to Children and Servants upon every
trifling occasion, works in them an overmuch rustic slavery, makes them
dejected, dull, and stupid, and unfit for any service. Carry your selves
therefore in that manner, that they may neither fear or have your morosity, nor
grow wanton upon the commonness of your carriage.

9. Be careful not to manifest too much severity against a fault when it is
ingeniously and fully confessed, for if you do, you will cause your Children and
Servants to deny the truth another time. When superiors are equally severe
when their inferiors confess, as when they deny the truth of the fact, they
provoke them to lie. If a confession of a fault does not procure a moderation
of correction, yea sometimes an omission of correction, another time inferiors
will obstinately deny what they have done, and add sin to sin. And let such
superiors know, that they are guilty of every such lie their inferiors tell,
and shall answer for it as their own sin.

I have here given those general directions how Husbands und Wives should carry
themselves to their inferiors, because their disorderly carriages to Children
and Servants have caused hot contests between them. When the one has fallen
fiercely upon a Child or Servant, the other has disliked it, and thereupon
have fallen out with each other, and have been so furious against each other,
that they have not been reconciled in a long time. Therefore, O Husbands and
Wives, as you desire to have a comfortable enjoyment of each other, observe
those directions in your carriages to your inferiors

But I pass on to the next particular, to give some particular directions to
Husbands and Wives concerning the education of their Children.

1. Beware of manifesting your affections to one Child more than another, but
show equal love to them all, otherwise that will be an heinous crime in one,
which will seem no blemish or fault in the other. For an unequal affection
blinds the judgment, and the child that is respected, is dealt harsher with,
whereby it is very much discouraged, dejected, and grieved.

2. Do not overmuch restrain them from innocent and lawful recreations but give
them some convenient liberty to refresh themselves in the exercise of them,
which may better dispose them to receive benefit by your education, and be a
means the sooner to make your godly instructions to them.

3. Beware of base vilifying language in your rebukes, which will provoke
Children to be dogged, sullen, and grow worse rather than reform them.

4. Do you sometimes wink at small things in Children, and not chide them for
every trifle, else as Children grow older, Parents will grow contemptible.

5. Let not the Mother chide or correct the Child in the Fathers presence; but
if the Father does not observe the present ill behavior, or know of a former
miscarriage, let the Wife then inform the Husband, whose right then it is to
chide or correct by the authority of his place, or deal with the Child when the
Father is gone forth, for otherwise she does not respect her Husbands
superiority over her self as well as the Child.

6. Use not many words in rebuking your Children. Let your words be few, proper
and weighty, and let your carriage be grave, but not fierce.

7. Do not upbraid your Children with former miscarriages in your passionate
heats, for which they have received reproof and correction before, but when the
same faults are again renewed, give new reproofs or corrections, as the nature
of the offense does require.

8. Study the constitutions of your Children. Mildness will do better with
some, than severity, and the dispositions of others need severity to be
exercised toward them.

9. When the Husband rebukes a Child, let the Wife be silent, and not plead for
him in the child's hearing: If the Husband does what is not proper, let her tell
him of it in private.

10. If you are angry with Children for some miscarriage, forbear rebuking or
correcting, till your spirits are cooled. That cannot be done regularly that is
done in fury. Whatever is done rashly will be done disorderly, and so no good
effect can be produced.

11. Be careful that you be not causers of your childrens undultifulness and
disobedience by your bad examples and ill behavior. If you have not walked so
circumspectly as the duties of your Children might be due unto you, even in
regard of your behavior you have brought on your selves the guilt of your
Childrens want of duty. You should be holy, grave and modest in your lives, and
eminently exemplary for practical godliness, and then your instructions will
more effectually influence their hearts, and breed and continue in them an awe
and reverence of your parental authority. But alas! in how many places are
Parents of careless and loose lives, of peevish and froward humors, bewraying
their neglect of Religion, going to Religious Exercises when they ^^st, making
every trifling occasion a sufficient excuse for neglecting Christian duties,
sometimes pretending inability of body, when laziness and want of affection is
the principal cause of their neglects! Others carry no gravity ^n their doings,
nor modesty in their behaviors, but live most dissolutely, and often
incontinently. Others swear fearfully without regard, speaking profanely, not
respecting the frailty of the youth that hear them. Sometimes Husbands and
Wives let unkind speeches pass from them one toward another in the presence of
their Children, to the great impairing of their credit with them. Other Parents
are too careless of bringing up their Children in the fear of God, in the
nature and admonition of the Lord, as they are bound Ephesians. 6.4. (...) these
are means to make Children fill^^ reverence to their Parents, and to tempt them
to sin; and though you may be grieved that your Children want a reverend regard
of you, yet your selves have been causers of the same. Pray then consider. O ye
Parents, what cause ye have given of y ur Childrens disobedience, and bewail
it, and be watchful against such carriages for the future, as have heretofore
occasioned their disobedience; for surely what duties the Law binds all
Children to perform, it as strictly binds all Parents to deserve. The Parents
evil does not at all excuse the Child's miscarriages, but it makes him guilty
of his Child's offense. Beg then of God to pardon your past miscarriages, and to
work such gracious principles in you, that you may never more be precedents in
sin to your Children, that you may not by your bad examples draw them into the
ways of their ruin. Your laboring by an holy life to deserve duty from your
Children, will exceedingly forward your Childrens performance of their duties
in you. So that it is your great concern to beware of speaking or doing any
thing before your Children, that you would not have them to imitate you in; for
Children are more forward to imitate the examples of their Parents in things
that are evil, than in things that are good. Therefore be patterns of good to
them, be patterns of meekness, and not of wrath, that they may observe that in
your behaviors that deserves their imitation, and so may be followers of you
in well doing. O that Parents would strictly observe those directions, that
their Children may be piously educated, whereby they may be able to take
comfort in their modest, respectful, and orderly behavior toward them.

12. Abuse not your parental authority by provoking your Children to wrath, or
by imbittering their Spirits, Ephesians. 6.4. And this is done,

1. By denying them that which is their due, in Food, Raiment, or means of
Education, neglecting to bring them up in an honest Calling, whereby they might
get their living in the fear of God, Lament. 4, 3, 4.

2. By commanding them to do things unjust in themselves, as in 1 Samuel 20.31.
or by unjust and rigorous commands about things in their own nature
indifferent, 1 Samuel 14.28, 29. You lay great burdens upon your Children,
pressing them still with your authority. You enjoin them what you list, not
weighing well what they like, and not carefully considering as well their
natures, as your own desires, as well their comfort and convenient being, as
your own affection and will to have it, whereby your Childrens lives are very
much embittered.

3. By inveighing with bitter w rds against them, giving them furious speeches
and violent language, chiefly when there is no cause, as Saul did to Jonathan,
1 Samuel 20.30.

4. By beating them unjustly when there is no fault, 1 Samuel 20.33. or
immoderately, unreasonably and basely, when there is a fault, doing it with
bitterness without compassion, instruction, and prayer. These unnatural
carriages exceedingly provoke Children to wrath, and thereby your Children are
provoked by you to sin; for Children cannot bear cruel injuries from their very
Parents, without being incited thereby to sinful anger. Therefore the Apostle
says, Provoke not your Children to anger: yet I say, Parents are not to with
hold seasonable, necessary, and moderate correction from their Children,
although the^ Children should be enraged and provoked (...) wrath by it; for
though they must not provok^^ them to wrath, yet they must not neglect (...)
bring them up in the nurture and admoniti^^ of the Lord. They must not go from
one ex^ream to another, i.e. from Regidity to too much Lenity. Whiles Parents
are cautioned against rigid severity. It Is necessary to guard them against too
much indulgence, that they may ^^t let their Children persevere in Vicious
^^urses without control. Parents ought to take care of their Childrens Souls,
faithfully endeavoring to beat down sin in them by nurture or correction, and
using all means possible to bring them up for Sons and Daughters to the Lord
Almighty.

13. When ever you reprove, instruct, when ever you find fault with any evil
your Children have done, inform them of some good, that they should be doing.
There are many that are apt to be much in reproving faults that are seldom or
never teaching duties. The Wife thinks it her special privilege to check, and
the Fathers duty only to teach; yet when they are teaching them, Wives will
quarrel with their Husbands for not giving better instructions to their
Children; but will not allow their Husbands to speak to them in their presence,
or they will find fault with the matter or manner of instructing. Indeed while
Children are young, the duty of teaching and instructing them is more incumbant
on the Wife then the Husband; for while the Wife keeps in her place, and as she
ought to be. Tit. 2.15. A keeper at home, she is most conversant with them, and
has most oportunities of conversing with them by way of Instruction, the good
Wife that Solomon mentions in Prove. 31.26. She opened her mouth with wisdom,
and in her tongue is the law of kindness. She looks well to the ways of her
household.

Those are far from having a law of kindness in their tongues, who are still
casting forth in their Expressions the filth of their froward minds, and that
Wife is far from carrying her self as a Christian Parent that is always raging
against pretended faults, but never giving loving instructions or good advise
or counsel. Parents ought to be giving pious instructions to their Children,
when there is no cause of reproof, they ought to instruct every day, but
reprove them only when an offense is committed. Instruction is seasonable when
there is no need of reproof; but reproof is never profitable without
instruction. When a fault is reproved, the evil of it must be shown to the
Child offending, and the necessity if desisting, and the danger of continuing
such a practice must be demonstrated, and how the Child ought to behave himself
in his carriage toward God and them must be demonstrated. If Husband and Wife
were faithful in this respect, there would not be such jarrings and contentions
between them as there are.

14. Before you instruct or correct Children or Servants, beg God to direct you
how to manage your instructions and corrections, and to sanctify them to their
benifit, you cannot expect God to succeed that; which you do not beg God to
bless. Instructions are so often given without success, because so often given
without Prayer, and your Corrections are so often given in passion, that they
are seldom given with moderation, and the gratifying of passion ^s oftener the
ground of Correction then Reformation, because angry superiors will not allow
themselves time to pray before they do correct. So that is made an act of
rashness, which should be an act of seriousness. You complain of your inferiors
stubbornness, Children and Servants are stubborn, your instruction and
correction does influence them very little, but when did you make a solemn work
by solemn, or ejaculatory Prayer, before you entered upon it? Blame your
neglects of duty to God, as the ground of your riors neglect of duty to you.

Lastly, If Wives would live in peace and amity with their Husbands, if any of
of them are married to a man that had Children by a former Wife, let such a
Wife beware that she do not vilify her Children in law, nor represent every
Childish act as an Abomination, when she cannot evidence them to be possitively
sinful. Some Wives will exclaim against their Children in Law for very trifles,
accuse them to their Husbands as gulty of stubborness and rudeness to incense
their Husbands against them, and if they cannot influence their Husbands to be
dogged to them or if their Husbands will not countenance, and encourage their
harsh dealings with them, they contend with their Hesbands and will not permit
them to end joy any quiet in their Families. I say if such Wives cannot by any
of their subtle contrivances and unjust complaints prevail with their Husbands
to withdraw their affections from them, they will withdraw their affections
from their Husbands and refuse to give them any conjugal respect. They approve
of no Servants but such as will make complaints against their Children in the
law, and concur with them in villifying of them, and such a course has been
the cause much discord between Husbands and Wives. Indeed it is a
Mother-in-laws prudence to wink at many Childish faults in her Husbands
Children by a former Wife, and not aggravate every failing in them. Let
Mother-in-laws know that they cannot justly claim a right to exercise equal
Authority over them as over Children born of their own bodies, because not so
nearly related to them, yea not related to them at all by blood, and
notwithstanding what some Mother-in-laws have asserted, yet it cannot be
thought true; that they are so much Mothers to their Children in Law, as they
are Wives to their Husbands: because their chiefest right of authority over
their Children in law does arise from their Husbands Resignation of them to
their charge and Tutorage, and their own taking charge of them by virtue of the
said Resignation.

For the Mother-in-laws authority over the Children that are not born of her
own body, is derived from her Husband, and conferred on her by her Husband, and
as she has not an equal authority over her own Children as her Husband has,
who is her superior by Gods appointment, much less over her Children in law.
It Is true as in the absence of the Husband, the Wife is principally concerned
in the Government of the Family, and Children in law are Members of the Family,
in that respect the Mother-in-law has the same authority over them, as other
Members of the Family. Therefore let all Mother-in-laws consider Docter Harris,
his last advice to his Wife. If you marry again, remember your own observation,
that second Husbands are very uxorious, second Wives very prevalent, and
therefore take heed that you do no ill office in estranging your Husband from
his natuaral Children, and kindred; you shall thereby draw upon him a great
sin, and judgment, if you kill in him natural affections. Wherefore if
Mothers-in-law are so Resolute, and the fury of their Spirits is so raised,
that they will exercise more authority over their Children in law, then their
Husbands are willing to allow them; to preserve the peace of the Family, it is
the Husbands prudence to place his first Wives Children in other Famlies, where
they may be piously educated, and that Wife has no regard to the glory of God
nor the honor of Religion that will eppose it, if the Husband be able to
mentain them in other Families. The Apostle presses all to follow after the
things that make for peace. Romans 14.19. This Exhortation does concern the peace
of Families as well as the peace of the Church, therefore whatever does
necessarily tend to preserve peace between such near Relations as Husband and
Wife must be carefully followed, and whatever tends to be get strife and
contention between them must be carefully avoided; for such froward Persons as
are promoters of discord God hates. Prove. 6.19. Prove. 8.13. Therefore observe
these following cautions.

First, Beware of being discontented with the condition or relation in which
God has placed you, for nothing does more aim the Glory of God, more destroy
and ^^t out your Comforts then discontent.

2. Beware of looking on one another with a disdainful eye, as if each of you
did conceive your self to excel, and were superior in worth to the other, for
by having one another in contempt, you can never live peaceably together.

3. Beware of neglecting acts of conjugal love for that will breed strangeness
between you. By this means such as heretofore lay in one another bosoms, are
grown so strange, that they cannot stay with content in one another sight they
will scarce look upon one another; who not long since professed dearly to love
one another. It Is sad, yea very sad, that they who should be ready to die for
one another, can hardly live with one another! Oh when will the love of many
such Relations which has waxen cold, gather heat again? Were it not monstrious
that one Member of the body should withdraw ffices of love from another, or
should be as (...) stranger to it? So it is strange that Husband and Wife
should suspend the exercises of love to each other, that are as nearly allied
as one Member of the body to another, these unnatural distances between
Husbands and Wives are to open to be hid or denied. And it is not a reproach to
Christianity, that such as are one flesh, should act as if they were not
Members of the same World. If then you would live peaceably together, beware of
suspending Acts of Love to each other.

4. Beware you do not reproach one another, for reproaches do make breaches, if
one Friend do reproach another, there will be a breach of their Friendship, for
bitter and calumniating words do very much vex our spirits, and usually the
chiefest causes of discord between you. -- Wherefore I pray consider that
Husbands and Wives continuing in strangeness to each other makes them at last
become guilty of burnings and bitterness of spirit one against another, it will
not only cause them to forbear the manifestations of kindness to each other,
but to be cruel, and devise evil one against another. Therefore let me persuade
you to love each other with a love of complacency. Let your delight be set on
each other, and let all the lines of your affections be centred in each other.
i.e. Let not every trifling occasion quench the flames of your affection, but
let the heat and height of your love be placed upon one another, beyond your
Children and other Friends. When such Relations decline in their love, they
incline to hatred. Conjugal love being ill digested, or corrupted, turns to the
greatest enmity. Husbands and Wives are under the closest obligations to love.
Now, the closer any obligation is, the wider is the breach when once the
obligation is broken or misimproved. If the Wife, whom the Husband dearly
loved, begins to fall from him, or forsake his bed, she usually falls out with
him. There has been sad experience of this, and it is an argument where it
happens, that such Wives did never love their Husbands upon Gospel-principles,
or in obedience to Gods command, for as they who turn against the Truths of
God, never received them in love, so she never in reality embraced her Husband
in love, who turns against him: for when grace is the cement of affections,
nothing can divide them. Certainly if Husbands and Wives would faithfully
endeavor to observe the directions that I have given them concerning their
carriages to each other, and to their Children and Servants, they would live
more peaceably and comfortably together than they now do. It Is their
unfaithfulness in relational duties that occasions much of their Discord. You
Wives that pretend reasons for your contendings with your Husbands, and for
your angry insulting language, endeavor to inform your selves more fully of
the nature of your relational duties, how you ought to carry it toward your
Husbands, and to your Children and Servants, and endeavor a faithful discharge
of those duties, and you will quickly find a better agreement between you. Thus
I have ended what I have to say on this subject.

FINIS.

