A SHORT TREATISE Touching Sheriffs Accounts.

Written by the Honorable Sir Matthem Hale, Knight. sometime Lord Chief Justice of
His Majesty's Court of King's Bench.

To which is added, A Trial of Witches, at the Assizes held at Bury St.
Edmonds, for the County of Suffolk, on the 10th of March 1664, before the said
Sir Matthew Hale, Knight.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Will. Shrowsbery, at the Bible in
Duck-Lane. 1683.

FOR The Right Honorable THE LORD HIGH TREASURER OF ENGLAND, And the
CHANCELLOR Of the EXCHEQUER.
ACcording to my Promise to your Lordships, I have given a large Historical
Narrative of the Sheriffs Accounts for the Annual Revenue of their Countries:
Wherein some things may occurr that may be useful to the understanding of the
Sheriffs Accounts, and many other old obscure Records, and some things
incidently opened that have been formerly obscure and scarce intelligible, yet
fit to be known. Some things also relating to the diff^rence between the
Auditors of the Revenue, and the Officers of the Pipe. There may be some
mistakes of my own, I confess, in a matter of so great intricacy, perplexity
and obsoleteness, which I could not easily correct, in the Country, because
many of my Papers are at London that concern this business, and, I fear, hardly
to be retrieved into a due order, in regard of the late distraction. And here
may be some mistakes in the Transcriber, which at this distance I could not
examine. But, possibly, notwithstanding these mistakes, Your Lordships may find
something that may be useful, and when I wait upon you I shall review and
correct.

Your Lordships humble Servant.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. TOuching the Ancient and Modern Weight and Allay of Sterling Silver.
Page 1. CHAP. II. Concerning the Weight of Coin, and the difference therein,
with regard to the Denomination of Coin. p. 14. CHAP. III. Touching the
Corruptions of Money and the Remedies anciently used in relation thereunto. p.
19. CHAP. IV. Concerning the manner of answering the King's Firmes anciently.
p. 30. CHAP. V. Concerning the manner of collecting the King's Revenues of the
County, and the several kinds of them, with their several Titles. p. 33. CHAP.
VI. Concerning the manner how the Annual Revenue of the Co^nty was usually
answered in the ancient times until 10 E. 1. p. 48. CHAP. VII. The Second
Period of the Sheriffs Accounts, viz. how they stood from 10 E. 1. until 34 H.
8. p. 63. CHAP. VIII. Touching the state of the Sheriffs Firmes from the
Statute of 34 H. 8. till the 14th year of the Reign of King Charles 1. which is
the Second Period. p. 77. CHAP. IX. The Third Period from the 15th year of King
Charles 1. until the year of our Lord 1650, and how the Sheriffs Firmes and
Accounts stood in that intervall. p. 87. CHAP. X. The Fourth Period of the
Sheriffs Firmes from the year 1650 unto this day and how they were answered in
that intervall. p. 89.
A Short TREATISE Touching Sheriffs Accounts.
CHAP. I. Touching the ancient and modern Weight and Allay of Sterling Silver.
IT will be necessary for the better understanding of Sheriffs accounts,
especially in the elder times, to examine these matters, viz.

I. Touching the Denomination* Weight and Allay of Sterling Money, the
Corruptions thereof in both, and the remedies that have been formerly applied
for the reformation of these corruptions.

II. Concerning Firmes* their nature, and how they were answered in former
times. The first shall be the subject of this Chapter, the second the subject
of the next.

Concerning the former of (...) I shall apply my self singly to the business of
Silver Coin, because that was the usual species wherein the King's Firmes were
commonly answered.

And first, concerning the Coin of Silver, there are these things considerable
therein.

1. The Authority or Power that gives it its Stamp, Weight, Denomination and
Value.

2. The Matter of it.

3. The Weight and Denomination.

As concerning the first of these, it is, without all question, the inherent
Regality and Prerogative of the Crown, to give the Currantness, Allay, Weight,
Denomination and extrinsique Value to the Coin of this Kingdom: and as it is a
part of his Regality and Prerogative, so it is a part of his Regal Revenue,
which is called the King's Seigniorage, or Royalty, or Coinage, viz.
ordinarily, on every pound weight of Gold, the King had for his Coin 5 s. out
of which he paid to the Master of the Mint, for his work, sometimes 1^.
sometimes 1 s. 6 d. Upon every pound weight of Silver, the Seigniorage, or
Coinage, answered to the King, in the time of King Edw. 3. was 8 penny weight,
pondere, which about that time amounted to 1 s. out of which he paid sometimes
8 d. sometimes 9 d. to the Master. In the time of H. 5. the King's Seigniorage
of every pound weight of Silver was 15 d. See Rot. Parl. 9 H. 5. pars 2. N. 15.
although the Authorization, Denomination and Stamp of Coin was undoubtedly the
King's right, yet it appears by Roger Hawood, that in the troublesome times of
King Stephen, viz. An. Dom. 1149. Omnes Potentes, tam Episcopi quam Comites and
Barons, suam faciebant monetam. But Henry the second coming to the Crown,
remedied this usurpation of the Baronage: Novam fecit monetam qu^e sola recepta
erat and accepta in regno. And since that time, the exercise as well as the
right of coining of Money in the Kingdom has remained uninterruptedly in the
Crown. It is true, that by certain ancient privileges, derived by Charter and
Usage from the Crown, diverse, especially of the eminent Clergy, had their Mints
or Coinages of Money. As the Abbot of St. Edmunds*bury, Claus. 32 H. 8. m. 15.
dorso: And the Archbishop of York Claus. 5 E. 3. pars 1. m. 10. 19. dorso, and
some others. But although they had the profit of the Coin, yet they had neither
the Denomination, Stamp, nor Allay: for upon every change of the Coin by the
King's Proclamation, there issued over a Mandate to the Treasurer and Barons to
deliver a Stamp over to those private Mints to be used. But this liberty of
Coinage in private Lords has been long since disused, and in a great measure,
if not altogether, reassumed by the Statute of 3 H. 7. Cap. 6.

2. Concerning the second, viz. the Matter or Species* whereof the current Coin
of this Kingdom has been made, it is Gold or Silver, but not altogether pure,
but with an Allay of Copper, at least from the time of King H* 1. and H. 2.
though possibly in ancienter times the Species whereof the Coin was made might
be pure Gold or Silver; and this Allay was that which gave the Denomination of
Sterling to that Coin, viz. Sterling Gold, or Sterling Silver: Wherein there
will be inquirable,

1. Whence that Denomination came.

2. How ancient that Denomination was.

3. What was the Allay that gave Silver that Denomination.

For the former of these there are various conjectures, and nothing of
certainty.

Spelman supposes it to take that Denomination from the Esterlings, who, as he
supposes, came over and reformed our Coin to that Allay. Of this opinion was
Cambden, A Germanis, quos Angli Esterlings, ab Orientali situ, vocarunt, facta
est appellatio; quos Johannes Rex, ad Argentum in suam puritatem redigendam,
primus evocavit: and ejusmodi ^^mmi Esterlingi, in antiquis scripturis semper
reperiuntur. Some suppose that it might be taken up from the Star Jud^eorum,
who being the great Brokers for Money, accepted and allowed Money of that
Allay, for current payment of their Stars or obligations. Others from the
impression of a Sterling, or of an Asterisck upon the Coin. *Pur ceo que le
form d'un Stare, don't le diminutive est Sterling, fuit impresst o^ stamp sur
ceo.

Auters pur ceo que le*primer de cest Standard ^uit coin en le Castle de
Sterlin in Scotland pur le Roy Edw. 1. And possibly as the proper name of the
fourth part of a Penny was called a Farthing, and ordinarily a Ferling; so in
truth the proper name of a Penny in th^se times was called a Sterling, without
any other reason of it than the use of the times and arbitrary imposition, as
other names usually grow. For the old Act of 51 H: 3. called Compositio
Mensurarum, tells us that Denarius A^gliae Sterlingus dicitur. And because this
was the root of the measure, especially of Silver Coin, as will be showed,
therefore all our Coin of the same Allay was also called Sterling, as five
Shillings Sterling, five Pounds Sterling.

2. When this name of Sterling came first in is uncertain, only we are certain
it was a Denomination in use in the time of H. 3. or Ed. 1. and after-ages. But
it was not in use at the time of the compiling of Doomsday, for if it were we
should have found it there* where there is so great occasion of mention of
Firmes, Rents and Payments.

Standard del money en French est appel Pied de money per Bodin, Pes monetarum,
qua^i Princeps ibi pedem figit.

Matthew. Paris mag. Hist. 220. b. In le 12 an. de Roy John le primier standard
del English* money fuit establish en Realm d' Ireland, et fuit equal al primes,
and que l'English money ne fuit au quart part melior in value que l'Irish, come
ceo ad estre depuis le temps del Edw. 4. Et fuit change in Ireland come ceo
fuit change in Engleterre. Le primer difference and inequality inter les
Standards del English moneys, and Irish moneys est troue in 5 Ed. 4. car donque
fuit declare in Parliament icy que le Noble serra current en cest Realm pur
10s. and issint fuit que l'Irish Shilling forsque 9d. Dengletre.

Hovenden in Rich 1. fol. 377. b. Videns igitur Galfridus Eboracensis electus,
quod nisi mediante pecunia amorem Regis ^ui nullatenus habere possit, promifit
ei tria millia Librarum Sterlingorum pro amore ejus habendo. Que fuit devant le
temps del Roy John; pur que semble que le temps quant cest money fuit
primerment coin est uncertain. Car ascuns diont que fuit fait per Osbright un
Roy de Saxon race 160 ans de^ant le Norman conquest. Nummus a Numa que fuit le
primer Roy*que fesoit moneies en Rome. Issint Sterlings, alias Esterlings,
queux primes fesoient le money de cest Standard en Engleterre.

3. As touching the Allay that is by use and custom fitted to that Money which
we call the Sterling, or Sterling Allay; perchance we shall not find that
constancy in the Allay as is generally thought.

The Sterling Allay of Gold, according to the Red Book of the Exchequer is
this. The Pound weight of Gold consists of twenty four Charats, every Charat
weighing half an Ounce of Silver; and every Charat of Gold consists of four
Grains, and consequently every Grain of Gold weighing thirty of these Grains
which we call Silver Grains, whereof hereafter.

In the time of Edw. 3. the Pound of Sterling Gold consisted of twenty three
Charats, three Grains and a half of pure Gold, and half a Grain of Allay of
Copper.

The Sterling Silver, as it seems to me, in former times had an Allay differing
from what it is at this day. At this day a Pound weight of Silver (viz. 12
Ounces to the Pound, or Troy weight) consists of eleven Ounces two Peny-weight
of fine. Silver, and eighteen Peny-weight of Allay or Copper: every Pound
containing twelve Ounces, and every Ounce divided into 20 parts called twenty
Peny-weight: For at that time 20 Peny-weight weighed one Ounce, which though
the Peny-weight be altered, yet the Denomination continues. And this Allay was
in use in the forty sixth year of King Edw. 3. and for some time before, and
has continued ever since.

In the Treatise of Money in the Red Book of the Exchequer which seems to be
written in the time of Edw. 3. for it mentions the Indentures of the Mint in 23
Ed. 3. it is said the use was then that in every pound weight of Sterling
Silver there was sixteen Peny-weight of Allay: the consequence whereof is that
the Pound of Sterling Silver then contained eleven Ounces four Peny-weight of
fine Silver, and sixteen Peny-weight of Copper.

And it should seem by what follows in the Chapter, that in the time of H. 2.
the Allay of Copper in Sterling Silver was less than that: For upon every Pound
weight of Silver Money they used to allow 12 Peny-weight ad dealbandam firmam;
which seems to be the remedy for the reduction of the Money then current into
fine Silver, sed de hoc postea.

But at this day, and for very many reasons, the Allay of Sterling Silver has
been 18 Peny-weight of Copper allowed to 11 Ounces 2 Peny-weight of fine
Silver; thereby making up the Pound weight Troy of Sterling. Vid. Indentures of
the Mint, Claus. 46 Ed. 3. m. 18. Dors. Claus. 1. H. 5. m. 35. Dors. Claus. 4.
Ed. 4* m. 20. And this I take at this day to continue the Standard of Sterling
Silver.

29 E. 1. Per special ordinance del Roy les Pollards and Crockards fueront
decrie and adnul, quel ordinance fuit transmit in Realm d' Ireland and enrol en
Exchequer icy, come est troue in Libro rubra Scaccarii, ibid. pars 2. fol. 2. b.

En temps E. 1. Denarius A^gli^e, qui nominatur Sterlingus, rotundus fine
tonsura, ponderabit triginta and duo grana in medio spic^e.

Sterlingus and De^arius sont tout Die. 6. and ^ Ed. 6.
un. Le Shilling con^istoit de 12 Sterlings. 25 E. 3. cap. 6. Le substance de
cest denier ou Sterling Penny al primes fuit vicefima pars un^i^e. Et issint
continue ^astal Money. 345.
tanq. 9 E. 3. quant l'ounce del Silver fuit tallie in 26 pence que proportion
fuit continue tanq. 2 H. 6. quant l'ounce del Silver fesoit 32 pence* Et cest
iusque al 5 E. 4. quant fesoit 40 pence. Et cest iusques 36 H. 8. quant il
prepare son journey al Bulloigne and donque fuit divide en 45 pence. Que
continue iusques al 2 El. quant l'ounce de pure Silver fuit tallie en Davies 24.
60 pence, and cest Standard remain a cest jour.

Et qu^elibet libra de sterling avoit 18d. ob. d'allay de Copper, and nient
plus. Et cest allay de sterling Money les Ordinances ou Statutes de 25 E. 3.
cap. 13. and 2 H. 6. cap. 13. font mention, and est contein en touts Indentures
fait enter le Roy and les Masters del Mint.

CHAP. II. Concerning the Weight of Coin, and the difference therein, with
regard to the Denomination of Coin.
THE Pound weight of Gold though it were the same with that of Silver, yet is
made up of smaller parts of a different Denomination, every Pound weight
consisting of 24 Charats, and every Charat consisting of 4 Grains.

The Pound weight of Silver is subdivided into parts of another Denomination;
for every Pound consists of 20 Peny-weights, and every Peny-weight of 24
Grains. This appears by the Books and Records above mentioned. Et touts susdits
moneys dargent issint faites serront dallay de Standard de veil Esterling: Cost
ascavoir que chescun leivre dargent de cestes moneys de poize tiendra vnze
ounces and 2d. de poize dargent fine, and 18d. de poys dallay, chescun penny
weight containant 24 grains.

So that every Charat in the Pound weight of Gold equals half an Ounce of
Silver; and every Grain of Gold, the fourth part of a Charat, equals 60 Grains
of Silver weight.

In that old Ordinance, before mentioned called Compositio Mensurarum 51 H. 3.
it is said, Per ordinationes totius Regni Angliae ^it una mensura Domini Regis
composita, viz. quod Denarius Angliae, qui nominatur Sterlingus, rotundus fine
tonsura ponderabit triginta and duo Grana frumenti in medio spic^e; and viginti
Denarii faciunt Vnciam; and duodecim Vnci^e faciunt Libram, etc.

But these thirty two Grains in the middle of the ear of Corn, are the natural
Grains, which were the weight of the then English Sterling Penny. But for the
better accommodation of Accounts, these 32 natural Grains are reduced to 24
artificial Grains, which, from very ancient time unt^ this day are the common
measure of the Peny-weight, as the 20 Peny-weight is the measure of an Ounce.

Having thus stated the artificial weights of Gold, and Silver, especially the
latter, I shall proceed to the comparison that now and anciciently stands
between these artificial weights and the Coin of Silver.

It is very plain that in the latter end of H. 3. and the beginning of King Ed.
1. and for a long time before, twenty Pence of Sterling Money did weigh an
Ounce, and twelve times twenty Pence or twenty Shillings did then weigh a Pound
Troy weight: and accordingly as twenty Peny-weight was then an Ounce, and so
called, so two hundred forty Pence, or twenty Shillings was a Pound weight, and
so called, viz. Libra Argenti. And although at this day the Penny and the 20
Shillings of Silver is much altered in their true weight, yet the Denomination
is still retained. The Ounce is commonly divided and estimated by 20
Peny-weight, and 20 Shillings is called Libra Argenti.

In the time of King Edw. 1. (as appears) an Ounce of Sterling Silver made 20
Sterling Pence, and consequently a Pound of Sterling Silver made 240 Pence
Sterling. But process of time has made a great alteration between the Weight
and extrinsique Denomination or Value of Money.

In 46 E. 3. it appears by the Indenture of the Mint that a Pound of Sterling
Silver made then 300 Sterling Pence. Claus. 46. E. 3. m. 18.

And afterward in 1 H. 5. the reduction of Coin was such that a Pound weight
of Sterling Silver made 360 Pence Sterling. Claus. 1. H. 5. m. 35. dorso. Which
made the Pound weight of Silver to contain 30 Shillings, and deducting 1
Shilling for Coinage, the Merchant had 29 Shillings for his Pound of Silver
brought into the Mint.

In the 4th year of Ed. 4. the Pound of Sterling Silver yielded 33 Shillings
viz. about 396 Pence in the Pound: and consequently 33 Sterling Pence then made
the Ounce of Silver. Claus. 4. E. 4. m. 20.

At this day the Ounce of Silver coined contains 5 Shillings, or 60 Pence: and
consequently the Pound weight of coined Silver yields 60 Sterlings or 720
pence. So that at this day the extrinsecal Denomination or Value of Money in
proportion to its Weight, is three times higher than it was in the time of E.
1. And thus much shall suffice touching the second enquiry.

CHAP. III. Touching the Corruptions of Money, and the remedies anciently used
in relation thereunto.
BY what has been before said it appears, the two special requisites of the
current Coin of this Kingdom are,

I. That it be of the true Standard in relation to its weight.

II. Of the true Standard with relation to its Allay: and proportionably to
these two requisites are these defects, which have happened in Moneys in modern
and ancient times, viz.

I. The defect in the due weight of Money which happened sometimes by
counterfeiting the Sterling Money, though with a weight below the Standard.
Sometimes by clipping, or otherwise impairing the weight of true Money.

2. The defect in the due Allay: viz. overcharging the fine Silver or Gold with
an Allay of Copper more than the Standard, which happened sometimes by the deceit
or ignorance of the officers of the Mint, and sometimes by the counterfeiture
of the Coin of England.

And by these practices the King's Exchequer (into or through which the most of
the Money of the Kingdom successively came) was many times surcharged with such
defective Money, and the King thereby deceived in his Firmes.

And therefore in ancient times there were successive experiments made by the
officers of the King's revenue for the discovery and avoiding of these
defective Moneys and that his Rents might be answered in Money of a just weight
and Allay; which, for the better understanding of ancient Records, remain here
to be explicated, viz. Solutio ad Scalam, Solutio ad Pensum, and Combustion, or
trial by fire. The two former being such Remedies as related to defective
Weight, and the latter being the Remedy that relates to defect in the Standard
of Allay. And, touching this business, although we have very frequent mention
of them, in the Pipe-rolls especially, yet the best, and contemporary
exposition of them is Gervasius Tilburiensis, or the black Book of the
Exchequer, written in the time of H* 2. who gives us the account thereof in his
first Book, Cap. A quibus, and ad quid inventa fuit Argenti examinatio, who
thus expounds it.

1. Solutio ad Scalam, viz. proeter quamlibet Libram numeratam sex Denarios,
which it seems was agreed upon a medium to be the common estimate or Remedy for
the defective Weight of Money, thereby to avoid the trouble of weighing the
Money which was brought into the Exchequer. And this is the meaning of that
frequent expression in the ancient Pipe-rolls In Thesauro 100 l. ad Scalam,
which seems to be one hundred Pounds, and one hundred Sixpences, or fifty
Shillings.

2. Solutio ad Pensum: which was the payment of Money into the Exchequer by
full weight, viz. that a Pound, or 20 s. in Silver, numero, or by tale, should
not be received for a Pound unless it did exactly weigh a Pound weight Troy, or
twelve Ounces, and if it wanted any, that then the Payer should make good the
weight by adding other Money although it amounted to more or less than 6 d. in
the Pound (which was the Solutio ad Scalam, as before is mentioned.) And thus
frequently occurs in the Pipe-rolls, In Thesauro 100 l. and pensum, or full
weight.

3. Combustion or trial by fire: which is by Gervase supposed to be set on foot
by the Bishop of Salisbury, then Treasurer, (though in truth it were much more
ancient, as appears by frequent passages in the Book of Doomsday:) and the
Author gives the reason: Licet enim numero and pondere videretur esse
satisfactum, non tamen materia. Consequens enim non erat ut si pro Libra una
numerata 20 Solidos, etiam Libra ponderis respondentis consequenter Libram
solvisset: Argentum enim Cupro vel quovis Aere solvisset. And thereupon ensued
the constitution of examination of Money at the Exchequer by Combustion.
Whether this examination was to reduce an equation of Money only to Sterling,
viz. a due proportion of Allay with Copper; or to reduce it to fine and pure
Silver, and to make the estimate of the Pound or Libra Argenti, reserved of
their Firmes to be in pure Silver, and without Allay, does not so clearly
appear. Some think the former; and therefore that the old expression of Firma
alba, blank Firm, and dealbare Firmam, was nothing else but Coin melted down
and reduced to the Allay of Sterling, and after blanched, or whited, as is done
by the Moneyers with their Sterling Coin of Silver, which is to this day called
blanching. Vid. Spelman i^ tit. Firmam dealbare. But yet it may seem, by what
ensues, that it was to reduce it to fine Silver, and to the estimate of the
Pound, or Libra Argenti accordingly; for it is evident by what follows, that
the difference between a Pound, or Libra Argenti numero, and Libra Argenti
blanch, was 12 Pence in every Pound: which possibly might be that the allowed
Allay of Copper in the Sterling Silver was then twelve Pence weight of Copper
in the Pound of fine Silver, whereas it is now 18 Peny-weight in the Pound.
This trial of Silver by Combustion, in those elder ages soon prevailed and
obtained against the former reductions ad Scalam, and ad Pensum, as being the
only infallible trial of the truth of the Metal, whereby the former reductions
of Pensum and Scalam became in time antiquated.

And this begat the distinction in the old Rolls of the estimate of Money
Numero, and the estimate Blanc: and in pursuance thereto the reservations of
Rents and Firmes by the King were sometimes Numero, and sometimes Blanc.

The reservations of Rents numero were no other but so much Money reserved in
Pecuniis numeratis: as reddendo quinque Libras numero was fivescore Shillings,
which amounted in common estimation to five Pounds Troy weight: And this was
the ancient and usual reservation, and, prima facie, unless the contrary were
expressed, upon all Grants of Lands (reserving so much Rent) it was intended
numero; that is, so much in Money numbered, and the Firmor was not bound
dealbare Firmam, or to make good so much in fine Silver, or, if you will, in
such silver as was of the first Allay.

The reservation of so much Money, or so many Pounds blanc did enforce the
Firmor to make good to the King so much in fine Silver, (or at least in the
purest Sterling) and therefore such Firmor, when he paid in his Firm upon such
a reservation blanc, was bound dealbare Firmam, which was to submit his Money
to the test of the fire; and to answer his Money, and make it good in fine
Silver according to the reservation, or to pay in allowance thereof that rate
which was the ordinary measure of reduction of it to fine Silver, which was 12
d. for every Pound as shall be showed.

And hereupon grew the common difference which is everywhere mentioned in the
Pipe-rolls of Firmes numero, and Firmes blanc or alb. Firm.

This difference of these Firmes is expounded by the Black Book of the
Exchequer, Lib. 2. Cap. Quid sit quosdam fundos dari blanc, quosdam numero,
viz. that if a Firm or Tenement were let by the King generally, without
expressing blanc or numero, it was to be answered only numero, unless
specially reserved blanc, (viz. 5 s. blanc.) But if a Royalty or Franchise were
only granted, then the general reservation of so much Rent, was to be blanc
Rent. Porro, Firmam numero dari diximus cum tantum numerando, non examinando
ipso satisfit. Cum ergo Rex Firmam alicui contulerit, simul cum Hundredo vel
placito quoe ex hoc proveniunt, Firma dealbari dicitur: sin simpliciter fundum
dederit (non determinans cum Hundredo vel blanc.) numero datus dicitur. And
from this diversity of the Rents arising in any County (some blanc only, some
numero only, some in both) arose the diversity in the titling of the Sheriffs
Accounts, viz.

Firma de remanente Comitatus post terras datas blanc: which was applicable to
those Rents of his County, which were answered in fine Silver reduced to the
test by combustion, or with an allowance of 12 d. in the Pound in compensation
of it.

Firma Comitatus numero, was his Firm for those Rents of his County which were
only answered in Money numbered, without reducing them to their fineness by
Combustion, or any satisfaction for it: But of this more fully in the ensuing
Chapter.

I have before mentioned that when any Firm was reserved or answered blanc,
the Money was to be melted and answered in fine Silver, or at least to Silver
allayed to right and finest Sterling; or else he was to redeem himself from
that trouble by payment of 12 d. in the Pound: So that that Person upon whom
there was reserved 5 l. blanc was to pay 5 l. 5 s. if he would not have his
Money melted down and made good in fine Silver (or at least in true Sterling.)
And this appears to be true by infinite Records: Take two or three for instance.

In compoto cum Northampton, 21 H. 3. Summa totalis 102l. 3s. 7d. de qua 4l.
9s. 4d. blanc, quoe sunt extensoe ad 4l. 13s. 9d. subtrahuntur ad perficiendum
corpus Comitatus and remanet 97l. 13s. 10d. de quibus respondet de proficuo in
magno Rotulo.

Claus. 13. H. 3. m. 2. Sciatis quod perdonavimus dilectoe Sorori nostroe A.
Comitissoe Pembroc centum triginta and quinque Libras blanc, quoe extensoe sunt
ad* centum quadraginta and unum Libras, and quindecim Solidos.

In Compoto Bedf. and Bucks, 13 E. 3 Nic. Passelew de 18 l. 4 s. 4 d. numero
pro 17 l. 7 s. blanc.

In all these the proportion rises very near, bating the small fragments in
Pence, that every Pound blanc answered one Shilling over, to reduce it to its
value.

And hence it is that at this day the ancient Firmors of Cities, as London,
etc. which were commonly reserved blanc, do pay the same in Sterling Money, and
one Shilling for every pound over: As if 100 l. blanc be reserved, there is
answered at this day in the Receipt 105 l. which, as before, makes me suppose
that blanc Firm, or dealbata Firma, was in truth when it was reduced to fine
Silver, and not barely Sterling: for this advance of 12 d. in the Pound upon
such blanc Firmes is still answered though paid in Sterling.

CHAP. IV. Concerning the manner of answering the King's Firmes anciently.
IN ancient times, viz. about the time of William the first and Henry the
second, the reservation of the King's Firmes and Rents were so many Pounds or
Shillings, etc. in Money, and they were answered numero, or in Pecuniis
numeratis, until afterward for the avoiding of corrupt Money, they were
reserved in blanc or white Money, which, as before is observed, was intended
either of pure Silver, (or at least Silver reduced to the Allay of Sterling)
and then whitened or blanched, as is used in the Mint to this day, for all
Sterling Money: I shall not much contend whether it were the one or the other,
but for the most part in this Discourse I shall suppose it fine Silver.

But although Firmes were reserved in Money, as the best and commonest measures
of values, yet it appears by Tilburiensis, Lib. 1. Cap. A quibus and ad quid
instituta fuit Argenti examinatio; that it was in those ancient times of King
W. 2. and H.1. usually practiced that those Firmes should, according to their
values be answered in Cattle, Corn and other provisions; which perchance in its
first institution might be a convenience to the King, to have his Family
furnished with provisions in specie, and to the Country, among whom Money was
not then very plentiful, and they could better answer their Rents in
Provisions.

And to the end that an equation might be made between the Rents reserved in
Money and the Provision delivered by the Tenants in lieu thereof, the same
Tilburiensis tells us, there were certain prices and rates set upon provisions,
that the Tenant might know what to pay, and the King's Officers might know what
to receive. As for Wheat for 100 men 12 d. for a fat Ox 12 d. etc. which it
seems were dilivered to the hands of the Sheriff who, if he firmed the County,
might retain it to his own use; but if he firmed it not he accounted to the
King, for these Provisions or their values, as he did for other rates of the
County collected by him.

But as for Cities and Franchises that were granted out to Firm, because they
had not Provisions of this nature to answer, they paid their Rents in Money.

Thus, it seems, the King's Firmes of Rents of his Firmors and Tenants in the
Country were answered in the time of King William the first and William his
son. But in the time of H. 1. the Tenants were weary of answering their Rents
in provisions, and the King's foreign occasions called rather for a supply of
Money, and so the Rents were answered by the Tenants as formerly in Money
according to the tenor of their reservations, and the delivery of Victual and
other Provisions in lieu thereof ceased.

CHAP. V. Concerning the manner of collecting the King's Revenues of the
County, and the several kinds of them with their several Titles.
THE Sheriff of the County had a double Office: 1. As a Minister of Justice
under the King for the preservation of Peace, and Writs issuing from the King's
Courts* 2. As the King's Bailiff of his Revenues arising in the County, which
was of two kinds.

1. The improving and letting, and sometimes stocking of the King's Demesnes,
and such Lands as were seized into the King's hands (other than such as
belonged to the Escheator, as Wardships and Escheats.) And hence it is that
there are upon the accounts, especially of Buckingham and Bedford, allowances
made to the Sheriff of that County ut.....Comitatus.

2. The second part of his Office was in collecting of the King's Rents of his
County, which sometimes he did as Custos or Bailey; sometimes ut Firmarius, viz.
he took the Rents to his own use, and answered the King a certain Firm or Rent
at his own peril, whereof more in the ensuing Discourse. Now concerning the
kinds of the King's Revenues arising in the several Counties, we are to take
notice that they were of two kinds, viz. Annual or Casual.

The Annual Revenue was again of two kinds, viz. Fixed and Certain, or Casual
and Uncertain.

The Annual, Fixed and Certain Revenue of the Counties were of these kinds.

1. The King's Demesnes that were in his own hands, or let at Rack rents to
Tenants, whereof I have before spoken, and they make not much for that purpose
I aim at.

2. Firmes, which were of two kinds, viz. Gross Firmes which were charged upon
particular persons, or Cities, or Towns, and so charged in the great Roll; as
thus, Philippus d'Aura debet 2 Marc. de reditu unius virgate terre. And these
were thus charged upon these two reasons: 1. Either because they were never
parcel of the Sheriffs Firm of this County, (de quo infra,) but great Firmes
written out to the Sheriff to be answered by the persons upon whom they were
charged. 2. Or else they were such as happened to be reserved after the Firm
of the County was reduced to certainty and answered by the Sheriffs. Or else,
Secondly, they were small rents commonly called Vicontiel Rents; the
Particulars whereof we shall enumerate under their several heads in due time.

3. Common Fines, at first imposed upon Townships, upon several occasions, as
for Bon pleder, for Suit and Ward, for excuse of attending the Sheriffs turn:
and these grew in process of time to be fixed and settled Revenues. And these
again were of two Sorts; such as came within the Title of Firma Comitatus, and
were written out under that general head, viz. sub nomine Vicecomitis: And some
again were written to the Sheriff in the particular charge of such and such
Townships and Lands, and so charged upon the Towns by the express words of the
process.

4. Arrentations of Assarts and Purprestures in Wastes and Forests set by
Justices in Air, which for the most part were written out in charge against
the particular Lands upon which they were charged: and some perchance were
demanded in a gross Sum, among other small Rents sub nomine Vicecomitis.

5. Crementum Comitatus, or Firma de cremento Comitatus; which were some
improvements of the King's Rents above the ancient Vicontiel Rents, for which
the Sheriff answered under the title of Firma Comitatus. And this Crementum
Comitatus or the several small advances of the old Vicontiel Rents, were
answered under the title of Crementum Comitatus, or Firma de cremento
Comitatus. But those kinds of Firmes de cremento are only found in the
Counties of Bedford, Bucks, Norfolk, Suffolk, Warwick, Leicester, Wigorn and
Gloucester: Certain other Sums annually charged in gross upon the Sheriff for
certain other small or minute Rents under several titles in several Counties;
as, De Cornagio, de Wardis, Castle de Firma, Purprest and Escaet de diversis
Firmis, de minutis particulis, Serjancia de tr^is assert infra diverse forest:
all which were charged in gross Sums upon the Sheriff, and sub nomine Vic.
without expressing any particulars, or upon whom they were charged, which
because they were not common to all Countries, but varied according to the
various usage of several Counties, I shall not at large handle, but shall
content my self with the enquiry into those that were the common charges of the
Sheriffs of every several County, viz. the Corpus Comitatus, and the Proficua
Comitatus.

The Vicontiel Rents that made up the Sheriffs Firm of the Body of the County,
came under various Titles and Denominations in several Counties, viz.

1. Reditus Assize in Cumberland, Hertford, Surry. 2. Firm and feodi Firm in
Cumberland, Northumberland, Nottingham, Stafford. 3. Firma antiqua in
Huntington. 4. Albe Firm in Norf. and Suff. 5. Blanch Firmes in Ebor', and
Suff. 6. Blanc Rents in Kent. 7. Albus Cervus in Dorset. 8. Auxilium Vicecom'
in Cant', Cumbr', Essex, Hunt', Leic', North', Sussex, Warw', Wilts. 9.
Auxilium ad Turcum Vicecom' in Devon. 10. Hidage in Berks, Bedf. Bucks, Oxon.
11. Prestatio pro pulchre placitando in Bedf', Bucks. 12. Secta and Warda in
Bedf', Bucks. 13. Visus Franci plegii in Bedf', Bucks, Cant', Hunt', Essex,
Hertford, North'ton, Somerset, South'ton, Stafford. 14. Certitudines in Berks,
Heres', Rutland. 15. Certi reditus in Lincoln, Leicester, Somerset, South'ton,
Warwick and Wilts. 16. Certi reditus ad communem finem in Derby, Nottingham.
17. Reditus pro Warda Castri in Cant', Northum', Oxon, Nor^*, and Suff'. 18.
Reditus ad Turnum Hundredi in Dorset. 19. Finis antiq^us in Essex. 20. Finis
pro secta Curie relaxand' in Berks and Oxon. 21. Communes fines in Glouc',
Heref', Hert^, ^urry, Suffolc, Salop. 22. Fi^es Aldermanno^um in Sussex. 23.
Turnum Vicecom' in Essex and Hert^. 24. Secta Burg. and Vill. in Cant'. 25.
Suit Silver in Staf^. 26. Hundred Silver in Nor^. 27. Faith Silver in Staf^.
28. Panel Silver in Nor^. 29. Ward Silver in Essex. 30. Certum let cum
Capitag' in Nor^. 31. Leet fee in Suff'. 32. Soken fees in Suff'. 33. Mott fee
in Salop*
These are the general Titles of those Vicontiel Rents that usually came under
the Title of Firma Comitatus, which were written generally sub Nomine Vicecom',
without expressions of the parti^ulars: But the Sheriff that had a particular
Roll of these Vicontiel Rents, delivered in that Roll many times upon his
Accounts, though not written especially ^n charge under those names, or in
par^icular by the Summons of the Pipe: And thus much concerning the certain
Annual Revenue*

2. The uncertain Annual Revenue was the Proficuum Comitatus, which in ancient
times when most of the Lawsuits were transacted in the Counties and
Hundred-Court, was a considerable Revenue. But since that time, viz. about the
beginning of E. 1. when much of that business was transacted at the great
Courts, this profit of the County sunk to very little. And in my enquiry
touching this part of the Revenue, I shall First set down what it was not:
Secondly, I shall set down what it was, and how it did arise.

1. Touching the former of these what it was not; I say, most clearly it w^^
not that profit which is now the only considerable profit of the Sheriffs
employments, viz. the Fees and Perquisites for the execution of Writs, and
Process and Execution issuing out of the King's Courts. For,

1. Until the Stat. of 23 H. 6. c. 10. there were no Fees at all by Law due
for any execution of Process or Warrants for the same. Till the Sta^. of 29 El.
2. there were no Fees allowed by Law for levying of Debts or Damages: But by
the express provision of the Sta^. of Westminster the first, the Sheriff was
bound to execute the King's Process without any Fee, which is no other* but a
declaration of the Common Law.

2. In no Viscontil Schedule or Account of the County that ever I could see or
hear of, is there any Account for Fees for execution of Process, or any mention
thereof.

3. If the Sheriff did in those elder times take any Fees for execution of
Writs, there was no color of reason that he should (...) for that: and if he
did take more than a reasonable recompense for his pains, it was more than
could be justified, and not at all due to the King.

II. But now, as to the Second enquiry, what this Proficuum Comitatus was: And
it seems very plain that it was made up principally by these particulars, as
most evidently appears by diverse accounts of Sheriffs in ancient times, when
they accounted ut Custodes or Ballivi, not ut Firmarii, viz.

1. The Fines, Issues and Amercements, and other Profits of the County-Courts,
which in those ancient times were very considerable, for it held Plea in all
Writs that were Vicontiel, directed immediately to the Sheriff out of the
Chancery, viz. by Justices; and many times not only personal Suits were
removed thither out of inferior Court-Barons and Hundred-Courts, but also
Pleas Real, viz. Writs of Right; and in ancient time many real Actions,
especially Writs of Right were determined in the County. And therefore it is
frequent in the old Schedules of Proficua Comitatus, especially in ^orkshire in
the times of R. 1. and King John, such as these, viz. De J. S. pro licentia
concordandi demimark. De J. S. pro Warrantia Essonii 2 s. and sometimes a Mark
*pro mi'a Comitatus, sometimes 10 s. quia retraxit se, Demimark. De pretio
bonorum per distringas demimark. Pro transgressione 2 s. Pro falso clamore
demimark, etc.

So that it appears in the account of 20 Johannis Regis, the profits of the
bare County Court of York for one half year amounted to 31 li. which is more
than 100 l. in a just estimate at this day.

2. The Profits of the Sheriffs Turns, or the Sheriffs Leets, which had
Conusance of matter Criminal, as his County Court was for matters Civil* and
the Profit consisted,

1. In Amercements of Suitors that made default.

2. In the Fines and Amercements of such as were convict of offenses inquirable
in the turn; as Nusances, Bloodshed, Assize of Bread and Beer, etc. and these
arose usually to a considerable Sum yearly.

3. The Profits of the Hundred-Courts and Wappentake-Courts; the Profits
whereof consisted in the Fines, Amercements and other Perquisites of the
Hundred-Court, which the Sheriff sometimes took in kind; sometimes he let it to
Firm. These Baylywicks of these Hundreds, and with them the Profits and
Perquisites of Courts were sometimes let to Firm by the King, and in such
cases the Sheriff accounted Proficua Ballivatus, which oftentimes arose to
very considerable Sums. In the time of H. 3. the Firmes of the Baylywicks of
the Hundreds in Torkshire, beside Stancliff and Strafford, were let for 100 l.
6 s. 8 d. per annum, which was then a considerable Sum, and amounts now in
Sterling Money to thrice as much. But as the business and jurisdiction of the
Hundred-Courts sunk gradually in their employment, (whereby the Perquisites now
do but little surmount the charge of keeping them) so now by the Stat. of 23 H.
6. cap. 10. the Sheriff is restrained from letting the Baylywick to Firm; and
most of the Hundreds, at least in many Counties, are disjoined from the County
and granted out, some in Fee-farm, and some otherwise, though there have been
frequent attempts of rejoining them to the Sheriffs by acts of Resumption.

And these are the Profits that made up the Proficuum Comitatus, for which the
Sheriff most commonly in ancient time answered as Firmarius at a certain Rent,
though sometimes he accounted for it as Custos or Ballivus as shall be shown.
And I know no other* Perquisite that made up the Prof^c^^m Comitatus but what
is above mentioned; only in Northumberland there were some Castle gard-Rents
that were in truth Vicontiel Rents, and in their propriety and nature belonged
to the Corpus Comitatus, which yet by constant usage were usually answered
among the Proficua Comitatus. And thus far concerning the annual Revenue of the
County, both Certain and Uncertain, chargeable upon the Sheriffs collection.

2. The Revenue Casual consisted of many Particles under various Heads or
Titles, viz. Debts drawn into the Pipe, and thence written out unto the
Sheriff. Fines voluntary or compulsary. Seisures of Lands and Compositions,
etc. they may be reduced under these three Heads at this day.

1. The Debts written out to the Sheriff from the several Offices, viz. the two
Remembrancers, Clerk of the Pipe, etc.

2. The Summons of the Gree^ Wax, written to the Sheriff with the Estreats from
the Treasurer's Remembrancers.

3. The foreign Account, or Seisures of Lands for Debts or Forfeitures.

As touching escheated Lands and Wardships they came under the Escheator's
charge, and the Profits thereof rarely answered by the Sheriff, unless ^or some
few ancient E^cheats.

CHAP. VI. Concerning the manner how the Annual Revenue of the County was
usually answered in the ancient times until 10 E. 1.
HAving showed what the Annual Profits of the County consisted of, I shall now
descend to the manner how it was anciently answered. The Sheriff, as has been
shown was the King's Bailey for the collecting of the King's Revenue: And
touching the manner of his collecting and answering them, and therein
principally concerning those two great parts of the Annual Revenue, viz. the
Corpus Comitatus, or when it was in Firm, the Firma corporis Comitatus: And
the Proficuum Comitatus, and when it was in Firm, the Firma de profic^o
Comitatus; both which shall be hereafter more fully explained.

These Profits were anciently, and are to this day, answered at two Terms in
the year, viz. Michaelmas and Easter.

But to enable the more effectual levying of them, there always issued to the
Sheriff before Easter and Michaelmas, out of the Exchequer a Writ called the
Summons of the Pipe, which had annexed to it the charge or Sums for which the
Sheriff was answerable, viz. those which were charged upon himself sub nomine
Vicecomitis, and those which are charged upon others. The Form of the Writ is
recorded in the black Book of the Exchequer, Lib. 2. cap. Qualiter fient
Summonitiones; which continue to this day, viz. Rex Vic' Ebor' Salutem. Vide
ficut teipsum and omnia tua diligas quod sis ad Scaccarium nostrum Westm' in
Cro' Sancti Michaelis, vel in Cro' Clausi Paschae, and habeas ibi quicquid
debes de vetere firma vel nova: Et nominatim haec debita subscripta. And then
the whole charge is inserted which commonly began with these annual Revenues,
viz. De Corpore Comitatus (or if it were in Firm) De Firma de Corpore Com. 100
bl. De Numero Comitatus 10. De Proficuo Comitatus (or if in Firm) De Firma de
proficuo Com. 50


And then the Sum in gross charged upon the Sheriff for diverse small Rents,
and then afterward all those Firmes that were charged upon particular persons
seriatim and in order.

And according to the order where in they were written out to the Sheriff,
accordingly in effect were the Accounts passed, and the Entries made thereof in
the great Roll of the Pipe, only the particulars in the Writ was their charge
of the Sheriff, unto which he was to give his answer upon his Account, and then
there are entered his discharges.

And this Firm continues there to this day, with such alterations as are
hereafter mentioned: and therefore the Ordinance or Statute in Libro Rubro
Scaccarii, fol. 242. made in 54 H. 3. is nothing else but the stable and fixed
method for writing the great Roll, observed both before and since that day.

Primo, Scribatur Corpus Comitatus, deinde Eleemosyne constitute, and
Liberationes and Bria' prisci Vicecom' ficut semper fuit consuetum. Deinde
oneretur Vic' de Firmis pro proficuo Comitatus vel de proficuis: Deinde
scribantur omnes Firm tam majores quam minores, etc.

And although the certain Debet of the Sheriff could not be known before the
finishing of his Account, because it could not be known what he levied, and
what not; and what he had paid, and what not; (which Account was not until the
end of his year) yet it seems there was anciently an estimate what this
constant charge of the annual Revenue amounted unto, and what the constant
allowances amounted unto, according to a medi^m, or possibly according to those
Firmes and gross Sums which were charged immediately upon the Sheriff Sub
nomine Vicecomitis; and these Sums were paid into the Exchequer at the return
of the Writ of Summons of the Pipe, and they were, and are to this day called
Profre Vicecom', or the Sheriffs Profsers. And by the Statute of 51 H. 3.
called Statutum de Scaccario, those profsers are appointed to be paid on the
morrow of St. Michael, and the morrow post Clausum* Paschae; and the payment of
these profsers are continued to this day: But although they are paid, yet if
upon the conclusion of the Sheriffs Account, and after the allowances and
discharges had by him, it appears that he be in surplusage, or that he is
charged with more than indeed he could receive, he has sometimes, and for the
most part, all his profsers paid or allowed to him again: and so indeed it is
but a mock*payment, a payment kept on foot to maintain the old method of his
Account, but is in effect but so much Money lent, for he has it (and justly
enough) allowed to him back again: the reason and justice whereof shall be
shown hereafter. And now to return again from whence we digressed, I shall now
search out the meaning of these Firmes, Corpus Comitatus bl. and Numerus
Comitatus, and Firma de Corpore Comitatus, and Proficua Comitatus, and Firma de
proficuo Comitatus, I mean as they relate to the Sheriffs Account for what the
things were is sufficiently discovered before.

Therefore as to the Corpus Comitatus, I have already shown in the precedent
Chapter, what it consisted of, viz. the Vicontiel Rents of the County; and they
consisted of two sorts of payment, viz. those that were answered in blanch
Money, and those* that were answered in Money numbered. And this ordinarily made
two titles of the Corpus Comitatus in most Counties, vi^. where there were
Firmes of these dif^ering natures, and they are then thus noted, viz.

De Corpore Comitatus. 100 l. bl. De Numero Comitatus 50
And they were written out thus generally, without expressing the several
Vicontiel Rents, but only the gross Sums what they amounted to blanc, and
what they amounted to numero, or de numero Comitatus. And the Sheriff upon his
Account was used to bring in a Vicontiel Roll, containing these particular
Vicontiel Rents, what they were and what he had levied.

By this it appears that in the first consti^^tion of this Vi^ontiel Account
the Sheriff accounted for these Rents as Bailey or Custos, and answered what he
levied though they were written out, and stood upon the great Roll all in a
lump, and when the Sheriff accounted thus, he accounted as Custos or Bailey. But
in process of time (but that time very ancient) the Sheriff for the time being
took the Corpus Comitatus or Vicontiel Rents to Firm, which Firm for the most
part amounted to very nea^ the entire quantity of the Vicontiel Rents. And this
Firm in many Counties was very ancient, for we find them mentioned in the Pipe
rolls of the time of King J^hn and ^. 1.

And by this means the Sheriff was to answer at his peril his Firm, for it
became his own debt, and he was to gather up the Vicontiel Rents to his own use
to make himself a Saver.

She Sheriffs Commission hereupon was with the reservation of the Firm, and
although we have not memorials of ^ll those reservations, yet of some we have.

Int^r Communia of 19 E. 1. Bedf. Bucks, Rex 16. Jan. Anno 19. Commisit Will.
Turvil Com' Bedf. and Bucks cum pertinent' c^stodient quamdiu Regi placuerit
redde^do inde per annum quantum Johannes Palam ^uper Vicecomes eorund^m reddere
consuevit.

And by little and little this grew into a usage, the succeeding Sheriff
answering the Firm of the County, and of the Profits of the County as his
predecessor had done* whereby the Firma Comitatus and the Firma de proficuis
Comitatus became as settled Firmes charged upon the Sheriff though there w^^e no
express reservation of it upon his patent or Commission of Sheriff.

And because these Firmes were in their first reservation proportioned to the
value and nature of those Rents, which now the Sheriff had, as before the King
had them, in specie; hence the Sheriffs Firm of the County or Body of the
County as it was proportionable to the same, answered for the Vicontiel Rents;
so it was proportioned to their nature, viz. because some of the Vicontiel
Rents were in blanc Money, the Sheriffs Firm corresponding to that was
answered in blanc Money: and some of those rents being answered numero, the
Sheriffs Firm corresponding thereto was answered numero.

And by this Account the charge both upon the Summons of the Pipe and upon the
great Roll was altered viz. whereas the former Style of the charge was De
corpore Comitatus blanc and numero, now it was changed, viz.

De Firma de corpore Com' 100 l. bl. De numero Comitatus 40
Ad thus the manner of the charge stood for the times of H. 3. and E. 1. and
for some time before, a^ least in some Counties: and so it continues to this
day with such alterations as shall be shown.

And as the Corpus Comitatus thus by usage grew a Firm, or Rent charged upon
the Sheriff, so also did the Crementum Comitatus, in those Counties where such
Crementa was answered, viz.

De Firma Comitatus 100 l. De numero Comitatus 40 De Cremento Comitatus 10
All being governed by the word Firma* For, as I have said, a long letting of
these Vicontiels to Firm, had brought them to be a settled charge, charged
upon, and answered by the Sherif^; and he gathered up the Vicontiels to his own
use, to make himself a Saver, and to make good his Firm. And thus much
concerning the answering and altering of the charges of the Vicontiels, or the
Corpus Comitatus both before and after it was in Firm.

2. As concerning the Proficuum Comitatus, the proceeding was much the same as
that concerning the Corpus Comitatus.

In the ancienter times, when the Proficua Comitatus was at all answered by the
Sheriff, it was answered by him, as Custos or Bailey upon Account: Though in
some ancient Pipe-rolls, for some Counties we find no distinct mention of it;
as in the Pip^-roll of 19. R. 1. Glouc. Herbertus reddit compotum de 372 l. 14
s. 6 d. bl. de Firma Comitatus. The like, ibid. 13 Johannis. But very
frequently afterward the Sheriffs, when they had the Corpus Comitatus, or the
Certain Annual Revenues under a Firm, yet answered the Proficua Comitatus as
Custos or Bailey: for instance, Pipe-roll 9 R. 1. Bedf. and Bucks, Simon de
Bello campo reddit compotum de 369 l. 19 s. 11 d. bl. Et de 79 l. 8 s. 1 d.
numero, de Firma Comita', without mentioning the Proficua Comitatus.

But in the Pipe-roll 25 H. 3. Bedf. and Bucks, Paulinus Pejor, ut Firmarius
reddit compotum de 369 l. 19 s. 11 d. bl. and de 108 l. numero de Firma
Comitatuum.

Idem Vicecomes reddit compotum de 100 marc' pro proficuo Comitat.

And Anno 44 H. 3. Alexander Hampden, ut Firmarius reddit compotum de 369l.
19s. 11d. bl. and de 108l. numero, de Firma Comitatuum.

Idem A. reddit compotum de 220 marc' pro proficuo Comitat' ^icut conti^etur in
originali.

And in 51 H. 3. Galfridus Rus ut Firmarius de anno 50 reddit compotum de 369l.
19s. 11d. bl. and de 108l numero de Firma Comitat'.

Idem Galfridus reddit compotum de 180 marc' pro proficuo Comitatus de anno 50.
^icut continetur in quodam Rotulo attachiato originali ejusdem anni.

And in the year following, Edvardus filius Regis primogenitus, Bartho^* de
Ire^e Subvicecomes ejus reddit pro ^o per breve Regis, compotum de 369l. 19s.
11d. bl* and 108l. numero de Firma Comitatus hoc anno.

Idem E* Vic' non reddit de aliquo proficuo Comitat' quia Rex ei commi^it
dictos Comitatus respond' inde per annum de antiqua Firma corporis, ^icut
co^tinetur in originali anni precede^t^s.

And so in the great Roll of 50 H. 3. Glouc. Reginaldus de Ale de 372 l. 14 s.
6 d. de Firma Com'.

Idem Vicecomes reddit compotum de 80 marc' pro proficuo Com' and exit' ville
and nundinorum and Hundredi de Wencham sicut continetur in quodam Rotulo, etc.
and so it continued in the time of E. 1.

By which it is evident, 1. That sometime there was nothing at all answered pro
proficuis, but it was cast into the Firm of the County. 2. That although the
body of the County, consisting of a certain yearly Revenue was in Firm, yet
oftentimes the Proficua Comitatus were not in Firm, but the Sheriff accounted
for them ut Custos, sometime higher, sometime lower, as the profits arose.

But in process of tim^ the Proficua Comitatus, at least in some Counties, fell
under a Firm, though in some Counties sooner, in some later; and having once
begun to be in Firm, the succeeding Sheriff took it as his predecessor left
it; and so it became in time a settled Firm, though not expressly reserved upon
the Patent of every Sheriff.

And yet in such cases it was become a settled Firm, by usage and custom; yet
when the Sheriff found that his Firm was too great for these profits (which
were casual, sometimes more, sometimes less) he was in those elder times
admitted to account ut Custos, without being bound to answer his entire Firm,
unless he saw fit. But that was rarely in use after the time of H. 4. and
accordingly it seems to be intimated in that ordinance of 54 H. 3. above
mentioned, for writing the great Roll of the Pipe, viz. de Firmis pro
Proficuis, vel de Proficuis. And this shall suffice for the unriddling of the
Sheriffs Accounts till the 10 and 11 Ed. 1.

CHAP. VII. The Second Period of the Sheriffs Accounts, viz. How they stood
from 10 E. 1. until 34 H. 8.
WE have in the former Chapter seen how the Statute of the Sheriffs Accounts
stood in relation to the annual Revenue of the County, whether Certain or
Uncertain, and both stand now reduced under a Firm, viz.

1. The Corpus Comitatus answered under a Firm; partly blanc, and partly
numero.

2. The Proficua Comitatus gradually also reduced into a Firm entirely numero;
but with a liberty for the Sheriff to ease himself of the excess of his Firm
above the profits, by submitting to an account of these profits as Bailey or
Custos.

It fell out in process of time that the Kings of England granted away many of
those Vicontiel Rents, and the Lands upon which some of them were charged,
whereby the Sheriff lost much of what was to make up the Firm of his County.
And although the Sheriffs, upon showing thereof upon their Accounts, had an
allowance of that which was so granted away, yet it made a trouble and disorder
in the Sheriffs Accounts.

And therefore it was necessary to have some provision for the same, but this
only concerned that part of his Firm which was of the Corpus Comitatus, or
the Firm of the Certain Annual Revenue. Therefore by the Stat. of R^tland 10
E. 1. this provision is settled.

Quod non scribatur de cetero corpora Comitatum in Rotulis singulis, quin
scribantur in quodam Rotulo annuali per se, and legantur fingulis annis super
compotum Vicecomitis fingula, viz. in ^ingulis Comitatibus* ut sciatur si quid
nobis possit accidere in quocunque Comitatu. Reman^nt vero eorundem Comitatuum
post terr^s datas scribatur in Rotulis annualibus and onerent^r inde
Vicec^mites. In quibus quidem remanentib^s all^^entur liberationes* eleemosyne,
etc. Scribantur etiam in eisdem Ro^ulis annualibus Firm Vicecomitum, proficui
Comitatus, firm Serjantiar' and Assartor', Firm Civitatum, Burgorum and
Villarum, and alie Firm de quibus est respo^sum annuatim ad Scaccarium
predictum. Scriba^tur i^ eisdem omnia debita terminata and omnia grossa debita
de quibus spes est quod aliquod inde reddi possit. Item om^ia debita quae
videntur esse clara, tit^lum de novis obtatis. Nihil scribatur in Rotulo
Annuali ni^i ea de quib^s est spes, etc. De Firmis vero mortuis and debitis de
quibus non est spes, fiat u^^s Rotulus, and irrotulentur and legantur singulis
annis super Compot' Vicecom' and debita de quibus Vicecomes respondeba^
scribantur in Rotulo annuali and ib^ acquietent^r.

And by this Act these alterations were made.

I. the state of the yearly Rents which heretofore made up the Corpus Comitatus
was* examined, and it was considered what parts thereof had been granted out by
the King, to the end that the Sheriffs Fi^me of the body of the County might be
abated with respect to those grants; which reduction of the Firm is styled
Remane^tia Firm post terras datas.

II. The old style of Corpus Comitatus was now put out of the charge, and
whereas formerly the Sheriffs charge was De Firma de corpore C^mitatus, now it
was changed, and the charge was De remanente Firm post terras datas: And
accordingly it was forthwith altered in the great Roll, only when those
remaining Rents that were to make good this Remanentia Firm, did consist of
Rents blanc, or of Rents numero only, it was accordingly written, viz. in this
manner.

De remanente Firm de Com' 100 l. bl. De numero Comitatus 50
III. There was to be extracted out of the great Roll the old Rents that made
up the Corpus Comitatus and the title thereof, and those Firmes that were Firm
mortue or obsolete, illeviable Firmes, and those debts that were desperate, and
the great Roll of the Pipe (which was written every year) was to be
disburthened of them, and they were to be transcribed into another Roll called
an Exannual Roll.

This Exannual Roll to be yearly read to the Sherif^ upon his Account, to see
what might be gotten: and if any thing appeared to be good, then the same to be
recharged again upon the great Roll of the Pipe.

IV. But there was no alteration hereby made of the Firma de Proficuis: So that
by this Act as in relation to the Firmes and Rents of the County these things
were done. 1. Those Firmes or Rents that were wholly granted away, were wholly
put out of charge, whether they were assart Rents or Firmes charged upon
particular Persons or Land, or that were within the Sheriffs Firm as Vicontiel
Rents. 2. If any Vicontiel Rents that made up the Sheriffs Firma de corpore
Comitatus were granted out, the Sheriffs Firm was abated in respect thereof.
3. If there were any Obsolete or Dead Rents, that were either Vicontiel Rents
or charged upon particular Lands or Persons which had not been a long time
answered, they together with the Corpus Comitatus were removed out of the
Annual Roll and transmitted into the Exannual Roll read yearly to the Sheriff,
to see whether any hope of levying them: but their writing out in charge in the
great Roll suspended till they might be after discovered to be leviable.

And accordingly presently after the making of this Act, the Firm of the
Sheriffs charge in the Summons of the Pipe and the entry thereof upon the great
Roll was changed, and this memorial is made upon the Pipe-roll for every County.

Corpus hujus Comitatus non annotatur hic, sed annotatur in quodam Rotulo in
quo scribuntur omnia corpora Comitatuum Angliae in manu Regis existentia simul
cum Firmis mortuis and debitis quasi desperatis quae debe^t singulis annis legi
and recitari super Compotum Vic' ut sciatur quid inde accidere possit Regi ex
quacunque causa que sunt in Thesauro. In quibus etiam continetur quod inde
Vicecomites onerentur in compotis suis predictis de remanentibus Firmarum
Comitatuum post ^erras datas. Et quod in eisdem remanentibus allocentur
liberationes and Eleemosyne constitute and alie allocationes si quas Vic'
habuerint per Br'ia Regis de eorundem exitibus.

And according to this Act and Memorandum the great Roll was certified: for
instance, before this Act the great Roll for Gloucester did run thus.

J. F. reddit compotum de 372l. 13.s 6d. blanc. de Firma Comitatus.

But after this alteration it runs thus.

In the great Roll 12 E. 1. Rogerus de Lockington Vicecomes reddit compotum de
38l. 14s. 11d. blanc. de remanente Firm Comitatus post terras datas.

Idem Vic' reddit compotum de 80 marc' de Firma pro proficuis Comitatus (which
was the old Firm thereof before 10 E. 1.)

So again in the Pipe-roll 10 E. 1. which was the Account of the year next
before the making of this Act the Roll runs thus, viz.

Bedf. Bucks, Richardus de Gollington reddit compotum de 319l. 19s. 11^. bl.
and de 108l. numero, de Firma Comitatus. Et reddit compotum de 180 marc' de
Firma pro proficu^ Comitatus sicut Johannes de Chedley reddere consuevit. In
the Roll next after the making of this Act it runs thus.

Richardus de Gollington Vic' reddit compotum de 17l. 7s. bl. de remanent'
Firm ^omitatus post terras datas sicut supra continetur, and de 108l. de Firma
numero.

Et Vic' reddit compotum de 100 marc' de Firma pro proficuis ^icut continetur
in Rot. 11: By which instances these things appear, viz.

1. That the Firma de Proficuis continued the same as before: For therein no
alteration was made by the Stat. of Rutland.

2. That the Title of the Firma de corpore Comitatus was changed into the Title
de remanente Firm Comitatus post terras datas.

3. That the quantity of the Firmes were reduced to smaller Sums with respect
to those Firmes or Lands charged therewith formerly and since granted out.

4. That yet the Titles of Blanc and Numero continued or were omitted as the
nature of the Vicontiel Rents that remained ungranted were, viz. When all the
blanc Rents were granted out, the Firm de remanente was answered only numero.
Where all the Rents numero were granted the Sheriff answered his Firm wholly
blanc. If part of his Rent blanc were granted and nothing of those Rents that
were answered numero, he answered the remaining part of his Firm blanc, and
the entire residue nume^^. For the Sherif^s Firm of the County before, and de
remanente now, did answer to the quantity, and also to the nature or quality of
those Vicontiel Rents that he was to receive to make good his Firm.

But abating that one alteration from Firma corporis Comitatus to de remanente
Firm, and the abridging of the Firm as before, and the discharging both of
the Summons of the Pipe and the great Roll of those charges that were
transcribed into the Exannual Roll, the rest, both of the charge and great Roll
continued as before.

But notwithstanding this provision gave some ease to the Sheriffs in relation
to those Firmes, yet the charging of them with these Firmes became a matter of
continual complaint, for that they were still charged with these Firmes, yet
many of the Rents and benefits that should make good their Firmes were sold or
became illeviable after Rot. Parl. 25 E. 3. n. 39. Item pry les Commons que
touts Vicounts que sont charge de certain Firmes pur les Counties ou* ils sont
Vicounts soient discharge de ce^ post resceit de lour Baily per cause de
Franchises grant Run breve soit mand al Treasurer and Barons deschequer quils
faient due allowances al chescun Vicount ^ur le render de lour Accounts en
chescun case la ou ils voilent quil soit reasonable.

And in the same Parliament in 47, the Sheriffs of Bedf. and Bucks pray to be
discharged of the Firmes of the Baylywick of their Hundreds, because those
Baylywicks yielded no profit: they are remitted to the Exchequer, Rot. Parl. 45
E. 3. n. 45. The Sheriffs of Essex and Hertford, pray an ease in respect of
illeviable Firmes charged upon them, and Hundreds and Rents granted from them:
answered, Le Roy lour ad fait grace.

By the Statute of 1 H. 4. cap. 11. upon the complaint that the Sheriffs are
charged with the ancient Firmes of their County, notwithstanding that great
part of the profits of the same be granted to Lords and others: It is enacted
that the Sheriffs shall account in the Exchequer and have an allowance by their
Oaths of the issues of their Counties.

Rot. Parl. 11 H. 4. n. 46. and sequent'. The Sheriffs of several Counties
complain that they are charged with several ancient Firmes which they are not
able to levy, viz. Essex and Hertf. with the Firm of the County, and the Firm
of the profits of the County: York with the Firm of the County* post terras
datas. Devonshire with the remanent' Firm C^mitatus post terras datas, the
Firma de Proficuis Comitatus, and a certain Firm of 100 marks called blanch
Firm. Norfolk and Suffolk with a Firm called de remanent' Firm post terras
datas, and Firma de Proficuo Comitatus, whereof they complain that they cannot
levy any thing, and besides the Hundred and Liberties granted out to the
diminution of their profit; and pray remedy according to the Stat. of 1 H. 4.

They are referred to the King's Council to make such pardon and mitigation as
they shall think reasonable.

Rot. Parl. 1 H. 5. n. 34, 35. The like complaints are made in the behalf of
the Sheriffs, and prayed that they may have allowances out of their Firmes upon
their oaths according to the Statute of 1 H. 4. But they have the like answer
as before, viz. a reference to the Council.

But Rot. Parl. 4 H. 5. n. 24. and 4 H. 5. cap. 2. The like petition is
received, viz. that by their oaths they may have an allowance of what the
cannot levy out of those great Firmes that are charged sub nomine Vic,' viz.
Firmes*of their Counties, blanc Firmes de novo incremento, etc. But instead of
redress they lost that benefit which the Statute of 1. H. 4. had before
afforded them. And it is directly enacted that the Sheriffs shall have
allowances by their oath of things casual, which lie not in Firm or annual
demand: But of those things which lie in Firm annual, or demand annual, they
be charged as Sheriffs in aforetime had been charged. And thus stood the
business of the Sheriffs Firmes until the Statute of 34 H. 8. which is the
next Period.

CHAP. VIII. Touching the State of the Sheriffs Firmes from the Statute of 34
H. 8. till the fourteenth year of the Reign of King Charles 1. which is the
Second Period.
WE have seen in the former Chapter how the case stood with the Sheriffs Firm
after the Statute of Rutland, and how the Statute of 4 H. 5. cap. 2. bound the
Firmes charged upon the Sheriffs, closer upon them than for some years before:
and so they continued till the making of the Statute of 34 H. 8. cap. 16.

This Statute recites those several Firmes charged to the Sheriff sub nomine
Vicecomitis, viz. de remanent' Firm post terras datas: Firma de Proficuo
Comitatus, and those other minute Firmes demanded sub nomine Vicecomitis. And
many of these particular small Rents that made up these Firmes charged upon the
Sheriffs are lost or not leviable, or extinguished by Attainders and
Dissolutions of Monasteries, and yet the Sheriffs continue charged with their
Firmes as formerly. It enacts*

1. That all Sheriffs that have no Tallies of Record shall upon their days of
prefixion deliver in Rolls or Schedules of Parchment containing the particular
Sums of Money which he has or might have levied as parcel of the said ancient
Firmes, naming the Person and Lands of which they are to be levied.

2. That after such Schedules delivered the Court shall have power to allow and
make deductions in the said Sheriffs Firmes of all such Sums of Moneys as the
Firmes shall be more than the Sums in such Schedules shall amount unto.

3. And the Court shall proceed to the recovery of such Sums belonging to the
said Firmes as are omitted in such Schedules.

4. That the Sheriff have allowance and discharge of all such illeviable Sums
as are written to him in process.

5. That the Sheriff have allowance for entertainment of Justices, etc.

But this was but a temporary Act, and discontinued at the next Parliament. But
a farther Act was after made for the ease of the Sheriff, especially in
relation to those Firmes, viz. 2 and 3 E. 6* cap. 4. By this it is enacted,

1. That the Sheriff shall have such allowances and Tallies of reward as they
had before the Act of 34 H. 8. or may account according to the Act at their
election.

2. That they that account and take no Tally of Record shall be treated in the
Exchequer as though the Act of 34 H. 8. were in force.

3. That those that have no Tallies of reward shall have allowance of the Diet
of the Justices, etc.

4. That all such Sheriffs as take no tallies of reward shall be discharged of
all Firmes, Goods, Chattels, Profits, Casualties, etc. as they cannot levy or
come by.

5. That all that have Tallies of Reward shall be discharged of all Firmes and
Sums of Money that they cannot levy, except* Vicontiels with which they are to
remain chargeable as before the making of the former Act.

6. That Sheriffs shall have allowances of such Vicontiels as are extinguished
by unity of possession in the Crown by dissolution of Monasteries.

7. That the Sheriff at his day of prefixion when he is sworn to his account,
shall be sworn to deliver into the Court of Exchequer, Rolls or Schedules of
Parchment containing all the particular Sums of Money which he has levied or
might levy of his Vicontiels or other Firmes, mentioning the Persons and Lands
of which they are leviable, and the Court to take care for the levying of such
of the Vicontiels, or Firmes, which are omitted out of the Schedules, for
saving the King's rights, and to make out process for the same.

Upon these Acts these things are observable.

I. That those Sheriffs that have Tallies of reward may not discharge
themselves of their Vicontiels, viz. the Remanent' Firm post terras datas, and
Cr^o Comitatus, and other small Rents charged sub nomine Vicecomitis (if he
take his Tally of reward) by oath that he cannot levy it, or all of it.

II. But if such a Sheriff will wave his Tally of reward, he may account
according to the Statute of 34 H. 8. and so discharge himself of his Vicontiels
or Firmes thereof as well as other Firmes. And the truth is, I think, anciently
there were some. Sheriffs that had Tallies of reward, viz. York, Northampton,
Cumb'land, Hereford, etc.

But since the making of this Act they have waved them, accounting it more
beneficial to take the benefit of those Statutes upon their account, than to
take their Tallies of reward. So that now all Sheriffs have an equal benefit of
the Statutes of 34 H. 8. and 2 and 3 E. 6.

III. But those Sheriffs that had no Tallies of reward might discharge
themselves of their Vicontiels and Firmes de remanente Comitatus, as well as
other things that they could not levy.

IV. That all Sheriffs, as well those that had or had not Tallies of reward
might discharge themselves of the casual charges, or their annual uncertain
charges; and consequently might, and most ordinarily after this Statute did
discharge themselves of the entire Firm de proficuis Comitatus, in case the
profits of their Counties did not surmount the charge that attended them. And
by this means since the making of this Statute, those Sheriffs that were
charged with the Firma de proficuis rarely if at all answered any thing for it,
because they have always ascertained the Court that there were no such profits
beyond the charge in collecting them: or that the charge of keeping the
County Court, the Turns, the Hundred-Courts, which were the things that made up
the Firma de proficuis, surmounted the benefit.

V. And this making appear was no other than the oath of the Sheriff, that he
could not levy this or that Rent, parcel of his Vicontiels, or that there were
no Proficua Comitatus, etc. And this oath of the Sheriff has always been the
Warrant to discharge him of all or any part of his Firmes. By which means it
has most ordinarily come to pass that although the Sheriff has paid in his
profers at Easter and Michaelmas, yet when he comes upon his account he does by
his oath discharge himself of all his Firma de remanente Comitatus, and thereby
most times the King becomes Debtor to the Sheriff for those Moneys which he
received as profers, or Moneys due by the Sheriff upon his Firm.

And it is but reason; for the Statute gives him that just benefit to discharge
himself by his oath of what he cannot levy or receive.

And yet though the Sheriffs have constantly by their oath discharged
themselves of the entire Firm de Proficuis Comitatus, and of a great part of
their other Firmes of the Vicontiels, or Remanent'Firme, and other Rents
charged upon them in gross Sums, by swearing the illeviableness of some of
those Vicontiels which make up those Remanent' Firm Comitatus and gross Sums,
yet constantly after this Act and until the year of our Lord 1650 the entire
Firmes, viz. the entire Firm of the Remanent' post terras datas, and the
entire Firm de proficuis Comitatus, were constantly written out in charge to
the Sheriff upon the Summons of the Pipe, and entirely charged upon the great
Roll* as they had ever been since the Statute of Rutland, and in the very same
manner, though in truth it was for the most part but an idle piece of
formality; for the Sheriffs constantly swear it off by virtue of the Statute.
And thus by these Statutes the Sheriff had ease by his oath from that part and
those parts of his Firmes that he sweared he could not levy.

But the truth is the Sheriffs have taken that part of the Statute which was
for their ease, viz. to swear in discharge of their Firmes, but have two much
omitted that other part of the Statute that was for the King's advantage, viz.
the delivery in upon their oaths the Schedules of their Vicontiels: by which
omission possibly many small, but good, Rates have been lost since the Statute
of 2 and 3 E. 6. which might have been preserved. Although possibly the far
greater part were lost long before, as appears by the complaints of the
Sheriffs, in relation to their Firmes, in the Parliament Roll of 11 H. 4. above
mentioned* And thus the Sheriffs Firmes stood until the 15th of King Charles
the first.

CHAP. IX. The Third Period from the fifteenth year of King Charles the first
until the year of our Lord 1650. And how the Sheriffs Firmes and Accounts
stood in that interval.
BY an order of the Court of Exchequer made the 25th. Junii, 15 Car. 1. upon
the complaint of the King's Firmor of decayed Rents it was ordered that the
Clerk of the Pipe should cast up and compute, and severally and distinctly put
in charge arrearages of decayed Rents and parcells of Rents, that process and
commissions might be made forth thereupon by virtue of the order. But this
proved uneffectual, for although the same was done accordingly, yet the King
received litte advantage thereby, neither did it at all convenience the
Sheriff, or alter the charge written out in the Summons of the Pipe, or upon
the great Roll* For the Firmes continued still in charge as before, without any
alterations: And though somewhat of small consequence was found out, which
might help to make good the Sheriffs Firmes in some particulars, yet the same
still fell short, and the Sheriffs were still enforced to make use of the
advantage of the Statute of 2 E. 6. to ease themselves by their oath of
illeviable Rents, till the year 1650.

CHAP. X. The Fourth Period of the Sheriffs Firmes from the y^ar, 1650 unto
this day, and how they were answered in that interval.
IN the times of the late troubles, viz. 6. Julii, 1650. there was an order
made in the Court of Exchequer touching the Sheriffs Firmes and the Vicontiel
Rents, which because it has set a Rule in this Business, which to this day is
observed, I shall here transcribe verbatim.

Whereas the Sheriffs of several Counties of England stand charged in the great
Roll of the Pipe, and have so stood charged anciently with diverse Sums of
Money in gross, sub nomine Vicecomitis, under the several Titles of de rem'
Firm' Com' post terras datas: de veteribus Cr^i Comitatus. De Firma de proficuo
Comitatus. De Cornagio. De Warda Castri. De Firma perprestur and escaet. De
emersis Firmis. De minutis particulis. Serjantia de tr^is Assart' infra
diversas Forestas, and the like. And the said Sheriffs yearly, and from year to
year, have been and still are commanded by the Summons of the Pipe, to levy the
same as heretofore to the use of the Crown, so now to the use of the
Commonwealth, without expressing where, of whom, for what cause, or out of
what Lands or Tenements the same are particularly to be levied by the said
Sheriffs, or out of what particulars the said Sums in gross do so arise; in
regard whereof, and that it has heretofore appeared in the time of King H. 8.
upon complaint of the Sheriffs, that a great part of the particular Rents and
annual Sums of Money, wherewith the said Sheriffs do stand charged upon their
Accounts in gross, had been long before that time payable by Monasteries,
Abbots, Priors, attainted Persons, and the like, whose Estates were come to the
Crown, and so ought to be discharged by unity of possession; and yet that the
said Sheriffs were still charged in gross with the same, to their great burden
and grievance; it was in the 34th year of the said late King H* 8. enacted by
Parliament in the case of these Sheriffs, and of all Sheriffs for the time to
come; that the said Sheriffs should be charged to answer upon their Accounts
yearly such Rents and Sums of Money of the natures aforesaid only, as by the
particular Rentals or Vicontiels, by them to be yearly delivered in upon oath,
they should set forth and make appear to be by them leviable; and that they
should be discharged of all the residue which they upon their Oaths should
affirm to be illeviable, by virtue of the said Act of Parliament, which has
been so continued accordingly, ever since. Howbeit the Sheriffs have from time
to time complained, and still complain against the writing forth of more to be
levied and answered by them upon their Accounts, than such Rents and Sums of
Money only as appears upon the oaths of their predecessors, Sheriffs, to be
leviable; and that the rest, appearing to be illeviable, ought to be removed
out of their said annual Roll, and Commissions thereupon to be awarded out of
the Exchequer, for reviving the same according to the true intention of the
said Statute of 34 H. 8. which the now Lord chief Baron, and the rest of the
Barons, taking into their serious consideration, and being willing and
desirous, so far forth as may stand with the preservation of the due rights of
the Commonwealth, to give all fitting ease and satisfaction to Sheriffs
therein, according to the meaning of the said Statute of 34 H. 8. and according
to the Statute of Rutland, 10 Ed. 1. whereby it is provided that nothing shall
be written out to the Sheriffs but such Firmes and Debts whereof there is some
hope that something may be levied. And that all dead Firmes and desperate Debts
are to be removed from the annual or great Roll into the exannual Roll, and not
to be written forth in process to the Sheriff, but to be inquired of to see if
any thing may be revived. Whereupon the said Lord chief Baron and the rest of
the Barons, calling before them the Clerk of the Pipe, with the Secondaries,
and the rest of the sworn Clerks of the said Office, and upon debate of the
business, finding it to be a work of great difficulty, labor and care, to
examine and set forth in every County, from the Originals and Records of such
antiquity to be compared with later times, the particulars which are from
henceforth to be written to the Sheriffs to levy in certain. And such as are
for the reasons aforesaid to be removed out of the said annual Roll have
nevertheless in ease of all Sheriffs for time to come, with respect to the
labor and care of the Officers and Clerks to be by them undergone therein. It
is this day ordered that the Clerk of the Pipe, the Secondaries and other sworn
Clerks of the said Office in their several assignments shall in pursuance of
the said Statute of Rutland, and the said Statute of 34 H. 8. use their best
endeavor, diligence and care, with as much convenient speed as a work of so
great labor and consequence may well be performed, fully to explain and set
forth, and shall from henceforth fully explain and set forth, in the subsequent
annual Roll of this Court, so many of the particular Rents as they find out and
discover by any of the Remembrances, Books, Vicontiels of Sheriffs, or other
Records of this Court, to have been, and which be appertaining to the making up
of every of the said Firmes so charged in gross Sums as aforesaid, and shall
therein distinguish which and how much of those particular Rents have been and
are to be yearly answered.

And so much of the said Firmes as cannot be explained by setting forth the
particulars, together with the particulars so set forth and explained, which
have been in decay and unanswered by the space of forty years last past, and
which are become illeviable, shall be thereupon removed and conveyed out of the
said annual Roll and Sheriffs Accounts into the exannual Roll of this Court.
And that Commissions and Process shall be from time to time awarded to regain
and recover the same, according to the true intention of the said Statutes.

This Order produced these Effects.

I. Great care was taken to collect and set forth the obscure Rents, and upon
what they were charged.

II. The particulars of those Rents and Vicontiels that made up the Sheriffs
Firmes formerly, of Remanent' Firm post terras datas, and De Cremento
Comitatus, as also those Rents that were charged upon the Sheriffs in gross
Sums, as De diversis Firmis, De minutis particulis Serjantiarum, and such
other charges in gross were wholly left out and omitted.

IV. Instead thereof such particular Rents and Vicontiels as made up formerly
these Firmes and gross charges, or Money of them as could be discovered were
particularly written out in the Summons of the Pipe, and in the great Roll
first under the title of several Hundreds, wherein the Bills lay that were
charged or had any Lands charged within them with these Vicontiels and the
several Vills under the Titles of these Hundreds, and the several Lands that
were charged within those Vills, as far forth as could be discovered.

V. Those Vicontiels that were part of those Firmes or gross charges, and
likewise such particular Rents charged formerly in the annual Roll in
particular, which had not been answered in forty years before, were removed out
of the Summons of the Pipe and great Roll into the exannual Roll to be put in
process as they could be discovered. And thus the form of the charge which had
continued ever since 10 E. 1. as to the Firmes and gross Sums, was too lately
changed to the great ease of the Sheriffs, of the Court and of the People, who
were often harassed by the Sheriffs to make themselves savers, by levying these
obscure uncertain and illeviable Sums. And all this without any detriment to
the King who indeed before had an appearance of great Firmes and Sums
expressed in the Summons of the Pipe and great Roll, which yet were sworn off
too little by the Sheriffs in pursuance of the Statute of 23 E. 6.

VI. But besides all this, the Firma de proficuo Comitatus was also wholly laid
aside and put out of the charge of the Summons of the Pipe and the great Roll.
It is true there is no clear warrant for putting the Firm out of charge by
that order, for that order seems to extend only to Rents and Vicontiels, which
indeed made up the other in Firmes and gross Sums charged upon the Sheriffs.
But this Firm was answered for the profits of Courts and other casual
perquisites, and not in respect of any Vicontiel or annual Rent. But yet for
all that, the true extent of that order might extend to put that Firm wholly
out of charge, since it is apparent that the profits of the Sheriffs Courts
whether Hundred-Courts, County-Courts or time, do scarce quit the charges of
keeping them at this day, nor for a long time past. Neither is the King de
facto at any loss thereby, for though before this order this Firm was indeed
in charge and carried the show of some benefit to the King, yet it was wholly
sworn off by the Sheriffs by virtue of the Statute of 2 and 3 E. 6.

Only it seems reasonable that though the Firma de proficuis be put out of
charge so that the Sheriff should not be compelled to answer a Firm to that
which yields little or no benefit, yet that the Sheriff should be charged to
account for the Proficua Comitatus as Bailey or Custos though not as Firmor.

And that therefore there should stand in charge upon him to account de
Proficuis, which is all that I can find considerable to be supplied in that
order, orvin the present methodizing of the great Roll in relation hereunto.
And although this order was made in the late time of trouble, yet it has
obtained and stood in force unto this day.

The late Act of this Parliament entitled An Act for the preventing of the
unnecessary delays of Sheriffs, etc. has this Clause suitable to the said
order, viz.

And to the end that Sheriffs may for the time future be eased of the great
charge and trouble which they heretofore have been put to in passing their
Accounts in the Exchequer, occasioned partly in regard that diverse Sums of
Money have stood charged upon them in gross without expressing from what
persons, or for what cause, or out of what Lands and Tenements, the same are
particularly to be levied, or out of what particulars the said Sums in gross
do arise, whereby it comes to pass that the Sheriffs do still stand charged in
gross with diverse Sums of Money which were heretofore payable by Abbots*
Priors, Persons attainted, and such other Persons, whose Estates are since come
to the Crown, or are otherwise discharged or illeviable. And partly by the
Account of Seisures, or foreign Accounts, and by exaction of undue Fees of
Sheriffs upon their opposals. But it is enacted, etc. that no Sheriffs shall be
charged in account to answer any illeviable Seizure, Firm, Rent or Debt, or
either Seizure, Firm, Rent, Debt or other matter or thing whatsoever, which
was not writ in process to him or them to be levied wherein, the persons of
whom, or the Lands and Tenements out of which, together with the cause for
which the same shall be so levied shall be plainly and particularly expressed,
but shall be thereof wholly discharged without Petition, Plea or other trouble
or charge whatsoever.

This Act had in effect discharged the old charges in gross, had not this
business been before settled by the order of 1650. But by that order the same
thing is done and much more, and put into a very good order.

And thus I have done with this ^ntricate Argument touching the Sheriffs
Firmes. And the occasion of my strict enquiry into it was, a difference between
the Auditors and the Clerk of the Pipe: upon the whole debate whereof, I found
only these matters.

1. That, in truth, the great occasion of complaint was, that the Clerks of the
Pipe used different methods of accompting from the Auditors of the Revenue, the
not observance whereof occasioned a mistaken representation by the Auditors
that there was a deceit in their Accounts, whereas it appeared to be no such
thing: for when both accounted their several ways, the issue was that the
Accounts agreed in the conclusion.

2. That the Firm de proficuo Comitatus was put out of charge without Warrant,
and it was thought by the Auditors, a great and considerable loss to the Crown,
supposing that the Fees for execution of Process and Writs were to make up that
Firm: but this is sufficiently unriddled before.

3. That there was an allowance to the Sheriff of Bucks of a considerable
yearly Sum, ut Apparatori Comitatus: This indeed ought not to be allowed at
this day, the reason thereof ceasing as has been showed; and therefore from
henceforth that charge is to be disallowed, but the Clerk of the Pipe not
greatly blamable herein, because there was an order of the Court in the Queens
time for making that allowance: But the reason whereupon that order was made
was a mistake and an error in the Court not in the Clerk that followed the
order.

4. That there is no account given for the Firmes of Baylywicks as was
anciently; which indeed, was parcel of the Proficuum Comitatus, as has been
showed. But the truth is, there is no great reason for any such complaint* the
Firmes of Baylywicks being taken away by Act of Parliament, and levy disused in
most places.

5. That when a Sheriff is in Surplusage they make it good unto him out of any
other debt by the Sheriff himself, or any other Sheriff of the same or any
other County, without any Warrant from my Lord Treasurer or the Court. And
besides that, the other Sheriff is discharged upon the Roll of his Debt, and it
does not appear upon what reason. And indeed, this is a thing fit to be
reformed, and that such allowances be not made without Warrant from the Lord
Treasurer, or Order of Court, and that an Entry or Memorandum thereof be made
upon the Roll of the Debts so discharged. But yet, the truth is, this manner of
allowance has been a long time used, and it is no novelty or late attempt,
neither is there any great damage to the King by it, for it is but the payment
of one real Debt with another. But howsoever, this is fit to be reformed by
order of the Court that the Sheriffs deliver not in the Roll of the Vicontiel
as is required by the Statute. And it is true, he ought to do it or should be
sworn thereunto. But the necessity is not now so great, because the particular
Rents are now charged upon the great Roll by virtue of the order of 1650, which
does in a great measure supply that defect, and yet the delivery in of the
Vicontiel Roll may be fit to be revived.

The most of the rest of the complaints were touching particulars mischarged,
or not charged, but the Errors were rather in the Complainers than in the
Pipe, and for want of a clear understanding of those intricate and obscure
proceedings of the Pipe. And upon a full search of the particulars, I find the
Clerks of the Pipe gave very clear satisfaction therein.

Upon the whole matter of these Accounts, I do observe these Two or Three
Observables.

I. That the inconvenience of retaining the old formalities of proceedings, the
same terms and words, and very same mood of all things in Accounts, when the
nature of things and times requires a change, and accommodation of new forms or
expressions as a piece of hurtful superstition; therefore, although the change
of forms of this nature is not to be done rashly and precipitantly, yet when
the exigence of things requires it, there must be an accommodation to the
present use, understanding and exigence of affairs.

And hence it is that the Accounts of the Auditors of the Revenue are more
easily intelligible as being framed to the use and exigence of the times; but
the Accounts of the Pipe more mysterious and perplexed, to persons unacquainted
with them, for till 10 E. 1. they kept in all things the precise form of
writing their great Roll, as had been used in King Stephen's time. And the same
form they kept until 1650, abating the alterations made in 10 E. 1. not
without great inconvenience to the King's people and Sheriffs.

II. That these small Rents and Vicontiels would be with much more advantage to
the King, and be sold off to the several Persons and Townships chargable
therewith, than be kept in method of collection, as now they are, unless some
more ready collecting of them by the Receivers could be thought upon, provided
the Money arising by sale be laid out presently in more certain Revenue: For,
1. They are in respect of their smallness, and dispersedness, and uncertainty
of charge and manner of collecting very subject to be lost, as they have been
commonly from time to time. 2. The charge of collecting and accompting for them
by the Sheriff is very great, and the trouble and charge to the people very
much more. 3. The cost and trouble to the King in respect of Officers writing
and other matters relating thereunto, might be well retrenched thereby. And yet
when all is done, it brings a great trouble, and makes a great noise as if it
were a Revenue of great moment, and yet by that time the Sheriffs have done
swearing of particulars as illeviable, or that they know not where to charge
it, it becomes a very pitiful inconsiderable business, and scarce answering
the charge of the collecting, accompting and answering it. For it must be
observed that although by the order of 1650, the charge is more certain than
formerly, yet the Sheriff has still by the Law the benefit of the Statute of 2
and 3 E. 6. even as to those ascertained Rents, and if he cannot find them he
is, and ought to be discharged upon his oath thereof. And accordingly is daily
discharged of many of those Rents though rendered much more certain by that
order, and the pains and method of the Charge and Account, used in pursuance
hereof. Whereby in process of time, many, even of these Rents particularly
charged by virtue of that order, will be successively lost.

Sed de his curent Superiores.

FINIS.

