AN ACCOUNT Of several New Inventions and Improvements Now necessary for
England, In a Discourse by way of LETTER TO THE EARL of MARLBOURGH, Relating to
Building of our English Shipping, Planting of Oaken Timber in the Forests,
Apportioning of Public Taxes, The Conservacy of all our Royal Rivers, in
particular that of the Thames, The Surveys of the Thames, etc.


Herewith is also published at large

The Proceedings relating to the Mill'd-Lead-sheathing, and the Excellency and
cheapness of Mill'd-Lead in preference to Cast Sheet-Lead for all other
purposes whatsoever.

ALSO A Treatise of NAVAL PHILOSOPHY, written by Sir Will. Petty.

The whole is submitted to the Consideration of our English Patriots in
Parliament Assembled.

LONDON, Printed for James Astwood, and are to be Sold by Ralph Simpson at the
Harp in St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCXCI.

LICENSED,

March 6 th. 1690. Rob. Midgley.

A TABLE OF Some of the Principal Matters contained in the following LETTER TO
THE EARL of Marlbourgh.
T(...)etian Ambassador's Complaint of the (...)ant of publick-spirited Men in
England, Page 1, 2. Few or no Inventions come into the World perfect, p. 2.
Reason not believed against Interest, p. 4. The illumination of every New Art
stands in some Men's light, p. 6. The Invention of the Sea-Compass, Printing,
and of the Circulation of the Blood, maligned, p. 6, 7. The knowledge of
Anatomy advanced a third part in this last Century, p. 7. The Invention of an
Ayr-Chamber, p. 7. The old lost Invention of Malleable Glass, and the fate of
the Inventor, p. 7, 8. Inventors honored by Kings, p. 8. Charles the 5 th.
visited the Tomb of William B^ckeld, which recorded his being the Inventor of
Pickling Herrings, p. 9. The Dutch States erecting a Monument for Ludovicus a
Culen, on which was engraven his discovery, ib. Peter Pett Esquire the first
Inventor of our English Frigates, p. 10. The Constant Warwick the first Frigate,
and built by him in the Year 1646. ib. Sir Phineas Pett built 15 Capital Ships
of the Navy-Royal, besides many of lesser Rates, ib. Much admirable Invention
in the Kings-fisher, by him built in the Year 1675. ib. and p. 11. K. Charles
the second observed the Invention of Frigates in danger to be lost, p. 12. The
Britannia, built by Sir Phineas Pett, the best Ship in the World, p. 13. The
proud Inscription on the St. Lewis of France, ib. The Verses in Latin and
English under the Draught of the Britannia, p. 14, 15. Sir William Temple
quoted about the strength of our Shipping, making us an over-match for our
Enemies, p. 17. He is again quoted about the strength of our Oak, and the Art
of our Shiprights awing our Enemies, p. 17. Our Shipwrights bound by their
Charter not to communicate their Art to Foreign Princes or States, ib. The
Contracts at the Navy-Board 'till of late restrained Builders of Ships, to
build only with English Timber, ib. The Word [ English] now left out in
Contracts, ib. Shortly after the Restoration of King Charles the second, the
Corporation of Shipwrights presented him Proposals in Writing for the
preservation and increase of Oaken-Timber, p. 18. His Majesty referred those
Proposals to the then Attorney General, ib. Mr. Attorney referred it to the
Navy-Board to consider. ib. A Report from Sir Will. Coventry, Sir Will. Batten,
Mr. Pepys, and the rest of the Navy-Board, how a sufficient number of Oaken
Trees might be planted in his Majesty^s Forests, ib. Acorns sown have in 30
Years born a Stem of a Foot diameter, ib. Timber of a Foot and a half so, will
be sufficiently useful in building Ships, ib. The scarcity of Timber in the
Forests, makes for the necessity of promoting the Mill'd-Lead Invention for
Sheathing, especially in time of War, p. 19. The Mill'd-Lead Invention of age
to speak for it self. ib. King Charles the second highly approved of the
Invention, p. 20. The Phoenix sheathed therewith at Portsmouth, and the good
success thereof after diverse Voyages, ib. His Majesty's Reason why several
Shipwrights opposed the Invention, p. 21. His Majesty's Master-Shipwrights
approved thereof, p. 23. A superstitious Fancy of an impossibility made use of
against it, p. 24. Several excellent Inventions have been run down by
Superstition, ib. What ensued upon the Mill'd-Lead Company's Reply to the
Navy-Board before the Commissioners of the Admiralty, p. 25, 26, 27, 28. The
Company's large Reply, drawn by the excellent Pen of Mr. Pepys, p. 26. Tycho
Brahe appealed from the Judgment of the Age he lived in, to that of Posterity,
p. 30. The Verses writ by Tycho Brahe under the Pictures of the old famous
Astronomers in his Study, and under his own Picture there, p. 30, 31. An
Account of the Fate of Galilaeus, p. 32. Of Peiresk's Letter to him, ib. He
confuted Pope Urban's idle Comment upon Aristotle de Coelo, ib. The Pope got
his Book condemned as Heretical by the Consistory, ib. Dr. Robert Wood's
learned and excellent Invention, drawn by himself, in Latin and English, for
the fixlng of Easter for ever, from p. 32, to p. 38. The Author of The Happy
future State of England referred to for celebrating the Royal Society, p. 39.
That Author referred to as the first Discoverer of the Numbers of the People of
England from Records, ib. An An^imadversion on such Fops as ridicule the Royal
Society, ib. Mynheere Van Beuninghen made the People of England and Wales but
two Millions, p. 40. Dr. Isaac Vossius made the People of England, Scotland and
Ireland but two Millions, ib. The Observator on the Bills of Mortality with
excellent fine spun Notions made them about six Millions, ib. The Author of The
Happy future State of England, does from the Returns on the late Poll Acts, and
the Bishops Survey in the Year 1676. make them about 8 Millions, p. 41. He has
given Accounts of the Numbers of the People of France, Spain, Holland, ib. He
has given Directions about the apportioning Taxes with equality, p. 42. The
want thereof is the only Grievance in Taxes, ib. Sir Will. Petty's Judgment how
a Million should be raised in England, p. 43. Half as much more now paid by the
Land Tax alone, than in the Million, as distributed by Sir Will. Petty's
Proposal, ib. By the Rule of Sir Will. Petty's Calculation of a Tax of one
Million, above six Millions may be raised, and no Man feel it much, if equally
laid, and yet according to it no man will pay above a tenth part of his yearly
Expense, p. 44. Princes and their Ministers to be steered in their
apprehensions of the Danger of Civil War, by the Rule of Dulce Bellum
inexpertis, p. 45. An Account of the French King's Expenses and Receipts in the
Year 1614. out of Thuanus. p. 46. The yearly Expenses and Receipts of the
present French King, more than quadrupled since that time, ib. Sir Will.
Petty's Naval Philosophy herewith published, p. 47. That Work of his justly
extolled, ib. The Earl of Marlbourgh's Courage and Conduct in the taking of
Cork and Kingsale referred to with Honor, p. 48. An Account of the Invention
of Gunns in the Year 1378. i^. That Invention maligned by Polydore Virgil,
Cardan and Melancton, ib. King Alfred the first Inventor of Lanthorns, p. 49.
Of our new Invented Glasses and Lamps, p. 50. Of the Scarlet or Bow-Dye, p. 51.
Of the New-River-Water, p. 52. An Account of the New Engine for taking away
Obstructions and Shelfes in the Thames, and other Royal Rivers, p. 53, 54. How
much the River of Thames is shallower before the King's Yard at Deptford, since
King Charles the second's Restoration, p. 55. Of the City of London's
Applications to the former Commissioners of the Admiralty for the Preservation
of the River of Thames, p. 56. Of the City of London's Reasons in writing,
presented to that Board against Letters Patents for licensing Encroachments, p.
56. If that River were spoiled, the great Trade of England would be
transplanted, not to other Seaport Towns in England, but to Foreign Parts, p.
57. A Lease made of a great part of the Soil of the River, and by which the
Conservatorship thereof may accrue by Survivorship to a Colour-man in the
Strand. ib. Those Commissioners of the Admiralty took much Pains in preserving
that River, ib. The Report from the Judge of the Admiralty of the Admiral's
being Conservator of all the Royal Rivers, and having a Concurrency with the
Lord Mayor in the Conservacy of the Thames, p. 58. The Wisdom of our Ancestors
in making them both Conservators of it, p. 59. Of the Conservators of the great
Rivers among the Romans, ib. and p. 60. The River* of Thames now laboring
under its most Critical State, p. 60. The great ill effect that the Fire of
London had on the Thames, p. 61. The Stream of the Thames more clear and gentle
than that of Severn, and the Cause thereof, ib. and p. 62. Why the Tide flows
up so high into the heart of this River, p. 62. The Cause of the shifting of
the Tides there, ib. The three Constituent parts of a River, p. 64. Of the
destruction of several great Rivers by Sullage, ib. The Administration of the
Banks of great Rivers is a part of the Regalia, p. 65. The Conservatorship of
such Rivers is a part of the Regalia, ib. Of the Conservators of such Rivers,
and their Banks among the Romans, p. 66. This Branch of the Regalia granted to
our Admirals in their Patents, ib. The Vice-Admirals of Counties are in their
Patents from the Admiral, appointed Conservators of the Royal Rivers there. ib.
Of those Vice-Admirals Non-user of the Power to demolish Nusances, p. 67. Of
the Agreement of the Common Law and Civil-Law Judges An. 1632. that the Admiral
may redress all Obstructions in Rivers between the first Bridges and the Sea.
p. 68. Licenses granted by the Admiral for enlarging Wharfs, etc. p. 69. The
illegality of granting Forfeitures before Conviction, p. 72. Sir George Treby,
the Attorney General, mentioned with Honor, ib. The Benefit the People now
find by being freed from illegal Grants of Forfeitures before Conviction does
much outweigh all the Taxes they pay to their Majesty's, p. 77. The Passage
concerning the Alderman who asked King James the first, if he would remove the
River of Thames, ib. and p. 78. Of the Survey of that River by Sir Jonas M^or,
p. 79. Of the Survey of that River by the Navy-Board and Trinity-house, with
the assistance of Captain Collins, ib. and p. 80. Captain Collins his Draught
of that River commended, ib. The only way possible for preventing future
Encroachments on that River, ib. The Nature of the Office of a Conservator, as
defined by the Writers of the Regalia, p. 81. The same agrees with the Measures
of our Law Books, ib. Granting things to the Low-water-mark vexatious, p. 83.
The Course taken by the Council Board An. 1613. to preserve the River of Tyne,
p. 84, 85. An Order of Council for demolishing a Nuisance to Navigation in the
Port of Bristol, An. 1630. p. 87. More of the Conservacy of the Royal Rivers,
ib. and p. 88, 89. That Care be taken against the Sea-mens being molested, ib.
and p. 90. In a little more than 12 Years after the Year 1588. our Seamen were
decayed about a third part, p. 90. In the Act of 35 Eliz. for restraining New
Buildings, a tender regard was had to the Seamen, ib. and p. 91. A necessary
Document to be thought of by the Conservators of our Rivers, p. 92. The
Wardmote Inquest referred to for the preservation of the River of Thames, p.
93, 94. A fifth part of the River of Thames in our Memory taken in by
Encroachers, p. 95. The Profit accruing from the River of Thames to the Admiral
and Lord Mayor, ib. and p. 90. Of the Charge incident to the Lord Mayors in the
Conservacy of that River, ib. Of the Charge born by the City in the obtaining
Patents to be vacated, that prejudiced that Conservacy, ib. and p. 97. Of the
City's applying to King Edward the 4 th. for a Scire Facias to vacate a Patent
of that Nature, and of the Lord Mayor's obtaining and prosecuting that Scire
Facias to effect, p. 97. The Diligence of several late Lord Mayors in thus
showing their Zeal for the Conservacy of the Thames, ib. The present Lord Mayor
referred to with Honor on the same account, p. 98. Courage in Magistrates
commended, ib. The City of London applied to the Government in Henry the
eighth's Reign for a Proclamation, and obtained one, for the better enabling
the Lord Mayor and his Deputies to promote the Conservacy of the River of
Thames, p. 99. Of the late King James rejecting a Proposition for Building on
the Shore above Bridge, p. 100. More of the present State of Encroachments on
that River below Bridge, and the only way to prevent future ones there and in
the other Royal Rivers, from p. 107, to the end.
To the Right Honorable John LORD Churchill, Baron Churchill of Sandridge,
Viscount Churchill of Aymouth in the Kingdom of Scotland, Earl of Marlborough,
and one of their Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
My most Honored LORD,
IT has been observed by several of our late ingenious Writers, that an
eminent Venetian Ambassador, after a long residence in England, sailing
homeward, did cast his Eye back on this Land, and said in his own language, O
Isola felicissima, etc. The happiest Country on the face of the Earth, did it
not want public Spirits among them: Nor do I think that the pudet haec
opprobria nobis, etc. was in any Age so justly applicable to England on this
account as in the present one, wherein Men generally depraved by a selfish
inhospitable temper, do like the Hedge hog, wrap themselves up in their own
warm Down, and show forth nothing but Bristles to the rest of the World, and
cry out (...)! when they have found a Stone to throw at an Inventor of any
thing beneficial to Mankind, instead of giving a tender helping Hand to the
Inventions themselves, and which might with Iustiee be expected, since few or
none come into the World with all the perfection they are capable of.

But, My LORD, tho this Invention of Mill'd-Lead (how much or little soever I
contributed to its first Conception, it matters not, I being at its Birth
concerned in a greater share and Interest therein, and the Transactions
relating thereto, than any one else, although (...) willingly then admitted the
use of other Names more considerable to give Countenance and Credit to the
Work, and to avoid Envy) has been accompanied with tho fate of all Inventions,
namely, a peevish ^ndeavour of some narrow-soul'd Men to run it down, yet
according to the saying, Unus dum tibi propitius est Jupiter, tu hosce mi^utos
Deos, flocci feceris: Your Lordship with your great Heroical Genius, and your
incomparable penetrating Understanding, having surveyed all the circumstances
relating to this Invention, and the past Transactions about it, and your having
afterward been pleased to patronize the Inventors and Invention, I can easily
be unconcerned at the Censures of smaller People who are concerned against it.

My LORD, I have been long since taught by a great Philosopher of the Age, that
When Reason is against Men, they will be against Reason, and have sufficiently
observed, that the way that most Men take to be cried up for Masters of Reason,
is to make Reas^n serve them, that is, to serve their ^urn.

I am not now to learn, that whoever attempts the settlement of any Question,
which would be the unsettlement of any men's Interest, may be suspected to have
either an unsettled Fortune, and that like a New^comer to the Coast of such a
Question, he comes to settle himself thereby, or to have an unsettled Head, and
to be one who knows not that against any thing by which Men get their living
they would not own to believe any that came from the dead. Tho the Proofs for
any thing are as clear as the Meridian light, yet where Men are Antipodes to
each other in Interest, at the same time it is Noonday with the one, and
Midnight with the other.

And moreover, Reason as it resembles Gold in being the most valued, so (as one
says) it does too, in being the most ductile thing in Nature.

We know how much Mechanics depend on the Rule of Rectum est index ^ui and
obliqui; and here it comes into my mind to entertain your Lordship with no
unpleasant or vulgar Sp^culation in Geometry, that Maximus Angulus est recta
linea, and minimus Angulus est recta linea, the greatest Angle and the least
are both the same with a right line.

But if it were for the general profit or pleasure of Men to deny that there is
any right or strait line, or that any Right Line can be made so much as for
use, many would be found to deny it strenuously, and who perhaps either would
argue, that there is not in Nature any right Line, and that all Lines are
Artificially made by the ducture of some point, or the meeting of two
superficies, making the edge of any thing, or the Contact of a Cylinder with a
Plain, and that neither of these ways can produce a right Line, because there
is no true strait Superficies, but what has inequality or hollowness in it, and
that consequently the motion of any Point upon any uneven Superficies, or the
mutual concurrence of two uneven Superficies can never produce an even or right
Line, or who else would, if not cut off, yet jogg the Hands of those they found
making right Lines, or if they found any made, would either oblitterate them,
or apply Microscopes to them, whereby some inequality or raggedness in them
would be discovered, or they would pervert Witnesses to swear, or Judges to
decree, that they were not Right Lines, or perhaps they would turn the making
of Right Lines into Ridicule, according to the Humor of this Age, or according
to the humor of an old barbarous former one, maliciously call it the Black Art.

We know that according to the Sea-phrase one Ship is said to wrong another,
that excels it in swiftness of sailing: And thus the Shipwrights and Plumbers
may if they please think the Mill'd-Lead Invention has wronged them in doing
so much right to Shipping and Navigation in particular.

Nor is it indeed possible for any New Invention, how profitable soever to
Mankind, to appear in the World, but that such new Illumination must stand in
some Men's light, and obstruct their pratique in those Arts of life wherein they
were expert. Thus there is no doubt but the Invention of the Sea-Compass was
maligned by the old dull Coasters, and that of Printing by the Hackney Writers,
and the excellent Notion of the circulation of the Blood, by the old Mump^imus
Doctors, who being sufficiently at ease by the Circulation of Money and Trade
in the Realm* knew how to stuff their hollow Teeth with their Patient's Bread,
without studying Anatomy; the knowledge whereof has been enriched by a full
third part at least within this last Century, as the learned Dr. Henshaw tells
us, in his very ingenious Book called A Register for the Air, printed An. 1677.
and wherein he has published an excellent Invention of a Domicil or Air
Chamber* and by means whereof in any part of our Native Soil we may have the
Air as pure as on the top of the Pike of Teneriffe, and made so pure as is not
to be found on the face of the habitable Earth.

And thus no doubt but the Goldsmiths and Silver-smiths would think themselves
injured by any who could revive the Art of making Glass malleable, which one in
Tiberius's time had found out a way to do, and withal so yielding, and such as
would rather bow than break; for he bringing a Glass Vial to the Emperor to
show his Art, he threw the Vessel against the Stone-pavement, with which blow
it was not broken but dented, and then taking his Hammer, be again beat out the
dent: But he was secretly made away for his pains, as likewise several
Inventors have been by the Dullards who only had the Wit to do that, and the
Assassinates have thought they might dispatch them as justly as Soldiers think
they may deal so with those who come to beat up their Quarters.

Yet however the fate of some Inventors has been to fall at the feet of
Envious Plebeian Mechanics, others of them have had that reward of their
diligence in all Ages and Countries, to stand before Kings; and the Vicegerents
of the God of Nature have with peculiar respect treated such as the King of
Kings delighted to honor, by imparting the secrets of Nature to them.

And such respect has been shown to the Memory of useful Inventors by the
greatest Princes, that several Historians have mentioned it, that Charles the
5th. with a great Parade of his Attendants, went out of his way to see the Tomb
of William Buckeld, who (as it was recorded in his Epitaph) was the Inventor of
the Dutch way of Pickling of Herrings, which is so beneficial to those States,
that may make it be said that Amsterdam is founded upon Herring bones: His
Contrymen it seems were so just to him, as to perpetuate the fame of the
Invention as well as the Name of the Inventor by a grateful Inscription.

And thus too was the Memory of Ludovicus a Culen, Professor of Geometry at
Leyden, honored by those States, by their taking care that on his Tomb should
be engraven his Attempt to find out the proportion between a Diameter and a
Circle, dividing the Circle into more parts than Sand would constitute the
whole Earth, and yet an Uni^e was too much, and a Null too little.

I am here minded of mentioning how the Tomb of Peter Pet, Esquire the
Master Builder of England (and whose Ancestors for upwards of two hundred Years
have been Master Builders and principal Officers of the Navy Royal) records his
being the first Inventor of our English Frigates, and of which the Constant
Warwick, built by him in the Year 1646. was the first, and which sort of
Shipping is variously the most excellent and useful in the known World.

And it having been the fortune of all the Master builders of that Family
gradually to excel each other in their Art, I cannot here omit to take notice
how Sir Phineas Pett, the Son of that great Artist, having built fifteen
Capital Ships for the Royal Navy, besides many more of the lesser Rate, has
obliged his Country with a great deal of admirable Invention in the Fabric of
the Kings fisher, a fourth Rate, built by him in the Year 1675.

For whereas all Ships before, since the first use of Navigation, were built by
rising Lines, which made not so regular a Figure in the Water, he built that by
Horizontal ones, and so contrived the Port holes therein, that most of her Guns
might point to one Center, and thereby cause such breaches in the sides of the
Ship she fought with, that could not be stopped with Pluggs, and that brought
her safe off from her being taken by seven Algerine Men of War, according to
the Relation of it in the Gazets I have been informed of, and which could not
have happened but by her Guns so pointing, making such great breaches in their
sides as forced them to draw off. And so much has the New Invention of the
building her by such Lines, contributed to the excellency of her sailing, that
I have read it in a relation of the Engagement between her and the Golden Rose
of Algiers, so much famed for her sailing, printed in London in the Year 1681.
that the Kings-fisher much out sailed that Ship, and having taken her, found so
much Water in her Hold, occasioned by the great breaches in her sides, which
made her to sink down within an hour after her Capture.

What the great effects of such an Invention may hereafter be throughout the
Maritime World, I know not, Capital Ships being now liable to be sunk by
Bullets which before they were not, by reason of the multitude of Pluggs and
Hands to apply them, always in readiness, unless a Shot had lighted in the
Powder-room, as was supposed to have happened in Admiral Opdam's Ship. But he
having done so much impartial Justice to the Invention of the
Mill'd-Lead-Sheathing, I am very well contented that it comes in my way here to
retaliate to him by the just mention of the matters of fact whereby he has
obliged this Age and succeeding ones, to account him a Benefactor to his
Country.

And, my Lord, I do think my self the more obliged out of my love to my Native
Country, to present your Lordship with this glancing View of these two great
Inventions, because they are very likely in a short time to come among
Panciroll's Res deperditae, without care taken to prevent it; for King Charles
the second, who had very great Skill in the Mystery of the Shipwrights Calling,
has been heard to observe it, that the Fabrics of our English Ships did for
several Years more and more degenerate from the Friga^ way in which the
Constant Warwick was built, to the way of our sluggish old built Ships, and not
at all adapted for swiftness of Sailing, and insomuch that the Constant Warwick
it self being after the Death of the Inventor repaired by another Artist, was
in its repairing spoiled of the excellency of its sailing.

Nor have I heard of any other Ship built by the Kings-fisher's Lines, except
the Katherine Yatcht. And therefore it is of great importance to the Nation
that the Draughts of those three Vessels particularly should be transmitted
with great Care to Posterity.

I must not here forget to mention, that among the many Capital Ships built by
Sir Phinehas Pett, the BRITANNIA is by the concordant Voice of all the curious
Judges of Naval Architecture allowed to be the best Ship in the World, and far
exceeding in excellency of Building and Strength the great first Rate of
France, called the St. Lewis, on the which is engraven this proud Inscription,
Je ^uis L'unique de l' Onde, and mon Roy du Monde. An admirable Draught or
Sculpture of this Ship BRITANNIA, in four large sheets of Dutch ^aper, will
sh^rtly be published, with more modest but just Encomiastick Verses in Latin,
English, French and Dutch under it, which I thinking fit to Copy out on my
sight of the Draught, shall here entertain your Lordship with those of them
that are in Latin and English, Viz.

Ad Navem Britanniam.
Nomine digna tuo Navis, cui vela Britanii,
Imperii titulo jure superba tument;
Quid Tormenta vehis? Patrium pro fulmine Nomen,
Fluctibus and terris quo modereris habes.
Tum Caesar tibi Numen adest dextraque refulgent,
Majora Aequorei Sceptra Tridente Dei.
Quod Natura potest, potuitve Ars praestitit in Te.
Ingenio Artificis, Robora tuto tuo es.
To the Ship Britannia.
Hail mighty Ship: None has so just a claim
To swell her Sails with great Britannia's Name.
Thou need'st no Guns, that Name over Sea and Land
Thunders aloud, and gives thee full Command.
Thy Prince's Hand a Triple Scepter wields,
To which great Neptune's Trident homage yields.
The Builder's Skill equals thy strength; in thee
What Nature could, what Art can do, we see.
I have the rather thought fit to mention the just celebration of this Ship,
because some impudent Scriblers of the Coffee-House News-Letters presumed last
Summer to scandalize her, as if she were rotten, and disabled for Sea-service,
whereas in truth she was then only put into the Dock for such necessary.
Repairs as most of the thirty Capital Ships required, which were built pursuant
to the Order of Parliament, but from thence she will be lanched out perfectly
good, and as strong as ^ver.

It was a proverbial saying among the ^^mans, Moenia Sancta: And the profane
Vulgar, who write their despicable Lies for Bread, ought not to be suffered to
pollute the Walls of our Nation with their vile Pens; and such Epistolae
obscurorum Virorum should meddle, with the Gally-^oists of my Lord Mayor's
Show, and not first Rate Ships: And I believe had any such pauvres Diables in
France so belyed the Sh^p St. Lewis, they would have been Pillory'd, or
Keel-hauled under her.

Our excellent Statesman Sir William Temple (who truly deserves the Name of a
public spirited Man, for the excellent Writings he has published) in his
Su^vey of the Constitutions and In-Interests of the Empire and other Countries,
with their relation to his Majesty in the Year 1671. mentions the strength of
our Shipping, as having for many Ages past (and still for ought we know) made
us an over-match for the strongest of our Neighbors at Sea; and speaks of the
Dutch having been awed by the strength of our Oak, and the Art of our
Shipwrights, etc. It is therefore not without reason, that the Charter of the
Corporation of our Shipwrights has obliged them not to communicate their Art
to any Foreign Prince or State. But yet when I consider that whereas the
Contracts of the Navy-Board for building of Ships did 'till within these few
Years past oblige the Builders to build with good substantial English Oaken
Timber and Plank, and that such not being now to be had, that word [ English]
is left out, and liberty given to build with foreign; and further consider,
that application was made to the Ministers of King Charles the second by the
Cnrporation of Shipwrights, shortly after his Restoration, with their Proposals
in Writing for the preservation and increase of Oaken Timber (and Copies of
which I have seen under the Hand of Sir Phinehas Pett, and many others of the
most eminent of that Corporation, and that those Proposals being referred to
the then Attorney General, he referring their Consideration to the Navy-Board,
Sir William Coventry, Mr. Pepys, Sir William Batten, and the rest of the
Commissioners of the Navy, did with great Judgment Report in Writing how and
where a sufficient number of Oaken Trees might be planted in his Majesty's
Forests, and that the judicious Report from that Board carried with it
self-evidence of the practicableness of the thing with ease, and that had not
so great a Proposition then evaporated, but on the contrary have been
vigorously pursued, the Oaken Timber sufficient for the use of the Navy Royal
had now been in a forward way to its sufficient growth: For it having been
known that Acorns sown, have in the space of thirty Years born a Stem of a
Foot diameter, it is obvious how soon they will bear a stem of a foot and a
half diameter, and that such Timber so of a foot and a half, will be
sufficiently serviceable in the building of Ships. I say, when I consider these
things, and fear how few else consider them here, and how many observe and
consider them abroad, I think there is too much occasion to bewail our Soils
not being fertile with men of public Spirits.

Whether we shall at this rate come to build with English Oak again before
Plato's great Year, I know not: But, my Lord, this that I have said does speak,
(or as I may say) cry it aloud to us, that while we have the Mill'd^Lead
Sheathing for Ships, without fear of losing it, that he will scarce deserve to
be thought a Patriot, who at this time of day, when the Crown has so little
Timber in its Forests serviceable for Shipping, and has Lead of our own for
Sheathing, would have it unnecessarily send a great deal of Money for Eastland
^irr for that purpose, of which the arrival here will be so uncertain, and
indeed hazardous in time of War.

My Lord, I intend not to entertain your Lordship with Rhetorical flourishes
and Harangues of the usefulness of the Invention of the Mill'd-Lead Sheathing:
It is of Age in the World to speak for it self, and it has had the Honor not
only to have great unbiased Artists for its Encomiasts, but a great Prince,
who had a profound Judgment in the Shipwrights Mystery, I mean King Charles the
second: For as soon as Sir Francis Watson had acquainted him with the Invention
of Milling Lead for Sheathing, his Majesty was very impatient 'till he had made
experiment thereof, whereupon Lead was prepared by a small Engine, wherewith
the Phoenix, a fourth Rate was sheathed by Sir Anthony Dean at Portsmouth,
which he saw done with care, the Bolt-heads, etc. being fairly parcelled, as
they ought to be in any sheathing; and after diverse Voyages to the Straits,
Guinea, and the West Indies, she had her sheathing stripped at seven Years end
to repair the Plank, but not for any defect in the Sheathing it self. Nor could
those of the Navy-Board, when at their attendance on the Council with their
Complaints of Eight Ships in Twenty, make the least Objection (though they were
fairly challenged to it) against the Rudder-Irons, Bolts, or other Iron work of
the Phoenix; the which made that judicious Peer, the then Earl of Hallifax
declare, That if of twenty Ships they complained of Nineteen, and had nothing
to say against the twentieth, he must conclude it to be the Workmens fault, for
if they had done the other nineteen as that twentieth Ship was done, they must
have proved all as well as she: The King also at the same time, when they
objecting that the Merchants did not use it, which they would do if it was so
good a sheathing as was pretended, replied, That the Shipwrights (whose best
Friend the Worm was) wanted not Skill to discourage them; yet that their
decrying it must soon be discerned to proceed from their interest. And indeed
it is obvious how the Shipwrights do influence the Merchants and Owners in the
Sheathing and other Repairs of Ships, by their being generally Part-Owners in
all the new Ships they build.

Nor is it to be wondered at that the King from the beginning gave all the
encouragement he could to this Invention; for when he considered of the thing
upon Sir Francis Wat^on's first laying it before him, his Majesty pressed him
to make effectual Preparation for the Work, saying, It would save him at least
40000 l. a Year in his Navy, the which was not improbable, if it had met with
that due encouragement, use and application for Sheathing, Scuppers, Bread
rooms, and all other purposes it was capable of, with regard had to the charge
and damage that a Wood-sheathing brings to the Plank by the great Nail-holes,
which they use to spile up at stripping, and other inconveniences that attend
Wood-sheathing.

And here it occurrs to my thoughts, that his Majesty being occasionally in
Dep^ford yard, as the Workmen were bringing on an ordinary Straits-sheathing
with Wood upon one of his small Ships, he asked them why they did not sheath
her with Mill'd-Lead, and answer was made, she was a weak Ship, and required
strengthening. The King thereupon replied, they had as good have sheathed her
with Sar^enet, as such a sheathing to strengthen her, and saying, Lord have
Mercy on the Men who depend on that sheathing, if the Ship be not strong enough
her self without it.

One would think now, my Lord, that after so great a King, so judicious in all
Naval Mechanics had approved the great usefulness of this Invention, and after
all his eminent Master Builders (and who were the only Shiprights disinterested
from opposing it, in regard their subsistence depended only on their Salaries
from the Crown) had done so too, it should be some potent and weighty Objection
that should be a Remora to ^^s progress. But according to the idle conceit of
the Fish Remora, which men's so^tishness has made a vulgar one, namely that it
can stop the motion of a Ship under sail, (and some vain Authors have essayed
in print to give reasons for such energy of that Fish; and other Authors have
attributed the cause of that Fish's power to that mighty nothing of occult
qualities, whereas the true cause of that vulgar Error was what an old famous
Naturalist said of that^ Fish, Flent venti, saeviant procellae, semper Navem
immobiliter tenet; which implies no more, but that notwithstanding any violent
Tempests, it always did stick to the Ship immoveably) a superstitious vain
imagination of an impossibility, namely, of the Milled Lead corroding the
Iron-work, through some occult quality, has been made use of as the Remora
that has hindered the progress of this Invention, when it was so fairly under
sail, and had made so good a Voyage for the Crown, as to bring it above Cent.
per Cent. profit, besides the great advantage in sailing.

But it is no matter of Raillery, to observe that many excellent and most
useful Inventions have been run down in the World by superstitious Fancies and
Imaginations, and fortifying impossibilities with occult qualities; insomuch
that our late Act for burying in Flannel, that was of such benefit to the
public, was once in danger of being run down by an idle Notion of an
impossibility that intoxicated the beliefs of the Mob, namely, that the Air was
likely to receive putrefaction by Flannels making the Dead to sweat; and as
reasonably may the populace here imagine, that the New-River-Water conveyed to
dress their Meat through Pipes of Lead, will corrode their entrails, if Lead
has such an occult quality to corrode Iron: And as well may we be afraid to
take the Venice Treacle, because of its being long kept in boxes of Lead.

But your Lordships Judgment is so excellent, that it cannot be imposed on by a
Non Causa pro Causa, or any other fallacy; and that I might totally avoid the
least suspicion of one who would impose either on your Lordship, or on any of
Mankind, while under the shelter of your Lordships Name I write to the World, I
have here fairly and heartily set forth the Matters of Fact in the Transactions
the Settlement of this Invention has occasioned on the Stage of the World.

My Lord, I know it is fit for your Lordships entire satisfaction, and that of
others, that I should mention what ensued upon the Company's Reply to the
Navy-Board before the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty. In short, one of
those Lords, who was likewise a Member of the Privy Council, was by that
Admiralty-Board desired to carry both that Report and Reply to the
Council Board: And upon reading the Report, his Majesty in Council was pleased
to referr the whole matter back again to those Commissioners of the Admiralty;
and whereupon the Company addressed themselves by the Memorial herewith also
published, desiring that for the greater clearness of the matters complained
of, that what the Navy-Board or the Company had further to say, might be laid
down before them in Writing. It is fit I should here acquaint your Lordship
that the Companys Reply was drawn by the excellent Pen of Mr. Pepys, and whom
the Author of that most elaborate Book, The happy future State of England, does
deservedly call the great Treasurer of Naval and Maritime knowledge, and of the
great variety of the Learning which we call Recondita Eruditio. And it is no
reflection on the Integrity of those Gentlemen of the Navy-Board, who made the
complaining Report against this Invention, when I shall say that Mr. Pepys his
Character justly renders him aequiponderous to them in Moral, and much
superior in Philosophical and Political Knowledge, and the universal Knowledge
of the Economy of the Navy.

But before there was any further proceeding, his Majesty thought fit to
supersede that Commission for executing the Office of the Lord High Admiral:
And the King then taking the Admiralty into his own hands, and the Company
having thoughts to Petition his Majesty to hear the whole Matter himself, they
were by some Persons newly put into the Navy-Board, (who had for several Years
showed their approbation of the Mill'd-Lead Sheathing) advised to offer to that
Board a New Proposal to sheath at a rate certain by the yard ^qu^re, and with
an intimation that the Navy-Board would take it more kindly, and that they were
by this time satisfied that their former Complaint was by misinformation. This
Advice was approved, and a new Proposal laid before the Board, the 20th. of
December, 1686. which was much approved by Mr. Pepys, saying, That he doubted
not but they would comply with it; and declaring that on his part when it came
into his way, he would promote it, as he had a full Conviction (to use his own
words) that it was a great Service to the King; and whether for that there was
no occasion for a good while to sheath any of the Kings Ships, or by reason of
a great deal of peremptory business calling for the time of that Board, or by
the Company's happening to be slack in their application, I know not; but it
seems that after a years time that Board was pleased to referr to two of their
own Members, Sir Phinehas Pett and Sir Anthony Dean (who had both of them been
Master Builders) the Consideration of the Company's new Proposal. Nor could the
Company wish for more equal Judges of the Mill'd-Lead Sheathing, than those two
worthy Persons, who so well understood it, and had formerly done so much right
to it upon all occasions, as judging it so much for the King's service: But the
Kings service calling them from the Navy-Board to a long stay at Chatham, to
which place it stood not with the Company's convenience to repair, and there
press them to make their Report; and a long Sickness seizing on Sir Phinehas
Pett at his return from Chatham, and he being shortly after his recovery,
employed in a Journey about the King's service in some other of his Majesty's
remote Yards; or what else being the true Cause thereof, as your Lordship may
judge, so it is that the said Proposal, which is herewith also printed lies
still before that Board without any further proceedings thereon ever since.

My Lord, I have now let your Lordship see how I have been damnatus ad Metallum
in the progress of this Invention: And considering the course of corrupt and
degenerate humane Nature, no Inventers can promise themselves a nobler fate,
tho the scene of their Invention lay in a nobler metal.

For as Sir William Petty well observes in his Observations on the Bills of
Mortality, that if the art of making gold were known to one person, such single
adeptus could not, nay durst not enjoy it, but must be either a Prisoner to
some Prince, and slave to some voluptuary, or else sculk obscurely up and down
for his privacy and concealment.

And so churlish has the generality of Men been to Inventers, whose
discoveries have only salved the Phoenomena, that they have been unwilling to
give those a good word who have taught the Age great things, yet such where the
brightness of their knowledge would not have the operation of the Sunbeams, in
putting out any man's Kitchen fire.

And this made the Great Tycho Brahe, as to his famed Discovery console
himself, by appealing from the judgment of the Age he lived in to that of
Posterity.

I shall here divert your Lordship, by entertaining you in his Study which he
had in an Island in Denmark by the Munificence of his Patron King Frederick,
and where (removing the cover of the room) he could as he lay with his face
upward in the Night time exercise his speculation with beholding the Stars. And
there he had all the famous Astronomers painted, and the following Verses were
added, each to the Picture to which they belonged.

Salvete Heroes, vetus O Timochare salve:
Aetheris ante alios ause subire polos.
Tu quoque demensus solis, lunaeque recursus,
Hipparche, and quotquot sydera Olympus habet.
Anriquos superare volens, Ptolomaee, labores,
Orbibus innumeris promptius astra locas.
Emendare aliquid satis Albategne studebas,
Sydera conatus posthabuere tuos.
Quod labor and Studium reliquis tibi contulit aurum,
Alphonse ut tantis annumerere Viris.
Curriculis tritis diffise Copernice terram
Invitam, astriferum flectere cogis iter.
In the best place Tycho Brahe had set his own Picture with the following
Verses, Quaesitis veterum and propriis Normae astra subegi,
Quanti id, Judicium posteritatis erit.


Your Lordship who knows so many things, can be no stranger to the fate of
Galilaeus, who after he had placed the Earth among the Heavens, found so much
ingratitude on it as to be made a Prisoner in it for so doing, by no meaner a
Man than Pope Urban the 8th. Gassendus tells us of this in his Life of Peiresk,
and how Peiresk wrote a Letter to him, to condole with him during his
confinement, and employed his interest in a great Cardinal to procure his
enlargement. Pope Urban, it seems, had wrote an idle Comment upon Aristotle de
Coelo, and Galilaeus thought fit to confute him, giving him the Name of
Simplicius: But the Pope got his Book condemned by the Consistory as heretical;
ab art sua non recedens, tho very unnatural.

Thus dangerous a thing is it for a Man to over-oblige the World.

And here it comes in my way to observe how Dr. Robert Wood, a person very
famous for all Mathematical knowledge, lately trying to salve the Credit of
this Age from being thought barbarous on the account of Easter Day being so ill
fixed in our Liturgy, has not been by any Author I have met with, except one,
so much as quoted for his illuminating us.

The only Person who quotes him for it, is, the Author of The happy future
State of England, and he there in p. 241. like a careful observer of the Age,
has these following passages, viz. The great Controversy about Easter, that
heretofore put all the World in a rattle, and almost shook it to pieces, what a
toy is it self now reputed, insomuch that our latest Ascertainers here of the
time of its celebration, seemed not to think it tanti to awake when they were
about it; and tho onr lately having in our Almanacks two Easters in one Year,
easily awakened the Non-conformists to take notice of it, and to say, that
therefore they could not give their unfeigned assent and consent to all and
every thing contained in, and prescribed by the Book entitled The Book of
Common Prayer, etc. And tho thereupon a Person of the Royal Society, very
profoundly knowing in all the Mathematical Sciences, has published an
infallible way of fixing Easter for ever, (and that it may be no longer a
fugitive from the rule of its practice, as it often is at present, nor dance
away from it self, as I may say in allusion to the vulgar Error of the Suns
dancing on Easter Day) and fixing it so as perhaps none else could have done,
nor possibly himself any other way, yet has this great right done to that
great day, been by the generality of People not so much regarded as would an
Advice to a Painter, or such like Composure have been.

But however, the Doctor having published it but in a quarter of a Sheet of
loose Paper, and that may be likely to come among the Res deperditae, I shall
here record that his Invention in his own words, that it may the better be
transmitted to the Judicium posteritatis, the present World being not only a
kind of Areopagus that sits in the dark, but is also asleep.

Novus Annus Luni-Solaris, sive Ratio Temporis Emendata:
Ita ut Mensis quilibet Initium sumat a Novi-lunio, intra unum plus minus Diem;
and quilibet Annus, intra semimensem ab Equinoxio verno.
I. Incipiat Calculus cum 10/20 Martii, 1680.

II. Distribuatur inde Tempus in Periodos, continentes 38 Annos; viz. 24
ordinarios, (Mensium duodecim) and 14 extraordinarios, mensium tredecim.

III. Anni cujuscunque, communes and priores duodecim Menses constent e Diebus,
alternatim, 30, 29, etc. Hoc est, primus Mensis, e diebus 30; secundus, 29;
tertius, 30, etc. viz. Impar Luna pari, par fiet in impare Mense.

IV. In Periodi cujuscunque Annis 2, 5, 7, 10, 13, 15, 18, 21, 24, 26, 29, 32,
34, 37, hoc est, in 14 extraordinariis Annis, intercaletur Mensis decimus
tertius, Dierum 31, 30, etc. alterne etiam numerandorum: viz. in periodi Anno
secundo, Mensis 13us intercalaris habeat 31 dies; Anno quinto, 30 dies;
septimo, 31, etc.

V. Singulis (37 Periodis) 1406 Annis, inserantur 14 Dies: Hoc est, 1 Dies
singulis 100^/7 Annis; vel potius, in 800 Annis, 1 Dies singulis 100 Annis; and
in 606, 1 Dies singulis 101, alternatim interponatur.

Quo facto, aequabitur Temporis Ratio in Secula seculorum.

R. W.

Mensura Mensis Medii Synodici and Communis secundum Astronomos, viz.
d. h. I II III IIII Hipparch. Ptolom. 29 12 44 3 15 44 Lansberg. Vendelin. 29
12 44 3 12 Kepler. 29 12 44 3 10 50 Copernic. Reinold. 29 12 44 3 10 48 Vieta.
Clav. 29 12 44 3 10 43 R. W. 29 12 44 3 10 27 Dechales. 29 12 44 3 10 9
Ricciol. 29 12 44 3 10 Bulliald. 29 12 44 3 9 37 Tyc^o. 29 12 44 3 8 39

A rectified Account of TIME, by a New Luni-Solar Year;
So as the beginning of every Month shall be within about a Day of the New
Moon; and of every Year, within half a Month of the Vernal Equinox.
I. LET the Account begin with March 10, 1680. From thence --

II. Let Time be divided into Periods, of 38 Years each; viz. 24 ordinary
Years, of twelve Months; and 14 extraordinary, of thirteen Months.

III. In every Year, let the twelve first common Months consist of Days 30, 29,
etc. alternately; viz. the first Month, of 30 Days; the second, of 29; the
third of 30, etc. that is, The od Months, of even days; and the even Months, of
od days:

IV. But in the Years 2, 5, 7, 10, 13, 15, 18, 21, 24, 26, 29, 32, 34, 37, of
every Period, viz. in the 14 extraordinary Years, let a 13th Month be
intercalated, having Days 31, 30, etc, alternately also: viz. the intercalar
13th Month of the second Year of the Period, to have 31 days; of the 5th Year,
30 days; of the 7th, 31, etc.

V. Let 14 additional Days be inserted every (37 Periods) 1406 Years; that is,
1 Day every 100 Years and 3/7 of a year; or rather, 1 Day every 100 Years, for
800; and for 606, 1 Day every 101 Years, interchangeably.

The which being done, will adjust the Account of Time for ever.

R. W.

The Author in that Book mentions his having chosen in the conjuncture in which
he writ, to build his Fabrics of Numbers and Calculations on the course soil
of Popery and the Papal Usurpations, and that finding that Men's Fancies at that
time relished no subject grateful but Popery, he made that the Vehicle of the
Notions he meant as Phyfic to cure their Understandings: And he there hits a
blot in the Papal Teners that was never hit before by any Protestant Writer,
namely the rendering it to be one of those Ten^ts, That it is lawful to burn a
whole City, in which the major part are Heretics, expecting such a Discovery
should be very welcome to the populace in that Conjuncture.

His so much and so often celebrating the Royal Society throughout his Work,
was too a stemming of the tide of humor that prevailed with a great part of
the Age, who knowing little either of the Old or New Philosophy, or real
Learning and Experimental Philosophy, value themselves on the ridiculing and
crying down those who advance the same.

And having thus again referred to this book of the Happy future State of
England, and to which I do but common Justice in representing it full of most
useful Inventions and new Discoveries in Politics, must too refer to the
common fate of Discoverers it has met with, namely, in finding the World an
unteachable Animal. I do not account the Author's great Notion in p. 112. new,
namely, That the knowledge of the Numbers of the People is the substratum of
all Political Measures: For that Thesis those words of the Captain of our
Salvation have long since taught the World, namely, What King going to make War
against another King, siteth not down first and consulteth whether he be able
with ten thousand to meet him that comes against him with twenty thousand? or
else while the other is yet a great way of, he sends an Embassage, and
desires Conditions of Peace?

But after so great a Minister of State as Mine Here Van Beuninghen had (as De
Leti has mentioned it in print) made the People of England and Wales to be but
two Millions: And after so illustrious a Writer as Dr. Isaac Vossius in his
Variarum Observationum liber, dedicated to King Charles the 2d. had made the
People in England, Scotland and Ireland, to be but two Millions, (tho both of
them probably had read the Observations on the Bills of Mortality wherein
excellent fine-spun Notions had made the People about six Millions) his so
largely instructing us out of Records, (and against which there is no averment)
and particularly out of the Returns of all the Counties of England and Wales
upon several late Pole Acts; and out of the Numbers of the Conformists and
Nonconformists upon the Bishops Survey made in the Year 1676. that the People
of England and Wales are above eight Millions (and indeed that we may probably
conclude them to be about ten Millions) may be said to be an happy New
Discovery for us in Politics, he being the first who evinced it out of
Records, and wherein his Benefactorship to his Country in the doing it at his
own charge, might in the paying of Fees to Clerks and Registers well be thought
to surpass the charge of the impression of that voluminous Work; without
reckoning in the great charge he must have been at in having accounts of
various importations taken by Officers of the Custom House out of their Books,
as particularly in p. 254.

The Author gives well-grounded Accounts of the Numbers of the People in
France, Spain, Flanders and Holland: But if he had took the pains to calculate
the Numbers of the People in China, Aethiopia, or Tartaria, it had been as
acceptable to many of our continuando-talkers of Politics, and to some who
would take it ill not to be vogued for first-rate Politicians, though they
never spent a thought about reducing Politics ad firmam, by Number, Weight and
Measure, as this Author has done.

I shall commend to your Lordship a frequent Conversation with this Book, as
containing in it more variety of Political Calculations than you will find in
all Printed Books in all Languages: And it is the rather worthy your serious
perusal in this Warlike conjuncture of time, because the Author has in so
nervous (...) Manner given our English World so many New Directions about the
Modus of our being furnished with the sinews of War, and in apportioning great
Taxes with great equality, the want where^^ is in effect the only grievance in
public Supplies. And this your Lordship will find if you consult what he has
in p. 192 and out of Sir William Petty's Verbu^ Sapienti, in Manuscript, viz.

If a Million of Money were to be raised in England, there should be levied on
the M. lib. Lands -- 216 viz. 1/30 of the Rent. Cattle -- 54 -- 1/600 Personal
Estate -- 60 -- 1/600 Housing -- 45 viz 12 d. a Chimney in London, 10 d.
without the Liberties, 6 d. in Cities and Towns, and 4 d. elsewhere. People --
625 at 2 s. 1 d. per Head, or rather a Poll of 6 d. and 19 d. Excise, which is
not full 1/84 part of the mean expense. M. lib. Total a Million -- 1000

There is half as much more paid now ^y the Land Tax alone than in the Million
distributed on the several Fonds ^s above. And by the Rule of Sir W. P's.
Calculation of a Tax of one Million, above six Millions may be raised, and no
Man feel it much, if equally laid* And tho it falls heaviest upon Persons* yet
according to it no Man will pay ^ tenth of his yearly expense.

It is certainly now the Opus diei, and a propos what he had said before in
tha^ Page, viz. That he believed that the suture State of Christendom will
necessa^^rily prompt all Patriots instead of stu^dying to make men unwilling to
promote public Supplies, to bend their Brains in the way of Calculation t^
show what the Kingdom is able to con^tribute to its defense, and how to d^ it
with equality.

Your Lordship will find this Book sol^ at the Shop of William Rogers,
Book^seller, at the Sun over against St. Du^stans Church in Fleetstreet, as I
find (...) in an Advertisement thereof in one (...) the New Almanacks for the
Yea^ 1691.

I must frankly own that I should no have repented of my expense in the
purchase of this Book, had there been (...) Calculation in it but that in p.
188* and 189. where the Author Calculates the number of the now living here,
who were born since the Year in which our Civil War ended, or were then
Children, viz. of such Years as not to have experienced or been sensible of the
Miseries and Inconveniences of the War, and a Calculation of what Numbers of
those who lived in 1641. are now dead, and what proportion of those now living
who lived in the time of the War did gain by the War, and of the number ^f such
in Ireland and Scotland. The Au^hor gives a very momentous reason ^or the
finding out those things by Calcu^^tion, and the which might well seem
^mpossible to be performed. For that ^rinces and their Ministers being
ratio^ally to be steered in their apprehensions (...) the danger of Civil War
by the great ^ule of Dulce Bellum inexpertis, ought ^arefully to have their Eye
on the Num^ers of such inexperti in any long time (...) Peace.

So little regard has been had by our ^eat Political Writers to Matters of
^alculations and Accounts of the Re^enues of Princes, that I have in the great
Thuanus observed but one passage relating to the same, and which by this Author
is cited, p. 246. viz. as to the Receipts and Expenses of Lewis the 13th. for
the Year 1614. (and in p. 250, out of his own Observation he makes the Expenses
and Receipts of the present French King more than quadrupled since, as to what
they were in the Year 1614.) and in the so much cried up Political Treatise
called Nouveaux Interests des Princes de l'Europe, and commended by the Author
of la Republique des Lettres, there is little or nothing of such Political
Calculations contained.

But tho at present in the many such curious Calculations presented to the Age
by that Author of the Happy future State of England, he does as to the Rabble
of Readers, Vinum raris praeministrare, whereas Water would have served their
turns as well, yet I believe its impression on Men of refined thought and sense
will be such as to make the way of writing of Politics hereafter without
Calculations, grow as much out of Fashion as the garb of Trunk-breeches.

My Lord, I have herewith for your Lordships farther Entertainment thought fit
to publish Sir William Petty's rough draught of Naval Philosophy. The filings
of Gold are precious, and a Schytz or hasty Piece of Painting done by a great
Hand is of great Value. To have drawn so great an historical Picture of that
Philosophy, as he had the Idea of in his Mind, would have took up his whole
Life: And he therefore considering the little value the Age has for such
Curiosities, thought it only worth his while to finish this Piece up at one
sitting, and to show Posterity what he could have done. But in this as it is,
the Judicious few will find many a Coup de Maitre, and may instruct themselves
thereby in some very considerable principles relating to Naval and Maritine
knowledge.

My Lord, I know that Providence has so disposed of the course of your
Lordships Life, as to call you to do things that are to be written of, rather
than to read things by others already written. Your Lordships great and
successful Courage and Conduct, lately so conspicuous to the World in the
taking of Cork and Kin^ale, will employ the Writers of the Annals of our
Nation, and add a further luster to the Name of Marlborough, which was so much
ennobled by your Lordships Predecessor, that the great Poets of the Age crowned
him with their just Laurels, when they said, Marlborough who knew, and durst do
more than all. There is one noble Invention that was there tributary to your
Lordships success, I mean that of Guns: But as great and noble as this
Invention is, (and which was found out by a German in the Year 1378. and
whereby the Lives of Men, if we reckon by wholesale, are better preserved in
the defense of Cities, and by the fate of Victory being sooner decided in
Camps, that hinders Armies from so much butchering one another as formerly) it
has been by snarling Writers of great Name maligned; and because by it some
Men were killed by retale, it has been rendered execrable and diabolical; and
that not only by Polydore Virgil, but by Cardan and Melancton.

Nor need it be told your Lordship how much this Invention has been improved
since its first use. The manner of contriving and applying them has not been
less improved than the way of preserving light for the Passengers in our
streets, since the finding out of Lanthorns has: The only Author I know, who
has recorded the Original of Lanthorns is our learned Antiquary Mr. Gregory,
in his learned Notes on Ridley's View, etc. He there tells us, p. 286. That the
Inventor of Lanthorns was our King Alured, in whose days the Churches were of
so poor and mean a structure, that when the Candles were set before the
Relics, they were often blown ou^ by the Wind which got in, not only per Ostia
Ecclesiarum, but per frequent^s parietum rimulas; insomuch that the ingenious
Prince was put to the practice of his dexterity, and by occasion of this
Lanternam ex lignis and bovinis cornibus pul^herrime construere imperavit; by
an apt composure of thin Horns in Wood, he taught us the Mystery of making
Lanthorns.

But our New invented Glasses and Lamps, that casting out so powerful and
extensive, and withal so durable and cheerful an Illumination, as to make Men's
passing about their Affairs in the Night not only tolerable but pleasant, have
much outdone the Lanthorns invented by our Monarch, in diebus illis.

Yet on the publishing of a Paper containing the various uses this Invention
might be of to the Nation, and wherein it was mentioned inter alia, that these
Lights might for the public good be employed at the Light-houses, which give
directions to Seafaring People in dark and stormy Nights; and that these
Lights being so clear and strong, and continued with so much certainty as might
probably save many from Shipwreck, where the usual Coal-fires or Candles often
fail, by either not giving sufficient Light, or by the uncertainty of these
Lights, subject to so many acciden^s as does often occasion the great losses
both of Men, Merchandise and Vessels: The Patentees of these New Lights being
invited to discourse with those that have the Charge, and receive the profits
of the Light-houses, they said, they thought they came to save their Candles,
but since the Oil necessary to maintain these Lights (though a Pint, which
would cost about a Groat, they were told would serve one Lamp burning twelve
hours) was dearer than Candles, they declined the use of these Lamps; whereupon
the Patentees telling them, they thought the saving of Men^ Lives and Goods to
be of more importance than the saving a few Candles, desisted from further
application.

I might here too instance in the Invention of the Scarlet or Bow-dye, the
exportation whereof has brought us in return so much Treasure, was put to it
to make its way into the World through much opposition. And thus is, and was,
and always will the birth of every New Art and Science be of difficult
parturition, and the Inventors be enforced to cry, Fer opem Lucina, I mean, to
crave aid and Patronage from such generous and Heroical and public spirited
men as your Lordship.

My Lord, about eighty Years ago the Invention of the New-River-Water was much
labored, and it was a kind of partus Elephantinus, about ten Years in bringing
to perfection by Sir Hugh Middleton; but Stow tells us of the great danger,
difficulty, detraction, scorn, envy and malevolent interpositions it first
encountered with.

And indeed it may be said, that after the six days Work and Adam's Fall the
World was yet a kind of Chaos as to the use and service of Man, till necessity
and humane Industry set his Reason to work, and by degrees to invent and
contrive how to apply and dispose the things he found therein best for his ease
and service; and teeming Nature goes still big with new Inventions to improve
the things we have, and is ready to bring them forth, whenever Philosophical
and Industrious Men lend her their Midwivery: And for this purpose I am
thinking, it was a noble and ingenious saying of Seneca, Pusilla res mundus
est, nisi in illo quod quaerat omnis mundus habeat, Senec. Not. Qu. l. 2. par.
3. i. e. The World were a poor little thing, but for its affording ample matter
of research and enquiry to all succeeding Ages.

My Lord, there is another incomparable Invention that was found out not many
Years since, and which without some such Patriotly Hero as your Lordship
awakening the Age about it, is likely to fill up the Number of lost things; and
it is the New Engine that so much exceeds all formerly used for the eternal
preservation of our Royal Rivers, by deepening them, and making them every
where Navigable, and taking away all Obstructions and Shelfs in a very short
time. Sir Martin Beckman, the chief Engineer of England, and as I am informed
the ingenious Sir Christopher Wren, their Majesty's Surveyor General, have
given their approbation thereof; and as likewise did King Charles the second,
who was highly pleased therewith, and declared after he had seen the working of
the Engine, which in his Majesty's presence took up about a Tun and an half in
little more than a Minutes time, that he was perfectly satisfied it would
answer the end proposed; and that by means of its working horizontally, it made
no holes, but rather filled such as lay in the way of its working, and left the
bottom of the River level as it wrought, whereby such inconveniences would be
avoided, as had happened from the common Ballast-Lighters making such great
Holes in the River of Thames, and in which several of the Kings as well as
Merchants Ships coming to an Anchor, had broke their backs.

And his Majesty having been made acquainted that this Engine being sent down
below Bridge to Berking-shelfe, where is nothing but hard Shingle, and that
after half an hours breaking ground, it took up at 19 Foot deep, about two Tuns
in a Minute and a half, during the whole time it wrought, he said thereupon,
That he thought there was no way practicable for the deepening the River of
Thames, and removing Shelfes therein, but by this Engine.

This Engine was invented by Mr. Bailey, an excellent Engineer, and much
cultivated and improved to its perfection by the great Expense of Mr. Joseph
Cotinge.

King Charles the 2d. so often going down that River in his Barges and Yachts,
took occasion thereby often to consider the State thereof, insomuch that upon a
public Hearing in Council, that the Lord Mayor and Aldermen had upon their
Complaint against Patents that straightened the River, and licenced Encroachments
on it, he took occasion to speak it openly, that the River was shallower before
his Yard at Deptford by three Foot since his Restoration, and that if it
should be but a Foot shallower there, his Ships that did ride at Anchor there
would be spoiled.

But I have heard Mr. Shishe, the Master Builder there, and likewise Sir
Phinehas Pett, who was formerly Master Builder there, and afterward at Chatham,
averr, that the River is there very near four Foot, if not altogether,
shallower than it was at that King's Restoration; insomuch that their
Majesty's Ships there (as likewise in the River of Medway at Chatham) do ground
about four Foot before they have Water enough to wind up with the Tide of
flood, the which does very much strain and wring them to their great prejudice,
and that if there be not a speedy course taken to remove some Encroachments,
and prevent all future ones, and the farther stopping up those Rivers with
sullage, those two Royal Rivers will be spoiled, and in a short time useless
for Capital Ships riding therein, and the Crown be put to immense Charge in
purchasing of ground for other Ship-yards, and in making of Docks and Store
houses, and building new Dwelling-houses for the Officers of the Yards.

I remember, visiting my worthy Friend Mr. Brisband, who was Secretary to the
former Lords Commissioners for the Admiralty, he entertained me with the fight
of many Papers in his Office that related to the Applications that had been
made by the City of London to that Board, for the preservation of the River of
Thames, and one of them was a Paper of the City's Reasons against the Patents
for Licensing Encroachments, and straitning that River, and which seemed to me
very weighty, and drawn with such great care and pains, that what Councellor
soever drew them, I am sure he deserved a very large Fee from the City; and out
of which I noted down this Passage, namely, That if that River were spoiled,
the great Trade of England would be transplanted, not to other Sea-port-Towns
in England, but to Foreign Parts. Those Reasons mentioning Patents of the Soil
to the low-water-mark on both sides the River, infer, That without speedy care
taken, the River will be so straightened as to become thereby not only useless,
but even hurtful to Shipping, by a violent and rapid course of the Tide that
will then necessarily ensue: And the City therein Complains of a Lease made of
a great part of the Soil of the River, and that the right of the disposal of
the Shore of the River, or the Conservatorship thereof, may by survivorship
accrue to a Colour-man in the Strand.

Mr. Brisband informed me, that those Commissioners of the Admiralty as well as
the Lord Mayor had taken a great deal of pains in the preserving of the River,
and that it was incumbent on both their Offices so to do; for which purpose he
showed me a most judicious and learned Report made by the Judge of the
Admiralty, wherein it was said, That the Admiral is by his Office and Patent
not only Custos Maritimarum partium, but Custos portuum and Conservator
Fluminum infra fluxum and refluuum maris; and that he is by his Patent
empowered to make Sub-conservators, and has by the Statute of primo
Elizabethae a concurrency with the Lord Mayor of London in the Conservatorship
of the River of Thames, and that the Shore of the River is a part of the River,
and ought not to be held by private Persons, as of their own right, but by
those Conservators in trust for the Government.

And in fine, that Secretary acquainted me, that there was to be a Survey of
the River and the Encroachments on it, to be made by Trinity-house and
Navy-Board, with the assistance of Captain Collins the King's Hydrographer: And
I have since seen a Copy of that Survey made accordingly, and great pains was
therein taken. The great pleasure I have taken in going down that River in
Boats and Barges, made me always wish well to the State of it; but the sight of
the Papers before mentioned, inclined me to account it a Patriotly thing to
promote its preservation by all the means I could, and gave me occasion to
reflect on the great Wisdom and Care of the Public that appeared in our
Ancestors, when they made the Admiral and Lord Mayor the Conservators of it;
after the example of the old Romans, as Gryphiander in his learned Book de
Insulis, p. 430. quotes several places out of the Civil Law, to show, that they
appointed their Hydrophylacas, or Conservators of their great Rivers, and
deliverers of them from being choked up with Annoyances and Shelfes; and he
there p. 441. cites A. Gellius for the ratio retandi flumina, id est, purgandi
a Virgultis, arboribusque in alveo Natis, ne impedimento sint navibus,
practiced by them: And he says, that simili verbo returandi usus est Nonius
quod est obturando contrarium, Turneb. l. 28. advers. 12. And then speaking of
the Engines they used to that end, he says, In quem usum Instrumenta
hydrautica deducendis, hauriendisque aquis inventa sunt, de quibus Vitruvius,
l. 10. quem explicat Turnebus, l. 2. advers. 22. Gothof. in l. 4. c de Excus.
Mun. l. 10. Dalacamp. ad Plin. l. 7. c. 37.

Those Engines are long since gone among lost things: Nor do I think we need
wish any other Engine for the purging the River of Thames from Obstructions,
than this I have referred to: And according to the common Observation of
Providence taking care to send both new Diseases and Remedies into the World in
the same Conjuncture, and often from the same place, (as for example the Lues
Venerea and Guacum, and Sassafras from the West Indies) it was worthy of its
care for England, that at this time, when this our River, on which depends the
Fate of our Nation is laboring under the most critical state it ever kn^w, and
is ready to be destroyed, to offer us such an Engine for its being restored to
such a good Condition of being Navigable, as its Conservators can wish.

My Lord, There is one thing that has caused most horrible ill effects to this
River, and which I have met with no Man who has observed, and therefore it is
fit it should be known; and that is the Fire of London: For every five Yards of
Pavement a load of Gravel is used, and a great part of this Gravel lies so
loose, that by the force of the Rain it is frequently driven into the Sewers
and the Thames: And every Pavement raises the Street paved two Inches at
least; but the burned part of London is at a Medium four Foot higher: And so I
account that by the Fire and Rebuilding of London, more Gravel and Soil has
gone into the Thames than perhaps will again in the next three hundred Years.

Some who are interested in this Engine, have said, that by it the Bar of
Dublin might be taken away; but I have heard that that is a rocky Bar; and if
so, such effect of the Engine is not to be expected: But that such Shelfes
arising in our River from the Gravel and Sullage that are washed into it, may
with ease be removed by it, is not to be doubted.

This River glides along with a much more clear and gentle stream than the
River of Severn; and the Cause of the clearness of its Water, is its running in
a Gravelly Valley, and over a clear Ground: And the great winding of the River,
which locks in the Water that it cannot make that haste down to the Sea that it
would, and the low-lying of the Head-springs of it, from whence there is but an
easy descent to the Sea, are the two chief Causes of the gentleness of its
Current: It may be here remarked, that this easy descent of the Waters to the
Sea-ward, is another reason why the Tide flows up so high into the heart of
this River; for the more steep the River is, the less able is the Tide to force
its way up into it. Swift Rivers have always their Heads lying high, or their
Course direct, or both.

Since I have been (as I may say) a Student of this River, I have took occasion
to pity those who look on the strange shifting of Tides in this River as a
great Prodigy, because happening seldom: But I think the Cause of the shifting
of the Tides, is only the over-bearing of their Course, when they are at their
slackest, by a Northwest Wind, which is the most powerful adversary they can
have on our Coasts: For if a slow Ebb be encountered full in the teeth with a
hard Storm, what can follow but a return of the Tide back again? And if the
Northwest Wind either abate its fierceness, or shift into some other quarters,
as the South-west or North-east for some short time, and then either return to
its former place, or resume its former force, and do this once, twice, and
again (which we know is not inconsistent with the Nature and Custom of the Wind
off at Sea, tho at Land its wanderings are not altogether so sensible) we may
easily believe (seeing so plain a reason for it) that there will be a playing
of the Tide too and fro, and several Floods and Ebbs succeeding one another in
a few hours space. My Sentiments in this place are those of the Author of
Britannia Baconica. It was the Praediction of Campanella, that Venice should at
last be destroyed by Oblimation, that is, by the Sullage of its Waters that
should spoil their being Navigable. And Gryphiander in his Book before
mentioned, has a great deal of curious Learning, to show what famous Rivers in
the World had been destroyed by Obstructions: He in p. 448. cites Ovid for his
-- Vidi factas ex aequore ^erras. He in p. 177. making the three constituent
Parts of a River to be Water, the Banks and Channel, considers the Mutations
incident to them all, and in p. 460. says, Ravenna Italiae urbs ab Augusto
Caesare portu manufacto aucta, nunc pro flumine spaciosissimos hortos ostendit,
malis plena, sed de quibus non pendeant vela sed poma. Ita Patavij, Aquileiae,
and alibi latissima nunc jugera sunt, ubi olim classium stationes fuerunt, etc.
Leowerdia, Bosswerdia, aliaeque Frisiae urbes olim maritimae, nunc integro
milliari a Mari recesserunt: And then speaks of other excellent Harbors there
destroyed by Oblimation or Sullage. And in p. 177. he has a great deal of
excellent Learning much to this purpose, and says, Quod si perpetua sit
fluminum mutatio, viderur ipse Deus imperij and provinciae terminos mutaros
velle, qui ob hanc cau^am Moabitis minatur, fluvium ipsorum Nimrim exsiccatum
iri, Ierem. 48. v. 34. Psalm. 107. v. 33. Atque hoc experientia confirmat. De
qu^ Lucian in Charon. Atque urbes tanquam homines, and quod magis est
admirabile, etiam universi Fluvii evanescunt. Inachi enim nullum Argis extat
vestigium. Seneca in Hercul. Oetheo. Mutetur Orbis, vallibus currat Novis
Ister, novasque Tanais accipiat vias.


Inde factum cum ex fluminum insolitis mutationibus praesagia sumerentur de
mutationibus imperiorum, ut flumina ipsa ab Ethnicis pro diis colerentur. v.
Natal. Commit. lib. 1. Mythol. 11. Ita Nilus in Aegypto pro Deo cultus. De cujus
presagiis, Seneca l. 4. Not. quest. 2. And there afterward speaks of the
changes of the Channel in the Rhine.

He does often inculcate that Notion, That the administration of the Banks of
Rivers is a part of the Regalia; and he in p. 436. quotes a great Writer of the
Regalia, to show that the Work of the Inspection and Conservacy of them is
among the Regalia: Sicuti etiam jus retardandi fl^mina, ripas muniendi,
alveumque purgandi: And there says, Hinc semper potestas statuendi de
aggeribus ad ^uperiores pertinuit. Ita Romae remedium coercendo Tyberi ex
Senatus consulto Ate^o Capitoni and L. Aruntio Mandatum, Tacit. 1. Annal. and
Constitutus est in eum usum certus Magistratus ab Augusto Caesare, Sueton. cap.
37. Nempe curator Riparum, and alvei Tyberis ut inscriptiones veteres habent,
Lips. in Comment. ad Annal. Tacit. Tyberius etiam quinqueviros constituit, Dio
Cass. lib. 37. Quos titulos usurpare ne principes quidem puduit.

This great part of the Regalia, namely, the Conservation of all the Royal
Rivers of England, has been always by our Kings deposited in the hands of the
Lord High Admiral of England and Ireland; and the trust thereof is both granted
to our Admirals in all their Pattents, and is inherent in their Office; and in
all the Patents of the Viceadmirals of the maritime Countyes in both Realms,
the Viceadmirals are expressly constituted Conservators of all the Royal Rivers
and Ports belonging to those Counties, as Mr. Brisband informed me upon his
having perused the draughts of many Viceadmirals Patents; I thereupon asking
him whether those Viceadmirals did put their power of being Conservators of the
Royal Rivers in execution; he told me that upon his having consulted some of
the Offices and Officers in the high Court of Admiralty about this very thing,
he could find no footsteps of their having minded the Power of such
Conservacy: That he observed them diligent enough in that part of their Office
that enabled them to receive several Admiralty Perquisites and Droits, of the
which they were Collectors for the use of the Admiral, and to whom they often
gave their accounts about the same; but that he never found in the Accounts of
their Disbursments any thing inserted of a Penny charge they ever were at in
the demolishing any Nusances, or removing any Shelfs in the Royal Rivers; and
that the doing this being a thing of great charge, and they having no allowance
of any Sallary to support their Office, this Work was never expected from them.

Thus then have Eneroachers took what liberty they pleased, to make
Purprestures on the Royal Rivers in the Country, and to build Houses thereon
as seemed good in their own eyes; and it has there been, as Gryphiander says,
p. 522. In Corcyraeos propter impunitatem maleficiorum jocus est apud Eustat.
in Dionys. (...). i. e. Libera Corcyra, caca ubi velis.

But the Secretary showed me how that in the Finalis Concordia of the 18th. of
February, 1632. before the King in Council, between the Common Law Judges and
the Judge of the Admiralty concerning Prohibitions, one Article agreed to, was,
That the Admiral may enquire of and redress all Annoyances and Obstructions in
all Navigable Rivers beneath the first Bridges, that are any impediments to
Navigation, or Passage to or from the Sea, etc. and no Prohibition to be
granted in such Case: And from the foremen^ion'd Report of the Judge of the
Admiralty to the late Commissioners of the Admiralty, it is plain that the Lord
high Admiral in his high Court of Admiralty here, under the eye of the
Government, has variously acted in the Conservacy of the River of Thames; for
thence I noted down what follows, viz. It can be made appear by Records in the
Court of Admiralty, that Licenses have been given by the Lord Admiral for the
enlargement of Wharfs, and that the said Court has punished Persons for not
keeping them in repair, and Orders have been made from time to time for the
regular lying of Ships, by appointing how many shall ride a breast, etc. and
the Report mentions, that one was treated with by Persons concerned in a late
Patent, that he might be permitted to take in some part of the Shore to the Low
water-mark, and that another had de Facto agreed with them for the sum of 20
l. for taking in 80 Foot deep, and 100 Foot long of the Shore. I have been by
my Council at Law informed, that he has seen various late Patents for granting
away the Soil of the Shore to private Persons, not only in Middlesex and
Surrey, but in the Counties of Kent, and Southampton, and Norfolk; and that he
saw a Deed under the Hand and Seal of the Colour-man before named in the City's
Reasons, the which Deed was dated the 22d. of January, in the second Year of
the late King James; and in which he Covenants with some Seafaring People,
inhabitants by the Thames-side in Wapping, that neither he nor his Heirs and
Assigns will build any House or Wharf on the Soil between their Houses and
Ground and the Low-water-mark; which necessarily shows that he claimed a Power
of so doing if he would.

But at the Admirals granting Licenses for the Enlargement of Wharfs I do not
wonder, though yet there is no doubt but that both the Admiral and Lord Mayor as
Conservators of the River of Thames, have administered that branch of the
Regalia candide and cast, and with great precaution, with reports after
references to sworn Surveyors, that the River would not be damnify'd by such
enlargement of Wharfs, causing any Jettys to obstruct the course of the Tide in
carrying away the Sullage; a thing that generally happens by the Encroachments
that private Persons have presumed to make on the River.

And here I shall take occasion to observe, that it is not only possible in
some Cases to take in some part of the River without prejudice to it, but it is
also probable that the taking in some places of the River would tend to the
good of it. The general Rule is, that we may with safety to the River gain upon
the hollow shore, but not on the Unequal Shore, or where there are Head-lands;
for then it would change the Channel and turn the stream into Eddys; as for
example, If the Custome-House-Key should be carried further, which is already
brought to the Channel, it would be fatally mischievous.

It has been by several skilful Surveyors told me, that after the Fire of
London, they upon the digging the foundation of the present Custom House,
found that it was all such as we call made Earth, and had been gained out of
the Thames, and therefore it was (I account) with great Prudence, that the
Conservators of the River consented, that 'till they came to deep Water, it
should be gained in for the better Convenience of Navigation, that Vessels
might float at ebb as they now do at the Custom House.

The same Surveyors assured me that under St. Magnus Church they after the Fire
met with an old Campshot and Wharfing, gained from the Thames, and that at the
same time they were informed that there were found Campshots much further from
the Thames in digging of Cellars; and whence it may be inferred probably, that
all Thames Street from Queenhithe downward to the Custom House, was gained out
of the Thames.

I give no hint of this, that any Projector may take occasion from hence to
beg Thames Street. God be thanked, the illegality of granting Forfeitures
before Conviction is now out of fashion. All vexatious or prolling Patents are
now in the State of damnati antequam Nati: And it must be acknowledged to the
immortal praise of that true Englishman, Sir George Treby, the Attorney
General, that he finding their Majesty's Names surreptitiously used in the
Prosecution of such a Patent, did that great Iustiee to the Honor of the
Government, and to his own Character, as to cause a Cesset Processus to be
entered in the Case.

When I consider the many Patents, both illegal and vexatious that passed in
the Reign of King Charles the second, I call to mind that Maxim, that the King
can do no wrong; that is, he can in no Grant cum effectu, injure his People,
but by some of his Ministers in the Law passing it, and who in so doing may be
said, Violare Sacramentum Domini Regis. I believe that that excellent Prince
did in his Nature wish well to the Ease of his People as well as his own, while
by the fault of some of his Ministers so many Grants surreptitiously did pass
of the Same concealed Lands, and of Purprestures, and of Lands derelicted, etc.
and when after Composition paid by the People to one Court-beggar, he sent
another to their doors; and when the suffering Populace, whose pretended
Forfeitures were granted before Conviction, were so often tempted to cry out,
Quem das ^inem Rex magne laborum.

It was in that Reign excellently well said by the Earl of Shaftsbury, in his
Speech in the Exchequer, at Sergeant Thurland' s being sworn a Baron there,
viz. Let me recommend to you, so to manage the King's Justice and Revenue, as
the King may have most profit, and the Subject least Vexation: Raking for old
Debts, the number of Informations, Projects upon concealments, I could not find
in the eleven Years experience I have had in this Court, ever to advantage the
Crown: But such Proceedings have for the most part delivered up the Kings good
Subjects into the hands of the worst of Men. And Sir William Petty in a
Manuscript I have seen of his, of the Trade of Ireland, for this purpose,
taking Notice of the several Trades by which People there subsist, speaks of
many there driving the Trade of Projectors, and of such who make use of the
King' s Name, and the Process of the Exchequer, about concealed Lands, to
sponge Composition out of such as are willing to buy their Peace; and he having
showed how much the King is damnified by those Traders, he says very
judiciously in the end, That this Trade does not add any thing more to the
Commonwealth than Gamesters, and even such of them as play with fal^e Dice, do
to the common stock of the whole Number.

It is here therefore but just to take notice of the Prudence of the
Trinity-house, in that after they had on the 18 th. of August, in the 15th.
Year of that King's Reign, pass^d Letters Patents, not only of the Ballast of
the River of Thames, but also of all the Wast ground, Purprestures and
Encroachments, and Soil to it belonging; they soon found that it would engage
them in Controversies with the City of London, and Seamen and Sea-saring
People, and therefore surrendered it, and the Surrender was enrolled in
Chancery the 9 th. of December, in the 16th. Year of that King; and on the
24th. of June, in the following Year, they took out Letters Patents for the
Ballast alone. But there were Patents passed of the same Encroachments Prior to
the Patent of Trinity-house as well as after it; and it may be said, that on
those after it, the Patentees came a gleaning, not only after the Reapers, but
after the Beggars, since whatever Trinity-house receives, is only for the use
of the Poor: However, the Trinity-house in taking out that Patent for
Encroachments on the Thames, was made use of afterward as an Example or
President in that Reign, for other C^urtiers Petitioning for a Grant of the
Encroachments on the Rivers Royal in the Out^ports through all England; and the
Petition referred found a favorable Report from one of the King's Council at
Law, but was stopped on the Letters from all the Seaport Towns in England to
oppose it, as likely to be troublesome and vexatious to the People, and of
which Letters I have seen the Abstracts.

I thank God for his inclining me to* value that habit of ^ind, namely, of not
giving any man the least Offense to get the greatest profit to my self, equal
with my Life; and as those divine words of Tully show he did with his, viz. Non
enim mihi est vita mea utilior, quam animi mei talis affectio, neminem ut
violem commodi mei gratia, lib. 3. Offic. And were I commanded to write the
History of the Reign of any Prince, and therein in proper Colors to delineate
any of the Ministers at Law to him who violated the ease of his fellow
Subjects, by the illegal passing of Grants of Forfeitures before Conviction, I
should transmit his Character to Posterity, in the words of Vir natus ad
corruptissimum istius saeculi Genium: But the Genius of the Age is now for the
making it self easy by its spewing up such Patents: And the benefit the People
find thereby, does in a modest Computation outweigh all the Taxes they pay to
the Government.

The Magistrates of our Metropolis are now eased from the labor of going in
their Formalities, and with a Parade of City-officers attending them to
Whitehall, to seek relief as formerly in the Reign of that Prince.

And I may for the Edification of the Citizens of our Metropolis in Loyalty,
fairly take occasion here to mind them, that when (as the Story is in Howel's
Londinopolis, p. 19.) King James the first, being displeased with the City of
London for their refusing to lend him Money, told the Mayor and Aldermen
attending him, that he would remove his Court, and the Tower Records, and
Courts of Westminster Hall to some other remote place; and an Alderman then
asked him, if he would remove the River of Thames? that if the Alderman thought
that an impossibility, he was certainly ^ar gone in Capon^brot^.

For upon a discourse I had with a most sk^lful Surveyor, on the occasion of my
^elling him that I thought whoever b^rgain'd away that part of the Shore that
was before mentioned, viz. 80 Foot deep, and 100 Foot long, for 20 l. sold
Robin Hood's Penny worths of it, his Measures agreeing with mine therein, and
that many a Man would have given 500 l. for the same; I found on the Result of
our Conference how the Crown might grant away but a Moity of the River of
Thames, namely, the Shore to the Low-water-mark on both sides, (and which would
in effect destroy the whole River as aforesaid) and gain the value of four
Aldermens Estates by it.

For thus his Calculation was, viz. to show that whoever gave 500 l. for it,
would gain 200 l. by the bargain. To go into the Thames 100 Foot long below
Bridge, will cost a Man 300 l. with the slighter sort of Wharfing. If he goes
80 Foot deep, he has it filled for nothing with rubbish; so then he gives 500
l. and gives 300 l. more for the charge of his Whar^: And he may gain 200 l.
by the bargain by the ground^rents, thus, viz. He may build forward and
backward on the Premises, and may compute the ground rent by 6 or 7 s. the
front Houses per Foot, and 2 s. 6 d. per Foot the back Houses; so then there
being in a Mile above 5000 Foot, he will gain in one Mile 50 times 200, that
is, 10000 l. and the like on the other side; and so proportionably for another
Mile on both sides; Quod erat demonstrandum.

There were by the appointment of King Charles the second two Surveys made of
the River of Thames, the one of the several depths of the River in its parts
below Bridge, performed with great Care and Skill by that excellent
Mathematical Person, Sir Jonas Moor, and a Copy of which I can direct the
Conservators of the River where to obtain for an inconsiderable Charge.

The other was a Survey of the Encroachments I before referred to, performed by
the Navy-Board and Trinity-house, with the assistance of Captain Collins, his
Majesty's Hydrographer, and wherein I said great pains was taken; and a Copy
whereof is herewith published for the use of the Conservators of the River, and
I can direct them to Captain Collins his most accurate Draught of the River,
and most necessary to be had by them: And he in my judgment deserves to be well
rewarded with some acknowledgment by the City for the great Pains taken, and
Skill by him shown in that Draught, tending to the preservation of their River:
For he has thereby laid an everlasting Foundation for the easy and certain
Prevention of all future Encroachments on the Thames, and which may be this
way, and I believe cannot possibly be effected by any other; namely, if the
Lords Commissioners for executing the Office of the Lord High Admiral shall
appoint the Marshal of the Admiralty, or some other Person, and the Lord Mayor
appoint his Water-Bailiff at the mending or repairing of any Wharf upon the
Thames, to see a Stake stuck down, beyond which the Repairers of the Wharf
shall not proceed; and both of these Officers shall be ordered to demolish
immediately whatever shall be added beyond such Stake. Captain Collins his
Draught does sufficiently set forth how far the Encroachments went that were
made before the Month of October, 1684. the Month in or about which he gave in
his Draught, and to which this printed Survey referrs.

Upon my consulting the Authors that write of the Regalia, to know their sense
of the Office of a Conservator, I found this definition of it there, viz.
Conservator est qui sine judiciali examine jus aliquod publicum tuetur. Nor is
there any moot-point in our Law that need divert our Conservators of the Royal
Rivers from the immediate demolishing of Nusances, sine judiciali examine.

For as little as I have conversed with Law Books, I find 1 Crook* 184. James
and Haywards Case. Coke 5th. report.
that a Nuisance once erected may be abated by any Body, and that before
prejudice received, and that it cannot be granted by the King, nor continued by
the King's Grant or Pardon.

And therefore when any one buys a Nuisance, 101. Penruddock's Case; and 9th.
Report. 53. Bettons Case, cummultis aliis.
say I, Caveat Emptor: I wish that all Mercy may be shown to those who have
formerly encroached, and even to their old Encroachments, as may be without
Cruelty to the River. But I am informed that that merciful Prince, King Charles
the 2d. gave Order to the Lord Mayor for the demolishing some particular New
Encroachments that were very prejudicial to the River of Thames. He w^ll kn^w
that two parts of three of the Customs come to the Crown from the Port of
London: And no doubt but the consideration of that, as well as the National
concern of his Subjects, inclined him to endeavor the preservation of that
River by the most effectual means; and he being so often upon the River, knew
well that it would bear no more En^roachments, it (...) in the Pool so full of
(...) in of the (...) that a B^ar can hardly pass. He (...) that the great
strai^ness of the (...) the Conserva^o^s (...) more Ships to (...) been
formerly (...) might produce ^he danger of (...).

His Majesty and a^l his People, both representative and diffusive, had been
long sufficiently acquainted with the Doctrine of Nusa^ces, since the passing
of the Act against Irish Cattle, and that a Patent for a Nuisance was not worth
its weight in burnt Silk: And he has been often heard to say, that he would
damn all Patents that damned the River; and that the granting of things to the
Low-water-mark must needs be vexatious; for that the Neap tides and
Spring-tides being so various at different times of the Month, and different
times of the Year, beside all variety of Wind and Weather from abroad, the
great uncertainty of such Grants must make perpetual disturbances among his
Subjects; and that if any presumed to take in the River to what may seem the
Low-water-mark, that then Ships lying by the Walls would increase the Mudd
there, and add to the dirt thrown in, and that that might be built on too, and
so the River be annihilated. And he being informed that the Person who had made
that Encroachment so prejudicial to the River, and which he purchased for 20 l.
was only Fined by my Lord Mayor's Court of Conservacy 5 l. for it, was resolved
to have it demolished, b^th for the good of the River, and to terrify
Encroachers for the future; for that he well knew the demolishing of that one
Encroachment would spoil the Market of selling Nusances for ever.

Nor is it to be wondered at, that his Majesty was so thoughtful and resolved
about the preservation of his River of the Thames, since the Care of some Royal
Rivers, not so considerable as that, has been known to take up so much of the
time of the Council Board, when they were much endangered by Obstructions and
Annoyances. I shall here take occasion to mention what I find in Sir Julius
Caesar 's Manuscript Collections of Matters of State, that after King James had
granted the Conservacy of the River of Tyne to the Mayor and Burgesses of
New Castle, Complaints were brought to the Council Board, of the great Decay of
that River; whereupon on the 29th. of January, An. 1613. certain Articles were
ordered to be put in execution for the remedying the Abuses complained of: And
it appearing that that River was in such eminent danger of being destroyed, if
a very speedy course were not taken concerning it, the Council ordered that Sir
Julius Caesar, and Sir Daniel Den, one of the Judges of the Admiralty, with
the assistance of the Trinity-Masters of London, should draw up additional
Articles to be joined with the former, for the effectual Conservation of that
River: And one of them was, That some truly trusty substantial Men, Burgesses
of New Castle, be appointed to View the River every Week, and to make Oath of
the abuses done to the same; two of them to be Masters of the Trinity-House of
New Castle, and they to have no Coals, nor Mines, nor Ballast-shores, and who
might be thought not concerned for their own profit in casting Sullage into
that River.

The Government then thought not fit to make any Men Guardians of the Soil of
that River, who had a pretense by Patents to inherit it.

In short, when the Sun is just come into its Winter- Tropic, the days begin
to lengthen, and not 'till then; and when things were at the worst with the
River of Tyne, they did then begin to mend: And the Wisdom of the Government
showed its Dominion over all the Stars, whose influences threatened that Royal
River: Dictum, factum; and that River is preserved to this day, and so I hope
with Gods help will the River of Thames, and all our Royal Rivers be for ever.

It was the saying of Maximilian the first, Deus aeterne nisi vigilares quam
male esset mundo, quem regimus ego miser Venator and ebriosus ille Julius. The
Viceadmiral of the County, and the Mayor of Newcastle were in that Conjuncture
drowsy Conservators of that River; but Divine Providence was then awake to
preserve that great useful River, and to awaken the Government to take those
Measures for its preservation that were necessary, and suitably to which a fac
simile might easily be taken on occasion for any other of our Royal Rivers.

There is another of the Royal Rivers where the great Concern of Navigation did
so wo^thily employ the time of the Council Board in the Reign of King Charles
the first: For one Morgan having built a House at Crockyern^^ill, in the Port
of Bristol, (and in which place Posts had formerly b^^n er^ct^d, for Ships and
Barks being fastened to them) the Lords of his Majesty's Council upon a
Complaint of that hindrance to Navigation, made an Order that Morgan should
demolish and pull down that House, that so Posts might remain there as
formerly, for the fastening of Ships; as may appear by two several Orders made
at Council Board, the one bearing date the 11 th. of June, An. 1670. and the
other the 29th. of October.

And if any private Person may abate a Nuisance, even before prejudice received,
none need make it a Question whether the King or his Privy Council may, or
Persons by them Commissioned so to do.

Because (as we say) that which is every body's work is no body's, for that
reason the Law has entrusted that power of abating Nusances in the Royal
Rivers to the Lord High Admiral, as their Conservator, ex Officio; and here for
the doing that in the River of Thames, the Lord Mayor has been admitted to
that trust; and it is vested in both of their Offices, both by Grant and
Prescription, according to that distinction so often used among the Writers of
the Regalia, cumulative but not privative; that is to say, by the accumulating
the power of Conservacy both to the Lord Admiral and the Lord Mayor, neither of
them is deprived of it. Neither would either be deprived of the exercise of
their Power of demolishing Nusances, if the King should grant a Commission to
many other particular Persons so to do: Nor yet would the Commissionating of
many other such Persons deprive the rest of their fellow Subjects of their
right so to do.

And here it is obvious to be said by the way, that tho a Patent that pretends
to grant Encroachments or Nusances is void, yet a Patent or Commission to throw
them down is most certainly very legal. But yet if any Man were so
publick-spirited as without a Patent to attempt a thing so beneficial to his
Country, he would be able to effect it with as much readiness as that
honorable Person, who has on many Accounts deserved so well from his
Country, the Earl of Craven, without Patent or Commission, or a Parade of
Officers and gilded Maces going before him, has been long obeyed in the
quenching of Fires.

My Lord, I believe the English Nation is doubled in populousness, since the
ancient Methods were first used of trusting the Care of Conservacy of the Royal
Rivers in the Country to our Viceadmirals, whose so long Non-user of their
power relating to the Encroachments on them, has sufficiently appeared by the
many Patents of those Encroachments in the several Countries granted in the
Reign of King Charles the second, and the which has beside the inconvenience
of the straitning those Rivers, produced another to our Navigation, namely, the
Creating much trouble by innumerable Lawsuits to our Navigators, who generally
inhabit by the sides of those Rivers, and where their Ships use to lie: And it
is pity but that some Clauses should have been inserted in those Patents, to
direct a different way of Prosecution in their Case from that of other
Subjects, and that unless very enormous prejudice had come by their
Encroachments to the Royal Rivers, the Seamen might not have been put to it to
give Compositson-money for the licensing their Nusances. It has been truly
observed by a late Writer, That Seamen are easily tempted to seek good
Entertainment in other Countries, if they find it not in their own, and that
they are apt to change their own Quarters, and embarque in Foreign Service,
sometimes upon a Capricio of their reputing themselves disobliged at home, and
at other times on their expectance of being better used abroad. And in a
Remonstrance from Trinity-house to the Earl of Nottingham, Lord high Admiral,
it was certify'd by them to his Lordship, that in a little more than 12 Years
after 1588. the Shipping and Number of our Seamen were decayed about a third
part.

It seems by the wise Conduct of the Government then, our Seamen and their
numbers were carefully enrolled.

But so indulgent was Queen Elizabeth to the Seamen in her Reign, that we find
in the Act of Parliament, 35 Eliz. c. 6. An Act for restraining of New
Buildings, a particular tender regard is had to the Seamen; for there it is
said, Provided also notwithstanding any thing in this Act, it shall and may be
lawful for every such Mariner, Sailor, etc. as shall be allowed by the Lord
Admiral, and the Masters and Company of the Trinity-House for the time being,
in writing under their Hands and Seals to continue in his habitation in any
House that has been built sithence the said Proclamation, near to the
Thames-side, serving only for the habitation of such Mariner, and not to be
used for any Victualling-house, nor for any House for any Merchandise, etc. and
likewise that any Mariner may hereafter build any House for such purpose, and
for no other, on or near the Thames-side, so as it may be distant from the very
Wharf or Bank thirty Foot, so as People may pass between the said Houses, and
the said Bank and the Thames, etc.

I speak not this as if I would have any Mariners make any new Encroachments on
any of our Royal Rivers, especially on the Thames, which is already so much
straightened: But I urge it to show how the Wisdom of the Government then did
make it (as I may say) a fundamental Rule for the Preservation of the River of
Thames, that even while encouragement was providing for the Seamen, (the Walls
of the Kingdom) yet Houses by the Thames should not be permitted, but by the
Allowance of the Admiral, the great Conservator of all the Royal Rivers, and
the Trinity-house, first had under their Hands and Seals. Several of the
Members of the Trinity-House dwelling by the Thames-side below Bridge, cannot
but as they go up and down by Water, take notice of the Encroachments as they
are making, and which of them will eminently prejudice the River, and which
not, and so are the more proper to be consulted in the Case.

And from hence we may Collect this great Document, and so necessary to be
thought of again and again, by the Conservators of our public Rivers, namely,
That whatever alteration is made in them, by building on them, tho never so
little, ought to be with great Care, and with the use of the Consilium
peritorum, and not by the arbitrage of private Patentees and their Executors,
but by the Public Conservators, to whose personal Circumspection and Skill
that great trust was always committed by the Government; the Office of the
Admiral having never been granted by Inheritance, as some great Offices, viz.
the Earl Marshal and Lord Great Chamberlain have been.

And there is another instance of the ancient Care of the Government over the
River of Thames, that is very memorable, namely, the excellent Institution of
the Wardmote Inquest, the which thing has worthily made the Government of the
City of London so famous all over the World.

I have read the Articles of the Charge of the Wardmote Inquest, that were in
print in Queen Elizabeth 's time, whereof the 4th. Article is, Ye shall swear
that ye shall enquire and truly present all the Offenses and Defaults done by
any Person or Persons in the River of Thames, according to the intent and
purport of an Act made by our late Sovereign Lord King Edward the 6 th. in his
High Court of Parliament, and also of diverse other things, ordained by Act of
Common Council of this City, for the redress and amendment of the said River,
which as now is in great decay and ruin, and will be in short time past all
remedy, if high and substantial Provision and Help be not had with all speed
and diligence possible, as more plainly appears in the said Act of
Parliament, and the said Act of Common Council of this City.

Here the most grave and substantial Citizens, are put to it by a promissory
Oath to stake their Eternities, and in effect to invocate God, both as Witness
and Revenger, about their doing right to that River in their Presentiments; and
I am sure the present State of it being conformable to the Words, in that
Article relating to its great decay and ruin, etc. is what they may safely
swear in an Oath assertory.

Howel in his Londinopolis, p. 392. speaks of this Article still continuing in
Presentiments in the Wardmote Inquest.

When the Government did anciently order the Lord High Admiral and the Lord
Mayor to espouse the Interest of this River, our Monarchs did not present to
them, as one did who told a Roman Emperor, he offered him a Lady, who was Vidua
and indotata. As much as it has been (as I may say) widdowed, and bereaved of
that Care it should have found, while many now living remember at least a fifth
part of it to have been taken in by Encroachers, it brings in still a very fair
and plentiful Dower to the Lord Admiral and Lord Mayor. The Lord Admiral has
been by it enabled to support the Trinity-House by the Ballast-Office; and I in
my Conscience think it well bestowed on them, that is to say, on the poor
Seamen whom that excellent Corporation relieves thereby.

The Chainage of Ships belongs to the Admiral, and the right of the Ferriage
over all Rivers between the first Bridges and the Sea is a Perquisite of
Admiralty, and the right thereof is inherent in the Office of the Admiral; and
it is notorious that the Right of the Ballastage in all the other Royal Rivers
of England belongs to the Admiral, as well as in the River of Thames. There is
the Perquisite of Anchorage in the Thames, as well as elsewhere, belonging to
the Admiral, as are likewise many other Perquisites, and that are enumerated in
the Admiral's Patent.

Nor can any Right belonging to the Admiral be passed by the Crown under the
Great Seal to any one but by the Admiral's Warrant to the Attorney or Solicitor
general.

To the Lord Mayor as Water-bayly and Conservator of the River of Thames,
several Fees and Profits belong: And to that Office of Conservator belongs the
Office of Measuring Coals, Grain, Fruit, in the Port of London, with the Fees
belonging to it; and the Fines imposed in his Court of Conservacy, or by the
Commissioners of Sewers for Misdemeanors that concern the River; and other
Perquisites, and in the which the Admirals have long ceased to intermeddle; and
not without cause, because of the great Charge incident to the Lord Mayor's
Conservacy of the River, and particularly in matters relating to the Fishery,
and the charge that attends the traversing Indictments, and removing them to
the King's Bench, as likewise the Charge of suing out Scire Facias 'es to vacate
the Grants of particular Persons that entrench on the rights of the Lord
Mayor's Conservacy, and which Charge they have often supported without being
therein assisted by the Lord Admirals.

I might instance in many passages in the reigns of our Kings long ago,
concerning the Lord Mayor's applying to the Government, when private Courtiers
had surreptitiously obtained Patents that interloped in the Conservacy of the
River; as for example, Edward the 4 th. having made a Grant to the Earl of
Pembroke for setting up a Wear in the River of Thames, and the Lord Mayor
applying to the King about it, obtained a Scire Facias to vacate that Grant,
and vigorously prosecuted the vacating thereof to effect.

And how in the two last Reigns several Lord Mayors with great Industry and
Charge prosecuted the vacating of Patents that they judged entrenching on the
Conservacy, that both by Charter and Prescription belonged to them, is known to
every one: Nor will the unwearied diligence of those Patriotly Lord Mayors, Sir
William Pritchard, Sir Henry Tulse, Sir James Smith, Sir Robert Jefferys, Sir
John Peak, in thus showing their Zeal for the Conservacy of the River, be ever
forgot, while that City keeps Records.

And they are strangers to the Character of the present Lord Mayor, both for
integrity and prudence in Political Conduct, and his Zeal for maintaining the
known Rights of the City, who shall think that if he had been at the Helm of
them Government of the City when they were, he would not have steered the same
Course as the most active of them did, and that with such a Courage as is
worthy the high Sphere of Magistracy he moves in. A Coward (says one) cannot
be a good Christian, much less a good Magistrate. Solomon 's Throne of Ivory
was supported by Lions. Innocence and Integrity cannot be preserved in
Magistracy without Courage. Magistrates are great Blessings, Modo audeant, quae
sentiunt, if they dare do their Conscience. Me quae te peperi ne Cesses Thorna
tueri, was the ancient Inscription of the Bridge-house Seal, and which may give
an occasional hint to any Citizen of London, advanced to Authority and Opulency
therein, to wish well to the defense of that River that has so long bred and
preserved the Riches of that City.

I am here led to observe, how that River being pestered by various Annoyances
in the Reign of Henry the 8 th. and the Lord Mayor's Offices being made
uneasy, and hindered in the Conservacy of the River; the City applied to the
King for a Proclamation, who accordingly issued out one in the 34th. Year of
his Reign, strictly requiring, That none should presume to resist, or deny, or
impugn the Lord Mayor or his Deputies, in doing or executing any thing that
might conduce to the Conservacy of the River, etc.

And methinks the Customary yearly Solemnity of the New Lord Mayor's attended
with all the City Companies in their Barges on the Thames, and there on that
River above Bridge having their first Scene of Triumph, as they are going to
Westminster Hall to be sworn, should give them occasion to think often of that
Rivers preservation in the following part of the Year.

I am here led to call to mind a fatal danger that that River above Bridge
escaped in the Reign of the late King, when some were so hardy as to offer him
a Proposition, and in the way of a Project to enlarge his Revenue by straitning
the River, and by building another Street, between the high and low-water-mark,
from the Bridge to White Hall. But tho so great a straitning of the River there
would not have been so prejudicial to the public as lesser straitnings of it
below bridge, where the great Scene of Navigation lies, yet his Majesty with
great judgment gave a peremptory denial to the Proposition, for this particular
reason, namely, that such an alteration in the River might perhaps produce an
alteration in the Tide of Flood, and be the cause of its not flowing so many
hours as it does, and which effect too he thought the building of a Bridge at
Lambeth (a Project that some offered to his Consideration) might produce, it
being obvious that the Obstacle the course of the Tide meets with by London
bridge, does much occasion the Tide of Flood being the shorter.

And if great Care had not been taken by the Trinity-house, in the government
of their Ballast-Lighters, and ordering them not to draw up Ballast too near
the Banks of the River, there would have been great danger of another accident
that might have curtailed the Tide of Flood; I mean by their coming nearer to
the shore than the safety of the great Level by Limehouse will admit. In the
same time that they can draw up one Tun of Ballast in deep Water, they may draw
up three near the shore. A breach in that Level did within these few Years cost
the Proprietors 25000 l. a third part of the value of the Land: And if a new
greater breach came, perhaps it would not be repairable, and possibly cause the
Thames not to flow up so far as it did, and yet does. But any thing of this
Nature we may well hope will be prevented by the excellent Management of the
Ballast-Office, by the industry of that Virtuous and Prudent Lady, the Lady
Brooks, who has the Lease thereof from the Trinity-house, and has taken much
more Care of its being managed for the good of the River, than was took
formerly.

I forgot when I was just now considering the Affair of the Annoyances and
Streightning of the River above Bridge, to mention it, that a Gentleman of the
Temple, who has not been many Years a Barrester, told me, He remembers that
since he was of that Society, the River at low water came up so far as to touch
the Garden-wall; and every one knows at what great distance it is now from the
Wall at low water.

My Lord, I have here given your great active thoughts the best entertainment I
could upon our Royal Rivers, and particularly on the Thames. Great men are like
the heavenly bodies that find much veneration but no rest, unless we find a
Salvo for their having the latter, by saying what the Philosophers do of the
Heavens, that Movendo quiescunt. And whoever will be just to your Lordship,
must acknowledge that you have esteemed your self most at your ease and rest,
while in the high Orb Fate has placed you in, you have been most active and
busy in blessing the World with your i^fluences. Your Lordship need not be
directed to that Moral remark, that your private good is included in the
public, Tanquam Trigonum in Tetragono. And as in Nature we see that all bodies
do by their own proper Center tend to the Center of the Universe, so they that
know your Lordship, know it is natural to you by your tendency to your own
Welfare and Happiness to endeavor to promote the bliss of your Country in all
the ways you can.

Your Lordship is no stranger to what the Roman Poet says of Caesar, -- media
inter praelia Caesar,
Astrorum Coelique plagis, superisque vacabat.


And therefore if his great mind could in the heat of Battle find leisure to
employ it self about the imaginary Circles in the Heavens, and which only salve
the appearances, I believe if presently after you had charged in a Battle, I
had hinted to you some of the great matters before mentioned, that are as real
as th^se three great Foundations of real Learning can make any thing, I mean,
number, weight, and local motion, and matters on which the Salus Populi does
absolutely depend, your Lordship would have given me the hearing. And having
said this, I shall not doubt but that now you are by Providence brought to
support the Crown and your Country, by the great Figure you make in the
Council and Parliament, and in the peaceable administration of the Civil
Government, your Lordship will therein be as vigilant for the public as ever
you were in War.

Nor to a Soul so refined as your Lordships could any War but what is in order
to Peace seem eligible; and when in the Case of any degenerate stupid Members
of Mankind, who are deaf to all Reasons for their being happy, or suffering
others to be so, you are called to awaken the World out of its Lethargy with
the sound of Drums and Trumpets. But it is an easier and gentler way of
awakening any of our Magistrates, whom you may judge to be sometimes drousie in
the Administration of those great trusts reposed in them by the Government,
that I here most humbly offer to your Lordships thoughts, and particularly as
to the public concern in the Con^ervacy of the public Rivers, and the Care of
which in this growth of the populousness of our Country, and overgrowth of the
abuses done to those Rivers, may well call for the Supervisorship of some
particular Person or Persons, who either being Commissioned for their
Conservacy under the Crown, or the Commissioners of the Admiralty may really
Conserve them.

Nor need the Vice-admirals Commissions on this occasion be altered. Let them
be nominal Conservators still, and real ones too as far as they please. Nor
need any the least deduction be made from, or intrenchment on any Fees taken by
the Lord Mayor's deputy Water-bayly or Sub-Conservators for the River of
Thames, as I find him styled in that Book of Howel, where he p. 35. treating of
the State of the Lord Mayor, says, He has a Sword Bearer, Common-hunt, and
Common Crier, and four Water-Bayliffs, Esquires by their Places; whether he
there makes three too many, I know not, I have formerly heard of one too many.
But tho neither Mayor nor Admiral can erect a New Court of Justice without an
Act of Parliament, or Letters Patents from the Crown, yet common reason tells
us they may make as many Sub-Conservators or Deputies for the Ministerial work
in the Conservacy of the River as they please. And if any one public spirited
Man were either by the Crown or Admiral entrusted with the Conservacy of the
other Royal Rivers, he might for each of them employ what hands he pleased.
Quod quis per alium facit per se facere videtur.

According to the vigilance and prudence of the former Commissioners of
Admiralty, in effecting the before mentioned Survey of the Encroachments on the
River of Thames, and likewise the Draught of the River by Captain Collins, the
like Surveys and Draughts of all the other public Rivers beneath the first
Bridges, may in a Years time or thereabout be prepared, the which draughts of
the respective Rivers being fairly set out in Frames, may usefully be hung up
as Ornaments in a Gallery in the House of such general Conservator for the time
being, and be left to his Successors to have the Custody of. And to such
Draughts recourse may easily be had by any of their Majesty's Ministers of
State, or Officers in the Admiralty Court or Navy, or by the Trinity house,
upon occasion. Such Surveys and Draughts being skilfully and accurately
prepared, and some Elbows of Wharfs and Jettys being taken away, whereby the
sides of the Rivers may as much as is needful come toward the shape of a right
Line, the Course of the Rivers themselves will begin to Cure them of their
Sullage; and such Eddys as caused the Water to settle with the mud formerly be
prevented: And these Draughts of the Rivers serving as the Standards by which
all future Enlargements or Diminutions of Wharfs or Banks may be guided, will
make it appear as absurd for Encroachers to break in upon them thus reformed
and regulated, as it does to Clippers to incroach on our curious new Milled
Moneys and the Letters about their Edges, and as absurd for any to beg Patents
from the Crown to take in the Lines of our public Rivers, as the Letters of
our Coin.

And thus after a little diligence and resolution employed in the first settling
of this work, the constant Conservacy of all our Royal Rivers, would be
comparatively easy, the populace seeing that the Government was in earnest in
the thing, and as it appeared to be in the Conjuncture before mentioned, when
the Magistracy did rouse it self for the preservatio^ of the River of Tyne.

Who would have thought that after the Survey of the Encroachments on the River
of Thames, and the Draught of that River by Captain Collins, they should be no
more minded than if such a Survey had been made of the Annoyances of the Rhine
or Texel?

Would any one think that after the vast pains taken by the Trinity-House in
going down the River to perfect its Survey so many times, in the extremity of
Winter-weather, and many of them being Veteran Seamen, thereby contracting
dangerous Colds, Coughs and Catarrhs, because the Government required the
Survey to be made with all expedition; and after that excellent Seaman and
Hydrographer, Captain Collins, had in order to the making his Draught of the
River exact, made so many weary steps in the mud of the shore, yet many Summers
after Summers should pass without any thing brought to effect for the good of
the River, or the abatement of one Causway or other Nuisance, and both Survey
and Draught be no more regarded than an old Almanac calculated for the
Meridian of Paris or Madrid? Nay, which is more, can it be imagined that
Captain Collins, a Person of great integrity, should relate it to another such
Person, That he within this Year or thereabouts, going to see the sides of the
River formerly surveyed, and to find what effects the Survey and his Draught
had there produced, that he there found Stone-wharfs built into the Thames for
three or four hundred Foot in length, and from ten to thirty Foot in breadth;
and that he found a great many other smaller Encroachments on both sides of the
Water, and several new Causeways, which in time would raise the Mud equal to
the superficies of the Causways; and that he acquainting the City-Officer
entrusted with the Care of the Concerns of the River therewith, had from him
instead of thanks a ruffianly Answer? yet these very words of the Captains
speaking were Noted down from his Mouth by the Person to whom he spoke them.
Thus is the Case of the Rivers Survey and Abatements of its Nusances, like that
in the Epigrammatist, Eutrapelus tonsor dum Circuit ora Luperci
Arraditque genas, altera barba subit.


His dilatory Shaving occasioned a New Beards forth coming.

But that the Watermen may have no cause to complain that they cannot Land nor
take in their Fare, if they may not have that use of the Causways that the
Survey mentions as prejudicial, I shall here say, that both their Fare and they
may be accomodated as well below Bridge as above, by the Use of a Truck or
Board with Wheels at the end next the Water, to move too and fro as the Tide
comes in or goes out, which may answer their purpose.

And if those to whose Care the Conservacies of the Rivers are entrusted as
Depositories, may happen to tell your Lordship that they are not at leisure to
mind the vigorous discharge of this trust, a Reply may be had from the trite
passage of King Philip's telling a Complaining Woman that he had no leisure to
do her Justice, and on which occasion she said, that then he should have no
leisure to be King. Most certainly he who receives a Depositum, obliges
himself to be at leisure to preserve it: And I never knew any Judge but who
would find leisure to ampliate and enlarge his Jurisdiction, especially when he
saw any Men find leisure to try to diminish it.

There was one thing that seemed to be of some moment for the discouraging any
one from a belief of the likelihood of any of the Encroachments on the Royal
Rivers being shortly removed, or of the event of any Person of Honor or
Quality's being likely to undertake to serve his Country therein; namely, the
want of any Fonds to support the Charge of such Office. But as to which, it is
obvious to consider that the Law is open to compel Encroachers to be at the
Charge of abating their own Encroachments, if able to do it, and wherein such
especially who after the Survey made Encroachments on the Thames, will deserve
little Favor.

And in the Case of Insolvents, the Encroachments of solvent Persons that shall
by the Conservators be permitted to continue, as consistent with the safety of
the Rivers, may easily be made to bear that charge.

I remember a Person employed by some of the late Kings Ministers to discourse
Sir Robert Jefferys, when Lord Mayor, about this Matter, acquainted me that Sir
Robert then moved it to the Court of Aldermen, That a Committee thereof might
be appointed to meet at his House with that Person, and he there offering it to
their Coasideration, as the sense of those Ministers, that Commissioners should
be appointed by his Majesty to make moderate Compositions with the Owners of
such Encroachments as were not very prejudicial to the River, and were to be
continued, and the Charge of the demolishing the prejudicial ones might be
defrayed out of such Composition, and that he desired to know whether they had
any thing to object against it. The Lord Mayor and the rest of the Committee
unanimously declared that they were very well pleased with the Proposition, and
did thankfully embrace it.

And no doubt but if the like way of Compositions were ordered for such
Encroachments as are to continue in the Royal Rivers in the Country, the
charge of the demolishing some there, and of the regulation of those Rivers,
might not only be thence defrayed, but a considerable sum of Money might be
thence brought in to support the Charge of the Government, and that without any
gainsaying or reluctance from the People, provided that they might be delivered
from the vexatious Prosecutions of the many Patents to private Persons for such
Encroachments; to whom they have been in a manner forced to give Money to
redeem their Vexation, rather than out of hopes that they could buy a good
Title for the continuance of their Nusances. And certainly the Condition of the
French Subjects being so ill on the account of their being forced to buy Salt'
any Men's being harrass'd into the buying such ins^pid things (or as I may
rather say noxious) as Nusances, is a more compassionable Case. This is humbly
offered to the Consideration of the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, in
order to their offering it to the Considerations of their Majesty's, or of the
House of Commons, (who are the grand Inquest of the Kingdom) or of the House of
Lords, as they shall see occasion. And perhaps if by their Application, a
Clause may be inserted in some new Act of Parliament, for the continuance of
Peoples Enchroachments that shall be compounded for by Commissioners in the
respective Counties named in the Act, or by their Majesty's, they being by the
Legislative power secured in their Titles to such Encroachments, will no doubt
be cheerfully ready to pay near the full Value thereof.

The common Observation, that Prerogative in the Hand of the Prince is a
Scepter of Gold, but in the Hand of the Subject a Rod of Iron, is apparently
applicable to the Case of the Jubilee such People will have, when freed from the
Vexations by Color of Law given them by the Proling litigious Instruments
employed under such Patents, who are usually the Faex Populi, and may well
bring to our minds the saying of Solomon, A poor Man that oppresses the poor,
is like a sweeping Rain which leaves no Food.

I have been informed from Mr. L. J. a worthy Bencher of the Temple, that the
poor People were so miserably harras'd by the Agents employed in the Lady S --
ll's Patent for derelict Lands, about twenty Years since, that the Court of
Exchequer, burdened with Complaints about it, Ordered, that no Process of the
Court should be further issued out upon it.

I do studiously avoid the naming of other Patents or the Patentees, or any of
their Instruments or Agents, and do not desire to give our Admirals any trouble
with reflections on such, however yet in the course of my little reading in
Parliament-Records, I find that many Persons have been censured in Parliament
for taking out and procuring illegal and vexatious Letters Patents from the
Crown. The Case of Sir Francis Mitchel for his pro^uring a Patent of forfeited
Recognizances before Conviction, is fresh in Memory.

Nor shall I here mention the Names of those Patentees particularly, who gave
multitudes of the Seamen so much trouble at Law by their Patents for
Encroachments, while they knew there were Prior Patents in being for the same
Encroachments, and that therefore no Action was then maintainable by the latter
Patentees, and that they could have no design by bringing their innumerable
Actions against the Seamen, but to get Composition out of them.

Nor shall I mention the Name of a Waterbailiff, who was reflected on in
Council in the two last Reigns, for having the Encroachers on the Thames for
his Tenants, and whom a late Lord Mayor reproved very worthily on that account.
Nor shall I name a later Lord Mayor, who instead of being a Conservator of the
River, appeared as a Patron of Encroachers, by effecting it that a Ringleader
of the Encroachers should be fined only a Noble for an Encroachment, that in
the Survey of the Navy-Board and Trinity-house is particularly branded with its
dimensions as prejudicial to the Thames, and his being suffered to continue
that Encroachment; and the which Favor his Lordship was known to show him at
the request of a Person who was by Name reflected on in The City Reasons before
mentioned, as an Encroacher of their Conservacy. The words of the wise are
heard in quietness; and I therefore desire not to ruffle the Cares of any of
our Magistrates, from whom the redress of these evils may be hoped, by the
noise of the Names of Persons. I desire that they may please to look forward,
not backward, and that at things rather than Persons, and nequid detrimenti
capiat publicorum fluminum Conservatio.

And here it falls in my way to observe, that supposing the Conservators should
not think it necessary in have to abate any Nusances, or to effect the raising
of any Revenue for the Crown, or Fond for this Office on the Encroachments, yet
may the charge of the Office before mentioned be competently supported out of
Admiralty Perquisites, either as they are already vacant, or as they shall be;
and such Perquisites as to common reason may seem most proper to be applied to
a public use, and as I before mentioned how the Ballast was. The truth is,
considering how little the standing Fees of the Judge and other Officers of the
High Court of Admiralty are proportioned to the great pains by them taken, and
trust in them reposed, and for how much a greater income than yet belongs to
Trinity-house, that is so useful a receptacle as to the Charities to be
bestowed on decayed Seamen, and their Widows and Orphans, and where they are
to such with so much exact Care applied, I have been much troubled when I have
heard of Admiralty Perquisites bestowed formerly on Courtiers and Voluptuaries,
by whom the Admiralty Office and Jurisdiction, and the moral Offices incumbent
on the same, have not been promoted one jot.

But since the Nature of things does Call so loud for the speedy Settlement of
this Office, by which means only the Trust in the Admiral's Office can be
discharged for the prevention of future Encroachments on the Royal Rivers, and
for that frustra differtur remedium quod est unicum, it may be worthy the Care
of those honorable Persons who administer that Office, to see some support
provided for that Office as soon as may be, and to apply to the Crown or the
Legislative Power, as they shall find occasion, for any thing to be done,
necessary to the settlement and support thereof.

Both because the River of Thames is the most principal of the Royal Rivers,
and for that the Country is naturally in all things influenced by the Example
of London, the effectual Conservacy of its River may well seem to require the
Priority of their Care. And here after the example of the Government, that as
was before mentioned provided A. 1613. for the preservation of the River of
Tyne, that the Persons who were appointed to View that River, should every Week
make Oath of its State, and the Abuses done to it, perhaps it may appear
necessary, both to the Commissioners of the Admiralty and the Lord Mayor, to
apply to the Parliament that a New Form of Oaths may be enjoined to all Persons
ministerially concerned in the Care of the River of Thames, and the which kind
of Oaths may likewise be enjoined to Persons employed in the Conservacy of the
Royal Rivers in the Country. This is here mentioned, because it is conceived,
that a New Oath cannot be imposed but by Authority of Parliament.

I suppose the Lord Mayor's Deputy Water-Bailiff was never upon his Oath not to
connive at Encroachments on the River: But the very common Fame about the
Water-Bailiff's Tenants, may make either a promissory Oath to that effect
necessary in the beginning of every Mayor's Year, or at the end of it an
assertory one that he has not done it.

I know a Gentleman, who charging a late Water-Bailiff with taking of Money
from Encroachers, was answered, That he did no such thing, but would not deny
but that some of his followers might do so. Good God! what unsafe anchoring do
all our great Trusts in this World find, while we trust our Bodies to
Apothecaries Boys, our Estates to Lawyers Clarks or the Apprentices of
Scriveners, our Souls to poor Curates, and our principal Royal River to a
Water-baily's Followers!

When I consider that mighty spirit of Industry that appeared in France with
success, for joining the two Seas, a work that heretofore abashed the Roman
Empire, and was attempted and given over in foregoing Reigns, and yet
notwithstanding the remoteness of the two Seas, the Mountains, the Boggy-Lands,
the scarcity of Water in a Country where there was hardly enough to supply the
Gardens, and many other difficulties, that it was in a few Years brought to its
perfection, while the Crown there was in War against the most powerful States
of Europe united together, I shall wonder much if we have not a stock of Brains
and Industry enough going to keep our River of Thames.

What great Pains and Charge the work of meliorating that River cost our
Ancestors, the Chronicles tell us, and how useful for the preservations of it
the pains taken in a late Conjuncture, (when the Cities Charter was in its low
estate) by the former Commissioners of the Admiralty, proved, is obvious; and
therefore the Wisdom of our Ancestors in Complicating the Office of the Lord
Admiral with the Lord Mayors in its Conservacy, was very profound; for the
Admiral's Office being during pleasure, we are sure that whoever have that
Office, are the actual Favorites of the Government; and by being so, they have
with the better success signalized their diligence in the preserving that River.

It must here in Justice be acknowledged, that the late King James, while the
Admiralty was in his Hands, was not by all the Cares and Business incumbent on
the Crown, diverted from the Conservacy of the River. And if all the
particulars of the vast pains taken by Mr. Pepys therein, while he was
Secretary of the Admiralty, were enumerated, they would fill a much larger
Volume than what I here send your Lordship. His concerning himself so much and
so often in the behalf of Petitioning Seamen who conceived themselves injured
by the Agents of Patentees requiring Money of them for their Ships lying on the
Shore, and his Frank interceding with the King as Admiral for them, and
effecting their being speedily righted, and that without any Fee of Office
expected or paid, are things fresh in the Memories of those who live by the
Thames-side below Bridge.

And the truth is, to a Person so knowing in the Office of the Admiral, it must
needs be known, that Seamen being more than other Subjects compelled to serve
the Crown in times of Peace and War, and at the Crowns own Rates both at home
and abroad, are entitled to a more tender Protection from the Crown than other
Subjects are: And that the Seamen being called to such Service by the Admiral's
Warrant, will in the Case of any general pressure happening to them wherein the
King's Name is used, expect that the Admiral shall apply to the Crown in their
behalf, as knowing that no Admiral ever refused or delayed in such Case to take
the trouble of patronizing them.

My Lord, I have now almost done troubling you for the present; and yet
according to a Jewish Proverb, that Molestus ubi se molestum agnoscit, no^ est
molestus, shall hope I have not done it at all. But I shall chiefly fortify my
hopes of my not having so done, by the Consideration of its being no trouble to
you, but an Obligation for any One to furnish your great thoughts with any
useful Materials for the promoting the service of your Prince and Country, in
such a critical season as this, that calls so loud for that Old heathenish
Virtue of the Pietas in Patriam to awaken it self among English Christians.

We may well believe our Chronicles, that tell us of a Porter who slept
fourteen days and nights together, when we have seen so great a part of a
whole Nation asleep four or five Years, and much longer.

The last Reign save one was a time wherein men made pleasure their business,
and when the Nation suffered more by Lethargy than the Plague. But as Nature
does now call upon us to make Business our Pleasure, and to build Workhouses
as well as Play Houses, so it may be supposed that our World is as weary of
sleeping as ever it was of waking, and that Reasons for Men's being public
spirited and nobly active in all the public Spheres in Magistracy to which
they are called, may be patiently heard, and that it may seem a reasonable
Request, since we see in things natural, some inanimate things to serve the
Nature of the Universe do sometimes forgo and quit their particular Nature (and
as for example, water to prevent a Vacuum which Nature abhorrs, does ascend,)
that Magistrates would go on in their own natural Course to what lies in the
plain way of their Duty, and what is incumbent on them by moral Obligations.
Faxit: And that he may neither be a shame to, nor ashamed of his Country, who
has the Honor of being

My LORD, Your Lordships most Humble and most Devoted Servant, T. H.

ERRATA
In the foregoing Letter to the Earl of Marlbourgh.
PAge 2. for (...)! read (...). p. 14. for Britannij r. Britanni. ib. for
Robora r. Robore. p. 18. l. 3. after the word Corporation close the
Parenthesis. p. 26. for Moral r. Morals. p. 46. for raris r. Ranis. p. 54. for
Mr. Joseph Coting r. Mr. Joseph Colinge. p. 59. for Hydrautica r. hydraulica.
p. 77. l. penult. instead of a Point of Interrogation make a Comma. p. 87. for
the Year 1670. r. 1630. p. 97. for patriotly r. particular. p. 98. for Thorna
r. Thoma. p. 105. l. 18. for Subconservators r. Subconservator. p. 110. l. 3.
for making r. speaking. p. 110. l. ult. for are r. is. p. 114. l. 13. dele
perhaps.

THE New Invention OF MILL'D-LEAD, FOR Sheathing of Ships against the Worm,
better for Sailing, and Cheaper above Cent. per Cent. than the old way with
Boards.

As also For Bread-rooms, Scuppers, Furnaces, etc.

The Objections, Answers, Proofs and Proceedings, between the Officers of the
Navy and the Mill'd-Lead Company, before the late Lords of the Admiralty and
Council Board, submitted to Consideration.

ALSO The said Mill'd-Lead from many Years Experience, as well as the reason of
the thing it self, proved to be much better and cheaper, for Covering of
Houses, Gutters, Pipes, Furnaces for Dyers, Copperas-works, Lining of Cisterns,
and other Vessels for Brewers, Dairies, and all purposes whatsoever, where
Sheet-Lead is used, than Cast-Lead can be, and the Plumbers suggestions
decrying the same, proved to be idle, scandalous and false.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1691.

A TABLE OF The Principal Matters in the following Discourse of the New
Invention of MILL'D-LEAD.
THe substance of the Navy-Officers Report to the Lords of the Admiralty,
October 28. 1682. giving their Opinion against any further use of
Lead-sheathing, p. 1. The Companies Reply thereto, together with their whole
Interest and Right in this Affair, entirely submitted by them to his Majesty
and their Lordships, p. 2. An Account of the Company's first becoming Masters
of this Invention, and their submitting it to the Censure of his Majesty in
Parliament, Anno 1670. p. 3. The Parliaments strict Inquisition into, and most
ample Approval of the said Invention, in an Act passed in favor of the same.
p. 4. The first Essay made thereof by the Company upon the Phoenix, in March,
1670/1. and successively on other of his Majesty's Ships, p. 6. The studied
Obstructions nevertheless raised and long continued against it, from Persons
interested in the opposing it, p. 6. The final removal of those Obstructions by
the express Order of his Majesty and the Lords of the Admiralty in the Year
1673. upon three Years proof of the efficacy of the said Invention, and the
King's personal Observation of its success upon the Phoenix, p. 7. The
Navy-Officers contracting with this Company for the use of this their
Invention, (after five Years trial of it) in March, 1675/6. in terms expressly
declaring their sufficient experience thereof, both as to Lead and Nails, p. 8.
The first breaking forth (after this five Years proof) of a Complaint from the
Streights of an extraordinary decay discovered in Ships Rudder-Irons, from
their being sheathed with Lead, p. 9. The care of his Majesty and the Lords of
the Admiralty by their several Orders to the Navy-Officers for the finding out
the true grounds of that Complaint, and improving (in Order thereto) a
Suggestion and Proposal of this Company's, touching their Iron-work, p. 10. The
particular Instances of Complaints, upon which the Navy-Officers do found this
their Judgment against Lead-sheathing, with the Companies solutions thereto,
and observation of a greater number of Ships resting uncomplained of, than
those they have instanced in, were their Complaints true, p. 11. The Companies
Remarks upon the Philosophical reasoning of the said Officers upon the Lead it
self, as a Metal, p. 17. The Companies Opinion and Argument, that the
sheathing Ships with Lead, neither is, nor can be the true Cause of this decay
of Iron-work, p. 19. Their Judgment and Reasons, what alone this Mischief ought
rightly to be imputed to, p. 23. The only certain and effectual Expedient of
arriving at the knowledge of the truth in this matter. p. 32. Instances of the
Discouragements and Obstructions wherewith this Company has ever hitherto been
prevented by the Officers of the Navy, in their Endeavors of serving his
Majesty herein, p. 34. Their fresh Offer nevertheless of the proposing of an
effectual Remedy to the Evil complained of, after premising the three following
Reflections, viz. p. 36. 1. That Sheathing with Wood (the only security before
this of Lead, for sheathing Ships against the Worm) is, and has always been
owned to be attended with circumstances greatly detrimental to his Majesty,
with respect both to his Ships and to his Service, p. 36. 2. That the only
Expedient besides this of Lead, for obviating those Evils in Wood-sheathing,
has hitherto been the exposing his Majesty's Ships to the Worm unsheathed, p.
39. 3. That the only third Method yet extant of serving his Majesty herein, is
this of Lead sheathing; against which none of the Evils in the former two, nor
any other are at this day so much as suggested by the Officers of the Navy
themselves, after near twelve Years experience of it, saving this relating to
the Iron-work, p. 40. The Company's final Proposal of an obvious, easy and
chargeless Remedy to the said Evil, to whichsoever of the supposed Causes the
same should be found imputable, p. 41. A particular of the Navy-Officers
Complaints, with reference to the Company's particular Answers thereto in the
Reply, p. 45. The Navy-Officers Report, and the Companys Reply, laid before the
King and Council by one of the Lords of the Admiralty, p. 50. The
Council-Boards Order upon hearing, referring it back to the Commissioners of
the Admiralty, thoroughly to examine the Matter, and Report the Fact upon each
Article, with their Opinion, p. 51. The Company's Memorial presented to the
Commissioners of the Admiralty upon the Council-Boards Reference, p. 54. The
determination of the Admiralty Commission before any Report, p. 58. The
Company's New Proposal to the Navy-Board, 20 December. 1686. to sheath the Kings
Ships per Yard square, and to keep them in constant repair at a rate certain,
above Cent. per Cent. cheaper than the present Charge, p. 60. Letters and
Certificates from Master Builders, Carpenters, etc. in behalf of the
Lead-sheathing, p. 72. Pursers Certificates how the Sheathing Lead proved in
the lyning their Bread-rooms, p. 82. A Brief of the Controversy between the
Officers of the Navy and the Mill'd-Lead Company, p. 86. The Excellency and
Cheapness of Mill'd-Lead for Covering of Houses, etc. p. 92. An Advertisement
lately printed and published, to all that have Occasion to make use of
Sheet-lead, abundantly proving Milled Sheet-Lead to be much cheaper, as well as
better than Cast Sheet-lead, for any use whatsoever, p. 93. A Paper presented
by the Plumbers, to prevent the Company's Contract with the Navy-Board,
wonderfully decrying the Mill'd-Lead, and commending their own, naming half a
score Houses that they say were amongst many others covered with Mill'd-lead,
which being defective, were stripped, and their Cast-lead laid in the room, p.
102. Letters and Certificates from the Owners or Inhabitants of those Houses,
proving the Plumbers said Paper to be scandalous and false, p. 105. Also their
idle suggestion therein about their Solder answered, p. 113. A Memorial given
in to the Navy-Board by the Mill'd-Lead Company, proving that by two Trials
purposely made with the Plumber in Jan. and Febr. 1678/9. the Mill'd-Lead
Scuppers were according to the Order given, which the Plumber could not obey,
and above 25 l. per Cent. in both those Trials cheaper to the King than theirs,
p. 114. A Treatise of Naval Philosophy, written by the ingenious Sir William
Petty, p. 117. A Survey of the Buildings and Encroachments on the River of
Thames, on both sides, from London Bridge Eastwards, to the lower end of
Lyme-house, taken by ^he principal Officers and Commissioners of his Majesty's
Navy, with the assistance of the Elder Brethren of Trinity-House, in pursuance
of an Order of the Lords Commissioners for executing the Office of Lord High
Admiral of England, Dated the first of March, 1683/4. Wherein is also
particularly expressed which of the said Buildings and Encroachments are old,
and which are new, and likewise which of them are judged most prejudicial to
Navigation and the River, together with References to each of them by Numbers
in the Draught of the River lately made by Captain Collins.
To the Right Honorable, The LORDS COMMISSONERS For executing the Office of
Lord High Admiral of England.
The humble Reply of Sir Philip Howard, Sir Francis Watson, Kts. and Comp.
interested in the Manufacture and Invention of Milled-Lead, October. 28. 1682.
to the late Report to your Lordships from the Officers of the Navy, touching
the Method of Lead-sheathing, used upon his Majesty's Ships: Wherein they show
to your Lordships,
THat from every Ship of his Majesty's that has been so sheathed, they have had
complaints of the extraordinary Eating and Corroding of their Rudder-Irons and
Bolts, beyond whatever was found upon any Ship not so sheathed, and annexed a
Transcript of several Complaints by them received from several Commanders and
others to that effect: And that therefore upon due sideration had thereof, and
of the many Experiences had of the great damages arising from this sort of
Sheathing; They give it as their Opinion, that it will not be for his Majesty's
Service, that the same be longer used upon his Ships: but that the Ships so
Sheathed, may have their sheathing stripped off, and new Iron-work supplied
where defective, as well to prevent any further damage from the longer
Continuance of the said Sheahing upon them, as that they may be in a condition
of service whenever on a sudden occasion, the same may be called for.

To which Report, and the Matters of Complaint whereon the same is grounded,
importing a vehement suggestion of ruin likely to attend the Ships and Service
of his Majesty, in Case this Method of Lead-sheathing should be continued: The
said Sir Ph. Howard and Compa. do make this plain Return, viz.

THat as their first interesting themselves in this undertaking, was wholly
founded upon the hopes they had of being enabled to contribute somewhat thereby
to the Service of the Royal Navy, and those hopes confirmed by as ample
Instances of Public approbation as were ever given to any precedent Invention;
so do they still give his Majesty's Service the same entire preference to all
considerations of private advantage that either has or can arise to them from
the same undertaking; And therefore are not only contented, but desirous, that
in case your Lordships shall (after perusal of this Paper) hold the
reasonableness of the said Officers Advice, for suppressing the further use of
Lead-Sheathing, sufficiently demonstrated by what they have offered as the
grounds thereof in that collection of Complaints: No Considerations relating to
the Interest or Right of this Company, may stand in the way of whatever his
Majesty and your Lordships shall think most for his Service to determine
concerning it.

A Deduction of the whole Matter relating to the Lead-sheathing of his
Majesty's Ships, with what this Company do in their Duty hold themselves bound
on this Occasion to offer of their own Reflections and Sentiments thereon.
IT was in the Year 1670. when this Company becoming Masters of this Invention
of Milled-Lead, they soon met with Encouragement, not only from sundry Officers
and Builders of the Navy, but from his Majesty himself, and his Royal Highness
then Lord High Admiral of England, to an immediate exposing the same to
practice.

But such was their backwardness to presume upon falling into the exercise of
an Invention, (though never so self-convinced of its Efficacy and Safety) whose
first Experiments, and future use, were principally to be made upon a Subject
of so high consideration, as that of the Royal Navy of England, without passing
the most strict and solemn probation a matter of that kind could, and ought to
have in a Government like this subsisting by Navigation, namely, That of his
Majesty's in Parliament, that they in the same Year brought this their
Invention into the Parliament then sitting: Where, after all the severities of
Scrutiny capable of being exercised in each of the Houses successively, and
public Conferences had with all Persons qualified for giving Advice therein,
and those attended not only with the prejudice all new Propositions ordinarily
meet with, but from opposition of the Persons interested in the preservation of
the old ones, (whereof more hereafter,) it not only received full Approbation
by being passed then into an Act, but had the same done in Terms the most
expressive of the Conviction and Satisfaction wherewith his Majesty and
Parliament passed the said Act with regard both to the Invention and Inventors;
as by part thereof following appears, viz.

An Act for granting unto Sir Philip Howard, Knight, and Francis Watson
Esquire, the sole use of a Manufacture, Art, or Invention for the benefit of
Shipping.
WHereas it appears upon Examination that Sir Philip Howard, Knight, and
Francis Watson, Esquire, by their great Charge and Industry have found out a
New Manufacture, Art, or Invention to preserve Ships, and other Uessels under
Water, with certain Commodities chiefly of the growth of his Majesty's
Dominons, which is much cheaper, and more smooth, and dureable than any way by
Deals for Sheathing, or Pitch, Tarr, Rozin, Brimstone, or any Graving hitherto
used: Now for the Encouragement of Ingenuity and Industry in the like cases;
and to the intent that the said Sir Philip Howard, and Francis Watson, may be
protected in the use of the said Manufacture, Art, or Invention, and have
encouragement to make the same public, for the benefit of his Majesty's
Dominions in general, etc.

This being done, and the said Company not only invited, but by his Majesty
commanded to apply themselves forthwith to the putting in use this Invention
upon some of his own Ships, they by his Order, and on Terms adjusted with the
Officers of the Navy, proceeded to the making the first Experiment thereof at
Portsmouth upon the Phoenix, in the month of March, 1670, and not long after
did the like upon several others, of which these following were part, viz.

Dreadnought. Henrietta. Mary. Lion. Bristol. Foresight. Vulture. Rose. Hunter.
Harwich. etc.
But your Lordships may be pleased here to be informed, That (however upon the
stamp given it by Parliament) this Company were so let in by the Officers of
the Navy to the exercise of their said Invention; yet was it not without fresh
assaults from some who were interested in the benefit arising from the labor,
and the Materials employed in the bringing on, and stripping off the
Wood-sheathing, in whose place this was to succeed: And by their Arts and
Industry, were Sir Philip Howard, and Company in a restless manner urged to
give Answers (all over again) to the Objections formerly raised against them,
and their Invention in Parliament, namely, Its excess in charge above the
ancient method, its rough lying on Ships sides to the prejudice of their
Sailing. Its liableness to galling from the Cables, and cracking when brought
on ground. Its tediousness in bringing on and off. Aptness to foul, and
difficult in cleansing. Lastly, Its undurableness and doubtful efficacy in what
was chiefly expected from it against the Worm.

But so convincing were the Solutions brought (as before) to every particular,
and the same so confirmed by a three years proof by this time made of the
whole, and more especially by a Personal view had by the King himself of the
Phoenix, then come in and Careened at Sheerness, in the Year 1673. after two
Voyages to the Streights: That his Majesty to put an end to the unreasonable
importunities till then continued upon himself and them on this Subject, was
pleased by his then Commissioners of the Admiralty, to give a final Declaration
of his Opinion and Pleasure concerning it, in an Order from those Lords to the
Officers of the Navy, bearing date the 20 th. of December 1673. as follows,
viz.

AFter our hearty commendations, in pursuance of His Majesty's Pleasure
signified to us by himself at this Board; that in regard of the many and good
proofs which had been given of the usefulness of Sir Philip Howard, and Major
Watson's Invention of Sheathing his Majesty's Ships with Lead, in preference to
the doing of it with the materials, and in the manner anciently used, (with
respect had no less to the charge thereof, than the effectual securing the
Hulls of his Majesty's Ships against the Worm) his Majesty's Ships may for the
time to come be Sheathed in no other manner than that of Lead, without especial
Order given for the same from this Board: These are to Authorize you to cause
this his Majesty's Pleasure herein to be duly complied with. And so we remain,

Your Loving Friends, Anglesey. Ormond. G. Carteret.



Notwithstanding which, such was the Reluctance (or Caution) wherewith the
Officers of the Navy did yet think fit to proceed in the adventuring to give
any Encouragement to this Invention, That not adjudging a three Years proof
available in this Case, they thought expedient to take two Years more, and the
benefit of what Observations they could either make or collect from the several
Lead-sheathed Ships employed on Southern Service within that time, the better
to enable themselves without mistake to determine concerning the execution of
his Majesty's said Order; which indeed (after the five Years end) they did
comply with, by entering into a solemn Contract with Sir Philip Howard, and
Company, for the future sheathing his Majesty's Ships with Lead, and this with
such alacrity and fullness of seeming Conviction concerning it is
advantageousness to the King, that (besides their voluntary exchanging many and
good proofs, etc. the terms of his Majesty's said Order, into sufficient proof
and Experience of the Goodness and Usefulness of the Invention of Milled-Lead,
and Nails for the Sheathing and preserving Ships against the Worm) they would
not permit the said Company to reserve to themselves any part, but would secure
to the King in the said Contract a Title to the whole term then remaining of
the time for which they were by the Act of Parliament invested in the sole
benefit of their Invention, and whereof there was then twenty years yet to
come. And thus stood this Matter at the close of the Year 1675. when it might
reasonably have been thought, that it had come to such, and so deliberate a
settlement, as no new scruples could have been raised about it, on the part of
the Navy Officers, or any occasion of fresh disquiet created to this Company.

But so it was ordered, or at lest fell out, that no sooner were all things
thus seemingly satisfied, and established at home, but a new Cry, and of a
quite new kind, breaks out from abroad, of a quality discovered in our
Lead-sheathing, tending (if not timely prevented) to the utter Destruction of
his Majesty's Ships, namely, That of the Eating into, and wasting their
Rudder-Irons and Bolts under water, to such a degree, and in so short a space
of time, as had never been observed upon any unsheathed or Wood-sheathed Ships.

Nor lay this long unseconded by concurrent Advices from Portsmouth, in
reference to some of them that were sheathed with Lead, and then in that
Harbor, and the Accounts thereof circumstanced with such particularities as
seemed to obtain Credit not only with the Navy Officers, but his Majesty, and
the Lords of the Admiralty, and even this Company too, at least so far, as to
excite in all a desire of Enquiry into the true grounds of it.

In order to which (leaving it to the Navy Officers to give your Lordships an
Account of theirs, as we shall (by and by) of our own Endeavors therein) it
pleased his Malesty, and my Lords of the Admiralty, not only by several Orders
to recommend to the said Officers the general matter of this Enquiry, but (upon
a suggestion made to them by this Company, of their apprehending this evil to
arise from some defectiveness in the Iron-work it self, with a tender of their
service, toward finding out the full truth thereof) to direct the Officers of
the Navy by no less than four several Orders within the Months of April and
May, 1678. to receive from the said Company what Rudder-Irons should be so
provided by them, and employ no other upon any Ships to be thenceforward
sheathed with Lead, than what were so provided, since which (being full four
Years and an half) this Company has nevertheless been so far from having any
opportunities given them by the said Officers of doing his Majesty the service
by these Orders expected, That the first and only sight or knowledge we had of
what progress they in all that time made toward the decision of this matter,
is what your Lordships were pleased so lately to surprise us with in this their
Report; wherein the whole supposed Consumption of the Iron-work of his
Majesty's Ships, and all the ruinous Consequences apprehended therefrom to the
Navy, are expressly laid on Lead-sheathing, and that only; and grounded this
their sentence upon no other Inducements (for ought appears) than the
particulars of Complaint accompanying the said Report: The Truth, Consistences,
and Conclusiveness of which Complaints for proving the chargeableness of this
evil on Lead-sheathing, your Lordships will (we doubt not) see through, upon a
bare review of the said Complaints, joined with this their Reasoning therefrom,
as follows.

1. From Sir John Norbrough's saying, That in July 1678, the Plymouth's
Rudder-Irons began to be much eaten, doubting his being forced thereby to send
her home that Winter, from the incapacity he was in, of getting her recruited
abroad, and Sir R. B's adding in September 1682. that had she not been supplied
with new Rudder-Irons before her coming out of the Streights, she had been in
the same ill condition with another Ship he had then newly spoken of; whereas
we are under no doubts of Sir I. Narbrough's owning to your Lordships what he
has lately done to some of us, that she had no supply of fresh Rudder-Irons
abroad, but came home with her old ones, and those (it seems) in so good case,
that Sir R. B. could not distinguish them from Irons of a new supply.

2. From Sir R. B's descripition of the ill condition of the Harwich's
Iron-works discovered at her cleaning in 1682. in their being eaten away to
nothing, so as to make it matter of wonder that she sunk not in the Sea;
whereas (besides her said Iron-works having been fastened in her five Years and
an half, without any Complaint heard of concerning them all her Voyage, or at
her coming home in July, 1679. Sir R. B. must be thought subject to some
mistake; or both he, and the Surveyor of the Navy made accountable for a breach
(much less easily answered for) both of the general Laws of the said Navy, and
their particular Instruction therein, by suffering a Ship of her Value, and
coming home in so sinking a condition, to lie afterward above three Years in
Harbor unsearched.

3. From Sir John Kempthornes Complaint in June 1677. of the Dreadnought's
Rudder-Irons being within a Year and an half (and that in Harbor) so eaten, as
not to be fit for her being adventured to Sea again with them, for more than a
small tripp; and that followed by a later, from Sir R. B. in October 1682.
wherein (after her having been abroad) he makes the Condition of her Iron-works
so miserable, as to be under the same wonder he was before, that she also had
not sunk at Sea; whereas it appears even from their own calculations, that her
first set of Rudder-Irons lasted her four Years and an half, (which were it a
common standand for their duration, and then to be renewed, would yet leave
Lead-sheathing greatly cheaper than that of Wood,) and her second (for ought
that appears of any supplies) six Years and three quarters.

4. From a Certificate of the Officers in Portsmouth-Yard, in October 1677.
declaring the Condition of the Lyon's Iron-works under water, to be such as
they never saw in any Ship they ever had to do with, not sheathed with Lead,
though droven twice as long: Whereas that Certificate it self does not only
expressly confess her Bolts having been all in her five Years; but will here
furnish your Lordships with one Instance (besides the many you may hereafter
meet with) of what this Company is owing for, to the sincerity as well as
Thoughtfulness of its Accusers, if your Lordships shall please to have their
last Assertion examined by the Books of the Navy Officers, with whom it carries
so much weight, this Company being well assured, that instead of no Ship, not
sheathed with Lead, being ever found perished in their Iron-work under water in
twice five years, variety of instances will be met with, within much a shorter
time.

5. From Sir John Narbrough's saying in February 1676. that he had found the
condition of the Henrietta's Iron-works no other than that of the forementioned
Harwich: whereas your Lordships may be pleased (here) to take notice, that the
Lords your Predecessors in the Admiralty did by their Order of the 9 th of
April 1678. (upon some Complaints touching the Iron-works of this Ship,)
recommend to the Officers of the Navy, the making a strict enquiry into the
general and natural Reasons of this great Evil, directing them twice in the
same order to the particular case of this Ship: For execution whereof the said
Officers contented themselves, with answering the Lords not with any effects of
their own Inquisitions, but with a bare Transcript only of Sir R. B's
Conceptions thereon from Chatham; when (had they so thought good) they could as
well have given their Lorships something of their own, by communicating to them
the Result of an Occular Survey by them had in their Public Office (this
Company being present) of the Rudder-Irons themselves, sent from Chatham for
that purpose; where (upon the outward coat of the said Irons being eaten off
with Rust) the inside of their Pintells, (as never having had their due
welding) discovered themselves in three several arms or branches, like the
stalks of so many Tobacco-pipes, not only to the removing the wonder of this
Ships condition, but confirming the suggestion this Company had before made to
his Majesty and the Lords touching the Smiths neglects, and contributing not a
little toward the making a right Judgment in the Matters in question, of which
more in its due place.

6. From Sir R. B's observing in September 1682. the eating off of two of the
lower Pintells and Gudgeons wholly, and a third in part of the Rose, which will
not (as this Company conceives) be thought very extraordinary when it shall be
understood that this is the first and only Complaint heard of her, not only
after two Voyages to Sea, and one of them three years long, and her having lain
now three years more in Salt water in Harbor; but after her having worn those
Irons eight years, and the Complaint it self (when all is done) amounting only
to three Pintells and Gudgeons, without any thing objected to the rest of her
Iron-works.

7. From Sir John Narbrough's Information in July 1678. touching some
defectiveness then discovered in the James and Charles Galleys, which he fears
would force him to send them home that Winter, as not being repairable in the
Streights: Whereas the James being sheathed, and sent forth in October 1676.
continued there three years, when making a Tripp for England, she within two
months after returned thither, and has there remained to this day (being in all
six years) without ought said by the Officers of the Navy, of her having any
Recruits of her Rudder-Irons in all that time either at home or abroad.

And for the Charles, which accompanied the James to Sea in October 1676,
(instead of being driven home, as Sir John Narbrough apprehended in 1678.) she
continued there till about August 1680. (being four years) and has now remained
at home above two years more, (in all six years) without any such repairs
alleged to have been given her either in the Streights or here.

8. Lastly, From these particulars of eight Ships, thus circumstanced, the
Officers of the Navy have held it reasonable to assert to your Lordships their
having received Complaints of the extraordinary Corrosion of the Iron-works of
every of his Majesty's Ships sheathed with Lead: Whereas these make but eight
of twenty so sheathed, without any thing either offered now, or heretofore
appearing to this Company in exception to the other twelve, viz. Mary,
Defiance, Woolwich, Bristol, Hampshire, Foresight, Phoenix, Assistance,
Kingsfisher, Hunter, Vulture, Norwich.
but on the contrary many Instances might be drawn from them, in advantage to
the Credit of Lead-sheathing, of much more force (were that the business of
this Paper) than any thing of what has been before offered to its diminution:

But this Company humbly referrs your Lordships for that to the Navy Officers,
contenting themselves with an Appeal only to the Phoenix, and Norwich, the
first and last of all the twenty: The former of which coming home after two
Voyages, and three years spent therein, happened (as has been already
mentioned) to Carreene at Sheerness, where his Majesty receiving full
satisfaction in her having answered all that was aimed at in this sheathing,
she from thence proceeded to Guiny, and after return in 1674. was sent to
Iamaica, (Voyages all calculated for the proving her against the Worm,) and
coming back, was in 1677. stripped of her sheathing, and then sent abroad
unsheathed, without having one Bolt under water shifted from her being so
sheathed to that day, being seven years.

And for the Norwich, we are well informed, This is a Mistake, for she was
neglected to be sheathed with (...), tho Ordered.
that not one word of Advice, much less of Complaint has ever been received
either from her Commanders, or any other hand, of the least defect discovered
in any of her Iron-work under water during the whole four years time of her
service in the West Indies, from her first sheathing to the day of her
Miscarriage.

Nor does this Company (after having thus opened the matters of Fact reported
in these Complaints) conceive it will appear to your Lordships less allowable
for them in this place, to make one Remark upon what the Officers of the Navy
have offered in the same Paper of suggestions Philosophical, in support of
their present Sentence against Lead-sheathing, which is, that they were
suggestions, which seem rather calculated for the giving countenance to an
Opinion already espoused, than for the raising an Opinion upon that, is yet in
seeking; One being that of Sir John Kempthornes, who with some of his Officers
lighting upon a piece of Milled-Lead, (which seemed to them to have taken some
wet) they conceived it presently to look of a Cancarous and Corroding
substance, and venomous to Iron, (qualities not usuaily judged of by the Eye)
promising the sending up a Sample of it to the Officers of the Navy for their
Inspection; which if they did, the said Officers would not have needed any
other Evidence against Lead-sheathing, than their Experiments upon this one
piece, had Sir John Kempthornes conceptions of it, met with any Confirmation
therefrom; wherein your Lordships will easily receive full satisfaction from
the said Officers.

Another, That of Sir R. B's, who in his Declaration upon this matter charge
this Eating of the Lead-to the mixture it is prepared with for the making it
run thin, by which it is rendered of a more blew color than Lead ordinarily is,
and with Salt Water creates a kind of Coperas that consumes the Iron-works
under water; whereas whoever is conversant in the method of this Company in the
manufacturing part of their Invention, know that the only mystery thereof lies
in the application of Lead to Rollers, by which it is reduced without any
inequalities to what degree of thickness or thinness is demanded, without the
least other Preparation or Mixture exercised upon the Metal it self, but is
pressed, and brought upon the Ships sides as simple, and unaltered as ever it
flowed from the Pig.

The last, that of Sir John Narbrough 's Opinion of its being the Copper
covering the Rudder-Irons, and the Copper nails the sheathing is fastened
with, that destroys the Iron-work: whereto we hold it unnecessary here to
return any thing in opposition more, than what the said Officers at the same
time present you with of a quite contrary Principle, though in maintenance of
the same Position, from Sir R. B. who expressly declares his having found by
experience, That it is not the Irons covered with Copper, and nailed even with
Iron Nails, that suffer from the Rust; but only those which the Lead together
with the Salt water drains and falls upon.

And this, My Lords, having been said in Reference to all that the Navy
Officers have in their Report thought fit to give for the grounds of this their
so positive Determination against Lead-sheathing: And wherein this Company have
only this to ask, that they may not from ought they have already, or may yet
further say upon this occasion, be misunderstood by your Lordships, as if they
were under any disbelief themselves, or aimed at the getting any in others,
touching the Truth of Fact now discoursed upon, there being none more sensible
than themselves, both of the Reality of this wast of Iron-work by Rust, and the
ill importance of it, in its consequences; They now proceed to the giving your
Lordships the best assistance they can toward the discovery of what is the
true sourse of this Evil, and that in the plainness of this following Method,
viz.

1. By submitting to your Lordships their Opinion, and its Reasons, That the
Sheathing of Ships with Lead, neither is, nor can (as such) be the true Cause
of this decay of Iron-work.

2. By doing the like in reference to the Evils (for they are more than one)
whereto this matter under enquiry ought rightfully to be imputed.

3. By conducting your Lordships to that, which they take to be the only,
certain, speedy, and effectual Expedient of arriving at the Truth in this
matter.

First, Against the charging this Mischief upon sheathing with Lead, be pleased
to receive the Measures of this Companies judging therein, in the following
Considerations.

(1.) That without taking upon us to Discourse as Philosophers of the different
Structures, Consistences, Sweetnesses and Acidities of Bodies, and other
Difficulties wherewith they have been frequently entertained, in their
Enquiries on this Subject, They have made it their Endeavors to gather the
best Information they can, by resorting to that purpose, to Persons of most
allowed Name in Natural Philosophy and Chemistry, without being able hitherto
to meet with one that will admit any thing to lie within the whole natur^^ of
Lead, that either singly, or from any alteration that can be begotten by its
meeting with Salt Water, can contribute ought to the decay of Iron by
Corrosion, as being a Metal so void of any disposition that way, as to subdue
that very quality of corroding in other Bodies the most acid and sour, of
which, as we have had the honor more than once of hearing his Majesty himself
discourse in Confirmation, so do we readily and humbly referr your Lordships
not only to the same Royal Advice, but to the honorable and learned Gentleman,
and most eminently so, for his researches into those abstruser parts of Natural
Knowledge, Mr. Boil, or whoever you shall please to consult with herein,
taking with you the like confideration about the Nails, to which some (as has
been already shown) seem more inclinable to impute this Evil, than to the Lead,
our daily experience showing them at seven years end, as free from Rust, as at
their first driving, and being so Rust-proof in themselves, will not any more
be admitted with those we have discoursed with, as capable of infecting with
Rust any other adjacent, or even continguous Metal.

(2.) That from beyond the Memory of Man, and therefore before the being of
this Invention, (at least within these Dominions) universal Practice both in
his Majesty's Yards, and Merchants Buildings, has and does at this day make
Lead the common security of Iron-work against Rust, not only by covering
therewith (upon all Ships unsheathed, and designed on long Voyages) the
Iron-work about the Rudder, but by capping the heads of their Bolts under water
with pieces of Lead sized to, and nailed over the said Bolts.

Nor is this all, for at this day whatever Merchant-Man, or Man of War is
appointed for a Voyage where the Worm eats, the back of her Stern-post, and
Beard of her Rudder, are sheathed with Copper or Lead, and this even where the
Ships also are sheathed with Wood, the East India Company it self, (upon whom
we may best depend for cautions, wherever preservation of Ships is in question)
not omitting in that very case, to sheath their Rudders with Lead or Copper.

Which Practice could certainly never have prevailed with our Fathers, and been
followed with so continued a consent to this Day by us, if the vicinity of
either of these Metals assisted (as is by some imagined) by Salt Water, had
been ever found of so pernicious and certain Effect upon the very Matter they
are employed to secure.

(3.) Nor does what is thus approved of in the general, and universal Practice
of England, want its confirmation, by the like of several Foreign Nations, to
wit, the Dutch, Portuguese and Spaniard; the first of which are equally
observant with us, in the sheathing their Rudder Irons, and the Back of their
Posts with Lead or Copper upon all Ships bound in the way of the Worm; and for
the two latter, not only the Rudders but the whole Bodies of their Ships under
Water, even of their Gallions themselves, have of long time been, and are well
known at this Day to be entirely sheathed with Lead; which concurrence of these
two latter Nations, seems in this Cause so much more considerable than that of
any other, by how much not only their Voyages are the longest, their hazards
therein from the Worm the greatest, and Cargoes the most valuable of all that
Navigation knows, but for that the Hulls of their Ships abound the most with
Iron-work, as having all that in the fastening of our Plank we perform with
wooden Trunnels, done by them with large Spikes of Iron.

(4.) Lastly, Were this Spoil of Iron-work chargeable with nothing but what is
contained in the Lead and Nails, these pretended Effects of theirs would be
constant and uniform in all Ships alike sheathed; whereas nothing is more
frequent than the Instances of their Inequality, as will enough appear from a
bare Observation of what lies before your Lordships in this very Report of the
Navy-Officers: Forasmuch as this Company dare put the whole Credit of their
Cause upon that one Issue, viz. of your Lordships ever finding an Equal
Consumption of Ironwork under Water, whether upon the same, or different Ships
at any one time, or equal distances of time; the Account now before you of the
twenty Ships that have passed this Method of Sheathing, affording a most ample
Proof of this Inequality, by having eight of them laden with Complaints, (and
every one of them different from the rest, and at different times from it self)
while we are yet to be told, whether the other twelve were not, (as we are sure
some of them were) free from all ground of Complaint.

To our Second Undertaking, we conceive real Causes of this Evil, (that is to
say, so much thereof as is Extraordinary) to be these three.

1. The perfunctory Performance of the Smiths Part in this Affair, by some
Deficiency either in the choice, mixture or temper of his Metal, or failure to
give it its due welding or working: Forasmuch as by this alone can be
reconciled the forementioned Disparities in the Duration of Iron-work; whence
otherwise can it be, that all other circumstances (whereto that Disparity can
be referred) being the same, but the matter, one particular Piece of Iron shall
remain undiminished three times as long as that next to it; and this not only
in sheathed Ships (as in the Case of those before you) but unsheathed too; as
(to give but one Instance, in a Cause where every Ship is another) appears in
the Swiftures first Voyage to the Streights with Sir Rich. Rooth, where two of
her Rudder-Irons were eaten entirely in pieces, and shifted at her return in
Portsmouth-Dock; while at the same time the rest (though all put on together
several Years before) were found as firm and unwasted as at their first
fastening.

The consideration and thorough conviction of which led this Company in the
Year 1678. (when these Complaints were most active, and the Lords of the
Admiralty's Inquisitions into the Reasons of it, the more pressing) not only to
Communicate to them, and the Navy-Officers their Opinions therein, but at their
own hazards and the Ordinary Price, to become Undertakers themselves for what
further Rudder-Irons should be from thence called for (whether at home or
abroad) by any Lead-sheathed Ships: Which Proposition was not only approved of,
but the Officers of the Navy (as has been already said) by Orders upon Orders
from their Lordships directed, to see the same instantly put and continued in
practice.

But whence it was that those Orders me^ with no better compliance, or how it
came to pass, that so certain, speedy and chargeless an Expedient of coming by
the Truth in a matter of this Importance (and after a provocation too, so
public and seasonable, as that of the Henrietta's Rudder-Irons above
mentioned) could be so disregarded as never once to be set on Trial, your
Lordships will be best informed from them themselves, by whom variety indeed of
Ships were sent to Sea, subsequent to the said Orders, but without any call or
notice given thereof to this Company, that his Majesty might have the proof and
benefit of the Service so much expected from them, and required from the said
Officers both by the King and Lords on this occasion.

2. The manifest and knowing Omission of the Persons charged in seeing the said
sheathing brought on, to do in this case what the practice of all times, and at
this very day, both in the Kings and Merchants Service, has made a s^anding and
necessary piece of care to be exercised in the fitting forth of all Ships
(sheathed and unsheathed) bound on Foreign Voyages, namely, The parcelling, or
laying with Tarr and Hair all the Iron-work under water, before the sheathing,
(in case of the former) or the forementioned Capps (in case of the latter) be
brought over them.

In which as we are ready to appeal to the Surveyor of the Navy, or whoever
else is conversant in the Rules and Methods of Ship-Building, for the Truth of
what is here asserted, and what is owned in some of the Navy Officers own
Evidences, and particularly in a Letter of Sir R. B's; so do we willingly
referr our selves to the same Surveyor for the Truth of this suggestion of
ours, touching the under Officers omitting the performance of this their known
Duty of laying the Iron-work under water, at their bringing on the sheathing of
the said Ships.

And if so, and that this Companies pretensions in this Method of sheathing
never extended further, than to answering the efficacy, cheapness, and other
circumstances of advantage appertaining to the prevention of the Worm, (as the
Act of Parliament, and their Contract with the King abundantly prove) what more
Reason is there for their being held accountable for the Consequences of this
Omission in the Kings Officers, than for that of starting of a But-head in a
Ships side, that never had its due fastening? It being no part of their
Undertaking to answer for the Tightness of their sheathing when laid on, and
droven with Nails, further than for its unpassableness, not to the Water, but
to the Worm: And that being allowed, what can be more demonstrable, than that
the neglect of ordinary Cautions, must be attended with the ordinary Evils,
those Cautions were provided against.

Of which, that this of giving the Iron-work of these Lead-sheathed Ships,
their ordinary Defense against the Salt Water by Parcelling, or laying them
with Tarr and Hair under their Sheathing, is one, we shall not need to confirm
to your Lordships by more than the single Instance of the Phoenix, which having
had her Sheathing performed by Sir Ant. Dean at Portsmouth, with this common
right done to her, appears not to have had one Bolt shifted within the whole
seven Years of carrying the same: Nor are your Lordships without an eminent
proof of your own, touching the constancy and universality of this practice of
laying the Iron-work of all sheathed Ships with Tarr, and Hair, or Parcelling,
and the acknowledged importance of it, for the securing the said Iron-works
from the Salt Water, (which alone can perform upon that Metal, all that is here
laid upon the Lead) in the Happy Retnrn, sheathed but very few days since with
Wood at Woolwich, where your Builder will be found in the ordinary course of
his Trade to have laid with Tarr and Hair all her Bolt-heads under water, and
fastened Caps of Lead over them, notwithstanding this Sheathing with Wood was
to be brought on over all.

3. The unaccountable continuance of these Ships for nine, ten, and eleven
years together in their sheathing, without their being in all that time
unstripp'd, for the necessary searching of their bottoms, and timely supplying
the decays, (whether in Iron-work, or otherwise,) which are of course to be
expected within their proper distances of time; which as it contradicts all
ancient practice both of the Royal Navy, and that of Merchants, especially in
the case of Ships of value, and under careful Owners, so seems it in this of
ours, to be designed only to render that very Virtue for which (amongst others)
Lead-sheathing exceeds all that ever went before it, namely, its durableness, a
Vice of much worse consequence to the health of a Ship, than all it pretends to
do, and does against the Worm, can make amends for.

Your Lordships might otherwise be pleased to inform your selves from the
Officers of the Navy, whence it comes to pass, that after such Complaints
received from abroad, as they have handed to your Lordships, touching the
dreadful decays of those Ships Iron-work under water, they should suffer them,
when come home, to continue for two, three, and four years together in Harbor,
without any thing more done in all that time, toward their Relief against the
growing Mischiefs they are yet daily exposed to, than a Declaration of Wonder
at the three or four years end that they had not before sunk in the Sea.

Very dissonant is this Method of Proceeding (my Lords) from the Primitive and
present Institution of the Navy, that provides so carefully both in its joint
and separate Instructions to the Officers thereof, and more particularly to the
Surveyor, not only for the general good Government and Preservation of his
Majesty's Ships, but a more strict and Annual State to be had of all their
respective Hulls, Masts, and Yards, in order to your Lordships taking such
course for their Ransackings, Groundings, Dockings, and Repairings, as by you
shall be thought most for his Majesty's Benefit.

Nor are those Instructions a little enforced upon the said Officers by that
standing Article in the ordinary Estimate of the Navy, wherein they Annually
make Demands of a particular sum of Money toward their Execution thereof, nor
were ever denied the Allowance of it by his Majesty, as Duties owned on each
side necessary to be performed.

Which, how far it has been done in reference to those unhappy Ships, which of
all others have the least reason to suffer under this neglect; for that by the
terms upon which their Sheathing is performed by this Company for the benefit
of the King, They are well able to bear the charge of their having it done
twice within the Time, some of them (to the hazard of their Ruin) are suffered
to remain under its being done but once. We humbly submit to your Lordships,
and (with our full concurrence to that part of their Report, wherein they have
at length bethought themselves of advising your Lordships to order the doing of
that now, which the Practice of the Navy, and the acknowledged condition of
those Ships would have expected their having done long since) proceed to the
third and last branch of our Undertaking, and to that humbly say, viz.

3. That in order to our leading your Lordships the more satisfactorily to what
we take to be the only True and Competent method of rightly determining of the
different validities of what has been severally offered and asserted by the
Officers of the Navy, and this Company, in Maintenance of their different
Conceptions touching the Evil now enquired into: Your Lordships may in the
first place be pleased to take notice, (and therein to have the Opinion of the
said Officers) that no Ship however sheathed or unsheathed, did ever make a
Voyage to Sea, where her Iron-works came not home in a greater or less degree
seized on, and impaired by Rust. Next, That this Company does voluntarily take
upon it self (beyond what by any thing in their Contract they are obliged to)
an accountableness for this their Method's being as secure on behalf of the
King, in reference to this very point of the Iron-work, as Wood-sheathing, or
any other hitherto known, can be shown to have been.

Which being premised: And forasmuch as nothing is more true in Fact, or more
legible in the Records of the Navy, than the constant charge the Crown has been
always at for the shifting and supplying the defects of Iron-works, besides
what is to be read in the heaps of decayed Bolts, Rudder-Irons, etc. rarely
missing in his Majesty's Yards, but after a sale: And whereas it is no less
manifest, that among the other Instances already spoken of, of the unequal
decay of Iron-works, this is one, viz. That is has not been seldom noted to
exceed in the same Ship while unsheathed, what it has at another time been,
even while in a Lead-sheathing; witness the forenamed Phoenix, which being
furnished with a new Set of Rudder-Irons, at the stripping of that Sheathing
in Ian. 1677. and soon after sent so stripped to the Streights, was forced in
the very same Year, about Christmas, to shift every one of them, but one Brace,
and much of her Bolts, and other Iron-works, while (as has been already noted)
she appears not to have shifted so much as one Bolt, or received any
considerable Recruit of other Iron-work within the whole seven years of her
being Sheathed with Lead, with which concurrs the case of the Foresight, whose
new set of Rudder-Irons, put on in Ian. 1672. when unsheathed, were shifted in
little more than a year and an half, viz. in Aug. 1674. when being Sheathed
with Lead, she continued without any supply of Rudder-Irons till 1679: Nor do
we think it would conduce a little to the satisfaction of your Lordships, upon
this very head to require a just account of what has been lately observed in
the Ransacking even of a sheathed (that is to say a Wood-sheathed) Ship of his
Majesty's, where under the protection of such sheathing, Ships Iron-work has
been reckoned the best secured against Corrosion; yet even in this case will
your Lordships find upon the forenamed Happy Return, the greatest part of her
Iron-work eaten to pieces, and particularly her Bolts from Stem to Stern.

This Company therefore being in no kind desirous that his Majesty should be
under any Obligation, of serving himself with their Invention, longer than it
shall appear as safe to his Service and Ships in this particular of Iron-work,
as it has proved it self Superior to that of Wood in every other circumstance,
and they being to that purpose most willing to have the same determined by the
difference that shall be found between the Charge his Majesty has been at for
Iron-work for any number of years backward upon unsheathed, or Wood-sheathed
Ships, and those sheathed with Lead, where the work thereof in their sheathing
and fitting forth has in other respects been performed, but with the same
ordinary care, and observation of the common practice of the Navy.

They come now to offer to your Lordships that which (and which only) can give
you a full, easy, and uncontrollable account of the Truth in this matter,
namely, Your Order to the Officers of the Navy, for their directing a thorough
and impartial Inspection to be made into the Books of the several Yards, with a
particular Account drawn thereout, of what new Rudder-Irons, Bolts, etc. have
been for ten or twelve years last past furnished to any of his Majesty's Ships,
mentioning the Names of the said Ships, and distinct times of such their
supplies, distinguishing also between such thereof as were wholly, and that
were but in part supplied with new Rudder-Irons, and mentioning (in the latter
case) how many, and which of the said Irons they were; with a Report of the
result thereof to be made to your Lordships as soon as it shall be prepared,
and mutually accorded to (for its Truth) between the said Officers, and this
Company, who have nothing more now to add on this Subject, than the observing
to your Lordships, that had it pleased the Officers of the Navy to have
contributed their furtherance to the searching out the Truth in this Cause,
with a zeal equal to what this Company have, to the best of their
understandings ever endeavored to express toward it, this work (no more than
that relating to the Smith's) had been at this day to do, they having made the
same overture to the Lords and them, touching this very Expedient of examining
their Books, at the same time with the other in 1678. and prevailed at length
with the said Officers to issue Orders to the several Yards suitable to this
Proposal; but with what success, we humbly crave your Lordships to receive your
satisfaction from themselves, whose producing the Returns thereof from the
Yards, (if made) would at one view have helped your Lordships to what must be
owned by the Officers of the Navy, for the only, secure, clear and effectual
means of determining this Controversy, without either creating to your
Lordships, or continuing upon themselves and us, the trouble attending this
tedious method of Dispute.

But, My Lords, that while we speak of tedious, we may render what we are now
doing, as little so to your Lordships, as the Matter put into our hands, and
our Desires after his Majesty's and your Lordships Satisfaction will permit; we
shall now betake our selves to the last Article of our purpose in this Paper,
namely, the opening so to your Lordships a no less certain view of a Cure, than
we hope to have now done of the true Means of right discovering the Disease:
For, My Lords, however astonishing the Gentlemen of the Navy seem to make it,
that Ships abandoned to all the above mentioned neglects, and even arts of
ruin, should in length of Time arrive at such a state of weakness, as to be
suspected in their being able to support themselves above water; We cannot but
hold it a Subject much more fit for Wonder, that they who under the Lord High
Admiral, are by the Crown made the first and principal Curators of the Health
and Safety of its Ships, should not only content themselves for several years
together, in joining with the Cry against an Evil, they describe in Terms so
frightful, without making in all that time any one offer, or seeming step
toward its Remedy, but publish to all the World a neglect, contempt, and
endeavor of Discouraging, and even direct withstanding whatever was proposed
to that purpose by any others, as may appear,

(1.) From their open patronizing every of the Objections and Difficulties that
this Invention has from the beginning had to contend with, though so
groundless, that not one of them is now thought fit to be remembered in this
their Report to your Lordships Inquisition, after the Complaints made against
it.

(2.) From the manifest Industry wherewith (when time was) they labored to
expose it, by an application of it upon the Eagle, and serving themselves at
her return, with the success of their so doing, toward verifying their former
declaiming against its sufficiencies, viz. The Condition it now came home in
upon this Ship all cracked, and rent from Stem to Stern; whereas the ingenuity
of their dealing with us in this particular, had the misfortune of being first
discovered by the KING himself, upon a personal view he was pleased to take
thereof, and his therein observing the said Ships being by age become so
decrepit, as to be brought home by her Company with her whole Body woulded
about with Hawsers for preventing her very sides falling out, and Bottom
dropping into the Sea.

(3.) From their violation of every of the Orders heretofore mentioned of his
Majesty, and Lords of the Admiralty relating to this Affair, one forbidding
(above nine years since) the use of any other method of Sheathing, than this of
Lead, without special Order; whereas the contrary has been practiced by them in
many Instances. Another, for their sheathing two Ships, one with Lead, the
other with wood, in express order to a Proof to be made (upon some difference
in Opinion between themselves and one of their own number) touching the good
quality of their Rudder-Irons: A Third for doing the like to the Norwich, with
Directions to employ such Rudder-Irons thereon, as should be provided by this
Company: And a Fourth (inculcated within few days by a Fifth) forbidding the
whole use of any other Rudder-Irons upon Lead-sheathed Ships, than of this
Company's furnishing: But with so little regard ever paid to the same, that
rather than any Order, or even the most Essential Rules of the Navy should
stand in the way of their prejudice to this Invention, they have taken upon
themselves the sending into the mouth of the Worm no small number both of Men
of War, and others of his Majesty's Ships naked in their Hulls, without any
security against the worst effects thereof; which, what they have been, your
Lordships will more properly be informed in, upon their Return home and
Ransacking from the Officers of the Navy, than from this Company; some of whose
Experience nevertheless, and what present Advice they have received from
abroad, will justify their saying thus much before hand, that those Effects
will be found of many times more Charge to the King than all that the Complaint
now before your Lordships concerning Rudder-Irons can be made to amount to.

But, (My Lords,) As these Proceedings have not heretofore, neither shall they
now discourage this Company from a free Discharge of their Duty, by opening
whatever Conceptions of theirs they think reasonably grounded toward the
Remedying as well as Right understanding the Original of the Evil labored
under, and a Remedy both Obvious, Easy, Effectual, and next to being of no
Charge, we take our selves to be Masters of, and shall lead your Lordships to
the concurring with us in it, by the few steps, or Reflections following, viz.

First, That the only competent and allowed Defense of Ships against the Worm,
before this of Lead-sheathing, was the paying the Hulls from the Waters edge
downwards with Stuff, and laying the inside of a Sheathing-board (from inch and
quarter to three quarters thick) all over with Tarr and Hair, to be brought
over the forementioned Stuff, and being well nailed, Graving or Paying the
outside of the said Board all over with another Composition of Brimstone, Oil,
and other Ingredients, which is called Wood-sheathing.

Concerning which, however united the Opinion of us. English Men may be thought
to have been touching the same, it seems to this Company grounded not so much
upon the real Perfection thereof, as the Profit that attends it to the Builders
interested in the working of it, and consequently, leaving them under no
temptation, either to look out for a better themselves, or give encouragement
to any discoveries made toward it by others.

And that indeed the so universal Reception given to Wood-sheathing, is rather
due to this, than its own real sufficiency, your Lordships will be Judges of,
from the following Notes.

1. That if not the most, at least the most essential of all the Ingredients
employed in that method of Sheathing, are of Foreign growth; which we make use
of not so much for the sake of the Nationality of its Argument, (though yet
that is such as the Parliaments of England have ever laid great weight upon in
all their Deliberations upon Trade, and particularly in the Act relating to
this very Invention,) but from a Consideration which the Books of the Navy
sufficiently confirm the force of, viz. That being Foreign, such has sometimes
been the scarcity thereof here, (even when their use has been most wanted,)
that they have been either not to be had at all, or at Prizes much exceeding
the ordinary Market.

2. That the said Wood-sheathing has been always observed and confessed to be
very apt to gather Filth, and of no less uneasieness when fouled to be
thoroughly cleansed again.

3. That from its roughness and the multitude of Nail-heads standing out from
the Ships sides or otherwise, Ships sheathed with Wood have ever been
complained of, as lessened thereby in that only quality upon which our Friggats
most value themselves, and have their Service in preference to others
calculated from, namely, That of their Sailing; for proof of which, your
Lordships have not only the Evidence lately mentioned of the Navy Officers,
choosing to send naked Ships to the Streights, when with as little violence to
practice and order, they might have sent them so sheathed; but that general
application, which was heretofore made to his Royal Highness, then Lord High
Admiral of England, by the Flag-Officers and Commanders of the Fleet, designed
under Sir Thomas Allen (as we remember) against the Turks, advising, that as
his Majesty would expect any success of the said Fleet against that People, he
would let his Ships go with all their virtue of Sailing about them undiminished
by sheathing, as being (from former Experience of the Turks out-doing us that
way) taught, that without this, nothing was to be hoped for of Advantage to be
gained upon them; which Advice of theirs was urged so pressingly, and justified
so fully, that both his Royal Highness, and the then Officers of the Navy
concurred with those of the Fleet, (in the Council thereupon given his Majesty,
and afterward pursued) rather of exposing the Hulls of his Ships to the worst
Effects of the Worm, than hazard the loss both of their whole Service, and his
own Honor by sheathing, and thereby disabling them in this their best quality
of Sailing.

Secondly, Which being so, and that therefore (besides these plain and
important Imperfections in Wood-sheathing) the only Remedy hitherto thought on,
has been to deliver up his Majesty's Ships to the mercy of the Worm, by sending
them abroad wholly unprovided of any Fence against them: This Company takes
leave in the next place humbly to recommend to your Lordships the requiring
from the Officers of the Navy an impartial Account of the condition wherein the
Ships of that Fleet of Sir Thomas Allen's brought home their Hulls
notwithstanding all the mighty professions then made by their Commanders of the
care that should be taken in the frequent turning up of their Bottoms, and use
of the long Scrubbing-brushes, then first devised and introduced into the Navy
for the easier reaching toward their Keeles in the making of them clean.

And for whatever issue your Lordships are to expect from the late Liberty
taken by these Gentlemen of doing the like on other Ships at this day, though
it be yet too soon for your Lordships to expect any certain Account thereof, as
being a Matter not to be done before they are brought in and searched; Yet we
cannot think it will be reckoned any ill measure for your Lordships to frame
your Expectations by therein, to consider the single case of the Rupert in her
last Voyage to the Streights, under Captain Herbert, which Ship in lieu of
being according to the Kings Order sheathed with Lead, was by the said Officers
Advice, and the Undertaking of her Commander for the frequency of her cleaning,
sent away naked (saving in her Keel, which was Leaded) with this success, that
besides the Apprehensions Captain Herbert was under concerning her, even while
in the Streights, upon what was then discovered relating to the Worm, putting
him upon thoughts (had it been practicable) of shifting her Garble-strake
there; The Officers of the Navy are well able to inform your Lordships, that
(notwithstanding all that promised care of Captain Herbert, and their own
presumptions thereon) it will be no small charge to his Majesty to make good
the damage she brought home by Worm-eating.

What then remains after this that has been said, and lies so easily within
your Lordships proving, touching the Imperfections of both these Methods of
Sheathing Ships with Wood, and exposing them to Sea without any Sheathing at
all, but the waiting for some Fourth, not yet heard of, or continuing this
Third under debate, of Sheathing with Lead, to which nothing is so much as
pretended to, in Objection by the Officers of the Navy themselves, but this of
its supposed Influence upon Iron-work, as very well knowing, that no room is
left for the least such Pretenc^ upon any one head of what has been ever
suggested to the contrary, especially in those particular points of
Imperfections, wherein that of Wood-sheathing, and sending of Ships abroad
unsheathed, appears (as before) to remain yet chargeable; England being never
to be supposed unfurnished with Lead, as bearing it within its own Bowels; Nor
any Complaint hitherto heard of, either of its being in any degree so apt to
foul, or difficult to clean as Wood, Nor lastly, so much as one suggestion ever
made of its injuring Ships in their quality of Sailing; but so much the
contrary, that we are ready in all humility to make our Appeal to his Majesty
himself, whether the Harwich sent in her Lead-sheathing, Anno 1677. under
Captain Killigrew to the Streights, and hurried out from Chatham under the
disadvantage of not being so much as Tallowed, suffered any thing from her said
sheathing, in her virtue of Sailing; or did not outgo all (both Ships and
Yatchs) that were then attending the King with her, in his passage to the
Westward.

But of what satisfaction can this (say the Officers of the Navy) be, if one
Evil superior to all those Good qualities (for so they understand this about
the Iron-work to be) remains unremoved?

To which, (My Lords) we come now to Answer, and in so doing to open to your
Lordships what this Company takes to be the most natural, easy, and thorough
Remedy thereto, even though it were possible (as they believe, and doubt not
upon proof of what is here said of your Lordships believing also, that it is
not) that this suggestion of the noxiousness of Lead to Iron-work were true.

And this your Lordships may please to take from us in these few following
considerations.

1. That after all the noise that has been made of the damage sustained by the
King from this untimely consumption of his Ships Rudder-Irons, his full charge
for a whole set of them for a Ship of each of those Rates upon which Sheathing
is ordinarily used, viz. from a Third Rate downwards, will not one with another
exceed the values following, viz.

Rate. First cost. Value of Returns. Clear charge. For a Ship of the 3 15 10 0.
5 13 0. 9 17 0 4 9 18 0. 4 4 0. 5 14 0 5 6 4 0. 2 10 0. 3 8 0 6 4 10 0. 2 2 0.
2 8 0

2. That according to the Report of the Navy Officers themselves, with the
Schedule of Complaints attending it, and what has been ^bserved by us therein,
it is evident that the shortest Time to be supposed for the ordinary* duration
of Rudder-Irons in Lead-sheathed Ships, is two years and an half, or three
years, within which time no Ship of his Majesty's was ever known, or can be
supposed to want an opportunity of Grounding or Docking.

3. That (besides the other great advantage of cheapness which Lead-sheathing
must be owned to have above that of Wood) the Prices in this Table (were they
of ten times the value) would not bring the charge of Rudder-Irons to any
equality of consideration with the Evils lately recounted in both the other
methods of Sheathing with Wood, or not sheathing at all.

4. And that therefore in the last place, forasmuch as universal consent and
practice allows the laying them with Tarr and Hair under Lead, to be a certain
security to Ships Iron-works under water against Rust, at least for so much as
concerns their Bolts: And that therefore the only thing we seem now to be in
care for, is the supplying the Consumption that may happen during the Voyage in
their Rudder-Irons, which (were fresh ones in the way) no Ship (as is already
shown,) can at her Grounding or Docking want opportunities of doing by shifting
them; what then (in one word) can be more demonstrable than that a spare Set
thereof sent to Sea with every Lead-sheathed Ship (answerable to what is daily
done in materials of much greater charge, and for uses of less consequence) is
a no less easy than ready and Effectual Remedy to all the damage that can be
apprehended incident to a Ship upon this head of Rudder-Irons in any Voyage not
exceeding five or six years continuance.

Nor (may it please your Lordships) do we offer this as a new Resort whereto
this Report of the Navy Officers may be thought to have driven us at this day;
Forasmuch as it is no more than what in the same Terms this Company proposed in
the year 1678, to the then Lords of the Admiralty, and the Officers of the
Navy, when upon the like considerations then urged, their Lordships were
pleased not only to approve it, but by their express Order of the 12th of April
in that year, to require the said Officers (amongst other things) to receive
from this Company such Rudder-Irons as should be by them provided, upon a
Proposition they had then made of furnishing his Majesty's Lead-sheathed Ships
with that Commodity, not only for their present use at the time of their
Sheathing, but for a Reserve to answer accidents during their Voyages.

Which Order (if executed) must have long ago with little charge, and less
trouble, put an end to this clamorous Evil, (wherever the cause of it should at
length have been found to lie) and would (by preventing the great damages his
Majesty is supposed to have sustained from it,) have furnished the said
Officers with a much better Expedient of testifying their regards to the King,
and his Service: Their Duty to your Lordships, and the Lords your Predecessors;
Their heedfulness to the Established Methods of the Navy, and their own parts
declared therein: And lastly, their good will to these the humble Endeavors
and early Proposals of this Company for the Service of his Majesty on this
occasion, than thus by their own Failures, first not to prevent these Damages,
next to prolong them, and then to complain of them.

COMPLAINTS.
An Account of the Defects of his Majesty's Ships which have been sheathed with
Lead. Navy Office 20. Dec. 1682.

Dreadnought,
SHeathed 1671, Tallowed at Portsmouth, 6 June 1677, and the Pintels and
Gudgeons of her Rudder-Irons (which were all new about a year and an half
before, and the Ship not out of Harbor since) very much eaten and consumed,
and not to be trusted at Sea, unless for a short tripp, and the Swiftsures that
was graved at the same time, vide Answ. page 12.
her Rudder-Irons firm and sound, and not in the least consumed, though much
longer on. See Sir John Kempthorns Letter, June 1677.

She was again haled on Shore to clean, 8 October, 1682. Obs. This Sheathing
had continued on eleven Years.
and her Bolts found totally eaten away, as well as the Spikes and Iron-works
of the Rudder, so that they were forced to Plugg up the bolt-holes, and spile
the Spike-holes, there being nothing left in them but dirt, and new Iron-work
must be drove before she can go to Sea. See Sir R^B's Letter 8 Oct. 1682.

Lion,
Sheathed 1672. in October 1677. the greatest number of her Bolts under water
(under the Lead Sheathing) found very much corroded and eaten, v. Answ. page 13.
insomuch that some of them were gotten out by the Caulkers with their
Spike-Irons. The Spikes and Nails also under water under the Lead-sheathing
almost eaten to pieces, the like whereof the Officers at Portsmouth say, they
never found in any Ship not sheathed with Lead, although their Iron-work had
been drove twice as long. All her Bolts drove new about five years before. See
the Officers Certificate, 6 October. 1677.

Rose,
Sheathed 1674. In haling her on shore to clean in 1682. v. Answ. page 14. Obs.
This different decay cannot happen from the same Cause, viz. the Lead.
sheathing.
the' two lower Pintells and Gudgeons of the Rudder-Irons quite eaten off and
the third almost off, so that the Rudder was found to be unhung. See Sir R.
B's. Letter 21 September, 1682.

Harwich
Sheathed 1675. upon the Careening abroad in February 1675. and 6. the
Iron-work found much eaten with Rust about the Stern, especially the
Rudder-Irons, imputed to the Copper Nails that fasten the Lead-sheathing. See
Sir John Narbrough's Letter 20. of February 1676. When in the Dock, Anno* 1677.
v. Answ. page 11.
her Rudder-Irons Stirrups, Staples, etc. found very much corroded and
consumed, and rendered unserviceable, and the Nonsuch's Rudder-Irons, etc.
(being at the same time in the Dock) very good and firm, although she had them
on several years before the Herwich. See Sir John Kempthorns Letter, April
1677, Upon her cleaning September 1682. all the heads of the Bolts found eaten
away on both sides, and as well those as the Ragg-bolts eaten away to nothing,
and so also the Rudder Irons, so that she must have Bolts drove on both sides
before she can go to Sea, and have new Rudder-Irons. See Sir R. B's Letter, 24
September 1682.

James Gally.
Sheathed in October 1676. her bottom was viewed in February 1677. in Livorne
mould, and the Lead found all cracked in every Seam from one end to the other,
But it seems not so as that any Worm entered, against which Sheathing is only
intended.
as bad or worse than the Eagle, when she came from Guinny, and her
Rudder-Irons eaten clear asunder, her Rudder-Irons were there mended, and in
October following her Rudder new hung at Tangier, the Irons being all again
eaten in pieces. See Sir John Wyburns Letter and Account: she was repaired at
Woolwich in December 1679. v. Ans. p. 15
and her Lead-sheathing stripped off, the same being cracked in several places,
and the Rudder-Irons being eaten by the Rust, were forced to be shifted. See
Mr. Shishes Letter December 15. 1682.

Charles Galley,
Sheathed 1676. Sir John Narbrough in July 1678, writes, That the Rudder-Irons
were defective, so that he must send her home the ensuing Winter. See his
Letter July 30. 1678. Upon stripping off her Lead-sheathieg, Anno 1680, v.
Answ. page 15.
her Rudder-Irons under water found so much decayed, that she was supplied with
new ones, likewise all the Bolt-heads under water, in the but-ends of her
Planks quite eaten off, and most part of the heads of the Ryder-bolts, and the
Bolts in the Scarfs of her Keel and Stern. See Mr. Shishes Letter December 15.
1682.

Plymouth.
Sheathed 1677. Sir Io. Narbrough being in her in July, 1680. writes, that her
Rudder-Irons begun to be much eaten with rust, vid. Answ. page 11.
so that he believes he must be forced to send her home that Winter. See his
Letter, July 30. 1680.

Foresight.
Sheathed 1674. upon stripping her Sheathing off, all her Rudder-Irons under
Water so much decayed, that she was supplied with new ones, likewise all the
Bolt-heads under Water in the but-ends of her Plank quite eaten off, and most
part of the Heads of the Ryder-bolts, vid. Answ. Page 30.
and the Bolts in the Scarfs of the Keel and Stern.

King-fisher,
Sheathed 1677. stripped off in Nov. 1680. and her Rudder-Irons under Water found
so much decayed, that she was supplied with New ones; likewise all the
Bolt-heads under Water in the but-ends of the Plank were quite eaten off, and
most part of the Heads of the Ryder-bolts, and the Bolts in the Scarfs of the
Keel and Stem, all the Rings that were clenched on the ends of her Bolts were
eaten off, and the ends, and the reaching of the Ship cracked every seam of her
from the rung-heads upwards, so that upon a Survey of the Shipwrights, the
Sheathing was ordered to be taken off. See Mr. Io. Shishes Letter, 15 December.
1682.

Woolwich.
Sheathed 1677. repaired in July 1681. and the sheathing taken off, by reason
the Plank was defective under Water, and the Rudder-Irons so much eaten with
rust, they were forced to unhang the Rudder, and new hang it again.

Assistance.
Sheathed, October. 1677. she had a new set of Rudder-Irons 27 Months after the
former, being very much eaten, and the Lead was forced to be cut away in many
places, for the seams being cracked, she is now in want of another set of
Rudder-Irons. See Mr. Jo. and Tho. Shishes Letters, 15 December. 1682.

Henrietta.
Sheathed in 1672. in her Voyage from Tunis to Tripoly, her Rudder wrought it
self out of the Irons, hanging only by the uppermost Pintell, the Irons were
very much decayed, and the ends of the Pintels eaten away, vide Answ. page 13.
they made a shift to hang it again, Flemish Fashion, securing it with a
Top-chain; after that, when she was at Martha, her Rudder was unhung again, and
the Irons shifted, and when she came to Leghorn to carreen, the Rudder was had
on shore, and fixed with new Irons, and 4 or 5 new Stirrups put to secure the
false Keel: Upon the Ships being in the Dock at Chatham, 1677. Stripped 1678.
the Rudder-Irons under Water were found* very bad and much eaten, and wasted
away, but the Braces and Gudgeons very All must be equally decayed, if the
Lead-sheathing were the Cause.
good and serviceable, most of her Bolts under Water also found in a very bad
Condition, being likewise very much eaten and wasted. See Certificate from the
Officers at Chatham, Apr. 20. 1678.

Mary.
Sheathed 1672. in 1677. her Stirrups both before and abaft of the false Keel
found quite eaten and unserviceable, v. Mr. Medbury's Letter. p. 78.
as also the Staples are quite decayed, the Pintells much eaten with rust, and
too small for the Gudgeons. See Officers at Portsm. Certificate, Apr. 20. 1682.

Note. There were only Eight of these Ships complained of by the Navy-Officers,
when they made their Report 28 October. 1682. but they having afterward given in
this Scheam of Complaints to the Commissioners of the Admiralty 20 Dec.
following, to do them right, this last is Printed: To some of which no Answer
is given, as wanting opportunity* to enquire, or not thinking it necessary, the
Answers to the rest, with what is hereafter said in the Certificates,
sufficiently proving the constant inequality of the Iron-works duration on all
Ships, (some of the Lead-sheathed Ships Iron-work lasting much longer than
others, and also than others sheathed with Wood) so that the Lead-sheathing can
be no ways chargeable with the decays in the Iron-work.

The Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty having read the foregoing Reply to
the Officers of the Navy's Report, thought fit by one of them, a Member of the
Privy Council, to lay the same before that Board, who being attended by both
sides, upon hearing were pleased to make the Order following, viz.

At the Court at White Hall, December. 22. 1682. Present, The KING's most
Excellent Majesty in Council.
IT is this day Ordered by his Majesty in Council, that the whole Matter
contained in the Report of the Officers of the Navy to the Right Honorable the
Commissioners of the Admiralty, this day read at the Board, and the Answer
thereto from Sir Philip Howard and Company, relating to the Sheathing his
Majesty's Ships with Lead, together with the other Paper then also delivered
and read, from the Officers of the Navy; and what new Matter was further
mentioned by them in Discourse upon the same Subject, be Referred to the said
Commissioners for executing the Office of Lord High Admiral of England; who
upon the full and distinct Examination of the same, and Hearing of all Persons
concerned therein, are to make their Report upon each Article thereof in
Writing to this Board; with particular regard had therein to the showing the
differences of Charge that has attended his Majesty, whether in Iron-work or
otherwise upon the Hulls and Rudders of the several Ships that have been
sheathed with Lead, and those that within the same time have been either
Sheathed with Wood, or sent to Sea Unsheathed. And if upon Examination it shall
appear that Lead-sheathed^ships do sustain greater damage in their Iron-works,
than those Sheathed with Wood, or Not Sheathed at all, what the same is truly
to be imputed to; whether to their Lead, Nails, or what other Cause. In all
which the said Commissioners are to report to this Board the Truth of the Fact,
as the same shall upon Examination appear to them, with their Opinion touching
the same, and what upon the whole Matter may be most for His Majesty's Service
to be done therein, with relation to the ceasing or continuing the said Method
of Sheathing.

Francis Gwyn.

Hereupon Sir Philip Howard and Company further applied themselves to the Lords
Commissioners of the Admiralty in their humble Memorial following, viz.

To the Right Honorable, The LORDS, His MAJESTY's Commissioners, For executing
the Office of Lord High Admiral of England* The Humble MEMORIAL of Sir Philip
Howard and Company, Interested in the Manufacture and Invention OF Milled-Lead.
Showing, THat His Majesty and my Lords of the Council having (out of the same
Consideration of its Importance to the King, which led your Lordships first to
the laying it before them) been pleased by their Order of 22 December. last, to
Referr back to your Lordships the Business in Controversy between the Officers
of the Navy and this Company touching Lead-sheathing: These are humbly to
acquaint your Lordships that as we are, and shall at all times be ready to
answer any Commands which you shall think fit to direct to this Company in
relation thereto; so do we hold our selves bound, in Right no less to his
Majesty and your Lordships than our selves, to remove a Prejudice which the
said Officers did lately offer at the raising (before his Majesty in Council)
against what we had then, and may yet have further Occasion of saying in this
Debate, by a suggestion of our being governed by Considerations of
Self-interest, while themselves would be thought removed above all suspicion of
any other End herein than that of His Majesty's Service.

In Answer whereto we shall only crave leave to say, That as to that
Uninterestedness so pretended to by them, it is too manifest, that their
obtaining from your Lordships a sudden Condemnation of this Method of
Lead-sheathing, is the only Expedient they have for preventing the Effects of
that Enquiry (which the Wisdom of His Majesty and the Lords of the Council have
been so pleased to recommend to your Lordships) into the particulars of our
Answer, leading your Lordships to the several Failures in Duty and breach of
Orders reflected on them by us in relation to this Affair, and the Prejudices
sustained therefrom by his Majesty.

And for what concerns the Self-interest suggested to lie on our side, we shall
only Note,

1. That under all the Discouragements and Oppositions our Invention has for
twelve Years together been treated with by them, we never have given them nor
our selves the trouble of making one Complaint to his Majesty or your Lordships
concerning them, saving what has been extorted from us in our necessary Reply
to their late Report to your Honorable Board on this Subject; nor in the whole
four Years last past (wherein they have for ought appears both without, and
contratrary to Order, taken upon them the Exercising, even that, which is the
very Matter of the present Controversy, namely the Adviseableness of laying
aside the use of Lead-sheathing) have we ever made one Application to them for
removing or so much as enquiring into the Reason on their so doing.

2. That had there been the least solicitude on our parts after our private
benefit, it would have easily prompted us to a much greater reservedness of
Style than your Lordships find us using on this occasion toward the said
Officers, upon whose good will alone the success of ours, and all other
Contracts with the Navy, is well known wholly to depend: Nor does this Company
need to appeal to any other Evidence than your selves for the Fidelity of their
Proceeding in this Matter toward His Majesty, in preference to any thoughts of
private Advantage, after that Declaration under our Hands, wherewith we
Prefaced our very first Paper to your Lordships on this Occasion; not only of
our Consent but Desires, that No Considerations relating to the Interest or
Right of this Company, might stand in the way of whatsoever His Majesty and
your Lordships should think most for his Service to determine concerning it.

3. That (besides the many other Advantages arising to His Majesty from this
Invention) the saving of his Treasure will we doubt not in your Enquiry be
found concerned in a no less Degree than that 60 per Cent. was thought fit as
encouragement enough to be mentioned, though Mr. Pepys who also penned this
Memorial with Sir Ant. Dean and Mr. Hewer, found by their Calculations the King
had and might save by the use of this Sheathing above 150 per Cent. besides the
great benefit of securing the Hulls of his Ships against the Worm, without
hinderance to their sailing: Their Calculations the Publisher has in Mr.
Hewer's Handwriting by him.
of 60 l. or a much greater sum per Cent. through the whole of his Expense of
Lead-sheathing compared with that of Wood, or sending Ships to Sea Unsheathed:
Upon which Consideration, and of the good Husbandry the present State of his
Majesty's Treasure, seems in so particular a measure at this time to call for;
as also for our fuller Discharge against the Consequences of any Mistake that
may attend the issue of a Debate of such Importance to the Royal Navy of
England, We do on his Majesty's-behalf humbly pray, and must take leave to
insist upon with your Lordships, not only that the Contents of our late Reply
in this Cause may receive your due Construction and Examination with respect to
what we have therein, and do still assert touching the True Causes and Remedy
of the Evil in Controversy about Ships Iron-works: But that whatsoever your
Lordships shall in Order to his Majesty's Service (which alone we again desire
your having any regard to) find Cause of requiring further from the said
Officers on this Subject, may be mutually transacted between us in Writing, and
not otherwise: In which we shall endeavor to acquit our selves with all
faithfulness and Duty to his Majesty, and no less submission to your Lordships,
as becomes

My LORDS, Your Lordships, etc.

The Lords of the Admiralty's Commission being determined, before they had
proceeded to make any Report herein, and King Charles the second taking in to
himself the Office of Lord High Admiral of England, which was transacted by his
Brother, Mr. Pepys being Secretary, and Sir Anth. Dean and Mr. Hewer (the one
always a professed Friend to the Thing, and the other not only so, but to that
time a Partner also for a twelfth share in the Work) being made Commissioners
of the Navy, the Mill'd-Lead Company could not but expect their Lead-sheathing
would soon be restored by the Power of these Gentlemen, they having thoroughly
Examined the Matter, and informed themselves of the great Benefit and Advantage
this Sheathing had and might bring to his Majesty's Service, as has been
shown, and by the Post they were in, it now becoming their Duty also, so that
they did not much press their Work, waiting only to be called for, as soon as
it should be thought convenient; but much time being lost under these
Expectations, at length Complaining of this Delay to their late Partner, Mr.
Hewer, he advised them (not to Petition the King as they intended, but) to
present a New Proposal to the Board to do the Work per Yard square, without any
Reflection or Notice of the former Proceedings, saying* they that had been
against it, must needs be convinced of their misinformation which had caused
the Prejudices they had formerly conceived against Lead-sheathing, the whole
Matter ^eing so clearly stated, and this Sheathing so well vindicated in the
Company's Reply which they had had so much time better to examine and consider
of, and that they would take this way of application to them well, and we
needed not to doubt the better and speedier success. Wherefore the 20 December.
1686. the Company presented the Proposal following, which they leave still
before the Navy-Board, in hopes at one time or other they will find reason and
leisure to take the same into further consideration.

To the Honorable The Principal Officers and Commissioners OF HIS MAJESTY's
NAVY.
A Proposal of Mr. Kent and Partners concerned in the Work of Mill'd-Lead, to
Sheath his Majesty's Ships with the said Lead, for preservation of their Plank
against the Worm, which way of Sheathing is plainly much better for Sailing,
cheaper and more durable than any other way hitherto used.
IT is humbly offered to your Consideration, that when this way of Milling Lead
for Sheathing of Ships was first invented, it was immediately communicaed to
the late King, and his present Majesty then Lord High Admiral of England, and
the Usefulness of the Invention by them well weighed and considered, and
thought to be of such consequence, that his Majesty gave the Inventors
encouragement and advice to lay the same before the Parliament, where, after a
most strict scrutiny into the Matter in both Houses, they obtained in the Year
1670. an Act of Parliament, with Terms in it highly expressing the good Opinion
they had conceived of this Invention.

After which by his Majesty's particular direction it was first tried upon
several of his own Ships; but the interest several Persons (trading in the
Materials formerly used in Sheathing) had to oppose this Invention, did make
them very iudustrious to raise Objections against it, all which being thoroughly
examined by his late Majesty, and a View by him in Person made of the Ship
Phoenix after two Voyages to the Streights with the same Sheathing, it pleased
his Majesty by his Order of 20 th. December. 1673. to signify his pleasure that
for the future this way of Sheathing and no other should be used upon his
Majesty's Ships, by the then Lords of the Admiralty, in these words, viz.

After our hearty Commendations; in pursuance of his Majesty's Pleasure
signified to us by himself, at this Board; That in regard of the many and good
Proofs which had been given of the usefulness of Sir Philip Howard and Major
Watson's Invention of Sheathing his Majesty's Ships with Lead, in preference to
the doing of it with the Materials, and in the manner anciently used, and with
respect had no less to the charge thereof, than the effectual securing the
Hulls of his Majesty's Ships against the Worms, his Majesty's Ships may for the
time to come be sheathed in no other manner than that of Lead, without special
Order given for the same from this Board: These are to authorize you to cause
this his Majesty's pleasure ^erein to be duly complied with. And so we remain

Your Loving Friends, Anglesey. Ormond. G. Carteret.



And after two Years further experience, the then Navy-Board thought it for his
Majesty's Service to Contract with the Mill'd-Lead Partners for the Materials
to sheath his Ships at the Rates expressed in their Articles of Agreement
during their whole term of their Act of Parliament. And thus stood the Matter
'till the close of the Year 1675. at which time (as we humbly conceive, by the
Artifice of the interested Traders) was raised a Clamor never heard of before,
as if this way of Sheathing did occasion a more than ordinary Decay of the
Rudder-Irons.

This immediately put the Partners upon a strict enquiry into the Truth and
validity of these Objections, and it was not long e're they fully discovered
that this decay in the Iron-work proceeded not from the contrariety of the
Nature of Lead with the matter of Iron, but that the Iron-work lasted or
decayed, as it was better or worse mixed and wrought by the Smith, for such
different decays as are charged could never proceed from one common Cause: His
late Majesty himself was convinced that there was not such corrosive quality in
Lead, Mr. Boil.
having consulted the Person in England, the most skilful in those matters.

Furthermore, Universal Practice both in his Majesty's Yards, and Merchant
Builders has and does at this day make Lead the common security of Iron-work
against Rust, not only by covering therewith (upon all Ships unsheathed, and
designed for long Voyages) the Iron-work about the Rudder, but by capping the
heads of their Bolts under water with pieces of Lead sized to and nailed over
the said Bolts.

Nor is this all, for at this day whatever Merchant Man, or Man of War is
appointed for a Voyage, where the Worm eats, the back of her Stem-post and
beard of her Rudder are sheathed with Copper or Lead, and this even where the
Ships also are sheathed with Wood, the East: India Company it self, (upon whom
we may best depend for Cautions wherever preservation of Ships is in question)
not omitting in that very case to sheath their Rudders with Lead or Copper,
which practice certainly could never have prevailed with our Fathers, and been
followed with so continued a consent to this very day by us, of the vicinity of
either of these Metals, assisted (as is by some imagined,) by salt water, had
been ever found of so pernicious and certain ill effect upon the very matter
they are employed to secure.

Nor does what is thus approved of in the general and universal practice of
England want its Confirmation by the like of Foreign Nations, to wit, the
Dutch, Portuguese's, Spaniard; the first of which like us do generally sheath
their Rudder-Irons, and the back of their posts with Lead or Copper, upon all
Ships bound in the way of the Worm; and for the two latter, not only the
Rudders, but the whole Bodies of their Ships under water, even of the Gallions
themselves, have of long time been, and are well known at this day to be
entirely sheathed with Lead, which concurrence of these two latter Nations,
seems in this case so much more considerable than any other, by how much not
only their Voyages are the longest, their hazards therein from the Worm the
greatest, and Cargoes the most valuable of all that Navigation knows, but for
that the Hulls of their Ships abound the most with Iron-work, as having all
which in the fastening of our Plank is performed with Wooden Trunnels, done by
them with large Spikes of Iron.

In fine, were this spoil of Iron-work chargeable with nothing but what is
contained in the Lead and Nails, these pretended effects of theirs would be
constant and uniform in all Ships alike sheathed; whereas nothing is more
frequent than the instances of their Inequality, and this Company dare put the
whole Credit of their Cause upon that one Issue, viz. of ever finding an equal
Consumption of the Iron-work under water, whether upon the same or different
Ships at any one time, or equal distances of time: The complaint of Ships that
have passed this way of sheathing affording a most ample proof of this
inequality, by having some of them laden with Complaints, and every one
different from the rest, and at different times from it self, whilst we are yet
to be told whether the rest are not (as we are sure by the long lasting of the
Iron-work some of them were) free from all ground of this Complaint, and upon
Information of several Masters of Ships and other Seafaring Men, even upon
Ships that were sheathed with Lead, or not sheathed at all, they have found the
Rudder-Irons of some to decay much sooner than others, which they always
imputed to the Smiths different mixture, welding and working of the Iron.

To justify therefore the goodness and usefulness of this their Invention, the
Partners in the Year 1678. made a Proposal to the then Navy Board, to furnish
the Rudder-Irons for the Ships they should sheath, in which they would take
care themselves of the good mixture, welding and working thereof, which
Proposal was thought so reasonable that upon it several repeated Orders to that
Board were made by the Lords of the Admiralty.

Thus stood the matter in the Year 1678. about which time some differences
arose amongst the Partners themselves, which gave an interruption to their
Proceedings, and an opportunity to those whose Interest it was (by reason of
their respective Trades) to decry this Invention, though it was apparently of
so great advantage to the Kings service; but at present all differences being
reconciled, and the Interest in the Act of Parliament fallen into such hands as
are both willing and able to set it on foot, they thought it their Duty to lay
a new Proposal before your Honorable Board, which they do the more gladly, for
that they know you all to be Persons thoroughly acquainted with, and skilful in
these Matters, and most Zealous in the Profits and Interests of his Majesty.

They crave leave to begin with reminding you of some Arguments, which no doubt
have formerly lain before some of you, of the advantage that will accrue by the
use of this way of sheathing above that of Wood.

First, That the only competent and allowed defense of Ships against the Worm,
before this of Lead-sheathing, was the paying the Hulls from the waters edge
downwards with Stuff, and laying the inside of a sheathing board (from inch and
quarter to three quarters thick) all over with Tarr and Hair to be brought over
the forementioned stuff; and (being well nailed) graving or paying the outside
of the said Board all over with another composition of Brimstone, Oil, and
other Ingredients, which is called Wood-sheathing.

Secondly, Concerning which, however united the opinions of us English men may
be thought to have been touching the same, it seems to this Company grounded
not so much upon the real perfection thereof, as the profit that attends it to
the Builders interested in the working of it, and consequently leaving them
under no temptation either to look out for a better themselves, or give
encouragement to any discoveries made toward it by others.

And that indeed the so universal reception given to Wood-sheathing is rather
due to this, than its own real sufficiency, you will be Judges of from the
following Notes.

1. That if not the most, at least the most essential of all the Ingredients,
employed in that method of Sheathing are of foreign growth, which they make
use of not so much for the sake of the Nationality of its Argument, (though yet
that is such as the Parliaments of England have ever laid great weight upon in
all their Deliberations upon Trade, and particularly in the Act relating to
this very Invention) but from a consideration, which the Books of the Navy
sufficiently confirm the force of, viz, That being Foreign, such has sometimes
been the scarcity thereof here, (even when their use has been the most wanted,)
that they have been either not to be had at all, or at Prices much exceeding
the ordinary Market; whereas the Materials used by the Cop^rtners are of the
Product of England, and so can never be wanting.

2. That the Wood-sheathing has been always observed and confessed to be very
apt to gather filth, and of no less uneasiness when foul'd to be thoroughly
cleansed again.

3. That from its roughness, and the multitude of Nail-heads standing out from
the Ships side, or otherwise, and the thickness of the sheathing it self, Ships
sheathed with Wood have ever been complained of as lessened thereby in that
only quality, upon which our Friggats most value themselves, and have their
service in preference to others calculated from, namely, their Sailing.

All these Arguments they humbly hope have given you full satisfaction of the
preference this way of sheathing ought to have, and likewise hope they have
answered all Objections to it.

They crave leave therefore to begin their new Proposal with these Assertions.

1. That this sheathing with Lead, at the first hanging on, is, if at all, very
inconsiderably dearer than a good Streights sheathing with Wood.

2. That the Wood-sheathing never lasts above a Voyage or two, and when stripped
the old sheathing is worth little or nothing.

3. That this Lead-sheathing with some small repairs will preserve the Plank
from the Worm, (which is the true intent of sheathing Ships) till it shall be
required to be stripped off for Calking, or other reparation of the Hull when
that shall be necessary, but will never need stripping for any defect in the
sheathing it self; and when it shall be stripped, the old sheathing being Metal,
will yield its value to melt down again.

To reduce this Work to a certainty of great and undeniable Benefit and
Advantage to his Majesty, they offer as follows.
1. THat the Ships sides being prepared (and the Bolt-heads and Braces
parcelled or capt as they ought) to bring the sheathing on, they will sheath
the same with their Lead and Nails according to the Pattern now produced, which
is near 3. l. to the foot square, in any of his Majesty's Yards (convenient
Room being assigned them to store their Goods) and defray all charge of
Materials, Carriage, Workmanship, and wast at the rate of 11. s. 9. d. per Yard
square, which upon due enquiry will appear to be very little more than a good
Streights sheathing, and not above half so much as an East India sheathing.

2. To keep the same in constant repair, they offer to deliver on board
convenient Stores of Lead and Nails to supply Accidents if any happen in a
Voyage, for which the Carpenter may be answerable, and as often as any of the
Ships they shall sheath shall return home from their Voyages, any wise damaged
in their sheathing, they will be obliged* upon notice given when they are
Dockt, to repair the same, and so from time to time to keep the said sheathing
in good and constant repair at the rate of 10. l. per Cent. per Annum.
according to each Ships first Charge of sheathing, as long time as they shall
desire to have the said sheathing continued on to the time of stripping, and
then to allow for the old Lead 11. s. per hundred weight, whereas the
Wood-sheathing, which seldom lasts above a Voyage, when stripped yields nothing.

If any doubt yet remains, that this sheathing is the cause of a more than
ordinary decay in the Rudder-Irons, they do offer, if they may have the making
the Rudder-Irons themselves for such Ships they shall sheath, they will
undertake the same at the Kings Rates; and to prevent all suspicion of hazard,
while Ships are in their Voyages, they will at first sheathing provide two
setts of Rudder-Irons to each Ship, one to be in store always on Board to
shift if occasion requires, and those not to be paid for till it shall appear
that the first have lasted as long as the Rudder-Irons of other Ships usually
do; and when the Lead-sheathing is thereby sufficiently vindicated from the
fear of being any wise destructive to the Rudder-Irons, they may be made by the
same hands they now are, again.

All which is humbly submitted to your Consideration. 20. December 1686.
LETTERS and CERTIFICATES From the KING's Master Builders, Carpenters, etc. On
behalf of the Lead-Sheathing.
Sir Anthony Dean's Letter to Sir Francis Watson.
January 22. 1669. SIR,
THe Patterns of Lead you showed me of 4 l. to the Foot square, is absolutely
of great advantage to his Majesty, being very fit for the Uses of the Navy, and
will serve for Furnaces, Sea-store, Caps for Bolts, heads of Masts, and the
like: And the Pattern of 3 l. and under is very fit to nail under Knees,
Standards, Carved-work and Double-work, and would not do amiss for Sheathing,
if Nails can be found to last, which I thought convenient to be particular in
mentioning as well the size and weight as its Uses, to satisfy those who may
be concerned.

Anthony Dean, Master Builder at Portsmouth.

Portsmouth.
THese are to Certify whom it may concern, Mary.
that the Mary and Lion having been both on ground at Portsmouth, Ly^^
we did view the Sheathing upon the said Ships, which was done at Chatham in
the Year 1672. and do find it (...) on exceeding well, the Salt Water having
not eaten either the Lead or the Nails in the least as we can discern.

Dan. Furzer, Master Builder. Rog. Eastwood, Assistant.

Feb. 2. 1673/4;.
Chatham.
THese may Certify whom it may concrrn, Lion.
that the Ships whose Names are mentioned in the Margent, Henrietta.
were sheathed with thin Lead at his Majesty's Yard at Chatham, prepared and
made after the New Invention, Mary.
the Mary having been here in the Dock since she was Sheathed, her sheathing
lay all very firm, smooth, and good as when first put on, and very clean; and I
am of Opinion that the Lead made after this new Inveution, being so close
pressed, smooth, and equal in all parts, it is much more useful for Shipping,
and cheaper than the Lead cast after the usual manner, this Lead after this new
Invention being fit for all uses about a Ship, it being made to weigh 3, 4, or
5 l. to the Foot square.

Phin. Pett, Master Builder at Chatham.
Chatham-Dock, Feb. 25. 1673/4.
Woolwich.
WHereas his Majesty's Ships the Phoenix and Dreadnought were above three years
Phoenix.
since sheathed by Major Watsons new Invention with thin Lead, March 10. 1670/1.
and at their Returns after several foreign Voyages being ordered into his
Majesty's Dock at Woolwich, and committed to my care to search the condition of
their Hulls; upon view thereof I do hereby certify, Dreadnought.
(notwithstanding the fears the said Sheathings might have been prejudiced by
the Cables, lying on ground, or some other Accident) That their Sheathings did
continue very firm and fast, June 1671.
without the least damage from the first doing thereof, the Phoenix
particularly having then made two Voyages into the Streights, was since sent a
Voyage into Guinny without any Amendment.

Furthermore, Bristol.
His Majesty's Ship the Bristol being in the beginning of April last ordered
under my Charge to be sheathed, Apr. 1674.
I sheathed her with the same sort of Lead and Nails in less than three days
time, and the whole charge thereof upon the exactest Computation I could make,
did amount to 258. l. 4. s. which is as little as she could possibly cost for
an ordinary sheathing of Boards of 1. inch, well nailed. This I could no less
than Certify under my hand.

Phin. Pett, Master Builder at Woolwich.
July 2. 1674.
Sheerness.
THese are to Certify, Henrietta.
That about nine or ten days since his Majesty's Ships the Henrietta and
Phoenix, which are sheathed with Lead, were haled on Shore at his Majesty's
Yard at Sheerness, Phoenix.
the said Ships coming in thither from cruising in the Channel, the latter
having made her Voyage into the Streights; and that I found the sheathing of
the said Ships very firm and good, not at all damnified by the ranging of the
Cables along the side, or by rubbing on the ground, or otherwise.

John Shish, Master Builder.
October. 2. 1674.
THese are to Certify, Phoenix.
That I was Carpenter of his Majesty's Ship the Phoenix, in her Voyage from the
West Indies, or Barbados, in the Year 1674. Captain Atkins Commander, as we
were coming home in a storm of Wind, reeving our fore course the Rudder snapt
off, the waters edge being worm eaten quite through, the lower part tore away
all the eyes of the braces under water excepting one, The Rudder not being
sheathed high enough, no fault in the Rudder Irons nor Lead-sheathing.
and so sunk, the upper part hung fast, which I hung overboard, and took off,
unto which I fastened Planks to make a Rudder as well as I could; the reason of
the Rudder being lost, was by the Worm eating it in pieces.

Edward Ledger, Carpenter.

THese are to Certify, That I Edw. Wright was entered Cooper on board the
Kingsfisher, Kingsfisher,
about four months before she was sheathed with Lead, and that her Rudder Irons
(as I was informed) was put on her at Woodbridge about a year before, the Ship
having afterward lain in Chatham River till I entered, and I was on board her
above two years and a half, at least two years in the Streights, Captain
Trotter Commander. That she had none of her Rudder-Irons shifted all that time
except one Pintel, which was broke, and amended at Legorne, and at her new
Voyage when he left her about a year and a half ago, she shifted none of her
said Rudder-Irons. That in the said Voyage they did many times clean the said
Ship as there was ccoasion, which kept clean much better than a Wood-sheathing:
And when they had occasion in three or four months time or thereabouts, as they
had opportunity, they used to Careen her with her Guns, and in half the time
and trouble, with bristle brushes, provided for that purpose, they used to
clean her as they had formerly done their board-sheathing, with which Jo. Ward
her Carpenter, and Robert Bodenham her Boatswain, now in the Streights, were so
much pleased, that they would often fall into commendation of that new way of
sheathing, and the easiness of keeping it clean, and the great advantage
thereby to the Ship in its Sailing.

Edward Wright.
November. 22. 1682.
WE, whose Names are underwritten, Assistance.
Carpenters, employed about the stripping the Milled Lead-sheathing of the
Assistance, at her coming into Mr. Castles Dock at Deptford, to be repaired in
September 1686. do hereby Certify the said sheathing lay on very very well and
whole, from any galling by the Cables or rubbing off on ground, preserved its
Plank smooth and sound, from any Worm eating as at first laying on, which was
about ten years since.

Will. Bowerman. John Rumney.

October. 3. 1686.
A Letter from the Master Builders Assistant at Deptford, formerly
Master-Caulker at Portsmouth.
SIR,
AFter my hearty Service presented to you, These are to acquaint you that I had
answered your Letter e're this time, Mary.
only I did think it convenient to see how the Mary's Bolts proved at Woolwich,
Plymouth.
which I now understand are very bad; these Bolts have been drove 13 or 14
Years, Dreadnought.
which could not be expected any better than they be, but the Plank is very
good, and so was the Plymouth's and Dreadnought's, and not the worse for the
Worm except where the Lead was off, and that not worth speaking of, but all
Ships (as far as I see) the Plank proved as good as those which were sheathed
with Board: As to the Bolts and Braces, I dare engage they may be secured in
parcelling of them, and the Ships which were sheathed with Lead very tight,
when the work was very open under the sheathing.

Zach. Medbury.
July 4. 1680.
A Letter from the Master Builder of Portsmouth to the Lord Churchil.
My LORD,
IN Answer to your Lordships Letter, my Opinion of Lead-sheathing is, That it
is the finest and cleanest Sheathing in the world, and as for the destruction
of the Bolts; I say when well parcelled, no defect can come from the
Lead-sheathing; for I have made it my observation, That where the Bolt heads
are carefully parcelled (as they are or ought to be in a Wood-sheathing) no
defect is found, but where that is neglected, the water getting between the
Bolt-head and the Lead, there both the Lead and Iron are usually decayed: But I
find that his Majesty's Ships in ten or twelve years are generally Iron-sick,
whether sheathed either way or not sheathed at all, by reason of the builg
water. And as to the Rudder-Irons, I find that the Pintells decay soonest, but
that an unconstant and unequal decay in the said Iron are in all Ships, is most
certain, sheathed or not, and according to the goodness and well working of the
Iron, some prove of longer durance than other, the soon decay I cannot impute
to the Lead-sheathing, but if such decay were, hanging the Rudder Flemish
Fashion, it is easy to unhang the same, and upon such decay to hang on new
ones, the Braces being much more durable than the Pintells: And as
Wood-sheathing requires to be stripped once in three years, where the Worm eats,
so my Opinion is, that a Lead-sheathing ought to be stripped once in seven years,
by reason of the Ochams decaying in the Seams; (the which would lie on much
longer, and be firm, were it not for such decay) and as to its fouling, it
fouls nothing near so soon as a Wood-sheathing, and when foul is easily cleaned
with brushes, or Scrapers if barnicled, with very little trouble, it will also
endure a handsome fire to dry the same if occasion requires; and when this
Sheathing is stripped, the Plank is no wise damaged by the Worm as we ever found:
This I hope gives your Lordship full satisfaction from

Your Lordships, etc. Isaac Betts.
July 4. 1687.
A Letter from Sir Phineas Pet, Commissioner at Chatham, to my Lord Churchil.
My LORD,
IN Answer to your Lordships Letter, desiring my opinion of the Lead-sheathing,
and the Complaints that some have made against the Rudder-Irons and Bolts of
several of the Lead-sheathed Ships, I return your Lordship this general Account
following, which I suppose will give your Lordship full satisfaction. While I
was his Majesty's Master Builder here at Chatham, it fell into my way to sheath
and strip diverse of those Ships, by which I had opportunity enough to make full
observations, as well in respect of the Iron-work as sheathing; and I must
confess after I had seen some of those Ships return from their Voyages, as the
Lion, Henrietta and Mary, with their sheathing firm and sound, free from the
Worm, and very clean, I looked upon this sheathing as a very happy Invention
for his Majesty's Service, to have his Friggats thus secured from the Worm,
without hinderance to their Sailing, which a thick Wood-sheathing must needs
be; and by reason of its duration, the charge that was saved in Graving, and
the value of the old sheathing (being Metal) when stripped must needs be
considerably cheaper to the King, and I am of the same Opinion still, though I
have heard diverse Commanders and others say, this Sheathing is an extraordinary
decayer of the Iron-work, which they may fancy by taking notice only of some
particular Ships that perhaps may have had their Rudder-Irons last a shorter
time with a Lead-sheathing, than they have observed some other Ships that have
been sheathed with Wood, being not acquainted with the searching and repairs of
Iron-work in Ships of all kinds as Shipwrights are; for this great inequality
we constantly find in the lasting of the Rudder-Irons, and other Iron-work in
all Ships, whether sheathed either way, or not at all, may not be known to
them, which we always look upon to come from the Smith, in the better or worse
mixing, welding, and working his Iron: Nor can I imagine how the Lead-sheathing
should be any cause of the great decay in Iron-work, for we use in
Wood-sheathing to Capp the Bolt-heads with Lead, and many times to sheath the
Rudder-Post, and Beard of the Rudder with Lead. And for the Nails, their Heads
are so thin and small, that I do not see how they should continue so long in
the sides of a Ship, (as some of these Ships have been sheathed,) and at
stripping appear not at all to be diminished in their substance, and yet
communicate such a corroding mischief to the Iron-work as some would have it;
but if such a thing were, well parcelling the Bolts would secure them, and the
Rudder-Irons can decay in no Voyage so fast, but by having a fresh set always
on Board, opportunity may be found time enough to shift them, which would very
well be contrived, rather than to lose so many other great Benefits that
Lead-sheathing brings with it to his Majesty's Service as well as to the
Public. This is I think the substance of what your Lordship would be satisfied
in; and if you desire any thing more particularly, you may command

Your Lordships most, etc. Phin. Pett.
April 12. 1688.
PURSERS Certificates for the Goodness of Sheathing-Lead to line the
Bread-rooms.
THese Certify, R. Catherine.
That the Bread-rooms of his Majesty's Ship Royal Catherine being lined with
Lead, did very well preserve the Bisquet, insomuch that during the term of her
Voyage 1672 and 1673. there was not any Bisquet damaged.

Jacob Bryan.

THese are to Certify, Fairfax.
That his Majesty's Ship the Fairfax Bread-rooms were lined with Lead about two
years since, and that the said Bread-rooms was Bread for nine or ten years,
which during the said time was not removed, or stirred, and was at the
expiration of the said time as good as when it was first put in, and received
no damage by wet or damp to the prejudice of the Bread.

William Rivers.
Ian. 24. 1674.
SIR,
YOu having a desire to hear how the leading of the Bread room of the St.
David, St. David.
was a preservation of the Bread, I do assure you, that if it had not been for
the leading of it, it would not have lasted half so long; for I was two years
in the said Ship, and the very last of our Bread did hold out to be as good as
the first.

Ian. 5. 1673/4 Wilm. New.

THese do Certify whom it may concern, that the Bread-room belonging to his
Majesty's Ship the Happy Return are lined with Lead, Happy Return.
which Lead has for eight Months together preserved the Bread from any Damage
without being stirred, and it was in as good Condition as at first putting in.

Feb. 23. 1673/4 Maur. Linch.

THese are to Certify, ^. Prince.
that the Bread-room of his Majesty's Ship Royal Prince being lined with Lead,
did very well preserve the Bisquet, insomuch that during the last Voyage
betwixt 1 May, 1673. and 24. October. following, there was not in the term of the
said Voyage any Bisquet damaged.

Triamer Pickstock.

THese are to Certify, that the Bread-room of his Majesty's Ship St. George,
St. George
being seeled with Lead, did preserve and keep our Bread in very good condition
the whole time that she was at Sea.

Sept. 10. 1674. David Willis.

Perhaps it may be acceptable to some Readers, to have a glancing and shorter
View of the Company's Answer to the Officers of the Navy's Report and
Complaints to the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty against the
Lead-sheathing; and therefore it is thought fit that the Reader be entertained
therewith, as the same was also drawn by the Pen of that ingenious Person Mr.
Pepys, viz.

A BRIEF OF THE Controversy Depending between The Officers of the NAVY, Novem.
30. 1682.
AND Sir Philip Howard and Company, TOUCHING The late Invention and Practice of
Sheathing his Majesty's Ships with LEAD.
SIr Philip Howard and Company, Interested in the Manufacture of Mill'd-Lead,
and Contraction for the same with the Officers of the Navy for the use of his
Majesty, being surprised with a late Report to the Lords of the Admiralty from
the said Officers in prejudice of this Invention, did (in right to hi^ Majesty
and his Service, no less than to it and themselves) present their Lordships
this Day with a Reply to that Report, containing an ample Deduction and State
of the whole Matter, whereof the following is an Abstract:

Showing, THat this Company becoming Masters of the said Invention, Anno* 1670,
they in the same Year submitted it (as a Matter of public Import) to the
Examination and Censure of Parliament. Where after passing the most solemn and
strict Methods of Inquisition in both Houses, it received their Approval and
Confirmation, by an Act granted to that Effect, in Terms most Expressive of
their satisfaction in it, and Intentions of Encouragement to its Inventors.

After which, it was by his Majesty's Command immediately put in Execution,
first upon the Phoenix, and then successively upon other of his Ships. But not
without continued Industry and Combinations employed against it, by Persons
interested so to do, until by a three years proof of its Efficacy, in
contradiction to all that had been objected against it, and more particularly
from the satisfaction his Majesty received concerning it, in his personal View
and Observation o^ its success upon the Phoenix; he was pleased to put an end
to the same in the Year 1673. by an Order from the then Lords of the Admiralty,
solemnly establishing this Method of sheathing, in Exclusion to all that had
been till then used in the Navy.

Notwithstanding which, the said Officers thought fit to take yet two Years
more for its Probation, (in all five Years) before they would make it the
King's, by entering into any Contract for it with this Company: Which then (
viz. in the Year 1675.) they did, and that not only with a Condition of
securing the benefit of it to his Majesty for Twenty Years to come, (which was
the whole Term the Company had then remaining in it) but an express Declaration
of their entering into this Contract, Upon sufficient experience had of the
goodness and usefulness of this Invention, both as to the Lead and Nails.

All this neverthesess not sufficing against the Private Interests concerned to
expose it; a new Exception was soon after raised, upon the score of a Pretended
Discovery made of some Occult Quality in the Lead, by which the Rudder-Irons,
and other Iron-works of his Majesty's Ships under water were said to be in an
unusual Degree eaten and corroded with Rust.

Upon which his Majesty and the Lords of the Admiralty did by several and
repeated Orders in the Months of April and May 1678. not only recommend and
press upon the Officers^of the Navy, the making a strict Enquiry into the
General Truth, and Natural Ground of the Evil so complained of; but upon a
reasonable suggection then made by this Company, of its being rather chargeable
upon some Defect in the Iron-work it self, than ought to be apprehended from
the Lead, They were pleased to direct several Ships to be expressly fitted, and
other things done by the said Officers in conjunction with this Company, in
order to the better discovery of the Truth in that Particular; but without any
regard shown either to those Orders, or to the Importance of their Contents to
his Majesty, by any thing that appears to have been done toward it by the said
Officers, from that very day to the Date of this Report in October last,
wherein (upon the single score of its supposed Influence upon Iron,) they take
upon them peremptorily to Advise against the further use of Lead-sheathing,
without any other Evidence of the Truth or Ground of that their Supposal, than
what is to be inferred from a Particular thereto annexed, of the Decays of
Iron-work observed upon some of the Lead-sheathed Ships.

The invalidity of which Instances being severally opened by this Company, with
respect no less to their Truth, Consistencies, and Cogency, than to their
Disproportion in Number to those of the like sheathing, against which nothing
of Complaint has been suggested by them; The Company proceeds to show,

I. That the sheathing of Ships with Lead, neither is nor can (as such) be the
Cause of any decay in Iron: And this,

1. From the Universal Consent of Persons of the most allowed Knowledge in the
Theory and Operation of Metals.

2. From the Universal Practice (both Ancient and Modern) of the Shipwrights of
England, in their special Application of Lead to the preserving of Iron-work.

3. From the like Practice in Foreign Nations.

4. From their Observations touching the unequal growth of Rust upon Iron-work,
within the same or different spaces of Time, and on the same or different
Ships, however sheathed or unsheathed.

II. That the Real Causes to which alone this extraordinary decay of the
Iron-work is of right to be imputed, are,

1. The want of due Inspection to the performance of the Smiths Work.

2. An industrious Omission (in the particular Case of these Ships) of the
Principal Point of Care used both in his Majesty's and Merchants Service, in
the preparing of all Ships designed for sheathing.

3. An Unaccountable Continuance of the sheathing upon the Bodies of these
Ships, beyond what the Practice and Rules of the Navy, in the case of any such
Neglects can justify.

III. Lastly, That an Enquiry into the Books of Iron-Work in his Majesty's
Yards, is the only, and would long e're now (had this Company's Advice been
pursued) have been found an effectual and certain Expedient for the coming to a
right decision of this Question.

Which being said, and an Account given of the several Obstructions and
Discouragements, which both his Majesty's Service, and this Company have met
with from the Officers of the Navy, in all its Endeavors of bringing this
Matter to a Satisfactory Issue to his Majesty: The Company concludes with
showing these three things,

1. That sheathing with Wood (the only security for Ships against the Worm,
before this of Lead) is, and has always been owned to be, attended with several
Circumstances greatly Detrimental to his Majesty, both in his Ships and Service.

2. That the only Expedient also, besides this of Lead, for obviating those
Evils in Wood-sheathing, has been the flying to another Evil, no less fit to be
avoided than they, viz. That of sending the Kings Ships into the Worms way
unsheathed.

3. Lastly, That therefore the only Method in reserve (yet known) for the
serving of his Majesty herein, is this of Lead. Against which, none of the
Evils in either of the former, or any other, are (after near Twelve years
Experience of it) so much as suggested by the Officers of the Navy themselves
at this Day, saving this under dispute concerning Iron-work; To which, (after
all) the Company closes with Proposing a most obvious, easy, next to
chargeable, and effectual Remedy.

For the Particulars of which, and each of the foregoing Matters, reference is
to be had to their Original Paper, lying before his Majesty and the Lords of
the Admiralty; whereof this is only an Abstract.

HAVING in the foregoing part of this Discourse entertained the Reader with the
Transactions that have passed concerning the Milled Lead used upon the
sheathing, etc. of about twenty Ships of the Navy Royal, I shall now set forth
the great benefit and advantage accrewing from the use of this sort of Lead for
the covering all manner of Buildings, and other purposes where Sheet-Lead is
employed, which the Milled Lead Company some time ^ince also proposed to their
Majesty's Officers for Buildings and Ordnance, at rates greatly cheaper than
what was or is paid (with respect to the work done) for Cast-Lead, which they
had demonstrated to be much better as well as much cheaper, in a sheet of Paper
Printed and Published some Years ago, for general satisfaction, but could not
prevail with those Officers by all their Printing, Proofs, or Proposals, it
being against the Inclinations or Profit of the Plumbers and their Friends, who
had Power or Interest enough to hinder the admittance thereof into the Kings
Works, which being further proved by fresh Instances of Experience from
Coverings of Houses, etc. both ways done since the Rebuilding of London,
lately also published, the same here follows in terminis, for the better
satisfaction of those who have the disposal of their own Money.

AN ADVERTISEMENT To all who have Occasion to make Use of Sheet-Lead.
ALL New Inventions (being proposed (as better and cheaper) to lay aside
something before used for the same purpose) must expect to meet with great
Opposition; for some particular Persons, and some Trades which consist of many
Persons being concerned in Point of Interest, right or wrong, they will decry
that which is against their profit, and procure as many others as they can to
do so too; this being the Case o^ the Plumbers with those Concerned in the
Milled-Lead, whoever has Occasion to make use of Sheet-Lead ought not to regard
what interested Persons say on either side, but to weigh and consider with
himself the Reasons offered, and to examine the truth of what is said on both
sides: The Mill'd-Lead Company have Printed many of their Reasons some time
since, in a Paper at large: amongst which, to say nothing of its solidity,
smoothness, etc. the Equality of Milled Lead alone is sufficient to prove it
much better, and (at the Companys Rates in proportion to the least Inequality
that can be granted in Cast-Lead) much cheaper, which also may further appear
from the Considerations following.

1. It is agreed by all, that if the Plumber could cast his Lead exactly Equal
to the thinnest part thereof, it would be better than to be thicker in one
place than another, so that the excess of thickness is not only unnecessarily
paid for, but it makes the Sheet worse, and helps to crack and cockle the
thinner parts, by its stronger resisting the Sunbeams, and other Accidents of
Weather, which falling equally on all parts alike, draws the thinner parts,
when the thicker stay behind, which causes that Cockling and cracking therein:
Wherefore, if Milled Lead be thicker than the thinnest part of a cast Sheet, it
must be allowed to be better, and to last longer, and a less quantity of Lead
being employed, it may be cheaper to what degree in proportion to Cast Lead the
Customer shall judge it convenient and sufficient for the purpose designed to
have the thickness of his Mill'd-Lead to be of.

2. The wasting and decay of Sheet-Lead being chiefly beneath by the heat and
moisture contracted between it and the plain it lies on (turning it into
White-Lead,) that accident which the thinner as well as the thicker parts are
alike liable to, shows the great mischief that attends a Cast-Lead covering in
this respect also.

3. These particulars as well as the Plumbers vain pretense to near Equality,
and endeavor to cast as equal as he can, shows the excellency of Equality in
Sheet-Lead, and consequently that it is so much the worse, by how much it
deviates from Equalily, and this Inequality in a sheet of Lead being an Object
of Sense, any Man that has but his eyes in his head may be as good a Judge
thereof as the best Architect, Surveyor or Plumber in England; and if he please
but to give himself the trouble of viewing indifferently the Coverings upon
Houses in London, since the Rebuilding, and cut a snip from the thickest and
thinnest part of the edge of any Sheet he can come at, he will generally find
Cast-Lead to be a third, or at least a fourth part thicker, nay, many times
above twice as thick in some places as in others, and the Coverings for the
most part cracked, cockled and patcht with Solder, if they have not been new
laid, as many have been since the Fire, particularly the Royal Exchange and
Cordwaners-Hall new covered four or five Years ago; Since the R^building of the
City, and the first Notice of Milled Lead, the Plumbers to make their Coverings
seem cheaper, have generally cast much thinner than formerly, which has
produced these ill Effects in so short a time, tho in more ancient Coverings
the same Inequalities and defects proportionably may be seen.
the Kings Head, a Confectioners by Ludgate, part new covered about seven Years
since, and the new as well as the old cracked, cockled, and patcht with Solder;
the Eagle and Child in Tower-street, stripped and new laid in 1676. Mr. Clark's
House, next the Bell in Fryday-street, and abundance more new Covered, too long
here to mention; and where the old ones lie, this decay and patching generally
appears: Whereas such Coverings as have been laid with Mill'd-Lead, some not
above 6. l. to the Foot, ten or twelve Years ago, lie as well as at first
laying, and in all probability will so continue many Years, as to instance in a
few: At Mr. Wdgstaffe's, next the Hand and Pen in Rood-Lane, a Covering about
30 Foot square, with Sheets the full length; Mr. Miners's Buildings in the
Inner Temple, with Sheets 22 Foot long, where a Covering of Cast-Lead by, at
the same time laid, being compared, the Defects complained of will plainly
appear, in this, while that continues as well as at first, at Mr. Graydon's
House in the Pell-mell, and diverse others too long also here to mention;
besides many more in Town, and some great Houses in the Country done since, as
Esquire. Sanders's at Tooting, some Sheets 34 Foot long; Esquire. Tilney's new House
near Rotherwick in Bark-shire; Sir James Hayes's at Bedgbury, and Esquire. Vane's
at Fairlaune in Kent, etc. of different kinds, worth viewing for Beauty and
Imitation.

4. There are besides the Inequality, certain defects in Cast-lead that lie
concealed within the Sheet, not appearing on the superficies, called by the
Plumber Blow-holes and Sand-holes, which often happens in Casting, and must
help forward the decay of those Coverings, which the Mill discovers, such Holes
being enlarged as the Sheet lengthens in Milling, (and not closed up as they
falsely suggest) and where these Holes or Breaks are met with, the Sheet is
cut, if long enough for use; if not, all is returned again to be new Cast, so
that none but sound Sheets can pass the Mill twenty or thirty times, as every
Sheet does before it is finished.

5. Let us suppose then the present price of Mill'd-Lead to be 16 s. a hund.
and Cast-Lead 14 s. which is an eighth part less, whatever the Inequality of a
Cast-Sheet shall appear to be above an eighth part, which is not easily
discerned, so much must it be granted that Milled Lead is cheaper; but if
Milled Lead of 7 lib. to the foot be admitted but to be as good as the Plumbers
pretended 9. l. it is cheaper at 16. s. a hundred than his at 12 s. 6 d.

6. Wherefore since 7 lib. to the foot may very well be allowed, to remove all
Objections at once which the Plumbers and their Friends falsely charge the
Mill'd-Lead with, any Person (using the Plumber the Company shall recommend or
approve) that shall lay a Covering with their Lead of 7 lib. to the Foot
square, they will undertake (and secure him by good Covenants as Council shall
advise) to keep such Covering, not exceeding a 100 l. value, in good and
constant repair for a term of 41 Years (to mention a time certain and
sufficient) for 5 s. a Year, and proportionably for a greater; and if any Sheet
or Sheets shall crack, or any wise prove defective in respect of the Lead it
self, they will be obliged at their own Charge (Carriage only paid for) to lay
new Sheets in their room, without that patching and botching with Solder that
appears upon all the Cast-lead Coverings in Town, that have not lain half so
long, at a very great Charge in Work and Solder, besides the Damage the House
must have sustained thereby.

But because some Plumbers, and others their Friends, do pretend greater Care
and Improvement in their Casting of late, and have offered to lay Wagers that
they can Cast a Sheet of their full length equal within one pound in ten quite
through; Mr. Hale, a Partner and Manager of the Work, is ready to take any such
Wager; nay, he will give them a pound and an half in ten, and lay them the
price of a Fodder of Lead, that all the Plumbers in Town, and their Friends
joined to their assistance, in the way they have hitherto used of Casting upon
Sand, they cannot do it; and is ready to enter into fair Articles with any one
that shall make the Wager; though if some should be found so dexterous as to
cast one or two such Sheets perhaps in half a dozen, it would not mend the
matter for general use: Moreover, if this could be done, even at the rate of a
pound and an half in ten, Mill'd-Lead is yet cheaper about Three per Cent. For
Ten bundaed weight of Cast lead would cost 7. l. and Eight hundred and an half
of Milled Lead but 6 l. 16. s. As to the Plumbers pretense of Casting broader,
that is not yet (according to the Proverb) as Broad as Long; for the Milled Lead
size of Three Foot and an half being broad enough, and perhaps better than
broader for general use, and they able to make their Sheets above twice as long
as the Plumber can cast, if need require, to save Drips, and comply with the
length of Coverings, this disadvantage is not made good by any pretense of
breadth soever; which if greater breadths are necessary, as for Coperas-works,
etc. may be supplied with Milled Lead, by burning a Seam joining two Sheets
together.

This Milled Lead being to be had of any Thickness, even from one pound in the
Foot to twenty, or more if desired, must for the Reasons aforesaid be cheaper
and better than Cast Lead, and will serve for all uses that Cast Sheets are fit
for, and the thinner sorts for many more, any one may be supplied with able
Workmen to lay the same on Churches or other Buildings, or work it into
Cisterns, Fountains, Pipes, Vessels for Brewers, Dyers, Coperas-works, Dairies,
etc. and Solder at 6 d. a pound; also where Nailing is required there sheathing
Nails, made of a Metal that will not rust, corrode or decay the Lead, as Iron
does, may be had for 8 d. a Hundred, at the Mill'd-Lead-Shop, The
Mill'd-Lead-Shop is since removed to the Mill'd-Lead-sign in Orange-street by
Red-Lyon-Square, near Holborn, where Mr. Hale himself also now lives.
the Sign of the Mallard on the West Side of Fleet-Channel, near
Holborn-brigde, or by a Note left for Mr. Hale all the Temple Coffee-house, that
he may know where to speak with the Parties, or send his Plumber to undertake
their Work.

There Is nothing said herein relating to the Mill'd-Lead-Sheathing; that having
been discontinued in the Navy (after about twenty Ships sheathed) requiring a
more large and particular Account what may have been the Cause thereof, the
Objections, Answers, Proofs, and whole Proceedings in that matter, are intended
shortly to be Printed, which will suficiently satisfy the unprejudiced, and
justify the preference of Lead-sheathing before that of Wood in many
particulars, besides Cheapness; which with regard to its Duration, and the
Value of the old Sheathing when stripped, will save the Owner above Cent. per
Cent. And all the noise that has been about the Rudder-Irons decay, charged on
that Sheathing, proved to be frivolous, vain and groundless.

All Merchants or others that shall buy any considerable quantity, above a Tun
at least, upon discourse with the said Mr. Hale, may have some Abatement even
from the present Prices, suitable to the quantity and payment.

LONDON, Printed for T. H. and are to be had at Garraway's Coffee-house, the
Temple Coffee-House, and the Mill'd-Lead Shop abovementioned. 1690.

Notwithstanding which, the Plumbers (to prevent a Contract with the
Commissioners of the Navy, for which this Company had then a Proposal lying
before them to furnish their Mill'd-Lead of all sizes of thickness and
thinness, as well for Sheet-Lead as Scuppers, etc. into their Majesty's Yards)
gave in to them the Paper following: The Vanity and Falsehood of which Paper
will plainly appear to the Reader from the Testimonies given even by the Owners
or Inhabitants themselves of those Houses from whence they raise their
Instances of commending their Cast and decrying the Mill'd-Lead, diverse of
which are here also Printed at the Foot of their said Paper, others being
Houses never covered with Mill'd-Lead at all, as the Lord Preston's, or with
Mill'd-Lead, as the Lord Crew's, against which no ground for complaint of the
Lead, in which Houses Servant-women only living, they could not give proper
Certificates herein.

THE Plumber's Proposal TO THE NAVY-BOARD.
Right Honorable,
UNderstanding that the Persons concerned in the Mill'd-Lead have put out
Printed Papers in Vindication of the Service of the said Lead, and have also
lately made Proposals to your Honors to serve their Majesty's therewith, or
any private Persons for Covering of Houses, Gutters, Pipes, Cisterns, Scuppers,
Liquor-Backs, or such like Work, which they pretend will be cheaper and better
than Cast-Lead:

May it please your Honors,
THe Milled Lead is no ways so serviceable and cheap as the same is
represented, nor indeed scarce fit for any service, as is evidently proved by
daily experience in most places where the same has been used; that after it
has lain a few Years, it has cracked, flaw'd, and rose in ridges, so that the
Persons concerned, after having been at a considerable Charge in the daily
patching and mending of it, have at last been forced to take it up, and lay
Cast-lead in the room of it, before such time as the Houses or Places could be
made tight: of the truth of which, several Examples can be given your Honors
upon Oath, if required.

That on the other side, the Cast-Lead does plainly make appear its durance and
service, for in several old Buildings about this City and Westminster, where
this Lead has been laid for a great term of years, yet remains as firm and
right as when first laid: And besides, the same is cheaper and better to their
Majesty, or any private person, by 20 l. per Cent. than the Mill'd-Lead is,
according to the Rates it is now sold, which together with the strength and
service is very considerable.

Also the Solder made and used by them of the Milled Lead, is not fit for
service, whereas all Solder used by the Plumbers is by Essay sealed according
to the standing Rules of the Company.

By what is here offered, is humbly desired may be taken by your Honors, as
proceeding from Duty, and not in prejudice to the Persons concerned in the
Mill'd-Lead, for notwithstanding the plausible pretenses of the usefulness and
service of the said Lead, and the disparagement of the Cast-Lead, yet the
Plumbers have not made any like returns to discredit the Mill'd-Lead, not for
want of reasons, but being assured that a short time would sufficiently make
appear the service and firmness of the Cast-Lead, and the sleightness and the
charge of the other, which is now sufficiently evidenced, and is humbly
submitted to your Honors Considerations.

Places where the Mill'd-Lead has been used.
His Majesty's Horse-guard Houses at White Hall. The Lord Preston's House. The
Countess of Portland's. The Lord Crew's in Soho-square. Mr. Fox's in
Arundel-street. No such House to be found.
Mr. Harris's in Norfolk-street. Sir John James's in Pell-Mell. Dr.
Chamberlain's in Essex-buildings. Esquire Sanders at Tooting. Sir Ant. Deane's.
These and several others which have been covered with Mill'd-Lead, have been
taken up and laid with Cast-Lead in a very short time* as may be made appear.

Ex. per W. Dale,
23 Aug. 1690.
COPIES OF Letters and Certificates, Proving The Plumber's foregoing Paper TO
BE Scandalous and False.
Mr. Saunders's Letter.
Mr. Hale,
I Have thought upon the Paper you showed me, which you said the Plumbers
presented to the Navy-Board, complaining of mighty defects in your Mill'd-Lead,
and mentioning a great many places where they say they have been forced to
strip it off, and new cover with their Cast-Lead, and amongst the rest my House
at Tooting: I wonder much at their Confidence and Folly, to say such things
that may be so easily contradicted: I assure you my Covering at Tooting lies
very well, and I do not doubt but it will so continue; indeed I am very proud
of it, and I do not think there is a finer and better Covering in England, at
least not of Cast-Lead, for I have Sheets thereon about twice as long as I ever
heard the Plumber pretended to Cast, being 34 Foot long, and I was very well
satisfied after a great deal of Discourse with the Plumber before I began, that
your Milled Lead was cheaper in the whole Work, and would prove much better,
and being exactly equal (which theirs is far from) would last longer than
theirs, and I see no cause yet to alter my Opinion. Upon your request to have
something from me in Writing on this Occasion, I could say no less, and suppose
this may suffice from

28 Aug. 1690. SIR, Your Humble Sevant, Robert Sanders.

Dr. Chamberlain's Letter.
Mr. Hale,
WHen I last saw you, you showed me a Paper addressed by the Plumbers to the
Navy-Board, wonderfully decrying your Milld-Lead, commending their own, and
because that amongst several other places, which they ^ay were covered with
Mill'd-Lead, that in a short time (being very defective) were taken up, and new
laid with Cast-Lead, they mention mine in Essex-Buildings to have been one; you
then desired me to give two or three lines in Writing of the truth thereof,
which I could not reasonably deny you; and I do here assure you that the same
Mill'd-Lead which was first laid on about twelve Years since upon two Platforms
at my House there, remains on still very well, free from any such cracks or
flaws and ridges they complain of, which I have reason to believe would not
have continued so well, if they had been covered with Cast-Lead; for that the
Cast-sheets which were laid upon the Cornish next the Street before I came to
the House, were afterward in many places so cracked and cockled, that about
eight Years ago, as I remember, the Plumber took it up, or great part of it,
and new laid it again: I considered also of the Charge of both ways, before I
made use of the Mill'd-Lead, and was then satisfied that the whole was cheaper
to me, and would prove better than if I had laid it with Cast-Lead of the size
the Plumber proposed, and I continue of the same mind still; all which I
thought fit to say upon this occasion, and leave it to you to make use thereof
as you please, and am

26 Aug. 1690. SIR, Your Humble Servant, Hugh Chamberlain.

Mr. Hoy's Letter about Mr. Fox's Lead-Covering.
Mr. Hale,
ACcording to your desire I waited upon my Friend Mr. Fox, and acquainted him
that the Plumbers in a Memorial by them presented to the Navy-Board, had
alleged that several Houses (amongst which his House in Surry-street was
mentioned to be one) formerly covered with Mill'd-Lead, had been since stripped
and covered with Cast-Lead; and desiring to know the truth of it, he did assure
me that their Allegation was absolutely false* for that the Mill'd-Lead
formerly laid on by you, still remains there not stirred, which he would have
shown me, but was then a little indisposed, being but newly returned from
Tunbridge; and the access to it being by an Engine, which would have required
his Company, I was unwilling to trouble him, but will wait upon him again
whenever you desire:

Sept. 1. 1690. SIR, Your Servant, Clement Hoy.

Mr. Letchmere's Letter.
Mr. Hale,
YOu showed me a Paper which the Plumbers gave in to the Navy-Board, wherein
they much complain of the defects of the Mill'd-Lead (boasting of the
excellency and durableness of their Cast-Lead) and say, that where the
Mill'd-Lead has lain a few Years, it has so cracked, flaw'd, and rose in
ridges, that after the Owners have been at great Charge in the daily patching
and mending of it, they have at last been forced to take it up, and lay
Cast-Lead in its room: But I doubt these Plumbers mistake the one for the
other, for I know very well their Cast-Lead had all these ill qualities they
complain of; for upon a House of mine, where Mr. Clark now lives, next Door to
the Bell in Fryday-street, which was covered with Cast-Lead at the first
Building after the Fire: I do averr that after such rising and cockling, and
its being patched almost all over, about eight Years since the Tenant was
forced to strip it, and new lay it; and I well remember I allowed 10 l. toward
the charge, and I fear in a few Years it will be in as bad a Condition as ever,
for it is already patched in diverse places; and had I had the good Fortune to
have known time enough of your Mill'd-Lead, I am very well satisfied from my
own Observation of such Places where I have since known it laid, and the reason
of the thing it self, and the charge thereof (a Man paying for no superfluous
Lead, as in the other you do) that I might have saved Money, and have had a far
better and more durable Covering on my House than now I have.

SIR, I am so well satisfied of the excellency of your Mill'd-Lead, and of the
greatness of its worth for all uses beyond Cast (which is notwithstanding all
the Care that can be used in the Casting of it full of great unevenness and
other defects) that I could say much more than I have on this Subject, but I
always thought it a very impertinent thing to spend too much time in arguing
against Transubstantiation, it being maintained by the impudence of a Party
that resolve they will not be convinced, and I take the only reason why the
Plumbers oppose your Mill'd-Lead to be this, because their Interest is
concerned, and I think they are as much in the right in so doing as those
Persons are in the wrong, that make use of their Cast-Lead when the other may
be had.

27 Aug. 1690. SIR, Your Humble Servant, Tho. Lechmere.

Mr. Lightfoot, the Lady Portland's Steward's Certificate.
WHereas Mr. Hale did this day show me a Paper from the Company of Plumbers,
directed to the Honorable Commissioners of the Navy, wheriin they had
preferred Cast-lead far before Mill'd-Lead, and withal had there inserted
several Persons of Quality and others, among whom was my Lady, the Countess of
Portland's Name, that her House had formerly been covered with Mill'd-Lead, and
since with Cast-Lead: Now these are to Certify, that my Lady, the Countess of
Portland's House neither was nor is covered with Mill'd-Lead, but upon altering
the form of the Building, and making some additions thereto about Eleven Years
since, she covered the back part with Cast-Lead, which still remains, but not
without yearly repairing, of late occasioned by cockling and rising of the Lead
into a ridge, which afterward cracks, and so are obliged to patch it with
Soldar, as in several Places we have since 'twas laid on.

As Witness my Hand this 30th. day of August. 1690. Robert Lightfoot.

Mr. Martin's Letter.
YOu told me that some Plumber had lately informed the Navy-Board that the
Mill'd-Lead Covering upon a House of mine in Rood-lane was very much cockled
and cracked, and that they had taken off some part of it, and laid Cast-Lead in
its room; of the truth of which, you desiring a line or two from me in Writing:
I do assure you it is no such thing, for the same Mill'd-Lead sheets, near 30
Foot long, that was first laid on about eleven Years ago, lies very well
still, without any ground or cause for such Complaint; and I am so well
satisfied with it, that if I had the like, or any other Occasion for
Sheet-Lead, I should prefer the use of your Mill'd-Lead much before that which
is only Cast.

Josh. Martin.
Sept. 15. 1690.

As to the Plumbers Skill and Conscience they pretend about their Solder,
notwithstanding their hard Words and hard Metal they usually talk of therein
to make it a Mystery; all that are any wise conversant in Metals know, that
their Solder is only a Composition of Lead and Tyn in such proportions that the
same never stands them in above fourpence-half-penny a Pound, and therefore
well may be afforded at their highest Essay for six pence, so that the
Mill'd-Lead Company are under no Temptation of making it courser than they;
which however would be no damage to the Customer, but an injury to themselves
that work it, a due proportion of Tin being only necessary to make their Solder
work and run the better before their Iron.

The Mill'd-Lead Company after their new Proposal to the Navy-Board, presented
also the Memorial following, to show the preference of their Mill'd-Lead for
Scuppers, etc.

To the Right Honorable, The Principal Officers and Commissioners Of their
MAJESTY'S NAVY.
MEMORIAL, Humbly offered by the Mill'd-Lead Company, proving that their
Mill'd-Lead Scuppers are better than Cast-Lead, and at least 25 per Cent.
cheaper.
THis Company having in January, 1678. made a Proposal to this Board to make
their Scuppers of Mill'd-Lead, one Mr. Parsons a Plumber they then usually
employed, opposed it; pretending, that although their Lead was not exactly equal,
yet the inequality was so inconsiderable, that Mill'd-Lead Scuppers being then
4 ^* in a hundred more than theirs, they would be much dearer to the King;
whereupon the Board was pleased to appoint a time for hearing both sides; when
the Plumber to make his Pretenses good, undertook his Scuppers should not be
above half a pound in ten heavier than the size the Board should Order; they
thereupon, 7 Ian. 1678. ordered each to make 36 Scuppers of three several sizes
and thicknesses, viz. 8 l. 10 l. and 12 l. to the Foot square; both sides soon
after sent in their Scuppers to Deptford, where being received into the Stores
and weighed, the Mill'd-Lead Scuppers appeared to be conformable to the Order,
and to weigh but 8 c. 1 q. 26 l. whereas the Cast-Lead Scuppers weighed 12 c. 3
q. 10 l. above one third more; which appearing so gross a difference from what
the Plumber undertook, and he pretending Excuses and Servants carelessness:

The Board indulged him another Trial upon 72 Scuppers, when he took to his
Assistance one Mr. Whitehall, another Plumber that usually also made Scuppers
for the Navy, and it cannot be imagined but that these Plumbers now used all
their Skill and Care, which notwithstanding all, though in many places they
appeared to be thinner than the Milled-Lead of the sizes given, the weight of
the whole 72 came to 25 c. 1 q. 12 l. whereof Parsons made 31, weighing 9 c. 3
q. 0 l. and Whitehall 41, weighing 15 c. 2 q. 12 l. whereas the 72 Mill'd-Lead
Scuppers weighed but 16 c. 3 q. 10 l. about the same proportion the former
were, which at the then Prizes of 22 s. for the Cast, and 26 s. per hund. for
the Mill'd-Lead Scuppers, was 27 per Cent. loss to the King; after which the
Company made many more; however Demands have been discontinued since. This
being a matter of Fact, the truth of which may appear from the Storekeepers
Books at Deptford, this Company hopes when you shall thus be put in mind of the
great and certain loss their Majesty's have and must sustain in this
particular, demonstrated by Trials that have been so fairly and fully made,
your Honors will make no great difficulty of restoring this part of their Work
at least to their Service.

May 19. 1690. All which they humbly lay before this Honorable Board, for
their Consideration upon the New Contract proposed.



After all (and upon the Surveyors producing to the Board a piece of Lead
indifferently cut out of a Cast-Sheet of 8 l. in the Foot square, one with
another, in Deptford-Yard, which they owned to be not above 6 in some places)
they thought fit in September. 1690. to Contract with the Company to supply their
Majesty's Yards with their Milled Sheet-Lead, of all sizes, of thickness and
thinness, at Rates agreed; but as to the Scuppers, they were pleased to suspend
any Contract for them, 'till they should upon a further Trial (shortly to be
made) be satisfied that they also were better for their Majesty's Service than
Scuppers made of Cast-Lead, saying they had had no account of the Success of
the former Trials.

A TREATISE OF Naval Philosophy.

In Three Parts. I. A Phisico-Mathematical Discourse of Ships and Sailing. II.
Of Naval Policy. III. Of Naval Economy or Husbandry.


The First Part,
Contains the several Sorts and Closes of Experiments under-mentioned, viz.

1. THE specifical weight of Water, and Timber, and Irons, as also the several
Materials whereof Shipping is composed.

2. The absolute and comparative strength of Wood, Metals, and Ropes, in their
several dimensions, Figures and Quantities, and how much the strength of the
same is diminished by Notches, Holes, and other Excavations, or increased by
the Texture and grain of the said materials.

3. The motions, strength, and matter of the Wind.

4. The motion, strength, course, and figure of Waters, upon the surface
thereof in Rivers, Tide-ways, Currants, and Edies; as also in the Ocean,
whether the same be spontaneous, or by agitation of the Wind.

5. Of the Tractive and Pulsive forces upon swimming Bodies, in respect of
strength, time, proportional increase of swiftness, lines of Direction,
Superficies of Ressistance, Magnitude of the movent bodies, and impression of
force in various Angles of Incidence and Reflection.

6. Several Hydrostatical Experiments relating to Pumps, and Leakage, according
to several parts of the Ship, and depth under water, wherein the same may
happen.

7. Experiment of spinning, twisting and wearing, with reference to
Sail-Cloath, Cables, and all other sorts of Cordage.

8. Experiments upon Pitch, Tarr, Rosin, Oil, Brimstone, Tallow, Ocum-Leather,
etc. relating to the Sheathing, Caulking, and preserving of Vessels, and their
appurtenances from the injuries of water, weather, worms and weeds, and of
their weight, Extention, Duration, etc.

9. Of the choice seasoning and preparing of Timber and Plank, Knees, and
Trenails, as also of Iron, Hemp, and other Materials used in Shipping.

10. Of the particular power of Oars, Wheels, Poles, draught of men, and
Horses, with reference to their Actions upon Vessels, and of reducing them all
to one and the same Calculation and Principal.

11. Of founding and measuring the depth of water, and of discovering the
Nature of Ground as to the hold-fast of Anchors, wear and tear of
Ground-Tackle, with what else belongs to the artificial moving and riding of
Ships upon all occasions.

12. Magnetical, Hoxometrical, and Optical Instruments and Experiments.

13. Nautical Geography and Astronomy.

14. Nautical Staticks, and Mechanics, relating to Pullies and Crows,
Handspecks, Screws, Hances, Kildwedges, Nippets, Capsterns, Windlesses, Slings,
etc. in order to the Landing, Masting, Leading, Careening, and weighing up of a
Ship.

15. Of Gunpowder, the several sorts of Metals for Guns and Shot; their
several figures and proportions, in order to the several Effects of
Penetration, battering and direct shooting.

16. Of several Observations upon loading of a Ship with Lead, Wood, Cotton,
Liquor in Cask, Corn, Salt, Frail and Timber: And the Accidents which usually
fall out in each of the said sorts of loading, with reference to the safety and
well sailing of a Vessel.

The said first part containing also the Definition and division of a Ship in
its several parts, together with a Selection and Description of the principal
things and notions which are to be considered in framing and fitting of a Ship
for the several uses unto which the same is designed, in manner following.

1. A Ship is understood to be all from the Keel to the Vane, and from the
extremity of the Boulsprit to the Lanthorn.

2. The said Ship is divided into Hull, Sails, and her Burden.

3. The Hull is considered but as one piece of Timber, and carved out of one
Logg, and is divided into what is under the upper Deck, out of which all waters
is to be excluded. And what is above the same, as Cabins, Round-house, Cuddie,
Fore-castle, Coaches, etc. which may be rather esteemed as part of the burden
of a Ship, than Essential part of the same.

4. The Hull under the said upper Deck is divided into the Cavity or Hold,
whether the same shall be subdivided by other Decks and Bulkheads or not, as
also into the Shell of the said Cavity: and thereby into the Additaments
affixed to the outside of the said Shell. Such are the false Stemm, Gripe,
Keel, Stern-post, and Dead-rising up the Tuck, excluding the Rudder.

5. Upon the Shell of the Ship, or rather of the said Cavity, there are to be
considered the several Lines under-mentioned, to be drawn parrallel to the
Keel, (viz.)

1. The line unto which the Hull of the Ship sinks upon her launching.

2. The line unto which the whole Ship sinks when she is rigged, balasted, and
fitted for the best advantage of sailing, and manned with a sufficient
Complement for that purpose, victualled with three months Victuals, and
furnished with Defensive Arms.

3. The line unto which she sinks laden as a Merchant Man.

4. The line unto which she stoops upon a Wind of either side.

5. The line of Horizontal-section where the Gun Deck, and all other Decks and
Orlop ought to be placed, and the lines to which the Ports between each Deck
ought to be made.

In the next place is to be considered the three perpendicular length-way
sections following, viz.

1. The section of splitting the whole Ship, Cabin, and all other
superstructures included between the Plank-sheering, and the Keels, the upper
line of which section is called the Sheer of the Ship.

2. Upon the general and most comprehensive section I propound, that all the
Horizontal lines before mentioned may be marked together with the bottom line
of the Interval Cavity or Hold before mentioned.

Lastly, let there be a transverse section of the Hull at the main bend, within
which let two other parallel sections be described arising from each extremity
of the Keel.

Next to the several Lines and Sections before mentioned, it will be necessary
to take Notice of the Center of Gravity and Magnitude, as well of the whole
Ship comprehended between the Keel and the Vane, as of the several parts
thereof, viz. The Centers of Gravity and Magnitude of that part which is under
the water; as also of that which is above the water in the Air and Wind.

2. The same also to be observed when the Ship swims upon an uneven and unlevel
Keel drooping forwards, or sending aft.

3. Consideration is to be had of that line which by a Spindle passing and
fixed into the Ground, the Ship lying cross a Current when no Wind at all is
stirring, would be in Equilibrio; also the like line passing through the
supernatant part of the Ship would also be in Equilibrio, its broad side lying
to the Wind in dead water.

In the next place there ought to be considered the proportion between the way
of the Ship cut off at its greatest transverse section, and the way of the same
shaped from the same section forward in the usual manner, or to his best
advantage.

2. The proportion between the resistance, between the perpendicular length-way
section, and outside of the Hull shaped as is usual.

3. Between the Horizontal Section at the water line, and the bottom of a Ship
in its usual shape.

CHAP. II.
BEing thus furnished with the sixteen sorts of Experiments above mentioned,
and with the clear and definite understanding of the several parts of the Ship,
and of all the several Sections, Lines, Centers, and Proportions of resistance
above mentioned: We then proceed upon the third Branch of the first General
Part as follows. ( viz.) Suppose we have before us a piece of Timber, of
equal substance, of an indefinite length, and square at both ends, we are now
to consider by what process to carve out of the same the Hull of a Ship, which
work will contain the several Considerations following.

(1.) Of what length to cut the said Timber, which at first we will suppose to
be the length of four sides of the square, intending hereafter to debate
whether the same ought at all to be longer or shorter, and in what Cases.

(2.) Suppose the said Square be divided into twelve parts, and that seven of
them shall be under water when the Ship is laden.

(3.) Dividing the length line into twelve parts, and at three of them let the
two sides converge into an Angle, whose sides let be portions of Circles unto
which the remaining strait part may be a contingent line, which Angle is the
first means of facilitating the Ships way through the Water.

(4.) At four parts let the bottom superficies converge into an Angle, with the
Horizontal Section above mentioned, viz. at the Ships greatest draught of water.

(5.) At the said Section let the sides downwards converge into an Angle,
consisting also of Circular Lines. This last Angle is made for the Ships ease
of falling into the Sea, as the two first were for its easier passing through
it.

In the next place we must provide for the coming of water to the Rudder, which
is to be performed by two other Angulations, viz. from fifteen parts aft, let
the sides of the Ship converge into an Angle from the Horizontal saction
downwards, where the Ship draws least water at her Launching, which will be
the height of the Tuck, let the bottom superficies be bent in a Circular line.
And thus we have in gross set down the five Incurvations of the bottom and
sides of our Logg, and how the butt-ends thereof have been as it were abolished
forward on for the easy passage of the Vessel through the water, and aft for
the quick and effectual pulse of the water upon the Rudder.

In the next place we come to the like shaping of the remaining part of the
Logg, which we intend shall swim above the water, which is performed as
follows.

Let it be supposed that the Ship upon a Wind, is to stoop upon a certain
Angle, let the supernatant sides of a Ship so much tumble (as they call it) as
that the said sides may remain perpendicular when the Ship stoops, which being
done quite round the upper surface, the remainder will be the shape and section
of the upper Deck.

Memorandum, That all the forementioned Incurvations are to be trimmed and
repaired by reconciled lines.

In the next place we come to ^ollowing or excavating of our Logg, which
suppose (beginning at the middle) we do (leaving equal thickness) every where
until the Logg become so light that it swims at the line representing the
launching line, and consequently we have now acquired the model of a Ship as it
appears in her launching, except the Cabbins and what is usually
superstructed upon the upper Deck.

In the next place we are to consider how far ballast and weight of rigging,
etc. will sink the said Ship: And secondly, how much deep the weight that must
be added to fit out a Man of War will depress her, for till then we cannot
rationally determine the place of the Gun-deck, wherefore the next enquiry must
be, what extent of Sail our Vessel must carry, and consequently the length of
the Masts and Yards, and then of their thickness and weight; and from thence
the size of the rigging, and from thence the Wind-loft, and from thence the
Cables and Anohors, and from thence all the Capsterns and Windless Boats,
Bitts, Catheads and Davits.

In the next place we are to consider the quality, quantity and weight of our
ballast, so as the Ship may stoop but according to our intention, and according
to the strength of our Masts and Shrowds.

Having thus found out our second Water-line, which I call the sailing-line, as
the first was called the launching-line: Now we come to the third which is the
line of War. And this is to be discovered by computing the weight first of the
Ordnance, which suppose to be in a Man of War, one 6 th. part of what is
between the Sailing-line, and the line of Burden, or fourth Line. Secondly,
the weight of Men with three months Victuals; in order thereunto we must
determine the number of Men for sailing from the Spread of Canvas, and the
number of Men for fighting from the Amplitude of the Deck, and weight of the
Ordnance.

Having found out the said Line, and considered the distance of Trunnions of
the Guns from the Gun-deck, and the distance of the Muzzels of the Guns
levelled from the surface of the water, we come at length to determine the
place of the Gun-deck, and consequently of the other Deck.

Memorandum, That the superstructions upon the upper Deck are not only for the
Accommodation of Men, but also fortifications of the Ship; forasmuch as the
Guns in the Fore-castle and steerage clear the Deck, as those of the Round
house do the Quarter deck.

Having found the dimensions of the Masts, we next come to the place of them,
viz. by what points of the Gun-deck they must pass, and here we must consider
the reasons of their raking ast, as also of the steeving of the Boulsprit, and
withal the reasons of placing the Topmast before or behind the Mainmast, and
of dividing each Mast into three parts, and the proportion of the round Tops,
main Stays, the place and fitting of the Shroud so as to make way for the
gibbing of the Yards, and setting of the Shrowds loose or tort as the Condition
of Sailing of the Vessel requires.

CHAP. III.
1. THe reason of Ships going against the Wind, and in what proportion she
makes way between her being right before the wind, and lying within five points
of the wind.

2. The whole Doctrine of Steering and Rudders.

3. The whole doctrine of Mooring and Anchors.

4. Of the Lee-boards, their use, dimension and place.

5. What Sails, Masts, Yards, and Rigging is fittest for every size and sorts
of Vessels, according to the Seas and service whereunto it is to be applied.

6. Of the Shape, Cutting, Sowing, and Setting in of Sails into the Headropes
and Boltropes; of the several substance and thickness of Sails, and of the
Effect and Welling them, Easing of Shrowds, Looseness of Masts, and upper Masts.

7. Of the Effects of true Trim, shutting up the Ports, general Quietness,
firing of Stern-pieces, and the best course upon a Chase.

8. How Topsails, Stooping, Weather, or Leeward Helm; as also how the Keel,
Gripe, and Mizen Sail, may be fitted to promote or hinder the Sailing upon
occasion.

9. What makes a Ship Roll and laboursome in the Sea; what makes her wear and
stay well; and what makes her ride hard or easy at an Anchor: what makes her
pitch and scend too much: what makes her fall easy or hard into the Sea; what
makes her Leeward or keep a good Wind.

10. Of the just proportion of Sails with more or less, that which will make
the Ship go worse; of Equations between the spread of Sails, and the Velocity
of the Wind: Of the utmost Velocity of a Ship with Wind and Tide: Of the
proportion of the counter-resistance of winds or tides; why some Ships sail
better with much, and some with less proportionably.

11. How to compute the Impediment which Foulness and Weeds do make in a Ships
way, and in what proportion Smoothness, Soap and Tallow does quicken it.

12. How a Ship is to be fitted with Decks, to beat it up to windward in foul
weather, why the Fore-sail must be less than the Main-sail.

CHAP. IV.
WE have hitherto supposed the Ship to be exactly shaped inside and outside of
one simple Logg of Wood, which being impossible to do otherwise in Speculation,
it is necessary to come at length to the practical part of Ship-Carpentry,
which is the Art of imitating the moddel aforementioned, and of composing a
Ship, not out of one but several thousand pieces of Wood and Iron: Wherefore
this Chapter shall comprehend as follows.

1. The History of the Practice of the best Shipwrights in England, Holland,
and Portugal, in their building Ships as aforesaid.

2. Supposing that a Ship commonly reckoned 150 Tun, be a fit size to sail in
round the World: And that the just strength of every part of the same were
certainly known and determined, it is desired to know of what size and scantling
each correspondent Timber must be of, to make a greater or lesser Vessel of
equal strength, and to compute the difference of strength between greater and
smaller Vessels of the common Built.

3. How to make practical Equations between the strength of Timber and Irons,
and between Trenailes and Bolts, etc.

4. Out of what Data arises the knowledge of the strength of Knees, Bolts and
Nails.

5. That vast Ships of 1500 Tuns, do require a different way of Carpentry of
Masts and Yards than what is used, and particularly in no Case a Mast above 30
inches through and above the present length, is requisite.

CHAP. V.
1. WHat Alterations in Shipping, the use of the Compass and Guns have
produced, and consequently how to conjecture what was the Shipping of the
Ancients in these Countries.

2. How the difference of the Materials for Building, the difference of Trades
and Commodities, and the differences of defensive and offensive Warfare, does
occasion differences of Shipping in the several parts of the present World.

3. The History of the Improvement of Shipping, sailing upon a Wind, and
Advance of the Shipping Trade for the last Twenty years, by the Portugals,
Genoveses, English, Netherlands, and the inhabitants of Baltic.

4. A Description of several Attempts which have been made the^e last twenty
years for the improvement of Shipping, with the respective success and Sailers
of each.

The SECOND PART, Being of NAVAL POLICY.
CHAP. I.
THat the King of England, being not only by Right and Custom Sovereign of the
Narrow Seas, but having also the best Means and most Concernment to be more
considerable at Sea, than any other Prince or State; it is therefore his
Interest to know and discover as follows.

1. How many Tunn of Shipping there be in the whole Comercial World, from 15 to
1500 Tunns, as are able to cross the Seas, and how many Ships there be of each
Century of times, with the said 15 Centuries.

2. How many Ordnance belong to them, and of what weight.

3. How many Seamen there are in all, and particularly of such as have served
three years at Sea.

4. To have Lists of all the Ships and Seamen belonging to any Ports or places
within his own Dominions; and a ready Method to know where they are at all
times, at home, or at Sea.

5. What Harbors and Ports there are in the whole Commercial World; unto which
Shipping does belong, and what Ships they are able to receive, what are the
special advantages and Inconveniences of each.

6. What is the Wages and Rate of Victuals for Seamen in each state.

7. To have intelligence of all Privateers, Pickeroons, and Pirates which are
abroad at all times, and in a forwardness to go forth.

From hence only his Majesty can know how to proportion his Navy, (that is to
say) his Navy cannot or need not consist of more Tunns of Shipping than are
Seamen of his Subjects, and one quarter more; I say, greater it cannot well be,
and it need not be much bigger than of so many Tunns of Shipping; than any two
of his Neighbor States have Man to Man with preservation of their Trade: And
the intelligence last mentioned determins the number and sorts of Ships which
are to be always in readiness. Moreover, the Kings Navy must be of Ships above
600 Tunns, but need not have half so many lesser as will suffice in time of
Exigence, for such may be hired from Merchants.

CHAP. II.
1. OF the Advantages situate upon the Sea and Navigable water.

2. Of the benefit of a Shipping Trade in General.

3. Of the Fishing Trade, and how far the Subjects of the King of England are
able to manage it, and what have hitherto been the Impediments thereof.

4. Whether it were for the benefit of the Commonwealth, that Coals were found
near London: And that good Tobacco and Sugars would grow in England, for as
much as a parcel of proper fitting ground of twelve mile square, would bear as
much of these Commodities as do now come from America.

5. Of what benefit to the World is the Discovery of new Countries, new
Passages, new Mines of Gold, of Silver, and of the Longitude it self.

6. What increase of Trade does really signify and import.

7. The effect of depending upon foreign Countries for Hemps, Tarr, Masts,
Rozin, and Sail-Cloath.

8. Of the whole Expense of a Fleet, how much of that from foreign Countries,
and how much is the Domestics in value.

9. The same English men who now work upon exported Commodities, as woollen
Manufactures, Lead, Tinn, etc. did go to Sea in Men of War. Quer. Whether they
would not take as much Commodities by way of Prize, as they now receive in
Exchange for their said Exportations.

10. Of the Decay of Timber in England, Scotland, and Ireland, with the Causes
and Consequences, and Remedies thereof.

CHAP. III.
1. WHether Landmen and not Seamen bred, be fitter to Command at Sea.

2. Of all the Men in a Fleet of War, how many ought to be perfect Seamen, how
many of five lower degrees, and how many may be Landmen.

3. How, in what time Land Soldiers, and other Tradesmen of labor may be made
Auxiliary Seamen, and how many such may be requisite in Cases ordinary and
extraordinary, and how the said Men may be encouraged and employed at Land to
the public benefit.

4. Of allowing encouragement to Impotent Seamen, with the number of them, and
how to assist such Seamen as are low of employment.

Of NAVAL ECONOMY or HUSBANDRY. The Third PART.
HAving determined the number of the Tuns of Shipping of which the whole Navy
is to consist, and how many Ships in number they ought to be; as also how many
of each size and rate, and in what and how ma^^ Harbou^ they are to be kept, so
as to be ready to put to Sea upon any Occasion: it remains to set forth how the
same may be done wtth the least Charge, and with the least Expense of foreign
Commodities, to which purpose the following particulars are to be considered.

1. Forasmuch as a Ship does commonly Reign about thirty years, it follows,
that the 30 th. part of Tunns (...) Shipping, of which the whole Navy consists,
must be (...) built every year, the which may probably cost 15 l. (...) Ann.
with Gunners, Boatswains, and Carpenters stores.

2. The Charge of the English Navy in ordinary has by experience amounted to 20
s. per Tunn, per Annum.

3. For charge of maintaining a Man of War at Sea, completely fitted,
victualled, and manned, with the expense, wear, and tear of all manner of
stores, does amount to 24 l. per Ann.

4. There are Estimates by which Money must be provided for the use of the
Navy, but by good husbandry the Charge may be defrayed at a more easy Rate;
wherefore we shall in the next place describe Historically the present way of
managing his Majesty's Navy in England, and afterward make some animadversions
upon each of the three great branches of that Expense, which is Wages,
Victuals, and Stores, subdividing each of them again into several other
branches as the Nature of the thing and Custom requires.

FINIS.

