RESURGAM


GOLDEN REMAINS of the ever Memorable Mr. John Hales of Eton College etc.

LONDON Printed for Tim: Garthwait at the Little North door of St. Paul's. 1659

Reason.
Revelation.
CONTROVERSERS of the Times Like Spirits in the Mineralls, with all their labor
nothing is don.


My very Good Lord,
MY business is now effected by your L. care to my contentment, since the first
day of my coming to Dort, they have made me an allowance equal with our English
Divines, which is 20 Florens a day; a less allowance might very well have
served me, if I had not been joined with them, but being joined, it was not fit
that for matter of maintenance I should be in their debts: I am exceedingly
beholden to Mr. Musius his kindness, not only upon this, but upon all
occasions: It does proceed I suppose from your L. to whom as I must ever stand
bound for the return of perpetual thanks and service, so I would be a suitor to
your L. that your L. would be pleased to give Mr. Musius thanks for his
kindness: For our Synod business as we went too slow before, so now they would
have us go too fast, they would have us to dispatch one article a week; which
is too little time for so weighty questions. But I hope they shall be done to
some purpose: with the remembrance of my faithfullest duty and service to your
L. and your worthy Lady, and my best wishes for both your health and happiness,
I take my leave and rest.

Dordretch this 2d. of February Stylo Novo. Your L. in all true respects of
service, Walter Balcanqual.

My very Good Lord,
SInce Mr. Hales his going, here has been nothing done in the Synod of any
note, on the seventh of February now still was held the 76^^ Session; in which
nothing was done, but that they which before had not spoken in the second
article did speak what they thought fit, there was nothing of note spoken, save
that one of the Transisulani, took it evil that we took the Remonstrants
meaning in their opinions, where they spoke best and soundest; but he would
have their meaning to be gathered out of all places in their Books, where they
speak most absurdly, which we thought was very far besides the rule of charity:
so in that Session the Synodical diquisition for the second article was ended.
The President told us moreover, that the Delegats had sent to the Remonstrants,
and had demanded of them if they had any thing in writ which might serve for
the explication of their opinion concerning the five articles; and that they
had given to them, their confirmation of their opinion concerning the first
article, as likeways a confutation of that which they held for the Heterodox
opinion, and a beginning of their explication of the second article: now he
showed us the Book, of which is good faith I was ashamed to think that men of
judgment could imagine that the Synod could have time to peruse it; for it is
a little book of Martyrs, it does exceed two hundredth folia in folio; moreover
he told us that the Delegats had commanded them within 8. days to bring in all
they would or could say as necessary for the understanding of their mind
concerning the whole five articles. On the 8. of February Stylo Novo, was held
the 77^^ Session, i^^ which was nothing done but that the President did dictate
to us, these drawn out of the Remonstrants writings concerning the 3. and 4.
articles, which I hold not expedient to send to your L. but if I shall
understand that your L. do desire them, I can easily send them: It was
appointed we should this morning send our Amanuenses to write out so much of
the Remonstrants big Book as did concern the second article, which we did, and
that again Monday we should consult what we should have done with the great
volumn it self; this day the President sent to our particular College, some
particular strange points which he had drawn out of their late explication of
the second article, and in very pathetical terms did by his letter entreat us
to have a care of condemning them in our judgment of the same article.
Concerning this second article I beseech your L. give me leave to express my
grief, as there is difference touching it in the Synod, so there is much
difference about it in our own College: will your L. be pleased to give me
leave to say something of it; it is fit your L. should take notice of it, but
no ways as from me; the question amongst us is whether the words of the
Scripture, which are likewise the words of our confession. Christus oblatus est
aut mortuus pro toto humano genere seu pro peccatis totius mundi) be to be
understood of all particular men, or only of the elect who consist of all sorts
of men; Dr. Davenant and Dr. Ward are of Martinius of Breme his mind, that it
is to be understood of all particular men: the other three take the other
exposition, which is of the writers of the reformed Churches, and namely of my
late Lord of Sarisbury, both sides think they are right, and therefore cannot
yield one untoanother with a safe conscience: It is my Lord a matter of great
consequence for us to set down the exposition of one article of our Church
confession: will your L. therefore be pleased to think of this proposition:
since our judgment of none of the five articles is to be known, till we have
done with them all; what if we should desire the President to take no notice,
but to let us go on to the rest of the articles, and in mean time we should
send into England the true state of our controversy, and have advice there
from some of the chief of the Church. What exposition they would have to be
given of that article of their confession, which we may safely follow, for it
is no matter of salvation in which we differ, before we have done with the rest
of the articles we may easily have one answer from England; if your L. like
this motion or any other, your L. should do well by your letters to us to
desire it, if not; I beseech your L. pardon my error which proceeds only from
my fear of distraction among our selves, and from my obedience to his Majesty's
charge, who commanded me in all such cases to have recourse to your L. for
counsel: so with my best prayers to God for your L. health and happiness, with
the remembrance of my best service to your L. and your worthy Lady, I take my
leave and rest.

Dordretch this 9. of February Stylo Nouo. Your L. in all true respect and
service, Walter Balcanqual.

My very Good Lord,
THough your L. Letters caused some anger here with the informer, who was
unknown to them, yet believe it, your L. has done a work worthy of your
Honor, and such a one as if it had been left undone, would when it could not
have been helped, have made us all heartily wish that it had been done: your L.
Letters have taken the true effect which your L. in your advice intended, we
all acknowledge your L. counsel to be not only good but necessary, and yet we
are displeased your L. should be informed of the variance; without which we
must have been deprived of this your L. wholesome and necessary direction: since
my last Letters to your L. it is true that we agreed upon some propositions,
which are without question true, but they were such as did no ways decide the
question controverted in the Synod; we retained the words of Scripture and our
own confessions, but all the difference is in the interpretation of these
words. When the Canons of the second article come to be made, it will be
determined whether Christ did really persolvere pretium redemptionis pro
omnibus ac singulis hominibus, an pro solis electis, in the Synod then should
we have differed in voices: because I know your L. will write to my L. Grace, I
beseech your L. require a speedy answer, in our Letters to my L. Grace, we have
but a little noted the difference which is like to be; I have here in O Blatio
Christi facta in cruce perfecta est redemptio, propitiatio et satisfactio pro
omnibus peccatis t^^tius mundi tam originalibus quam actualibus. Contravertitur
an per totum mundum intelligatur mundus electorum an mundus omnium
particularium hominum: ubi de his tribus ambigitur.

Primo. An retinenda sit illa distinctio quae receptissima est apud Reformates
Doctores, quemque Episcopu^^ Sarisburiensis astruit page 35. et sequentibus:
mortuus est pro omnibus secundum sufficientiam seu magnitudinem pretii, non
secundum proprietatem redemptionis, quidam put ant non retinendum esse quia
putant sic sufficienter dici posse mortuum pro Diabolis.

Secundo. Contravertitur de hac propositione. Christus obtulit se pro omnibus,
seu persolvit pretium redemptionis pro omnibus: quidam putant sensum esse,
persolvit pretium quod sufficit pro omnibus non autem actu solvit pretium illud
nisi pro redimendis electis, alii putant hanc expositionem incommodam, quia
putant commentarium hunc verba ipsa destruere. Ea etenim putant sequi Christum
quidem habuisse pretium in numera^^o, quod persolutum suffecisset omnibus
redimendis; verum Christum non persolvisse actu pretiumillud, aut factum esse
propitiationem pro peccatis totius mundi.

Tertio. Contravertitur de sensu horum verborum, totius mundi, quidam putant
intelligi de singulis hominibus, aliis de solis electis, (hic est sanguis novi
testamenti qui funditur pro mult is in remissionem peccatorum) exponuntque haec
vocabula (totius mundi) ficut Augustinus exponit, epist. 48. Totus mundus est
in maligno positus propter zizania quae sunt per totum mundum, et Christus
propitiator est peccatorum totius mundi propter testicum quod est per totum
mundum.

Quaeritur ergo an per totum mundum debeamus intelligere singulos homines, an
solos elect^^s; an vero nulla sit danda explicatio; sed retinenda sint verba
confessionis absque ullo commentario.


this paper sent to your L. the true state of the difference, which will be
concerning this proposition. Christus obtulit se pro peccatis totius mundi, I
dare engage my credit with your L. that it is truly set down, and more fully
then in our Letters to my L. Grace; your L. may take so much of it as you shall
think fit, and make his Grace acquainted with it; and write that this is like
to be the difference not in (as your L. is informed) our College, but in the
Synod about the second article, and therefore desire his Grace to send us some
good counsel for our carriage in it; for certainly most voices in the Synod
will follow the received exposition of the reformed Doctors, confirmed much by
my late L. of Sarisbury his G. brother, who was thought to understand the
meaning of our confession as well as any man. I doubt not but that your L. will
crown your own work with following of it; when your L. shall find the fruit of
peace in the Synod among us procured by your L. your L. will find great matter
of joy, arising from the conscience of this Christian counsel; our controversy
among our selves, I must needs say, was with much love and amity, no man
desiring any thing to be put in our articles, but that we should all approve
of; but so the question had never been decided: I beseech your L. pardon this
my liberty to your L. it is the love of peace, and my respect to your L.
Honor does procure it.

Since my last to your L. there has been three Sessions^^ first the 78.
Session held on the 2. February Novo Stylo, in which Dr. Beckins one of the
Helvetian Devines at the President his entreaty did publicly discuss the 7.
arguments of the Remonstrants in Collat. Hag. whereby they prove Gratiam
regenerationis esse resistibilem. That being done al auditors were removed, and
it was inquired what order the Synod thought fittest to be taken with the
Remonstrants huge volume, the transcription whereof was impossible, the
President told us he had cast a general glance over it all, and did find that
a few of the first leaves did contain a confirmation of their opinion of the
first article, but all the rest did contain nothing but a confutation of the
contra R. opinion, and an exagitation of their persons: we desired some part of
it to be read; I must needs say the Remonstrants had no favor, for I will
assure your L. that the President picked out the worst part of it; there were
some five leaves read, which contained nothing but a bitter Satyr against
Calvin, Beza, Pareus, Piscator, Whittaker, Perkins, Bogorman, Festus, and
twenty more, but in truth though unhappily, yet finely penned, me thought it
was Episcopius his tongue; about the taking notice of this book the suffrages
of the Synod did vary much; yet most voices were, that it should be committed
to some Deputed by the Synod, who should diligently peruse it, and relate unto
the Synod, if they found any new thing in it, which was not contained in their
former writings, but yet so that any member of the Synod that would, might be
present with the perusers. The Delegats gave this mediatory sentence, because
they had observed that both the parts of it were desired by many: they desired
their might be a forenoon Session or two kept for the nonce, in which that
small part of the book which contained the confirmation of their opinion might
be read, and every man take with his pen, what he should think fit, the rest to
be put over to perusers, who should make relation to the Synod of any thing
they found new or fit: and therefore the Assessors; and D. Damannus the Scribe
were entreated to run over the book, and make choice of what things they
thought fit to be read in the Synod, which when they have done we shall hear
more of it.

The president tells us that the campenses Remonstrants, who had been lately
peremptorily cited to compeire before the Synod were not come, but that they
had sent three others in their place to plead their cause: and that he had
likewise received a supplication to the Synod from the Campenses
contra-Remonst. The Synod referred the hearing of the whole cause to deputies,
one out of every College.

Sessio 79. 12. Feb.] The Synodical disquisition concerning the third and
fourth article began, many Devines spoke diverse things, the disquisition came
down to D. Crocius of Breme, and so the Synod was dimissed.

Sessio 82. 12. Feb.] We went on in the Synodical disquisition of the third and
fourth article, where many men spoke their opinions freely, when it came to
Sibrandus he spoke at least an hour, in his speech he took exceptions at some
things that D. Martinius of Breme had spoken the day before, especially that he
had said God was causa physica conversionis; he delivered some reasons against
it, and desired Martinius to give satisfaction to them, and to instruct him in
that which he knew not before; Martinius answered for himself, but between them
both there were more words then sense, for they made it a mere Phylosophical
speculation, like to keeping a phylosophie act, much against the gravity of
questions to be discussed in a Synod: Martinius for the truth of his assertion
appealed to Goclenius their present, as being princeps philosophorum, who were
not wont to be appealed to in Synodical questions, and Goclenius took the
moderator his place bravely upon him; told us that Themistius, Averores,
Alexander Aphrodisaeus, and many more were of Martinius his opinion; and his
opinion true in Philosophy, but yet he would not have it to prescribe in
Divinity; Sibrandus fell upon Goclenius too, so after many words lost on all
sides, the President cut them off, and so that act ended, and so the
disquisition ended: yesterday we had no Session, this day we have one, of which
your L. by God his grace shall be advertised in my next. So with the
remembrance of my best service to your L. and your virtuous Lady I rest.

Dordrecht this 15. of February. Your L. in all faithful service, Walter
Balcanqual.

My very Good Lord,
SInce my last unto your L. their has been nothing of any moment done in the
Synod; but what was done, the sum of it is this.

Sessio 81. 13. Feb. Stylo Novo.] Credential letters were read from the
Frisians, by which Dacon ab Aisma, was deputed in the College of the Frisians
as a member of the Synod in the place of Meinhardus a senior Ecelesiae
Leowardensis, who lately died here; he took the oath of the Synod, and so was
admitted. Alstedius the only Nassovical Devine now left, by appointment of the
President publicly all auditors being admitted, did vindicate the 10.
arguments which the Contra-Remonstrants used in Collat. Hag. for proving of
irresistibility of grace, from the objections, exceptions, and instances of the
Remonstrants: and so the auditory was dismissed. The President gives us
warning, that on monday at 9. of the clock there should be a Session, in which
they would begin to read the great volume of the Remonstrants, lately given in;
and tells us moreover, that now they had given in their explication of the 3.
4. and 5. articles, but no confirmation of them: yet that the Delegats had
commanded them within eight days to bring in all they would or could say
concerning the five articles. Because the two Campenses Remonstrants being
peremptorily cited had not compeired, the President desired the Synod to think
of some fit punishment for this their contumacie. First we read letters from
Fosculius, one of these two Remonstrants; in which he excuses his absence by
these three reasons: first, that the Church could not bear their absence;
because if they should both come, there was none to preach: not that he himself
was making ready for the journey, but that he was stopped, by the tears,
howlings, sighs, outcries, lamentations, and prayers of all sexes, and ages,
and conditions of people, boys, girls, masters, servants, mistresses, and
maids, young and old, and many more such specifications there were; thirdly,
that they had sent two to the Synod to answer for them; and therefore do humbly
entreat, that they by these their procurators may causam dicere: after these
were read other latin letters from the Seniors of that same Church, wonderful
long, but so extremely foolish and idle, that one might see they were written
by some indiscreet pedant, who had run himself out of breath with trotting
through all the topic places of school boys rhetoric; they contained in them
the same reasons for their ministers none-comparence, which the former: and
moreover did protest that their ministers were ready for their journey, but
that the importunity of their roarings, houlings, hindered them: and therefore
in a most furious strain did desire the Synod to conceit with themselves, that
they did but now with their eyes behold this ruthful spectacle: to wit, The
whole city of Camps male and female, young and old lying before them, tearing
their hair, knocking their breasts, piercing the air with their sighs, and
heaven with their lamentable howlings, having their eyes sunk in their heads
with tears, and their hearts ready to burst out at their sides for anguish;
with such a deal of female foolish Rhetoric, as no masculine pen can relate,
they desire the non-comparence of their Pastors; of whose doctrines they might
take sufficient notice without their personal presence, since it was the same
which the Remonstrants had maintained in Collat. Hag. It is to be noted that
the Magistrates of Camps, who before had written in these citati favor, did
not now write.

Thirdly, there was read the contra-Remonstrants campenses, who were come to
accuse the citati, answer to the reasons contained in the citati letters, to
the first: that the Church could not want their presence, it was answered; that
the Classis Campensis would look to that, as other classes now did to the
charges of all the rest, who were present at the Synod; besides that no man's
charge in private can excuse him for non-comparence before a judge, when he is
cited. To the second, that they were coming, but were hindered by the people, it
was answered that a seditious tumultuary concourse of people, ought not to
hinder any man from comparence before a judge, especially since it is known
that this seditious conflux was procured by the citati, as is evident by the
confessions of many, (whose names were there expressed,) who being called to be
present at that tumultuary assembly refused; who did testify moreover, that
the citati went about begging hands to subscribe these foolish letters to the
Synod. To the third, that they had sent procurators to answer for them; it was
answered, that it was a thing not heard of, that another man should give
account of these things which they themselves bad taught. These things being
read, the Synod was required to give sentence: the Delegats sentence was this:
that notwithstanding all these idle excuses the citati were to be condemned of
contumacie, to be suspended from their ministry, but with this provision, that
if within fourteen days after the receipt of new Letters from the Synod, they
did personally compeire, they should be absolved from this sentence of
suspension; if they did not, this sentence should stand firm pro nunc et tunc
et omni tempore: the rest of the Synod were entreated that again Monday they
would deliberate of this business, and so give in their judgments of it.

Sessio 82. 18. Feb.] Their were read publicly 47. pages of the Remonst. book;
all which did contain only one answer to the first four places produced by the
contra-Remonstrants, in collatione Hag. whereby they prove that ( v^^lle Deum
soles fideles salvos facere; et infideles in ira relinquere) is not to^^ um et
integrum praedestinationis decretum; the like tedious prolixity, sometimes
racking of S^^ripture, sometimes paring and chipping of it has not been heard;
their was nothing in it which did not rather make men out of love with their
cause then affect it.

Sessio 83. eodem die post meridiem.] The sentence of the Synod was asked
concerning the Remonstrants Campenses, all agreed with the sentence of the
Delegats given at the end of the 81. Session: except only the Divines of Breme;
who delivered their opinion at large in writing, it was to persuade a milder
course, the reasons were many and well penned: when it came to the College of
the Professors, notwithstanding that D. Polyander had delivered their collegiat
sentence; yet D. Gomarus, Martinius his professed enemy, asks leave to speak;
and so enters into a confutation of that which they of Breme had delivered,
so that he and Martinius fell foul in the Synod, very much against the dignity
of such an assembly. In truth I must needs say, that some of the provincials do
use Martinius very uncivily, and all the foreign Devines begin to take it evil
at their hands, he is a man very learned, and very honest, sound in all the
five articles, as any man in the Synod, except the Second, in which when the
Canons come to be made, your L. shall hear there will be more of his opinion
besides himself, notwithstanding of all this; because he does mislike many of
the contra-Remonstrants broad speeches in many points, which I think every
learned and godly man will do; they use him with so much discourtesie, as I
will assure your L. he has been very near leaving of the Synod, and his
colleagues were half purposed to go with him, what a blow this would give to
the credit of the Synod, any man may easily perceive, the provincials in this
take not the right course. Though one be against the Remonstrants in all the
five articles in substance; yet if he differ from them but in manner of
speaking, they hold him as not sound: if by your L. means the President were
advertised of these things, it might do much good. What farther passes in the
Synod your Lordship by God his grace shall hear, in mean time with the
remembrance of my best service to your good Lordship, I take my leave and rest.

Dordrecht this 18. of February Stylo Novo: Your L. in all true respects of
service, Walter Balcanqual.

My very Good Lord,
Since my last Letters to your L. there has been no business of any great note
in the Synod, but that which I am sure your L. will be sorry to hear contention
like to come to some head, if it be not prevented in time: for there has been
such a plot laid ex composito for disgracing of the Bremenses, as I think the
Synod shall receive small grace by it.

Sessio 84. 19. Feb. Stylo Novo.] That part of the Remonstrants big book was
read, which concerned the 3. and 4. Articles; because these two Articles were
now in deliberation: there were read 57 pages, which for the most part did
contain nothing but an exagitation of some hard phrases collected out of
Calvin, Beza, Zanchius, Piscator, many Contra-Remonstrants.

Sessio 85. die 19. Feb. eodem die post meridiem.] Acronius and another of the
Church of Camps, who had compeired in the cause against the Remonstrants there,
were called in, and the decree of the Synod made against them whom they accused
was read; [the tenor whereof your L. may see in my last Letters.] D. Gomarus
being he at whom the last disquisition of the 3. and 4. Article ended, was
entreated by the President to speak his mind of the said Articles, but
Sibrandus desires the President first to give him leave to add some few
things to that he had spoken the day before: now what he added was nothing but
a renewing of that strife, which was between him and Martinius in the last
Session: two things he alleged, first that he had been at Goolenius his
lodging, conferring with him about that proposition, whether God might be
called causa physica of humane actions, and delivered certain affirmations
pronounced by Goclenius, tending to the negative, for the truth of his relation
he appealed to Goclenius there present, who testified that it was so: next
whereas Martinius had alleged a place out of Pareus for the affirmative in
opere conversionis, Sibrandus read a great many places out of Pareus tending to
the contrary; and (no question it being plotted before) he entreats that some
of the Palatines (naming them all severally) who were Pareus his colleagues,
would speak what they did know of Pareus his mind concerning the said
proposition: Sculie^^us begins with a set speech which he had in writ lying
before him; but such a speech it was, as I, and I think all the exteri were
exc^^edingly grieved it should have come from a man of so good worth. The sum
of it was this, that he did know upon his own knowledge, that Pareus did hold
the contrary of that which had been falsely fathered upon him in the Synod,
that he could not endure to bear his dearest colleague so much abused, as he
had been by some men in the Synod; moreover that he could not now dissemble the
great grief he had conceived, that some in the Synod went about to trouble
sound divinity with bringing in iricas Scholasticas, such as was to make God
causam Physicam conversionis; (that was for Martinius,) such por^^enta
vocabulorum as determinare and non determinare voluntatem; that some men durst
say that there were some doubts in the fourth Article, which Calvin himself had
not thoroughly satisfied, nor other learned reformed Doctors; that it was to be
feared that they intended to bring in Jesuits Divinity in the reformed
Churches, and to corrupt the youth committed to their charge, with a strange
kind of Divinity: this last speech concerned D. Crocius, Scul^^etus delivered
his mind in exceeding bitter and disgraceful words, and repeated his bitterest
sentences twice over: he having ended, Martinius with great modesty answered,
first that he would read Pareus his own words, which he did, next that for
Sibrandus, he wondered that he would now in public bring these things up:
since out of his love to peace, that very day he had sent his colleague Crocius
to Sibrandus, with a large explication of that sense in which he had delivered
that proposition, with which explication Sibrandus himself had sent him word
that he was fully satisfied, and so he made account that that business had been
peaceably transacted: all this while Crocius spoke nothing: Gomarus begins
to go on in the disquisition, but I think he delivered a speech against the
Bremenses, which none but a mad man would have uttered. First, whereas
Martinius had said that he did desire the resolution of this doubt, qui Deus
possit ab homine, cu^^us potentia est finita, fidem, quae est opus
omnipotentiae, exigere, and that neither Calvin nor any of our Divines had yet
plainly enough untyed that knot, he replied first, that he that had said so was
not dignus qui solveret Calvino corrigiam; and that for the doubt it self it
was such a silly one that ipsi pueri in trivio could ipsius solutionem
decantare, at which speech every body smiled, moreover whereas Martinius in his
answer to Scul^^etus had not spoken one word against him, but only this, that
he was sorry that one who had now 25. years been a professor of Divinity
should be thus used for using a School term; Gomarus very wisely had a fling at
that too, and tells the Synod that since some men thought to carry it away
annorum numero, he himself had been a professor not only 25. but thirty five
years; next he falls upon Crocius, and bids the Synod take heed of these
men that brought in these monstra, p^^rtent a vocabulorum the barbarismes of
the Schools of the Jesuits, determinare and non determinare voluntatem, with
many such speeches, delivered with such sparkling of his eyes, and fierceness
of pronunciation, as every man wondered the President did not cut him off, at
last he cut of himself I think for want of breath, and the President gives
Celeberrimo Doctori Gomaro many thanks for that his learned grave and accurate
speech; the exteri wondered at it, at last my L. of Landaffe, in good faith in
a very grave, short, sweet speech, (for which as for one of the best I am
persuaded he ever delivered, we and all the Exteri thought he deserved infinite
commendations:) he spoke to the President to this purpose, that this Synodical
disquisition was instituted for edification, not for any men to show studium
contentionis: and therefore did desire him to look that the knot of unity were
not broken: in this his L. speech he named no man, the last word was hardly out
of my L. lips, but furious Gomarus knowing himself guilty, delivers this wise
speech: Reverendissime D. Praesul agendum est hic in Synodo non authoritate sed
ratione: that it was free for him to speak in his own place, which no man must
think to abridge him of by their authority, my L. replied nothing; but the
President told my L. that celeberrimus D. Gom. had said nothing against men's
persons, but their opinions, and therefore that he had said nothing worthy of
reprehension: this gave every man just occasion to think the President was on
the plot: Martinius against this speech of Gomarus said nothing, but that he
was sorry that he should have this reward for his far journey. The disquisition
went on to Thysius, who very discreetly told the Synod he was sorry Martinius
should be so exagitated, for a speech which according to Martinius his
explication was true, just as Thysius was thus speaking, Gomarus and Sibrandus,
who sat next him, pulls him by the sleeve, talks to him with a confused
angry noise in the hearing and seeing of all the Synod, chiding him that he
would say so; afterward Thysius with great modesty desired Martinius to give
him satisfaction of one or two doubtful sentences he had delivered, which
Martinius thanking him for his courtesy fully did: the President was certainly
on this plot against Martinius, for at that same time he did read out of a
paper publicly a note of all the hard speeches Martinius had used: all this
while D. Crocius his patience was admired by all men, who being so grossly
abused and disgraced could get leave of his affections to hold his peace. What
this is like to come to I will tell your L. after I have set down the Sessions.

Sessio 86. 20. Feb.] There were read 63. pages of the Remonstrants book, which
concerned the fifth Article, it was for most part a confutation of the Doctors
above named.

Sessio 87. eodem die post meridiem.] Dr. Mayerus one of the Helvetians,
publicly all auditors being admitted, discussed the fifth Article de
perseverantia Sanctorum: he did rather like an Orator then a School-man.

Sessio 88. 21. Feb.] There are read publicly 60. pages of the Remonstrants
book, which concerned the first Article: they were of the same stuff with the
former, a confutation of the same men.

Sessio 89. 22. Feb.] There were read 57. pages of the Remonstrants book, which
concerned their opinion of reprobation, in which they did lay open the harsh
opinions of many of our men, which unless the Synod do condemn, as well as the
opinion of the Remonstrants, I see not how they can give the world satisfaction
touching their indifferency: among the rest which was read, this was one if
your L. can endure the smell of it, instan^^ Contrae-R. nassumus patroni
reproborum, Resp. justitiae divinae patroni sumus non reproborum; sicut
dicendum est D. Sibrandum inscript^^ su^^ adversus Vorstium non suscopisse
defensionem latrinarum dum defendit deum esse in faetidissimis tatrinis, sed
tantum suscepisse defensionem omnipraesentiae divine, quemadmodum nos justitia,
this is all was worthy the noting in that lecture.

Sessio 90. eodem die post meridiem.] Deo datus was appointed to discourse of
the first Article, but being sick, the five Belgic professors discussed it.

Sessio 91. 23. Feb.] There were read some 35. pages of the Remonstrants book,
concerning reprobation, and so the whole book is ended.

Now my L. concerning this matter of the Bremenses, is come to this height:
that they thought to have gone home, and withal were ready to have printed an
apology for themselves, and an narration of their hard usage in the Synod: but
that some of the Exteri Theologi came to the English College, and desired them
to help to quench this fire, all the Exteri take to heart these two things,
first that strangers should be used so disgracefully, for using two School
terms, which are both very common, next that Gomarus durst openly in the Synod
give such an irreverend answer to my L. of Landaffe, for which unless all the
exteri may have satisfaction. (Except the Palatines) I believe their will be a
shameful stir in the Synod; they desired the English to labor the Bremenses
to reconciliation with Scultetus, which this night they are doing; what
becomes of it your L. shall hear; but I have small hope, for the Bremenses
will take no satisfactiou but public, because it was a public imputation upon
their professions and School, as if that were a place for corrupting of youth:
and I think Scultetus will be loath to give public satisfaction; yet my L.
Bishop of Landaffe, D. Go^^d, and my self have dealt with Scultetus, and find
him tractable, Dr. Davenaut, and D. Wa^^d have dealt with the Bremenses, and
find them mightily incensed, Martinius has never come to the Synod since, but
with the rest of his colleagues they have complained to the Delegats, who I
think will take order with Gomarus: we the English are purposed (but I know not
whether that purpose shall hold) to desire the Delegats to take notice of the
wrong offered by Gomarus to my L. of Landaffe; my Lord, all I will say is this,
there are two men in the Synod, Sibrandus, but especially Gomarus, who is able
to set it on fire, unless they be look'^^ too; I think there is no man will
say, but that Gomarus has wronged the Bremenses infinitely, has wronged
exceedingly my L. of Landaffe, and in him all the English College, your L.
counsel to the President may bring much water to this fire.

There is here a little Pamphlet here to be sold in the Synod. Jambi de
concordia et pace, written by Petrus Bertius the author of Apostasiae
sanctorum: they say it has been out a great while; if any of the states have
seen it. I wonder he is not severely punished: it is the most seditious Satyr
against this state that ever I did read. Here is all, and I am sorry I had so
much to write to your L. so with the remembrance of my humblest duty to your L.
and your worthy Lady, I take my leave and rest.

Dordrecht this 23. of February, Stylo Novo. Your L. faithful and respectful
servant, Walter Balcanqual.

My very Good Lord,
FOr your L. last letters to my self, and the news in the letters enclosed, as
I stand much obliged to your H. so much more I with all others, who love peace
and long for the happy success of this Synod, must ever stand much obliged to
your L. for your Letters to the President; so full of sober, good, and
necessary counsel, the happy fruit whereof I hope during our being there we
shall not cease to find, as we have already begun to taste a little of the
sweetness of it; for the very next Session after the President had received
your L. letters, at the beginning in very mild and discreet words he entreated
all the members of the Synod, that in their disquisition of the fifth Article,
they should abstain from all bitterness, and personal opposition, and follow
meekness and brotherly kindness, which in that disquisition was observed by the
two Belgic professors, very strictly, and their phrase and style tempered
otherwise then heretofore it has been; so as one might see they had been
acquainted with the good counsel of your L. letters, for I will assure you they
followed it: your L. joy can not choose but be great when you remember the great
peace procured by your L. I should hold my self an enemy to the wealpublick, if
I should not particularly inform your L. of all the passages here, by whom if
any of them go amiss, they may so happily be corrected. The reason why I have
been so long a writing is, because I wanted news of which our Synod now is very
barren, and will be so till toward the latter end of the next week; at which
time all Colleges judgments of the five articles will begin to be read, the
matters now in hand are matters of knowledge not of action: yet I will be bold
for fashions sake to send your L. a note of such Sessions as have been since my
last letters to your L.

Sessio 92. 25. Feb. Stylo Novo.] We bent on in the Synodical disquisition of
the 3. and 4 article, which at that Session was made an end of, after that the
President did dictate to us, and all we did write large Theses collected out of
the Remonstrants books upon the five Articles.

Sessio 93. 26. Feb.] Since the Remonstrants by commandment from the Delegats,
had given up the defense of their opinion touching the second Article, their
were read 56. pages of this there other new volume, in which they studied to
overthrow that distinction, sufficientiae et efficaciae mortis Christi, and go
about to prove that those places of Scripture, which say that Christ dyed pro
peccatis totius mundi, are to be enlarged to all particular men, not to be
restrained ad mundum electorum.

Sessio 94. 27. Feb.] There were read publicly 53. pages more of this volume
of the Remonst. upon the second Article, in which they did vindicate their own
arguments propounded in Collat. Hag from the instances and exceptions of the
Contra-Remonst. in the same Conference.

Sessio 95. eodem die post meridiem.] Deo datus was this Session appointed to
discuss the first Article; but because of the continuance of his sickness, his
colleague Tronchinus did perform that task for him, publicly all auditors
being admitted, who with good commendation did establish Sanctorum
perseverantiam.

Sessio 96 28. Feb.] There was an end made of the reading the Remonst. volume
on the second Article, there were read some 54. pages, which were spent in the
vindicating the rest of their own arguments from the exceptions of the
contra-Remonst. in Collat. Hag.

Sessio 97. eodem die post meridiem.] We begun the Synodical disquisition upon
the 3. Article, where every one of our College spoke at large, but especially
my Lr of Landaffe, who I will assure your L. has by his most accurate and
excellent speech at that Session gained unto himself wonderful great
reputation; I doubt not but he will send a copy of it to your L. and then it
will speak for it self, believe me I never heard him do any thing like it, and
so thinks every one in the Synod it was learned, devout, and the style
masculous; quicquid dixero minus erit: the disquisition came to the Helvetian
Divines.

Sessio 98. 1. March.] We went on in our Synodical disquisition of the fifth
Article, where my L. of Landaffe his yesterday speech was cited by two or three
several Divines with great Honor and commendation: the disquisition came to
the College of the Geldrians.

This my Lord is all we have done, when there is any thing worthy the relating,
I shall not fail to advertise your L. hoping your L. in this time of my other
business, which must not be neglected, will pardon both the rudeness of the
hand and style; for both which my necessary plea is want of time. The matter
between the Bremenses, and Scultetus, with the other two professors is taken up
by the Praeses, and the Delegats; the Bremenses have shown their inclination to
peace, and were contented with private satisfaction, the other three did
protest they had no hard opinion of them, but accounted them learned,
religious, orthodoxal, were sorry they had done that which was done, and would
do so no more: the Bremenses desired that one of our College might be present
at this satisfaction, but the other three would no way yield to it. Gomarus was
there admonished to repair to my L. of Landaffe, and to testify unto him his
sorrow for the word which unawares had proceeded from him to his L. in the
Synod; but yet the old tuffe man is not come to his L. I hope after this we
shall live in peace; which I must needs confess for the greatest part of it, we
are debtors to your L. Notwithstanding the late proclamation set out by the
states General, for restraining the printing of all seditious books during the
time of the Synod: yet even now in the Belgic tongue, there is come forth a
seditious pamphlet, with no name of Author or Printer, containing all the acts
which has been made against the Remonstrants in this Synod, especially by the
Delegats; a book made only to incite the common people to a dislike of the
Synod, they are not to be sold, but they send them abroad among their
favorites, I have all this day been using means for compassing one of them to
send to your L. but cannot, yet there is one of them promised me, but it may be
your L. by this time has seen some of them. By my letters from England, from
one who I believe knows it, it will light heavy upon the party your L. names
in the end of your letter; as much I mean as his place in the State is worth;
their is scuffling for to be his successor: what is reported of Mr. Pakker is
but guessing, your L. is in name for it at Court, but upon what ground I know
not, I would it were as sure as my wishes are strong. So with the remembrance
of my best service to your L. and your worthy Lady, I take my leave and rest.

Dordrecht this 2. of March. Your L. in all true respect and service, Walter
Balcanqual.

My very Good Lord,
THough our Synod yields no great argument of writing, for now we are taken
up in hearing altogether, yet I can not omit my duty in letting your L. know
how we spend the time.

Sessio 99. 4. March Stylo Novo.] The President did invite the whole Synod to
the Funeral of a Helvetian Gentleman, one Mr. Staffurins who came hither, as
comes itineris with the Helvetian Divines, the invitation was against the
morrow at 11. of the clock. The President moreover with great joy told the
Synod that he had received news from the Magistrates of Camps; whereby they
signify that they rest well satisfied in the last decree of the Synod
concerning the suspension of their cited ministers, and continuance of the same
suspension, in case of their not comparence within 14. days after new
advertisement, that they would do what in them lies to persuade them to
comparence, which if they refused, that they would not give them any more
countenance or protection, as heretofore they had done; moreover that they did
with all due respect expect the resolutions of the Synod, concerning the points
of religion now in question, to which they mean to submit themselves wholly,
and by their own example of obedience, encourage and persuade as much as in
them lies their distracted people to yield the like obedience, and that in the
mean time the care of their Ministers Flocks should be no pretense to their
cited ministers for not comparence, because that during their abscence, they
themselves would undertake to see their cures sufficiently discharged both for
reading and preaching of the word: I must needs say this message was much
unlike their former letters, which they were wont to write in favor of their
Remonstrant Ministers. Moreover the President told us that D. Altingius one of
the Palatine Divines, had brought him letters to the Synod from old D. Paraeus
of Heidelberge, together with his judgment in a written book of the five
Articles in controversy, which he told us should presently after the Synodical
disquisition be read. We go on in the Synodical disquisition of the fifth
Article, where some of the provincials observed some things, some nothing, and
so at this Session quickly our disquisition upon the first Article was ended;
then Paraeus letters to the Synod were read; the sum whereof was this, I am
not so good an English man as to adventure to translate, I will therefore give
you the Latin.

Quantum doloris et lachrimarum sentiebamus hic omnes jam per aliquot annos ex
flends illo schismate et dissidio quod Ecclesiam Vestram Florentissimam
laceravit, tantum etiaem et nunc gandii et gratulationum experimur ex coactione
Celeberrimae bujus Synodi, cu^^us open et saluberrimis consiliis speramus
altissimum hoc vulnus sanatumiri; quantum gloriandi mater^^am de derit
Pontificiis Vestrum schis^^a palam est omnibus: illis ut Synodus obstruat os,
possitque hoc Ecclesia Vestra incendium restinguere, pacemqne vestram nimis
collapsam restituere, illud est quod sieut expectant a vobis boni omnes, ita et
a Deo Opt. Max. omnibus precibus expetunt: O utinam daretur mihi in ultima jam
senectute venerandam hanc Synodum conspicari, Verum cum illud aetas mea mihi
deneget tametsi Doctissimi mei Collegae meas vices supplebunt, visum tamen fuit
mihi meam quoque de famosis illis 5. Articulis ad Reverentias Vestras
senten^^iam perscribere, et una cum Ecclesia Resormata meam quoque (...)
testatam facere; Videbitis me hic conditionatam Electionem rejicere,
Reprobationem una cum D. Calvino passim, praesertim Institutionum lib. 3. ad
vitiositatem refer, si minus fortassis quam par est Praedestionis mysteria
pertractavero, illud putate consulto factumesse, sunt enim illa adoranda magis
quam discutienda: solitam et receptam de merito mortis Christi distinctionem
puta sufficientiae et efficientiae, videbitis me retinere, Distinctionem illam
de resistibilitate et irresistibilitate gratiae Divinae velim ^^ad authors
suos puta Jesuitas relegari; Heteredoxa illa de apostasia sanctorum sententia
se ipsam jugulat. Det Deus, ut in omnibus orthodoxam doctrinam retineatis, et
paecem unice sectemini. The subscription was, Rever. Vest. Observantissimus
David Paraeus Septuagenarius Scribebam manu propria: This was the sum of this
letter, and of the Session too.

Sessio 100. 5. of March.] There was read publicly so much of Paraeus his
sentence as concerned the first and second Article, in which he did accurately
dispute against the Remonstrants opinion in both, and spent a great many pages
in expounding and confirming the received distinction of the sufficiency and
efficiency of the merit of Christ his death.

Sessio 101. eodem die post meridiem.] Dr. Martinius of Breme aypointed by the
President publicly, all auditors admitted, did very accurately and soundly
discourse of the true Deity of Christ, and especially labored to prove his
omnipraesentia, opposing and answering all those places of Vorstius in which in
his disputation de Deo he calls the omnipraesentia of Christ into question.

Sessio 102. 6. March.] We went on in the public reading of D. Paraeus his
judgment upon the 3. 4. and 5. Articles; where I must needs say that he did
most accurately, and soundly, and methodically, with great subtilty and variety
of reasons overthrow the Remonstrants opinions of Resistibility of grace, and
the apostasy of the saints, one would little think that that wit and judgment
could be so young in so great age: the President told us that after the
Collegial judgment were read, that the Synod by their public letters must
needs give him many thanks for these his great and good pains, as he did not
doubt but that the Estates General would take order for doing of the like. So
one of the Scribes by the President his appointment, was beginning to read our
College his judgment, but D. Davenant told the President, that he thought it
greatly concerned the dignity of the Synod, that the Collegial suffrages should
not be read thus privately, but that they should be read as publicly as might
be, all auditors being admitted; both because it might be that the Remonstrants
being moved by force of their reasons, might relent something in their
opinions; and all other auditors be edified and confirmed in the truth, as
likewise; because all auditors should perceive the consent of so many several
learned men's judgments, who by the more perverse sort might otherwise be
thought to use some plot and conspiracy to make their opinions meet together.
This unexpected motion did not a little trouble the President, who was
altogether set against any such course, which made all; especially the exteri
wonder that he should offer to pass over a matter of so great consequence
without asking the Synods advice for the manner of reading their own
judgments; the reason why this motion was made by our College was this; in
forming of our judgments, as we have studied to condemn all in the
Remonstrants, which can justly be taxed; so we took pains to condemn no more
but that which must be condemned, and to condemn too some hard phrases of the
contra Remonstrants, especially in the matter of Reprobation; but they are only
phrases; now we know that in the making of the Canons no words of ours, which
sound any thing that way shall be expressed, because the provincials in forming
of the Canons will carry us down by voices; and therefore we desired that in
the reading of our judgments, at least our ingenuity might be taken notice of
by all the auditors. Well to this motion the President made this answer, that
within these few days he himself was in that same opinion which now was
propounded; but having with more mature deliberation thought upon it, and asked
the advice of his Assessors, that he had now thought it fit, the judgments
should be read, no auditors being admitted, unless it were some few choice
ministers of good worth, who did here attend about the Synod, the reasons
moving them thereunto were these. First, because this course seems to come
nearer the intent of the commission of the Estates General then the other, in
which they were appointed to enquire after Synodical suffrages privately among
themselves without other auditors, unless the Synod should think it fit to
admit auditors. Secondly, because it had been a custom hitherto observed in
all Synods and counsels to take the suffrages, all auditors being excluded.
Thirdly, because, though the suffrages of all Colleges do agree (as he
perceived by reading of them) in the thing it self; yet because there was some
disagreement in phrases and forms of speaking, it was to be feared that the
Remonstrants and other Jesuits and Dominicans present, would make great matter
of these verbal differences, that they would cast abroad among the people
strange reports of the dissensions of the Synod, and in another case, that the
Remonstrants no question (as lately they had done) would put out in print the
opinion of the Synod concerning the Articles, before the Canons were formed by
the Synod, and in their pamphlet no doubt they would oppose sentence to
sentence, wheresoever they might take hold of the least suspicion of
difference. Fourthly, and chiefly, because by this course the judgment of the
Synod concerning the 5. Articles, should go abroad among the people, before
either the Synod it self had determined what should be their judgments, or the
Estates General could be made acquainted with the judgments of the Colleges
and Synod, who notwithstanding in all reasons and good manners ought next to
the Synod it self, to know what is likely to be the event of all business in
it: the President added that since this was but a matter of order, he hoped the
Synod would trust him and the Assessors with the managing of it; but perceiving
that a great many were not content with it, he was glad to put the matter to
voices; the Delegats being asked their voice, they desired the matter might be
deferred till the afternoon, and so the Synod was dismissed.

The President in mean time sent Dammanus one of the Scribes, to entreat us to
give way to the Presidents motion; and no question, they labored other
Colleges as well as us; but certainly all the Presidents reasons above
mentioned might easily have been answered; for my part I think his course was
tutior, but ours honestior.

Sessio 103. eodem die post meridiem.] Voices were asked concerning the manner
of reading the Collegial judgments. The Delegats suffrage pronounced by
Heinsius was, that in reading of the judgments, all auditors whatsoever, as well
contra-Remonst. as Remonst. should be excluded; and besides they entreat all
the members of the Synod, that they would conceal as much as might be the
things that were done in the Synod. The whole members of the Synod without
exception according to the judgment of the Delegats. So ( Q. F. F. of the
first Article, que sit) we begun to read the College judgments, at this
Session were read the judgments of our College, and the College of the
Palatines, both of a just length, and agreeable in all things; except that the
Palatines had added to the end of theirs a very good and necessary counsel for
the sober and wholesome manner of propounding to the people the doctrine of
Election and Reprobation; we purpose after our judgment on the fifth Article,
to give in such a counsel for the sober propounding of the whole five Articles
to the people.

Sessio 104. 7. March.] There were publicly read the judgments of the College
of the Hassians who were exceeding long, of the Helvetians who were but short
and grave, of Alstedius, he who is only superstes of the Nassovians, who was
but short, there was no difference between their judgments, and the others
which were read before them.

Sessio 105. eodem die post meridiem.] There were read publicly, first the
judgment of the Genevenses, who were pretty long; they kept a form by
themselves, for where the confirmations of other ^^olledges Theses, consisted
of reasons, places of Scriptures, and fathers, their confirmations were nothing
but places of Scripture, barely propounded in great number, and in a very fine
contexture and frame; at the end they used this short peroration, that they had
simply out of the Scripture delivered, that concerning the first Article, which
they knew to be agreeable with the Church of Geneva, nay, and beside of all the
Churches of France which did stick to the French confession. Next was read the
judgment of the Bremenses, which was of a just length very sound and accurate,
in all things agreeable to the other judgments read before, except only with
this difference; whereas other judgments had said either nothing of the
election and salvation of Infants begotten of faithful parents, and dying in
their Infancy, or they which had touched it, had determined that faithful
parents had no reason to doubt of it; but might very well for any thing they
did know hope and persuade themselves of it: the Bremonses did absolutely
determine that all such Infants dying in their infancy if they were baptized
were certainly saved, concluding it not only ex judicio charitatis as others
had done, but ex judicio certitudinis too: Next begun to be read the judgment
of the Divines of Embdane; from whom (as Mr. Hales well knows) extraordinary
prolixity was to be expected; after it had been read half an hour the
President told us, that because the hour was past, the rest must be left till
the morrow.

Sessio 106. 8. Martii.] We went on in reading the judgment of the Embdanes,
which at this Session continued yet full two hours, in the coldest weather
that we have felt. So now the judgments of all the Exteri Theologi concerning
the first Article were read, among whom there was nothing to be seen but full
and orthodoxal consent, for which the President told us God was to be praised,
and he prayed God that the like Harmony might be found among the Provincials:
my Lord this is worth the observing, that there is no College yet which has
not overthrown Gomarus his opinion of the subject of Predestination; for though
none of them did directly dispute against it, yet all of them expressly took it
as granted, that not homo creabilis, but homo lapsus was subjectum both of
Election and Reprobation, which I think does trouble Gomarus not a little. Now
the Embdanes judgment being ended, we begun to read the judgment of the
College of the Belgic professors, where at the very first to our grief we
observed the Belgic humor of particular opinions; for there are but five of
that College as we are of ours, and yet they are divided into three parts, and
have given in three distinct and several judgments. D. Polyander, D. Thysius,
and D. Wallaeus have given in and subscribed one judgment, Dr. Sibrandus has
given in another judgment by himself; and D. Gomarus a third judgment by
himself; at the latter end of this Session the first three their judgments
begun to be read; but by that time two pages were read the hour was passed,
and so the rest of it was continued till the next occasion, only my L. I must
tell you that so much as was read, gives us little hope of agreement among
them, for where as other Colleges had taken it as granted only, that ho^^o
lapsus was subjectum Praedestinationis, they in these two pages did only
dispute by many arguments against Gomarus his opinion, and proved that largely,
which others had only taken as a ground, their arguments Gomarus I see him
note; what difference shall further happen in their judgments, your L. shall
understand by my next.

Sessio 107. eodem die post meridiem.] This Session was public, all auditors
being admitted, in which D. Deodatus did at great length handle these two
questions. 1. Quantum differat sides (...) seu temporaneonum a vera et
justificante Regenitorum side. 2. Quousque conceditur Diabolo progredi in
oppugnanda justificatorum side; he did very sweetly just as he uses to preach,
not as Doctors use to do in Schools.

^^This is all which is done this week; for this day being Saturday we have no
Session. The last Sunday I (in which I returned the letter your L. was pleased
to send me) sent to your L. all which had passed the week before, which I hope
your L. had, your L. sees there are but ordinary passages yet in the Synod, if
there were any thing worthy of extraordinary note, I should not fail with all
diligence to give your L. notice of it; in mean time with many thanks to your
L. for all your L. courtesies, and the remembrance of my humblest service to
your L. and your worthy Lady, I take my leave, ever entreating your L. that I
may be accounted by your L. as I am.

I doubt not but your L. has seen this pamphlet, yet if you have not, here it
is.

Dordrecht this 9. of March, 1619. Your L. in all true respect and service,
Walter Balcanqual.

My very Good Lord.
SUch things as have passed in our Synod, since my last letters unto your L. I
here send your L. as briefly as I can: I hope now at length toward the latter
end of the next week, we shall come to the making of the ^^anons.

Sessio 108. 11. Martii Stylo Novo.] Georgius Faebricius a Nassovian Divine,
substituted in the place of D. Bisterfield, who died here, was with the
accustomed solemnity admitted into the Synod: we go on in reading the judgment
of the three Belgic professors, which was very sound and of a just length; it
was subscribed by their three names: Johannes Polyander, Antonius Thysius,
Anthonius Wallaeus, and a little beneath, that it was thus written, Ego
Sibrandus Lubertus hoc collegarum m^^orum judicium perlegi. et per omniae
probo; Gomarus his name was not at it; but he presently rose and testified viva
voce, that he had read it, and did in all things approve the judgment of his
Colleagues, excepting only that part of it, which did determine hominem lapsum
to be the object of Predestination, which he said had not as yet been
determined in the Belgic Churches, in the French nor English Churches, and
many others. Next was read the judgment of D. Sibrandus upon the same article,
which differed nothing from that former of his Colleagues, but that it was
longer, it was subscribed with his own name, and a little beneath the former
three professors by their subscriptions testified, that they had read it, and
did approve it. Gomarus stood up, and viva voce gave this same testimony to
this judgment which he had given to the former, making the same exception.
Next was Gomarus his judgment read upon the same Article; he said nothing of
that question of the object of predestination, whether it was homo lapsus or
not, which silence in that point being excepted, his judgment in all points
agreed with the former judgments of his Colleagues, it was only subscribed
with his own name; but D. Polyander did viva voce testify in the name of
himself and his Colleagues, that they did approve all things in Gomarus his
judgment, excepting only that opinion of the object, the contrary whereof they
professed themselves to hold: the President instructed us concerning some
particulars of the business of Camps, and desired us against three of the clock
in the afternoon to consult about it; the particulars whereof your L. shall see
in the next Session.

Sessio 109. eodemdie post meridiem.] The President told us first, that the
time of fourteen days granted to the two suspended Ministers of Camps for their
comparence was now passed, and so that they contemned this favorable respite
granted by the Synod, and persisted in their contumacy. Next that the other two
Ministers of Camps, who were here among the cited Remonstrants had been
appointed by the Synod to give in within 14. days an answer to the accusations
laid against them by the deputies of the Reformed Church of Camps; the copy of
which accusations at their own earnest request had been delivered to them by
one of the servants of the Synod, but that now in place of their answer which
was expected, they had sent to him a letter which was read unto the Synod; it
had two great faults, it was exceeding long, and exceeding foolish; to this
sense or rather none-sense, they did show that they could not at the day
appointed give in their answer to the accusations; and why they could no more
go on in this Synodical action which was commenced against them; for many
causes, such as were, first, because they were wholly taken up in making ready
some writings for the Synod concerning the five Articles, which were imposed on
them by the commandment of the Delegats. 2. Because the copy of the
accusations brought unto them by one of the Synod officers, was not subscribed
by the President, nor by either of the Scribes of the Synod; and therefore they
thought it not an authentic copy or of any credit. 3. Because crimes in it
were objected to them both promiscuously, and that laid to both their charge,
which only one of them had delivered; and therefore their accusation was not
exact according to form of law. 4. That there were many things in it objected
to them, not warranted by any witness, unless it were by some proofs taken out
of their Colleague Foskculius late book, which they christened with the name of
stultum and tenebricosum scriptum. 5. Because it was full of false spellings
and writing, and therefore they thought it was but negligently stubbered over;
for these and many more such causes as idle as these, (with which I hold it not
fit to detain your L.) though they might decline the judgment of the Synod,
especially since against the practice of the Belgic Church, their own
consistory, Classis, and Provincial Synod being skipped over, they were
immediately accused before the Synod; yet notwithstanding after they had done
with all they had to say upon the five Articles, they promise that they will
give in their answer to this bill of accusations; but upon this condition,
(which I beseech your L. to observe,) that first the Synod would declare them
to be free from these false and malicious slanders, wherewith they and the rest
of their brethren Remonstrants cited to the Synod, had been most injuriously
and falsely charged in that Session of the Synod, in which they were dismissed
by the President, with this elogium, to wit, that they had refused to go on in
the Synodical action; that they had showen themselves unworthy with whom the
Synod should have any further dealing; and that as they had begun this business
and continued it with lying and equivocations, so now they had ended it. But
yet that notwithstanding of all this they were contented to go on in this
action before the College of the Delegats of the Estates General, but not
before the Synod. These long letters being read, next was read an answer to
these letters penned by the deputies of the reformed Church of Camps; to whom
the President had given these letters that they might answer them, they did
meet particularly with every thing alleged in the other letters, which was
needless; and therefore I omit all their answers, save only to that one thing
which seemed to require one, that was, that against the custom of their Church
they were immediately brought before the Synod, to which it was answered, that
both the consistory and Classis of Camps were altogether Remonstrantical, and
that therefore they were both of them such as ought rather to be abrogated then
appealed unto; but for their Provincial Synod, they wondered with what face
they durst affirm they had not been cited thither, since that Synod had dealt
with them oftener then once, though to no purpose. Next was read a supplication
penned and subscribed by Acronius in name of the Reformed Church of Camps, in
which they relate how F^^skulius one of the two suspended at Camps, while he
was rehearsing unto his flock the sentence of his own suspension, that he had
stirred up the people ad tumultuariam infamam: next they humbly beseech the
Synod, that now for the two suspended, their sentence of suspension might be
ratified by the Synod, and for the other two here present at Dort, to wit,
Mathisius and Gosuinus, since they had refused to give in their answer at the
time appointed, that the Synod would pronounce the like sentence of suspension
against them: the President propounded this to the Synod, whether they thought
it fit that the sentence already given against the former two should be
ratified, and that the other two should be cited to give in their answer to the
bill of accusations within fourteen days, in which if they failed, the like
sentence of suspension should be given against them, which had been given
against their Colleagues; the whole Synod approved it, and so it was decreed.

We beginning to go on in reading the Collegial judgments; but my L. of
Landaffe (according as we at home had deliberated among our selves) desired
leave to speak, which being granted he spoke to this purpose. D Gomarus in the
forenoon delivered, that this question, whether homo lapsus be subjectum
Praedestinationis, had not been determined by the confession of the Church of
France; and as I and my Colleagues conceived he delivered the like for the
confession of the Church of England; and therefore I do entreat D. Gomarus in
my own name, and the name of my Colleagues to declare before the Synod, whether
he did say so or not. D. Gomarus with good modesty answered that indeed he did
say so, but he protested it was not out of any evil meaning, but only to show
that as other Churches, so the Church of England had left that undetermined,
since the words of the confession determined no farther of the subject, then (
quosdam ex humano genere) my Lord of Landaffe replied, that he himself and the
rest of his Colleagues could not choose but think themselves by that speech
touched for temerity or ignorance; for since they in their judgment had
delivered the contrary for homo lapsus, it was as much to say as that they had
delivered that in the Synod, which was not according to the judgment of the
Church of England, but to let the Synod know that they had said nothing in
their judgment, which was not the judgment of their Church, they desired the
Synod to hear the words of their confession; so D. Goad read publicly the 17.
Article of the confession, where the words are quosdam ex humano genere, in
exitio et maledicto, which last words Gomarus had left out: Gomarus answered,
that if he had understood the words of the confession amiss, he would submit
himself to the judgment of the Synod. The President told Gomarus roundly
enough, that it was free for every member of the Synod to deliver his own
judgment concerning any point or question; but that men ought to be very
careful that they do not rashly meddle with the judgments of other Churches.
My L. of Landaffe desired further leave to add this. Since all the foreign
Divines, without exception, and likewise all the Belgic professors except
Gomarus, had already delivered their judgments for homo lapsus, and that he
doubted not but the Provincials would determine the same; it were very fit that
the Synod should likewise determine so of it; neither was it any reason that
for the particular opinion of one professor, who in this did disassent from the
judgment of all the reformed Churches, the Synod should abstain from
determination of the question. Gomarus answered, that the University of Leyden
had never yet determined for homo lapsus, and that both D. Whittakers, and Mr.
Perkins had determined the contrary, whom he took to be such men as would not
disassent from the confession of the Church of England: that the matter ought
first to be discussed with arguments on both sides, before any thing should be
determined on either side; to whom the President returned this answer, that
after the judgments of all the Colleges were read, the Synod would decree of
that question what they shall think best; after the Canon is conceived it shall
be read, if then you can show that any thing contained in that Canon is against
the word of God. The Synod shall with all dutiful patience here what you can say.

There were read the judgments of the Geldri; the South- Hollandi, (who in
their judgment wished that the question of homo lapsus might be left
undetermined) the North- Hollandi, the Z^^landi, who were all not long; and
agreed in all things with the former judgments delivered, and so this long
Session ended.

Sessio 110. 12. Martii.] There were read the Collegiat judgments of the
Ultrajectini, the Frisia, the Transisulani, the Groninganii et Omlandii, all
which four were of a good length, and in all things consonant to the former
judgments.

Sessio 111. eodem die post meridiem.] There were read the Collegial judgments
of the Drentani, and Gallobelgici, which were brief, and agreeable to the
former judgments, and so was ended the reading of the judgments of all
Colleges; in which (God be praised for it) there was not the least suspicion
of of dissension of any thing, and it is to be noted that all of them
determined homo laepsus to be the subject of Predestination; except Gomarus
whom all men know to be against it; and the South- Hollandi, who only said they
would determine nothing of it.

There was read the judgment of the Divines of Great Britain upon the second
Article; they were briefer then upon the first Article, they left the received
distinction of sufficientiae and efficacia mortis Christi untouched; as
likewise they did not touch that received restriction of those places which
make Christ's suffering general to the world, only ad mundum Electorum. There
were read the judgments of the Palatines, of the Hassians, of the Helvetians,
who all did maintain the received distinction, to wit, that Christ his death
was only sufficient for all men, not efficient or impetrative, and did restrain
all the general propositions which are in Scripture to that purpose only ad
mundum Electorum, concluding that Christ was no ways expiatio pro peccatis
singulorum.

Sessio 112. 13. Martii.] There was read publicly the judgment of the
Nassovici, after them the judgment of the Genevenses, both of which defended
the received distinction and restriction; after were read the judgments of the
Bremenses, who according to the number of their persons had three several
judgments. Martinius his judgment was first read, who did stand in effect to
the tenants of the Remonstrants in the second Article, he mainly overthrew the
received distinction and restriction and did determine that Christ did truly
die for all and every man, that he was made a propitiation both for the godly
and wicked, and that by his death he did impetrate reconciliation with God for
them all, at the latter end he condemned many things both in the Remonstrants,
and in the Contra-Remonstrants opinion, but more in the Contra-Remonst. next D.
Isselburgius the second Bremensis his judgment was read, who was directly
against Martinius defending both the received distinction and restriction.
Thirdly, was read the judgment of D. Crocius the third Bremensis, who
propounded a middle way between his two Colleagues; granting (which we also in
our College did) that Christ did merit by his death some supernatural things
for the wicked; as the word preached, and all such good graces as are common
both to the godly and wicked, but nothing belonging to remission of sin or
reconciliation with God, and so indeed for any thing I could perceive his
judgment was directly against that of Martinius, and in effect all one with
that of Isselburgius. Next was read the judgment of the Embdani, who were
exceeding long, and agreed in all things with the Contra-Remonstrants, as they
do express themselves in the Collat. Hagiensis.

Sessio 113. eodem die post meridiem.] D. Isselburgius one of the Bremenses, at
the President his appointment publicly all auditors being admitted, did at
very great length prove that God his vindicative justice is natural and
necessary unto him, and that therefore that satisfaction which Christ made for
the sins of the world was simpliciter necessaria, proving withal by many
arguments the fullness and sufficiency of Christ his satisfaction; answering the
arguments of Socinus and Vorstius against both the former conclusions.

Sessio 114. 14. die Martii.] There was read the judgment of four of the
Belgic Professors, subscribed by Polyander, Gomarus, Thysius, Wallaeus, and a
little beneath was written Ego Sibrandus Lubertus hoc Collegarum meorum
judicium per omnia probo: next was read Sibrandus his judgment who differed
nothing from his colleagues, save that he was shorter, it was subscribed first
by himself, and then approved by the subscriptions of the rest of his
colleagues; all five of them did stand mainly for the above named distinction
and restriction. Next was read the judgment of the Geldri, who were too too
rigid in many things, next them the judgment of the South- Hollandi next them
the judgment of the North- Hollandi, who had many things which we thought not
only to be rigid but false, all these three Colleges at great length disputed
for the received distinction and restriction.

Sessio 115. eodem die post meridiem.] There were read the judgments first of
the Zelandi, next of the Ultrajectini, next of the Frisii, next of the
Transi^^sulani, next of the Groninganii and Omlandii: all of them stood for the
same distinction and restriction.

Sessio 116. 15. die Martii.] There were read the judgments first of the
Drevtani, who delivered many false and absurd propositions; next of the
Gallobelgici, who were moderate enough, both of them did maintain the former
distinction and restriction; and so was ended the reading of all Collegial
judgments upon the second Article, in which their was not altogether so
uniform a consent both in regard of phrases and forms of speaking; and i^^
regard of some propositions, as was in the first Article: yet certainly there
was very great, more then could well have been expected from so great a number
of learned men in so hard and an controverted Article.

There was read the judgment of our College upon the third and fourth
Article, which was most just and equal, condemning the rigidity of some of the
contra-Remonstrants opinion, though not by that name, as well as the errors of
the Pelagians, Semipelagians, and Remonstrants.

There was read the judgment of the Palatines, who in all things agreed with
the judgment of the contra-Remonstrants, as it is set down in Collati^^
Hagiensis.

Sessio 117. eodem die post meridiem.] There were read the judgments of the
Hassiaci, the Helvetians, the Nassovici, who agreed in all points with the
contra-Remonstrants of the Gene^^onses, who carried a very even hand in this
Article, their Theses, as before, were confirmed only by places of Scripture,
but finely digested; of the Bremenses who handled the head de gratia et libero
arbitrio in general, and in particular overthrew resistibility of Grace. Of the
Embdani, whose judgment after an hours reading was not near half done, and
therefore we were glad to make an intercession of their discourse of Grace till
the morrow.

Sessio 118. 16. Martii.] We went on in reading the judgment of the Embdani,
which yet continued above an hour and an half; they discussed 34. questions,
and to speak truth they were long above the strength of patience. There was
read the judgment of the four Belgic Professors subscribed by themselves,
and afterward approved by the subscription of Sibrandus; next was read the
judgment of Sibrandus subscribed by himself, and approved by the subscriptions
of his Colleagues; next was read the judgment of the Geldri.

So my very good Lord, here is the sum of all has passed this week; I hope
your L. has received the letters I sent these last two weeks, what follows I
shall not fail to advertise your L. So with the remembrance of my most
observant duty to your L. and your worthy Lady, I take my leave and rest.

Dordrecht this 16. of March, Novo Stylo, 1619. Your L. in all true respect and
service, Walter Balcanqual.

My very Good Lord,
AFter I had written these yesternight, I received your L. letters, for which I
stand much obleiged to your L. I had before them received very particularly
news from England; but especially of the Star Chamber sentence from a gentleman
of good worth, who was present; many memorable sentences his Majesty delivered,
such as were these, he said this sin was like the first sin committed in the
world, that my Lady Lake was the Serpent, my Lady Rosseas Eve, and Sir Thomas
Lake the man: he desired the noble men to take heed of their wives, for he had
now known five of his counsel who had been overthrown by their wives, and
especially bid such look to themseves, who had Popish wives; if for no other
thing, yet for this, that a Whore and a Papist were termini convertibiles.
Moreover speaking publicly of the Navy, he gave in the Star Chamber three
reasons why he had made my L. of Buckingham Admiral; one was because the other
was exceeding old; second, because this was young and fit for service; third,
because of his love to this, and his being near about him. I am sure your L.
has the Kings meditation upon the Lord^^ Prayer dedicated to my L. of
Buckingham, else I would have sent your L. one. Yesternight their landed here
one English Gentleman of good worth, who assures us that on Tuseday last the
Queen died; and it may be true, for I had a letter written the first of March,
assuring me that my L. of Canterbury was sent for in haste to Hampton Court, as
was thought, to see her die. I hear likewise, but cannot believe it that Mr.
Dean of Worcester comes this journey over with my L. Hayes in his Embassage to
the Emperor.

Now for your L. directions in our Synod business, our thanks is but a small
recompense, your L. may justly look for your reward in heaven; I pray God send
us out of the second Article well, and I shall be persuaded of Harmony in all
the rest: for in good faith some of the Provincials especially the Geldri, and
the North- Hollandi; who are of all in the Synod, greatest in the President his
books, have delivered such propositions in that Article, as I dare say never
any Divine in the world dreamed of but themselves, for mine own part, I had
rather loose m^^ne hand, then subscribe them. For that your L. advises from
the King about the Palatines, it is a thing absolutely necessary, for they are
the only Magistrales Doctores next to Gomarus in all the Synod, and think every
thing they speak should be taken for text: in good faith in their judgment
upon the second Article, they did gird most bitterly at some things which D.
Ward had delivered in the Synod of that same Article, with which D. Ward is
very much moved. Our judgment in the second Article is already read in the
Synod, so we must study to frame our selves to our directions from England, in
making of the Canons, my L. his Grace his letter is to have us conform our
selves to the received distinction and restriction, with which his grace
acquainted his Majesty and received approbation from him: but I must needs say,
that the directions which your L. has sent from Secretary Nanton, do seem to
will us to be as favorable to the general propositions as may be, giving as
little offense to the Lutherans as we can, which counsel in my poor judgment
we have in our Theses already followed.

Frequent admonitions and exhortations rather from your L. or by your L. means
procured to the President, for prudence and wariness, and keeping the bond of
peace may hinder much indiscretion in this Synod, in which as I hope your L.
will not be wanting; so by Gods grace I shall not be wanting to give your L.
all convenient information, not be wanting in my prayers to the God of peace
that your L. may still go on in procuring the peace of our assembly. So once
again with the remembrance of my most sincere duty I rest.

This Sunday morning 17. March. Your L. faithful and respectful servant, Walter
Balcanqual.

My very Good Lord,
SInce my last unto your L. there have been but three Sessions; no matter of
moment has been done in them, and therefore I will defer the relation of them
to my next letters: only I thought good to let your L. know that yesterday
after the forenoon Session, the President called me into his lodging, and told
me he would show me a miracle, which in truth he did; for there he showed me a
volume which the Remonstrants that morning had given in to the Delegats upon
the 3. 4. and 5. Articles; I was I confess astonished when I looked on it; for
I could not with mine one hand lift it from the table, it is above twice as
much as all they have given in yet; in good faith my Lord I think it is fully
as big as one of our Church great Bibles; which I would have your L. think I
speak without any figure, trope, or Rhetoricallie, for it is so big, I told the
President, that it was a thing impossible the Synod could take notice of the
contents of that volume under six months, he answered me that for my comfort
he would show me two lines in the Preface, which would rid me of that fear, and
so he did; for in these lines they do protest that they do not offer this
volume to the Synod, for they profess that they have nothing, nor will have
nothing to do with the Synod, Since the Synod has refused to have any doings
with their living persons, but only their dead books, and therefore they do
only offer this book to the Delegats, but will not have it thought by any man
that they offer it to the Synod: Heinsius dyned with us yesterday, and I asked
him when they had given in this book, he told me that morning, but with such
impudence as is almost incredible; for when one of the Delegats told them that
he wondered why they would give in so much paper as was impossible it should
ever be read in the Synod, Episcopius answered they had nothing to do with the
Synod, they offered it only to them who were the Delegats; the former Delegat
replied, that the Delegats were not to judge of their opinions, but the Synod;
and that in their letters citatorie they were warned to come and give an
account to the Synod of the doctrine which they had delivered in their Schools
and Pulpits; Episcopius most impudently answered thus briefly: we here
delivered to you the Delegats this book and to none else, if you be pleased to
take it from us, we will leave it with you, if not, we pray you give it us
again, and we will keep it; one of the Delegats commanded Heinsius to write
down that their peremptory and saucy answer, Episcopius very bravely told
Heinsius that they would save him that labor, for they had set down the same
words already in their Preface, and pointed out to him the place where he might
find them: so that my L. they were never since the beginning of the Synod so
lusty as now, so as none can choose but think that they yet have some secret and
sure hopes. I forget to tell your L. that the President told me he had been
glancing at this volume, and he finds it to be in many parts a confuration of
the several discourses which have been had publicly in the Synod upon the five
Articles. There is some ta^^ here about the citation of Vorstius, and Festus
Hommius yesternight told me he had some talk with your L. about it. If he be
cited your L. credit with the Prince of Orange, and count William must help us
for discretion in dealing with him, else he will keep the Synod as long as the
Remonstrants did; your L. I hope will give counsel to them, that if Vorstius
should desire to have time to give in apologies and explications, for ^^he hard
speeches in his book De Deo; and should desire to be convinced with Reason, and
satisfaction of his arguments; all which would take up a long time, that the
Synod would talk of no such matter with him, but in plain terms tell him that
all the members of the Synod had read his book, and found many things in it
very near unto open blasphemy, and scandalous without all question to the
reformed religion; that explications of things which are not once to be called
in question, is no satisfaction; and they therefore only desire to know whether
he will make a plain recantation and denial of it, and publicly ask God
forgiveness for it, and his Church likewise there assembled, whom by that book
he has scandilized; if he do this we gain him; if not, then without any more
ado, let the Synod censure him as they shall think fit; I wish that to the
terror of others he might solemnly be excommunicated in the Synod; in this and
all other businesses we do and must rely upon your L. care, for the handsome
carriage of them; which as your L. has hithertil done, so that your L. may
still continue to the good of Gods Church, and your own immortal credit, it is
no small part of the prayers of

Dordrecht this 20. of March. Stylo Novo. Your L. humble and faithful servant,
Walter Balcanqual.

My very Good Lord,
THis week has been a very barren one for news, for we have been taken up
wholly with hearing, yet such Sessions as we had your L. shall here have a note
of them.

Sessio 119. 18. Martii. stylo novo.] There were read Letters from the Marquis
of Brandeburgh in Dutch containing (as the President told us) an excuse why he
deputed none to the Synod, the President told us they should be turned into
Latin, and after read again unto the whole Synod, there were read the
judgments of the South- Hollandi, the North- Hollandi, the Zelandi, the
Ultrajectini upon the third and fourth Articles.

Sessio 120. eodem die post meridiem.] The were read upon the same Articles the
judgments of the Frisii, the Transisulani, the Groninganii, and Omlandii, the
Gallobelgici, the Drentani; And so was ended the reading of all the Collegial
judgments, upon the third and fourth Articles, in which there was wonderful
great consent, both in the things themselves as likewise in the phrases and
forms of speaking.

Sessio 121. 19 March.] There were read the judgment of our College upon the
fifth Article; Which was far longer then any which we gave in before; At the
end of it we annexed an adhortation to the Delegates, for the defense in their
Provinces of the Doctrine recived in the Reformed Churches; Likewise an
Exhortation to all the Members of the Synod for avoiding harshness and
rigidity, and embracing of all moderation in making the Cannos, especially upon
the second Article; as likewise an admonition to the Provincials, for great
wariness and discretion, in propounding to the common People the Doctrine of
Predestination, and especially Reprobation; these things we told his Majesty,
desired us to observe, and so with a Prayer we wished both we and all the Synod
might be careful in the observing of them; There was read the judgment of the
Palatines, at the end whereof they annexed an Epilogue much to the same purpose
with ours; In all the judgments that were read upon this Article, it is to be
observed that every College concluded with such an Epilogue and a Prayer.

Sessio 122. eodem die post meridiem.] There were read the judgments of the
Hassiaeci, of the Helvetici, of the Nassovici, of the Genevenses, who used, as
in their former judgments, no confirmations, besides plain citations of places
of Scripture of the Bremenses.

Sessio 123. 20. March.] There were read the judgment of the Embdani who were
exceeding long, of the four Professores Belgici, which was subscribed as with
their own hands, so a little beneath with the hand of Sibrandus; next the
judgment of Sibrandus; subscribed likewise by the other four Professors, there
were read likewise the judgment of the Geldri, of the South- Hollandi, all
these except the Embdani were exceeding short.

Sessio 124. eodem die post meridiem.] D. Crocius one of the Bremenses
appointed by the President publicly, all Auditors being admitted, did discuss
at great length these two questions; First, An fides justificans per Dei
accepti ^^tione ^^ repute^^ur a Deo pro omni illa legis justitia quam nos
praestare tenebamur; The Second, An ipsa fides s^^n To credere id est actus
credendi imputetur homini a Deo ad justitiam; he held the Negative of both
against Socinus, the Remonstrants, but namely Bertius.

Sessio 125. 21. Martii.] There were read the judgments of the North-
Hollandi, the Zelandi, the Ultrajectini, the Frisii.

Sessio 126. eodem die post meridiem.] There were read the judgments of the
Transisulani, the Groninganii and Omlandii, the Drentani, the Gallobelgici, And
so was happily ended the reading of all the Collegial judgments upon the five
Articles, in which, praised be God for it, there was seen an incredible
harmony, far greater then almost could be hoped for in so great an Assembly of
so many learned men. The President told us that the Estates General between
this and Easter did expect that the Cannons should be made, and therefore did
desire that against the morrow at ten of the Clock every College would depute
one, who might meet about the conceaving of the Canons, that one should relate
to the rest of their College, what Articles they agreed upon, and accordingly
consult with them to know what they would have added paired, or changed, so
after these deputed and had agreed, the Cannons should be publicly read and
approved.

This is all, but that I think our President has need of your L. good counsel,
for the carrying himself in making the Cannons; I find every man murmuring
already that he would make them, and does but only dictate them to the rest.
With the remembrance of my best service to your L. and my Lady, I take my leave
and am,

Dordrecht this 23. of March, New style. Your L. in all true respects and
service, Walter Balcanqual.

My very Good Lord,
WHat stir we have had about the making of our Cannons your L. shall understand
by letters from our whole College; if we had not written a common Letter, and
then your L. should have taken some particular notice of the contents of mine,
the rest of my Colleagues must needs have suspected that your L. had had
intelligence from me; And therefore I did presently deal with my Lord and the
rest of our Society, that they would write a common Letter to your L.
concerning the particular passages of this troublesome business, These three
things I may say in it; First, that the President would take upon him more then
ever any President did, to make Cannons and pass them by placet or non placet,
and then he has so many of the Provincialls as command to pass what he will, I
cannot I confess yet see how it can consist with the dignity of any, much more
of some of the Members of the Synod, that the President should dictate Cannons
and the rest especially a Bishop write after him; so that he makes the Canons,
and the whole Synod are called non ad consilium sed tantum consensum. Next I
think my L. that if the Synod had wanted but two men which are of it, we had
wanted a great deal of contention, which I perceive will not forsake the Synod
so long as they are in it; I mean Sibrandus and Gomarus; they keep their fits
of madness by course; the last fit before this came to Gomarus his turn, and
this day Sibrandus flew out, but with such Raving and fierceness of
countenance, such unheard bitterness against our College; as I desire no other
revenge on him then the very speaking of the words, which while they were in
his mouth, were checked by both Presidents Politic and Ecclesiastical; D.
Davenant who is a very moderate man, would have answered him much against my
will, and no man could blame him, for Sibrandus his words against our College,
if they had come from a wise man his lips, had been above the strength of
patience, I was glad the President gave not way to D. Davenant speech, which
notwithstanding, I am sure would have been full of discretion; and for
Sibrandus I blame him and Gomarus no more for these ecstasies, then I do a stone
for going downward, since it is both their natural constitution. Thirdly, if
your L. care do not now most of all show it self for procuring of good counsel
to be sent hither for the constitution of the Canons, we are are like to make
the Synod a thing to be laughed at in after ages. The President and his
provincials have no care of the credit of strangers, nor of that account which
we must yield at our return unto all men that shall be pleased to call for it;
their Canons they would have them so full charged with catechetical
speculations, as they will be ready to burst, and I perceive it plainly, that
there is never a contra-Remonstrant minister in the Synod, that has delivered
any doctrine which has been excepted against by the Remonstrants, but they
would have it in by head and shoulders in some Canon, that so they might have
something to show for that which they have said: God his goodness toward his
Church, and your L. vigilant constancy in perfecting this good course, which
you were so careful to procure, I hope will teach us to overcome all these
difficulties.

In my last letter I wrote as I suspect, that the Palatines inveighed against
some things delivered by Dr. Ward in the 3. and 4. Articles; if I had so, I was
mistaken, I should have said the second Article. We shall have no more Sessions
till all be agreed upon in private Colleges; and therefore I thought to have
come over to have done my duty to your L. this Easter, but I understand by a
letter from Sir Thomas Jermyn that my L. Hayes had warning to make himself
ready for his Embassage against the 10. of March; I think he will come by the
Hague, if I understand of his coming I must likewise do my duty to him, and I
can hardly make two journies; and so with my humblest service for your L. kind
invitation, and for all the rest of your L. most undeserved favors to a
stranger, which since my fortune is not likely ever to give me leave to
requite, I must take leave to acknowledge, and with my best prayers for your L.
and my Ladies happiness, I take my leave and am as I ever shall be,

Dordrecht this 25. of March. Your L. in all true respect and service, Walter
Balcanqual.

My very Good Lord.
ALL my answer to your L. arguments is my acknowledgement of your L.
extraordinary courtesy in your kind invitations. I could not be so fitted in
my mourning apparel as I would before Saturday at night: besides we must now
narrowly look to the Canons which are sent to us by the Deputies of the Synod;
for we are required upon Tuseday next to give in our observations upon them; my
L. of Landaffe being one of the Deputies, has already delivered his opinion of
them; and therefore his L. may here be spared till Wednesday next, the rest of
us have not, and it being the main business of our coming hither, we must plie
it so as it may be done to some good purpose. My L. of Landaffe his coming to
your L. tells me that the writing of any occurrences here are needless; so
with the continuance of my best wishes for your L. health and happiness, I take
my leave; and shall ever account it a great part of my temporal happiness, if
your L. shall be pleased to account me as I am:

Dordrecht this 29. of March, Stylo loci. Your L. in all dutiful respect and
service, Walter Balcanqual.

My very Good Lord,
THis place is yet still barren of news, but I make no question but my next
letters shall send your L. some. The Deputies appointed by the Synod have taken
pains I must needs confess to give our College all satisfaction; besides the
second Article, some of our College have been earnest to have this proposition
out. ( Infideles damnabuntur non solum ob infidelitatem, sed etiam ob omnia
alia peccata suatam originale quam actualia.) Because they say that from thence
may be inferred that original sin is not remitted to all who are baptized,
which opinion has been by more then one council condemned as heretical: they
have therefore at their request put it out; so I know now of no matter of
disagreement among us worthy the speaking of: the morrow there is a Synod, one
way or other we shall determine what shall become of the Canons, what we do
your L. by Gods grace with the first occasion shall understand. I have here
sent your L. my speech made in the Synod; I know your L. experience will pardon
the imperfections of a discourse delivered upon less then two days warning. Now
my Lord, to write a History of Dr. Goad his journey and mine own, between
Roterdam and Dort that night, on which we came from your L. would move too much
pity, especially if you should make relation of the same to my Lady: the
compend of it is this; that a little after five a clock in the afternoon we
took ship at Roterdam, and about a little after one of the clock in the night
we arrived at Dort, but could get no entrance; and therefore until half an
hour past five in the morning, we sometime lay in the ship, sometime walked on
the Bulwark: if we were not sufficiently assaulted with cold and watching we
know our selves. Mr. Downs his wooing in Greek was never so cold as we were
that night: Letters I have received from England: the sum of the news are,
that the Spanish Navy is dissipated, and that it never exceeded 60. sails.
The King of Spain has written large letters with his own hand to our King; in
which he protests, that he never intended any thing against England nor any
Christian Kingdom. The talk of the Spanish match has of late been very fresh
again in England, but this is certain that the other day at Theobalds the King
asking a gentleman of good note what the people talked of the Spanish Navy,
received of him this answer: Sir the people is nothing so much afraid of the
Spaniards powder as of their match. My Lord I can but thank your L. for all
your courtesies, especially your L. great kindeness at my last being with you,
which since my fortune will not give me leave to requite, I must take leave to
acknowledge. With the remembrance of my best duty and service to your L. and
your worthy Lady, and my faithful wishes for both your happiness, I take my
leave, hoping your L. will believe that there lives no man of whom you may
more freely dispose, then of

Dort this 4/14 of April. Your L. most faithful and respectful in all true
service, Walter Balcanqual.

My very Good Lord,
DOctor Davenant his coming to your L. saves me the writing of any news here:
for he will perfectly relate them to your L. we are full of trouble about
things altogether unnecessary, they are so eager to kill the Remonstrants, that
they would make their words have that sense which no Grammar can find in them:
upon Tuseday in the afternoon we had a Session, in which were read the Canons
of the first and second Article, and were approved, except the last of the
second Article, which we never heard of till that hour, and the second
heterodox in that same Article, what they were Dr. Davenant will inform your L.
the last was such as I think no man of understanding would ever assent unto. On
Thursday morning we had another Session, in which was nothing done, but that it
was reasoned whither that last heterodox should be retained; our College in
that whole Session maintained dispute against the whole Synod; they condemned
the thing it s^^l^^ as a thing most curious, and yet would have it retained
only to make the Remonstrants odious, though they find the very contrary of
that they would father upon them in their words. That day in the afternoon was
another Session, in which were read the Canons of the 3. 4. and 5. Articles and
were approved, the particular passages of these Sessions I will send your L. by
the next occasion, they were no great matters in them, yet when I send your L.
the next Sessions in which it is like that something will be done, I will send
a note of them too: yesterday there was no Session, but the Deputies met for
taking order about the Preface and Epilogue of the Canons, and mending those
things in the Canons which were thought fit to be amended, and have sent them
worse then they were; in case we stand, and what need of counsel we have, this
worthy Dr. will sufficiently inform your L. My Lord, I have had a great deal of
talk with Mr. Douglas about the controversies in this Church, and find him
unquestionably sound in them, also that there is no fear of his opinions, if
otherwise he be found sufficient: I much wonder that we do not hear of my L. of
Doncaster. There is here in the Synod a report of our King his mortal disease,
it comes from Scul^^etus, but I hope it is but the Gout; with the remembrance
of my best duty and service to your good L. and my Lady, I take my leave and
rest ever,

Dort this 9/19 of April. Your L. in all true respect and service, Walter
Balcanqual.

My very Good Lord,
NOw at last we have made an end of our business of the five Articles; what
trouble we have had in these last Sessions none can conceive but those who were
present at them: and what strange carriage has been in them, especially on the
President his part it is too palpable, he has deceived all men's hope of him
very far. This matter of the personal censure which was a thing of great
consequence, we were never made acquainted with before the very instant in
which it came to be read; and because the Delegats must not be stayed from
their going to the Hage, therefore all the Synod must say Amen to it; between
the forenoon and the afternoon Session, there was strange laboring with the
Exteri for getting their consent to it; yet we meddled not with it; all I can
say is, me thinks it is hard that every man should be deposed from his
ministry, who will not hold every particular Canon; never did any Church of
old, nor any reformed Church propose so many articles to be held sub poena
excommunicationis; but had it not been then cruel, if all had gone for Canons
which they would have had gone, v. g. that of an absolute necessity of
similitude of nature for working our redemption. None of us have the Canons
yet, neither shall till the Estates have approved them: a note of such Sessions
as have passed since my last notes which your L. had I do now send your L. our
Sessions have been so long and late as I had no time to write them: I was
therefore bold to send them to your L. as my scribe transcribed them out of my
notes which I took in the Synod, hoping your L. will have regard of our
perpetual business here: with the remembrance of my best service to your L. and
my Lady, I take my leave, remaining always,

Dort this 25. of April, Stylo loci. Your L. in all true respects and service,
Walter Balcanqual.

SEssio 127. 26. Mar^^ii Stylo novo.] Praeses D. Delegatorum, oratione brevi
monet Synodicos, D. Delegatis omnino videri futurum e re et dignitate Synodi,
si domino prae sidi, et D. assessoribus pauci aliquot a Synodo tum ex exteris
tum ex provincialibus adjungantur, in quos authoritate publica, cura
concipiendi, et concinnandi canones devolvatur; publicisita gratiis ab ipso
nomine Delegatorum D. Praesidi Ecclesiastico actis ob grat^^ssimum laborem
hactenus in canonibus concipiendis susceptum, eorundem nomine rogat, ut quam
viam ingressus esset in primo, eandem quoque in reliquis articulis viam
insif^^eret, rogat porro ut statim aliquot nominet Synodus qui cum D. Praesidi
in idem negotium incumbant; utque velint rotum hoc negotium quam fieri possit
citissime maturare; cum id praesertim ab ipsis D. ordines generales vehementer
contendant: Rogantur de deputatis hisce Synodicorum sententiae in quibus
ferendis suit magna admodum varietas; multi volebant praesidem eodem quo
caeperat pede pergere in o^^on^^bus Dictandis, inter Exteros isthoc consilium
vehementius urgebat D. Sculretus, inter provinciales D. Sibrandus, sed
immodeste et imptudenter satis, adversus enim illos qui hoc consilii
suggesserant fervide admodum declamabat seu potius exclamabat; dicebat enim
quosdam esse qui huc illuc cursitaverant ut alios in suas parts pertraherent;
quos putabat omnino censura ecclesiastica notandos, neque hic debere Exteros
nimium laborare, ut pote quibus non tam constaret de ratione Ecclesiarum
Belgicarum, quam provincialibus, ed demum serebatur, ut D. Praeses politicus,
itidem et D. Praeses Ecclesiasticus, eum graviter monerent, suaderentque ipsi
majorem modestiam; D. Davenantius cum se et collegas suos hic sugillati
putaret; petiit a D. Praesidi ut liceret sibi a se et suis calumnias istas
depellere; verum roga^^u D. Praesidis a responsa abstinuir, cum vero
deposceretur South Hollandorum suffragium. D. Latius (is est qui historiam
Pelagianorum scripsi^^) eo quod putaret se et collegas suos nomine cursitantium
a Sibrando imperitos suisse modeste certe in suffragio suo D. Sibrandum
perstringebat; aiebat enim omnino sibi videri e dignitate Synodi, ut Canones
authoritate publica non privata conciperentur; posseque se facillime illi
respondere qui hoc suum et collegarum consilium perstrinxerat, nisi charitate
aliquid dandum esset, neque hic sicut dicehatur consilium consilio opponi,
inconsulte admodum hoc dictum esse, eumque non minus Ecclesiasticam censuram
mereri qui tam inconsulti loqutus sit, quam illos qui authors suerant consilii
istius de nominandis deputatis. Tandem post lata omnium suffragia potioribus
sente^^iis nominati sunt inter Exteros, D. Episcopus Landavensis, D.
Sculcetu^^, D. Deodatus, inter provinciales D. Polyander, D. Wallaeus, D.
Triglandius qui una cum D. Praeside et assessoribus canonibus concinnandis
incumberent, quos concinnatos ad singula collegia mitti curarent, si quid forte
additum, demptum, mutatum cupiant, deinde a collegiis remissos limarent manu
ultima, ut sic tandem toti Synodo propositi ad eadem approbenter.

Sessio 128. 16. Aprilis stylo novo post meridiem.] D. Praeses narrat jam
tandem post aliquot septimanarum laborem assiduum, indulsisse Synodo Deum
consensum illum suavissimum quem omnes tanto opere exoptaverant: moram monebat
nemini debere esse gravem; sed gratam potius, quia ut ut in fundamentalibus
optime inter omnes et singulos (sicut patebat in iudiciis) convenerat: sperari
tamen non poterat singulos in ipsis loquendi formulis conspiraturos: monebat
porro dictam fuisse hanc sessionem, ut D. Delegati omnium et singulorum
consensum observarent: Rogantur singuli Synodici, ut diligenter attendant
lectioni articulorum, et moneant si quid forte mutatum velint, nec aegre serant
si mutetur fortassis verbulum aliquod aliter quam se habeat in exemplaribus
quibus heri singuli subscripserant; eum in reipsa nihil plane sit mutatum.

Leguntur itaque articuli Synodici, seu canones de 1. articulo contraverso:
singuli Synodici post ipsorum lectionem viritim rogati de consensu, singuli
solenniter profitebantur se articulos Orthodoxiam complectentes probare ut pote
consentientes cum sacra scriptura et confessionibus Reformatarum Ecclesiarum,
articulos vero Heterodoxiam complectentes improbare ut ab iisdem dissentientes,
Deo agebant singuli gracias de tam suavi consensu, votoque deum rogabant ut
vellet parem semper harmoniam Ecclessis suis Reformatis largiri: observandum
autem est hic singulos significasse, quod heri illis articulis subscripserant;
exceptis folis Theologis Britannis qui subscriptiones suas differebant, donec
posset exemplar aliquod n^^tide describi.

Leguntur articuli Synodici seu canones de secundo articulo contraverso: in iis
autem articulis praelectis, fuerant quaedam verba mutata et aliter disposita,
quam fuerant in articulis quibus heri Synodici omnes exceptis Britannis
subscripserant: Britanni eandem sente^^tiam quoad consensum de hisce articulis
quam de prioribus serebant, nisi quod secundam Heterodoxam putarent magis clare
et perspicue proponi posse, et ultimam Heterodoxam, quae est de potentiadei, an
potuerit alium reconciliationis modum quam per Christum acceptasse, dicerent
jam p^^imum ipsos observasse, et videri sibi esse eam magis scholasticae
speculationis, quam disquisitionis Synodicae, itaque petebant deliberandi
tempus: petebant porro ut quae in illis articulis damnatentur pro Socinianismo,
possent ipsis oftendi ex Socino deprompta, rem ipsam damnabant, sed an a Socino
prosectum esset i^^hoc dogma nesciebant, cum scriptorum Socinianorum non dum
facta esset ipsis copia: Hassiaci eundem testati sunt consensum quem in priori
articulo, nisi quod in articulo octavo orthodoxo vox illa ( Singulari) non
addita esset ad isthaec verba (liberrimo con^^lio) prout in observationibus
suis ad canones de secundo articulo anno^^averant, verum cum persuasum sit
illis omissionem istius vocabuli facere ad pacem Ecclesiarum Belgicarum, se
acquiescere, et semper exposituros canonem illum secundum suum sensum id est
quem possit habere verbo illo addito: verum ne fratres putarent ipsos in suis
observationibus aliquid posuisse quod in rei ipsius substantia aut fundamento a
canone jam praelecto discreparet, paratos s^^ esse qui cum fratribus, si modo
id cupiant, observationes suas communicent: Helvetil testabantur consensum suum
cum illis articulis quibus heri subscripserant; verum cum nunc videant aliqua
verba immurata esse, rogant ut articulos relegant ut sic ad conscientiae
consensum possit quoque o^^is consensus accedere: Bremenses, consensum quoque
suum testabantur, sed addita eadem illa ad eundem articulum cautione quam
adhibuerant fratres Hassiaci, reliqui omnes Synodici plenum suum consensum
sicut in primo articulo testati sunt, Annotarunt solum Goclenius, Sihrandus,
Gomarus, et fortassis unus adhuc aut alter, quaedam, sed quae plane Grammatica
erant: aberant ex Synodicis pauci aliquot sed quos praeses narrabat singulos
articulos suis syngraphis comprobasse: propter publicum quod die crastino
celebrandum est jejunium, monet praeses non habendam esse Sessionem ante diem
jovis.

Sessio 129. 18. Aprilis, stylo novo.] Quaesitum fuit susius de ultimo
Heterodoxo canone in articulo secundo, qui rejicit eorum opinionem qui statuunt
ad sufficientiam Pretii Redemptionis nostrae, non fuisse necessariam naturae
nostrae similitudinem in Christo: Quaerebatur an deberet hic re^^ineri tanquam
error Remonstrantium, an vero hic omitti, and numerari postea inter errores
Vorstianos: Theologi Britanni pluribus rem disceptabant, contendebant enim si
canon intelligendus esset de absoluta necessitate, id est tali quae removeret a
Deo omnem potentiam aliter statuendi, ante suppositionem omnis decreti, and
volunratis cerrae temere nihil definiendum esse de absoluta Dei potentia, esse
ha^^c speculationem magis Scholasticam, Ideoque Canones Synodicos non debere
ingredi, praesertim cum quidam Patres, et nonnulli Doctores reformati putent
illam naturae similitudinem hoc sensu non fuisse simpliciter and absolute
necessariam, si veto Canon sit intelligendus, de necessitate hypothetica id est
ex suppositione decreti and voluntatis certo nobis in Scriptura Revelatae, (quo
sensu putant vocabulum necessitatis in hoc negotio in sacra Scriptura accipi)
canonem verum esse putant; sed nullo modo ferire Remonstrantes qui absolutam
tantum necessitatem rejiciunt ut pa^^et ex ipsorum verbis in nupera
declaratione exhibita, Ideoque putant consul^^us hunc cannonem posse omitti, a
pluribus multa de hac quaestione dicta sunt; quibus omnibus Britanni
Responderunt; Potior^^ tamen suffragia voluerunt canonem illum retineri,
praeses monuit sic concipiendum esse ut possit omnibus sati^^sieri.

Sessio 130. ^^odem die post meridiem] Leguntur Canones Synodici de 3. and 4.
articulis, ubi omnes ac singuli Synodici post ipsorum praelectionem viritim
consensum suum solennibus verbis testabantur; Varii Theologi tamen va^^ia
annotabant: sed quae tantum perspicuitatem in verbis spectabant; in re ipsa
nihil desiderantes.

Leguntur Canones Synodici de 5. articulo post ipsorum Lectionem singuli potro
(ut in prioribus) ipsos solenni consensu comprobabant: D. Goadus recitavit
catalogum duriorum phrasium quas Theologi Brittanni cupiebant a Synodo rejici,
eo quod exipsis, tum Remonstrantes tum Pontificii, doctrinam Reformatam
calumniandi magnam ansam sumerent; D. Scultetus etiam suadebat ut usus aliquis
a Synodo deligeretur qui ultimam manum canonibus imponeret, daterque operam ut
stylus canonum ubique par esset and limatus satis and perspicuus, aliqui nec
dictionem nec stylum mutari voluerunt; quidam quoque putabant non fore e re
Synodi ut duriores illae phrases rejicerentur a Synodo, quia sic laederetur
fama excellentissimorum virorum quorundam; Praeses movet die crastino mane
deputatos Synodicos conventuros esse, capturosque con^^ilium de mutandis illis
aut delendis quae observata sunt a quibusdam fratribus atque etiam de
rejiciendis phrasibus durioribus, idque ea ratione qua possit magis commode
omnibus satisfieri; porroque de praefatione, and Epilogo canonum prospecturos;
Rogatque ut singula collegia unum aliquem ad horam quartam pomeridianam
mi^^rant; qui describant ea quae conceperunt deputati, and ad collegia sua
referant, ut sic de omnium consensu cons^^are possit ante proximam Sessionem.

Sessio 131. 20. Aprilis stylo novo] Legitur Epilogus post Canones conceptus a
deputatis, in quo etiam continebatur abstersio calumni^^um quarundam, quibus
doctrinam Ecclesiarum Belgicarum Remonstrantes gravare conantur; Quaetitur an
omnes Synodici in forma prelecta acquiescant: Britanni voluerunt quaedam alia
rejectanea addita qualia erant illa duo praecipue [Deum movere Hominum linguas
ad blasphemandum] and [ Hominem non posse plus boni facere quam facit.]
Hassiaci legerunt scriptum prolixum and been conciunatum, in quo pluribus
rationibus ostendebant necessarium esse ut plures duriores locutiones quae apud
privatos scriptores reperiuntur, rejicerentur a Synodo, ut sic Ecclesiae
reformatae a gravissimis calumniis circa Reprobationis doctrinam liberari
possint: Bremenses itidem scripto been prolixo idem contendebant: Reliqui
Theologi Exteri formam jam prelectam probabant: D. Praeses movebat non roganda
esse provinci ^^lium suffragia ante Sessionem pomeridianam; quia vid^^bat
Theologos Exteros hic non idem sentire, and movet professores Belgicos ut in
horam quartam pensitent rations quae urrinque fuerunt allatae.

Sessio 132. eodem die post meridiem] D. Praeses antequam pergat in rogandis
suffragiis de quaesito antemeridiano, rogat Synodum ut velit audire quae ipse
una cum D. assessoribus tempore intermedio de rejectione duriorum locutionum
conceperant: and rogat Synodum ut velit ha^^c duo perpendere, primo neminem ex
Theologis Belgis istiusmodi nun quam scripsisse aut doc^^isse; ac proinde non
spectare illa ad hanc Synodum quae tantum Belgica esset: Secundo doctores illos
apud quos isthaec duriora dicta comperiuntur fuisse and esse vel Theologos
Anglos, vel Gallos, vel Germanos; qui cum a suis principibus and Ecclesiis ob
illas duriores loquendi formas non essent notati, ve^^isimile aiebat esse
principes illos and Ecclesias exteras aegre laturas si Synodus haec nationalis
Ipsos ob isthaec dicta aliqua censura notaret.

Legitur forma Epilogi jam de novo concepta, in qua plures aliquot incommodae
locutiones rejiciebantur quam in priori, sed nullae ex iis quos Theologi Exteri
addi cupiebant: Quaeritur Synodicorum de hoc Epilogo sententia: Britanni serio
urgent additionem plurium praesertim eorum quae Sessione antemeridiana
memoraverant: ad duas Rations a D. Praside allatas Respondebant ad primam
Remonstrantes in declarationibus suis ad Synodum exhibitis, multa loca contra
Remonstrantium, ipsos libros and paginas ci^^are in quibus istiusmodi
scripserint; nisi itaque Synodus istiusmodi dicta improbet, non posse Belgis ab
istiusmodi calumniis liberari ad secundum Theologos Exteros non debere quidem
in Synodo notari, verum si quid dixerint aut scripserint quod cedat Reforma^^ae
Ecclesiae in contumeliam; illud posse Synodum cujuscunque demum sit rejicere
neque hoc debere Synodum morari. Quod forrassis non sint Belgae, hac enim
ratione Synodo nihil permitti in Socinu^ cujus tamen dogmata saepius qua^ semel
in canonibus damnat; neque debuisse Regem Magnae Britanniae aliquid adversus
Vorstium statuere qui ipsius subditus non erat; optare se ut fiat summus
delectus eorum quae rejiciuntur, nec posse aliquam Reformatam Ecclesiam hoc
aegre far; cum nihil cupiant rejici quod a consensu alicujus Reformatae
Ecclesiae comprobatum sit: cupere se presertim ut illa sententia rejiciatur, [
Neminem posse plus boni facere quam facit] cum exinde nulli Reformato doctori
defuncto aliqua contumelia inferatur; cum sit sententia heri tantum nata, quae
vix septimum aetatis suae numeraret annum: Reliqui omnes Theologi exteri quia
cupiebant (ut ajebant ipsi) multum paci dare; in forma prelecta acquiescebant;
optabant tamen illi qui antemeridiem rations su^^s at ^^ulissent ut possint
plura rejici, Provinciales omnes formam praelectam probabant: and prosessores
Belgae multis rationibus contendeb^^nt non debere Synodum dicta virorum alioqui
optime de Ecclesia Reformata meritorum aliqua censura notare; D. Sibrandus
tamen ajebat negati non potuisse quin aliqui in Belgio duriora qua dam
docuerint quam essent illa quae Theologi Bri^^anni in caralogo suorum
rejectaneorum recitaverant, sub finem praeses monet cum haec sit res ordinis,
non doctrinae solius consulendos esse de hoc negotio Dominos Delegatos: qui
rogati deliberaturos se de re praesenti in Sessionem crastinam matutinam
pollicentur.

Sessio 133. 22 Aprilis stylo novo.] D. Praeses rogat D. Delegatos ut velint
Synodo exponere quid ipsi de Epilogo proxima Sessione prelecto statuant: D.
Delegati cupiunt ipsum Danuo Relegi, Relegitur: D. Delegati illum probant, and
rogant Synodicos ut si id fieri possit velint in ipso acquiescere, Orant porro
ut jam tandem quam fieri possit maturime negotium hoc. 5to articulorum semel
absolvant; quippe quod ipsi jam denuo iteraris Jussionibus urgeantur a D. Suis
ordinibus Generalibus ad hoc serio flagitandum: Rogantur Synodici de hac
formula praelecta; Britanni omnibus modis urgebant ut aliqua rejectanea porro
adderentur hoc prae^^ipue, [ Hominem non plus boni facere quam facit:] verum si
hoc obtineri nequiret; ut darent multum paci non nemo ex ipsis monebat,
ampliandam esse illam sentenriam [ Et quae alia sunt huju^^ generis plurima] ut
si quando exprobaretur ipsis aliqua horriblis sententia quam non rejecerant,
possent se excusare per illam parenthefin, and asserere omnia istiusmodi in
illa sententia rejecta fuisse a Synodo: Itaque ut paci and tempori consulant,
acquiescunt; monentes tamen illud omnino mutandum esse quod habetur in Epilogo;
doctrinam Reformatarum Ecclesiarum censendam esse Eam quae hisce canonibus
continetur, se enim profitebantur deputatos a serenissima Regia majestate non
ab Ecclesii^^ suis, nulla sibi commissam authoritatem qua possent Ecclesiarum
suarum confessiones explicare, tulisse se tantum privata sua judicia quae ipsi
putarent vera esse; multa se in canonibus tanquam vera conclusisse, de quibus
ne verbum quidem habetur in Ecclesiarum su^^rum confessionibus, verum quod
sciant nihil in illis contineri quod iftis confessionibus repugnaret: Reliqui
Synodo prelectum Epilogum probabant, et complurimi censebant reliquas duriores
loquendi formulas deberi in scripto Elenchico quod adornatur discuti; atque
illic calumnias quibus ob ipsas gravatur reformata Ecclesia debere depelli. D.
Praeses icaque mouet Deputatos Synodi a meridie conventuros, ut quam fieri
possit, canones illos duos Heterodoxos in primo articulo de quibus tantopere in
Synodo non ita pridem disceptabatur, ita componant ut singuli facile in
consensum adduci possent. Interea monet jam describi nitidum omnium Canonum
exemplar, quibus public in Synodo a singulis sessione crastina autemeridiana
subscribendum effet ut sic Canones -- absoluti eodem die possunt Hagam ad D.
Ord. Generales transmitti, sub initium enim hujus Sessionis, narrabat D.
Gregor: Martinii, D. Delegatos quosdam exipsorum numero delegisse qui die
Crastino Canones ad D. Ordines essent delaturi, hoc enim ajebat D. Ordines; et
cum Ecclesiae, tum Reipubli^^ae Belgicae statum deposcere.

Sessio 134. 33. Aprilis stylo novo.] Leguntur articuli de primo articulo
contraverso quibus omnes et singuli solenniter subscribunt, in tribus
exemplaribus, praeses monet a singulis collegiis unum exemplar describendum
esse cui etiam singuli Synodici subscripturi essent: loca Scripturae narrat
postea describenda esse et addenda fusius, quae jam per temporis angustias
describi non potuerunt: Narrat jam inter deputatos convenisse de mutatione
secundi articuli Heterodoxi in secundo articulo in tres articulos, et deletione
ultimi Heterodoxi in eodem articulo qui erat de absoluta necessitate
similitudinis naturae in mediatore nostro: quae mutata etant in secundo
Heterodoxo leguntur; et rogat D. Praeses singulos ut in sessionem pomeridian^^m
deliberent number possint in mutatis acquiescere.

Sessio 135. eodem die post meridiem.] Rogantur Synodicorum sussragia number
placeat ipsis ut ultimus ille Heterodoxus Canon in secundo articulo deleatur,
et secundus ille in tres praelectos Canones mutetur, placuit omnibus et
singulis. Leguntur itaque Canones de secundo, tertio, quarto, quinto,
articulis, quibus etiam singuli solemniter subscribunt, duravit haec sessio in
horam 10. vespertinam.

Sessio 136. 24. Aprilis stylo novo.] D. Praeses monet D. Deputatos a Synodo,
mandasse uni, ut conciperet formam personalis censurae quam Synodus exerceret
adve^^sus citatos, et quoscunque alios qui recusarent doctrinam Synodicam,
varios quoque Synodicos Deputatis formulas obtulisse, ^^os tandem in unam
convenisse, quae nunc prelegenda esset Synodo ut eam probet, vel corrigat:
legitur, fuit autem in hanc sententiam, Synodum censere Remonstrantes esse
novatores et perturbatores patriae, Reipub. praesertim Ecclesiae Belgicae,
ejusmodi docuisse dogmata quae a verbo dei, et confessionibus Reformatarum
Ecclesiarum dissentirent, praeterea citatos ad hanc Synodum tentri reos
contumaciae adversum cum supremum Magistratum cujus decreta spreverint, ^^um
ipsam Synodum quam pro legitimo judice nunquam voluerunt agnoscere, ideoque
Synodum omnes ad praesentem Synodum abdicare ab omnibus suis muneribus tum
Ecclesiasticis tum Academicis, eo usque dum paenitentiam agant de falsis
dogmatibus a se scriptis, prelectis, et doctis, et possint hanc suam
paenitentiam indubitatis studiis et signis Ecclesiis Belgicis testatam facere,
reliquos vero Remonstrantes in Belgio ad Synodos provinciales remittit, quibus
mandat ut ductores et pertinaces continuo omnibus suis muneribus abdicent,
reliquos vero vitio temporis lapsos, et a seductoribus abreptos omni lenitate
et patientia, conentur in viam reducere, quos si lucrifacere possint omni
conatu id agant, sin minus pa^^iter et cum ipsis agant: Porro Synodus,
illustrissimos ord. Generales obnixe rogat ut hanc suam sententiam de quinque
articulis, atque etiam de Remonstrantibus abdicandis firmam et ratam esse
velint et jubeant, gratiasque ipsorum Dominationibus cum omni debito obsequio
desert propter ipsorum de reformandis Ecclesiis suis studium fingulare:
Queritur Synodicorum judicium de censura hac personali: Theologi Britanni omnes
ac singuli respondebant doctrinam Ecclesiarum Belgicarum hic in Synodo assertam
suam fuisse, ac proinde ipsos vocatos sententiam suam de illo exposuisse,
personas vero qui contrariam sententiam docu^^rint esse cives Belgas; Ideoque
de aliorum subditis nolle se ullo modo personalem sententiam far, ideoque se
censuram omnino provincialibus relinquere, quibus, integrum esset de suis
ministris statuere: idem sentiebant omnes Theologi exteri, exceptis
Genevensibus et Embdanis qui sententiam praelectam probabant, et Bremensibus
qui tempus deliberandi poscebant: Provinciales quaedam in forma praelecta
observabant: Cujusmodi suit illud non esse fori Ecclesiastici eos damnare
tanquam perturbatores patriae et pacis Reip, hoc spectare ad civilem
magistratum: magna fuit disceptatio inter provinciales an tollerandi essent
illi qui uteunque nollent subscribere articulis Synodicis, tamen reciperent se
nihil unquam vel public vel privatim adversus ipsos dicturos aut docturos:
quidem ex provincialibus petebant ut The ologi Exteri de hac re suam sententiam
aperitent, sed D. Praeses respondebat is^^a particularia omnino oportere
relinqui Synodorum provincialium prudentiae, et nescire se adhuc quam
tollerantiam permissuri essent D. Ord. Generales, itaque forma prelecta, si
paucula quaedam mutarentur, ab omnibus provincialibus probata est, exceptis
Zelandis et Gallobelgicis qui spatium deliberand^^ de re gravissuna petiverunt.

Sessio 137.] Relegitur censura personalis emendata in qua illud de
perturbatione patriae et ^^eip. omittebatur: quaeritur Synodicorum sententia de
ipsa jam correcta, Britanni et Hasciaci eam nec probabant nec improbabant,
noluetunt enim se personalibus immiscere, reliqui omnes Exteri, ut aiebant re
ipsa melius perpensa quam ante meridiem came probabant, exceptis Bremensibus,
quorum duo priores initius quoddam consilium suggerebant, tertius vero D.
Crocius rem putabat esse maximi momenti ideoque nihil posse se de ea statuere
nisi apographum formulae praelectae et tempus deliberandi concedatur:
provinciales, omnes eam probabant, Gomarus autem etalii petebant ut Synodus
apud ord. generales intercederet pro largiendo Remonstrantibus minus
percinacibus trimestri stipendio, fortassis enim possent cupere illo tempore
cum viris doctis confer suisque conscientiis de canonibus Synodicis
satissacere; sed volnit ipsos primo quoque tempore a ministeris sui exercitio
suspendi, D. Praeses Respondebat non esse e dignitate Synodi tam Angustae, ut
intercedat apud D. Ordines pro re stipendiaria, verum non dubitare se quin D.
Ordines benign satis et clementer cum ipsis acturi essent: rogatur D.
Delegatorum de hac praelecta censura judicium, qui respondebant se nolle tantum
sibi assumere ut ipsam probent, sed delaturos se ipsam D. Ord. generalibus, a
quibus solis comprobatio expectanda esset: Theologi Britanni monebant in hac
censura dici Synodicos articulos conclusos esse secundum sententiam omnium
Reformatarum Ecclesiarum quo dicto in nuebatur Ecclesias Lutheranas, quae
aliter sentirent, non habendas esse pro Reformatis, quod ipsis durum admodum
videbatur; D. Scultetus, et Polyander reponebant, ipsos Lutheranos nomen hoc
deprecari, et nostris Ecclesiis ex hoc nomine ( Reformatarum) solere invidiam
conslare, et D. Praeses addebat hic in Belgio solere nostras Ecclesias per
illud nomen ( Reformatas) non solum a pontificiis verum etiam a Lutheranis
distingui: Britanni respondebant in suis Ecclesiis Lutheranos haberi pro
Reformatis, ut pote a quibus Religionis Reformatio primum tentata est,
habereque se porro in mandatis a serenissimo D. Rege ut quantum fieri possent
despicerent ne offenderentur Ecclessae Lutheranae, itaque addita est isthaec
vox Nostrarum.

Leguntur blasphemae opiniones duorum fratrum Thomae, et Petri Gesterranorum,
qui Remonstrantes erant, et ab Ordin^^bus Hollandiae et West-Frisiae suspensi a
ministeriis dum Synodus possit de ipsorum opinionibus cognoscere.

Sessio 138. 25. Aprilis stylo novo.] Legitur supplex libellus Johannis Macovii
Theologiae professoris in Academia franekerana, quo gravissime queritur se apud
ordines Frisiae in simulatum fuisse hereseos a D. Sibrando Luberto, petit
itaque suppliciter ut Synodus velit de tota causa cognoscere, ut audito
Sibrando ipse possit d^^cere pro se s^^ltem ut Sibrandus et ipse ex Synodicis
arbitros deligant, qui totum hoc negotium diligenter examinent et ad Synodum
referant, Praees rogat D. Sibrandum ut exponat coram Synodo sente^^tiam suam de
tota hac lite, Sibrandus negat se unquam suisse Macovii accusatorem, verum
testimonio duorum fratrum Frisiorum probat ipsum a class Franekerana fuisse
accusatum, se autem jussu D. ordinum Frisiae, et rogatu praedictae classis
solum classis os pro illo tempore fuisse, itaque sicut ante hac in hac lite
pars non suerat, fic et nunc nullo modo se velle haberi pro part protestatur:
D. praeses narrat conveniens esse ut Synodus de hac causa cognoscat, quia id
serio petunt D. Ordines Ftisiae per literas suas ad D. Delegatos, atqne etizm
huc ad Synodum omnia acta in lite hac apud ipsos contestata transmisctint.
Queritur itaque a Synodo cum Sibrandus non sit pars, an debeat ipse Macovins
primum audiri, an vero ipso semoto ex actis ordinum Frisiae de causa cognosci,
placuit Synodo ut primum acta prelegerentur, deinde si opus esset, ut auditetur
coram Macovins.

Legitur proaemium been longum quod praefigendum esset canonibus Synodicis,
quaeritur de illo judicium Synodi, quod sic se habebat, esse putabat isihoc
proaemium nimls longum, porro que styli sublimis admodum, adeoque a stylo
canonum admodum disparis, Ideoque ^^mnino brevius conficiendum esse putat,
succinctum and nervosum, exponens occasionem and finem convocatae Synodi, quod
praemit tendum esset Canonibus, si fortassis ab actis Synodicis seorsim
excudantur: praeses itaque monet deputatos Synodicos ut ante meridiem
conveniant, ut ex pluribus brevioribus formulis, quae sibi a variis Synodicis
essent oblatae: unum aliquod succinctum proaemium possent conficere.

Sessio 139. eodem die post meridiem.] Legitur aliud novum brevius proaemium a
deputatis Synodicis ex variis formulis sibi oblatis confectum: quod totum
Synodo placuit si paucula quaedam mutarentur: Britanni putabant pro [
Anti-christi tyrannide] magis commode diciposse [ Anti-Christiana tyrannide]
quia ut ut fortassis verum putarent pontificem Romanum esse magnum illum
Antichristum, tamen sine justo examine praemisso vix putarent debere hoc a
Synodo determinari, quod a nulla Reformata Ecclesia adhuc excepta Gallicana
quae and jam articulum illum ex confessione sua retraxit sactum esset; quidam
ex Synodicis aegre ferebant hoc vocari in quaestionem; quibus reponebant
Britanni, non vocari nunc rem ipsam nlmirum an pontifex Romanus esset ille
antichristus qui quaestionem; sed hoc an debeat hoc a Synodo determinari nulla
deliberatione praemissa.

Sessio 140. 26. Aprilis stylo novo.] Legitur alter supplex libellus Macovii,
quo petit ut arbitri deligantur, and ut responsum suum ad errores sibi objectos
ipsiusque explicatio legi possit. D. Scribae and porro D. Thysius and D. Lydius
publica fide testantur se quaedam exemplaria canonum Synodicorum cum criginali
fideliter contulisse, eaque cum ipso per omnia convenire, quibus singuli
Synodici subscribunt.

Leguntur acta in lite Macovii ad Synodum ab ordinibus Frisiae transmissa; and
primum legebantur. 50. errores objecti D. Macovio in class Franekerana quos
videre poteris in altero meo libro Synodico: qui revera primo quoque auditu
videbantur exceptis uno aut altero, non suisse tanti momenti ut homo doctus de
illis coram Synodo accusaretur: complurimi ipsorum erant ex ista receptissima
distinctione agentis Physice and moraliter, ab accusatore male intellecta.

Sessio 141. eodem die post meridiem.] Legitur una D. Macovii Responsio ad
errores sibi objectos; deinde alia brevior, in utraque satisfaciebat criminibus
sibi objectis abunde satis, alios negando, alios explicando.

Legitur Epistola facultatis Theologicae Heidlebergensis ad Ordines Frisiae, in
qua facultas Theologica monet dominos ordines Frisiae ne patiantur Theses tam
otiosas metaphysicas, obscuras, falsas in suis scholis disput ari, quales
fuerant nuper in Academia Franeke^^ana Theses de traductione sub Macovio
disputarae.

D. Praeses quarit a Synodo an ubetior Macovii explicatio quam hic offert
Synodo, deberet etiam in Synodo legi, and qua ratione pergendum sit in hac
causa: Quidam ex Exteris Theologis dicebant potuisse illos. 50. errores, ad
quinque vel etiam quatuor reduci potuisse; nec ullum crimen haereseos sicut
objectum fuerat in illis deprehendi; Omnes exteri per deputatos rem putant
agendam, and cupiunt duos exteros nominari and totidem professores B^^lgicos,
quibus adjungi possent duo pastores qui de tota causa cognoscant, and referant
ad Synodum, plerique ipsorum explicationem prolixam Macovii putant non
audiendam in Synodo, sed referendam etiam ad deputatos: Genevenses soli hoc
consilium non probabant: Deodatus rem ad solos provinciales voluit deserri post
exterorum discessum; Tronchinus vero oratione vehementissime contendebat nullo
modo Macovium audiendum esse coram; sed debere agi cum illo tanquam cum
Remonstrantibus and Episcopio: Illum judicandum ex scriptis: quod Judicium in
hominem nullo modo heterodoxias suspectum mirabantur omnes: dum suffragium
dandum esset a D. Sibrando, Immodeste satis invehebatur in Festum exprobrans ei
summam in se ingratitudinem: recitabarque porro novum catalogum oplnionum D.
Macovii quae ejusdem erant farinae cum prioribus: festus venia fandi a praeside
impetrata modeste satis D. Sibrandum excipiebat, narrabat theses illas
compositas fuisse no^ a D. Macovio sed a quoda^ Parkero Iuvene Doctissimo, and
ab omnis heterodoxias suspitione long remotissimo; and licet nunc Sibrandus
sustinete partem accusatoris recuset, tamen se a quibusdam fide dignis
accepisse, omnes illos errores Macovio objectos; D. Sibrandum ex Thesibus illis
and aliis ipsus praelectionibus compilasse, quod ut audiebat D. Sibrandus
vehementissime commotus bis deum vindicem in animam suam precabatur ^^ isthaec
vera essent; adeo ut D. Praeses eum saepius modestiae sanctae and Reverentiae
Synodo debitae Jusserit meminisse.

Sessio 142. 27. Aprilis stylo novo.] Pe^^gitur in rogandis suffragiis de causa
Macovii plures Mirabantur eum ob illas Theses po^^se haereseos insimulari,
praelertim cum unus ex South-Hollandis testatus sit D. Aimesium: illas theses
primum vidisse and approbasse, and jam paratum esse qui ipsas defendat: tandem
potioribus suffragiis, statutum est tertium scriptum Macovii legendum esse
public in Synodo, and tres ex Theologis Exteris, totidem ex provincialibus
deputandos esse qui rem totam cognoscant and referant ad Synodum^^ verum quia
D. Preses dicebat illud scriptum continere multa personalia praesertim in D.
Sibrandum compilata, Quidam ex Exteris ob p^^cem conservandam petierunt, ut
rogarentur de is^^ho^^ den^^o Synodicorum suffragia, quod factum est: and plura
suflragia tum voluerunt legi tantum privatim apud deputatos: Nominati itaque
sunt potioribus suffragiis deputati ad causam hanc audiendam, ex exteris
Scultetus, Sthenius, Brittingerus: Ex provincialibus Gomarns, Thysius, Menius:
certe Exteri mirabantur D. Scultetum nominatum fuisse a provincialibus, and
multo magis D. Scultetum id munus velle subire cum facultas Theologica
Heidelbergensis, cujus ipse pars esset, theses illas quae examinandae sunt jam
hactenus tanquam otiosas, metaphysicas, and falsas damnaverit.

Sessio 143. 29. Aprilis stylo novo] Leguntur literae Belgicae a magistratu and
presbytero Campensi ad Synodum quibus rogat Synodum ut velit scribere ad
magistratum and presbyterium Arnemiense ut velit dimittere D. D. Stephani, quem
poscunt ipsis pastorem dari: Item ut ve. lit ad magistratum and presbyterium
quoque scribere pro dimissione D. Plancis, Synodus noluit se istiusmodi
negotiis immiscere, ne fortassis cederet in praejudicium classium and
presbyteriorum: Leguntur al^^ae literae a magistratu Campensi, quibus petunt ut
per Synodum liceat Ecclesiae Remonstranticae Campensi in templis suis habere
lectionem sacrae Scripturae per lectores suos, eo usque dum posset ipsi
prospici de pastoribus: D. Praeses monet perscriptum esse campis lectores illos
solere attexere capitibus prelectis longas enarrationes subministratas sibi a
duobus ministris suis jam a Synodo suspensis, quibus doctrina Remonstranium
asserebant, and in Orthodoxam invehebantur: porro duos ipsorum ministros qui
sunt ex numero citatorum hic ad Synodum, misisse hinc literas ad Ecclesiam
Remonstrantium quae est campis: quibus plebem animabant ad constantiam in
Remonstrantium doctrina, jubebantque brevi certissimam liberationem ab hac
persecutione expectare; quae literae ante dies non ita multos a lectoribus
public in templo pro tota blebe recitabantur.

Leguntur aliae literae Belgicae a Domino Battenberg, quibus Belgio Synodum
gratulatur; promittitque se onaturum ut inditione sua, obtineat illa doctrina
quae hic a Synodo stabilita esset.

Legitur proaemium praesigendum Canonibus jam emendatum, ubi pro [Antichristi]
ponebatur [Romani Antichristi] quo vocabulo addito satisfy bat illis qui
voluerunt sine deliberatione a Synodo statim pontificem Romanum esse insignem
illum Antichristum; sed Antichristum tamen, atque ita proaemium sic emendatum
omnibus placuit.

Legitur confessio Petri Molinae^^ pastoris Ecclesiae Reformatae Parisiensis
super quinque articulis in Belgio contraversis; quam huc ad Synodum transmisit.

Sessio 144. eodem die post meridiem.] Pergitur in prelectione confessionis
Petri Molinaei: D. Praeses monet jam rediisse Haga D. Delegatos, qui Canones
Synodicos illuc ad illustriss. ord. Generales detulerant: oratque ipsorum
Dominationes, ut velint eoram Synodo exponere; Quid D. Ord. General: de ipsis
sentiant. D. Greg. M^^rtinii oratione brevissima refert Ord. Generales
summopere gavisos esse de Synodico consensu, in canonibus; probare ipsorum
dominations, eos universos and singulos, agereque de labor exantlavo
Theologiis tum Exteris tum Provincialibus gratias maximas: rogare porro ut jam
Synodus velit proximo in loco confessionem Belgicam perlustrare, in qua nihil
mutatum cupiunt fine gravi and necessaria causa:

Dies Lunae proximus publicandis Canonibus omninm Synodicorum consensu
judicitur.

Praeses^^ togat Singulos ut velint dilig^^nter attendere lectioni confessionis
Belgicae; incidit quaestio, quaenam editio confessionis Belgicae habenda esset
pro authentica, cum ipsus editiones multum discreparent: eam statuit Synodus
legenda^, and perlustrandam quae inseritur Syntagmati confessionum Ecclesiarum
Reformatarum: Illa itaque public prelegitur: D. Praeses rogat singula collegia
ut in horam nonam crastini diei velint exhibere collegialia judicia de
confessione prelecta tota, exceptis tribus articulis videlicet 30. 31. 32. qui
ordinen and Regimen Ecclesiae spectant, Rogat singulos ut non velint insistere
in latinitate, aut phraseologia sed simpliciter, far judicium number quicquid
illa contineatur; quod non sit verbo divino consentaneum.

Sessio 145. 30. Aprilis, stylo novo.] Quaeritur judicium Synodicum de
confessione Belgica, Britanni Probant omnia dogmata ipsius, putant nihil in ca
quoad substantiam contineri, quod sacrae paginae repugnet, quaedam minutiora in
ea observabant, sed quae fac^^llime ex collatis exemplaribus in correcta, and
nova quam parant editione emendari possent, monent de tribus capitibus, quae
ordinem Ecclesiasticum spectant se nullam far sententiam, sed interim putare
se regimen Ecclesiarum suarum esse institutionis Apostolicae: Episcopus autem
Landavensis oratione brevissima contra illa tria praedicta capita perorabat;
contendebatque in Ecclesia neque Apostolorum temporibus, neque postea unquam
fuisse ministrorum aequalitatem: Itaq: communi Britannorum consensu declaratum
est, nihil in confessione Belgica contineri, quod pugnaret cum sacra pagina,
aut analogia fidei. Eximus omnes ad funus D. Canteri Senioris Ultrajectini
unius ex deputatis Synodicis, Redimus, Legitu^^ judicium deputatorum a Synodo
in causa Macoviana; cujus summa haec erat; D. Macovium nullius, gentilismi,
judaismi, pelagianismi, socinianismi, aut alterius conjuscunque haeresos reum
teneri, immeritoque illum fuisse accusatum, peccasse eum, quod quibusdam
ambiguis, and obscuris Phrasibus scholasticis usus sit, quod scholasticum
docendi modum conetur in Belgicis Academiis introducere quod eas selegerit
quaestiones disceptandas, quibus gravantur Ecclesiae Belgicae: Monendum esse
eum, ut eum Splritu Sancto loquatur, non cum Bellarmino aut Suarezio: hoc vitio
vertendum ipsi, quod distinctionem sufficientiae and efficientiae mortis
Christi asseruerit esse futilem, quod negaverit humanum genus lapsum esse
objectum praedestinationis, quod dixerit Deum velle, and decernere peccata,
quod dixerit D eum nullo modo velle omnium hominum salutem, quod dix. erit duas
esse electiones: Judicant denique liticulam hanc inter D. Sibrandum, and D.
Macovium componendam esse, and deinceps neminem debere eum talium criminum
insimulare.

Sessio 146. eodem die post meridiem.] Pergitur in rogandis suffragiis de
confessione Belgica in eadem sint sententia cum Britannis: propter editionum
varietatem petunt, ut exaretur exemplar aliquod unum exactum. ord. generalium
authoritate confirmandum.

Sessio 147. calend. Maii. stylo novo.] D. Gregorius Martinii exponit mentem
Illustriss. ord. general, eandem esse de Catechesi, quae fuerat de confessione;
Rogat itaque Synodum ut de Gatechesi quoque Palatino-Belgica velit sententiam
dicere, nec tam methodum, aut Phraseologiam spectare, quam dogmata doctrinalia:
Legitur totus catechismus: Rogantur Synodici, ut ad horam. 4. Pomeridianam
parent le ad rerendum collegialia de catechesi perfecta judicia.

Sessio 148. eodem die post meridiem.] Omnium judiciis approbantur dogmata in
eo catechismo comprehensa, ut verbo dei coasentanea, ac pie prudenterque
conscripta, Britanni de interpretatione articuli, de discensu Christi ad
inferos suam ab aliis Ecclesiam vindicat al^^ter explicandi potestatem:
Ac^^demum propter gravem ab urbe Dordrechtana datam neglecti diei dominici
offensionem, rogant, ac monent Synodum, ut apud Magistratum intercedat, ne
forenses emptiones, apertis mercium officinis eo die exerceri permit^^ant: ea
occasion a quodam ex provincialibus mota quaestio de observatione Sabbathi,
sed non discussa penitus, quia rejecta inter gravamina provincialia post ubi
tune nostra tractanda.

Sessio 149. 2. Maii. stylo novo.] Gregor^^ Martini unus ex politicis
delegatis, Synodo and ordinum mentem exponit de Vorstio, eos nempe mandare, ut
de Theologia ejus fiat summaria ex scriptis cognitio, ac ut eo respiciant
judicia Synodica, utrum doctrina Vorstiana ad Ecclesiae aedificationem faciat,
adeoque talis doctor Dignus videatur, qui Cathedram teneat^^ Theologi eum:
Scripsit jam tum Vorstius eodem exemplo literas ad singula exterorum collegia,
simulque ad Synodum publicas: eaeque perleguntur, in quibus Synodi
aequanimitatem, and Christianam charitate^ implorat, s^^u^ cora^ Synodo
co^pare^di desideriu^ insinuat, rogat, ut si quae ab ipso liberius suit
disputatu^, veritatis eruendae studio imputetur, ut rationibus ex verbo dei
petitis convincatur, se paratum esse testatur ad collationem cum Exteris
Theologis in eundam item ad heresin Socinianam refutandum, si ipsi ea mandetur
provincia. Nec posse sibi persuadere comburendos ipsius libros, cum quaedam
Piscatoris scripta long horridiora, et bonis moribus infensiora non sint rogo
addicta.

Lecta hac, epistolae antiquae nonnullae Vorstii simulatoriae, et vulpinae
praesertim circa sui explicationem, ac palinodiam Heidelbergae praestitam
frauds in medium proferuntur deinde er^^orum, et blasphemiarum Vorstii
catalogus a Belgicis professoribus collectus Synodo praelegitur ad capita
reductus de dei attributis, Christique deitate, ab illo partim aperte partius
clanculum imminutis.

Sessio 150. 3. Maii stylo novo.] Collegia singula tam exterorium, quam
provincialium suum proferunt de vorstio judicium scripto exaratum, Britanni
lecta a se collecta precipuarum Vorstianarum contra divinam naturam
blasphemiarum Synopsi, monenti Vorstium dato hoc scandalo, nunquam tamen in
subsequentibus suis seu explicationibus, five defensionibus ullum in suo de dei
attributis libro propositum errorem agnoscere, sed absurdissimis
distinctiunculis, et inanibus subterfugiis obvelare, imo etiam praecipua
orthodoxae doctrinae fundamenta callide pro viribus suffodere. Se itaque non
modo ipsum Vorstium orthodoxe professoris munere ac nomine indignum judicare,
sed etiam persuadere ne hujusmodi ejus libri in bibliopiliis prostare
permittantur. Denique rogare, ut in exemplum, sanctium in dei causa zeli
testimonium Vorstii de deo tractatus sumi magistratus jussu, aut Synodi decreto
eadem munito palam solenniterque flammis absumatur, simulque hujusmodi infamis
holocausti specimen. A Britannis eorum Synodo legitur authenticum
procancellarii Cantabrigensis sigillo munitum, decretum 21. Septembris 1611.
Cujus vi etiam Serenissimi regis nostri iudicio preeunte public flammis
ultricibus expurgatus est liber praedictus: ejusdemque decreti Cantabrigiensis
exemplar inter Synodi acta relatum. Serenissimi regis, et Cantabrigensis
intentio se examini subscribere testantur Palatini Theologi, ac Vorstii
palinodiam multis abhinc annis Heidelbergae prestitam, quam fuerat fraudulenta
narrant.

Hassiaci etiam commemorant quam fuerat post modum non modo parum grata, sed
etiam invisa illustrissimo suo domino Landigravio dedicatio sui de deo libri,
eidem pio principi nuncupata, quamque prudenter ipsum Vorstium princeps ille ad
se commendatum ad Cathedram professoriam admittere recusaverat. De Vorstio ut
cathedra indigno exautorando reliqui tum exteri tum provinciales omnes
consentiant quod autem se obtulerit jam pugilem evocandum contra Socinianos
responsum est. Non tali auxilio, nec defensoribus istis,
Tempus egit. --
Ut pote cum ipse Vorstius ad errorum, hereseon curriculum etiam Socianismi sit
suspectissimus, nec ex animo rem ges^^rus putetur: ac in eo negotio sibi dudum
commisso, nihil prorsus prestiterit.

Sessio 151. 4. Maii stylo novo.] Decretum quoddam Synodicum de Vorstii causa
conceptum legitur et approbandum proponitur inde nonnulla interpellanda, alia
omittenda, alia explicanda, moventur presertim a Britannis, qui hic urgent
quaedam attribui Vorstio, de capite justificationis de quibus, nec dum satis
constat, quid asserat Vorstius, illin^^ autem omitti alia, aut non satis aperte
damnari, quae maxim blasphema sunt, et Ecclesiae quasi universae Christianae
gravissimum commoverunt offendiculum, ibidem multis agitatum, cum Verstius
corporis ejusdem resurrectionem neget, aut Christi satisfactionem cum Socino
penitus tollat. Et rei probandae leguntur privatae Vorstii ad Dominum Tossanum
llterae pluribus abhinc annis scriptae in quibus aperte Socinianismom,
profitetur. Sed a Britannis responsum judicandum reum ex libris a se agnitis et
publicatis, non ex epistola privata de qua etiam non constat number ab ipso
conscripta fuerit, constet ante scriptum fuisse ante palinodiam ejus
Heidelbergensem. De libro Vorstii comburendo Synodus non volt statuere, sed ad
summum refert magistratum.

Sessio 152. eodem die post meridiem.] Decretum contra Vorstium denuo
proponitur paulo mutatum, in eo desiderant Britanni plura dei attributa a
Vorstio impetita recenseri, ac Vorstii de Christi satisfactione et hominis
justificatione sententiam, vel in censura omitti, vel Synodo, ut de eo melius
constet, explicare. De his aliisque Vorstianis dogmatibus diu multumque
disceptatur. Tandem consensum est in eam, quae sancita est formam, (quam vide
in altero meo libro Synodico,) qua Vorstius ob suam in suffodiendis praecipuis
fidei fundamenris audaciam et impietatem indignus Cathedra Theologica
judicatur. Optaturque ne ipsius libri de deo passim volitare permittantur, et
nonnulla speciatim alia quae in eodem decreto continentur. Ante quam
dimitteretur hic confessus qui in multam noctem duravit, legitur: et per plu^^a
Synodi suffragia approbatur, sententia dependatorum in causa Macoviana qui eum
ab omni haeresi absolvendum censuerunt, sed monendum ut Theologiam docendi
modum commodiorem sequatur, verborumque formis ex sacra scriptura petitis
utatur etiam justam eum reprehensionem incurrere ob quasdam propositiones ab
ipso erudius et ^^igidius assertas. His itaque clam compositis, interpellat
Frisius quidam senex nomine Donia se quod ad ipsum attinet Macovium (qui suum
passus est tacit obvolvi negotium) nihil velle commovere: se ipsum autem^^
aliosque nonnullos hac in causa laesos, ideoque comuni collegarum nomine coram
Synodo protestari salvo jure ut agant contra accusatores, parts autem
accusatorias domino Sibrando esse demandatas, constare ex literis quibusdam
publicis, quas e sinu deprompsit, ac coram Synodo legi postulavit,
increbescenti hac in inexpostulatione plurium servori, ac multiloquio, modum
imponunt Delegati politici malleo suo, quo mos est silentium obstr^^pentibus
imperare. Denique praeses ad Synodum ^^efert diem lunae proximum Canonibus in
majore u^^bis Templo publicandis destinatum esse, et sic conventus dimittitur.

Sessio 153. 6. Maii stylo novo.] Convenimus primum in loco Synodali, ubi erat
spectatorum nobiliumet aliorum, uttiusque sexus maximus confluxus; praeses
solennem precationem concipit; qua hodierno negotio faustum successum vovet,
auditorium dimittitur, paulo post, singuli Synodici non sine decora pompa a
loco Synodali ad magnum Templum per platcas Dordrechtanas pergunt; nudique,
cuncti numerosis spectatoribus, incedebant autem Synodici bini, hoc ordine,
primo incedebant illustrissimo ordines Generales Delegati quos sequebatur
ipsorum Secretarius D. Heinsius: postea sequuti sunt D. Episcopus Landavensis;
et D. Praeses Synodi ipsi a sinistra, dein reliqui omnes Theologi Exteri,
secundum loca ipsis, in Synodo de signata, Exteros sequebantur D. assessores et
scribae; post illos D. professores Belgici, et post ipsos reliqui provinciales
Theologi, secundum illum quo in Synodi sedebant ordinem, In templum devenimus
capacissimum et splendidum, quod tamen ingenti auditorum numero suit
repletissimum, inter quos suerunt complurimi nobiles et Generosi, in utroque
sexu cum ex Belgico, tum etiam ex aliis nationibus, occuparunt Synodici loca
sua in choro templi ubi tota haec solennitas peragebatur, a part dextra
considebant, primum D. Praeses Ecclesiasticus, post eum D. Assessores et
scribae, post illos D. Episcopus, reliquique deinceps se cu^du^ ordinem
Synodicu^, Theol. Exteri, in loco editiori et satis co^modo, in scamnis
inferioribus co^fidebant illust. ord. Gener. delegati, pos^^ illos D.
Professores Belgici, D. Praeses singulis suo ordine jam collocatis, ex pulpito
ibi extructo co^modissime sito ad partem chori occidentalem adeoque in ipsa
Templi medietate, ubi possit co^modissime a co^sertissi^^a corona ex audiri,
solennitatem auspicatus est precatione valde prolixa, sed pientisima et
appo^^itis^^ima, cujus prior pars et multo longior fuit ex solis scripturaru^
sententiis, cum summ^^ elegantia, et judicio contexta, planeque concinnata ad
venerandu^ antiquitatis stylum, legebat eam ex Schedulis descriptis, duravitque
per hor^^dimidium, postea sine ullo prae famine, narrat qua^ brevissime
auditorio indictu^ fuisse hanc solennem conventu^, ut omnes jam tandem fructum
laboru^ Synodicoru^ perciperent, audiren^^que prelectos illos canones, quos tot
tantisque laboribus exantlatis, immenso dei beneficio, et suavissima omniu^ ac
singulor u^m co^spiratione, veneranda Synodus conceperat, ac efformaverit.

Itaque D. Da^ma^nus unus ex scribis Synodicis, in idem pulpitu^ ascendit, ac
prin u^ prelegit proaemium quod canonibus praefigitur: quo prelecto, D^^
Praeses monet omnes auditores ut ex more recepto, singuli velint hodierna^
laetitiam, et suam divinae majestati gratitudinem testari erogando ^^leemosyna^
pauperibus: quam diaconi quida^ Ecclesiae Dordrech^^anae ad id muneris
designati colligebant, procul dubio satis amplam: neminem enim observavimus qui
manum suam front hilari non porrigebat, redit ad pulpitum D. Dammannus et
aggreditur ipsorum canonum praelectionem, lectis articulis primi capitis
contraversi, propter templi magni^^dinem, et spissas frequentissimi auditorii
animas, deficere incipiehat ipsum vox, itaque D. Festus Hommius alter scriba
Synodicus pulpitum conscendit, legitque canones de secundo tertio et quarto
articulis; et voce ipsum qnoque ob praedictas causas deficiente, rediit D.
Damma^^nus, legi^^que canones de quinto articulo, et Epilogum Synodicum, quibus
finitis legit quoque singulorum subscriptiones, singuliad nomina sua audita
sidem canonum apertione capitis restabantur postea legit quoque Idem sc^^iba
Synodi censuram personalem de Remonstrantibus cui non addita crant singulorum
Syngraphae, eo quod quidam ex Exteris voluerint de hominum personis sed tantum
de ipsorum doctrina aliquid statuere.

Post omnia lecta, legebatur quoque testimonium, D. Delegatorum, quo testantur
se inter, fuisse dum isthaec agrerentur, om^^iaque quae jam prelecta fuerant
optima ^^fide relata fuisse; quod singuli una cum D. Heinsio ipsorum
secretario, suis Syngraphis comprobant, monet porro D. Praeses, confessionem
and catechesin Belgicam esse quoque a Synodo comprobatas; and sic concludit cum
precatione and gratiarum action; ejusde^ Plane flyli cum priori and fere Paris
prolixitatis; post absolutam totam solennitatem pulsantur Organa, and sic omnes
Synodici domum redeu^^ted locum Synodicum eodem plane ordine quo venerant; Ibi
dominus Praeses monet jam omnia negotia Synodica quae poscerent opem Exterorum
Theologorum, abloluta esse; Ideoque monet ut singula collegia duos mittant qui
ad horam quartam Pomeridiana incipiant describere canonet, quibus postea
subscribant ipse cum Assessoribus and scribis, ut sic singula collegia habeant
exemplar authenticum asservandum in perpetuam rei memoriam: brevi precatione
Synodum dimittit.

Sessio 154. and ultima. 9. Maii. stylo novo.] D. Praeses movet hune ultimum
Synodi conventu^ celebrari ad agendu^ Deo gratias pro exoptatissimo Synodi
exitu, porr^^que ad agendas gratias Theologis Exteris pro gravissimis laboribus
susceptis: Gregorius Martini unus ex Delegatis, ^^ precatione^ habet suavissima
and justae prolixitatis qua Deo gratias agit pro asserenda religionis punirate
in Ecclesis Belgicis, operi and consiliis hujus Synodi, precaturque iisdem
Ecclesiis in veritate hic asserta invictam constantia^, Precatione finita,
oratione eleganti Theologos Exteros co^pellat, nomine Illustriss ord. genesis
singulis gratias rependit pro saluberrimis ipsoru^ consiliis, and
gra^^vis^^imis laboribus quibus hoc tempore Ecclesias Belgicas sublevassent,
itidem and ingentibus illis princibus Rebuspublicis, Magistratibus qui ipsos
delegassent, nominatim ipsos cu^ summa observantia recensendo; rogatque ut
Ecclesias Belgicas ipsoru^ ^^elsitudinibus curatent fore co^mendatissimas:
rogat ut singuli praesentes persuadeant sibi de prolixissimo ord. genesis erga
ipso animo, utque ante discessum Hagam comitis petant, referantque ab
illustriss. ord. genesis gratias, and porro ad principes and Respublicas sus
literas dimissorias.

D. Praeses Ecclesiasticus oratione pia co^memorat Dei beneficia in Ecclesia^
sua^ saepius lapsente^, applicatione facta ad Ecclesias Belgicas praedicat
mediata illa instrume^ta quibus Deus ad hanc rem usus fuerat, cum primis Rege^
magnae Britanniae, deinde reliquos principes and Magistratus nominatim, qui huc
Theologos fuos misissent: deinde omnes and singulos Theologos Exterors hic
praesentes, quibus omnia fausta et caelestes benedictiones comprecatur,
Jubetque ipso esse persuasissimos eoru^ memoria^ fore hic in aeternum
suavissima^ primu^ Theologi Britanni singuli orationibus brevibus et
succinctis, Deo agunt gratias de Synodi tam faelici successu, D. Delegatis et
fratribus Belgis ob singulare^ humanitate^, Deum rogant ut velit Ecclesias
Belgicas sem^^er faelices esse et pacatas: Idem praestiterunt palatini
perdominu^ Scultetu^; Idem Hassiaci per D. Crucigerum, Idem Helvetii per D.
Brittin germu. Idem Nassovici per D. Alstediu^: Idem Genevenses singuli; Idem
Bremenses, per D. Martiniu^, Idem Embdani singuli, sed uterque prolixissime,
itaque omnes Exteri vota sua nuncupassent praeses Synodo piissima et
Gratulatoria precatione^ finem imposuit; Tum, primum D. Delegati, dein. D.
Praeses, dein. D. Assessores et scribae, dein Singuli Synodici Belgae loca sua
relinquentes singulos Theologos Exteros ordine datis dextris et adjunctis votis
humanissime salutant; atque sic Sessio haec auditoribus frequentissima^^
ad^^oque ipsa Synodus Dor^^ drechtana, cum summis gratulationibus, et maxima
animorum laetitia ob speratum finem, et maerore ob corporum divulsionem Q. F.
F. Q. sit dimissa est.

FINIS.
To the Reader.
IF that ^^Reverend and worthy person Mr. Farindon had not died before the
Impression of this Book, you had received from that excellent hand an exact
account of the Authors Life, which he had begun, and resolved to perfect, and
prefix to this Edition. And as the loss of him is great in many particulars, so
especially in this; because there was none to whom Mr. Hales was so thoroughly
known as unto him, nor was there any so able to declare his worth, partly by
reason of his own abilities eminently known principally because he learned his
Author from an intimate converse, who was a man never to be truly expressed
but by himself.

I am therefore to entreat thee, Reader, being deprived of the proper Plutarch,
not to expect any such thing as a Life from me, but to accept of so much only
as is here intended. If Mr. Hales were unknown unto thee, be pleased to believe
what I know and affirm to be true of him; if he were known, then only be
satisfied that what is published in his name did really proceed from him: and
more then this needs not to be spoken in reference to the advancement of this
Work; because he which knew or believes what an excellent person Mr. Hales
was, and shall be also persuaded that he was the Author of this Book, cannot
choose but infinitely desire to see and read him in it.

In order to the First of these, I shall speak no more than my own long
experience, intimate acquaintance, and high veneration grounded upon both,
shall freely and sincerely prompt me to. Mr. John Hales, sometime Greek
Professor of the University of Oxford, long Fellow of Eton College, and at
last also Prebendary of Windsore, was a man, I think, of as great a sharpness,
quickness and subtilty of wit as ever this; or, perhaps, any Nation bred. His
industry did strive, if it were possible, to equal the largeness of his
capacity, whereby he became as great a Master of polite, various and Universal
Learning as ever yet conversed with Books. Proportionate to his reading was
his Meditation, which furnished him with a Judgment beyond the vulgar reach of
man, built upon unordinary Notions, raised out of strange observations and
comprehensive thoughts within himself. So that he really was a most prodigious
Example of an acute and piercimg Wit, of a vast and illimited Knowledge, of a
severe and profound Judgment.

Although this may seem, as in it self it truly is, a grand Elogium; yet I
cannot esteem him less in any thing which belongs to a good man then in those
intellectual perfections: and had he never understood a letter he had other
Ornaments sufficient to endear him. For he was of a Nature (as we ordinarily
speak) so kind, so sweet, so courting all mankind, of an affability so
prompt, so ready to receive all conditions of men, that I conceive it near as
easy a task for any one to become so Knowing as so Obligeing.

A a Christian, none more ever acquainted with the nature of the Gospel,
because none more Studious of the knowledge of it, or more curious in the
search, which being strengthened by those great advantages before mentioned
could not prove otherwise then highly effectual. He took indeed to himself a
liberty of judgeing, not of others, but for himself: and if ever any man might
be allowed in these matters to judge, it was he who had so long, so much, so
advantageously considered, and which is more, never had the least worldly
design in his determinations. He was not only most truly and strictly Just in
his Secular transactions, most exemplarily Meek and Humble notwithstanding his
perfections, but beyond all example Charitable, giving unto all, preserving
nothing but his Books to continue his learning and himself: which when he had
before digested, he was forced at last to feed upon, at the same time the
happiest and most unfortunate helluo of Books the grand example of learning and
of the envy and contempt which follows it.

This testimony may be truly given of his Person, and nothing in it liable to
the least exception but this alone, that it comes far short of him, Which
intimation I conceive more necessary for such as knew him not than all which
has been said.

In reference to the second part of my Design, I confess, while he lived none
was ever more solicited and urged to write, and thereby truly to teach the
world, than he; none ever so resolved (pardon the expression, so obstinate)
against it. His facile and courteous nature learnt only not to yield to that
solicitation. And therefore the World must be content to suffer the loss of
all his learning with the deprivation of himself: and yet he cannot be accused
for hiding of his talent, being so communicative that his chamber was a Church
and his chair a Pulpit.

Only that there might be some taste continue of him: here are some of his
Remains recollected; such as he could not but write, and such as when written
were out of his power to destroy. These consist of two parts, of Sermons, and
of Letters, and each of them proceeded from him upon respective obligations.
The Letters though written by himself yet were wholly in the power of that
Honorable person to whom they were sent, and by that means they were
perserv'd. The Sermons preached on several occasions were snatched from him by
his friends, and in their hands the Copies were continued or by transcription
dispers^^d. Of both which I need to say no more then this, that you may be
confident they are his.

The Editor has sent these abroad to explore what well-come they shall find;
He has some more of his Sermons and Tractates in his hands, and desires if any
Person have any other Writings of the same Author by him, that he would be
pleased to communicate them to the Printer of this work, T. Garthwait upon
promise, and any other engagement, that he will take care to see them Printed,
and set forth by themselves. This, Reader, is all the trouble thought fit to be
given thee^^

By JOHN PEARSON.
Mr. Garthwait.
I Am very glad you chose so Judicious an Overseer of those SERMONS of Mr.
HALES as Mr. Gunning, whom I always have had in high esteem both for his
Learning and Piety; and I am of his Opinion, that they may pass for
extraordinary. That Sermon of Wresting hard places of Scripture may well begin
your Collection. The other on Romans 14. 1. Him that is weak in the Faith
receive, etc. was preached at Paul's Cross, and I moved him to print it. That of
My Kingdom is not of this World; I once saw and returned to Mr. Hales with
four more which I saw him put into Mr. Chillingworths hands: I wish Dixi
Custodiam were perfect, I have often heard him speak of it with a kind of
Complacency. That of He speak a Parable that men ought always to pray, I
believe is his by the passage of the Sponge and the Knife, which I have heard
from his mouth. The Sermon which you had from D. Hammond upon Son remember,
etc. was preached at Eaton College. The other of Duels was either one or two,
and preached at the Hague to Sr. D. Carlton and his company. That you call a
Letter on I can do all things, is a Sermon. The Sermon of Peter went out and
wept, etc. -- is under his own hand.

One caution I should put in, that you print nothing which is not written with
his own hand, or be very careful in comparing them, for not long since one
showed me a Sermon, which he said was his, which I am confident could not be;
for I saw nothing in it which was not Vulgaris monetae, of a vulgar stamp,
common, and flat, and low. There be some Sermons, that I much doubt of, for
there is little of his spirit and Genius in them, and some that are imperfect,
that of Genesis 17. 1. Walk before me, etc. is most imperfect, as appears by
the Autographum which I saw at Eaton a fortnight since.

For his LETTERS, he had much trouble in that kind from several friends, and I
heard him speak of that friends Letter you mention, pleasantly, Mr. -- He sets
up Tops and I must whip them for him. But I am very glad to hear you have
gained Those Letters into your hands written from the Synod of Dort, you may
please to take notice that in his younger days he was a Calvinist, and even
then when he was employed at that Synod, and at the well pressing 3. S. John
16. by Episcopius, -- there, I bid John Calvin good night, as he has often told
me. I believe they will be as acceptable, or in your phrase as Saleable as his
Sermons, I would not have you to venture those papers out of your hands to me,
for they may miscarry, and I fear it would be very difficult to find another
Copy; peradventure I may shortly see you, at the Term I hope I shall, and then
I shall advise you further the best I can about those other Sermons you have.

I see you will be troubled yet a while to put things in a right way. I have
drawn in my mind the Model of his Life, but I am like Mr. HALES in this, which
was one of his defects, not to pen any thing, till I must needs.

God prosper you in your work and business you have in hand, that neither the
Church nor the Author suffer.

September. Your assured friend to his power Anthony Farindon.

CHOICE SERMONS PREACHED ON SEVERAL EMINENT OCCASIONS.

By Mr. John Hales of Eton College.

LONDON, Printed for Timothy Garthwait, at the Little Northdoor of St. Paul's.

2 Pet. 3. 16. Which the unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do the other
Scriptures, unto their own destruction.
THE love and favor which it pleased God to bear our Fathers before the law,
so far prevailed with him, as that without any books and writings, by familiar
and friendly conversing with them, and communicating himself unto them, he made
them receive and understand his laws: their inward conceits and intellectuals
being after a wonderful manner as it were Figured, and Charactered, In Psalm. 28.
(as St. Basil expresses it) by his spirit, so that they could not but see, and
consent unto, and confess the truth of them. Which way of manifesting his will,
unto many other gracious privileges which it had, above that which in after
ages came in place of it, had this added, that it brought with it unto the man,
to whom it was made, a preservation against all doubt and hesitancy, a full
assurance both who the author was, and how far his intent and meaning reached.
We that are their offspring ought, as St. Chrysostom tell us, so to have
demeand our selves, that it might have been with us as it was with them, Hom.
1. in Mat.
that we might have had no need of writing, no other teacher, but the spirit,
no other books but our hearts, no other means to have been taught the things of
God, Nisi inspirationis divinae internam suavioremque doctrinam, ubi sine sonis
sermonum and sine elementis literarum, eo dulcius quo secretius veritas
loquitur; as says Fulgentius. (...) (...) says Isidorus Pelusiota: for it is
a great argument of our shame and imperfection that the holy things are written
in books. L. 3. Epist. 106.
For as God in anger tells the Jews, that he himself would not go before them
as^^ hitherto he had done, to conduct them into the promised land, but would
leave his Angel with them as his deputy: so has he dealt with us, the unhappy
posterity degenerated from the ancient purity of our forefathers. When himself
refused to speak unto our hearts because of the hardness of them, he then began
to put his laws in writing. Which thing for a long time amongst his own people
seems not to have brought with it any sensible inconvenience. For amongst all
those acts of the Jews, which God in his book has registered for our
instruction, there is not one concerning any pretended ambiguitie or obscurity
of the Text and Letter of their Law, which might draw them into faction and
schism; the Devil belike having other sufficient advantages on which he
wrought. But ever since the Gospel was committed to writing, what age, what
monument of the Churches acts is not full of debate and strife, concerning the
force and meaning of those writings, which the holy Ghost has left us to be
the law and rule of faith? St. Paul, one of the first penmen of the Holy Ghost,
who in Paradise heard words which it was not lawful for man to utter, has left
us words in writing, which it is not safe for any man to be too busy to
interpret. No sooner had he laid down his pen, almost ere the ink was dry, were
there found Syllabarum aucupes, such as St. Ambrose spoke of, qui nescire
aliquid erubescunt, and per occasionem obscuritatis tendunt laqueos
deceptionis, who thought there could be no greater disparagement unto them,
then to seem to be ignorant of any thing, and under pretense of interpreting
obscure places laid gins to entrap the uncautelous; who taking advantage of the
obscurity of St. Paul's text, made the letter of the Gospel of life and peace,
the most-forcible instrument of mortal quarrel and contention. The growth of
which, the Holy Ghost by the Ministry of St. Peter, has endeavored to cut up
in the bud, and to strangle in the womb, in this short admonition which but now
has sounded in your ears. Which the unlearned, etc. In which words, for our
more orderly proceeding, we will consider, First, the sin it self that is here
reprehended, wresting of Scripture: where we will briefly consider what it is,
and what causes and motioners it finds in our corrupt understandings. Secondly
the persons guilty of this offense, discipher'd unto us in two Epithets,
unlearned, unstable. Last of all the danger in the last words, unto their own
damnation. And first of the sin it self, together with some of the special
causes of it.

(...). They wrest. They deal with Scripture as Chimicks deal with natural
bodies, torturing them to extract that out of them which God and nature never
put in them. Scripture is a rule which will not fit it self to the obliquity of
our conceits, but our perverse and crooked discourse, must fit it self to the
straightness of that rule. A learned writer in the age of our fathers,
commenting upon Scripture spoke most truly when he said, F^^ber.
that his Comments gave no light unto the text, the text gave light unto his
Comments. Other expositions may give rules and directions for understanding
their authors, but Scripture gives rules to exposition it self, and interprets
the interpreter. Wherefore when we made in Scripture, non pro sententia
divinarum Scripturarum, as St. Austine speaks, sed pro nostra ita dimicantes ut
tan velimus Scripturarum esse quae nostra est: When we strive to give unto it,
and not to receive from it the sense: when we factiously contend to fasten our
conceits upon God: and like the Harlot in the book of Kings, take our dead and
putrified fancies, and lay them in the bosom of Scripture as of a mother, then
are we guilty of this great sin of wresting of Scripture. The nature of which
will the better appear, if we consider a little, some of those motioners which
drive us upon it. One very potent and strong mean is the exceeding affection
and love unto our own opinions and conceits. For grown we are unro extremities
on both hands: we cannot with patience either admit of other men's opinions, or
endure that our own should be withstood. As it was in the Lacedaemonian army,
almost all were Captains: so in these disputes all will be leaders: and we take
our selves to be much discountenanced, if others think not as we do. Schol. in
Thucyd.
So that the complaint which one makes, concerning the dissension of Physicians
about the diseases of our bodies, is true likewise in these disputes which
concern the cure of our souls, hincillae circa aegros miserae sententiarum
concertationes, nullo idem censente, ne videatur accessio alterius. Flinie.
From hence have sprung those miserable contentions about the distemper of our
souls, singularity alone, and that we will not seem to stand as ciphers to make
up the sum of other men's opinions, being cause enough to make us disagree. A
fault anciently amongst the Christians so apparent, that it needed not an
Apostolical spirit to discover it, the very heathen themselves to our shame and
confusion, have justly, judiciously, and sharply taxt us for it. Ammianus
Marcellinus passing his censure upon Constantius the Emperor: Christianam
religionem absolutam and simplicem (says he: and they are words very well
worth your marking) Christianam religionem absolutam and simplicem anili
superstitione confudit. In qua scrutanda perplexius quam componenda gratius,
excitavit dissidia pluri^^a, quae progressa fusius aluit concertatione
verborum, dum ritum omnem ad suum trahere conatur arbitrium. The Christian
religion, a religion of great simplicity and perfection, he troubled with
dotage and superstition. For going about rather perplexedly to search the
controversies, then gravely to compose them, he raised great stirs, and by
disputing spread them far and wide, whilst he went about to make himself sole
Lord and commander of the whole profession. Now (that it may appear wherefore I
have noted this) it is no hard thing for a man that has wit, and is strongly
possessed of an opinion, and resolute to maintain it, to find some places of
Scripture, which by good handling will be woed to cast a favorable countenance
upon it. Pythagoras Scholars having been bred up in the doctrine of numbers,
when afterward they diverted upon the studies of nature, fancied unto
themselves somewhat in natural bodies like unto numbers, and thereupon fell
into a conceit that numbers were the principles of them. So fares it with him
that to the reading of Scripture comes forepossest with some opinion. As
Antipheron Orietes in Aristotle thought that every where he saw his own shape
and picture going before him: so in diverse parts of Scripture where these men
walk, they will easily persuade themselves that they see the image of their own
conceits. It was, and is to this day, a fashion in the hotter countries, at
noon, when the sun is in his strength, to retire themselves to their Closets or
beds, if they were at home, to cool and shady places if they were abroad, to
avoid the inconvenience of the heat of it. To this the Spouse in the Canticles
alluding, calls after her beloved, as after a shepherd: Show me, O thou whom my
soul loves, where thou feedest thy flock, where thou do rest at noon. The
Donatists conceiting unto themselves that the Church was shut up in them alone;
being urged by the fathers to show how the Church being universal, came on a
sudden thus to be confinde to Africa: they had presently their Scripture for
it: for so they found it written in the Canticles: Indica, quem diligit anima
mea, ubi pascas, ubi cubes in meridie. In which text, meridies doubtless as
they thought, was their Southern country of Africa, where the shepherd of
Israel was, and no where else, to feed his flocks. I may not trouble you with
instances in this kind: little observation is able to furnish the man of
slendrest reading with abundance. The texts of Scripture which are especially
subject to this abuse, are those that are of ambiguous and doubtful meaning.
For as Thucydides observes of the fat and fertile places of Greece, that they
were evermore the occasions of stirs and seditions; the neighboring nations
every one striving to make it self Lord of them: so is it with these places
that are so fertile, as it were, of interpretation, and yield a multiplicity of
sense: they are the Palaestra for good wits to prove masteries in, where every
one desires to be Lord and absolute.

A second thing occasioning us to transgress against Scripture, and the
discreet and sober handling of it, is our too quick and speedy entrance upon
the practice of interpreting it, in our young and green years, before that time
and experience have ripened us and settled our conceits. For that which in all
other business, and here likewise does most especially commend us, is our
cautelous and wary handling it. But this is a flower seldom seen in youths
garden. Aristotle differencing age and youth, makes it a property of youth,
(...) to suppose they know all things and to be bold in affirming: and the
heathen Rhetorician could tell us, that by this so speedy entering upon action,
and so timely venting our crude and unconcocted studies, quod est ubique
perniciosissimum, praevenit vires fiducia, a thing which in all cases is most
pernicious, presumption is greater then strength, after the manner of those,
who are lately recovered out of some great sickness, in whom appetite is
stronger then digestion. These are they who take the greatest mysteries of
Christian religion to be the fittest arguments to spend themselves upon. So
Eckius in his Chrysopassus, a work of his so termed, wherein he discusses the
question of predestination, in the very entrance of his work tells us, that he
therefore enterpris'd to handle this argument, because forsooth he thought it
to be the fittest question in which he might Juveniles calores exercere. The
ancient Masters of fence amongst the Romans were wont to set up a post, and
cause their young Scholars to practice upon it, and to foin and fight with it,
as with an adversary. Instead of a post, this young fencer has set himself up
one of the deepest mysteries of our profession to practice his freshmanship
upon. Which quality when once it finds Scripture for his object, how great
inconvenience it brings with it, needs no large discourse to prove. St. Jerome,
a man not too easily brought on to acknowledge the errors of his writings,
amongst those few things which he does retract, censures nothing so sharply as
the mistake of his youth in this kind. In adolescentia provocatus ardore and
studio Scripturarum, allegorice interpretatus sum Abdiam Prophetam, cujus
historiam nesciebam. He thought it one of the greatest sins of his youth, that
being carried away through an inconsiderate heat in his studies of Scripture,
he adventured to interpret Abdias the Prophet allegorically, when as yet he
knew not the historical meaning. Old men, says our best natural master, by
reason of the experience of their often mistakes, are hardly brought constantly
to affirm any thing, (...) they will always caute^^ously interline their
speeches, with it may bees, and peradventures, and other such particles of
wariness and circumspection. This old men's modesty of all other things best
fits us in perusing those hard and obscure texts of holy Scripture. Out of
which conceit it is that we see St. Austine in his books de Genesi ad literam,
to have written only by way of questions and interrogations, after the manner
of Aristotle in his Problemes, that he might not, (for so he gives his reason,
by being over positive prejudice others, and peradventure truer
interpretations: that every one might choose according to his likeing, and ubi
quid intelligere non potest, Scripturae Dei det honorem, sibi timorem: and
where his understanding cannot attain unto the sense of it, let him give that
honor and reverence which is due unto the Scripture, and carry himself with
that aw and respect which befits him. Wherefore not without especial providence
it is, that the Holy Ghost by St. Paul giving precepts to Timothy, concerning
the quality of those who were to be admitted to the distributing of Gods holy
word, expressly prescribes against a young Scholar, least says he, he be puffed
up. For as it has been noted of men, who are lately grown rich, that they
differ from other rich men only in this, Arist. Rhet. 2.
(...) that commonly they have all the faults, that rich men have and many
more: so is it as true in those who have lately attaind to some degree and
mediocrity of knowledge. Look what infirmities learned men have, the same have
they in greater degree, and many more besides. Wherefore if Hippocrates in his
Physician required these two things, (...) great industry and long experience,
the one as tillage to sow the seed, the other as time and season of the year to
bring it to maturity: then certainly by so much the more are these two required
in the spiritual Physician, by how much he is the Physician to a more
excellent part.

I will add yet one third motioner to this abuse of Scriptures, and that is the
too great presumption upon the strength and subtilty of our own wits. That which
the Roman Priest sometimes told an over pleasant, and witty vestal Virgin, Coli
Deos sancte magis quam site, has in this great work of exposition of
Scripture an especial place. The holy things of God must be handled sancte,
magis quam sci e, with fear and reverence, not with wit and daliance. The
dangerous effects of this have appeared, not in the green tree only, in young
heads, but in men of constant age, and great place in the Church. For this was
that which undid Origin, a man of as great learning and industry, as ever the
Church had any; whilst in sublimity of his wit, in his Comments on Scripture,
conceiving Meteors and airy speculations, he brought forth those dangerous
errors, which drew upon his person the Churches heaviest censure; and upon
posterity the loss of his works. Subtle witted men in nothing so much miscarry
as in the too much pleasing themselves in the goodness of their own conceits;
where the like sometimes befalls them which befell X^^uxis the Painter, who
having to the life pictured an old woman, so pleased himself with the conceit
of his work that he died with laughing at it. Heliodor Bishop of Tricca in
Thessaly, the Author of the AEthiopick story, Nicephorus.
a polite and elegant I consess, but a loose and wanton work, being summoned by
a Provincial Synod, was told, that which was true, that his work did rather
endanger the manners then profit the wits of his Reader, as nourishing loose
and wanton conceits in the heads of youth: and having his choice given him
either to abolish his work, or to leave his Bishopric; not willing to loose
the reputation of wit, chose rather to resign his place in the Church, and, as
I verily think, his part in Heaven. And not in private persons alone, but even
in whole nations, shall we find remarkable examples of miscarriage in this
kind. The Grecians, till barbarism began to steal in upon them, were men of
wondrous subtlety of wit, and naturally over indulgent unto themselves in this
quality. Those deep and subtle heresies concerning the Trinity, the Divinity of
Christ and of the holy Ghost, the Union and Division of the Divine Substance
and Persons, were all of them begotten in the heat of their wits; yea, by the
strength of them were they conceived, and born and brought to that growth, that
if it had been possible for the gates of Hell to prevail against the Church,
they would have prevailed this way. Wherefore as God dealt with his own land,
which being sometimes the mirror of the world for fertility and abundance of all
things, now lies subject to many curses, and especially to that of barrenness:
so at this day is it with Greece Where sometimes was the flow and luxury of
wit, now is there nothing but extreme barbarism and stupidity. It is in this
respect so degenerated, that it scarsly for some hundredth of years has brought
forth a child that carries any show of his Fathers countenance. God as it were
purposely plaguing their miserable posterity with extreme want of that, the
abundance of which their fathers did so wantonly abuse. The reason of all, that
hitherto I have in this point delivered, is this, Sharpness of wit has
commonly with it two ill companions, pride, and levity. By the first it comes
to pass that men know not how to yield to another man's reasonable positions; by
the second, they know not how to keep themselves constant to their own. It was
an excellent observation of the wise Grecian, Thu^^yd.
(...) etc. Sad and dull spirited men usually manage matters of State better
then quick and nimble wits. For such for the most part have not learnt that
lesson, the meaning of that voice that came to the Pythagorean, that was
desirous to remove the ashes of his dead friend out of his grave, (...) things
lawfully settled and composed must not be moved. (...) (...) says, Julian. Men
over busy are by nature unfit to govern. For they move all things, and leave
nothing without question and innovation, (...) as Nazianzen speaks, out of
desire to amend what is already well. And therefore we see that for the most
part such, if they be in place of Authority, by unseasonable and unnecessary
tampering, put all things into tumult, and combustion. Not the Common wealth
alone, but the Church likewise has received the like blow from these kind of
men. Nazianzene in his six and twentieth Oration, discoursing concerning the
disorders committed in the handling of Controversies, speaks it plainly: (...)
etc. Great wits, hot and fiery dispositions have raised these tumults. From
these it is (says he) that Christians are so divided. We are no longer a tribe
and a tribe, Israel and Judah, two parts of a small nation: but we are divided
kindred against kindred, family against family, yea, a man against himself. But
I must hasten to my second general part, the persons here accounted guilty of
abuse of Scripture.

The persons are noted unto us in two Epithets, unlearned, unstable. First,
unlearned, It was Sain Jeroms complaint, that practitioners of other Arts could
contain themselves within the bounds of their own Profession, Sola Scripturarum
ars est, quam sibi omnes passim vendicant. Hanc garrula anus, hanc delirus
senex, hanc sophista a verbosus, hanc universi praesumunt, lacerant, docent
antequam discant: every one presumes much upon his skill, and therefore to be a
teacher of Scripture: (...) (so Nazianzen speaks) as if this great mystery of
Christianity were but some one of the common, base, inferior, and contemptible
trades. I speak not this as ^^ envied that all even the meanest of the Lords
people should prop^^sie: but only that all kind of men may know their bounds,
that no unlearned beast touch the hill, least he be thrust through with a dart.
It is true which we have heard, surgunt indocti and rapiunt regnum coelorum:
they arise indeed, but it is as Saint Paul speaks of the resurrection, every
man in his own order. Scripture is given to all, to learn: but to teach, and to
interpret, only to a few. This bold intrusion therefore of the unlearned into
the chair of the teacher, is that which here with our blessed Apostle I am to
reprehend. Learning in general is nothing else but the competent skill of any
man in whatsoever he professes. Usually we call by this name only our polite
and Academical studies: but indeed it is common to every one, that is well
skild, well practiced in his own mystery. The unlearned therefore, whom here
our Apostle rebukes, is not he that has not read a multiplicity of Authors: or
that is not as Moses was, skilful in all the learning of the Egyptians: but he
that taking upon him to divide the word of God, is yet but raw and
unexperienced; or if he have had experience, wants judgment to make use of it.
Scripture is never so unhappy, as when it falls into these men's fingers. That
which old Ca^^o said of the Grecian Physicians, quandocunque ista gens literas
suas dabit, omnia corrumpet, is most true of these men; whenever they shall
begin to tamper with Scripture, and vent in writing their raw conceits, they
will corrupt and defile all they touch. Quid enim molestiae tristitiaeque
temerarii isti praesumptores, etc. De Genesi ad literam.
as S. Austine complains: for what trouble and anguish these rash presumers
(says he) bring unto the discreeter sort of the brethren, cannot sufficiently
be expressed: when being convinced of their rotten and ungrounded opinions; for
the maintaining of that which with great levity and open falsehood they have
averd, they pretend the authority of these sacred books, and repeat much of
them even by heart, as bearing witness to what they hold: whereas indeed they
do but pronounce the words, but understand not either what they speak, or of
what things they do affirm. Belike as he that bought Orpheus Harp, thought it
would of it self make admirable melody, how unskilfully soever he touched it: so
these men suppose that Scripture will found wonderful musically, if they do but
strike it, with how great infelicity or incongruity soever it be. The reason of
these men's offense against Scripture, is the same with the cause of their
miscarriage in civil actions, (...) says Thucydi^^ (...). Rude men, men of
little experience, are commonly most peremptory: but men experienced, and such
as have Waded in business, are slow of determination. Quintilian making a
question, why unlearned men seem many times to be more copious then the learned
(for commonly such men never want matter of discourse) answers that it is
because whatsoever conceit comes into their heads, without care or choice they
broach it, cum doctis sit electio and modus: whereas learned men are choice in
their invention, and lay by much of that which offers it self. Wise hearted
men, in whom the Lord has put wisdom and understanding to know how to work all
manner of work for the service of the sanctuary, like Bezaleel and Aholiab
refuse much of the stuff which is presented them. But this kind of men whom
here our Apostle notes, are naturally men of bold and daring spirits, quicquid
dixerint, hoc legem Dei putant, as Saint Jerome speaks, whatsoever conceit is
begotten in their heads, the spirit of God is presently the father of it: Nee
scire dignantur quid Prophetae, quid Apostoli senserint, sed ad suum sensum
incongrua aptant testimonia. But to leave these men, and to speak a little more
home unto mine own auditory: Let us a little consider, not the weakness of
these men but the greatness of the business, the manage of which they
undertake. So great a thing as the skill of exposition of the word and Gospel
is, so fraught with multiplicity of Authors, so full of variety of opinion,
must needs be confessed to be a matter of great learning, and that it cannot,
especially in our days, in short time with a mediocrity of industry be
attained. For if in the Apostles times, when as yet much of Scripture was
scarsly written, when God wrought with men miraculously to inform their
understanding and supplied by revelation what man's industry could not yield; if
I say in these times St. Paul required diligent reading, and expressly forbad
greenness of schollarship: much more then are these conditions required in our
times, wherein God does not supply by miracle our natural defects, and yet the
burden of our profession is infinitely increast. All that was necessary in the
Apostles times is now necessary and much more. For if we add unto the growth
of Christian learning, as it was in the Apostles times, but this one
circumstance (to say nothing of all the rest) which naturally befalls our times,
and could not be required at the hands of those who guided the first ages of
the Church: that is, the knowledge of the state and succession of doctrine in
the Church from time to time; a thing very necessary for the determining the
controversies of these our days: how great a portion of our labor and industry
would this alone require? Wherefore if Quintilian thought it necessary to
admonish young men that they should not presume themselves satis instructos, si
quem ex iis, qui breves circumferuntur, artis libellum edidicerint, and velut
decretis technicorum tutos putent: if he thought fit thus to do in an art of so
inferior and narrow a sphere; much more is it behooveful that young students
in so high, so spacious, so large a profession, be advised nor to think
themselves sufficiently provided upon their acquaintance with some Notitia, or
Systeme of some technical divine. Look upon those sons of Anak, those
Giant-like voluminous writers of Rome; in regard of whom our little tractats
and pocket volumes in this kind, what are they but as Grasshoppers? I speak not
this like some seditious or factious spy, to bring weakness of hands, or
melting of heart upon any of Gods people: but (...) to stir up and kindle in
you the spirit of industry to enlarge your conceits, and not to suffer your
labors to be copst and mued up within the poverty of some pretended method. I
will speak as Joshua did to his people, Let us not fear the people of that
land, they are as meat unto us, their shadow is departed from them: the Lord is
with us, fear them not. Only let us not think, sedendo and votis debellari
posse, Livie
that the conquest will be gotten by sitting still and wishing all were well:
or that the walls of these strong Cities, will fall down, if we only walk about
them, and blow rams horns. But as the voice of Gods people sometime was, by the
sword of God and of Gideon, so that which here gives the victory must be the
grace of God and our industry. For by this circumcised, narrow and penurious
form of study, we shall be no more able to keep pace with them, then a child
can with Hercules. but I forbear and pass away unto the second epithet, by
which these rackers of Scriptures, are by St. Peter styled Vastable.

IN the learning which the world teaches, it were almost a miracle to find a
man constant to his own tenants. For not to doubt in things in which we are
conversant, is either by reason of excellency and serenity of understanding
thoroughly apprehending the main principles on which all things are grounded,
together with the discrying of the several passages from them unto particular
conclusions, and the diverticles and blind bypath which Sophistry and deceit
are wont to tread: and such a man can nature never yield: or else it is through
a senseless stupidity, like unto that in the common sort of men, who conversing
among the creatures, and beholding the course of heaven, and the heavenly host,
yet never attend them, neither ever sinks it into their heads to marvel, or
question these things so full of doubt and difficulty. Even such a one is he,
that learns Theology in the School of nature, if he seem to participate of any
setledness or composedness of conscience. Either it never comes into his head
to doubt of any of those things, with which the world has inured him: or if it
does, it is to no great purpose, he may smother and strangle, he can never
resolve his doubt. The reason of which is this. It lies not in the worlds power
to give in this case a text of sufficient authority to compose and fix the
thoughts of a soul, that is disposed to doubt. But this great inconvenience
which held the world in uncertainty, by the providence of God is prevented in
the Church. For unto it is left a certain, undoubted, and sufficient authority,
able to exalt every valley, and lay low every hill, to smooth all rubs, and
make our way so open and passable, that little enquiry serves. So that as it
were a wonder in the school of nature to find one settled and resolved: so
might it seem a marvel that in the Church any man is unstable, unresolved. Yet
notwithstanding even here is the unstable man found too, and to his charge the
Apostle lays this sin of wresting of Scripture. For since that it is confessed at
all hands, that the sense and meaning of Scripture is the rule and ground of
our Christian tenants, whenever we alter them, we must needs give a new sense
unto the word of God. So that the man that is unstable in his religion can
never be free from violating of Scripture. The especial cause of this levity
and flitting disposition in the common and ordinary sort of men, is their
disability to discern of the strength of such reasons, as may be framed against
them. For which cause they usually start, and many times falls away, upon every
objection that is made. In which too sudden entertainment of objections, they
resemble the state of those, who are lately recovered out of some long
sickness, qui et si reliquias effugerint, suspicionibus tamen inquietantur,
Seneca
and omnem c^^lorem corporis sui calumniantur: Who never more wrong themselves
then by suspecting every alteration of their temper, and being affrighted at
every little passion of heat, as if it were an ague-fit. To bring these men
therefore unto an (...) and to purchase them a setledness of mind; that temper
that St. Austine does require in him that reads his book, tales meorum
Scriptorem velim judices, qui responsionem non semper desiderent, quum his quae
leguntur audierint aliquid contradici: the same temper must be found in every
reader of Scripture, he must not be at a stand and require an answer to every
objection that is made against them. For as the Philosopher tells us that mad
and fantastical men, are very apprehensive of all outward accidents, because
their soul is inwardly empty and unfurnished of any thing of worth which might
hold the inward attention of their minds: so when we are so easily dord and
amated with every Sophisme, it is a certain argument of great defect of inward
furniture and worth, which should as it were balance the mind and keep it
upright against all outward occurrents whatsoever. And be it that many times
the means to open such doubts be not at hand, yet as S. Austine sometime spoke
unto his Scholar Licentius concerning such advice and counsel as he had given
him: Nolo te causas rationesque rimari, quae etiamsi reddi possint, sidei
tamen, qua mihi credis non eas debeo: so much more must we thus resolve of
those lessons which God teaches us: the reasons and grounds of them, though
they might be given, yet it fits not that credit and trust which we owe him,
once to search into, or call in question. And so I come to the third general
part, the danger of wresting of Scripture, in the last words, unto their own
damnation.

The reward of every sin is death. As the worm eats out the heart of the plant
that bred it: so whatsoever is done amiss naturally works no other end, but
destruction of him that does it. As this is true in general, so is it as true,
that when the Scripture does precisely note out unto us some sin, and threatens
death unto it, it is commonly an argument, that there is more then ordinary,
that there is some especial sin, which shall draw with it some especial
punishment. This sin of wresting of Scripture in the eye of some of the
ancients seemed so ougly, that they have ranged it in the same rank with the
sin against the holy Ghost. And therefore have they pronounced it a sin, (...)
greater then can be pardoned. Isidorus Pelusiota.
For the most part of other sins, are sins of infirmity or simplicity, but this
is a sin of wit and strength. The man that does it, does it with a high hand;
he knows, and sees, and resolves upon it. Again, Scripture is the voice of God:
and it is confessed by all that the sense is Scripture, rather then the words. It
cannot therefore be avoided, but he that wilfully strives to fasten some sense
of his own upon it, other then the very nature of the place will bear, must
needs take upon him the Person of God, and become a new inditer of Scripture:
and all that applaud and give consent unto any such, in effect cry the same
that the people did to Herod, the voice of God, and not of man. If he then that
abases the Princes coin deserves to die, what is his desert that instead of the
tried silver of Gods word stamps the name and Character of God upon Nehushtan,
upon base brazen stuff of his own? 2. Pet. 1. 20.
Thirdly, No Scripture is of private interpretation, says the Apostle. There
can therefore be but two certain and infallible interpreters of Scripture:
either it self; or the holy Ghost the Author of it. It self does then expound
it self, when the words and circumstances do sound unto us the prime, and
natural, and principal sense. But when the place is obscure, involved and
intricate, or when there is contained some secret and hidden mystery, beyond
the prime sense; infallibly to show us this, there can be no Interpreter but
the holy Ghost that gave it. Besides these two, all other Interpretation is
private. Wherefore as the Lords of the Philistines sometimes said of the kine
that drew the Ark unto Bethshemesh; If they go of themselves, then is this from
God; but if they go another way, then is it not from God, it is some chance
that has happened unto us: so may it be said of all pretended sense of
Scripture. If Scripture come unto it of it self, then is it of God: but if it
go another way, or if it be violently urged and goaded on, then is it but a
matter of chance, of man's wit and invention. As for those mavelous discourses
of some, framed upon presumption of the spirits help in private, in judging or
Interpreting of difficult places of Scripture, I must needs confess I have
often wondered at the boldness of them. The spirit is a thing of dark and secret
operation, the manner of it none can descry. As underminers are never seen till
they have wrought their purpose; so the spirit is never perceived but by its
effects. The effects of the spirit (as far as they concern knowledge and
instruction) are not particular Information for resolution in any doubtful case
(for this were plainly revelation) but as the Angel, which was sent unto
Cornelius, informs him not, but sends him to Peter to School: so the spirit
teaches not, but stirs up in us a desire to learn: Desire to learn makes us
thirst after the means: and pious sedulity and carefulness makes us watchful in
the choice, and diligent in the use of our means. The promise to the Apostles
of the Spirit which should lead them into all truth, was made good unto them by
private and secret informing their understandings, with the knowledge of high
and heavenly mysteries, which as yet had never entered into the conceit of any
man. The same promise is made to us, but fulfilled after another manner. For
what was written by revelation in their hearts, for our instruction have they
written in their books. To us for information, otherwise then out of these
books, the spirit speaks not. When the spirit regenerates a man, it infuses no
knowledge of any point of faith, but sends him to the Church and to the
Scriptures. When it stirs him up to newness of life, it exhibits not unto him
an inventory of his sins, as hitherto unknown; but either supposes them known
in the law of nature, of which no man can be ignorant; or sends him to learn
them from the mouth of his teachers. More then this in the ordinary proceeding
of the holy spirit, in matter of instruction. I yet could never descrie. So
that to speak of the help of the spirit in private, either in dijudicating, or
in interpreting of Scripture, is to speak they know not what. Which I do the
rather note, first, because by experience we have learnt, how apt men are to
call their private conceits, the spirit: and again, because it is the especial
error, with which S. Austine long ago charged this kind of men: tanto sunt
ad seditionem faciliores, quanto sibi videntur spiritu excellere: by so much
the more prone are they to kindle schism and contention in the Church, by how
much they seem to themselves to be endued with a more eminent measure of spirit
then their brethren; whilst (...) (as St. Basils speaks) under pre^^ense of
interpretation they violently broach their own conceits. Great then is the
danger in which they wade, which take upon them this business of
interpretation. temeritas asserendae incertae dubiaeque opinionis, says St.
Austine, difficile sacrilegii crimen evitat: the rashness of those that aver
uncertain and doubtful interpretations for Catholic and absolute, can hardly
escape the sin of sacrilege.

But whereas our Apostle says, their own destruction, is the destruction only
their own? This were well if it stretched no farther. The ancients much
complain of this offense, as an hinderer of the salvation of others. There were
in the days of Istdorus Pelusiota some that gave out that all in the old
Testament was spoken of Christ: belike out of extreme opposition to the
Manichees, who on the otherside taught, that no text in the old Testament did
foretell of Christ. That Father therefore dealing with some of that opinion,
tells them how great the danger of their tenent is. (...) for if, says he, we
strive with violence to draw and apply those texts to Christ, which apparently
pertain not to him, we shall gain nothing but this, to make all the places that
are spoken of him suspected; and so discredit the strength of other
testimonies, which the Church usually urges for the refutation of the Jews. For
in these cases a wrested proof is like unto a suborned witness. It never does
help so much whilst it is presumed to be strong, as it does hurt when it is
discovered to be weak. S. Austine in his books de Genesi ad litteram, sharply
reproves some Christians, who out of some places of Scripture misunderstood,
framed unto themselves a kind of knowledge in Astronomy and Physiology, quite
contrary unto some part of heathen learning in this kind, which were true and
evident unto sense. A man would think that this were but a small error, and
yet he doubts not to call it, turpenimis, and perniciosum and maxim cavendum.
His reason warrants the roundness of his reproof. For he charges such to have
been a scandal unto the word, and hinderers of the conversion of some heathen
men that were scholars. For how, says he, shall they believe our books of
Scripture persuading the resurrection of the dead, the kingdom of heaven, and
the rest of the mysteries of our profession, if they find them faulty in these
things, of which themselves have undeniable demonstration? Yea though the cause
we maintain be never so good, yet the issue of diseased and crazie proofs
brought to maintain it, must needs be the same. For unto all causes, be they
never so good, weakness of proof, when it is discovered, brings great
prejudice, but unto the cause of religion most of all. St. Austine observed
that there were some qui cum de aliquibus, qui sanctum nomen profitentur
aliquid criminis vel falsi sonuerit, vel very patuerit, instant, satagunt,
ambiunt ut de omnibus hoc credatur. It fares no otherwise with religion it
self, then it does with the professors of it. Diverse malignants there are, who
lie in wait to epsy where our reasons on which we build are weak, and having
deprehended it in some, will earnestly solicit the world to believe that all
are so, if means were made to bring it to light: (...), as Nazianzen speaks:
using for advantage against us no strength of their own, but the vice and
imbecility of our defense. The book of the Revelation is a book full of wonder
and mystery: the ancients seem to have made a religion to meddle with it, and
thought it much better to admire it with silence, then to adventure to expound
it: and therefore amongst their labors in exposition of Scripture, scarsly is
there any one found that has touched it. But our age has taken better heart.
and scarsly any one is there who has entertained a good conceit of his own
abilities, but he has taken that book as a fit argument to spend his pains on.
That the Church of Rome has great cause to suspect her self, to fear least she
have a great part in the prophesies of that book, I think the most partial will
not deny. Yet unto the expositors of it, I will give this advice, that they
look that that befall not them, which Thucidides observes to befall the common
sort of men: who though they have good means to acquit themselves like men, yet
when they think their best hopes fail them, and begin to despair of their
strength, comfort themselves with interpretations of certain dark and obscure
prophesies. Many plain texts of Scripture are very pregnant, and of sufficient
strength to overthrow the points maintained by that Church against us. If we
leave these, and ground our selves upon our private expositions of this book,
we shall justly seem in the poverty of better proofs, to rest our selves upon
those prophesies; which, though in themselves they are most certain, yet our
expositions of them must, (except God give yet further light unto his Church)
necessarily be mixed with much uncertainty, as being at the best but unprobable
conjectures of our own. Scarsly can there be found a thing more harmful to
religion, then to vent thus our own conceits, and obtrude them upon the world
for necessary and absolute. The Physicians skill as I conceive of it, stands as
much on opinion, as any that I know, whatsoever. Yet their greatest master
Hippocrates tells them directly: (...) etc. Then the Physicians presumption
upon opinion, there is not one thing that brings either more blame to himself
or danger to his patient. If it be thus in an art which opinion taken away,
must needs fall; how little room then must opinion have in that knowledge,
where nothing can have place but what is of eternal truth? Where if once we
admit of opinion all is overthrown? But I conclude this point, adding only this
general admonition, that we be not too peremptory in our positions, where
express text of Scripture fails us: that we lay not our own collections and
conclusions with too much precipitancy. For experience has showed us, that the
error and weakness of them being afterward discovered brings great
disadvantage to Christianity, and trouble to the Church. The Eastern Church
before S. Basils time, had entertained generally a conceit, that that those
Greek Particles, (...) and the rest, were so divided among the Trinity, that
each of the Persons had his Particle which was no way appliable to the rest. S.
Basil having discovered this to be but a niceness and needless curiosity,
beginning to teach so, raised in the Church such a tumult, that he brought upon
himself a great labor of writing many tracts in Apology for himself, with much
ado, ere matters could again be settled. The fault of this was not in Basil, who
Religiously fearing what by way of consequence might ensue upon an error,
taught a truth; but in the Church, who formerly had with too much facility
admitted a conclusion so justly subject to exception. And let this suffice for
our third part.

Now because it is apparent that the end of this our Apostles admonition is to
give the Church a caveat how she behave her self in handling of Scripture, give
me leave a little, instead of the use of such doctrines as I have formerly laid
down, to show you, as far as my conceit can stretch, what course any man may
take to save himself from offering violence unto Scripture, and reasonably
settle himself, any pretended obscurity of the text whatsoever notwithstanding.
For which purpose the diligent observing of two rules shall be thoroughly
available. First, The literal, plain, and uncontroversable meaning of Scripture
without any addition or supply by way of interpretation, is that alone which
for ground of faith we are necessarily bound to accept, except it be there
where the holy Ghost himself treads us out another way. I take not this to be
any peculiar conceit of mine, but that unto which our Church stands necessarily
bound. When we receded from the Church of Rome, one motive was, because she
added unto Scripture her glosses as Canonical, to supply what the plain text of
Scripture could not yield. If in place of hers, we set up our own glosses, thus
to do, were nothing else but to pull down Baal, and set up an Ephod; to run
round, and meet the Church of Rome again in the same point, in which at first
we left her. But the plain, evident and demonstrative ground of this rule, is
this. That authority which does warrant our faith unto us, must every way be
free from all possibility of error. For let us but once admit of this, that
there is any possibility that any one point of faith should not be true; if it
be once granted that I may be deceived in what I have believed; how can I be
assured that in the end I shall not be deceived? If the author of faith may
alter: or if the evidence and assurance that he has left us be not pregnant,
and impossible to be defeated, there is necessarily opened an inlet to
doubtfulness and wavering, which the nature of faith excludes. That faith
therefore may stand unshaken, two things are of necessity to concur. First,
that the Author of it be such a one, as can by no means be deceived, and this
can be none but God. Secondly, that the words and text of this Author upon whom
we ground, must admit of no ambiguity, no uncertainty of interpretation. If the
trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall provide himself to battle. If the
words admit a double sense, and I follow one, who can assure me that that which
I follow is the truth? For infallibility either in judgment, or
interpretation, or whatsoever, is annexed neither to the Sea of any Bishop, nor
to the Fathers, nor to the Councels, nor to the Church, nor to any created
power whatsoever. This doctrine of the literal sense was never grievous or
prejudicial to any, but only to those who were inwardly conscious, that their
positions were not sufficiently grounded. When Cardinal Cajetan in the days of
our grandfathers had forsaken that vein of postilling and allegorising on
Scripture, which for a long time had prevailed in the Church, and betaken
himself unto the literal sense: it was a thing so distastful unto the Church of
Rome, that he was forced to find out many shifts, and make many apologies for
himself. The truth is (as it will appear to him that reads his writings) this
sticking close to the literal sense was that alone, which made him to shake
many of those tenants, upon which the Church of Rome and the Reformed Churches
differ. But when the importunity of the Reformers, and the great credit of
Calvin's writings in that kind, had forced the Divines of Rome to level their
interpretations by the same line: when they saw that no pains, no subtlety of
wit was strong enough to defeat the literal evidence of Scripture: it drove
them on those desperate shelves, on which at this day they stick, to call in
question, as far as they durst, the credit of the Hebrew text, and countenance
against it a corrupt translation; to add traditions unto Scripture; and to make
the Churches interpretation, so pretended, to be above exception. As for that
restriction which is usually added to this rule, that the literal sense is to
be taken, if no absurdity follow, though I acknowledge it to be sound and good,
yet my advise is that we entertain it warily. S. Basil thought the precept of
Christ to the rich man in the Gospel, Go sell all thou have and give unto the
poor, to be spoken as a command universally and eternally binding all
Christians without exception. And making this objection, how possibly such a
life could be amongst Christians, since where all are sellars, none could be
buyers: (...) (says he) (...) etc. Ask not me the sense of my Lords commands.
He that gave the Law, can provide to give it possibility of being kept without
any absurdity at all. Which speech, howsoever we may suppose the occasion of it
to be mistaken; yet is it of excellent use, to repress our boldness, whereby
many times, under pretense of some inconvenience, we hinder Scripture from that
latitude of sense, of which it is naturally capable. You know the story of the
Roman Captain in Gellius, and what he told the Shipwright, that chose rather to
interpret, then to execute his Lords command: Corrumpi atque dissolvi omne
imperantis officium, si quis ad id quod facere jussus est non obsequio debito,
sed consilio non desiderato respondeat. It will certainly in the end prove
safer for us to entertain Gods Commandments obsequio debito, then to interpret
them acumine non desiderato. Those other ways of interpretation, whether it be
by allegorizing, or allusion or whatsoever, the best that can be said of them
is that which Basil has pronounced: (...). We account of them as of trim,
elegant, and witty speeches, but we refuse to accept of them, as of undoubted
truths. And though of some part of these that may be said which one said of his
own work, Ausoni^^ in monosyl.
quod ad usum lusi, quod ad, molestiam laboravi, in respect of any profit comes
by them, they are but sport, but in respect of the pains taken in making of
them they are labor and travel: yet much of them is of excellent use in
private: either to raise our affections or to spend our meditations, or (so it
be with modesty) to practice our gifts of wit to the honor of him that gave
them. For if we absolutely condemn these interpretations, then must we condemn
a great part of antiquity, who are very much conversant in this kind of
interpreting. For the most partial for antiquity cannot choose but see and
confess thus much, that for the literal sense the Interpreters of our own
times, because of their skill in the Original Languages, their care of pressing
the circumstances and coherence of the text; of comparing like places of
Scripture with like, have generally surpast the best of the ancients. Which I
speak not to discountenance antiquity, but that all ages, all persons may have
their due. And let this suffice for our first rule.

The Jewish Rabbis in their Comments on Scripture so often as they met with hard
and intricate texts, out of which they could not wrest themselves, were wont to
shut up their discourse with this, Elias cumvenerit, solvet dubia: Elias shall
answer this doubt when he comes. Not the Jews only, but the Learned Christians
of all ages have found many things in Scripture which yet expect Elias. For
besides those texts of Scriptures, which by reason of the hidden treasures of
wisdom, and depth of sense and mystery laid up in them, are not yet conceived,
there are in Scripture of things that are (...) seemingly confused, (...)
carrying semblance of contrariety, anachronisms, metachronisms, and the like,
which bring infinite obscurity to the text: there are I say in Scripture more
of them, then in any writing that I know secular or Divine. If we mean not to
settle our selves till all these things are answered, let us take heed least
the like be said to us, which S. Austine said to some of the Gentiles, who
refused to believe till all objections were satisfied sunt enim innumerabiles
quae non sunt finiendae ante fidem, ne vita finiatur sine fide. The Areopagites
in Athens, when they were troubled in a doubtful case in which they durst not
proceed to sentence, were wont causam in diem longissimam differ, to put it
off till a day of hearing for some hundredth years after, avoiding by this means
the further being importuned with the suit. To quiet our selves in these doubts
it will be our best way in diem longissimam differ, to put them to some day
of hearing a far off, even till that great day, till Christ our true Elias
shall come, who at his coming shall answer all our doubts, and settle all our
waverings. Mean while till our Elias come, let us make use of this second rule.
In places of ambiguous and doubtful, or dark and intricate meaning, it is
sufficient if we religiously admire and acknowledge and confess: using that
moderation of Austine: Neutram partem affirmantes sive destruentes, sed
tantummodo ab audaci affirmandi praesumptione revocantes. Qui credit, says
one, satis est illi quod Christus intelligat. To understand belongs to Christ
the Author of our Faith: to us is sufficient the glory of believing. Wherefore
we are to advise, not so much how to attain unto the understanding of the
mysteries of Scripture; as how it best fits us to carry our selves when either
the difficulty of the text, or variety of opinions shall distract us. In the
sixth General Council Honorius Bishop of Rome is condemned for a Monothelite.
Two Epistles there are of his which are produced to give evidence against him.
For the first I have nothing to say. For the second (I speak with submission to
better judgment) notwithstanding the sharp proceeding of the Council against
him, I verily suppose that he gives unto the Church the best Counsel, that ever
yet was given for the settling of doubts, and final decision of controversy.
For that which he teaches in that Epistle, at least in those parts of it, which
there are brought, sounds to no other purpose but this: That whereas there was
lately raised in the Church a controversy concerning the duality or unity of
wills in Christ; since that hitherto nothing in the Church concerning either
part has been expressly taught, his Counsel was that men would rather cease to
doubt, then to be curious to search for any solution of their doubtings; and so
abstain from teaching doctrinally either part, and content themselves with that
express measure of faith, with which the Church has hitherto rest satisfied.
This to my conceit is the drift of his Epistle. How this advise of the Bishops
was appliable or how it fitted the question then in controversy; or what
reason moved the Council to think that it was absolutely necessary for them, to
give an express decision, and determine for the one part, belongs not to me to
discuss. But I verily persuade my self, that if it had pleased those, who in
all ages have been set to Govern the Church of God, betimes to have made use of
this advise, to have taught men rather not to have doubted, then to have
expected still solution of their doubtings: to have stopped and damm'd up the
originals and springs of controversies, rather then by determining for the one
part, to give them as it were a pipe and conduit to conveigh them to posterity,
I persuade my self the Church had not suffered that inundation of opinions,
with which at this day it is overrun. Is it not Saint Paul's own practice, when
having brought in a question concerning Gods justice in predestination, he
gives no other answer but this, O man, who art thou that disputest with God? Is
it not his plain purpose to advise the disputer rather not to make the
question, then to require a determination of it at his hands? How many of the
questions even of our own times, even of those that are at home amongst us,
might by this way long since have been determined? I have, I confess, the same
disease that my first Parents in Paradise had, a desire to know more then I
need. But I always thought it a very judicious commendation, which is given to
Julius Agricola, that he knew how to bridle his desire in pursuit of knowledge,
retinuitque, quod est difficillimum, ex scientia modum. Mallem quidem (as S.
Austine says) eorum quae a me quaesivisti habere scientiam, quam ignorantiam;
sed quia id nondum potui, magis eligo cautam ignorantiam confiteri, quam falsam
scientiam profiteri. It shall well befit our Christian modesty to participate
somewhat of the Sceptike, and to use their (...) till the (...) and remainder
of our knowledge be supplied by Christ: In quem si credimus, ut si aliqua nobis
non aperiat etiam pulsantibus, nullo modo adversus eum murmurare debeamus. To
conclude, S. Austine in his eightieth Epistle discoursing of the speedy or slow
coming of our Savior to judgment, to show that it is the safest way to teach
neither, but to suspend our belief, and confess our ignorance, ranging himself
with men of this temper, obsecro te (says he to Hesychius, to whom he writes
that Epistle) obsecro te ut me talem non spernas. So give me leave to commence
the same suit to you: obsecro vos ut me talem non spernatis. Let me request you
bear with me, if I be such a one, as I have S. Austine for example. For it is
not depth of knowledge, nor knowledge of antiquity, or sharpness of wit, nor
authority of Councels, nor the name of the Church can settle the restless
conceits, that possess the minds of many doubtful Christians: only to ground
for faith on the plain uncontroversable Text of Scripture, and for the rest to
expect and pray for the coming of our Elias, this shall compose our waverings,
and give final rest unto our souls.

Thus instead of a discourse which was due unto this time, concerning the
glorious Resurrection of our blessed Savior, and the benefits that come unto
us by it, I have diverted my self upon another theme, more necessary as I
thought for this auditory, though less agreeable with this solemnity. Those who
have gone before me in that argument have made so copious a harvest, that the
issue of my gatherings must needs have been but small, except I had with Ruth
gleaned out of their sheaves, or strained my industry which is but small, and
my wits which are none, to have held your attentiveness with new and quaint
conceits. In the mean time, whether it be I or they, or whatsoever has been
delivered out of this place, God grant that it may be for his honor, and for
the Churches good, to whom both it and we are dedicate. To God the Father, etc.

Romans 14. 1. Him that is weak in the faith receive, but not to doubtful
disputations.
MIght it so have pleased God that I had in my power the choice of my ways, and
the free management of my own actions, I had not this day been seen, (for so I
think I may better speak: seen may I be of many, but to be heard with any
latitude and compass my natural imperfection does quite cut of:) I had not I
say in St. Paul's Cross
this place this day been seen; Ambition of great and famous Auditories I leave
to those whose better gifts and inward endowments are Admonitioners unto them
of the great good they can do, or otherwise thirst after popular applause. Unto
my self have I evermore applied that of St. Hierome, mihi sufficit cum auditore
and Lectore pauperculo in angulo Monasterii susurrare, a small, a private, a
retired auditory better accords both with my will and my abilities. Those unto
whose discretion the furniture of this place is committed, ought especially to
be careful, since you come hither to hear, to provide you those who can be
heard, for the neglect of this one circumstance, how poor soever it may seem to
be, is no less then to offend against that faith which comes by hearing; and
to frustrate as much as in them is, that end for which alone these meetings
were ordained. We that come to this place as God came to Elias in the mount, in
a soft and still voice, to those which are near us, are that which the grace of
God does make us, unto the rest we are but Statues: such therefore as my
Imperfection in this kind shall offend, such as this day are my spectators
only, know, I trust whom they are to blame. At my hands is only required truth
in sincerely discharging a common care, at others, care of profitably
delivering a common truth. As for me, the end of whose coming is to exhort you
to a gracious interpreting of each others imperfections, having first premised
this Apology for my self, it is now time to descend to the exposition of that
Scripture, which I have proposed. Infirmum in side recipite, etc. Him that is
weak in the faith receive, etc.

GOodness, of all the attributes, by which a man may be styled, has chief
place and Sovereignty. Goodness, I say, not that Metaphysical conceit which we
dispute of in our Schools, and is nothing else but that perfection which is
inwardly due, unto the Being of every creature, and without which either it is
not at all, or but in part, that whose name it bears: but that which the common
sort of men do usually understand, when they call a man Good; by which is meant
nothing else, but (...) (...) a soft, and sweet, and flexible disposition. For
all other Excellencies and Eminent qualities which raise in the minds of men,
some opinion and conceit of us, may occasion peradventure some strong respect
in another kind; but impression of love and true respect nothing can give but
this. Greatness of place and authority may make us feared, Depth of Learning
admired, Abundance of wealth may make men outwardly obsequious unto us; but
that which makes one man a God unto another, that which does tie the Souls of
men unto us, that which like the Eye of the Bridegroom, in the book of
Canticles, ravishes the heart of him that looks upon it, is Goodness, without
this mankind were but (as one speaks) Commissiones merae, and arena sine
calce, stones heapt together without mortar, or pieces of boards without any
caement to combine and tie them together. For this it has singular in it,
above all other properties, of which our Nature is capable, that it is the most
Available to Humane Society, incorporating, and as it were kneading us together
by softness of disposition, by being compassionate, by gladly communicating to
the necessity of others, by Transfusing our selves into others, and Receiving
from others into our selves. All other Qualities, how excellent soever they
are, seem to be somewhat of a melancholic and solitary disposition. They shine
then brightest, when they are in some one alone, or attained unto by few; once
make them common, and they lose their luster. But Goodness is more sociable;
and rejoices in equalling others unto it self, and loses its Nature, when it
ceases to be communicable. The Heathen speaking of God usually style him by two
Attributes. Optimus and Maximus, the one importing his goodness, the other his
Power. In the first place they called him Optimus, a name signifying his
goodness, giving the precedence unto it; and in the second place Maximus, a
name betokening his Power: yea, Goodness is that wherein God himself does most
delight himself; and therefore all the Acts of our Savior, while he conversed
on earth among men, were purely the issues of his tenderness without any
aspersion of Severity, two only excepted: I mean his Chasing the Prophaners out
of the Temple, and the Curse laid upon the innocent Fig Tree: and yet in both
these mercy rejoiced against judgment and his goodness had the pre-eminence.
For the first brought some smart with it indeed, but no harm at all, as Fathers
use to chastise their Children by means that fear them more then hurt them. The
second of it self was nothing, as being practiced on a Creature dull and
senseless of all smart, and punishment; but was merely Exemplary for us,
sterilitas nostra in sicu vapulat. Christ whips our fruitlesness in the
innocent figtree; like as the Manner was among the Persians, when their great
men had offended, to take their Garments and bear them. Now that gracious way
of goodness which it pleased our Savior, thus to tread himself before us, the
same has he left behind him to be gone by us, and has ordained us a course
of Religious and Christian service unto him, known by nothing more then
goodness and compassion. The very Heathen themselves, though utter enemies unto
it, have heartily afforded us this Testimony. Ammianus Marcellinus taxing
Georgius a factious and proud Bishop of Alexandria, for abusing the weakness of
Constantius the Emperor by base tale-bearing and privy informations; notes
precisely that he did it, Oblitus professionis suae, quae nil nisi justum
suadet and lene; quite besides the meaning of his profession, whose especial
notes were Gentleness and Equity. And Tertullian tells us that anciently among
the Heathen, the professors of Christanity, were called, not Christiani, but
Chrestiani, from a word signifying Benignity and sweetness of disposition. The
learned of our times, who for our instruction, have written de Notis Ecclesiae
by what notes and signs, we may know the Church of Christ may seem to have but
ill forgotten, this which the Heathen man had so clearly discovered. For what
reason is there, why that should not be one of the chiefest notes of the Church
of Christ, which did so especially Characterize a Christian man, except it were
the decay of it at this day in the Church: of this thing therefore so excellent
in it self, so useful, so principally commended by the precept and example of
our blessed Savior, one especial part is, if not the whole, which here by our
Apostle is commended unto us, when he speaks unto ^^ of kindly entreating, and
making much of such, who are as he calls them weak in Faith.

Him that is weak in Faith, etc. To know the natural ground and occasion of
which words, it shall be very pertinent, to note unto you, that with the Church
of Christ, as it signifies a Company of men on earth, it fares no otherwise,
then it does with other Societies, and civil Corporations. One thing there is
unavoidable, and natural to all societies, which is the greatest occasioner,
yea the very ground of disunion and dissent, I mean Inequality of persons and
degrees. All are not of the same worth, and therefore all cannot carry the same
esteem and countenance: yet all even the meanest are alike impatient of
discountenance and contempt, be the persons never so great, from whence it
proceeds. Wherefore we find that in States governed by the people nothing did
more exasperate the common sort, then the conceit of being contemned by men of
greater place. For the taking away therefore of tumult and combustion, which
through this inequality might arise, it was anciently accounted an excellent
policy in the Roman state, that men of greater account and place, did as it
were share the inferior sort amongst themselves, and every one according to
his Ability entertained some part of them as Clyents, to whom they yielded all
lawful favor and protection. Even thus it fares with the Church of God, it
cannot be, that all in it should be of equal worth, it is likewise
distinguished into Plebem and Optimates. Some there are, and those that either
through abundance of spiritual graces, or else of natural gifts do far
outstrip a great part of other Christians, these are the Optimates, the Nobles
of the Church whom our Apostle, some where calls strong men in Christ. Others
there are, and those most in number, who either because God has not so
liberally blessed them with gifts of understanding, and capacity; or by reason of
some other imperfections are either not so deeply skilled in the mysteries of
Christ, and of Godliness, or otherwise weak in manners and behavior, and these
are the Plebs the Many of the Church, whom our Apostle sometimes calls Brethren
of low degree, sometimes Babes in Christ, and here in my text the weak and sick
in faith. Men, by nature querulous, and apt to take exception, (...) says
Electra in the Tragedy. A sick man is a pettish, and wayward Creature hard to
be pleased; as therefore with the sick, so are we now to deal with a Neighbor
weak and sick of his spiritual constitution, and much we are to bear with his
frowardness, where we cannot remedy it. For as Varro sometimes spoke of the
Laws of Wedlock. Vxoris vitium aut tollendum est aut ferendum, either a man
must amend, or endure the faults of his wife, he that amends them makes his
wife the better, but he that patiently endures them makes himself the better:
so is it much more true in dealing with our weak Brethren, if we can by our
behavior remedy their imbecillities, we make them the better, if not, by
enduring them we shall make our selves the better; for so shall we increase the
virtue of our patience, and purchase to our selves at Gods hand a more
abundant reward. A great part of the luster of a Christian man's virtue were
utterly obscure, should it want this mean of showing it self; for were all men
strong, were all of sufficient discretion, to see and judge of Conveni^^ncy,
where were the glory of our forbearance? As well therefore to increase the
reward of the strong man in Christ, as to stop the whining and murmuring of the
weaker sort, and to give content at all hands, our Apostle like a good Tribune
in this Text gives a rule of Christian popularity advising the man of worthier
parts, to avoid all sleighting behavior, to open the arms of tenderness and
compassion, and to demerit by all courtesy the men of meaner rank, so to
prevent all inconvenience, that might arise out of disdainful and respectless
carriage; for God is not like unto mortal Princes, jealous of the man whom the
people love. In the world nothing is more dangerous for great men, then the
extraordinary favor, and applause of the people. Many excellent men have
miscarried by it. For Princes stand much in fear, when any of their subjects
has the heart of the people. It is one of the commonest grounds upon which
Treason is raised, Absalom had the Art of it, who by being plausible, by
commiserating the peoples wrongs, and wishing the redress; O that I were a
Judge to do this people good, by putting out his hand and embracing and kissing
every one that came nigh him, so stole away the hearts of the people, that he
had well-nigh put his Father beside his Kingdom: but what alters and undoes the
Kingdoms of this world, that strengthens and increases the Kingdom of God,
Absalom the popular Christian, that has the art of winning men's souls, and
making himself beloved of the people, is the best subject in the Kingdom of
grace, for this is that which our Apostle expresses in the phrase of Receiving
the weak.

Now it falls out oftentimes that men offend through intempestive compassion
and tenderness, as much as by over much rigidness and severity: as much by
familiarity, as by superciliousness and contempt. Wherefore even our love and
courtesy must be managed by discretion. St. Paul saw this well; and therefore
he prescribes limits to our affections, and having in the former part of my
text counseled us as Christ did Peter, to let loose our nets, to make a
draught; to do as Joseph did in Egypt, open our garners and storehouses, that
all may come to buy, to admit of all, to exclude none, from our indulgence and
courtesy, in this second part But not to doubtful disputations; he sets the
bounds how far our love must reach. As Moses in the 19. of Exodus, set bounds
about Mount Sinai, forbidding the people, that they go not up to the Hill, or
come within the borders of it, so has the Apostle appointed certain limits to
our love and favor, within which it shall not be lawful for the people to
come. Enlarge we the Phylacteries of our goodness as broad as we list, give we
all countenance unto the meaner sort, admit we them into all inwardness, and
familiarity; yet unto disputations and controversies, concerning profounder
points of Faith and religious mysteries, the meaner sort may be by no means
admitted. For give me leave now to take this for the meaning of the words: I
know they are very capable of another sense: as if the Apostles counsel had
been unto us to entertain withal courtesy our weaker brethren, and not
overbusily to enquire into, or censure their secret thoughts and doubtings, but
here to leave them to themselves, and to God who is the Judge of thoughts. For
many there are, otherwise right good men, yet weak in judgment, who have
fallen upon sundry private conceits, such as are unnecessary differencing of
meats and drinks, di^^^ction of days or (to exemplify my self in some conceit
of our times) some singular opinions concerning the State of Souls departed,
private interpretations of obscure Texts of Scripture, and others of the same
nature: of these or the like thoughts, which have taken root in the hearts of
men of shallow capacity, those who are more surely grounded, may not presume
themselves to be judges, many of these things of themselves, are harmless, and
indifferent, only to him that has some prejudicate opinion of them, they are
not so, and of these things they who are thus, or thus conceited shall be
accountable to God, and not to man; to him alone shall they stand or fall.
Wherefore, bear (says the Apostle) with these infirmities, and take not on you
to be Lords of their thoughts, but gently tolerate these their unnecessary
conceits and scrupulosities. This though I take to be the more natural meaning
of the words, (for indeed it is the main drift of our Apostles discourse in
this chapter) yet choose I rather to follow the former interpretation. First,
because of the Authority of sundry learned Interpreters, and because it is very
requisite that our age should have something said unto it concerning this over
bold intrusion of all sorts of men into the discussing of doubtful
Disputations. For Disputation, though it be an excellent help to bring the
truth to light, yet many times by to much troubling the waters, it suffers it
to slip away unseen, especially with the meaner sort who cannot so easily
epsy, when it is mixed with Sophistry and deceit. Infirmum autem in side
recipite, but not to doubtful disputations.

This my text therefore is a Spiritual Regimen and diet for these who are of a
weak and sickly constitution of mind, and it contains a Recipe for a man of
crazie and diseased faith. In which by that which I have delivered, you may
plainly see there are two general parts. First an admonition of courteous
entertainment to be given to the weaker sort in the first words. Him that is
weak in the Faith receive, etc. Secondly, the restraint and bound of this
Admonition, how far it is to extend even unto all Christian offices, excepting
only the hearing of doubtful disputations. In the first part we will consider;
first, who these weak ones are of whom the Apostle speaks, and how many kinds
of them there be, and how each of them may be the subject of a Christian man's
goodness and courtesy. Secondly, who these persons are, to whom this precept
of entertaining is given, and they are two, either, the private man, or the
public Magistrate. In the second general part we will see what reasons we may
frame to our selves, why these weak ones should not be admitted to questions
and doubtful disputations. Which points severally, and by themselves we will
not handle, but we will so order them, that still as we shall have in order
discovered some kind of weak man, whom our Apostle would have received, we will
immediately seek how far forth he has a right to be an hearer of sacred
disputation, and this as far only as it concerns a private man: And for an
up-shot in the end, we will briefly consider by it self, whether, and how far
this precept of bearing with the weak pertains to the man of public place,
whether in the Church or in the commonwealth. And first concerning the weak,
as he may be a subject of Christian courtesy in private. And here because,
that in comparison of him that is strong in Christ, every man of what estate
soever, may be said to be weak, the strong man only excepted, we will in the
number of the weak contain all persons whatsoever. For I confess, because I
wish well to all, I am willing that all should reap some benefit by my text. As
therefore the woman in the Gospel, who in touching only the Hem of Christ's
garment did receive virtue to cure her disease: so all weak persons whatsoever,
though they seem to come behind, and only touch the hem of my text, may
peradventure receive some virtue from it to redress their weakness; nay, as the
King in the Gospel that made a feast, and willed his servants to go out to the
highways side to the blind, and the lame, and force them in that his house
might be full: so what lame or weak person soever he be, if I find him not in
my text, I will go out and force him in, that the doctrine of my Text may be
full, and that the goodness of a Christian man may be like the widows oil in
the book of Kings, that never ceased running so long as there was a vessel to
receive it. Wherefore to speak in general: there is no kind of man, of what
life, of what profession, of what estate and calling soever, though he be an
heathen, and Idolater, unto whom the skirts of Christian compassion do not
reach. St. Paul is my author: Now whilst you have time (says he) do good unto
all men, but especially to the household of Faith. The household of faith indeed
has the pre-eminence; it must be chiefly, but not alone respected. The
distinction that is to be made, is not by excluding any, but not participating
alike unto all, God did sometimes indeed tie his love to the Jewish Nation
only, and gave his laws to them alone: but afterward, he enlarged himself, and
instituted an order of serving him promiscuously capable of all the world. As
therefore our religion is, so must our compassion be, catholic. To tie it
either to persons or to place, is but a kind of moral Judaisme. Did not St.
Paul teach us, thus much common reason would. There must of necessity be some
free intercourse with all men, otherwise the passages of public commerce were
quite cut of, and the common law of Nations must needs fall. In some things we
agree, as we are men, and thus far the very heathen themselves are to be
received. For the goodness of a man which in Solomon's judgment, extends even
to a beast, much more must stretch it self to a man of the same nature with
him, be his condition what it will. St. Paul loved the Jews, because they were
his brethren according to the Flesh. We that are of the heathen by the same
same anology ought to be as tenderly affected to the rest our brethren, who
though they be not as we are now, yet now are that which we sometimes were.
Pacile est atque proclive, says Austine, malos odisse quia mali sunt, rarum
autem and pium eosdem ipsos diligere, quia homines sunt, It is an easy thing
to hate evil men, because they are evil, but to love them as they are men this
is a rare and a pious thing. The offices of common hospitality, of helping
distressed persons, feeding the hungry, and the like are due not only betwixt
Christian and Christian, but between a Christian and all the world. Lot, when
the Angels came to Sodom, and sat in the streets: Abraham when he saw three
men coming toward him stood not to inquire who they were, but out of the sense
of common humanity, run forth and met them, and gladly entertained them, not
knowing whom they should receive. St. Chrysostom considering the circumstances
of Abraham's fact, that he sat at his tent door, and that in the heat of the
day, that he came to meet them, thinks he therefore sat in public, and
endured the inconvenience of the heat even for this purpose, that he might not
let slip any occasion of being hospital. The writings of the Fathers run much
in commendation of the ancient Moncks, and were they such as they report, well
did they deserve to be commended, for their manner was to sit in the fields,
and by the high way sides, for this end, that they might direct wandering
passengers into the way, that they might relieve all that were distressed by
want, or bruising or breaking of any member, and carry them home into their
cells, and perform unto them all duties of humanity. This serves well to tax
us, who affect a kind of intempestive prudence, and unseasonable discretion in
performing that little good we do, from whom so hardly after long enquiry and
entreaty drops some small benevolence, like the sun in winter long ere it rise
and quickly gone. How many occasions of Christian charity do we let slip, when
we refuse to give our alms, unless we first cast doubts, and examine the
persons, their lives, their necessities, though it be only to reach out some
small thing, which is due unto him, whatsoever it be. It was anciently a
complaint against the Church, that the liberality of the Christians made many
idle persons. Be it that it was so yet no other thing befell them, then what
befalls their Lord, who knows and sees^^ that his Sunshine and his Rain is
every day abused, and yet the Sun become not like a Sack nor the Heavens as
Brass; unto him must we, by his own command, be like: and whom then can we
exclude, that have a pattern of such courtesy proposed to us to follow? we
read in our books of a nice Athenian being entertained in a place by one given
to hospitality, finding anon that another was received with the like courtesy,
and then a third, growing very angry. I thought, said he, that I had found here
(...) but I have found (...) I looked for a friends house, but I am fallen into
an Inn to entertain all Comers, rather then a Lodging for some private and
especial friends. Let it not offend any that I have made Christianity rather an
Inn to receive all, then a private house to receive some few. For so both the
precepts and examples I have brought, teach us, beneficia praestare non homini,
sed humano generi, to extend our good, not to this or that man, but to mankind,
like the Sun that arises not on this or that nation, but on the whole world.
Julian observes of the fig tree, that above all trees it is most capable of
grafts and Siences of other kinds, so far as that all variety will be brought
to take nourishment from one stock: Beloved, a Christian must be like unto
Julians fig tree, so Universally compassionate, that so all sorts of grafts by
a kind of Christian inoculation may be brought to draw life and nourishment
from his root.

But I am all this while in a generality only, and I must not forget, that I
have many particular sick Patients, in my Text, of whom every one must have his
Recipe, and I must visit them all ere I go. But withal, I must remember my
Method which was still as I spoke, of Receiving the weak to speak likewise of
excluding them from disputation. So must I needs ere I pass away, tax this our
age, for giving so general permission unto all to busy themselves in doubtful
cases of Religion. For nothing is there that has more prejudiced the cause of
Religion, then this promiscuous and careless admission of all sorts to the
hearing and handling of controversies, whether we consider the private case of
every man, or the public state of the Church. I will touch but one
inconvenience which much annoyes the Church, by opening this gate so wide to
all comers, for by the great preass of people that come, the work of the Lord
is much hindered. Not to speak of those who out of weakness of understanding
fall into many errors, and by reason of liberty of bequeathing their errors to
the world by writing easily find heirs for them. There is a sort that do harm
by being unnecessary, and though they sow not tares in the field, yet fill the
Lords floor with chaff; For what need this great breed of writers, with which
in this age the world does swarm? how many of us might spare the pains in
committing our Meditations to writing, contenting our selves to teach the
people viva voce, and suffering our conceits quietly to die in their birth? The
teaching the people by voice is perpetually necessary, should all of us every
where speak but the same things; For all cannot use Books, and all that can
have not the leisure; To remedy therefore the want of skill in the one and of
time in the other, are we set in this Ministry of Preaching. Our voices are
confined to a certain compass, and tied to the Individuating properties of Hic
and Nunc: our writings are unlimited. Necessity therefore requires a multitude
of speakers, a multitude of writers, not so. G. Agricola writing de Animantibus
subterraneis reports of a certain kind of Spirits that converse in Minerals
and much infest those that work in them, and the manner of them when they come
is, to seem to busy themselves according to all the custom of workmen; they
will dig and cleanse and melt and sever metals, yet when they are gone, the
workmen do not find that there is any thing done: so fares it with a great
part of the multitude, who thrust themselves into the controversies of the
times, they write Books, move questions frame distinctions, give solutions, and
seem sedulously to do, whatsoever the nature of the business requires, yet if
any skilful workman in the Lords Mines shall come and examine their work, he
shall find them to be but Spirits in Minerals, and that withal this labor and
stir there is nothing done. I acknowledge it to be very true, which S. Austine
spoke in his first Book de Trinitate: Utile est plures libros a pluribus fieri
diverso stilo, sed non diversa fide, etiam de quaestionibus iisdem, ut ad
plurimos res ipsa perveniat ad alios sic, ad alios vero sic. It is a thing very
profitable that diverse Tracts be written by diverse men, after diverse fashions,
but according to the same Analogy of Faith, even of the same questions that
some might come into the hands of all, to some on this manner to another after
that. For this may we think to have been the counsel of the Holy Ghost himself,
who may seem even for this purpose, to have registered the self same things of
Christ by three of the Evangelists with little difference; Yet notwithstanding,
if this speech of S. Austine admit of being qualified, then was there no time
which more then this age required it, should be moderated, which I note,
because of a noxious conceit spread in our Universities to the great hindering
of true proficiency in Study springing out from this Root. For many of the
Learned themselves are fallen upon this preposterous conceit, that learning
consists rather in varieting of turning and quoting of sundry Authors, then
in soundly discovering and laying down the truth of things. Out of which arises
a greater charge unto the poor Student, who now goes by number rather then
weight, and the Books of the learned themselves, by ambitiously heaping up the
conceits, and authorities of other men increase much in the bulk, but do as
much imbase in true value. Wherefore as Gedeons army, of two and thirty
thousand by prescript from God was brought unto three hundred: So this huge
army of disputes, might without any hazard of the Lords battles, be well
contracted into a smaller number. Justinian the Emporour when he found that the
study of the Civil Law was surcharged and much confused, by reason of the great
heaps of unnecessary writings, he calls an assembly of learned men, caused them
to search the books, to cut of what was superfluous to gather into order and
method the sum and substance of the whole Law: were it possible that some
Religious Justinian might after the same manner employ the wits of some of the
best Learned in examining the controversies, and selecting out of the best
writers what is necessary, defaulting unnecessary and partial discourses, and
so digest into order and method, and leave for the direction of posterity as it
were Theological pandects: infinite store of our books might very well lie by,
and peaceably be buried, and after ages reap greater profit with smaller cost
and pains. But that which was possible in the world united under Justinian in
this great division of Kingdoms is peradventure impossible. Wherefore having
contented my self to show what a great and irremediable inconvenience this
free, and uncontrollable ventring upon Theological disputes has brought upon
us, I will leave this project as a Speculation, and pass from this general
Doctrine unto some particulars. For this generality, and heap of sick persons,
I must divide into their kinds and give every one his proper Recipe.

The first in this order of weak persons, so to be received and cherisht by us,
is one of whom question may be made whether he may be called weak or no; he may
seem to be rather dead: for no pulse of infused grace beats in him. I mean such
a one who has but small, or peradventure no knowledge at all in the mystery of
Christ, yet is otherwise, a man of upright life and conversation, such a one as
we usually name a moral man. Account you of such a one as dead, or how you
please, yet methinks I find a Recipe for him in my text. For this man is even
to be woed by us, as sometimes one heathen man wished of another, Talis c^^m sis
utinam noster esses; This man may speak unto a Christian as Ruth does unto
Booz, spread the skirt of thy garment over me, for thou art a near kinsman. Two
parts there are that do completely make up a Christian man. A true Faith, and
an honest conversation. The first, though it seem the worthier, and therefore
gives unto us the name of Christians, yet the second in the end will prove the
surer. For true profession without honest conversation, not only saves not, but
increases our weight of punishment: but a good life without true profession,
though it bring us not to Heaven, yet it lessens the measure of our judgment:
so that a moral man so called is a Christian by the surer side. As our Savior
says of one in the Gospel that had wisely and discreetly answered him, Thou
art not far from the kingdom of Heaven: So may we say of these men, suppose
that as yet they be not of, yet certainly far from the Kingdom of Heaven they
cannot be, yea, this sincerity of life though severed from true profession, did
seem such a jewel in the eyes of some of the ancient Fathers, that their
opinion was and so have they in their writings (erroneously doubtless) yet so
have they testified it, that God has in store for such men not only this
mitigating mercy of which but now I spoke, but even saving grace so far forth
as to make them possessors of his Kingdom. Let it not trouble you that I
entitle them to some part of our Christian Faith, and therefore without scruple
to be received as weak and not to be cast forth as dead. Salvianus disputing
what Faith is, Quid est igitur credulitas vel fides? says he, opinor fideliter
hominu^ Christo credere, id est, fidele^ Deo esse, hoc est fideliter Dei
mandata servare. What might this faith be? (says he) I suppose it is nothing
else, but faithfully to believe Christ, and this is to be faithful unto God,
which is nothing else but faithfully to keep the commandments of God. Not
therefore only a bare belief, but the fidelity and trustiness of Gods servants
faithfully accomplishing the will of our Master, is required as a part of our
Christian Faith. Now all those good things which moral men by the light of
nature do, are a part of Gods will written in their hearts, wherefore so far as
they were conscientious in performing them (if Salvianus his reason be good) so
far have they title and interest in our Faith. And therefore Regulus that
famous Roman, when he endured infinite torments rather then he would break his
Oath, may thus far be counted a Martyr, and witness for the truth. For the
Crown of Martyrdom sits not only on the heads of those who have lost their
lives, rather then they would cease to profess the Name of Christ, but on the
head of every one that suffers for the testimony of a good conscience, and for
righteousness sake. And here I cannot pass by one very general gross mistaking
of our age. For in our discourses concerning the notes of a Christian man, by
what signs we may know a man to be one of the visible company of Christ, we
have so tied our selves to this outward profession that if we know no other
virtue in a man, but that he has cond his Creed by heart, let his life be
never so profane we think it argument enough for us to account him within the
Pale and Circuit of the Church: on the contrary side let his life be never so
upright, if either he little seen in, or peradventure quite ignorant of the
Mystery of Christ, we esteem of him but as dead; and those who conceive well of
those moral good things as of some tokens giving hope of life, we account but
as a kind of Manichees, who thought the very earth had life in it. I must
confess that I have not yet made that proficiency in the Schools of our age, as
that I could see: why the second table and the Acts of it, are not as properly
the parts of Religion and Christianity, as the Acts and observations of the
first. If I mistake, then it is S. James that has abused me, for he describing
Religion by its proper Acts, tells us, that True Religion and undefiled before
God and the Father is to visit the Fatherless and the widow in their
affliction, and to keep himself unspotted of the world. So that the thing which
is an especial refine dialect of the new Christian language signifies nothing
but morality and civility, that in the language of the holy Ghost imports true
Religion. Wherefore any difference that the holy Ghost makes notwithstanding,
the man of virtuous dispositions, though ignorant of the mystery of Christ, be
it Fabricius or Regulus or any ancient heathen man, famous for sincerity and
uprightness of carriage, has as sure a claim and interest in the Church of
Christ as the man deepest skilled in, most certainly believing, and openly
professing all, that is, written in the holy books of God, if he endeavor not
to show his faith by his works. The Ancients therefore where they found this
kind of men gladly received them, and converst, familiarly with them, as
appears by the friendly intercourse of Epistles of S. Basil with Libanius of
Nazianzen and Austen with sundry others, and Antiquity has either left us
true, or forged us false Epistles betwixt Saint Paul himself and Seneca. Now as
for the admitting of any of these men to the discussing of the doubts in our
Religious mysteries, who either know not, or peradventure contemn them, there
needs not much be said: by a Cannon of one of the Councels of Carthage it
appears, it had sometimes been the erroneous practice of some Christians to
Baptize the dead, and to put the Sacrament of Christ's body into their mouths.
Since we have confessed these men to be in a sort dead, as having no supernatural
quickening grace from above, to put into their hands the handling of the word of
life at all, much more of discussing of the doubtful things in it, were nothing
else, but to Baptize a carcass, and put the communion bread into the mouth of
the dead. Wherefore leaving this kind of weak person to your courteous
acceptance.

Let us consider of another, one quite contrary to the former; a true
professor, but a man of profane and wicked life, one more dangerously ill then
the former, have we any recipe for this man? May seem for him there is no balm
in Gilead, he seems like unto the Lepar in the law, unto whom no man might draw
near, and by so much the more dangerous is his case, because the condition of
conversing with heathen men, be they never so wicked is permitted unto
Christians by our Apostle himself, whereas with this man all commerce seems by
the same Apostle to be quite cut off. For in the 1 Cor. 6. St. Paul having
forbidden them formerly all manner of conversing with Fornicators, infamous
persons, and men subject to grievous crimes, and considering at length how
impossible this was, because of the Gentiles with whom they lived, and amongst
whom necessarily they were to converse and trade, he distinguishes between the
fornicators of this world, and the fornicators which were Brethren. I meant not
(says the Blessed Apostle) expounding himself that ye should not admit of the
Fornicators of this world, that is, such as were Gentiles; for then must ye
have sought a new world. So great and general a liberty at that time had the
world assumed for the practice of that sin of fornication, that strictly to
have forbidden them the company of fornicators had almost been to have excluded
them the society of mankind. But says he, if a brother be a fornicator or a
thief, or a railer with such a one partake not, no not so much as to eat.
Wherefore the case of this person seems to be desperate. For he is not only
mortally sick, but is bereft of all help of the Physician, yet notwwithstanding
all this we may not give him over for gone, for when we have well searched our
boxes, we shall find a Recipe even for him too, think we that our Apostles
meaning was, that we should acquaint our selves only with the good, and not the
bad; as Physicians in the time of pestilence look only to the sound, and shun
the diseased? Our Savior Christ familiarly converst, eat, and drank with
Publicans and sinners, and gives the reason of it; because he came not to call
the Righteous but sinners to repentance. Is Christ contrary to Paul? this
reason of our Savior concerns every one on whom the duty of saving of Souls
does rest. It is the main drift of his message and unavoidably he is to
converse, yea, eat and drink with all sorts of sinners, even because he is to
call not the righteous but sinners to repentance. Necessary it is that some
means be left to reclaim notorious offenders, let their disease be never so
dangerous. Nescio an in extremis aliquid tentare medicina sit, certe nihil
tentare perditio est, who can tell whether in this extremity, were it at the
last cast it may some way profit, to receive him, but this we all know that
altogether to cast him out of the society of good men, is to cut him off from
all outward means of health. The Leper in the law though he were excluded the
multitude; yet had he access unto the Priest. Beloved the priest in the new law
has much greater privilege then the ancient had, he was only a judge and
could not cure: but this is both a judge and a Physician, and can both discern
and cure the leprosy of our souls; wherefore he is not to be excluded from the
most desperately sick person. Neither does this duty concern the priest alone.
For as Tertullian sometimes spoke in another case; In majestatis reos and
publicos hosts omnis homo miles est. Against Traitors and public enemies
every man is a soldier, so is it true in this. Every one who is of strength to
pull a soul out of the fire, is for this business, by counsel, by advice, by
rebuking a priest, neither must he let him lie there to expect better help.
Again, no man so ill but has some good thing in him, though it break not out,
as being clouded and darkened with much corruption, we must take heed, that we
do not pro solis comprehendere frequentissima mistake in thinking there is
nothing else but evil, where we often see it. We must therefore entertain even
nea^^ friendship with such a one to discover him. Nemo enim nisi per amicitiam
cognoscitur, says St. Austine. No man is perfectly discovered, but by his
inward acquaintance. As therefore they who seek for treasure give not over by
reason of clay and mire, so long as there is any hope to speed: so may we not
cast off our industry, though it labor in the most polluted soul, ut ad
quaedam sana in quorum delectaetione acquiescamus per charitatis tolerantiam
perducamur, that so at length, through charitable patience and long suffering
we may discover in him some good things which may content us for the present,
and give hope of better things to come. For as they that work in gold and
costly matter, diligently save every little piece that falls away: so goodness
wheresoever it be, is a thing so precious that every little spark of it
deserves our care in cherishing. Many miscarry through the want of this
patience, in those who undertake them, whilst they despair of them too soon;
dum ita obiurgant quasi oderint, whilst they rebuke us, as if they hated, and
upbraid rather then reprehend. Transit convitium et intemperantia culpatur,
uterque qui periere arguuntur. As unskilful Physicians, who suffer their
patients to die under their hands, to hide their error, blame their patients
intemperance: so let us take heed, least it be not so much the strength of the
disease, as the want of skill in us which we strive to cover, and vail over
with the names of contumacy intemperance or the like. David received an express
message from the Prophet, that the child conceived in adultery should surely
die, yet he ceast not his prayers, and tears, and fasting as long as there was
life in it: we receive no such certain message concerning any man's miscarriage,
and why then should we intermit any office which Christian patience can afford.
Wherefore, what Maecenas sometime spoke loosly in another sense, debilem facito
manu, debilem pede, coxa: lubricos quate dentes: vita dum superest been est,
that we may apply more properly to our purpose, let our weak person here be
lame, hand and foot, hip and thigh, sick in head and heart, yet so long as
there is life in him, there is no cause we should despair. How know thou how
potent the word of God may be through thy ministry, out of these stones to
raise up children unto Abraham? I cannot therefore persuade my self. that this
prohibition of St. Paul, of which we but now spoke, so far extended, as that it
quite interdicted good men the company of the sinners, be they never so gross.
For when he delivered men unto Satan, (the greatest thing that ever he did in
this kind) it was ad interitum carnis, to the mortifying of the flesh, that so
the spirit might be safe in the day of the Lord. But this is worse, for by this
peremptory excluding the gross sinner from the good, a greater gap is opened
to the liberty of the flesh, and a more immediate way could not be found to
bring final destruction on him at that day. The extent therefore of St. Paul's
precept, though given in show to all, I take to reach no farther then the weak,
and such as are in danger of infection; for the weaker sort of men are always,
evermore the most, and a charge given unto the most, is commonly given under
the style of all. Our Apostle therefore jealous of the tenderer sort, whom
every unwholesome blast does easily taint, seems, what he intended for the most
to make general to all. The reason which the Apostle gives, does warrant this
restraint. See ye not (says he) that a little leaven sowers the whole lump? If
therefore there be any part of the lump, (...) out of shot and danger of
sowring and contagion, on it this precept can have no extent: and surely some
wrong it were to the Church of Christ, to suppose that all were necessarily
subject to sowring and infection, upon supposal of some admission of leaven.
Evil indeed is infectious, but neither necessarily, nor yet so, that it need
fright us from those who are diseased with it. Contagious diseases which ceaze
on our bodies, infect by natural force and means, which we cannot prevent: but
no man drinks down this poison, whose will is not the hand that takes the Cup:
so that to converse with men of diseased minds infects us not, except we will.
Again, Aristotle in his problems, makes a question, why health does not infect
as well as sickness. For we grow sick many times by incautelously conversing
with the diseased: but no man grows well by accompanying the healthy: thus
indeed it is with the healthiness of the body: it has no transient force on
others, but the strength and healthiness of the mind carries with it a
gracious kind of infection: and common experience tells us, that nothing
profits evil men more then the company of the good. So that strength of mind
accompanied with the preservative of the grace of God, may not only without
fear of contagion, safely converse with ungracious sinners, but by so doing, as
it were infect them, and make them such as himself is. No cause therefore
hitherto, why the true professors, though notorious sinners should not be
partakers of our Christian Courtesies; and therefore as of the former, so of
this my conclusion is, we must receive him. Only let me add St. Paul's words in
another place, Ye that are strong, receive such a one.

HAving thus far spoken of his admission, let us now a little consider of his
Restraint; and see whether he may have any part in hearing and handling
religious controversies; where plainly to speak my mind, as his admission
before was, so his exclusion here is much more necessary, the way to these
schools should be open to none, but to men of upright life and conversation:
and that as well in regard of the profane and wicked men themselves, as of the
cause which they presume to handle: for as for themselves this is but the
field, wherein they sow and reap their own infamy and disgrace. Our own
experience tells us; how hard a thing it is for men of behavior known to be
spotless, to avoid the lash of those men's tongues, who make it their chief
fence to disgrace the persons, when they cannot touch the cause. For what else
are the writings of many men, but mutual Pasquils and Satyrs against each
others lives, wherein digladiating like Eschines and Demosthenes, they
reciprocally lay open each others filthiness to the view and scorn of the
world. The fear therefore of being stained, and publicly disgraced, might be
reason enough to keep them back from entering these contentions. And as for the
cause it self, into which this kind of men do put themselves, needs must it go
but ill with it: for is it possible that those respects which sway and govern
their ordinary actions, should have no influence upon their pens? It cannot be,
that they who speak, and plot, and act wickedness, should ever write uprightly.
Nam ut in vita, ita et in causis quoque spes improbas habent: doubtless, as in
their lives, so in the causes they undertake, they nourish hopes full of
improbity. Besides all this, the opinion of the common sort is not to be
contemned, whom no kind of reason so much abuses, and carries away, as when the
discredit of the person is retorted on the cause, which thing our adversaries
here at home amongst us know very well, a masterpiece, of whose policy it is
to put into the hands of the people, such pamphlets which hurt not our cause at
all, but only discredit our persons. Saint Chrysostom observes out of the
ancient customs of the Olympian games, that whenever any man offered himself
to contend in them, he was not to be admitted till public Proclamation had
been made thorowout the multitude to this purpose, Whither any man knew him to
be either a servant, or a thief, or otherwise of infamous life. And if any
imputation in this kind were proved against him, it was sufficient to keep him
back. Had the Heathen this care that their vanities should not be discredited?
how great then must our care be, that they which enter into these exercises, be
of pure and upright condition? Let men's skill and judgment therefore be never
so good, yet if their lives be notoriously subject to exception, Let them know
that there is no place for them in these Olympicks. Men indeed in civil
business have found out a distinction between an honest man and a good Common
wealths-man: and therefore Fabricias in the Roman story is much commended for
nominating to the Consulship Ruffinus a wicked man and his utter enemy, because
he knew him to be serviceable to the Commonwealth, for those wars which were
then depending. But in the business of the Lord and Commonwealth of God, we
can admit of no such distinction. For God himself in the book of Psalms, staves
them off with a Quid tua ut enarres mea, etc. What have thou to do to take my
words into thy mouth since thou hate to be reformed? The world for the
managing of her matters, may employ such as her self has fitted: but let every
one who names the name of God depart from iniquity. For these reasons therefore
is it very expedient, that none but right good men should undertake the Lords
quarrels, the rather because there is some truth in that which Quintilian
spoke, Cogitare optima simul and deterrima, non magis est unius animi, quam
ejusdem hominis bonum esse ac malum. As impossible it is that good and bad
thoughts should harbor in the same heart, as it is for the same man to be
jointly good, and bad. And so from the consideration of this sick person, let
us proceed to visit the next. The weak persons, I have hitherto treated of are
the fewest as consisting in a kind of extreme. For the greatest sort of men
are in a mediocrity of men eminently good or extremely ill the number is
smallest; but this rank of sick persons that now we are to view is an whole
army and may be everyone of us, if we do well examine our selves, shall find
our selves in it: For the weak whom we now are to speak of, is he that has not
that degree and perfection of faith and strength of Spiritual constitution that
he ought to have; Wherefore our Recipe here must be like the Tree of life in
the book of the Revelation, it must be medicine to heal whole nations. For who
is he amongst men that can free himself from this weakness? Yea, we our selves
that are set over others for their cure, may speak of our selves and our
charge, as Jolaus in Euripides does of himself and Hercules children, (...) we
take care of these, our selves standing in need of others care for us.
Hippocrates counsels his Physician, to look especially, that himself be healthy
to be(...) fair of color and full of flesh. For otherwise says he how can he
give comfort and hope of success to a sick patient, who by his ill color and
meagerness bewraies some imperfection of his own. But what Physician of Soul
and manners is capable of this counsel; or who is it that taking the cure of
others does not in most of his actions bewray his own desease? even thus has
it pleased God to tie us together with a mutual sense of each others weakness,
and as our selves receive and bear with others; so for our selves
interchangeably must we request the same courtesy at others hands:
Notwithstanding, as it is with the health of our bodies, no man at any time is
perfectly well, only he goes for an healthy man, who is least sick: so fares it
with our souls, God has encluded all under the name of weak, some peradventure
is less weak then others but no man is strong. Infaelicissimu^ Consolationis
genus est de miseriis hominu^ peccatorum capere solatia. It is but a miserable
comfort to judge our own perfections only by others defects, yet this is all the
comfort we have. Let us leave therefore those who by reason of being less crazy
pass for healthy, and consider of those whom some sensible and eminent
imperfection above others has rank't in the number of the weak. And of those
there are sundry kinds, especially two. One is weak because he is not yet
fully informed, not so sufficiently Catechized in the Mysteries of Faith, whom
farther Institution may bring to better Maturity. The other peradventure is
sufficiently grounded for principles of Faith, yet is weak, by reason either of
some passion or of some irritatory and troublesome humor in his behavior,
nullum unquam ingenium placuit sine venia. There is no man so perfect, but has
somewhat in his behavior that requires pardon. As for the imperfection of the
former of these, It is the weakness of infancy and childehood in Faith rather
then a disease: And with this weak man we are especially to bear above all
others. For as for him that is weak through gross and wilful ignorance or
contumacy or the like, it is pardonable, if sometimes we yield him not that
measure of courtesy, which were meet, but to be cruel against infancy and
childehood were inhumanity. The manner of our Recipe for these men, our Apostle
somewhere expresses where he tells us of some that must be fed with milk and
not strong meat: Unto these we must rather be as Nurses then Physicians,
submittendo nos ad mensuram discentis, and manu^ dando and gradu^ nostra^
minuendo, by gently submitting our selves to the capacity of the learner, by
lending our hand by lessning our steps to keep them in equipace with us till
they come up to their full growth. As Christ being God emptied himself, and
became Man like to us, so must we lay down our gifts of wit, in which we
flatter our selves and take our selves to be as Gods, and in show and fashion
become like one of them. Grave men have thought it no disparagement, to have
bin seen with their little sons, Ludere par impar equitare in arundine longa,
toying and practicing with them their childish sports: and if any take offense
at it, they are such as know not what it is to be Fathers. Those therefore who
bear the office of Fathers amongst other men, to bring up the infancy of Babes
in Christ, must not blush to practice this part of a Father, and out of Paul's
lesson of becoming all to all, learn to become a child to children, do it he
may very well, without any impeachment to himself. He that helps one up that is
fallen, non se projicit ut ambo jaceant, sed incurvat tantum ut jacentem
erigat, throws not himself down to lie by him, but gently stoops to lift him up
again; but of this weak person, I have little need, I trust to speak. For no
man in these days can be long weak, but by his own default, so long and careful
teaching as has been and every day is, must needs take from men all pretense
of weakness in this kind. Nam quid aliud agimus docendo vos, quam ne semper
docendi sitis. For what is the end of all this labor and pains in teaching, but
that ye might at length not need a teacher. Wherefore from this I come unto
that other weak person, strong in Faith, but weak in carriage and behavior.

Having before proved that Christian courtesy spreads it self to all sorts of
men, to the Insidel, to the gross notorious sinner, then will it without any
streining at all come home to all the infirmities of our weaker brethren: For
that which can endure so great a tempest, how can it be offended with some
small drops. Is Christian patience like unto Saint Peter's resolution, that
durst manfully encounter the high Priests servant, yet was danted at the voice
of a silly maiden, whatsoever it is that is irksome unto us in the common
behavior of our Brethren, it were strange we should not be able to brook.
Epictetus conconsidering with himself, the weakness which is usual in men,
still to make the worst of what befalls us, wittily tells us that every thing in
the world has two handles one turned toward us which we may easily take, the
other turned from us harder to be laid hold of; the first makes all things
easy, the second not so, The instance that he brings in my very purpose. Be it
says he, thy Brother has offended thee, here are two hand-fasts, one of the
offense, the other of thy Brother. If thou take hold of that of the offense it
will be too hot for thee, thou will not easily endure the touch of it: but if
thou lay hold of that of thy Brother, this will make all behavior tolerable.
There is no part of our Brothers carriage toward us but if we search it, we
shall find, some hand-fast, some circumstance, that will make it easy to be
born. If we can can find no other, the circumstance of our Savior Christ's
example will never fail. An example which will not only make us to endure the
importunity of his ordinary behavior, but all his outrageous dealing
whatsoever. For says S. Chrysostom, did thou know that thy Brother intended
particular mischief against thee that he would embrue his hand in thy blood,
(...), yet kiss that hand, for thy Lord did not refuse to kiss that that mouth
that made the bargain for his blood. It is storied of Protagoras that being a
poor youth and carrying a burden of sticks, he piled so them, and laid them
together, with such art and order, that he made them much more light and easy
to be born. Beloved, there is an Art among Christians like unto that of
Protagoras of so making up and ordering our burdens, that they may lie with
much less weight upon our shoulders, this art, if we could learn it, would make
us take all in good part at our Brothers hand, were he as bad as Nabal was, of
whom his own servant complained that he was such a man of Belial that no man
could speak unto him.

Wherefore leaving you to the study, and learning of this most Christian art, I
will a little consider for what Reasons we may not admit of these two sorts of
weak men to controversy. For as for the unlearned, in private, nothing more
usual with them then to take offense at our dissentions, and to become more
uncertain and unjoynted upon the hearing of any question discust. It is their
usual voice and question to us: Is it possible that we should be at one in
these points in which your selves do disagree? thus cast they off, on our backs
the burden of their backsliding and neutrality, wherefore to acquaint them
with disputation in Religion, were as it were to blast them in their infancy,
and bring upon them some improsperous Disease to hinder their growth in Christ.
Secondly, what one said of other contentions, In bellis civilibus audacia etiam
valet singulorum, In civil wars no man is too weak to do a mischief, we have
found too true in these our Sacra Bella; no man is to weak, (I say not) to do
mischief, but to be a principal Agent and Captain in them. Simple and unlearned
souls trained up by men of contentious spirits have had strength enough to be
Authors of dangerous heresies, Priscilla and Maximilla, silly women laden with
iniquity were the chief ringleaders in the error of the Montanists, and as it
is commonly said, bellum inchoant inertes, fortes finiunt, weaklings are able
to begin a quarrel, but the prosecution and finishing is a work for stronger
men, so has it fared here. For that quarrel which these poor souls had raised,
Tertullian a man of great Wit and Learning is drawn to undertake: so that for a
Barnabas to be drawn away to error, there needs not always the example and
authority of a Peter. A third reason is the mavelous violence of the weaker
sort in maintaining their conceits, if once they begin to be opiniative. For
one thing there is that wonderfully prevails against the reclaiming of them,
and that is, the natural jealousy they have of all that is said unto them by
men of better wits, stand it with reason never so good, if it sound not as they
would have it. A jealousy founded in the sense of their weakness arising out
of this that they suspect all to be done for no other end, but to circumvent
and abuse them. And therefore when they see themselves to be too weak in
reasoning, they easily turn them to violence. The Monks of Egypt, otherwise
devout, and religious men anciently, were for the most part unlearned, and
generally given over to the error of the Anthropomorphitae, who held that God
had hands and feet and all the parts that a man has, and was in outward shape
and proportion like to one of us. Theophilus a Learned Bishop of Alexandria
having fallen into their hands was so roughly used by them, that ere he could
get out of their fingers, he was fain to use his wits and to crave aid of his
Equivocating Sophistry and soothly to tell them. I have seen your face as the
face of God. Now when Christian and Religious doubts, must thus be managed with
wilfulness and violence, what mischief may come of it is already so plain, that
it needs not my finger to point it out. Wherefore let every such weak person
say unto himself, as Saint Austine does, Tu ratiocinare, ego mirer, disputa tu
ego credam, let others reason I will marvel. Let others dispute I will believe.
As for the man strong in passion or rather weak, for the strength of passion is
the weakness of the passionate; great reason has the Church to except against
him. For first of all from him it comes that our books are so stuffed with
contumelious malediction, no heathen writers having left the like example of
choler and gross impatience. An hard thing, I know it is to write without
affection and passion in those things which we love, and therefore it is free
so to do, to those who are Lords over themselves. It seems our Savior gave
some way to it himself. For somewhat certainly his Kinsmen saw in his
behavior, when as S. Mark reports they went forth to lay hold upon him
thinking he was beside himself. But for those who have not the command of
themselves, better it were they laid it by, S. Chrysostom excellently
observes that the Prophets of God, and Satan, were by this notoriously
differenced, that they which gave Oracles by motion from the Devil did it with
much impatience and confusion, with a kind of fury and madness but they which
gave Oracles from God by Divine Inspiration, gave them with all mildness and
temper, If it be the cause of God which we handle in our writings, then let us
handle it like the Prophets of God with quietness and moderation, and not in
the violence of passion, as if we were possessed, rather then inspired. Again,
what equity or indifferency can we look for in the carriage of that cause, that
falls into the handling of these men. Quis confer duces meminit qui pendere
causas? Qua stetit inde favet, what man overtaken with passion remembers
impartially to compare cause with cause, and right with right. Qua stetit inde
favet -- on what cause he happens, that is he resolute to maintain, ut
gladiator in arenam; as a Fencer to the Stage, so comes he to write, not upon
conscience of quarrel, but because he proposes to contend, yea, so potently
has this humor prevailed with men that have undertaken to maintain a faction,
that it has broken out to the tempting of God, and the dishonor of Martyrdom.
Two Friars in Florence in the action of Savonoralla, voluntarily in the open
view of the City, offered to enter the fire: so to put an end to the
controversy, that he might be judged to have the right who like one of the
three children in Babylon, should pass untouched through the fire. But I hasten
to visit one weak person more and so an end.

He whom we now are to visit, is a man weak through heretical and erring Faith,
now whether or no, we have any receipt for him it may be doubtful; For S. Paul
advises us to avoid the man, that is, a maker of Sects, knowing him to be
damned. yet, if as we spoke of not admitting to us the notorious sinner, no not
to eat, so we teach of this, that it is delivered respectively to the weaker
sort; as justly for the same reasons we may do: we shall have a Recipe here for
the man that erres in faith, and rejoices in making of Sects: which we shall
the better do, if we can but gently draw him on to a moderation to think of his
conceits only as of opinions; for it is not the variety of opinions, but our
own perverse wills, who think it meet, that all should be conceited as our
selves are, which has so inconvenienced the Church, were we not so ready to
anathematize each other, where we concur not in opinion, we might in hearts be
united, though in our tongues we were divided, and that with singular profit to
all sides, It is the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, and not
Identitie of conceit, which the Holy Ghost requires at the hands of Christians.
I will give you one instance, in which at this day our Churches are at
variance. The will of God, and his manner of proceeding in predestination is
undiscernable, and shall so remain until that day, wherein all knowledge shall
be made perfect, yet some there are, who with probability of Scripture teach,
that the true cause of the final miscarriage of them that perish, is that
original corruption that befell them at the beginning, increased through the
neglect or refusal of grace offered. Others with no less favorable countenance
of Scripture, make the cause of reprobation only the will of God, determining,
freely of his own work, as himself pleases, without respect to any second cause
whatsoever. Were we not ambitiously minded, familiam ducere, every one to be
Lord of a Sect, each of these tenants might be profitably taught and heard, and
matter of singular exhortation drawn from either; for on the one part,
doubtless it is a pious and religious intent, to endeavor to free God from all
imputation of unnecessary rigor, and his justice from seeming unjustice and
incongruity: and on the other side, it is a noble resolution, so to humble our
selves under the hand of Almighty God, as that we can with patience hear, yea,
think it an honor, that so base creatures as our selves should become the
instruments of the glory of so great a majesty, whether it be by eternal life,
or by eternal death, though for no other reason, but for Gods good will and
pleasure sake. The authors of these conceits might both freely (if peaceably)
speak their minds, and both singularly profit the Church: for since it is
impossible where Scripture is ambiguous, that all conceits should run alike, it
remains, that we seek out a way not so much to establish an unity of opinion in
the minds of all; which I take to be a thing likewise impossible, as to
provide that multiplicity of conceit, trouble not the Churches peace. A better
way my conceit cannot reach unto, then that we would be willing to think, that
these things, which with some show of probability we deduce from Scripture are
at the best, but our opinions for this peremptory manner of setting down our
own conclusions under this high commanding form of necessary truths, is
generally one of the greatest causes, which keeps the Churches this day so far
asunder; when as a gracious receiving of each other, by mutual forbearance in
this kind, might peradventure in time bring them nearer together.

This peradventure may some man say, may content us in case of opinion
indifferent, out of which no great inconvenience by necessary and evident proof
is concluded: but what Recipe have we for him that is fallen into some known
and desperate Heresy? Even the same with the former. And therefore anciently,
Heretical and Orthodox Christians, many times even in public holy exercise
converst together without offense. It Is noted in the Ecclesiastic stories,
that the Arrians and Right believers so communicated together in holy prayers,
that you could not distinguish them till they came to the (...), the gloria
patri, which the Arrians used with some difference from other Christians. But
those were times quorum lectionem habemus virtutem non habemus, we read of them
in our books, but we have lost the practice of their patience. Some prejudice
was done unto the Church by those, who first began to intermingle, with public
Ecclesiastical duties, things respective unto private conceits. For those
Christian offices in the Church ought as much as possibly they may be common
unto all, and not to descend to the differences of particular opinions.
Severity against, and separation from heretical companies, took its beginning
from the Heretics themselves: and if we search the stories, we shall find
that the Church did not at their first arising thrust them from her: themselves
went out, and as for severity: that which the Donatists sometimes spoke in
their own defense. Illam esse veram Ecclesiam quae prosecutionem patitur, non
quae facit, she was the true Church not which raised, but which suffered
persecution was de facto true for a great space. For when heresies and schisms
first arose in the Church, all kind of violence were used by the erring
factions, but the Church seemed not for a long time to have known any use of a
sword, but only of a buckler, and when she began to use the sword, some of her
best and chiefest Captains much misliked it. The first law in this kind that
ever was made, was enacted by Theodosius against the Donatists, but with this
restraint, that it should extend against none, but only such as were
tumultuous, and till that time they were not so much as touched with any mulct,
though but pecuniary, till that shameful outrage committed against Bish.
Maximian, whom they beat down with bats and clubs, even as he stood at the
Altar: so that not so much the error of the Donatists, as their riots and
mutinies were by Imperial laws restrained. That the Church had afterward good
reason to think, that she ought to be salubrior quam dulcior, that sometimes
there was more mercy in punishing, then forbearing there can no doubt be made.
St. Austine (a man of as mild and gentle spirit as ever bare rule in the
Church) having according to his natural sweetness of disposition, earnestly
written against violent, and sharp dealing with He^, being taught by
experience, did afterward retract, and confess an excellent use of wholesome
severity in the Church. Yet could I wish that it might be said of the Church,
which was sometimes observed of Augustus. In nullius unquam suorum necem
duravit: he had been angry with, and severely punished many of his kin, but he
could never endure to cut any of them off by death. But this I must request you
to take only as my private wish, and not as a censure, if any thing have been
done to the contrary. When Absalom was up in arms against his Father, it was
necessary for David to take order to curb him, and pull him on his knees, yet
we see how careful he was, he should not die, and how lamentably he bewailed
him in his death: what cause was it that drove David into this extreme passion?
Was it doubt of heir to the Kingdom? That could not be. For Solomon was now
born, to whom the promise of the Kingdom was made, was it the strength of
natural affection? I somewhat doubt of it. Three year together was Absalom in
banishment, and David did not very eagerly desire to see him. The Scripture
indeed notes that the King longed for him: yet in this longing was there not
any such fierceness of passion: for Absalom saw not the Kings face for two
years more after his return from banishment to Jerusalem. What then might be
the cause of his strength of passion, and commiseration in the King? I persuade
my self it was the fear of his sons final miscarriage, and reprobation, which
made the King (secure of the mercies of God unto himself) to wish he had died
in his steed, that so he might have gained for his ungracious child, some time
of repentance. The Church who is the common mother of us all, when her
Absoloms, her unnatural sons do lift up their hands and pens against her, must
so use means to repress them, that she forget not that they are the sons of her
womb, and be compassionate over them as David was over Absalom, loath to
unsheath either sword, but most of all the temporal, for this were to send them
with quick dispatch to Hell.

And here I may not pass by that singular moderation of this Church of ours^^,
which she has most christianly expressed toward her adversaries of Rome, here
at home in her bosom above all the reformed Churches, I have read of. For out
of desire to make the breach seem no greater, then indeed it is, and to hold
communion and Christian fellowship with her, so far as we possibly can, we have
done nothing to cut of the favorers of that Church. The reasons of their love
and respects to the Church of Rome we wish, but we do not command them to lay
down: their lay-Brethren have all means of instruction offered them. Our Edicts
and Statutes made for their restraint, are such as serve only to awake them,
and cause them to consider the innocence of that cause for refusal of
communion, in which they endure (as they suppose) so great losses. Those who
are sent over by them, either for the retaining of the already perverted, or
perverting others, are either returned by us back again to them, who dispatched
them to us, or without any wrong unto their persons, or danger to their lives,
suffer an easy restraint, which only hinders them from dispersing the poison
they brought. And had they not been stickling in our state-business, and
meddling with our Princes crown, there had not a drop of their blood fallen to
the ground; unto our Sermons, in which the swarvings of that Church are
necessarily to be taxt by us, we do not bind their presence, only our desire
is, they would join with us in those Prayers, and holy ceremonies, which are
common to them and us. And so accordingly, by singular discretion was our
Service Book compiled by our Forefathers, as containing nothing that might
offend them, as being almost merely a compendium of their own Breviary and
Missal, so that they shall see nothing in our meetings, but that they shall see
done in their own, though many things which are in theirs, here I grant they
shall not find. And here indeed is the great and main difference betwixt us.
As it is in the controversy concerning the Cononical books of Scripture:
whatsoever we hold for Scripture, that even by that Church is maintained, only
she takes upon her to add much, which we cannot think safe to admit: so fares
it in other points of Faith and Ceremony; whatsoever it is we hold for faith,
she holds it as far forth as we; our ceremonies are taken from her; only she
over and above urges some things for faith, which we take to be error, or at
the best but opinion, and for ceremony which we think to be superstition. So
that to participate with us, is, though not throughout, yet in some good
measure to participate with that Church: and certainly were that spirit of
charity stirring in them, which ought to be, they would love and honor us,
even for the resemblance of that Church, the beauty of which themselves so much
admire. The glory of these our proceedings, even our adversaries themselves do
much envy. So that from hence it is, that in their vvritings they traduce our
judiciary proceedings against them, for sanguinary and violent, striving to
persuade other nations, that such as have suffered by course of public
justice for religion only, and not for treason have died, and pretend we what
we list, our actions are as bloody and cruel as their own: wherefore if a
perfect pattern of dealing with erring Christians were to be sought, there were
not any like unto this of ours, In qua nec saeviendi, nec errandi per eundique
licentia permittitur, which as it takes not to it self liberty of cruelty, so
it leaves not unto any the liberty of destroying their own souls in the error
of their lives. And now that we may at once conclude this point concerning
Heretics, for prohibiting these men access to religious disputations, it is
now too late to dispute of that, for from this that they have already
unadvisedly entered into these battles, are they become that which they are: Let
us leave them therefore as a sufficient example and instance of the danger of
intempestive and immodest meddling in Sacred disputes.

I see it may be well expected, that I should according to my promise add
instruction for the public Magistrate, and show how far this precept in
receiving the weak concerns him.

I must confess I intended and promised so to do, but^^ I cannot conceive of
it, as a thing befitting me to step out of my study, and give rules for
government to Commonwealths, a thing befitting men of greater experience to do.
Wherefore I hope you will pardon me if I keep not that promise, which I shall
with less offense break then observe: And this I rather do, because I suppose
this precept, to concern us, especially if not only as private men, and that in
case of public proceeding, there is scarce room for it. Private men may pass
over offenses at their pleasure, and may be in not doing it, they do worse: but
thus to do, lies not in the power of the Magistrate, who goes by laws,
prescribing him what he is to do. Princes and men in authority do many times
much abuse themselves by affecting a reputation of clemency, in pardoning
wrongs done to other men; and giving protection to sundry offenders, against
those who have just cause to proceed against them. It is mercy to pardon wrong
done against our selves, but to deny the course of Justice to him that calls
for it, and to protect offenders, may peradventure be some inconsiderate pity,
but mercy it cannot be. All therefore that I will presume to advise the
Magistrate is, A general inclinablenesse to merciful proceeding.

And so I conclude, wishing unto them who plentifully fowe mercy, plentifully
to Reap it at the hand of God, with an hundred fold increase; and that blessing
from God the Father of mercies, may be upon them all, as on the sons of mercy,
as many as are the sands on the Seashore in multitude. The same God grant that
the words which we have heard this day. etc.

A Sermon Preached on Easter Day at Eaton College.
Luke 16. 25. Son remember that thou in thy life time received'st thy good
things.
I Have heard a Proverb to this sound, He that has a debt to pay at Easter,
thinks the Lent but short: How short this Lent has seemed to me, who stand
indebted unto you for the remainder of my meditations upon these words, is no
matter of consequence; to you peradventure it may have seemed so long, that what
you lately heard at Shrovetide, now at Easter you may with pardon have
forgotten. I will therefore recall into your memories so much of my former
Meditations as may serve to open unto me a convenient way to pursue the rest of
those lessons, which then, when I last spoke unto you, the time and your
patience would not permit me to finish. But ere I do this, I will take leave a
little to fit my Text unto this time of Solemnity:

This time, you know, calls for a discourse concerning, the Resurrection of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; of this you hear no sound in the words, which I
have read, and therefore you conclude it a Text unbefitting the day. Indeed, if
you take the Resurrection for that glorious act of his Omnipotency, by which
through the power of his eternal Spirit he redeems himself from the hand of the
grave, and triumphs over death and hell, you shall in these words find nothing
pertinent; But if you take this Resurrection for that act, by which, through
the power of saving grace, Christ the Son of righteousness rises in our hearts,
and raises us from the death of sin unto the life of righteousness, here in
these words you may perchance find a notable branch of it. For to raise our
thoughts from this earth, and clay, and from things beneath (and such are
those, which here Abraham calls the good things of our life) and to set them
above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God, this is that practick
resurrection, which above all concerns us, that other of Christ in person, in
regard of us, is but a resurrection in speculation, for to him that is dead in
sin and trespasses, and who places his good in the things of this life, Christ
is, as it were not risen at all, to such a one he is still in the grave, and
under the bands of death: But to him that is risen with Christ, and seeks the
good things that are above, to him alone is Christ risen: To know and believe
perfectly the whole story of Christ's Resurrection, what were it, if we did not
practice this Resurrection of our own? Cogita non exacturum a te Deum, quantum
cognoveris, sed quantum vixeris, God will not reckon with thee, how much thou
know, but how well thou have lived: Epictetus, that great Philosopher makes
this pretty parable, should a shepherd, says he, call his sheep to account,
how they had profited, would he like of that sheep, which brought before him
his hay, his grass, and fodder, or rather that sheep, which having well
digested all these, expressed himself in fat, in flesh, and wool? Beloved, you
are the flock of Christ, and the sheep of his hands, should the great Shepherd
of the flock call you before him, to see how you have profited, would he
content himself with this, that you had well cond your Catechism, that you had
diligently read the Gospel, and exactly knew the whole story of the
resurrection? would it not give him better satisfaction to find Christ's
resurrection expressed in yours: and as it were digested into flesh and wool?
(...) To have read Chrysippus his Book, this is not virtue: To have read the
Gospel, to have gathered all the circumstances of the resurrection of Christ,
this is not Christianity: to have risen, as Christ, has done, so to have
digested the resurrection of Christ, as that we have made it our own, this is
rightly to understand the Doctrine of the resurrection of Christ. For this
cause have I refused to treat this day of that resurrection, in the Doctrine of
which I know you are perfect, and have reflected on that, in the knowledge of
which I fear you are imperfect: which that I might the better do, I have made
choice to prosecute my former meditations, begun when I last spoke unto you in
this place; For so doing I shall open unto you one of the hardest points of
your Spiritual resurrection, even to raise your thoughts from the things of
this life, and seat them with Christ above.

To make my way more fair to this, I will take leave to put you in mind, in
short, how I proceeded in the opening of these words, when I last spoke unto
you out of this place: You may be pleased to remember, that after some
instruction drawn from the first word, Son, I proceeded to consider the ensuing
words, wherein having by an Alchimie, which then I used, changed the word [
Recordare] Remember, into [ Cave] Beware, and so read my text thus, Beware thou
receive not thy good things in this life, I showed you that we had never
greater cause to consult our best wits, what we are to do, and how we are to
carry our selves, then when the world, and outward blessings come upon us; Upon
this I moved this Question, Whether or no, if the things of this world should
by some providence of God knock and offer themselves to us, we are bound to
exclude them and resuse them, or we might open and admit of them: I divided my
answer according to the diverse abilities and strengths of men, first, qui
potest capere capiat, he that has strength and spiritual wisdom to manage
them, let him receive them: But in the second place, he that is weak, let him
let strong diet alone, and feed on herbs, let him not entangle himself with
more then he can manage; Let him try, quid far resusent, Quid valiant humeri
-- to the first, the sum of what I spoke was this, Receive them we may, and
that with out danger of a Recepisti; first, if we so received them, as if we
received them not, secondly if we esteemed them not good, thirdly if we did not
esteem them ours: And here the time cut me off, and suffered me not to descend
unto the second part, upon which now I am about to fall, Cave ne recipias, Take
heed thou receive not thy good things.

In this matter of Receiving and enterteining these outward and foreign good
things, there have been two ways commended to you, the one the more glorious,
to receive them, of this we have spoken the other the more safe, not to receive
them, of this we are now to speak; these ways are trodden by two kinds of
persons, the one is the strong man, and more virtuous, the other is weaker, but
more cautelous, the one incounters temptation, the other avoids it: we may
compare them to the two great Captains, Hannibal and Fabius, the one ever
calling for the battle the other evermore declining it. In one of these two
ranks must every good man be found; If we compare them together we shall
find, that the one is far more excellent, the other far more in number: For to
be able to meet and check our enemy, to encounter occasions, to act our parts
in common life upon the common stage, and yet to keep our uprightness, this
indeed is truly to live, truly to serve God, and men, and therefore God the
more, because men. On the contrary to avoid occasions, to follow that other
vincendi genus, non pugnare, to overcome the world by contemning and avoding
it, this argues a wise, indeed but a weak and fainting spirit: I have often
wondered at Antiquity, which doting extremely upon a sequestered, a solitary,
retired, and monkish life, sticks not to give out, that all perfection is in
it, whereas indeed there is no greater argument of imperfection in good men,
quam non posse pati solemn, non multitudinem, not to be able without offense to
walk the public ways, to entertain the common occasions, but to live only to
God and to themselves, utilis ipse sibi fortassis, in utilis orbi, men of no
great public use, but excellent for themselves; Saints indeed in private, but
being called forth into common life, are like Bats in the Sun, utterly ignorant
of public practice, like Scheubelius a great Mathematician, but by book only,
and not by practice, who being required sometime in an Army to make use of his
Quadrant, knew not the difference between umbra recta, and umbra versa: yet,
beloved, because this kind of good men is by far the greatest in number, and
secondly because it is both an usual and a dangerous error of many men, to
pretend to strength, when they are but weak, and so forgetting their place,
range themselves among the first, whereas they ought to have kept station among
the second sort, I will take leave both to advise my self, and all that near
me, to like better of the safer, though the weaker side, and to avoid the
exprobration of a Recepisti here in my text, simply non recipiendo, by not
receiving, not admitting at all of the outward, lower, and temporal good
things, rather than by an improvident foolhardiness to thrust our selves upon
occasions which we are unable to manage without offense. This I am the more
willing to do, because there is not among men a greater error committed, and
more frequent, than in this kind; for in most things in the world, men that
have no skill in them, will be content to acknowledge their ignorance, and to
give place to better experience: should we put the discussion of some point of
Scholarship to the plough-hind, or a Case in Law to the Physician, or a point
in Physic to the Lawyer, none of these will offer to interpose, but will
advise to consult with every one in his proper mystery; but let offer be made
of moneys, lands, places of honor, and preferment, and who will excuse
himself, who will acknowledge his ignorance, or weakness to manage them?
Whereas in all the Arts and Sciences there are not so many errors committed, as
in the unskilful use of these things, cum tamen nusquam periculosius erretur,
and yet our errors are no where so dangerous: It is therefore a thing most
necessary, that in this behalf we advise men, either to know their weakness or
to suspect their strength. Malocautior esse quam fortior, fortis saepe captus
est, cautus rarissime; better to be cautelous and wary than strong, and hardy,
the strong man has been often captivated, but the wary man very seldom. We
read in many places of Moses and Samuel of a race of men, greater in bulk and
stature, than the ordinary men, unto whom men of common inches seemed but as
Grasshoppers; such were the Anakims, the Enims, the Horims, the Zamzummims, the
Rephaims, and the like, but if you read the Scriptures, you shall find it
observed unto your hand, that the men of lesser bodies allways drove them out;
if you demand the reason, experience will answer you, that the one went upon
the opinion of strength and hardness, the other of wary wit, and policy; it
fares no otherwise with these two orders of men, of which I have spoken, there
is the Anakim, the man that goes forth in the conceit of his strength and
valor, there is the man of mean stature, whose strength is his wariness; were
there a survey taken of both those, it would be found, that more by far have
perished by unadvised adventuring upon the things of this world, than by
discreet and sober retiring.

Wherefore, do thou find that thou come on, and thrivest in the world,
that the good things of this world woo thee, and cast themselves into thy lap,
that wealth, that honors, that abundance waits upon thee; take heed how thou
presume of thy strength to manage them, look well upon them, and see if there
be not written in the forehead of every one of them, Recepisti; but, beloved, I
perceive, I deceive my self, for these gay things of the world carry not their
recepisti in their foreheads, as they come toward us, they are smooth and
fair: you can prognosticate nothing by their countenance, but serene, and
summer weather, our great master Aristotle has told us, that if our pleasures
did look upon us, when they come to us, as they do when they turn their back,
and leave us, we would never entertain them; these goodly things have their
recepisti written in their back, it is never discovered, till it be too late to
mend it, when death summons us, when the world, the flesh, the glory and pomp
of life turns its back and leaves us, then shall you read recepisti: Cave
therefore, presume not, but be wary, and that thou may avoid a recepisti,
cave ne recipias, be sure thou receive not; how many of those think you, who
out of their opinion of skill and strength, have given free entertainment to
the world, have made large use of the world, lived abundantly, fared costly,
dwelt sumptuously, clothed themselves richly, when their time and hour came,
would rather have gone out of some poor cottage, than out of a princely palase,
and lived with no noise in the world, that so they might have died in some
peace? See you not, what some great persons in the Church of Rome have often
done? Charles 5. the Prince of Parma, sundry others, though they lived in all
pomp and state, yet at their death, they desired to be buried in a poor
Capuchins hood; miserable men, If to die in a state of perfect sequestration
from the world were so precious, so available a thing, how much more precious,
more available had it been, to live in it? For thus to die, not having thus
lived, is nothing else, but to give sentence against their own life; for we
shall not appear before God as we died, but as we lived. To profess hate, and
desertion of the world at our death, as most do, to put on humiliation at our
death, that live at ease and in state all our life, this is but to be buried in
a Capuchins hood; what is it, beloved, that thus reforms our judgment, and
clears our sight at that hour? Nothing but this, all our pleasures, all our
honors, all the May-games of our life, they now shall show themselves unto us,
and every one cry out unto us, Recipisti, Thou have received thy good things.

Now, beloved, that I may a little the better strengthen with good reason this
my advice, de non recipiendo, of retiring from, and rejecting the goodly things
of the world, give me leave a little to consult with my Topics, and to try out
of what place I may draw some arguments, to bring you on the easier.

And first of all, were there no other reason to persuade you, yet the very
reading of this story, where I have taken my text, would afford arguments
enough; for what meant Abraham, I beseech you, when he told the rich man, he
had received his good things? Did he use some obscure and unknown phrase, which
no circumstance of the story could open? It stands not with the goodness of the
Holy Ghost, to tell us of our danger in unknown language; something therefore
certainly we shall find, to open the meaning: cast back your eye upon the
description of the person, whom Abraham charges with this error, and see if you
find not a paraphrase there; the man to whom this phrase is applied is
described by the properties, of which I understand not that any one is a
virtue, first it is said, he was rich; secondly, he ware scarlet, and soft
linen; thirdly, he was (...) he was jovial, and feasted liberally every day;
does not this accurate description of the person show his error? For to what
other purpose else could this description serve? Either here is his error, or
this character is in vain; it seems therefore we must conclude, that to be
rich, to cloth our selves costly, to fare deliciously, thus to do, is to
receive the good things in our life, except some favorable interpretation do
help us out; but we must take heed how we do de scripturis interpretationibus
ludere, dally with, and elude scripture by interpretations, (...) when St. John
describes the world, which he forbids us to follow, he makes three parts of it,
the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life. Do not all
these three appear here in the character of our man? where is the lust of the
eye, if it be not in gaudy apparel? Where is the lust of the flesh, at least
one great branch of it, if it be not in the use of dainty diet? Where is the
pride of life, if not in riches? and what reason have you now to doubt, what
should be the meaning of recepisti, thou have received thy good things? He then
that fears to hear a recepisti, if he be rich, let him not forget to
distribute, and empty those bags, which lie up by him; if he be costly clad,
let him turn his scarlet into sackcloth; if he feed deliciously, let him turn
his costly dishes into temperance, and fasting: otherwise, what can we plead
for our selves, that we should not, as well as this man in my text, when our
time comes, hear our recepisti?

But I see what it is, peradventure, that troubles you, you will ask me,
whether I will avouch it to be a sin to be rich, I must walk warily, least I
lay my self open to exception; Pelaegius grounding himself upon that of our
Savior. [ It is impossible for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven,] taught that lesson indeed, as the words do lie, and would by no means
grant, that a rich man could be saved; but for this the Church noted him for an
Heretic, for among his heresies this is scored up for one, together with that,
that it is not lawful to swear; but if Pelagius had never otherwise erred, the
Church might very well have pardoned him that heresy: many times it falls out
by the reason of the hardness of our hearts, that there is more danger in
pressing some truths, than in maintaining some errors: that it is lawful
sometime to sport our selves, that it is lawful to feast at Christmas, that it
is lawful to swear, and many other things of the like nature, are all truths;
yet there is no necessity we should press them in our sermons to the people,
for there is no fear the people will ever forget these, Cavendum est ne nimium
me. minerint; better to labor that they do not too much remember them; he that
will labor in repressing the abuses, which people ground upon these truths,
must remember the old rule. Iniquum petendum est, ut aequum feras, he must go
very near to teach for truth the contrary falsehood. To return then from this
digression to our rich man, Pelagius, I grant, was deceived, when he shut all
rich men out of the Kingdom of Heaven: but suppose we that he had prevailed in
this doctrine, that he had wrought all the world to this bent, that the Church
had received it for Catholic doctrine, show me, he that can, what
inconvenience would have attended this error? If every rich man should suddenly
become liberal, and disburse his moneys, where his charity directed him; if
every painted gallant did turn his Peacocks feathers into sackcloth; if every
glutton left his full dishes, and betook himself to temperance and fasting,
yea, and thought himself in conscience bound so to do, out of fear, least he
might hear of Recepisti, I persuade my self the state of Greece would never
suffer the more for this, but the state of Christianity would have thrived the
more. Well had it been for our rich man here, if he had been a Pelagian; for
this point of Pelagianisme is the surest remedy, that I know, against a
Recepisti; whereas on the contrary side, by reason of the truth, many rich and
covetous persons flatter themselves in their sin, whereof they die well
conceipted, from which they had been freed, had it been their good fortune to
have been thus far deceived, and been Pelagians. Let men therefore either quite
refuse riches, if they offer themselves, which is the advice I give, or if they
will give them acceptance, let them believe, that if they be rich, they may be
saved, but let them so live, as if they could not; for the one shall keep them
from error in their faith, the other from sin in their Actions.

A second reason, persuading us to the neglect of these so much admired things
of the world, is the consideration of certain abuses, which they put upon us,
certain fallacies, and false glosses, by which they delude us; for I know not
how, the world has cried them up, and has given them goodly titles, ut vel
lactis gallinacei sperare possis haustum, as Pliny speaks; men call them
blessings and favors, and rewards, and think those men most blessed of God, who
enjoy most of them; these goodly titles serve for nothing, but to set men on
longing after them, and so fill those, that have them, with false persuasions,
and those that have them not with despair and discontents; were they indeed
blessings; were they rewards, then were our case very evil, and we ourselves in
greater danger of a recepisti, than before: for as Abraham here tells the man
of recepiste bona, thou have received tby goodthings, so our Savior tells more
than once of some qui habent mercedem, have their reward; if then we shall beg,
and receive these things at the hands of God, as a reward of our service, we
shall be no more able, when we come to appear before our God, to shelter our
selves from an habetis mercedem, you have your reward, then the rich man here
could defend himself from a recepisti. They may indeed pass for rewards, and
blessings, and that truly too, but to a sad, and disconsolate end; for their is
no man, though never so wicked, but that some way or other does some good, some
cup of cold water has been given, some small service enterprized even by the
worst of men: now God who leaves no service unrewarded, no good office
unrespected, therefore preserves these sublunary blessings of purpose, ut paria
faciat, to clear accounts with men here, who otherwise might seem to claim
something at his hand, at that great day; It is the question Ahasuerus makes,
What honor and dignity has been done to Mordecai for this? God is more
careful of his honor, than Ahasuerus was; none more careful than he, to reward
every service with some honor: Nebuchadnezzar was no Saint, I trow, yet
because of his long service in the subduing of Tire, God gives him Egypt for
his reward, they are the Prophet Ezechiels words: when therefore thou see God
willing to bring the world upon thee, to enrich thee, to raise thee to honors,
suspectam habe hanc Domini indulgentiam, as Tertullian says, be jealous of
this courtesy of God, or rather cry out with St. Bernard, Misericordiam hanc
nolo Domine, O Lord, I will none of this kind of mercy: for how know thou
whether he reward not thee, as he did Nebuchadnezzar only to even accounts with
thee, and show thee that he is not in thy debt, that thou may hear at the
last either a recepisti, or an habes mercedem, thou have thy reward? O quanta
apud Deummerces, si in praesenti praemium non sperarent, says St. Hierome, O
how great a reward might many men receive at the hand of God, if they did not
anticipate their reward and desire it in this life? Why do we capitulate with
him for our services? Why not rather out of pious ambition desire to have God
in our debt? He that does God the greatest service, and receives here from him
the least reward, is the happiest man in the world; there goes a story of
Aquinas, that praying once before the Crucifix, the Crucifix miraculously
speaks thus unto him, Benede mescripsisti Thoma, quam ergomercedem accipies?
Thou have written well of me, Thomas, what reward do thou desire? To whom
Aquinas is made to answer, Nullam, Domine, praeter Teipsum; no reward, Lord,
but thyself: it is great pity this tale is not true, it does so excellently
teach, what to ask of God for our reward in his service. Let God but assure
thee of this reward, caetera omnia vota Deo remittas, thou may very well
pardon him all the rest: let us therefore amend our language, and leave off
these solecismes and misapplied denominations of blessings, and favors, and
rewards, names too high for any thing under the moon, and at our leisure find
out other names to express them; as for this great esteem, which we make of the
things below, it comes but from this, that we know not the value of things
above; did we believe our selves to be the heirs, and the sons of God, and knew
the price of our inheritance in Heaven, it could not be, that we should harbor
so high and honorable conceits of earthly things; it is a famous speech of
MARTIN LUTHER, Homo perfect credens se esse haeredem et filium Dei, non diu
superstes maneret, sed statim immodico gaudeo absorberetur: Did a man indeed
believe that he is a son and heir unto God, it could not be, that such a man
should long live, but forthwith he would be swallowed up, and die of immoder
ate joy: And certainly either our not believing, or not rightly valuing the
things of God, or howsoever, not knowing them, is the cause of this our
languishing, and impatient longing after earthly things; It is but a plain
comparison which I shall use, yet because it fits the persoa, to whom I will
apply it, and because it is Theophylacts in his Comments on St. Lukes Gospel, I
will not be ashamed to make use of it; Swine, says he, have their eyes so
framed, that they cannot look up to Heaven; their keepers therefore when they
find themselves troubled with their crying, are wont to cast them upon their
backs, (...) and so make them cease their crying, for that beast being amazed
to see the frame and beauty of Heaven, which before he had never seen, (...)
being stricken with admiration, forgets his crying; the eyes of many men seem
to be framed like those of Swine, they are not able to cast them up to Heaven,
for would they but cast themselves upon their backs, turn their face from
earth, and view the beauty of things above, it could not be, but all this
claim, or rather clamor after earthly things should utterly cease.

Again, (yet the more to quicken one to the neglect of these things below)
among many other fallacies, by which they delude us, I have made choice of one
more, they present themselves unto us, sometimes as necessaries, sometimes as
Ornaments unto us in our course of virtue and happiness; whereas they are but
mere impertinences, neither is it any way material, whether we have them yea or
no; virtus censum non requirit, nudo homine contenta est, virtue and happiness
require nothing else but a man: Thus say the Ethnickes: And Christianity much
more: For it were a strange thing that we should think that Christ came to make
virtue more chargable: In regard of virtue and piety, all estates, all
conditions, high and low, are alike: It is noted by Petronius for the vanity of
rich men, Qui solas divitias extruere curant, nihil volunt inter homines melius
credit, qua quod ipsi tenent, those men whose minds are set upon wealth and
riches, would have all men believe that it is best so to do: But riches and
poverty make no difference, for we believe him that has told us, there is no
difference, Jew and Gentile, high and low, rich and poor, all are one in Christ
Jesus, Non naturae paupertas, sed opinionis est, says S. Ambrose, Poverty, as
men call it, is but a fancy, there is no such thing indeed, it is but a
Figment, an Idol, men first framed it, and set it up, and afterward feared it,
oculi nostri tota haec lunuria est; as some Naturalists tell us that the Rain
bow is oculi opus, a thing framed only by the eye, so this difference, betwixt
rich and poor is but the creature of the eye. Smindyrides the Sybarite was
grown so extremely dainty, that he would grow weary with the sight of another
man's labor, and therefore when sometime he saw a poor man digging, and
painfully laboring, he began to faint, and pant, and requires to be removed:
Beloved, when we are thus offended to see another man meanly clad, meanly
housed, meanly traded, all this is but out of a Sybaritish ridiculous
daintiness, for all this is but to grow weary at the sight of another man's
labor: would we follow our Saviors precept, and put out this eye of ours, the
greatest part of all this vanity were quite extinguished, for what were all
outward state and pomp imaginable, were no eye to see or regard it?

Now, beloved, yet to see this more plainly, what is the main end of our life?
what is it, at which with so much pain and labor we strive to arrive? It is,
or should be nothing else but virtue and happiness: Now these are alike
purchasable in all estates; Poverty, disease, distress, contumely, contempt,
these are as well the object of virtue, as wealth, liberty, honor, reputation,
and the rest of that forespoken rank: Happiness therefore may as well dwell
with the poor, miserable, and distressed persons, as with persons of better
fortune, since it is confessed by all, that happiness is nothing else but Actio
secundum virturem, a leading of our life according to virtue; As great art may
be expressed in the cutting of a flint, as in the cutting of a diamond, and so
the workman do well express his skill, no man will blame him for the baseness
of the matter, or think the worse of his work: Beloved, some man has a
diamond, a fair and glittering fortune, some man has a flint, a hard, harsh,
and despicable fortune, let him bestow the same skill and care in polishing and
cutting of the latter, as he would or could have done on the former, and be
confident it will be as highly valued (if not more highly rewarded) by God who
is no accepter of persons, but accepts every man according to that he has,
and not according to that he has not; To him let us commit our selves: To him
be all honor and praise, now and for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
Numbers 35. verse 33. And the Land cannot be cleansed of blood, that is shed
in it; but by the blood of him that shed it.
THese words are like unto a Scorpion: for as in that, so in these, the self
same thing is both Poison, and remedy. Blood is the poison, Blood is the
Remedy, he that is stricken with the Scorpion, must take the oil of the
Scorpion to cure him. He that has poisoned a Land with the sin of blood, must
yield his own blood for Antidote to cure it. It might seem strange, that I
should amongst Christians thus come and deliver a speech of Blood. For when I
read the notes and characters or a Christian in holy Scriptures, me thinks it
should be almost a sin for such a one to name it. Possess your souls in
patience: by this shall men know, that ye are my Disciples if ye love one
another: peace I leave with you. The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace in
the Holy Ghost. Lee your softness be known to all men: the wisdom that is from
above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of
mercy. It is reported by Avenzoar a great Physician, that he was so tender
hearted, that he could not endure to see a man let blood: he that should read
these passages of Scripture, might think that Christians were like Avenzoar,
that the sight of blood should be enough to affright them, But is the Common
Christian so soft? So tender hearted, is he so peaceable, so tame and tractable
a creature? You shall not find two things of more different countenance and
complexion, then that Christianity which is commended unto us in the writings
of the Apostles, and Evangelists, and that which is current in use and practice
of the times. He that shall behold the true face of a Christian, as it is
deciphered and painted out unto us in the books of the New Testament, and
unpartially compare it with that copy or counterfeit of it, which is expressed
in the life and demeanor of common Christians, would think them no more like
then those shields of Gold, which Solomon made, were unto those of brass, which
Rehoboam made in their steed: and might suppose that the writers of those books
had brought votamagis, quam praecepta had rather fancied to themselves some
admirable pattern of a Christian, such as they could wish, then delivered rules
and laws, which seriously and indeed ought or could be practiced in common life
and conversation. St. James observes, that he which beholds his natural face in
a glass, goes his way, and immediately forgets what manner of man he was.
Beloved how careful we are to look upon the glass, the books of holy
Scriptures, I cannot easily pronounce. But this I am sure of, we go our ways
and quickly forget what manner of shape we saw there. As Jacob and Esau had
both one father, Isaac; both one mother Rebecca, yet the one was smooth and
plain, the other rough and hairy, of harsh and hard countenance, and condition
so these two kinds of Christians of which but now I spoke, though both lay
claim to one father and mother, both call themselves the sons of God and the
sons of the Church, yet are they almost as unlike as Jacob and Esau; the one
smooth, gentle, and peaceable, the other rough and harsh. The notes and
characters of Christians, as they are described in holy Scriptures are patience
easily putting up and digesting of wrongs, humility, preferring all before our
selves: And St. James tells us, that the wisdom that is from above, is first
pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated. St. James indeed has
given the first place unto purity, and it were almost a sin to compare
Christian virtues together, and make them strive for precedence, and place. For
what Solomon says upon another occasion, is here much more true: say not why
is this thing better then that: for everything in its time is seasonable. Yet
he that shall mark how every where the Scriptures commend unto us gentleness
and meekness, and that peace is it quam nobis Apostoli totis viribus spiritus
sancti commendant, as Tertullian speaks, which the Apostles endeavor with all
the strength and force of the Holy Ghost to plant amongst us, might a little
invert the words of St. James, and read them thus. The wisdom that is from
above, is first peaceable, then pure. The son of God, who is the wisdom of the
Father, and who for us men came down from Heaven, first, and before all other
virtues commended this unto the world. For when he was born, the song of the
Angels was peace upon earth, and goodwill toward men. All his doctrine was
peace, his whole life was peaceable, and no man heard his voice in the streets.
His last legacy and bequest left unto his disciples was the same. Peace, says
he, I leave unto you, my peace I give unto you: As Christ, so Christians. In
the building of Solomon's Temple, there was no noise of any hammer, of any
instrument of Iron: so in the spiritual building and frame of a Christian,
there is no sound of Iron, no noise of any weapons, nothing but peace and
gentleness. Ex praecepto, fidei non minus rea ira est sine ratione suscepta,
quam in operibus legis homicidium, says St. Austin, unadvised anger by the law
of faith, is as a great sin, as murder was by the law of Moses. As some
Physicians have thought, that in man's body the spleen has very little use, and
might well be spared, and therefore in dealing with sundry diseased persons,
they endeavor by physic to abate, and take away that part in them, as much as
may be; so if we look into a Christian man, as he is proposed to us in the
Gospel, we may justly marvel to what purpose God has planted in him this
faculty and passion of anger; since he has so little use of it: and the Gospel
in a manner does spiritually diet, and physic him for it, and endeavors much
to abate, if not quite to purge out that quality. Beloved we have hitherto seen
who Jacob is, and what manner of man the Christian is, that is described unto
us in holy Scripture. Let us a little consider his Brother Esau, the Christian
in passage, and who commonly in the account of the world goes for one. Is he so
gentle and tr^^ctable a creature? Is his countenance so smooth, his body so
free from gall and spleen? To try this, as the Devil sometimes spoke unto Job.
Touch him in his goods, touch him in his body, and see if he will not curse
thee to thy face: so touch this man a little in his goods, touch him in his
reputation and honor; touch him in any thing that he loves, (for this is the
only way to try how far, these commands of peace, and forbearance, and long
suffering prevail with us,) and see if he will not forget and loose all his
patience. Which of us is there that understands the words and precepts of our
Savior in their literal sense, and as they lie? The precepts of suffering
wrong, rather then to go to law; of yielding the coat to him that would take
the cloak, of readiness to receive more wrongs, then to revenge one: these and
all the Evangelical commands of the like nature Interpretamento detorquemus. We
have found out favorable interpretations, and glosses, restrictions, and
evasions, to wind our selves out of them, to shift them all off, and put them
by, and yet pass for sound and current Christians: we think we may be justly
angry, continue long suits in law, call to the Magistrate for revenge, yea
sometimes take it into our own hands, all this and much more we think we may
lawfully, and with good reason do, any precept of Christ to the contrary
notwithstanding. And as it usually comes to pass, the permitting and tolerating
lesser sins, opens way to greater, so by giving passage, and inlet to those
lesser impatiences and discontents, we lay open a gap to those fouler crimes,
even of murder and bloodshed. For as men commonly suppose that all the former
breaches of our patience, which but now I mentioned, may well enough stand with
the duties of Christians: so there are who stay not here, but think, that in
some cases it may be lawful, yea, peradventure necessary, at least very
pardonable for Christians privately to seek each others blood, and put their
lives upon their swords, without any wrong to their vocation; out of this have
sprung many great inconveniences, both private and public. First, Laws made
too favorable in case of bloodshed. Secondly, a too much facility and
easiness in Princes and Magistrates, sometimes to give pardon, and release for
that crime. Thirdly and chiefly (for it is the special cause indeed that moved
me to speak in this Argument) an over promptness in many youngmen, who desire
to be counted men of valor and resolution, upon every slight occasion, to
raise a quarrel and admit of no other means of composing, and ending them but
by sword and single combat. Partly therefore to show the grievousness and
greatness of this sin of bloodshed, and partly to give the best counsel I can
for the restraint of those conceits and errors which give way unto it, I have
made choice of these few words out of the Old Testament which but now I read.
In the New Testament there is no precept given concerning bloodshed. The
Apostles seem not to have thought, that Christians ever should have had need of
such a prohibition. For what needed to forbid those to seek each others blood,
who are not permitted to speak over hastily, one to another, when therefore I
had resolved with my self to speak something concerning the sin of bloodshed, I
was in a manner constrained to reflect upon the Old Testament, and make choice
of those words. And the Land cannot be purged of blood that is shed in it, but
by the blood of him that shed it.

In which words for my more orderly proceeding, I will observe these two
general parts: First, the greatness of the sin. Secondly, the means to cleanse
and satisfy for the guilt of it. The first, that is the greatness of the sin,
is expressed by two circumstances. First, by the generality, extent, and
largness of the guilt of it: and secondly, by the difficulty of cleansing it.
The largness and compass of the guilt of this sin, is noted out unto us in the
word Land and the Land cannot be purged. It is true in some sense of all sins.
Nemo sibi uni errat, no man sins in private, and to himself alone; For as the
Scripture notes of that action of Jepthte, when he vowed his daughter unto God,
That it became a Custom in Israel: so is it in all sins. The error is only in
one person, but the example spreads far and wide, and thus every man that sins,
sins against the whole Land, yea against the whole world. For who can tell how
far the example and infection of an evil action does spread? In other sins the
infection is no larger then the disease: but this sin like a plague: one brings
the infection; (...) but thousands die for it, yet this sin of blood diffuses
and spreads it self above all other sins. For in other sins noxa sequitur
caput. The guilt of them is confined to the person that committed them. God
himself has pronounced of them. The Son shall not bear the sins of the Father,
the soul that sins shall die the death. But the sin of blood seems to claim
an exception from this Law. If by time i^^ be not purged, like the frogs of
Egypt, the whole land stank of them. It leaves a guilt upon the whole land in
which it is committed. Other sins come in like rivers, and break their banks to
the prejudice and wrong of private persons: but this comes in like a Sea,
raging and threatening to overwhelm whole countries. If blood in any land do lie
unrevenged, every particular soul has cause to fear, least part of the penalty
fall on him. We read in the books of Kings that long after Saul's death God
plagued the Land of Jewry with three years famine; because Saul in his life
time had without any just cause shed the blood of some of the Gibeonites:
neither the famine ceased, till seven of Saul's Nephews had died for it. In
this story there are many things rare and worth our observation. First, the
Generality and extent of the guilt of Bloodshed which is the cause for which I
urged it) it drew a general famine on the whole Land. Secondly, the continuance
and length of the punishment. It lasted full three years, and better. Thirdly,
the time of the plague; it fell long after the person offending was dead.
Fourthly, whereas it is said in my Text. That blood is cleansed by the blood of
him that shed it: here the blood of him that did this sin, sufficed not to
purge the Land from it. That desperate and woeful end, that besel both Saul and
his Sons in that last and fatal battle upon Mount- Gilboah, a man might think
had freed the Land from danger of blood: yet we see that the blood of the
Gibeonites, had left so deep a stain, that it could not be sponged out without
the blood of seven more of Saul's offspring. So that in some cases it seems we
must alter the words of my Text: The Land cannot be purged of blood, but by the
blood of him, and his posterity that shed it. Saint Peter tells us that some
men's sins go before them unto judgment, and some men's sins follow after.
Beloved here is a sin that exceedes the members of this division, for howsoever
it goes before, or after us unto Judgment: Yet it has a kind of Ubiquity,
and so runs before, so follows us at the heels, that it stays behind us too,
and calls for vengeance long after that we are gone. Blood unrevenged passes
from Father to Son like an Heirlome or legacy: and he that dies with blood
hanging on his fingers, leaves his Offspring and his Family as pledges to
answer it in his stead. As an Engineer that works in a Mine, lays a train, or
kindles a Match, and leaves it behind him, which shall take hold of the powder
long after he is gone, so he that sheds blood, if it be not be times purged, as
it were kindles a Match able to blow up not only a Parliament, but even a whole
Land where blood lies unrevenged.

Secondly, another circumstance serving to express unto us the greatness of
this sin; I told you was the difficulty of cleansing it; intimated in those
words, cannot be cleansed but by the blood of him that shed it. Most of other
sins have sundry ways to wash the guilt away. As in the Levitical Law, the
woman that was unclean by reason of Childe-bearing, might offer a pair of
Turtle-doves, or two young Pigeons: so he that travels with other sins, has
either a Turtle or a Pigeon, he has more ways then one to purify him: prayer
unto God, or true repentance, or satisfaction to the party wronged, or bodily
affliction, or temporary mulct. But, he that travels with the sin of Blood, for
him there remains no sacrifice for sin, but a fearful expectation of vengeance,
he has but one way of cleansing, only his blood, the blood of him that shed
it.

The second general part which we considered in these words, was, that one mean
which is left to cleanse blood expressed in the last words, the blood of him that
shed it. The Apostle to the Hebrews speaking of the sacrifices of the Old
Testament, notes that without blood, there was no cleansing no forgiveness. He
spoke it only of the blood of beasts of Bulls and Goats, who therefore have
their blood that they might shed it in man's service, and for man's use. But
among all the Levitical Sacrifices there was not one to cleanse the manslayer:
For the blood of the cattle upon a thousand Hills was not sufficient for this,
yet was that sin to be purged with blood too, and that by a more constant and
perpetual Law, then that of Sacrifices. For the cleansing of other sins by
blood is done away; the date of it is out; but to cleanse blood by blood
remains as a Law to our times, and so shall unto the worlds end, sanguine
quaerendi reditus, out of blood no way to get but by blood, (...): says S.
Basil, have thou shed blood? would thou be free from the guilt of it. Thy
best way is to be a Martyr, and shed thy blood for Christ's sake. Now that what
I have to say may the better be conceived and lodged up in your memories, I
will comprehend and order all that I will speak to under three heads. First I
will in General yet a little further, briefly show how great a sin the sin of
blood is. Secondly I will speak of the redress of some misorders very frequent
in our age which give way to this sin, especially private revenge and single
combat. Thirdly I will touch at the means of taking the guilt of blood away,
which here the holy Ghost commends to those which are set in authority to that
purpose. And first of the greatness of the crime and sin of blood.

Of sins in holy Scripture there be two sorts recorded. One sort is a silent,
dumb and quiet sin. God does as it were seek after it to find it, as the
people did after Saul, when he was hidden amongst the stuff. Of this nature are
the ordinary sins of our life, which do more easily find pardon at the hands
of God; but there is a second sort of sin, which is a vocal and a crying sin, a
sin like that importunate widow in the Gospel, that will not suffer the Judge
to be quiet, till he has done justice: and those are the more heavy and
grievouser sins of our lives. Of this second sort, there are two sins, to which
the Scripture does attribute this crying faculty. First the sin of Sodom; For
so God tells Abraham, The cry of Sodom and Gomorrha is come up before me. The
second is the sin of which I am now to speak, the sin of Bloodshed. For so God
tells Cain. The voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me from the earth, The
sin of Adam in Paradise doubtless was a great and heinous sin, which has thus
made us all the children of death, yet it seems to be but of the rank of mute
sins, and to have had no voice to betray it, God comes unto Adam, convents him,
examines him as if he had not known it, and seems not to believe any such thing
was done, till himself had confessed it. But blood is an unmannerly,
importunate, and clamorous sin, God shall not need to come and enquire after
it, it will come up unto him, and cry as the souls do under the altar in the
Revelation. How long Lord, how long? Nec patimur -- iracunda Deum ponere
fulmina, suffers not God to forget judgment, or entertain a thought of mercy.
To satisfy therefore the cry of this importunate sin, and to show men the
grievousness of it, the Laws of God and men have wonderfully conspired in the
avenging of blood; by what means, or by what creature soever it were shed.
Beasts, unreasonable creatures, though whatsoever they do, they cannot be said
to sin: for whatsoever they do, they do by force of that natural instinct, by
which they are guided, and led as by their proper law: yet man's blood if they
shed it, is revenged upon them. God himself is the Author of this law, ( Genesis
9.) where he tells Noah; The blood of your lives I will require, at the hands
of every beast will I require it. And accordingly in the 21. of Exodus, he
precisely enacts a law. De Bove petulco, If an Ox gore a man that he die, the
Ox shall be slain, and the flesh cast away as an abomination. The laws of
Natural men, who had no knowledge of God, come little behind this; yea, they
may seem to have gone before it in severe revenging of blood: for amongst the
laws, by which Athens that famous city of Greece was governed, there was one,
that if a Wall by chance had fallen down, and slain a man as the tower of
Siloam did, of which we read in the Gospel; that then the Judges should sit,
and formally arraign that wall, condemn it, and throw the stor^^s of it out of
the Country. This so formal proceeding against unreasonable, against dull and
senseless creatures, has been thus jointly both by God and man practiced only
for our example, to teach us how precious the life of man ought to be in our
eyes: and it resembles that action of Christ in the Gospel, where for our
instruction he curses the barren fig tree: Sterilitas nostra in ficu vapulat,
etc.

Now as exemplary justice is severely done on these creatures for man's
instruction: so much more if man himself kept not his hands clean from blood,
did the laws of God proceed with much strictness and severity: for to say
nothing of gross, malicious, and wilful murder; if a man only in his haste
struck another with a weapon, or with a stone, so that he died, though the
striker intended but to hurt, yet he was to die for it. That he did it in
anger, that he did it in his drink, that he did it provoked, that he did it in
defense of his honor, and reputation: none of all these pretenses might excuse
him. Nay, which is yet more, God himself propounds the case; If says he, a man
cleaving wood his axe head fly off, and hit his neighbor, so that he kills
him, except he could recover one of the Cities of Refuge, he was to die: and
having recovered a city of refuge, if before the death of the high Priest, he
were taken without the walls of the city, he was to die. So strickt was God in
the case of chance-medly, (as they call it,) in a case which he takes unto
himself, and makes himself the Author of. For in the 21. of Exodus, speaking of
the man that thus sheds blood by chance and unwittingly, his words are these;
If a man lie not in wait sed Deus objecerit manui ejus, but God put him into
his hands, I will appoint him a city of refuge to fly unto. In which words God
acknowledges, that he who thus dies by chance, dies by his providence, and not
by the sin of him that slew him. If God (says he) shall put him into his
hands; yet you see, what a penalty he lays upon the innocent instrument of
such blood shed. The blood that is shed in battle, and in times of lawful war
you all suppose as lawfully shed. Yet notwithstanding Moses in the 16. of
Numbers, gives charge, that the soldiers returning from battle, should stay a
while without the Camp, even seven days, until they were cleansed. Again, when
David advised with himself about the building of an house unto God, he sends
him word to lay by all thought of that: he was no fit person to do it; and he
gives the reason of it. Quia vir bellorum and sanguinum es tu. For thou art a
man have shed much blood, and fought many battles. Beloved the battles which
David fought were called the Lords battles, and therefore whatsoever he did in
that kind, he had doubtless very good warrant to do: and yet you see, that it
is an imputation to him, that he shed blood, though lawfully, ut fundi sanguis
ne just quidem, sine aliqua injustitia possit; so that it seems blood cannot
be so justly shed, but that it brings with it some stain and spot of injustice.

All this have I said to raise up in you as much as possibly I can, a right
conceit of the height and hainousness of this sin, and further, yet to effect
this in you, as in the beginning and entrance into my discourse, I briefly
touched at two reasons, showing the greatness of this sin, occasioned thereunto
by the words of my text: so will I as briefly touch at the two more tending to
the same purpose; one drawn from respect of the wrong, which by this sin is
done unto God; another from the wrong done to our selves. And first, what wrong
is done unto God, God himself shows us in the 9. of Genesis: where giving this
for an everlasting law. He that sheddeth man's blood, by man let his blood be
shed; he presently adds the reason of it. For in the image of God made he man:
we shall the better understand the force of this reason, if we a little look
into civil actions. It is the usual manner of subjects, when they rebel against
the Prince, to think they cannot more effectually express their hate; then by
disgracing, breaking, throwing down the statues and images erected to his
honor. The citizens of Antioch in a sedition against Theodosius the Emperor, in
one night disgracefully threw down all his statues, which fact of theirs caused
S. Chrysostom at that time preacher to that city, to make those famous Sermons,
which from that action to this day are called his (...) his statues. This by so
much the more is counted a great offense, because next unto wronging and
disgracing the very person of the Prince, a greater insolence cannot be
offered. For it expresses with what welcome they would entertain him, if they
had him in their power. Beloved man is the image of his maker erected by him as
a Statue of his honor. He then that shall despitefully handle, batter and
deface it, how can he be counted otherwise then guilty of highest Treason
against his Maker. Rebellion, says Samuel to Saul, is like the sin of
superstition and Idolatry. The sin of blood therefore equals the sin Idolatry,
since there cannot be a greater sin of Rebellion against God, then to deface
his image. Idolatry through ignorance sets up a false image of God, but this
sin through malice defaces, pulls down the true. Amongst the heathen, sometimes
the statues of the Emperors were had in such respect, that they were accounted
sanctuaries, and such as for offense fled unto them, it was not lawful to
touch. Beloved, such honor ought we to give unto a man, that if he have
offended us, yet the image of God which shines in him ought to be as a
sanctuary unto him, to save him from our violence, an admonitioner unto us,
that we ought not to touch him. A second reason. yet further showing the
hainousness of this sin, is drawn from the wrong which is done to our selves.
All other wrongs whatsoever they be admit of some recompense. Honors, wealth,
preferments, if they be taken from us, they may return as they did unto Job in
far greater measure, and the party wronged may receive full and ample
satisfaction; but what recompense may be made to a man for his life? When that
is gone, all the Kingdoms which our Savior saw in the Mount, and the glory of
them, are nothing worth, neither is all the world, all the power of men and
Angels able to give the least breath to him that has lost it. Nothing under
God is able to make satisfaction for such a wrong: the revenge that is taken
afterward upon the party that has done the wrong, cannot be counted a
recompense. That is done In terrorem viventium, non in subsidium mortuorum. It
serves to deter the living from committing the like outrage, but it can no way
help him that is dead: David at the same time committed two sins, great sins,
Murder and Adultery; the reward of either of which by Gods law, is nothing
else but death. Yet for his Adultery he seems to make some satisfaction to the
party wronged; for the text notes that David took her to his wife, made her his
Queen, and that he went in unto her, comforted her: all which may well be
counted at least a part of recompense. But for dead Vrias what means could
David make to recompense, to comfort him. For this cause I verily suppose it
is, that in his penitential Psalm, wherein he bewails his sin, he makes no
particular confession, no mention of his Adultery: but of the other, of blood,
he is very sensible, and expressly prays against it. Deliver me from blood
guiltiness, O God, thou God of my salvation; as if Adultery in comparison of
murder were no crime at all.

I am sorry I should have any just occasion amongst Christian men, so long to
insist upon a thing so plain; and show that the sin of blood is a great and
heinous sin. But he that shall look into the necessities of these times, shall
quickly see that there is a great cause, why this doctrine should be very
effectually pressed. For many things are even publicly done, which in part argue
that men esteem of this sin much more slightly then they ought. Aristotle
observed it of Phaleas, (one that took upon him, to prescribe laws, by which a
common wealth might as he thought, well be governed,) that he had taken order
for the preventing of smaller faults, but he left way enough open to greater
crimes. Beloved, the error of our laws is not so great as that of Phaleas was,
yet we offend too, though on the contrary, and the less dangerous side; for
great and grievous sins are by them providently curbed, but many inferior
crimes find many times too free passage. Murder, though all be abominable,
yet there are degrees in it, some is more heinous then other. Gross, malicious,
premeditated and wilful murder, are by our laws, so far as humane wisdom can
provide, sufficiently prevented: but murders done in haste, or besides the
intent of him that did it, or in point of honor, and reputation, these find a
little too much favor; or laws in this respect are somewhat defective, both in
preventing that it be not done, and punishing it when it is done; men have
thought themselves wiser then God, presumed to moderate the unnecessary
severity (as they seem to think) of his laws. And hence it comes to pass, that
in military companies, and in all great cities and places of Mart and concourse
few months, yea, few weeks pass without some instance and example of
bloodshed, either by sudden quarrel, or by challenge to Duel and single
combat. How many examples in a short space have we seen of young men, men of
hot and fiery disposition, mutually provoking and disgracing each other, and
then taking themselves bound in high terms of valor, and honor, to end their
quarrels by their swords? That therefore we may the better discover, the
unlawfulness of challenge and private combat; let us a little enquire and
examine in what cases blood may lawfully, and without offense be shed; that so
we may see where, amongst these, single combat may find its place.

The Manichees were of opinion that it was not lawful to violate any thing in
which there was life, and therefore they would not pull a branch from a tree,
because foresooth there was life in it. To think that man's life may be in no
case taken from him, is but a branch of Manichisme: and the words of my text do
directly cross it, where it is laid down, that for the cleansing of blood,
blood may and must be shed. For the avoiding therefore of the extreme, we are
to note that the lawful causes of bloodshed are either public or private,
public cases are two: First in case of Justice, when a malefactor dies for his
sin by the hand of the Magistrate. Secondly in case of public war and defense
of our Country, for the Doctrine of Christ is not (as some have supposed) an
enemy to Souldiership, and Military Discipline. When John the Baptist began to
Preach Repentance, and amendment of Life; amongst those that came forth to
understand and learn their duty, the Text says that the Soldiers came and
ask't him Master what shall we do. And John wills them not to lay down their
weapons; or to take another course of life (which he ought and would have done,
if that course had been unlawful) but he instructs them rather in their
calling. For he gives them these two Lessons, Do no man wrong, And be content
with your pay, your wages. Then which there could not have been better, or more
pertinent counsel given to Soldiers, they being the two principal vices of
Soldiers to wrong places where they live by forage, and pillage and to mutiny
in dislike of their pay. When Saint Peter came to Preach to the Centurion in
the Acts we find not a syllable in all that Sermon prejudicial to a Soldiers
profession. And therefore accordingly in the times of the Primitive Church
Christians served even under Heathen Emperors, and that with the approbation
of God himself.

For in the Ecclesiastic story we read of the Legio Fulminatrix of a band of
Soldiers called the Thundering Band. Because that at what time Marcus the
Emperor lying with his Army in Germany was afflicted with a great drought,
and in great danger of the enemy, when they were now about to join battle, the
Christian Soldiers, (that Band) fell flat on their faces, and by their instant
prayers obtained of God a great Tempest which to the Emperor and his army,
brought store of cold refreshing water, but upon the enemy nothing else but
fire and whirlwind. The Emperors Epistle in which this story is related, is
this day extant, recovered by Justin Martyr, who lived about the time the thing
was done: wherefore we may not doubt of the lawfulness of that profession,
which it has pleased God thus to grace, and honor with such a miracle.
Besides these two there are no other public causes of bloodshed. As for the
causes in private, I know but one, and that is when a man is set upon and
forced to it, in his own defense. If a thief be robbing in the night, and be
slain, the Law of God acquits him that did it: and by the Roman Laws, Nocturnum
furem quomodo libet, diurnum si se telo defenderit, it was lawful to kill a
thief by night at any hand, and by day if he used his weapon, of private
bloodshed there is no cause but this and this we must needs allow of. For in
all other private necessities into which we may be driven, the Law and
Magistrate have place to whom we must repair for remedy: but in case of defense
of life against sudden on set, no law can be made except we would make a Law to
yield our throats to him that would cut them, or our Laws were like the Prophet
that came to Jeroboam at Bethel, and could dry up men's arms that offered
violence, wherefore all cause of death, one only excepted, is public and that
for great reason. For to die is not a private action to be undertaken at our
own, or at any other private man's pleasure, and discretion. For as we are not
born unto our selves alone, but for the service of God and the commonwealth in
which we live: so no man dies to himself alone but with the damage and loss of
that Church or commonwealth of which he is a member. Wherefore it is not left
to any private man's power to dispose of any man's life, no not to our own, only
God and the Magistrate may dispose of this. As Soldiers in the camp must keep
their standing, neither may they move or alter, but by direction from the
captain: so is it with us all. Our life is a warfare and every man in the world
has his station, and place from whence he may not move at his own, or at
another man's pleasure, but only at the direction and appointment of God, his
General, or of the Magistrates, which are as Captains and Lievtenants under
him. Then our lawful times of death are either when our day is come, or to fall
in battle, or for misdemeanor to be cut off by the public hand of Justice, Ut
qui vivi prodesse noluerunt, eorum morte respub, utatur. He which otherwise
dies, comes by surreption and stealth, and not warrantably unto his end.

And though we have spoken something in Apology and defense of War, yet you may
not think, that in time of War your hands are loose, and that you may at your
pleasure shed the blood of your enemy. Misericorditer etiam bella gerantur,
says S. Austine, even in war and battle there is room for thoughts of peace
and mercy and therefore many of the ancient Heroes renowned Soldiers and
Captains were very conscientious of shedding the blood of their enemies, except
it were in battle, and when therewas no remedy to avoid it. In that mortal
battle, Sam. 2. between the Servants of David and the servants of Isbosheth;
the Scripture reports that Abner fled, And Azael Joabs brother following him
hard at heels to kill him, Abner advises him twice, Turn aside, says he, why
should I smite thee to the ground. But when Azahel would not hearken but
followed him still for his blood, then he stroke him with his spear, that he
died. In the time of War when he might lawfully have done it, in the fury of
the battle Abner would not shed blood, but by constraint. Xenophon would make
us believe that the Soldiers in Cyrus his army were so well disciplined, that
one of them in time of the battle, having lift up his arm to strike his enemy,
hearing the Trumpet begin to sound the retreat, let fall his arm and willingly
lost his blow because he thought the time of striking was now past: So far were
these men from thinking it lawful to shed the blood of a Subject in the time of
peace, that they would not shed the blood of an enemy in time of war except it
were in the field. J. Caesar was one of the greatest, and stoutest Captains that
ever was in the World, he stood the shock of fifty set battles, besides all
sieges and outroads, he took a thousand Cities and walled Towns; he overrun
three hundred several countries, and in his wars were slain well near twelve
hundred thousand men, besides all those that died in the civil wars, which were
great numbers, yet this man protested of himself, and that most truly that he
never drew blood but in the field, nunquam nisi in acie stantem never slew any
man, but in a set battle, I have been a little the bolder in bringing these
instances of heathen men. First, because the Doctrine of Christ, through error
is counted an enemy to policy of War and Martial Discipline. Secondly, because
we have found out many distinctions, and evasions to elude the precepts of our
Blessed Savior and his Apostles. For as it has been observed of the
God-makers, I mean the Painters and Statuaries among the heathen, they were
wont many times to paint their Goddesses like their mistresses, and then think
them most fair, when they were most like what they best loved: so is it with
many professors of Christian Religion they can temper the precepts of it to
their liking, and lay upon them glosses and interpretations as it were colors,
and make it look like what they love. Thirdly, because it is likely that the
examples of these men will most prevail with those to whom I speak as being
such to whom above all they affect to be most like. Except therefore it be
their purpose to hear no other Judgment but only their own unruly and
misorderly affections; it cannot but move them to see the examples of men
guided only by the light of reason, of men I say the most famous in all the
world for valor and resolution to run so mainly against them. To come then
unto the question of Duels; both by the light of reason, and by the practice of
men it does appear, that there is no case, wherein subjects may privately seek
each others lives. There are extant the Laws of the Jews framed by God himself.
The Laws of the Roman Empire made partly by the Ethnic, partly by Christian
Princes; A great part of the Laws of Sparta, and Athens (two warlike
Commonwealths especially the former) lie dispersed in our books: yet amongst
them all is there not a Law or Custom that permits this liberty to Subjects.
The reason of it I conceive, is very plain. The principal thing next under God
by which a Commonwealth does stand is the Authority of the Magistrate whose
proper end is to compose, and end quarrels between man and man upon what
occasion soever they grow; For were men peaceable, were men not injurious one
to another, there were no use of Government. Wherefore to permit men in private
to try their own rights, or to avenge their own wrongs, and so to decline the
sentence of the Magistrate is quite, to cut off all use of Authority. Indeed it
has been sometimes seen that the event of a battle by consent of both armies,
has been put upon single combat, to avoid further effusion of blood: but
combats betwixt Subjects for private causes till these later ages of the world
was never allowed. Yet I must confess the practice of it is very Ancient. For
Cain the second man in the world was the first Duelist, the first that ever
challenged the field (in the fourth of Genesis) the Text says, That Cain spoke
unto his Brother, and when they were in the field he arose and slew him. The
Septuagint, to make the sense more plain do add another clause, and tell us
what it was he said unto his Brother, (...) Let us go out into the field, and
when they were in the field, he arose and slew him. Let us go out into the
field, it is the very form and proper language of a challenge. Many times
indeed our Gallants can formalize in other words, but evermore the substance,
and usually the very words are no other but these of Cains, Let us go out into
the field. Abel I persuade my self understood them not as a challenge: for had
he so done, he would have made so much use of his discretion, as to have
refused it, yet can we not choose but acknowledge a secret Judgment of God in
this that the words of Cain, should still be so Religiously kept till this day
as a Proem and Introduction to that action, which doubtless is no other, then
what Cains was. When therefore our Gallants are so ready to challenge the
field, and to go into the field, Let them but remember whose words they use,
and so accordingly think of their action. Again, notwithstanding, Duels are of
so ancient and worshipful a Parentage, yet could they never gain so good
acceptance as to be permitted, much less to be counted lawful in the civil part
of the world till barbarism had overran it. About five or six hundred years
after Christ at the fall of the Roman Empire abundance of rude and barbarous
people brake in and possessed the civiler part of the world; who abolishing the
ancient Laws of the Empire, set up many strange customs in their rooms. Amongst
the rest for the determining of quarrels that might arise in case of doubtful
title, or of false accusation or the like, they put themselves upon many
unusual forms of Trial; as to handle red hot Iron, to walk bare foot on burning
coals, to put their hands and feet in scalding water, and many other of the
like nature, which are reckoned up by Hottoman a French Lawyer: For they
presumed so far on Gods providence, that if the party accused were innocent, he
might do any of these without any smart, or harm. In the same cases, when by
reason of unsufficient, and doubtful evidence, the Judges could not proceed to
sentence, as sometimes it falls out and the parties contending would admit of no
reasonable composition, Their manner was to permit them to try it out by their
swords. That so the Conqueror might be thought to be in the right. They
permitted, Isay, thus to do. For at the best 'twas but a permission to prevent
farther mischief; For to this end sometimes some known abuses are tolerated: So
God permitted the Jews upon slight occasions to put their wives away, Because
he saw that otherwise, their exorbitant lusts would not be bounded within these
limits, which he in Paradise in the beginning had ser.

And it is observed of the wise men which had the managing and bringing up of
Nero the Emperor, that they suffered him to practice his lusts upon Act one of
his Mothers Chamber-maids, Ne in stupra foeminarum illustrium perrumperet si
ill a libidine prohiberetur. Least if he were forbidden that, he should turn
his lust upon some of the Noble Women, permission and toleration warrants not
the goodness of any action. But as Caiphas said better one man die then all the
people perish; so they that first permitted Duels seem to have thought: better
one or two mutinous persons, and disorderly die in their folly, then the whole
Commonwealth be put into tumult and combustion: yet even by these men it was
never so promiscuously tolerated that every hasty couple, upon the venting of a
little choler, should presently draw their swords, but it was a public or
solemn action, done by order, with inspection, either of the Prince himself, or
of some other Magistrate, appointed to order it. Now certainly there can be no
very great reason for that action, which was thus begun by Cain, and continued
only by Goths and Vandals and mere Barbarism.

Yet that we may a little better acquaint our selves with the quality of it,
Let us a little examine the causes and pretenses which are brought by them who
call for trial by single combat. The causes are usually two. First, disdain to
seem to do or suffer any thing for fear of death. Secondly, point of Honor,
and not to suffer any contumely, and indignity, especially if it bring with it
disreputation, and note of cowardice. For the first disdain to fear death. I
must confess I have often wondered with my self, how men durst die so
ventrously except they were sure they died well. In aliis rebus siquid erratum
est potest post modum corrigi, in other things which are learnt by practicing,
if we mistak we may amend it: for the error of a former Action may be
corrected in the next. We learn then by erring, and men come at length not to
err, by having often erred. But no man learns to die by practicing it. We die
but once, and a fault committed then, can never afterward be amended, quia
poena, statim sequitur errorem, because the punishment immediately follows upon
the error. To die is an action of that moment, that we ought to be very well
advised, when we come to it, ab hoc momento pendet aeternitas, you may not look
back upon the opinion of honor and reputation which remains behind you: but
rather look forward upon that infinite space of Eternity either of bliss or
bale which besalls us immediately after our last breath. To be loath to die
upon every slight occasion is not a necessary sign of fear and cowardice. He
that knew what life is, and the true use of it, had he many lives to spare, yet
would he be loath to part with one of them upon better terms then those our
books tell us, that Aristippus a Philosopher being at Sea in a dangerous
Tempest, and bewraying some fear, when the weather was cleared up, a desperate
Ruffian came and upbraided him with it and tells him, that it was ashame that
he professing wisdom should be afraid of his life, whereas himself having
had no such education, expressed no agony or dread at all. To whom the
Philosopher replied, there was some difference between them two. I know says
he, my life may be profitable many ways, and therefore am I loath to loose it;
but because of your life you know little profit, little good can be made, you
care not how easily you part with it. Beloved it may be justly suspected, that
they who esteem thus lightly of their lives, are but worthless and unprofitable
men: our own experience tells us, that men who are prodigal of their money in
Taverns and Ordinaries, are close handed enough, when either pious uses, or
necessary and public expense requires their liberality. I have not heard that
prodigals ever built Churches. So these men that are so prodigal of their lives
in base quarrels, peradventure would be cowardly enough; if either public
service, or religion did call for their help; I scarcely believe any of them
would die Martyrs, if the times so required it. Beloved, I do not go about to
persuade any man to fear death, but not to contemn life; life is the greatest
blessing God gives in this world, and did men know the worth of it, they would
never so rashly venture the loss of it, but now lightly prizing both their own
and others blood, they are easily moved to shed it, as fools are easily won to
part with jewels, because they know not how to value them. We must deal with
our lives, as we do with our money, we must not be covetous of it, desire life
for no other use but to live, as covetous persons desire money only to have it:
neither must we be prodigal of life and trifle it away upon every occasion: but
we must be liberal of our lives, know upon what occasion to spare, upon what
occasion to spend them. To know where and when and in what cases to offer our
selves to die, is a thing of greater skill, then a great part of them suppose,
who pretend themselves most forward to do it. Nam impetu quodam and instinctu
currere ad mortem cum multis commune est. For brutishly to run upon and hasten
unto death is a thing that many men can do; and we see that bruit beasts many
times will run upon the spears of such as pursue them. Sed deliberare and
causas expendere utque suaserit ratio vitae mortisque consilium suscipere, vel
ponere ingentis animi est, but wisely to look into, and weigh every occasion,
and as judgment and true discretion shall direct: so to entertain a resolution
either of life or death this were true fortitude and magnanimity. And indeed
this prodigality and contempt of life, is the greatest ground of this
quarrellous and fighting humor. Qui suam vitam contempsit, dominus est
alienae. There is a kind of men, who because they contemn their own lives,
make themselves Lords and Commanders of other men's, easily provoking others to
venture their blood, because they care not how they loose their own. Few places
of great resort are without these men, and they are the greatest occasioners of
bloodshed, you may quickly know them. There are few quarrels wherein they are
not either principalls, or seconds, or some way or another will have a part in
them. Might there be public order taken for the restraint of such men, that
make a practice of quarrelling, and because they contemn their own lives,
carry themselves so insolently and imperiously toward others. It will prevent
much mischief, and free the Land of much danger of blood guiltiness.

The second cause, which is much alleged in defense of Duels, I told you was
point of honor, a conceit that it is dishonorable for men of place and
fashion quietly to digest and put up contumelye and disgrace, and this they
take to be a reason of that authority and strength, as that it must admit of no
dispensation; For answer. First, the true fountain and original of quarrel are
of another kind and honor is abused as a pretense. The first occasioners of a
great part of them are indeed very dishonorable, let there an Inventory be
taken of all the challenges that have been made for some time past, and you
shall find that the greatest part by far were raised either in Taverns, or
Dicing houses, or in the stews. Pardon me, if in a case of this nature I deal a
little plainly. Drinking, Gaming, and Whores, these are those rotten bones that
lie hid under this painted Sepulcher and title of honor.

Lastly, To conclude, It is a part of our profession, as we are Christians to
suffer wrong and disgrace. Therefore to set up an other doctrine, and teach
that honor may plead prescription against Christ's precepts, and exempt you
from patient enduring of contumely and disgrace, you withstand Christ, and
deny your vocation; and therefore are unavoidably Apostats. But we loose our
labor, who give young men and unsettled persons good advice and counsel. The
civil magistrate must lay to his hand, and pity them, who want discretion to
pity themselves. For as Bees, though they fight very fiercely; yet if you cast
a little dust amongst them are presently parted, so the enacting and executing
some few good laws, would quickly allay this greatness of stomach and fighting
humor. how many have been censured for Schismatics and Heretics, only
because by probable consequence, and a far off they seemed to overthrow some
Christain principle: but here are men, who walk in our streets, and come to our
Churches, who (...) (...) openly oppose that great point of Christianity, which
concerns our patience, and yet for their restraint, no Synod is called, no
magistrate stirs, no Church censure is pronounced. The Church of Rome has long
ago to the disgrace of the reformed Churches shut them out of the number of
Christians, and pronounced them all excommunicated persons, who upon what
pretense soever durst enter the field for Duel and single combat.

Theodosius the Emperor enacted it for a Law, and it is extant at this day in
the Code, a Book of Laws, that it any man spoke disgracefully of the Emperor,
Si ex levitate contemnendum, si ex infamia miseratione dignum, si ex injuria
remittendum.

Lactantius. Summa virtus habenda patientia est quam ut caperet homo justus
voluit illum Deus pro inerte contemni.

So great a virtue is patience, that for the attaining of it, it is Gods will
we should suffer our selves to be contemned as Cowards.

Christ is an Example to us of suffering disgrace; let us as the Israelites
look up to this Serpent, and all the stinging of fiery Serpents shall do us no
harm.

We must forsake all and follow Christ: therefore Honor and Reputation too; If
we be ashamed of this pattern of patience, Christ will be ashamed of us.

Now that God may give a Blessing to what has been delivered, let us, etc.

FINIS.
Matt. 26. verse 75. And he went forth, and wept bitterly.
THus to commit to writing, as here our Evangelist has done; and so to lay
open to all posterity the many slips and errors which have much blemished and
disgraced the lives and actions of the best, and most excellent men: may seem
in the judgment of a reasonable man to participate of much envy and
uncharitableness; so that their good life had remained upon record for our
example, we might very well have suffered their errors to have slept and been
buried with their bodies in their graves. St. Paul makes it the property of
charity to hide the multitude of sins: whose property then is it thus to blazon
them at midday, and to fill the ears of the world with the report of them?
Constantine, the firstborn among Christian Emperors, so far mislik't this
course, that he professed openly, if he found any of his Bishops and Clergy,
whom it especially concerned to have a reputation pure and spotless, committing
any grievous sin, to hide it from the eye of the world, he would cover it with
his own garment: he knew well that which experience had long ago observed, Non
tam juvare quae been dicta sunt, quam nocere quae pessime: things well said,
well done, do nothing so much profit and further us, as the examples of ill
speeches, ill actions do mischief and inconvenience us: and men are universally
more apt from the errors and scapes of good men to draw apologies for their
own, then to propose their good deeds for examples and patterns for themselves
to follow. Neither is this my own speculation: St. Austine observed it long
since, who discoursing upon the fall of David complains, that from his example
many framed unto themselves this apology, Si David, cur non et ago? If David
did thus, then why not I? Praeparas te adpeccandum, says he, disponis peccare:
Librum Dei ut pecces inspicis: Scrip^^uras Dei ad hoc audis ut facias qu^^d
displicet Deo. Thou do prepare thy heart to sin: thou providest thy self of
purpose; thou do look into the book of God, even therefore, that thou
might sin. The Scriptures of God thou do therefore hear, that by the
example of those that fell, thou may learn to do that which is displeasing
unto God. Yea, the greater is the person offending, the more dangerous is the
example. For greatness is able of it self, as it were, to legitimate foul acts,
to add authority and credit unto ill doings. Facilius efficiet quisquis
objecerit, crimen honestum, quam turpem Catonem: says Seneca of Cato,
Whosoever he be, says he, that objects drunkenness to Cat^^o, shall more
easily prove drunkenness to be a virtue, then that Cat^^o, who used it, was to
blame. When St. Peter ( Galath. 2.) had halted in his behavior betwixt the
Gentiles and those of the Circumcision, St. Paul notes, that many of the Jews,
yea, Barnabas himself was carried away with their dissimulation. And to speak
truth, whom would not the authority and credit of Peter have drawn into an
error? So easily the faults of great men, adolescunt in exempla grow up and
become exemplary, and so full of hazard is it, to leave unto the world a
memorial of the errors and scapes of worthy persons. Yet Notwithstanding all
this, the Holy Spirit of God, who brings light out of darkness, and works
above and against all means, has made the fall of his Saints an especial means
to raise his Church: and therefore has is pleased him by the Penmen of the
lives of his Saints in holy Scripture, to lay open in the view of the world
many gross faults and imperfections, even of the most excellent instruments of
his glory. That which he tells. the woman in the Gospel, who anointed him
before his passion, that wheresoever the Gospel should be preached, this fact
of hers should be recorded in memorial of her: the same, as it seems was his
intent concerning his Saints; that wheresoever the word of life should be
taught, there likewise should be related the grievous sins of his servants. And
therefore accordingly, scarcely is there any one Saint in the whole book of
God, who is not recorded in one thing or other, to have notably overshot
himself. Sometimes he has made the Saints themselves the proclaimers of their
own shame. So he makes Moses to register his own infidelity: so David in his
one and fiftieth Psalm, by the instinct of Gods spirit leaves unto the Church
under his own hand, an evidence against himself for his adultery and murder.
Sometimes he makes their dearest friends the most exact chroniclers of their
faults: for so St. Chrysostom observes of St. Mark, the companion and Scholar
of Peter, who has more particularly registered the fall of his master, then any
of the other Evangelists, (...) etc. Who would not marvel, says he, that St.
Mark not only concealed not the gross escape of his master, but has more
accurately then any of the rest recorded the particulars of it, (...) even
because he was his Disciple. As if he could have done his master no better
service, then to deliver a most exact relation of his fault. There are yet two
things further to be noted in this dispensation of Almighty God. The first in
regard of us, the second in regard of the Saints, whose errors are recorded:
for the first, who can but marvel, that since all things that are written, are
written for our instruction, that if they be good, they may serve for our
imitation; if otherwise, for warnings to us: yet many sinister actions of the
Saints of God are so expressed in Scripture, without censure, without note, that
it were almost some danger to pronounce of them? Abraham's equivocating with
Abimelech, Jacobs deluding his blind father, Rachel abusing Laban with a lie,
Jephthe his sacrificing his daughter, Sampson killing himself with the
Philistines; these and many other besides are so fet down, that they may seem to
have been done rather by divine instinct, then out of humane infirmity. Wherein
the Holy Ghost seems to me tanquam adoriri nos ex insidiis, to set upon us out
of ambush, to use a kind of guile, to see whether we have (...) spiritual
discretion, to try whether we will attribute more to men's examples then to his
precepts. Secondly, in regard of the Saints themselves, it is worth our noting,
that God seems to have had more care to discredit them, then to honor them, in
that their faults are many times particularly registered, but their repentance
is wrapped up in silence: so the story of Noah is concluded with his drunkenness:
after the report of Lots incest, there is not a word of him throughout the
Scriptures: as soon as the story of Salomons idolatry is related, it
immediately follows in the text: And Solomon died. We should very much wrong
these men, if we should think that they past out of this life without
repentance; because their repentance is concealed. Doubtless if we were worthy
to search the mysteries of the spirit, we should find that the Holy Ghost has
left something for our instruction even in this particular; for nothing in
Scripture is done by chance. But as St. Chrysostom is wont sometime to tell
his auditory, that he will not resolve all doubts, but leave some to meditate
on by themselves: so will I now deal with you, I will leave this to your
private considerations, to practice your wits in the depths of christianity,
and so to frame reasons unto your selves of this proceeding of the Holy spirit.

In the New Testament, the Holy Ghost constantly holds the same course of
relating the fall of the Saints: and so accordingly by all four Evangelists
sets down at large, the fearful sin of Peter in denying and forswearing his
Master. But as it pleased him in mercy to give him repentance, so in these
words which I have read unto you, has it pleased him to leave unto the Church
a memorial of it. Our first note therefore, before we come to the words, shall
be a note of that exceeding use and profit which has redounded to the Church
by the registring of Peter's repentance; for this is done by the Holy Ghost, to
signify unto us the necessity and force of repentance, and sorrow for sin. The
concealing of Solomon's reclaim has occasioned some, upon acknowledgement of
the necessity of repentance, to suppose that Solomon past away without it, and
so received the final reward of the impenitent. But he that should have read
this story of Peter, and observed what authority he had afterward, what
especial favor our Savior did him after his resurrection, notwithstanding his
fall, if the manner of his recovery had not been recorded, might easily have
entertained a conceit very prejudicial to repentance, Quid non speremus? Who
might not hope to regain the favor of God without shedding a tear, if Peter
notwithstanding so grievous a crime without repentance should again be
reconciled? We might therefore with excuse have presumed upon a nonnecessity of
repentance, as if it had been enough in case of sin to practice that which
common morality teaches, barely to relinquish it without any more ado, that
therefore which we learn by this registring of Peter's repentance is this, that
for the clearing of a Christian man's account unto God, it is nor sufficient
barely to cease from doing ill, to satisfy the law which we broke either with
our life, or with our goods: to make recompense to our neighbor for wrong done
him, all this and much more washes not away the guilt of sin before God. These
are things which the very light of nature teaches us to do. It was not to be
thought that David to his former adulteries and murder would have added new:
he that has been forced to restore fourefold, that which he had taken away by
stealth, will peradventure take warning to steal no more. But this does not
suffice him. There is a further duty, a duty of repentance required of every
Christian man, a duty proper to him alone. For this doctrine of repentance
Nature never taught in her school, neither was it ever found in the books of
the learned. It is particular to the Book of God, and to the doctrine that came
down from Heaven. In the sins against the first Table we offend immediately,
and only against God: but in the sins against the second Table, there is a
double guilt contracted, one against God, another against our Neighbor: In
these sins, as there is a double fault, so there is a double satisfaction to be
made, one unto God, another to our Neighbor: for this second satisfaction
between man and man, many Heathen commonwealths have been very sufficiently
furnished with store of excellent laws. But of an atonement over and above to
be made to God, they scarce seem to have had any thought: and indeed to speak
truth, to what purpose had it been to trouble their heads about it; It is
impossible that it should ever fall within the conceit of any reasonable
creature, to pronounce what satisfaction was to be made for offense committed
against God. He is of infinite majesty, holding no proportion, no
correspondence with any created being. What recompense then can he receive from
the hands of dust and ashes? Ten thousand worlds, were we able to give them
all, could not make satisfaction for any part of the smallest offense we have
committed against him: when therefore the inventions of men were thus at a
stand, when all discourse, all reason were posed, it pleased God in mercy to
open his pleasure in his word, and to accept of true and unfeigned repentance,
as the only means to wash away the guilt of sin against his majesty. A thing in
the eye of flesh and blood altogether ridiculous. And therefore Julian, that
accursed Apostata, scorning Constantine the Emperor for betaking himself to
the Christian religion, in contempt and derision of Baptism and Repentance,
thus speaks: (...) etc. Hoe, whosoever is a corrupter and a defiler of women,
whosoever is a manslayer, whosoever is an impure and unclean person, let him
from henceforth be secure, and care for nothing. I will show him a little
water, in which, if he do but dip himself, he shall be forthwith clean: yea,
though he desperately run again into the same crimes. I will give him this
gift, if he but knock his breast and strike his forehead, (which are the
gestures of the penitent,) he shall without any more ado become as pure as
glass. It Is true indeed, in spite of unbelieving miscreants, it has pleased
God through the foolishness of Baptism and Repentance to save those that are
his. The water of baptism, and the tears of true repentance, creatures of
themselves weak and contemptible; yet through the wonderful operation of the
grace of God annexed unto them are able, were our sins as red as twice-died
scarlet, to make them as white as snow. The sentence of God denounced unto
Adam, What day thou eatest of the Tree thou shall die, certainly was absolute
and irrevocable neither could any repentance of Adams totally have reverst it.
Yet Abulensis cries out, O quam foelix humanum genus, etc. O how happy should
mankind have been, if Adam after his fall had used the benefit of Repentance,
and in time acknowledged his sin unto God. Yea, he goes further and seems to
intimate, that it had been of force almost to restore us unto our primitive
purity. For this way his words seem to look, when he says, Quod si seipsum
accusasset nos omnes ab accusatione and judicio liberasset; If he had accused
himself; doubtless he had freed us all from accusation and curse. Whatsoever
his meaning was, thus much without danger we may think, that if our first
Parents had not so strangly shuffled their fault from the one to the other, the
man to the woman, the woman to the serpent, but had freely acknowledged it, and
humbly begged pardon for it, God whose mercies were then as many and as ready
as now they are, would, if not altogether have revok't, yet doubtless much have
qualified and mitigated the sentence of the curse. If Adam had used more
ingenuity in confessing, God would have used less rigor in punishing. Out of
all this I draw this one lesson for your instruction. Whosoever he be that
thinks himself quit of some sins into which either through weakness or
carelessnes he has fallen, let him not presently flatter himself as if for
this his book of debt unto God were canceled, as if he were in state of grace
and new birth: but let him examine his own conscience, and Impartially sist all
the manner of his reclaim. He may peradventure find that upon some moral
respect he has broken off the practice of his sin: he may find that he has
satisfied his neighbor, contented the Law, done many acts, by which he has
purchased reconciliation with the world. But if he find not this passage of
Repentance and hearty sorrow twixt God and his own soul, let him know that God
is yet unsatisfied, that he is yet in his sin: his sin is yet unrepented of and
therefore still remains.

THus from the necessity of registring Peter's Repentance I come to the words
wherein it is registered, And he went out, etc. In these words we will consider
four things, First the person: He] He went forth; or, and going forth he wept.
Secondly, the preparative to the Repentance, He went forth. Thirdly, the
Repentance it self, comprised in the word wept. Fourthly, the extent and
measure, and compass of this Repentance, in the last word, bitterly. I. He, The
way of man's life is a slippery way: no man whilst he is in it has the
privilege of not sliding, just, and unjust, thus far, are of like condition:
both fall. But here they differ, the just man rises again. Not the eminency of
Peter's person, not his great understanding in the mystery of Christ, not his
resolution in our Saviors quarrel, not the love and respect his Master bare
him, kept him from falling. But Peter being fallen provides himself to rise,
and therefore in the second place, he went forth, says my Text, Peter was now
in the Highpriests Court, a place very unfit for one in Peter's case. Princes
Courts are no place for Repentance: To wear soft raiment, to fair deliciously
every day, this is Courtiers guise. But (...) the shirt of hair, the tear of
Repentance; this is the habit of the penitent. But wherefore went Peter out?
Did he as our Savior observes of the Scribes and Pharisees, go out into the
wilderness to see? to gaze and look about him? No, His eyes now must do him
other service. He went out as Joseph did from the face of his Brethren, to seek
a place to weep. Maldonat the Jesuit thinks it would have been a more goodly
thing, and far more beseeming Peter's resolution, if in the place he had
offended in the same he had repented: if before those he had made a constant
confession of Christ before whom he had denied him: But be the reasons what
they will which moved Peter to go forth, we will not prescribe unto the Saints
a form of Repentance we will cease therefore to dispute what Peter should have
done, and rather gather lessons for our selves out of what he did: fourthly,
and last of all, as Peter's fault was great, so he contends that his Repentance
may be as serious. The tears therefore he sheds are not slight, and perfunctory
shed only for fashions sake, such as Quintilian spoke of, nihil facilius
lachrimis marescit, Nothing sooner grows dry then tears: but as the Text says,
He wept bitterly: to summon up that Siccoculum genus Christianorum, a sort of
Christians, who never had tear dropped from their eye to witness their
repentance: to teach us to enlarge the measure of our sorrow for our sins, and
in case of grievous relapse not mince out our repentance, but to let loose the
rains unto grief. And thus I come to handle the parts in order more
particularly: and first of the person, He.

Amongst all the Saints of God whose errors are set down in holy Scriptures,
there is none whose person was more eminent, or fall more dangerous then Saint
Peter's. That which wisemen have observed in great and eminent wits, that they
evermore exceed, either they are exceeding good or else they are exceeding bad,
in Saint Peter was true both ways. His gifts of Faith, of understanding in the
mystery of Godliness, of resolution to die in our Saviors cause, were
wonderful: but yet his errors were as many and as strange, yea, so much the
more strange, because in that thing he most offended, in which he was most
eminent. It was a great argument of his Faith, when in the Tempest meeting our
Savior on the waters, he calls out unto him, if it be thou, command me to come
unto thee on the waters; but no sooner was he come out of the ship, but through
infidelity he began to sink. Again, of his great understanding in the mystery
of Christ he gave a notable instance, when being questioned by our Savior whom
men took him to be, he gave the first evident, plain, and open testimony that
ever was given him by man, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God. John
indeed gave testimony, and so did Simeon, and so did many more: but it was more
involved, done in more covert terms, more dark: Whence we may and that not
without some probability argue, that the understanding of these men was not so
evidently, so fully, so perspicuously enlightened as was Peter's. Signum est
intelligentis posse docere: It is a great argument that a man does passing well
understand himself, when he is able perspicuously and plainly to speak to the
understanding of another. This confession therefore of Peter, that carries with
it greater light and perspicuity then any yet that ever was given, does not
obscurely intimate that he had a greater measure of illumination, then any of
his predecessors. Yet to see the wonderful dispensation of the holy Ghost,
scarce was this confession out of his mouth, but in the very next bout where
our Savior begins further to enform him in the particulars of his Passion, and
Death, and despiteful handling by the Jews, the edge of his conceit was quite
turned, quite blunted and dull. Poor man, as if he had been quite ignorant of
the end of Christ's coming, out of a humane conceit and pity, he takes upon him
to counsel and advise our Savior. Sir, favor your self, these things shall
not come unto you: and for this pains he is rewarded with no less reproachful a
name then that of Satan, of a seducer, of a Devil. He that shall peruse the
story of the Gospel, and here stay himself, might think that that which we read
John the sixth, v. 70. spoken of Judas, Have I not chosen you twelve and one of
you is a Devil: were here fulfilled in Peter, Last of all his love to Christ,
and resolution in his quarrel, he gave an evident testimony, when he protested
himself ready to lay down his life for him. Greater love then this in the
Apostles judgment, no man has then to lay down his life for his friend. This
Saint Peter had, if we may believe himself. Yea, he began to express some acts
of it, when in defense of his master he manfully drew his sword, and wounded
the servant of the high Priest. But see how soon the scene is changed. This
good Champion of our Savior, as a Lion that is reported to be daunted with the
crowing of a Cock, is stricken out of countenance and quite amazed with the
voice of a silly Damsel. Yea, so far is he possessed with a spirit of fear, that
he not only denies, but abjures his master, and perjures himself, committing a
sin not far behind the sin of Judas; yea, treading it hard upon the heels. But
the mercy of God that leaves not the honor of his servant in the dust of
death, but is evermore careful to raise us up from the death of sin, unto the
life of righteousness; suffers not this rock, this great pillar of his Church
to be overthrown. He first admonishes him by the crowing of a Cock: when that
would not serve, himself (full of careful love and goodness) though in the
midsts of his enemies, forgets his own danger, and remembers the danger of his
servant. Himself was now as a sheep before the shearer, dumb and not opening
his mouth: yet forgets he not that he is that great shepherd of the flock, but
David like rescues one of his fould from the mouth of the Lion and from the paw
of the Bear. He turns about and looks upon him, says the Text, he cries louder
unto him with his look, then the cock could with his voice. Of all the members
in the body the eye is the most moveing part, that oft-times is spoken in a
look, which by no force of speech could have been uttered, this look of Christ
did so warm Peter almost frozen dead with fear that it made him well-near melt
into tears. As if he had cried out with the spouse, Cant. 6. O turn away thine
eyes, for they have overcome me, he grows impatient of his looks, and seeks for
a place to weep, what a look was this think you? Saint Jerome discoursing with
himself what might be the cause that many of the Disciples, when they were
called by our Savior, presently without further consultation arose and
followed him, thinks it not improbable, that there did appear some Glory and
Majesty in his Countenance, which made them believe he was more than a Man that
thus bespake them; whatsoever then appeared in his Looks, doubtless in this
Look of his was seen some Sovereign power of his Diety that could so speedily
recover a man thus almost desperately gone: a man that had one foot in hell,
whom one step more had irrecoverably cast away: It was this Look of Christ that
restored Peter. Quos respicit Jesus plorant delictum, says Saint Ambrose,
those weep for their sins whom Jesus looks upon. Negavit primo Petrus and non
flevit, quia non respexerat Dominus. Negavit secundo: non flevit, quia adhuc
non respexerat Dominus. Negavit tertio, and respexit Jesus, and ille amarissime
flevit. Peter denies him once, and repents not, for Jesus looked not back upon
him: he denies him the second time, and yet he weeps not, for yet the Lord
looked not back. He denies him the third time, and Jesus looks upon him, and
then he weeps bitterly. Before I come to make use of this, it shall not be
altogether impertinent to say something unto some queries that here arise
concerning the condition of Peter, and in him of all the Elect of God, whilst
they are in state of sin unrepented of for, as for Peter's faith, which some
makes doubt of, there can as I conceive; no question be made. It is not to be
thought that Peter had rever'st with himself the confession that he had
formerly made of Christ or that he thought doubtless I have er'd, this is not
the person whom I took him to be. Indeed, through fear and cowardice he durst
not confess that with his mouth unto salvation which in his heart he believed
unto righteousness. Any thing further then this, that speech of our Savior
takes away, wherein he tells him before hand, I have prayed that thy faith
might not fail. But since our Age has had experience of some, who because the
Election of God stands sure, and Christ's sheep none can take out of his
hands, conclude therefore that for the Elect of God there is no falling from
Grace, that to David and Peter no ill could happen, no though (for so they have
given it out) that they had died in the very act of their sin: To meet with
such disputants, I will briefly lay down what I conceive is to be thought in
the point. Wherefore parate fauces pani, as Saint Barnard speaks. Hitherto I
have given you milk provide your stomachs now for harder meat, and such as
befits strong men in Christ. Peter and Judas (for I will couple them both
together in my discourse, whilst they are both joined together in sin) Peter, I
say, and Judas in regard of their own persons, were both, more or less in the
same case, both fallen from Grace, both in state of sin and damnation, till the
Repentance of Peter altered the case on his part. But the Grace of God
signified two things: either the purpose of Gods Election, the Grace and Favor
Inherent in the Person of God, which he still casts upon those that are his
notwithstanding their manifold backslidings: or else it signifies the habit of
sanctifying qualities Inherent in the Regenerat Man, those good Graces of God,
by which he walks holy and unblameable. Again, the state of damnation signifies
likewise two things: either the purpose of Gods reprobation, or else the habit
of damnable qualities in the sinful man: from the state of Grace, as it
signifies the purpose of God to save, the Elect can never fall: In the state of
damnation, as it signifies something inherent in us, every man by nature is,
and the elect of God even after their Calling many times fall into it: that is,
they may and do many times fall into those sins; yea, for a time continue in
them, too ( David did so for a whole years space) which except they be done a
way by repentance, inevitably bring forth eternal death, for the state of
mortal sin unrepented of, is truly and indeed the state of death; yea, the
whole and sole reason of the condemnation of every one that perishes; for
Christ has said it, except ye repent, ye shall all perish. So then you see,
that into the state of damnation, as it signifies something inherent in us, a
man may fall, and yet not fall from the state of grace, as it signifies Gods
purpose of election: for both these are compatible for a time; if then we look
upon the persons of Peter and Judas, both of them are in the state of mortal
sin unrepented of; and therefore both in state of damnation: but if we look
back unto God, we shall see a hand reached out unto Peter, pulling him back as
he is now running down the hill, which hand we do not see reached out unto
Judas. Christ had a look in store for Peter, which if it had pleased him to
have lent unto Judas, Judas would have done that which Peter did. When then we
pronounce Peter, and in him any of the elect of God, as they are in Peter's case
to be fallen from grace; we speak not with relation to any purpose of God; but
we mean only that they have not that measure of Sanctification, which ought to
be in every child, which shall be an heir to life, and what hinders to
pronounce that man fallen from grace, whom we must needs acknowledge to be in
that state, in which if he continue, there is no way open but to death? What
then may some man say, had Peter lost the spirit of adoption? Had he not those
sanctifying qualities of faith, hope, and charity, which are proper to the
Saints, and are given them by divine inspiration in the moment of their
conversion: was that immortal seed of the word quite killed? No verily; How
then? Having all these, may he yet be called the child of death? I answer, he
may and is indeed so, for these do not make him that at no time he can be so,
but that finally he shall not be so, for they are not armor of proof to keep
out all darts, neither do they make our souls invulnerable, as the Poets feign
the body of Cyenus or Achilles to have been: but they are precious balms
evermore ready at hand to cure the wound when it is given. They are not of
force to hinder mortal sin, (for then every soul in whom they are were pure,
undefiled, neither were it possible, that the Elect of God after their
conversion should fall,) but they are of force to work repentance, which makes
all our wounds remediable. He that is mortally sick and dies, and he that is
likewise mortally sick, and through help of restoring physic recovers, in this
both agree, that they are mortally sick, notwithstanding the recovery of one
party. The wound of Peter and of Judas was mortal, and in both festred unto
death; but there was balm in Gilead for Peter, for Judas there was none. The
sting of the fiery Scorpion in the wilderness was deadly, and all that looked
not on the brazen serpent died. The brazen serpent altered not the quality of
the Scorpions sting, it only hindered the working of the poison: the sting of
sin in Peter, and in Judas was deadly: but he that was lift up on mount
Calvary, as the brazen serpent was in the wilderness, at him did Peter look and
live: Judas did not look, and therefore died. How comes it about beloved that
God every where in Scripture threatens death, without exception to all that
repent not, if the state of sin unrepented of, in whomsoever it is, be not
indeed the state of death. When David was intending to stay in Keilah; and
suspecting the inhabitants of that city, asks of God whether the men of Keilah
would deliver him over into the hand of Saul: God tells him they would: and
therefore certainly had he stayed there, he had been betrayed unto Saul: to
urge that Peter, because of Gods purpose to save him, could not have finally
miscarried, though he had died without repentance, (as some have not stuck to
give out) is nothing else in effect, but to maintain against God, that David
had he stayed in Keilah had not fallen into Saul's hands, because we know it was
Gods purpose to preserve David from the violence of Saul. All the
determinations of God are of equal certainty. It was no more possible for Saul
to seize on David, then it is for the Devil to pull one of Gods elect out of
his hand; as therefore the determinate purpose of God to free David from the
malice of Saul, took not away that supposition, If David go to Keilah, he shall
fall into the hands of Saul, so neither does the decree of God to save his
elect destroy the supposition, if they repent not, they die eternally, for the
purposes of God, though impossible to be defeated, yet lay not upon things any
violent necessity, they exempt not from the use of ordinary means: they
infringe not our liberty, they stand very well with common casualty: yea, these
things are the very means by which his decrees are brought about. I may not
stand longer upon this, I will draw but one short admonition, and so an end:
Let no man presume to look into the Third Heaven, to open the books of life and
death, to pronounce over peremptorily of Gods purpose concerning himself, or
any other man. Let every man look into himself, and try whether he be in the
faith or no; the surest means to try this, is to take an unpartial view of all
our actions, many deceive themselves whilst they argue from their faith to
their works, whereas they ought out of their works to conclude their faith;
whilst presuming they have faith, and the gifts of sanctification, they think
all their actions warrantable: whereas we ought first thoroughly to sift all our
actions, to examine them at the Touch of Gods Commandments, and if indeed we
find them current, then to conclude that they come from Sanctifying Graces of
the Holy Spirit. It is faith indeed that gives the tincture, the die, the
relish unto our actions, yet the only means to examine our faith is by our
works. It is the nature of the Tree that gives the goodness, the favor and
pleasantness to the fruit, yet the fruit is the only means to us, to know
whether the tree be good. By their fruit ye shall know them, says Christ: It
is not a rule not only to know others, but ourselves too. To reason thus, I am
of the elect, I therefore have saving faith, and the rest of the sanctifying
qualities, therefore that which I do is good: thus I say to reason is very
preposterous. We must go a quite contrary course, and thus reason: my life is
good, and through the mercies of God in Jesus Christ, shall stand with Gods
Justice: I therefore have the Gifts of Sanctification, and therefore am of Gods
Elect: for Peter to have said with himself, I am of the Elect, this sin
therefore cannot endanger me, had been great presumption, but thus to have
reasoned, my sin is deadly, therefore except I repent, I am not of the number
of Gods Elect, this reasoning had well befitted Peter, and becomes every
Christian man, whom common frailty drives into the like distress.

I made my entrance into my Sermon with the consideration of the wisdom of
God, in permitting his chiefest servants to fall dangerously: I have largely
exemplified it in the person of Peter: give me leave to make this further
beneficial unto you by drawing some uses from it; for great profit has
redounded to the Church through the fall of these men; Felicius ille cecidit
quam ceteri steterunt, says St. Ambrose of this fall of Peter. His sin has
more availed us, then the righteousness of many others; for wheresoever it
pleases the Holy Spirit of God to work effectually, (I speak cautelously,
because I would give no place to presumption) in him he makes excellent use
oftimes, even of sin and evil. First of all it is a tried Case, that many times
through negligence and carelessness, we suffer our selves to lie open to many
advantages. In such a case as this, a blow given us, serves us for a
remembrance to call our wits about us, (...) to stir up the Grace of God that
isin us, which many times is interlunio lies covered like fire under ashes; for
as a skilful wrestler having suffered his adversary to take advantage upon some
oversight, recollects himself, and comes forward with greater strength and
wariness: et pudor incendit vires et conscia virtus: shame of the foil and
impatience of disgrace, adds strength unto him and kindles him: so often times
is it with the Saints of God. The shame of having fallen makes them summon up
their forces, to look better about them, to fulfill their duty in larger sort,
then if they had not slipped at all. Hence it is, that we see that of the
bitterest enemies of the Church, have been made the best converts; of this we
have a notable example in S. Paul; how eager was he in the quarrel of the Jews
against Christ? None a more mischievous enemy to the Christians then he; yet,
when it pleased God to show him his error, he proved one of the most excellent
instruments of Christ's glory, that ever was on earth. And so accordingly he
gives himself a most true testimony: I have labored more abundantly, not then
one or two of them, but, then they all: his writings being as much in quantity,
as of them all: and St. Lukes story being nothing else almost but a register of
the acts of St. Paul. The sense and conscience, I doubt not, of that infinite
wrong done to the Church provoked him to measure back to the utmost of this
power, his pains and labor in making up the breach, he had formerly made: here
then is a notable lesson for us, teaching us to make our former sins and
impieties, admonitioners unto us to know our own strength, and by Christian
care and watchfulness to prevent all advantages, which the Devil may take by
our rechlesness and negligence; for beloved, it is not so much our impotency
and weakness, as our sloth and carelessness, against which the common enemy does
prevail; for through the Grace of him that doth-inable us, we are stronger then
he: and the policy of Christian warfare has as many means to beat back and
defend, as the deepest reach of Satan has to give the onset. The Envious man
in the Gospel rusht not into the field in despite of the husbandman, and the
servants, but came and sowed his tares, whilst men slept says the text. Our
neglect and carelessness is the sleep that he takes advantage of; when David was
so strangely overtaken, the Scripture tells us he rose from his bed, to walk on
the top of his palace, from his bed indeed he arose, but not from his sleep;
for mark I beseech you: David had spent much of his time about the Court, he
had been abroad, and seen and ransak'd many cities, and doubtless he had seen
many women as fair as the wife of Vriah, and that in his younger days, when he
was more apt to kindle. Why then now commits he so great an oversight? Look on
him a while as now he is. He is now at rest in his palace, at ease on his bed,
and to solace himself he must rise and walk at the top of his house, and idely
gaze upon a naked dame: of this his idleness the Devil takes advantage: this is
the sleep in which he comes and sows tares in David's heart, even al manner of
lust. So that David fell as Adam did in Paradise, not as a man that falls
before an enemy stronger then himself. The greatest part of the sins which we
commit, are in this rank with David's sin: He is faithful, says the Apostle,
and suffers no man to be tempted above his strength. Many creatures, if they
knew their strength, would never suffer themselves to be awed by man as they
are. Beloved, we are become like horse and mule without understanding, we know
not our strength we are more blind then the servant of Elizaeus, and see not
that they that are with us are more, and more mighty then they that are against
us. The Angels are ministering spirits, sent out of purpose to guard us, and
doubtless do many and great services for us, though we perceive not. We have
the army of God, ubi mill clipei and omnis armatura fortium, where are a
thousand bucklers and all the weapons of the mighty, the helmet of Salvation,
the sword of the Spirit, the shield of Faith to quench all the fiery darts of
sin: only let us not neglect to buckle it on, and make use of it. We have to
strive with an enemy, such a one as Anibal reported Marcellus to be, Qui nec
bonam nec malam far fortunam potest seu vicit, ferociter instat victis; seu
victus est, instaurat cum victoribus certamen; a restless enemy that is never
quiet, howsoever the world goes, if he conquer us, he insolently insults upon
us; if we foil him; he still bethinks himself how to set upon us afresh. Let us
not therefore suppose sedendo and votis debellari posse, that the conquest will
be gotten by sitting still and wishing all were well. We often maintain against
the Church of Rome, that our natural abilities whilst we live serve us not to
fulfill the Law of God. What boots it thus to dispute? shall the confession of
our unableness to do what we ought, excuse us at all if we do not that which we
are able? S. Austin was of opinion how justly I will not dispute but of that
opinion he was, and it was the occasion of his book, de spiritu and litera ad
Marcellinum: that it was possible for us even in this natural life seconded by
the grace of God, perfectly to accomplish what the Law requires at our hands.
Let the truth of this be as it may be: certainly that is most true which the
same Father adds: that let our strength be what it will, yet if we know not our
duty we shall do it no more then the traveller sound of body or limb, can go
that way aright of which he is utterly ignorant. Yea, let our ability be
perfect, and let our knowledge be also absolute, yet if we have no mind; if we
want a love unto our duty, if we suffer our selves to be overswayed by
affection to other things, yet shall we not do our duty. For which of us being
at liberty will do that which he has no love unto? Beloved, as for or
knowledge God has left unto us Scripture, the perfect register of all our duty
the absolute itinerary and map of all the course which in this life we are to
run: and as for love he plentifully sheds it in the hearts of all those that by
faithful prayer beg it of him. If we shall search the Scripture to improve our
knowledge, if we shall earnestly beg at his hands to inflame our love. Let our
natural possibilities be what they will: he that now does little amongst us
shall do much, and he that does much shall do much more: and the promises made
unto the Jews concerning their carnal enemies, shall be made good on us
concerning our spiritual and ghostly enemies, one of us shall chase a thousand,
and if they come out against us on way, they shall fly before us seven ways.
And thus much for the first use.

There is a second benefit of great weight and moment, which we reap out of the
consideration of the errors of these excellent Ministers of God: namely a
lesson teaching us to beware of spiritual pride. Of all the vices which our
nature is subject unto, this is the most dangerous, and of which we had need be
most cautelous. For whereas all other vices proceed from some ill in us, from
some sinful imbecility of our nature, this alone arises out of our good parts;
Other sins draw their being from that original corruption which we drew from
our Parents, but this may seem to be the mother of that; as by which even
natures unstained and in their primitive purity may most easily fall. And
therefore not without some probability is it concluded in the Schools, That no
other crime could throw the Angels down from heaven but this. That which one
leaves for a memorial to great men, that in dangerous times, non minus
periculum ex magna fama quam ex mala, it was a matter of like danger to have a
good name as an ill, that may I pronounce of a Christian man, the danger of his
innocence is not much less then of his faults. For this Devil when he cannot
drive us to despair by reason of our sin, takes another course to see if he can
make us presume upon conceit of our righteousness. For when by the preventing
grace of God we keep our selves from greater offenses if we find our selves to
have a love unto the word of God, and the true professors of it, to be rich in
almsdeeds, to have a part in other acts of righteousness, he makes us first
take notice of these good things in us, notice taken draws us to love and
admire them in us: self-love draws us on to compare our selves with others,
then to prefer our selves before others, and thirdly to disdain others in
respect of our selves. Here now is a gap laid open to a thousand
inconveniences. And hence it is that we see diverse times men otherwise of life
and reputation pure and unblameable, upon conceit and unconsiderateness by a
secret judgment of God to fall upon extremes no less fearful then are the
issues of open prosaness and impiety. To cut of therefore all way that may be
opened to let in spiritual pride it has pleased God to make use of this as of
a soverain remedy namely to permit even in his most chosen vessels, evermore
secret and hidden infirmities and sometimes gross and open scapes, which may
serve when they look into themselves to abate all overweening conceit of their
own righteousness, and when they shall look into the errors of others, may be
secret admonitioners unto them, not rashly to condemn them, considering their
own weakness. I will therefore shut up this place with the saying of Saint
Ambrose, etiam laepsus sanctorum utilis est, Nihil mihi obsuit quod negavit
Petrus, etiam profuit quod emendavit. The fall of the Saints is a very
profitable thing. It hurts not me that Peter denied Christ, and the example of
his amendment is very beneficial unto me. And so I come unto the preparative
unto Peter's Repentance, in these words, and he went forth.

THe wisdom of God has taught the Church sometime by express message delivered
by words of mouth, sometime by dumb signs and actions. When Jeremy walked up
and down the city with a yoke of wood about his neck, when Ezekiel lay upon his
side, besieged a Slate with the draught of Jerusalem upon it, and like a
banished man carried his stuff upon his shoulders from place to place: they did
no less prophecy the captivity, desolation, famine and woe, which was to fall
upon Jerusalem, then when they denounced it by direct word and speech: yea,
many of the ordinary actions of the Patriarks, which seem to participate of
chance, and to be in the same rank with those of other men, themselves (as a
learned divine of our Mercerus age observes) not intending or understanding any
such thing, contained by the dispensation of the Holy Ghost, especial lessons
and instructions for us. That speech of Sarah, cast out the bondwoman and her
son, etc. seemed to Abraham only a speech of cursed heart, and she her self
perceives not her self to speak by direction from God, but moved with
impatience of Ismaels petulant behavior toward her son. Yet the Holy Ghost
himself has taught us, that this act of her prefigured a great mystery. Many
disputations there are concerning the cause of this action of Peter's going
forth: whether it were out of the common infirmity that is in most men, namely
a greater shame to repent then to offend: or whether it were out of modesty and
good nature, that he could not endure the sight of Christ, whom he had so
grievously offended. Howsoever it were, we shall do this Scripture no wrong, if
we think it to contain an act in outward show casual, and like unto the actions
of other men, but inwardly indeed an especial action of a person great in the
sight of God; and therefore comprehending some especial instruction. And to
speak plainly, this abandoning the place wherein he fell, the company for fear
of whom he fell, and those things that were occasioners of his sin, does not
obscurely point out unto us an especial duty of speedy relinquishing and
leaving of all, either friends or place, or means, or whatsoever else, though
dearer unto us then our right hand, then our right eye; if once they become
unto us inducements to Sin. In former days before the Fullness of time came, the
Calling of the Elect of God was not by any one act more often prefigured, then
by this action of going forth. When the purpose of God was to select unto
himself a Church, and to begin it in Abraham, come forth, faith he unto him,
out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy fathers house. When
Israel being in Egypt, it pleased God to appoint them a set Form and manner of
serving him, before this could be done, they and all theirs must come forth of
Egypt, they must not leave a hoof behind them. When the time of the Gospel
was come, our Savior holds the same course: none must be of his company, but
such as come forth, leave all and follow him. And therefore the Apostle putting
the Hebrews in mind of their duty, expresses it in this very term; Let us go
forth, therefore unto him, says he without the camp, bearing his reproach. And
in the original language of the New Testament, the Church has her name from
this thing, from being called forth; so that without a going forth there is no
Church, no Christianity, no Service to God, the reason of all which is this: we
are all by nature in the High Priests court, as Peter was, where we all deny
and forswear our Master as Peter did: neither is there any place for
Repentance, till with Peter we go forth and weep.

For our further light we are to distinguish the practice of this our going
forth, according to the diversity of the times of the Church. In the first
ages, when Christianity was like unto Christ, and had no place to hide its
head, no entertainment but what persecution, and oppression, and fire, and
sword could yield it; there was then required at the hands of Christians, an
Actual going forth, a real leaving of riches, and friends, and lands, and life
for the profession of the Gospel. Afterward, when the Tempests of persecutions
were somewhat alay'd, and the sky began to clear up, the necessity of actual
relinquishing of all things ceast, Christians might then securely hold life and
lands, and whatsoever was their own, yet that it might appear unto the world,
that the resolution of Christian men was the same as in times of distress and
want, so likewise in time of peace and security, it pleased God to raise up
many excellent men, as well of the Laity, as of the Clergy, who without
constraint, voluntarily, and of themselves, made liberal distribution of all
they had; left their means and their friends, and betook themselves to deserts
and solitary places, wholly giving themselves over to meditation, to prayer, to
fasting, to all severity and rigidness of life, what opinion our times has of
these, I cannot easily pronounce: thus much I know safely may be said, that
when this custom was in its primitive purity, there was no one thing more
behoofful to the Church. It was the Seminary and nursery of the Fathers, and of
all the famous Ornaments of the Church. Those two things which afterward in
the decay and ruin of this discipline, the Church sought to establish by
Decrees and Constitutions, namely to estrange her Priests from the world and
bind them to single life, were the necessary effects of this manner of living,
for when from their childhood they had utterly sequestered themselves from the
world and long practiced the contempt of it: when by chastising their body and
keeping it under with long fasting they had killed the heat of youth, it was
not ambition nor desire of wealth, nor beauty of women that could withdraw them
or sway their affections.

That which afterward was crept into the Church and bare the name of Monkery,
had indeed nothing of it but the name, under pretense of poverty they seized
into their possession the wealth and riches of the world, they removed
themselves from barren soils into the fattest places of the land, from solitary
deserts into the most frequented cities: they turned their poor cottages into
stately palace, their true fasting into formalizing and partial abstinence. So
that instead of going forth they took the next course to come into the world:
they left not the world for Christ, but under pretense of Christ they gained
the world: (...) as Nazianz^^ne speaks. One of their own, Saint Jerome by name,
long ago complained of it. Nonnulli sunt ditiores Monachi, quam fuerant
seculares, and clerici qui possideant opes sub paupere Christo, quas sub
fallaci and locuplete diabolo non habuerant ut suspiret eos ecclesia divites:
quos tenuit mundos ante mendicos. But I forbear and come to commend unto you
another kind of going forth, necessary for all persons, and for all times.
There is a going forth in act and execution, requisite only at sometimes and
upon some occasions: there is a going forth in will and affection: this let the
persons be of what calling soever, and let the times be never so favorable,
God requires at the hands of every one of us. We usually indeed distinguish the
times of the Church into times of peace, and times of persecution: the truth
is, to a true Christian man the times are always the same. Habetetiam pax suos
martyrs, says one: there is a martyrdom even in time of peace; for the
practice of a Christian man in the calmest times, in readiness and resolution
must nothing differ from times of rage and fire. Josephus writing of the
Military exercises practiced amongst the Romans, reports that for seriousness
they diffred from a true battle only in this, the battle was a bloody exercise,
their exercise a bloodless battle. Like unto this must be the Christian
exercise in times of peace, neither must there be any difference betwixt those
days of persecution, and these of ours, but only this, those yielded Martyrs
with blood, ours without. Let therefore every man thoroughly examine his own
heart, whether upon supposal of times of trial and persecution, he can say with
David, My heart is ready, whether he can say of his dearest pledges, all these
have I counted dung for Christ's sake, whether he find in himself that he can,
if need be, even lay down his life for his profession. He that cannot do thus,
what differs his faith from a temporary faith, or from hypocrisy? Mark, I
beseech you what I say, I will not affirm, I will only leave it to your
Christian discretion. A temporary faith, that is, a faith resembled to the seed
in the Gospel, which being sown on the stony ground, withered as soon as the
sun arose, a faith that fails as soon as it feels the heat of persecution, can
save no man. May we not with some reason think that the faith of many a one,
who in time of peace seems to us, yea, and to himself too peradventure to die
possessed of it, is yet notwithstanding no better then a temporary faith, and
therefore comes not so far as to save him that has it? Rufus a certain
Philosopher whenever any Scholars were brought unto him to receive education
under him, was wont to use all possible force of argument to diswade them from
it: if nothing could prevail with them but needs they will be his hearers, this
their pertinacy he took for a sure token of a mind thoroughly settled, and led as
it were by instinct to their studies. If God should use this method to try who
are his, and bring on us those Temptations, which would make the man of
temporary faith to shrink: think we that all those who in these times of peace
have born the name of Christ unto their graves, would have born unto the rack,
unto the sword, unto the fire? Indeed to man who knows not the thoughts of his
friend some trials sometimes are very necessary. But he that knew and foretold
David what the resolution of the men of Keilah would be, if Saul came to them,
knows likewise what the resolution of every one of us would be if a fiery trial
should appear. Who knows therefore whether God has numbered out the Crowns of
life, according to the number of their souls, who he foreknew would in the
midst of all Temptations and trialls continue unto the end? for what difference
is there betwixt the faith that fails upon occasion, or that would fail if
occasion were offered? for the actual failing of faith is not that that makes it
temporary, it is only that which detects it, which bewrays it unto us to be so. The
faith therefore of that man which would have sunk as fast as Peter did, if
tempests had arisen, notwithstanding that through the peace of the Church he
dies possessed of, is no better then a temporary, and comes short of a saving
faith. Durus sermo, it as a hard speech some man may say: but let him that
thinks thus, recount with himself that Dura via, it is is a hard way that leads
to life. Beloved, deceive not your selves: heaven never was, nor will be gotten
without Martyrdom: In a word my Brethren try therefore your selves, whether you
have in you true resolution, summon up your thoughts, surveigh every path in
which your affections are wont to tread: see whether you are prepared to leave
all for Christ. If you find in your selves but one affection looking back to
Sodom, to the things of this life, remember Lots wife, her case is yours, you
are not yet sufficiently provided for the day of battle.

FINIS.
Christian Omnipotency.
Philip. 4. 13. I can do all things, through Christ, that enableth or that
strengthens me.
FRom henceforth let all complaint concerning the frailty, and weakness of man's
Nature, for ever cease. For behold our weakness swallowed up of strength, and
man is become Omnipotent. I can do all things, says my Apostle. The strongest
reason, which the subtilest above all the beasts of the field, could invent, to
draw our first Parents from their allegiance, was this, Ye shall be like Gods.
Our Savior who is infinitely wiser to recall us, then our adversary was to
seduce us, takes the same way to restore as he did to destroy, and uses that
for Physic, which the Devil gave for poison. Is this it, says he, unto us,
that has drawn ye from me, that ye would be like unto Gods? why, then return
again, and ye shall be like Gods, by a kind of Communicatio idiomatum, by
imparting unto you such excellencies, as are proper unto myself. As I my self
do all things, so shall you likewise be enabled to do all things through me.
Falso queritur de Natura sua Genus humanum, quod imbecillis sit. It was the
observation of the Heathen Historian, that it is an error in men, thus to
complain of the infirmities, and weakness of their Nature. For man indeed is a
creature of great strength, and if at any time, he find himself weak, it is
through his fault, not through his nature. But he that shall take into
consideration these words of my Text, shall far better then any natural man,
be able to perceive, that man has no cause to complain of his weakness. (...)
(...) (...), says Aristophanes. It was a tale that passed among some of the
Heathen, that Vulcan offended with the men of Athens, told them that they
should be but fools: but Pallas that favored them, told them they should be
fools indeed, but folly should never hurt them. Beloved our case is like to
that of the men of Athens, Vulcan the Devil has made us fools, and weak, and
so we are indeed of our selves: but the Son of God, the true Pallas, the
wisdom of the Father has given us this gift, that our weakness, shall never
hurt us. For look what strength we lost in Adam, that with infinite advantage
is supplied in Christ. It was the Parable of Iphicrates, that an Army of Hearts,
with a Lion to their Captain, would be able to vanquish an army of Lions, if
their captain were but an Heart. Beloved, were mankind indeed but an army of
Hearts, were we Hinnuleo similes, like unto the fearful Hind, upon the
Mountains, that starts at every leaf that shakes: yet through Christ, that
strengthens us, having the Lion of the tribe of Judah for our Captain, and
Leader, we shall be able to vanquish all that force; which the Lion that goes
up and down seeking whom he may devour, is able to bring against us. Indeed we
do many times sadly bemoan our case, and much rue the loss, which through the
rechlesness of our first parents has befallen us; Yet let us cheer up our
selves, our fear is greater then our hurt: as Elkanah speaks unto Hannah in the
first of Samuel. Why weepest thou? Am not I better unto thee then ten Sons. So
will we comfort our selves in the like manner. Let us sorrow no more for our
loss in Adam. For is not Christten fold better unto us, then all the good of
Paradise. The Mulbery tree indeed is broken down, but it is built up again with
Cedar. The loss of that portion of strength, wherewith our Nature was
originally endued, is made up with fullness of power in Christ; It is past that
conclusion of Zeba and Zalmana unto Gideon, in the Book of Judges, As the man
is, so is his strength; for now Beloved, as is God so is our strength.
Wherefore as St. Ambrose spoke of Peter's fall: Non mihi obsuit quod negavit
Petrus, immo prosuit, quod emendavit: So may we speak of the fall of our first
Parents, it hurts not us that Adam fell; nay our strength and glory is much
improved, that by Christ we are redeemed. Our natural weakness be it never so
great, with this supply from Christ, is far a above all strength, of which our
Nature in its greast perfection was capable. If we survey the particulars of
that weakness, which we drew from the loins of our first parents, we shall
find the chiefest part of it to be in the loss of immortality. For as for the
loss of that pleasant place, the blindness of understanding, and perverseness
of will, being supposed to betide us immediately upon the fall, these seem
weaknesses far inferior to our mortality. For, God forbidding us the fruit of
the tree of knowledge, and setting down the penalty that should ensue, making
choice (as it is most likely) of the fearfullest judgment, and what he saw in
his wisdom, was most likely to awe us, threatens neither blindness of
understanding, nor crookedness of Nature, but tells us, What day ye eat of it,
ye shall die. Yet see beloved, with how great strength this mortal weakness is
repaired; For thus to be able to encounter with death, the fearfullest of all
Gods curses, and through Christ to overcome it, as all true Christians do, to
turn the greatest curse into the greatest blessing, is more then immortality.

Si non errasset, fecerat ille minus. Had not man been thus weak, he had never
been thus strong. Again, on the contrary, let us conceive unto the utmost, what
our strength might be in our first estate, let us raise our conceit unto the
highest note we can reach, yet shall we never find it to be greater, then what
here is expressed in my Text. For greater ability, then power to do all things,
is not imaginable, I can do all things. Beloved, these words are Anakims, they
beseem not the mouth of a man of ordinary strength. He that has right unto
them, must be one of the race of the Giants at least, for he says not simply,
(...) I can, though peradventure with some difficulty, hardly with much labor,
and pains, but he says (...); I can with ease, I have valor and strength to
do them. I ask then first as the Eunuch does in the Acts: of whom speaks our
Apostle this, of himself or of some other man? I answer both of himself, and
all other Christians; For every Christian man by reading it as he ought, makes
it his own, for in reading it as he ought, he reads it with the same spirit,
with which St. Paul wrote it. Wherefore as St. Paul some where records of
himself, that he was not found inferior to the chief Apostles, so is it true
that the meanest Christian that hears me this day, in all that is contained in
my Text, is paralleled, is nothing inferior unto St. Paul, unto the chief
Apostles. What a comfort then is this unto the brother of low degree, when he
considers with himself, that how mean soever he may seem to be, either in the
Church or common weal, yet notwithstanding in so great a privilege, as is this
omnipotent power of doing all things; he is equal unto Peter, unto Paul, the
greatest Peers of the Church. If then the weakness of Christians be so strong,
as to deserve the name of Almightiness, what name, what title does the strength
of a Christian deserve to bear?

Secondly, I ask what meaning has this word (...), this can do in my Text? I
answer very large: first, though it be rendered by this word doing, yet it
comprehends sufferings too, for possum: valeo, I can, is as well to suffer as
to do, and that our blessed Apostle amongst other things so meant it, is
apparent by the words foregoing my text. And here is the first part of a
Christians omnipotency: his patience is infinite, it suffers all things. Never
any contumely, never any loss, never any smart so great, as could weary out
Christian patience. Talia (says Tertullian,) tantaque documenta, quorum
magnitudo penes nationes detractatio fides est, peaes nos vero, ratio, and
structio. Such examples, such precepts, have we of Christian patience, as that
with infidels they seem incredible, and call in question the truth of our
profession; but with us they are the ground and foundation of faith. God
himself did never yet try the utmost of a Christians patience: neither has he
created any object, that is able to equal it, yet he seems for our instruction
to have gone about to try, what might have been done: he commanded Abraham to
sacrifice his dear and only son. Tam grave praeceptum, quod ^^ec Deo perfici
placebat, patienter et audivit, and si deus voluisset, implesset, says
Tertullian. So heavy was the command, that God himself liked not it should be
acted, yet Abraham heard it patiently, and had fulfilled it, if God would have
given him leave. What should I speak of poverty, of disease, of the sword, of
fire, of death it self, (...) says Gorduis the Martyr in St. Basil, (...)
(...). O at what a loss I am, says he, that I can die but once for my Savior.
Take the greatest instance of Gods sury and wrath, even the pains laid up in
Hell for the sinner, and we shall find that there have been Christians, who
for the glory of God, would gladly have endured them. St. Paul is the man
amongst all the Saints of God, the greatest and worthiest example of this
wonderful strength, of this omnipotency of a Christian man. What evil is
imaginable, which he did not either indeed, or at least in will, and affection
undergo? Omnem patientiae speciem adversus omnem diaboli vim expunxit, (...) I
am on fire says Saint Chrysostom, when I speak of St. Paul, and indeed whom
would it not inflame, to read that admirable Synopsis and brief of his
sufferings registered in the second of the Corinthians, at the Eleventh Chapter.
In labors more abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons more frequent,
in deaths often, and could he do more? Yes, he could; Sed ubi historiam praestare
non po^^uit, votum attulit. Hitherto he reports historically what was done, and
as if that were not enough, he tells us what he would have done, and that his
patience was able even gladly to have encountered Hell it self, (...) says he
in the ninth of the Romans, I have prayed unto God, I have begged it at his
hands, as a favor, that for the increase of his glory through the Salvation of
Israel my Kinsmen, according to the flesh, I might become a castaway, and
endure the pains of eternal fire. Tertullian considering the wonderful patience
of our Savior upon his cross; thinks that if there had bin no other argument
to prove him to be God, yet this alone had been sufficient. Hanc vel maxim,
Pharisaei Dominum agnoscere debuistis: patientiam hujusmodi nemo hominum
perpetraret. In like manner may we truly say were there no other argument to
prove that Christ does dwell in us, does mightily strengthen and enable us, yet
this wonderful measure of patience in so finite a creature, could never
subsist, if God were not in us of a truth.

Again (...), this word of doing here in my text, signifies not only
sufferings, and patience, this were to make a Christian but a kind of Stone: A
Christian has not only a Buckler to resist, but he must have a sword to
strike. Wherefore this word of doing, must signify yet further, some action
and life; And so indeed it does; For it notes unto us the most glorious and
eminent kind of Christian action, Victory and Conquest; and when my Apostle
here says, I can do all things, his meaning is, I can overcome and conquer all
things. And here is the second and most glorious part of Christian Omnipotency;
Never was any true Christian overcome or can he; For look how much he yields
unto his enemy, so much he fails of his profession and title. David complains
of Joab and his Brethren; These sons of Zeruiah are too strong for me. But,
Beloved, a Christian man finds none of these sons of Zeruiah, whom he needs to
fear, or of whom he needs to complain. For as Aristole tells us that a
magnanimous man is he, (...) who thinks nothing great, but conceits all things
as inferior to himself: so may we define a true Christian to be such a one as
to whom nothing is dreadful, in whose eye nothing under God carries any show of
Greatness, S. Paul has left us a Catalogue in the end of the eight to the
Romans, of all the forces, outward and inward, bodily and ghostly, that can be
mustred against us, life, death, Angels, principalities, powers, things
present, things to come, height, depth, any creature imaginable and pronounces
of them, that in all these we are Conquerors, Conquerors is too mean a word
(...) we are more then Conquerors, (...) says Saint Chrysostom, we conquer
them with ease, without any pains or sweat? Paucas victoria dextras -- exigit,
we shall not need to bring forth against them all our forces: a small part of
them will be sufficient to gain the day; and not only overcome them, but turn
them to our benefit and behoof. For sin is like unto Sampsons Lion: it comes
upon us with open mouth to devour us; but when we have slain it, we shall find
honey in the belly of it, wonderful therefore is the power of a Christian, who
not only overcomes and Conquers, and kills the viper, but like the skilful
Apothecary makes Antidote, and Triacle of him. Indeed our Adversaries seem to
be very great. S. Paul calls them by wonderful names, as if he meant to
affright us: powers, principalities, (...) depths, the Prince that rules in
the Air, the God of this world, and what not? Yet notwithstanding as one speaks
in Livie of the Macedonian war, as I remember: non quam magni nominis bellum
est, tam difficilem existimaveritis victoriam; we must not think there will be
any doubt of the Victory, because it is a war of great name, and noise; For me
thinks, I discover in our Apostle, when he uses these strange astonishing
words, a spiritual stratagem: by which to stir us up, and make us stand upon
our guard, he makes the largest report of our enemies forces. We read that one
of the Roman Captains, perceiving his Soldiers unnecessarily to faint draws
out letters before them, and reads the news of that which never was, of, I know
not what Kings with Armies and multitude coming forthwith against them, which
art of his did much avail him to gain the victory; because it made the
Soldiers to recollect themselves, and fight withal their might. Beloved, I may
not think, that the Apostle in making this report of our enemies forces,
relates that which is not, but this, I think, I may safely say that he makes
the most of that which is; For it can never hurt us to take our enemy, to be
as strong as he is; or peradventure stronger, for this is a very profitable
error, it makes us more wary, and provide our selves the better. But to flight,
and contemn our enemy, to err on the contrary side, and think him to be weaker
then he is, this has caused many an overthrow. It is a rule which Vigetius
gives us: Difficilime vincitur, qui vere potest de suis, and de adversarii
copiis judicare. It is an hard matter to overcome him that truly knows his
own strength, and the strength of his adversary. And here, beloved, is the
error of most Christians; we do not know of what strength we are. We look upon
this body of ours, and suppose that in so weak and faint a subject there cannot
subsist so great strength, as we speak of; as if a man should prize the liquor
by the baseness of the vessel in which it is. As diverse Landlords have
treasures hidden in their fields, which they know not of, so many of us have
this treasure of omnipotency in us, but we care not to discover it, and to know
it, did we but perfectly know our own strength and would we but compare it with
the strength of our enemies: we should plainly discover, that we have such
infinite advantage above them, that our conquest may seem not to be so great,
as is pretended. For the greater the advantages are, the glory of the victory
is the less: and that which makes a conquest great, is not so much the
greatness of him that Conquers, as the strength and greatness of him that is
overthrown, Now what proportion is there betwixt the strength of God himself
dwelling in us, and all the strength of Heaven, Earth, and Hell besides, how
then can we count this spiritual war so fearful, which is waged upon so unequal
terms. In quo si modo congressus cum host sis, viceris, in which if we but
give the onset, we are sure to gain the victory? restitisse vicisse est; To
resist is to conquer for so says the Apostle, Resist the Devil and he shall
fly from you. There was never yet any Christian conquered, that could not: and
in this war not to yield the victory, is to get it. As therefore one spoke of
Alexanders expedition into India: Been ausus est vana contemnere: the matter
was not much, which he did, the greatest thing in it was, that he durst do it:
so considering our strength, and the weakness of our adversaries, we may
without prejudice speak even of the worthiest Soldiers, that ever fought these
Spiritual Battles, Been aust sunt vana contemnere. The greatest thing that we
can admire in them is, that they durst do it. Would we but a little examine the
forces of our adversaries, we should quickly find it to be as I have said;
When Alcibiades a young Gentleman of Athens was afraid to speak before the
multitude, Socrates to put him in heart, asks him; Fear you says he, such a
one? and names one of the multitude to him; No says Alcibiades, he is but a
Tradesman; Fear you such a one, says he, and names a second; No for he is but
a Pesant: or such a one, and names a third? No, for he is but an ordinary
Gentleman? Now says he, of such as these does the whole multitude consist: and
by this device, he encouraged Alcibiades to speak: He that shall fear to
encounter the multitude, and army of Spiritual adversaries which are ready to
set themselves against him: Let him do by himself as Socrates did by
Alcibiades. Let him sitdown and consider with himself his enemies one by one,
and he shall quickly discover their weakness, Primi in praeliis vincantur
oculi. Its a saying that the first thing that is overcome in a Soldier, is his
eye, while he judges of his enemy, by his multitude, and provision, rather then
by his strength. Beloved, if we judge not of our adversary in gross, and as it
were by the eye: we shall easily see, that we shall not need to do as the King
in the Gospel does, send to his enemy with conditions of peace; For there is no
treaty of Peace to be had with these, Had Zimri peace that slew his Master,
says the Scripture: And there is no peace unto the wicked says my God. Not
only Zimri and the wicked but no Christian has or can have peace, he must be
always as fighting and always conquering: Let us single out some one of this
army and let us examine his strength, Is it sin does so much affright us? I
make choice of it, because it is the dreadfullest enemy that a Christian has:
Let us a little consider its strength and we shall quickly see, there is no
such need to fear it. Sins are of two sorts, either great and capital, or small
and ordinary sins. I know it were a paradox in nature to tell you that the
greatest and the mightiest things are of least force. Yet this is true in the
case we speak of: the greatest things are the weakest. Your own experience
tells you that rapes, and murders, parricide, poisoning, treason and the rest
of that rabble of arch sins, are the sins of the fewest, and that they have no
strength at all but upon the weakest men. For doubtless if they were the
strongest, they would reign with greatest latitude, they would be the
commonest, they would be the sins of the most: But wandering thoughts, idle
words, petty lusts, inconsiderate wrath, immoderate love to the things of the
world, and the rest of that swarm of ordinary sins, these are they that have
largest extent and Dominion, and some of these, or all of these, more or less
prevail with every man. As the Magicians in Exodus, when they saw not the power
of God in the Serpents, in the blood in the frogs; at the coming of the plague
of the Lice presently cried Digitus Dei his est; this is the finger of God: so
I know not how it comes to pass, though we see and confess that in those great
and heinous crimes, the Devil has least power, yet at the coming of Lice, of
the rout of smaller and ordinary sins, we presently yield our selves captives
and cry out Digitus Diaboli the strength of the Devil is in these, as if we
were like unto that fabulous rack in Pliny, which if a man thrust at with his
whole body, he could not move it, yet a man might shake it, with one of his
fingers. Now what an error is it in us Christians, when we see the principal
and captain sins so easily vanquished, to think the common Soldier or lesser
sort invincible? For certainly if the greatest sins, be the weakest, the lesser
cannot be very strong; Secondly is it Original corruption that does so much
affright us. Let us consider this a little, and see what great cause we have to
fear it. And first beloved let us take heed that we seem not (...) to fight
with our own fancy, and not so much to find, as to fain an enemy: Mistake me
not, I beseech you, I speak not this as doubting that we drew any natural
infection from the loins of our Parents: but granting this, I take it to be
impossible to judge of what strength it is, and deny that it is any such cause
why we should take it to be so strong, as that we should stand in fear to
encounter it, and overcome it: For we can never come to discover, how far our
nature is necessarily weak. For whilst we are in our infancy, and as yet not
altered a puris naturalibus from that which God and nature made us, none of us
understand our selves: and ere we can come to be of years to be able to
discover it, or define any thing concerning the nature of it, custom, or
education either good, has much abated, or evil, has much improved the force
of it; so that for any thing we know the strength of it may be much less then
we suppose, and that it is but a fear that makes it seem so great, (...) says
Chrysostom, It is the nature of timorous and fearful men evermore to be
framing to themselves causless fears, I confess, it is a strange thing, and it
has many times much amazed me, to see how ripe to sin many children are, in
their young and tender years: and ere they understand what the name of Sin and
evil means, they are unexpectedly and no man knows by what means, wonderfully
prompt and witty to villainy, and wickedness; as if they had gone to school to
it in their mothers womb. I know not to what cause to impute this thing, but I
verily suppose, I might quit original sin from the guilt of it: For it is a
ruled case, and concluded by the general consent of the Schools, that original
sin is alike in all: and S. Paul seems to me to speak to that purpose, when he
says, that God has alike concluded all under sin, and that all are alike
deprived of the glory of God. Were therefore Original sin the cause of this
strange exorbitancy in some young children, they should all be so: a thing
which our own experience teaches us to be false: For we see many times even in
young children many good and gracious things, which being followed with good
education, must needs come to excellent effect, In pueris elucet spes
plurimorum, says Quintilian, quae ubi emoritur aetate, manifestum est, non
defecisse naturam sed curam: In children many times an hope of excellent things
appears, which in riper age for want of cherishing, fades and withers away: A
certain sign that nature is not so weak as Parents and Tutors are negligent:
whence then comes this difference? Certainly not from our Nature, which is one
in all: but from some other cause. As for Original sin, of what strength it is
I will not discuss: only thus much I will say there is none of us all, but is
much more wicked, then the strength of any Primitive corruption can constrain.
Again, let us take heed that we abuse not our selves, that we use not the names
of original weakness, as a stale, or stalking-horse as a pretense to choke, and
cover somewhat else: For oftentimes when evil education, wicked examples, long
custom, and continuance in sin has bred in us an habit, and necessity of
sinning, presently Original sin, and the weakness of man's nature bear the blame:
Ubi per secordiam, vires, tempus, ingenium, defluxere, nature infirmitas
accusatur, When through floath and idleness, luxury and distemper, our time is
lost, our bodies decayed, our wits dulled, we cast all the fault on the
weakness of our nature; That Law of sin in our members, of which S. Paul spoke,
and which some take to be original corruption; S. Austine once pronounced of it
(whether he meant to stand to it, I know not, but so he once pronounced of it)
Lex peccati est violentia consuetudinis; That Law of sin, that carries us
against our wills, to sin, is nothing else, but the force and violence of long
custom and continuance in sin: I know, that by the error of our first Parents
the Devil has blinded, and bound us more then ever the Philistines did Samson.
Yet this needs not to make us thus stand in fear of Original weakness: For
blind and bound as we are, let the Devil build never so strong, yet if our
hair be grown, if Christ do strengthen us, we shall be able Samson-like to bear
his strongest pillars, and pull down his house about his ears.

Thirdly, is it the Devil that we think so strong an adversary? Let us a little
consider his strength; he may be considered either as an inward enemy,
suggesting unto us sinful thoughts: or as an outward enemy, lying in wait to
afflict us in body, in goods, or the like. First, against us inwardly, he has
no force of his own; From our selves it is, that he borrows this strength to
overthrow us. In Paradise, he borrowed the Serpent to abuse us, but now every
Man is that Serpent, by which himself is abused. For as Hannibal having
overthrown the Romans took their armor and fought against them with their own
weapons. So the Devil arms himself against us with our own strength, our
senses, our will, our appetite: with these weapons, he fights against us, and
uses us against our selves; Let us but recover our own again and the Devil will
be disarmed: Think you that the Devil is an immediate stickler in every sin
that is committed? I know ye do. But take heed, least this be but an excuse to
unload your faults upon the Devil, and to build them upon his back. For S.
Chrysostom thought otherwise, (...). The Devils hand says he, is not in every
fault, many are done merely by our own carelessness (...) (...). A negligent
careless person sins, though the Devil never tempt him. Let the truth of this
lie where it will, I think I may safely speak thus much, that if we would but
shut up our wills and use that grace of God which is offered. I doubt not but a
great part of this suggesting power of his, would fall to nothing: as for that
other force of his, by which he lies in wait to annoy us outwardly, why should
we so dread that? Are there not more with us both in multitude and strength^^
to preserve us? The Angel of the Lord (says the Psalmist) pitches his tents
round about those that fear him, to deliver them. And the Apostle assures us,
that the Angels are ministering Spirits, sent forth for those, that shall be
heirs of Salvation; shall we think, that the strength of those to preserve, is
less then that of the evil Angels to destroy? One Garcaeus writing upon the
Meteors, told me long since, that whereas many times before great tempests,
there is wont to be heard in the air above us great noise, and rushing, the
cause of this was the banding of good, and evil Angels, the one striving to
annoy us with tempests, the other striving to preserve us from the danger of
it. And I doubt not, but as about Moses body, so about every faithful person,
these do contend, the one to hazard, the other to deliver. Yea, but the Devil
inspires into us evil thoughts: well, and cannot good Angels inspire good; they
are all for any thing appears, by the law of their creation equal, and shall we
think that God did give unto the Devil an inspiring faculty to entangle, which
he denied to his good Angels to free us? Though good Angels could not inspire
good thoughts, yet God both can and does. So that for any thing yet appears, we
have no such cause to stand in fear of the strength of the Devil, either
inwardly or outwardly. Thus have I examined the force of three of our principal
enemies; I could proceed to examine other particulars of this army of our
adversaries, the world, the flesh, persecutions, and the rest, and make the
like question of them, as I have done of these, and so conclude as Socrates did
to Alcibiades. If you have just cause to fear none of these, why should you
fear them all, since that of such as these the whole knot of them consists? But
I must proceed to search out yet another meaning of this word of doing in my
text; and that briefly.

Thirdly, therefore we may take this word of doing in its largest sense: as if
the Apostle had meant literally, that indeed a Christian can do all things,
that he had such a power and command over the creature, as that he could do
with it, what he list. In which sense it is likewise true, though with some
limitation, and here is the third degree of our Christian Omnipotency. In the
former parts the omnipotence of a Christian suffered no restraint: it was
illimited, unconfined. He is absolutely omnipotent in his patience, and can
suffer all things: he is likewise absolutely omnipotent in battle, and can
conquer all his enemies. But in this third signification, his power seems to be
straightened: for how many things are there which no Christian man can do? Yet
is he so straightened, as that his Omnipotency suffers not. We are taught in the
Schools, though God be omnipotent, yet many things may be named, which he
cannot do: he cannot deny himself, he cannot lie, he cannot sin, he cannot
die. Yet may we not conclude, that therefore God is not Omnipotent; for
therefore is he the more omnipotent, because he cannot do these things: for
ability to do these things, is imperfection, and weakness, but in God we must
conceive nothing but what argues perfection and strength. In some degree we may
apply this unto our selves, in things that tend to Christian perfection, every
christian is omnipotent; he cannot raise the dead, turn water into wine, speak
with tongues. True, but if he could, had he for this any further degree of
perfection above other Christians? Our Savior seems to deny it. For many
(says he) at that day shall come and say, have we not cast out Devils, and
wrought miracles in thy name, and he will answer them, away, I know you not.
Beloved, our Savior loves not to slight any part of Christian perfection: yet
my meaning is not to deny unto a christian the power of doing miracles, for
every christian man does every day greater miracles, then yet I have spoken of.
But beloved, in this matter of miracles, we do much abuse our selves; for why?
Seems it unto us a greater miracle, that our Savior once turned a little water
into wine, then every year in so many Vine-trees to turn that into wine in the
branches, which being received at the root was mere water; or why was it more
wonderful for him once to feed five thousands with five Loaves: then every
year to feed the whole world, by the strange multiplication of a few seeds cast
into the ground? After the same manner do we by the daily actions of christian
men. For why is it a greater miracle to raise the dead, then for every man to
raise himself from the death of sin, to the life of righteousness? Why seems it
more miraculous to open the eyes of him that was born blind, then for every
one of us to open the eyes of his understanding, which by reason, of original
corruption was born blind. For by the same finger, by the same power of God,
by which the Apostles wrought these miracles, does every christian man do this:
and without this finger, it is as impossible for us to do this, as for the
Apostles to do the miracles they did, without the assistance of the
extraordinary power of Christ. So that hitherto in nothing are we found
inferior unto the chief Apostles: what if there be some things we cannot do?
Shall this prejudice our power? It is a saying in Quintilian oportet
Grammaticum quaedam ignorare. It must not impeach the learning of a good
Grammarian to be ignorant of some thing: for there are many unnecessary
quillets, and quirks in Grammar, of which to purchase the knowledge, were but
loss of labor and time. Beloved, in the like manner may we speak of our
selves. Oportet Christianum quaedam non posse, it must not disparage the power
of a Christian, that he cannot do some things. For in regard of the height, and
excellency of his profession, these inferior things, which he cannot do, they
are naught else but Grammar quirks, and to be ambitious to do them, were but a
nice, minute, and over-superstitious diligence. And yet a christian if he list,
may challenge this power, that he can do all things; yea, even such things as
he cannot do. Saint Austine answering a question made unto him, why the gift of
tongues was ceased in the Church, and no man spoke with that variety of
languages, which diverse had in the Primitive times: wittily tells us, that
every one may justly claim unto himself that miraculous gift of tongues. For
since the Church, which is the body of Christ, of which we are but members, is
far and wide dispersed over the earth, and is in sundry nations, which use
sundry languages, every one of us, may well be said to speak with diverse
tongues; because in that which is done by the whole, or by any part of it,
every part may claim his share. Beloved, how much more by this reason, may
every one of us, lay a far directer claim to an absolute power of doing all
things, even in its largest extent, since I say not some inferior member, but
Christ, who is our head, has this power truly resident in him. Howsoever
therefore in each member, it seems to be but partial, yet in our head it is at
full; and every one of us may assume to our selves this power of doing all
things, because we are subordinate members unto that head, which can do all
things, but I must leave this, and go on to the remainder of my Text.

Hitherto I have spoken first of the person, I. Secondly, of his power can do,
I should by order of the words proceed in the third place, unto the subject or
object of this power pointed out unto us in this word (...) all things. But the
subject of this Christian power has been so necessarily wrapped up, and tied
together with the power; that for the opening of it, I have been constrained to
exemplify at large, both what this (...) this all things is, and how far it
does extend: so that to enter upon it a new, were but to trouble you with
repetition of what is already sufficiently opened. I will go on therefore unto
the second general of my Text. For here me thinks that question might me asked,
which Dalilah asked of Sampson: Tell me I pray thee, wherein this great
strength lies. Behold, beloved it is expressed in the last words, through
Christ that strengthens.

This is as I told you that hair, wherein that admirable strength of a Cristian
does reside. I confess, I have hitherto spoken of wonderful things, and hardly
to be credited; wherefore (...); least the strangeness of the argument call my
credit into question. Lo here I present unto you the ground of all this: A
small matter sometimes seems wonderful till the cause of it be discovered, but
as soon as we know the cause, we cease to marvel: how strong soever my
discourse of Christian Omnipotency does seem, yet look but upon this cause, and
now nothing shall seem incredible. For to doubt of the omnipotency of a
Christian, is to question the power of Christ himself. As the Queen of Sheba
told King Solomon, that she had heard great things of him in her own country,
but now she saw truth did go beyond report, so, beloved, he that travels in the
first part of my Text, and wonders at the strong report of a Christian man's
power. Let him come to the second part, to our Solomon, to him that is greater
then Solomon, to Christ, and he shall find that the truth is greater then the
same of it; for if he that was possessed of the evil spirit in the Gospel, was so
strong, that he being bound with chains and fetters, he brake them all: of what
strength must he be then, whom it pleases Christ to enable, or what chains or
fetters shall be put upon him, which he will not break? From this doctrine
therefore that Christ is he, that does thus enable us, we learn two lessons,
which are as it were two props to keep us upright, that we lean not either to
the right hand, or to the left. First, not to be dejected or dismayed, by
reason of this outward weakness and baseness, in which we seem to be. Secondly,
not to be pust up, upon opinion and conceit of that strength, and glory which
is within us and unseen. For the first, for our own outward weakness, be it
what it will, we cannot be more weak, more frail then Gideons Pitchers: now as
in them their frailty was their strength and by being broken they put to flight
the army of the Midianites: so where it pleases Christ to work, that which
seems weakness shall become strength, and turn to flight the strongest
adversary, Satis sibi copiarum cum Publio Decio, and nunquam nimium Hostium
fore, said one in Livie, we may apply this unto our selves: be we never so
weak, yet Christ alone is army and forces enough, and with him, we can never
have too many enemies. The flesh indeed is weak; for our Savior tells us, yet
this weakness of the flesh is no prejudice at all to the strength of a
Christian; for though the flesh be weak, yet the spirit is strong, and so much
our Savior tells us too: and why then do we not follow the stronger part? Si
spiritus carne fortior, quia generosior, nostra culpa infirmiora sectamur,
says Tertullian. If the spirit be stronger then the flesh, what madness is it
in us to make choice of, and follow the weaker side? Nulla sides unquam miseros
elegit amicos. Which of you is so improvident, as in a faction, to make choice
of that side, which he sees to be the weakest, and which he knows must fall.
Again, this weakness of a Christian is only outward, within what he is, the
words of my Text do sufficiently show. Socrates outwardly was a man of deformed
shape, but he was one of an excellent spirit: and therefore Alcibiades in Plato
compares him to an Apothecaries box, which without had painted upon it, an Ape
or a Satyr, or some deformed thing, but within was full of sweet and precious
ointment. Thus beloved it is with a Christian, whatsoever outward deformity he
seems to have, howsoever he seems to be nothing but rags without, yet he is
totus purpureus, all scarlet and glorious within: I have said, ye are Gods,
says the Scripture, the Magistrate is wont to ingrosse, and impropriate this
Scripture to himself; because sitting in place of Authority, for execution of
Justice, he carries some resemblance of God: but to whom can this Scripture
better belong then to the Christian man? For the magistrate carries indeed some
show of God without, but many times within is full of corruption and weakness;
the Christian carries a show of weakness without; but within is full of God and
Christ. The second thing which I told you, we learned was a lesson teaching us,
not to be puffed up with opinion and conceit of our own inward strength and
glory: for if any man, because of this, shall begin to think of himself, above
what he ought. Let him know that he may say of his exceeding strength, no
otherwise then the man in the book of Kings, spoke, when his axe was fallen
into the water, Alas Master, it was but lent. Those that build houses make
Anticks, which seem to hold up the beams, whereas indeed as St. Paul tells the
Olive branch; Thou bear not the root, but the root thee: So is it true in
them, they bear not up the house, the house bears up them. Beloved, seem we
never so strong, yet we are but Anticks, the strength, by which the house of
Christ does stand; is not ours, it is Christ's, who by that power, by which he
is able to subdue all things to himself, does sustain both himself and us.

FINIS,
Luke 18. 1. And he spoke a parable unto them to this end, that men ought
always to pray and not to faint.
MY Text is like the Temple at Jerusalem: It is the house of prayer, wherein
we may learn many special points of the skill and practice of it. Now as that
Temple had two parts; First, the Forefront the porch, the walk before it; and
secondly the Temple it self: So have these words likewise two parts; First,
there are words which stand before like a porch or walk, and they are these,
And he spoke a parable unto them: Secondly, here are words like unto the Temple
it self: That men ought always to pray, and not to faint. If you please before
we enter into the Temple, or speak of these words, That men ought always to
pray, Let us stay and entertain our selves a little in the porch, and see what
matter of meditation it will yield; And he spoke a parable unto them, etc. To
instruct and teach the ignorant, no method no way so speedy and effectual as by
parables and Fables Strabo gives the reason of it (...); For man is a creature
natural desirous to know but it is according to the proverb, as the Cat desires
fish, loath to touch the water, loath to takes the pains to learn, knowledge is
indeed a thing very pleasant; but to learn is a thing harsh and tedious above
all the things in the world; the book which Saint John eats in the tenth of the
Apocalypse was in his mouth sweet as honey but bitter in his belly. Beloved those
Librorum helluones students that like S. John eat up whole volums, these find
the contrary: For in the mouth in the perusal, their books are harsh and
unpleasant; but in the stomach when they are understood, and digested then are
they delightful and pleasurable: yet one thing by the providence of God our
nature has which makes this rough way to learn more plain and easy: it is
(...) common experience shows, we are all very desirous to hear narrations and
reports either pleasant or strange: Wise men therefore and God himself which is
wiser then men being to train up mankind Genus indocile, a subject dull of
hearing, and hardly drawn to learn, have from time to time wrought upon this
humor, upon this part of our disposition and mitigated, sugared as it were the
unpleasantness of a difficult, and hard lesson with the sweetness of some
delightful parable or fable: And S. Chrysostom tells us of a Physician, who
finding his patient to abhor Physic, but infinitely long for wine, heating an
earthen cup in the fire, and quenching it in wine, put his potion therein, that
so the sick person being deceived with the smell of wine, might unawares drink
of the Physic: or that I may better draw my comparison from Scripture, as when
Jacob meant to be welcome to his father Isaac, he put on his brother Esau's
apparel and so got access: So beloved, wisemen when they meant either to
instruct the ignorant, or to reprove offenders to procure their welcome, and
make their way more passable, have been wont for the most part, as it were to
clothe their lesson or reproof in a parable, or to serve it in a dish savouring
of wine that so Jacob might be admi^^ted under Esau's coat, that the smell of
the pleasantness of wine might draw down the wholsomness of Physic: Great and
singular have been those effects which this kind of teaching by parables has
wrought in men, by informing their ignorance, reproving their error, working
patience of reproof; opening the understanding, moving the affections and other
sovereign commodities, (...) (...). And for this cause not only our Poets, and
profane Authors, but whole cities, and men which gave Laws to Commonwealths
have made especial choice of this course; Yea, our Savior Christ himself has
filled the Gospels with parables, made them like a Divine and Christian AEsop's
Fables, because he found it to be exceeding profitable. For first of all it is
the plainest and most familiar way, and above all other stoops to the capacity
of the learner, as being drawn either from trees, or beasts, or from some
ordinary common and known actions of men: As from a shepherd attending his
flock, from an husbandman sowing corn in his field, from a fisher casting his
net into the Sea, from a woman putting leaven into her dough, or the like. So
that in this respect a parable is like Moses Tabernacle which outwardly was
nothing but goats skins, or some ordinary stuff, but within it was silk, and
purple and gold. And indeed since those we teach are either children or
ignorant persons who are but children ((...) for every man in what he is
ignorant is no better then a child) that manner of information fits best,
which is most easy and familiar: Again, a parable is a kind of pattern and
example expressing unto us what we hear; Now nothing does more illustrate and
explain then instance and example (...) (...) in a parable as it were upon a
stage, the thing that we are taught is in a manner acted, and set forth before
our eyes. Secondly, parables do not only by their plainess open the
understanding but they work upon the affections, and breed delight of hearing
by reason of that faceteness and wittiness which is many times found in them,
by reason of which they insinuate themselves, and creep into us, and ere we are
aware work that end for which they were delivered: who is not much moved with
that parable of Jotham in the book of Judges, that the trees went forth to
choose a king, or that of Menenius Agrippa in Livie, that the parts of the body
conspired against the belly, by which the one showed the wickedness of the men
of Sechem against the sons of Gideon, the other the folly of the common people
in conspiring against the Senators and noblemen. And no marvel beloved, if
this faceteness of parables does thus work with men, since it seems to have had
wonderful force with God himself. For when the Canaanitish woman in the Gospel
had long importuned our Savior in the behalf of her daughter, and our Savior
had answered her with that short cutting and reproachful parable; It is not
meet to take the childrens bread and cast it unto dogs, she facetely and
wittily retorts and turns upon our Savior his own parable. Truth Lord, says
she, yet dogs do eat the crumbs that fall from their masters Table: be it that I
am but a dog: I require no more then is due to a dog: even the crumbs that fall
from your table, with which speech our Savior was so far taken, as that he
seems to have been stricken into a wonderment: for he presently cries out, O
woman great is thy Faith. Thirdly, there is one thing that this way of
instruction by parable has above all other kinds of teaching. It serves
excellently for reproof; for man is a proud creature, impatient of plain and
open check and reprehension: (...): many times no way of dealing with him, when
he has offended, but by deceiving him with wiliness and craft, (...) (...): he
that comes rudely and plainly to reprehend, does many times more hurt then
good. I speak not this only in regard of ministerial reprehension, used by the
preacher of the word: but of all other: for to reprove offenders is a common
duty, and belongs to every private man as well as to the Minister. St. Austine
in his book de civitate Dei, handling the question, why in common calamities
the good do bear a part as well as the evil, amongst many other reasons gives
this as a special one, that good men are not careful enough in reproving the
errors of their offending brethren, but by connivency and silence in a manner
partake in their sins, and as it were by consent, make them their own. It shall
not be amiss therefore, even for you of the Laity to hear something concerning
this art of reprehension, as a duty concerning you as well as the Preacher. For
the wisdom and gentleness of a Christian is never better seen, then in
reproving. Now one common error of reprehenders is their over-blunt, and plain
manner of rebuking, dum sic objurgent quasi oderint, whilst they reprove the
vice, as if they hated the person, and upbraid rather then reprehend. By this
our importunity we destroy more sinners then we save. It is an excellent
observation in St. Chrysostom, (...) unseasonable and importunate reprehenders
make offending persons, depudere to steal their forehead, and to set a good
face upon their fact, as the phrase of the world is, and to seek out excuses
and Apologies for their sin. Tully tells us, that Antonie the Orator being to
defend a person, who was accused of faction and sedition, bent his wits to
maintain sedition was good, and not to be objected as a fault. That we force
not our offending Brethren unto this degree of impudency, let us consult with
our charity; and know the quality and nature of the offender. Husbandmen tell
us, that the young and tender branches of a Vine are not to be pruned away with
a knife, but gently pulled away by hand. Beloved, before we reprove, let us
know the condition of our brother, whether he be not like the young Vine soft
and tender, and so to be cured rather with the hand, then with the knife: and
if he be grown so hard, that he shall need the knife, we must not rashly
adventure of it, but know there is a skill likewise in using the knife; as Ehud
in the book of Judges, when he went to kill Eglon carries not his Dagger in his
hand, but comes unto him with a present, and had his Dagger girt privily under
his garment, or as a skilful Physician of whom we read, being to heal an
impostume, and finding the sick person to be afraid of Lancing, privily wrapped
up his knife in a sponge, with which whilst he gently smoothed the place, he
lanced it: so beloved, when we encounter our offending Brother, we must not
openly carry the Dagger in our hand, for this were to defy our Brother: but we
must wrap our knife in our sponge, and lance him whilst we smooth him: and
with all sweetness, and gentleness of behavior cure him; as Esaias the Prophet
cured Hezekias, by laying a plaster of Figs upon the sore. Men when they have
offended are like unto fire, we must take heed how we come too near them; and
therefore as the Cherubin in the book of Esays prophecy takes a cole from the
Altar with the tongs: so when the prophets dealt with them, they did not rudely
handle them with their hands; but they came upon them warily under parables, as
it were with the Cherubins tongs. How could Nathan have come so near unto King
David, and drawn from him an acknowledgement of his sin, had he not come with
the Cherubins tongs, and deceived him with a parable, or how should the prophet
made King Ahab see his error in letting go King Benhadad, if he had not as it
were put a trick upon the King, and disguised both himself and his speech, and
mask't his errand with the parable of him, who let go the prisoner that was
committed to his charge. So that in this respect, if we would define a parable
we must pronounce it to be Piam fraudem a civil or spiritual Stratagem, by
which persons who need instruction are honestly and piously beguiled for their
own profit. No marvel therefore, if our Savior Christ in his preaching does
every where drive upon parables. For being to deliver to us so many lessons, so
strange, so uncouth, so hard to learn, it was meet he should make choice of
that method of teaching, which has most likelihood to prevail and commend them
unto us. The doctrine which our Savior in my text labors to beat into us, is
the continuing and perpetuating of our prayer and religious meditation. A
lesson hard to be attained, and therefore thrice he commends it unto us; once
by example, twice by parable, both of them very effectual means to teach: by
example of that importunate Canaanitish woman in the 15. of Saint Matthew: by
parable first in the 11. of Luke, of him that lying warm in his bed, and loath
to rise, yet at his Friends importunity gets up, and lends him bread: and
secondly, by the parable of the unjust Judge here in my text.

But all this while I must not forget, that I am but in the (...) in the Porch,
and entrance into the Temple, where to walk too long, were, if not to loose,
yet to abuse my time. Let us now therefore enter into the temple it self, and
consider the main words of my text. That men ought always to pray, and not to
faint: which words have a double meaning. First, there is Sensus quem faciunt;
there is a sense which the words themselves yield as they lie. Secondly, Sensus
quo fiunt, the sense and meaning in which the Holy Ghost intended and spoke
them. If we look upon the sense which the words themselves do give; it seems we
are advised by them to be like Anna the Prophetess in the second of Luke, who
departed not from the temple, but served God with fasting and prayer night and
day. In all places, at all times, in season, out of season, upon occasion, upon
no occasion, perpetually without intermission to pray. For thus the words do
run, that we ought always to pray, and not to faint. But if we look upon the
sense in which the Holy Ghost Spoke these words, and consider what was his
intent, when he wrote them, we shall find that the lesson which we are hence
to learn is, that we be like unto Jacob in the book of Genesis, wrestle with
God, and tell him to his face, That we will not let him go till he has given
us his blessing. That we become like bold faced suitors or impudent beggars
that will not be put by with a denial: but when we have powered out our
supplications unto God, and find his ear locked up against us, yet to commence
them again and again, and the third time; yea, without any fainting or giving
over, till by a kind of importunate and unmannerly devotion we have
constrained God to let a blessing fall: and that this was the intent of the
Holy Ghost in this place, it appears upon the very reading of the parable. I
will briefly speak unto you of both these senses in their order, and first of
the sense which the words do give. That we ought always without intermission
to pray. Devotion in ordinary persons is a thing easily raised, and easily
alayed, Every strange event, every fear, every little calamity or distress is
enough to put us into a strain of religious meditation, but on the contrary
side a small matter does again as quickly kill it. It seems to be like a
quotidian Ague, it comes by fits, every day it takes us, and every day it
leaves us: or like flax or straw, or such light and dry stuff, which easily
kindles, and as soon goes out. Indeed it is a good thing when we find out
hearts thus tender, and upon every occasion ready to melt into devotion: for as
to be quick of sense is a sign of life, and the purest and best complexions
are quickest of sense: so it is a great argument of spiritual life in us, and
of purity of soul, when we are (...) so easily apt to fall upon devout
meditation. But our Savior requires yet another quality in our devotion: it
must be as lasting as it is quick. Quintilian advises his Orator to beware how
he stand too long upon a place of passion: because that passion is not lasting,
and nihil facilius lachrymis in arescit; and men cannot long weep. But beloved
our Savior gives other precepts of Christian Oratory: he wills, if we will
prevail with God to insist and dwell long upon a place of religious passion,
and provide that our tears may be perpetual and never dry: an hard thing you
will take it to be; yet certainly it is very possible. There is a question
raised among the great masters of Natural learning, whether or no there may be
a lamp so provided, that it may burn for ever. And they think it may be done:
beloved, our Savior here teaches to practice that in spirituals, which has
been but a matter of speculation in Naturals, even so to kindle and dress our
lamps, as that they shall never go out, but be like unto the good Huswifes
candle in the Proverbs, that goes not out by night, or rather like the sun
which shines for evermore. Daniel is said to have kindled this lamp, and to
have made his prayer thrice a day, David seven times a day, but this is not
enough; for in that the one is noted to have prayed seven times a day, the
other thrice: It is likely at other times they did not pray, but God is not
contented with this Intermittent prayer; for if we look upon my text, we shall
see that there must be no instant free from prayer: we must not measure our
prayers by number. Number is a Discrete quantity as we call it, the parts of it
are not connext, are not tied together, there is a separation, a distance
betwixt them. That that measures out our prayer must be line and length, some
continued quantity, whose parts have no separation, no intermission: For so
says my text, men ought always to pray. Always, the whole life of a man
ought to be but one continual prayer. But let us a little consider how possible
this is, and see if there be any thing, that does necessarily enforce
intermission of prayer. And first, that wonderful lamp of which I but now told
you great Scholars had spoken, is not yet made, because they are not agreed of
what matter to make it. And indeed in the world, things either are not at all,
or being, do at length cease to be, either because there is no fit matter
whence they may be framed, or else the matter of which they are made, vanishes
and dies. But beloved, prayer is a strange thing, it can never want matter: It
will be made (...) e quolibet out of any matter, upon any occasion whatsoever,
whatsoever you do, wheresoever you are, does minister occasion of some kind of
prayer, either of thanksgiving unto God for his goodness, or of praising, and
admiring his greatness, or of petitioning to him in case of want or distress,
or bewailing some sin or neglect committed. Is it the consideration of Gods
benefits, that will move us to thankfulness? Then certainly our thankfulness
ought to be perpetual, there is no person so mean, no soul so poor, and
distressed and miserable, but if he search narrowly, he shall find some
blessing, for which he ows thankfulness unto God. If nothing else, yet his very
misery and distress is a singular blessing, if he use it to that end for which
it was sent. Is it the consideration of distress and affliction, and some
degree of the curse of God upon us that will stir our devotion? Indeed this is
it with most men that kindles the fire of prayer in our hearts. Men for the
most part are like unto the unslak't Lime, which never heats till you throw
water upon it; so they never grow warm in devotion till somewhat contrary to
their wishes and disposition begins to afflict them: then certainly our
petitions to God ought never to cease. For never was there man in any moment of
his life entirely happy, either in body, goods, or good name, every man has
some part of affliction? Blessing and cursing, though they seem to be enemies,
and contrary one to another, yet are never severed, but go hand in hand
together. Some men have more of one, some of another, but there is no man but
has some part of both; wherefore as it seems not only prayer in general, but
all kind, all sort of prayer ought to be continual. Prayer must not be, as it
were of one thread, we must blend and temper together all kind of prayer, our
praise or thanks, our sorrow, and make our prayer like Joseph's particolored
Coat, like a beautiful garment of sundry colors. So then as fire goes not out
so long as it has matter to feed on, so what shall be able to interrupt our
devotion which has so great and everlasting store of matter to continue it.

Secondly, many things in the world are necessarily intermitted, because they
are tied to place or times; all places all times are not convenient for them;
but in case of prayer it is otherwise, it seeks no place, it attends no time;
It is not necessary we should come to the Church, or expect a Sabbath or an
holy day, for prayer indeed especially was the Sabbath ordained, yet prayer it
self is Sabboathless, and admits no rest, no intermission at all: If our hands
be clean we must as our Apostle commands us lift them up every where at all
times and make every place a Church, every day a Sabbath, every hour
Canonical, (...): As you go to the market, as you stand in the streets, as you
walk in the fields in all these places ye may pray as well and with as good
acceptance as in the Church, For you your selves are temples of the holy Ghost,
if the grace of God be in you more precious then any of those which are made
with hands; The Church of Rome has made a part of her Breviary, or Common
Prayer Book, which she calls Itinerarium Clericorum, and it is a set form of
prayer, which Clergymen ought to use when they set out in a journey and are
upon their way, why she calls it Itinerarium Clericorum, and impropriates it
unto the Clergy, I know not, she might, for ought I see, have called it
Itinerarium Laicorum. The Itinerary of the Laity: since it is a duty belonging
unto them as well as to the Minister. Yet thus much the example of that Church
teaches, that no place no occasion excludes Prayer. We read in our books that
one of the Ethnic Emperors was much taken when he saw a woman going in the
streets with her vessel of water on her head, her child at her girdle, her
spindle in her hand twisting her thread as she went: He thought it a wonderful
portion of diligence thus to employ all places and times indifferently. Beloved
if it be thus with bodily labor, how much more should it be so with the labor
of the soul, which is far more easy and needs not the help of any bodily
instrument to act it. And how welcome a spectacle will it be think you unto the
great King of Heaven and Earth when he shall see that no time, no occasion, is
able to interrupt the labor of our devotion? Is it the time of Feasting and
Jollity, which seems to prescribe against prayer: Indeed prayer is a grave and
sober action and seems not to stand with sport and merriment; yet
notwithstanding it is of so pliable a nature, that it will accommodate and fit
it self even to feasts and sportings; we read in the book of Daniel that when
Belshazzer made his great and last feast to his Princes and Lords that they
were merry and drank wine in bowls and praised the Gods of Gold and Silver, of
Brass, and of Iron, of Wood, and of Stone. Beloved, shall Ethnic feasts find
room for their Idolatrous worship, and praise of their Golden, Brazen, Wooden
Gods, and shall not our Christian Feasts yield some place for the praise of the
true God of Heaven and Earth. Last of all is it time of sleep that seems to
give a vacation, and otium to prayer? Beloved, sleep is no part of our life, we
are not accountable for things done or not done then. Tertullian tells us that
an unclean dream shall no more condemn us then a dream of Martyrdom shall crown
us: and the Casuists do teach that loose dreams in the night shall never be
laid to our charge if they be not occasioned by lewd thoughts in the day: for
they are Cogitationes injectae non enatae, they are not thoughts springing out,
but cast into our hearts by the Devil, upon his score shall they go and we
shall not reckon for them: So then though sleep partake not of our devotion,
yet this hinders not the continualness of it. Aristotle tells us that men who
sleep perceive not any part of time to have passed; because they tie the last
moment of their watching with the first moment of their awaking, as having no
sense of what past betwixt, and so account of it, as one continued time.
Beloved, if we do with our devotion, as we do with our time, if we shut up the
last instant of our watching with a prayer, and resume that prayer at the first
instant of our waking, we have made it one continued prayer: without
interruption.

Thirdly, and last of all the greatest reason why many businesses of the world
cannot be acted perpetually, is because they must give room to others, Unicum
arbustum non alit duos Erithacos: The actions of the world are many times like
unto quarrelsome birds, two of them cannot peaceably dwell in one bush. But
prayer has that property which Aristotle gives unto substance nulli esse
contrarium, it is at peace and holds good terms with all our cares of the
world. No business so great, or that so much takes up the time and mind of a
man as that it needs exclude prayer: It is of a soft and sociable nature, and
it can incorporate and sink into our business like water into Ashes and never
increase the bulk of them: It can mix and interweave it self with all our cares
without any hinderance unto them: Nay, it is a great strength and improvement
unto them, (...) (...) etc. For says S. Chrysostom as they that build houses
of clay, must every where place studs and pieces of timber and wood so to
strengthen the building, (...) (...) so all our cares of this life, which are
no better then buildings of dirt and clay we must strengthen and compact
together with frequent and often prayer, as with bonds and props of timber; Let
no man therefore think it, (...) that it is too much to require at the hands of
men at one and the self same instant both to attend their vocation and their
prayer: For the mind of a man is a very agile and nimble substance, and it is
a wonderful thing to see how many things it will at one moment apply it self
unto without any confusion or let. Look but upon the Musician while he is in
his practice, he tunes his voice, fingers his Instrument, reads his dity marks
the note, observes the the time, all these things simul and semel at one and
the same instant without any distraction or impediment: Thus should men do in
case of devotion and in the common acts of our vocation let prayer bear a
part: For prayer added unto diligent labor is like a sweet voice to a well
tuned Instrument and makes a pleasing harmony in the ears of God, (...) (...)
(...); The good Huswife says St. Chrysostom, as she sits at her distaffe, and
reaches out her hand to the flax, may even then lift up, if not her eyes, yet
her mind unto Heaven, and consecrate and hallow her work with earnest prayer
unto God. Arator stivam tenens Hallelujah secantat, sudans messor Psalmis sese
evocat and curva attondens falce vites vinitor aliquid Davidicum canit. The
Husbandman (says St. Hierome) at the Plough-tail may sing an Hallelujah, the
sweating Harvest-man may refresh himself with a Psalm, the Gardener whilst he
prunes his Vines and Arbors, may record some one of David's sonnets. The reason
of this pliable nature of prayer is, because it is a thing of another
condition, then the acts of the world are. It requires no outward labor of the
body, no outward fashion and manner of doing, but is internally acted in the
soul it self, and leaves the outward members of our bodies free to perform
those offices which require their help. Our legal business in the world must be
done in certain forms of breves and writs, and I know not what variety of
outward ceremony, or else it is not warrantable. But prayer, beloved, is not
like an obligation or indenture, it requires no outward solemnity of words and
ceremony. Quaint, witty, and set forms of prayer proceed many times from
ostentation more then devotion: for any thing I know, it requires not so much
as the moving of the lips or tongue. Nay, one thing I know more, that the most
forcible prayer transcends and far exceeds all power of words. For St. Paul
speaking unto us concerning the most effectual kind of prayer, calls it (...)
sighs and groans that cannot be expressed. Nothing does cry so loud in the
ears of God, as the sighing of a contrite and earnest heart, we read in the 14.
of Exodus, that God speaks unto Moses, why cryest thou unto me, command the
children of Israel that they go forward: yet there appears not in the text any
prayer that Moses made, or word that he spoke. It was the earnestness of Moses
heart, that was so (...) that did so sound in the ears of the Lord. Wherefore
true prayer has no commerce with the outward members of the body, (...) (...)
(...); for it requires not the voice, but the mind, not the stretching of the
hands, but the intension of the soul; not any outward shape or carriage of
body, but the inward behavior of the understanding^^ how then can it slacken
your worldly business and occasions, to mix with them sighs and groans, which
are the most effectual kinds of prayer. And let this suffice concerning the
first meaning of the words; I will briefly speak concerning the second meaning
which I told you was the sense intended by the Holy Ghost when he wrote, and it
is an exhortation to a religious importunity in our prayers: not to let our
suits fall, because they are not presently granted, but never to leave
soliciting, till we have prevailed, and so take the blessings of God by
violence, Gratissima vis. This force, this violence is a thing most welcome
unto God; for if the importunity of Esau's false, feigned, and malicious tears
drew a blessing from his Father Isaac, who yet had no greater store of
blessings, as it seems, how much more shall the true religious importunity of
zealous prayer pull a blessing out of the hands of God, who is rich in
blessings above the sands of the Sea in multitude? It is the Courtiers rule,
that over modest suitors seldom speed. Beloved, we must follow the same rule
in the Court of Heaven: intempestive bashfulness gets nothing there. Qui timide
rogat, docet negare, Faint asking does invite a denial; will you know the true
name of the behavior which prevails with God; St. Luke in his 11. Chapter
calls it (...) and St. Chrysostom speaking of the behavior of the Canaanitish
woman in the 25. of St. Matthew tells us, (...) (...) improbity, importunity,
impudency, these be the names of that person and behavior, which you must put
on, if you mean to prevail in your suits with God. And indeed, if we consider
that habit and manner, that God is wont to put on, when his children do become
suitors unto him, how he puts on a rigid, rough and untractable carriage, even
toward his dearest children, even then when he means them most good, we shall
plainly see, we must use such kind of behavior,if we will prevail with him,
for the more effectually to express this demeanor of God toward his children,
and to assure us it is so, and to teach us importunity, our Savior Christ,
that great Master of requests, may seem to have done himself some wrong; first,
by drawing in a manner odious comparisons, and likening the behavior of God in
these cases to a slothful friend, that is loath to leave his warm bed, to do
his friend a pleasure, and here in my text to an unjust Judge, that fears
neither God nor man; and secondly, by his own behavior toward the Canaanitish
woman. It is strange to observe, how though he were the meekest person that
ever was upon earth, yet here he strives as it were to unnaturalize himself,
and lay by his natural sweetness of disposition, almost to forget common
humanity, and puts on a kind of sullen, and surly person of purpose to deter
her: you shall not find our Savior in all the New Testament in such a mood,
so bent to contemn and vilify a poor suitor. St. Austine comparing together
St. Matthew and Mark, who both of them record the same story, and gathering
together the circumstances out of them both, tells us, that first she follows
our Savior in the street, and that our Savior takes house as it were to
shelter himself from her, but she comes after, and throws her self at his feet:
and he as offended with her importunity, again quits the house to be rid of
her, and all this while deigns her not a word. If any behavior could have
dashed a suit, and broken the heart of a poor suitor, this had been enough, but
here is not all, we have a civil precept, that if we be not disposed to pleasure
a suitor, yet to give him good words and shape him a gentle answer, it is hard
if we cannot afford a suitor a gentle wo^^. We read of Tiberius the Emperor,
(as I remember) that he would never suffer any man to go sad and discontented
from him, yet our Savior seems to have forgot this part of civility, being
importuned to answer her, gives her an answer worse then silence, and speaks
words like the piercing of a sword, as Solomon speaks. I may not take the
childrens bread and cast it unto dogs. And yet after all this strange copy of
countenance, he fully subscribes to her request. Beloved, God has not only
expressed thus much in parables, and practiced these strange delays upon
Canaanitish women, but he has acted it indeed, and that upon his dearest
Saints. David one of the worthiest of his Saints, yet how passionately does he
cry out, How long Lord will thou forget me? How long shall I seek counsel in my
soul and be so vexed in my heart. Not only the Saints on earth, but even those
in heaven do seem to partake in this demeanor of God, we read in the book of
the Revelation that when the souls of the Martyrs under the Altar cried out,
how long Lord just and holy do thou not avenge our blood from off the earth;
they received this answer, have patience yet a little while. It is storyed of
Diogenes, that he was wont to supplicate to the statues, and to hold out his
hands and beg of them, that so he might learn to brook and devour denial, and
tediousness of suit. Beloved, let us but meditate upon these examples, which I
have related, and we shall not need to practice any of the Cynics art. For if
the Saints and blessed Martyrs have their suites so long depending in the
Courts of Heaven then good reason that we should learn to brook delays, and arm
our selves with patience and expectation, when we find the ears of God not so
open to our requests. When Joseph's brethren came down to buy corn, he gave them
but a course welcome he spoke roughly unto them, he laid them in prison; yet
the text tells us that his bowels melted upon them and at length he opened
himself, and gave them courteous entertainment. Beloved, when we come unto God
as it were to buy corn, to beg at his hands such blessings as we need though he
speak roughly, though he deal more roughly with us, yet let us know he has
still Joseph's bowels, that his heart melts toward us, and at length he will
open himself, and entertain us lovingly. And be it p^^dventure that we gain not
what we look for: yet our labor of prayer is not lost. The blessed souls under
the Altar of which I spoke but now, though their petition was not granted, yet
had they long white garments given them. Even so, beloved, if the wisdom of God
shall not think it fit to perform our requests, yet he will give us the long
white garment; something which shall be in liev of a Suit; though nothing else,
yet patience and contentment which are the greatest blessings upon earth.

FINIS.
John 18. 36. Jesus answered, my Kingdom is not of this world: If my Kingdom
were of this world, then would my servants fight, that I should not be
delivered to the Jews, etc.
AS in the Kingdoms of the world, there is an art of Courtship, a skill and
mystery teaching to manage them: so in the spiritual Kingdom of God, and of
Christ, there is an holy policy; there is an art of spiritual Courtship, which
teaches every subject there, how to demean and bear himself. But, as betwixt
their Kingdoms, so betwixt their arts and Courtship, betwixt the Courtier of
the one, and the Courtier of the other, there is, as Abraham tells the rich man
in St. Luke, (...) a great distance, a great difference, and not only one, but
many. Sundry of them I shall have occasion to touch in the process of my
discourse; mean while I will single out one, which I will use as a prologue,
and way unto my text. In the Kingdoms of earthly Princes, every subject is not
fit to make a Courtier; yea, were all fit, this were an honor to be
communicated only unto some: Sic opus est mundo. There is a necessity of
disproportion and inequality between men and men: and were all persons equal
the world could not consist: Of men of ordinary fashion and parts some must to
the Plough, some to their Merchandise, some to their Books, some to one Trade
some to anothe^^: only (...) as Aristotle calls them, men of more then common
wit and ability, active, choice, picked out of a thousand, such must they be
that bear honors, attend on Princes persons, and serve in their Courts. The
Scripture tells us that when King Solomon saw that Jeroboam was an active,
able, and industrious young man, he took him and made him ruler over all the
charge of the house of Joseph. Again, when David invited old Barzillai to the
Court, the good old man excuses himself: I am, says he, fourscore years of
Age, and can thy servant taste what I eat, or what I drink: can I hear any more
the voice of singing men and singing women: Lo here my son Chimham, he shall go
with my Lord the King, and do with him as shall seem good in thine eyes.
Jeroboam and Chimham, strong and able, and active persons such are they that
dwell in Kings houses: of the rest some are too old, some too young, some too
dull, some too rude, or by some means or other unfit for such an end. Thus
fares it with the honors of the world, they seem to participate of envy, or
melancholy, and are of a solitary disposition they are brightest when they are
alone, or but in few make them common and they loose their grace, like lamps
they may give light unto few, or to some one room, but no farther. But the
honors in the Court of the great King of Heaven, ore of another nature, they
rejoice in being communicated, and their glory is in the multitude of those
that do partake in them. They are like unto the Sun that rises non homini sed
humano generi: no^^ to this or that man, but to all the world; In the Court of
God no difference between Jeroboam and Barzillai, none too old, none too young:
no indisposition, no imperfection, makes you incapable of honors there; Be but
of his Kingdom, and you are necessarily of his Court: Every man who is a
subject there, is a Courtier; yea, more then a Courtier, he is a Peer, he is a
King, and has an army of Angels at his service to pitch their tents about him,
to deliver him; a guard of Ministering Spirits sent out to attend him for his
safety. It shall not therefore be unseasonable for the meanest person that
hears me this day to hear as it were a Lecture of Spiritual policy and
Courtship: For no Auditory can be unfit for such a lesson. Aristotle was wont
to divide his lectures and readings into Acroamatical, and Exoterical, some of
them contained only choice matter, and they were read privately to a Select
Auditory: others contained but ordinary stuff and were promiscuously and in
public exposed to the hearing of all that would; Beloved we read no
Acroamatick Lectures: The secrets of the Court of Heaven (as far as it has
pleased the King of Heaven to reveal them) lie open alike to all. Every man is
alike of his Court, alike of his Council: and the meanest among Christians must
not take it to be a thing without his Sphere, above his reach, but must make
account of himself as a fit hearer of a lesson in Spiritual and saving policy;
since if he be a subject in the kingdom of Christ, he can be no less then a
Courtier.

Now the first and main lesson to be learned by a Courtier, is how to discover
and know the disposition, and nature of the Lord, whom he is to serve, and the
quality of that Commonwealth in which he bears a place, ad consilium de
republica dandum caput est. That therefore our heavenly Courtier may not
mistake himself, but be able to fit himself to the place he bears. I have made
choice of these few words, which but now I read; words spoken by the King of
that Commonwealth of which I am to treat, unto such as mean to be his
Liege-men there: words which sufficiently open unto the Christian politician
the state and quality of that Court in which he is to serve: My kingdom is not
of this world, for if at were then would my servants fight; which words seem
like the Parthian horsemen, whose manner was to ride one way, but to shoot
another way, they seem to go apace toward Pilate, but they aim and shot at
another mark, or rather like unto the speaker of them unto our Savior himself
when he was in one of the Villages of Samaria, Luke the ninth, where the text
notes that though he were in Samaria, yet his face was set toward Jerusalem:
so beloved, though these words be spoken to a Samaritane to an infidel to
Pilate, yet their face is toward Jerusalem, they are a lesson directed to the
subjects of his Spiritual Kingdom of that Jerusalem which is from above and is
the Mother of us all. In them we may consider two General parts. First, a
Denuntiation and message unto us; and Secondly, a sign to confirm the truth
of it. For it is the manner and method as it were which God does use, when he
dispatches a message, to annex a sign unto it, by which it may be known. When
he sent Moses to the Israelites in Egypt, and Moses required a sign, he gave
him a sign in his hand, in his Rod; when he sent Gideon against Madian he gave
him a sign in the Fleece of Wool which was upon the Floor; when he sent the
Prophet to Hieroboam to prophecy against the Altar in Bethel, he gave him a
sign that the Altar should rend, and the ashes fall out, when he sent Esaias
with a message to King Ahaz, he gave him a sign; Behold a Virgin shall
conceive: So Beloved in these words, There is a Message, There is a Sign: The
first words are the Message; My Kingdom is not of this world, etc. The next
words, For if it were then would my servants fight, etc. These are Moses rod
and Gideons Fleece they are the sign which confirm the Message. The first part
is a general proposition or Maxim: the second is an example, and particular
instance of it. For in the first our Savior distinguishes his Kingdom from
the kingdoms of the world, and from all the fashions of them. In the second,
amongst many other he chooses one instance, Wherein particularly he notes, that
his Kingdom is unlike to earthly kingdoms. For the kingdoms of the world are
purchased and maintained by violence and blood, but so is not his. The reason
why our Savior fastens upon this reason of dissimilitude and unlikeness is,
because in gaining and upholding temporal Kingdoms, nothing so usual as the
sword and war. No Kingdom of the world, but by the sword is either gotten or
held, or both. The sword in a secular common wealth is like the rod in a
School, remove that away and men will take their liberty. It is the plea which
the Tarquins used to King Porsenna in Livie. Satis libertatem ipsam habere
dulcedinis, nisi quanta vi civitates eam expetant tanta regna reges defendant,
aequare summa infimis adesse finem regnis rei inter Deos hominesque
pulcherrimae. The taste of liberty is so sweet, that except Kings maintain
their authority with as great violence, as the people affect their liberty, all
things will run to confusion; and Kingdoms which are the goodliest things in
the world, will quickly go to wrack: when God gave a temporal Kingdom unto his
own people, he sent Moses and Joshua before them to purchase it with the sword,
when they were possessed of this Kingdom, he sends then Gideon and Sampson, and
David, and many worthies more to maintain it by the sword. But now being to
open unto the world another kind of Kingdom, of rule and government, then
hitherto it had been acquainted with: he tells us, that he is a King of a
Kingdom which is erected and maintained not by Joshua and David, but by Peter
and Paul, not by the sword, but by the spirit, not by violence, but by love,
not by striving, but by yielding, not by fighting, but by dying. Pilate had
heard, that he was a King. It was the accusation which was framed against him,
that he bare himself as King of the Jews; But because, he saw no pomp, no
train, no guard about him, he took it but as an idle report. To put him
therefore out of doubt, our Savior assures him, that he is a King, but of such
a Kingdom as he could not skill of: My Kingdom is not of this world, etc. For
the better unfolding of which words; first we will consider what the meaning of
this word Kingdom is, for there lies an ambiguity in it. Secondly we will
consider what lessons for our instruction the next words will yield, Not of
this world; first of this word Kingdom.

Our Savior is a King three manner of ways, and so correlatively has three
distinct several Kingdoms. He is first a King in the largest extent and
meaning which can possibly be imagined, and that is, as he is Creator and
absolute Lord of all creatures. Of this Kingdom, Heaven, Earth, and Hell are
three large provinces. Angels, Men, and Devils, his very enemies, every
creature visible and invisible are subjects of this Kingdom. The glory and
strength of this Kingdom consists least of all in men, and man is the weakest
part of it. For there is scarcely a creature in the world, by whom he has not
been conquered. When Alexander the great had traveled through India, and
overrun many large provinces, and conquered many popular Cities; when tidings
came, that his Soldiers in Greece had taken some small towns there, he scorned
the news, and in contempt, me thinks (said he) I hear of the battle of Frogs
and mice. Beloved, if we look upon these huge armies of creatures, and consider
of what wonderful strength they are, when the Lord summons them to battle: all
the armies of men, and famous battles, of which we have so large histories in
the comparison of these what are they, but a (...) but Homers tale, a battle of
Frogs and Mice. Infinite legions of Angels attend him in Heaven, and every
Angel is an Army: one Angel in the Book of Kings is sent out against the army
of the Assyrians, and in one night foure-score thousand persons die for it.
Base and contemptible creatures, when God calls for them, are of strength to
conquer whole Countries. He over-runs Egypt with his armies of Frogs, and
Flies, and Lice, and before his own people with an army of Hornets chases the
Canaanites out of the Land. Nay, the dull and senseless elements, are up in
arms when God summons them. He shoots his Hail-shot; with his Hailstones from
Heaven he destroys more of the Canaanites, then the Israelites can with their
swords. As for his armies of fire and water, what power is able to withstand
them; every creature, when God calls, is a soldier. How great then is the glory
of this Kingdom of which the meanest parts are invincible. Secondly, again our
Savior is a King in a more restrained and confined sense, as he is in Heaven
attended on by Angels, and Archangels, powers, principalities, and all the
heavenly hosts. For though he be omnipresent and fills every place both in
Heaven and Earth; yet Heaven is the Palace and Throne of this Kingdom, there
is he better seen and known, there with more state and honor served, and
therefore more properly is his Kingdom said to be there. And this is called
his Kingdom of glory. The rules, and laws, and admirable orders of which
Kingdom, could we come to see and discover, it would be with us, as it was
with the Queen of Saba, when she came to visit Solomon, of whom the Scripture
notes; that when she heard his wisdom, and had seen the order of his servants,
the attendance that was given him, and the manner of his table. There was no
more Spirit left in her. Beloved, Dum Spiritus hos regit artus. Whilst this
Spirit is in us, we cannot possibly come to discern the laws and orders of this
Kingdom, and therefore I am constrained to be silent.

Thirdly, our Savior is a King in a sense, yet more impropriated. For as he
took our nature upon him, as he came into the world to redeem mankind, and to
conquer Hell and death, so is there a Kingdom annexed unto him; A Kingdom, the
purchase whereof cost him much sweat and blood, of which neither Angels, nor
any other creature are a part, only that remnant of mankind, that Ereptus
titio. That number of blessed Souls, which like a brand out of the fire, by his
death and passion he has recovered out of the power of sin; and all these
alone are the subjects of that Kingdom. And this is that, which is called his
Kingdom of Grace, and which himself in Scripture every where calls his Church,
his Spouse, his Body, his Flock: and this is that Kingdom, which in this place
is spoken of, and of which our Savior tells Pilate. That it is not of this
world; My Kingdom is not of this world.

Which words at the first reading, may seem to savor of a little imperfection;
for they are nothing else but a Negation or denial. Now our Books teach us,
that a Negative makes nothing known; for we know things by discovering not what
they are not, but what they are: yet when we have well examined them, we shall
find that there could not have been a speech delivered more effectual for the
opening the nature of the Church, and the discovery of men's errors in that
respect. For I know no error so common, so frequent, so hardly to be rooted
out, so much hindering the knowledge of the true nature of the Church, as this,
that men do take the Church to be like unto the world. Tully tells us of a
Musician, that being asked what the Soul was, answered, that it was Harmony,
et is (says he) a principiis artis suae non recescit. He knew not how to leave
the principles of his own art. Again Plato's Scholars had been altogether bred
up in Arithmetic, and the knowledge of numbers, and hence it came, that when
afterward they diverted their studies to the knowledge of Nature, or Moral
Philosophy; wheresoever they walked, they still feined to themselves some what
like unto Numbers: the world they supposed was framed out of numbers, Cities,
and Kingdoms, and Commonwealths they thought stood by numbers, Number with
them, was sole principle and creator of every thing. Beloved, when we come to
learn the quality and state of Christ's Kingdom, it fares much with us, as it
does with Tullies Musician, or Plato's Scholars, difficulter a principiis
artis nostrae recedimus. Hardly can we forsake those principles, in which we
have been brought up. In the world we are born, in it we are bred, the world is
the greatest part of our study, to the true knowledge of God and of Christ,
still we fancy unto us something of the world. It may seem but a light thing
that I shall say, yet because it seems fitly to open my meaning, I will not
refrain to speak it: Lucian, when Priams young son was taken up into heaven,
brings him in calling for milk and cheese, and such country cates as he was
wont to eat on earth. Beloved, when we first come to the Table of God, to
heavenly Manna and Angels food, it is much with us, as it was with Priams young
son, when he came first into Heaven, we cannot forget the milk and cheese, and
the gross diet of the world. Our Savior and his blessed Apostles had great and
often experience of this error in men; when our Savior preached to Nicodemus
the doctrine of regeneration, and new birth, how does he still harp upon a
gross conceit of a re-entry to be made into his mothers womb. When he preached
unto the Samaritane women concerning the water of life, how hardly is she
driven from thinking of a material Elementary water, such as was in Jacobs
well. When Simon Magus in the Acts saw, that by laying on of hands, the
Apostles gave the Holy Ghost, he offers them money to purchase himself the like
power. He had been trafficking, and merchandising in the world, and saw what
authority, what a Kingdom money had amongst men: he therefore presently
conceited coelum venale Deumque: that God and Heaven, and all would be had for
money. To teach therefore the young Courtier in the Court of Heaven that he
commit no such Solecisms, that hereafter he speak the true Language, and
dialect of God, our Savior sets down this as a principal rule in our Spiritual
Grammar: That his Court is not of this world; Nay, beloved not only the young
Courtier, but many of the old servants in the Court of Christ are stained with
this error. It is storied of Leonides which was Schoolmaster to Alexander the
great, that he infected his nonage with some vices, quae robustum quoque and
jam maximum regem ab illa institutione puerili sunt prosecuta, which followed
him then, when he was at man's estate. Beloved the world has been a long time a
Schoolmaster unto us, and has stained our nonage with some of these spots
which appear in us, even then when we are strong men in Christ. When our
Savior in the Acts after his Resurrection was discoursing to his Disciples
concerning the kingdom of God, they presently brake forth into this question,
Will thou now restore the kingdom unto Israel? Certainly this question betrays
their ignorance, their thoughts still ran upon a kingdom like unto the kingdoms
of the world, notwithstanding they had so long, and so often heard our Savior
to the contrary, Our Savior therefore shortly takes them up; Non est vestrum,
your question is nothing to the purpose; the kingdom that I have spoken of is
another manner of kingdom then you conceive. Sixteen hundred years, Et quod
Excurrit, has the Gospel been preached unto the world, and is this stain
spunged out yet; I doubt it, whence arise those novel and late disputes, de
notis Ecclesiae, of the notes and visibility of the Church, Is it not from
hence that they of Rome take the world and the Church to be like Mercury and
Sosia in Plautus his comaedies so like one another that one of them must wear a
toy in his cap, that so the spectators may distinguish them; whence comes it
that they stand so much upon State and Ceremony in the Church? Is it not from
hence that they think the Church must come in like Agrippa and Bernice in the
Acts, (...) as S. Luke speaks with a great deal of pomp, and train and show,
and vanity, and that the service of God does necessarily require this noise,
and tumult of outward State and Ceremony. Whence comes it that We are at our
wits ends, when we see persecution, and sword, and fire to rage against the
true professors of the Gospel? Is it not because, as these bring ruin and
desolation upon the kingdoms of the world; so we suppose they work no other
effect in the kingdom of Christ? all these conceits and many more of the like
nature spring out of no other fountain, then that old inveterate error which is
so hardly wiped out of our hearts; that the State of the Church and Kingdom of
Christ does hold some proportion? Some likeness with the state and managing of
temporal kingdoms; wherefore to pluck out of our hearts, Opinionem tam insitam,
tam vetustam, a conceit so ancient, so deeply rooted in us, our Savior spoke
most excellently, most pertinently, and most fully when he tells us that his
Church, that his Kingdom is not of this world.

In which words of his, there is contained the true art of discovering and
knowing the true nature and essence of the Church. For as they which make
Statues, cut and pare away all superfluities of the matter upon which they
work, so our Savior to show us the true proportion and feature of the Church,
prunes away the world and all superfluous excrescencies, and sends her to be
seen as he did our first Parents in Paradise, stark naked; As those Elders in
the Apocryphal story of Susanna, when they would see her beauty, commanded to
take of her mask: so he that longs to see the beauty of the Church, must pull
of that mask of the world and outward show. For as Juda in the book of Genesis
when Thamar sat veiled by the way side, knew not his daughter from an whore:
so whilst the Church, the daughter and spouse of Christ sits veiled with the
world and pomp, and show, it will be an hard matter to discern her from an
harlot; But yet further to make the difference betwixt these kingdoms the more
plainly to appear, and the better to fix it in your memories, I will briefly
touch some of these heads in which they are most notoriously differenced.

The first head wherein the difference is seen, are the persons and subjects of
this kingdom; For as the Kingdom of Christ is not of this world, so the
subjects of this Kingdom are men of another world, and not of this: Every one
of us bears a double person, and accordingly is the subject of a double
Kingdom. The holy Ghost by the Psalmist divides heaven and earth betwixt God
and man, and tells us as for God, he is in heaven, but the earth has he given
to the children of men: So has the same spirit by the Apostle Saint Paul
divided every one of our persons into heaven and earth into an outward and
earthly man, and into an inward and heavenly man: This earth, that is, this
body of clay has he given to the sons of men, to the Princes under whose
government we live, but heaven that is the inward and spiritual man has he
reserved unto himself; They can restrain the outward man, and moderate our
outward actions, by edicts and laws, they can tie our hands and our tongues --
Illa se jac^^et in aula AEolus. Thus far they can go, and when they are gone
thus far, they can go no farther. But to rule the inward man in our hearts, and
souls, to set up an Imperial throne in our understandings, and wills, this part
of our government belongs to God and to Christ; These are the subjects, this
the government of his Kingdom, men may be Kings of Earth, and bodies; But
Christ alone is the King of Spirits and Souls: Yet this inward government has
influence upon our outward actions: For the Authority of Kings over our outward
man is not so absolute, but that it suffers a great restraint; It must stretch
no further then the Prince of our inward man pleases: for if secular Princes
stretch out the skirts of their Authority to command ought by which our souls
are prejudiced, the King of Souls has in this case given us a greater command,
That we rather obey God then men.

The second head wherein the difference betwixt these Kingdoms is seen is in
their laws; For as the kingdoms and the lawgivers so are their laws very
different: First, in their Authors, the laws by which the Commonwealth of Rome
was anciently governed, were the works of many hands, some of them were
Plebiscita the the acts of the people, others were Senatus-consulta the decrees
of the Senate, others Edicta Praetorum, the verdict of their Judges, others
Responsa Prudentum the opinions of Wisemen in cases of doubt. Others Rescripta
Imperatorum, the Rescripts and answers of their Emperors, when they were
consulted with; But in the kingdom of Christ there are no Plebiscita or
Senatus-consulta, no people, no Senate, nor wisemen, nor Judges, had any hand
in the laws by which it is governed. Only Rescripta Imperatoris the Rescripts
and Writs of our King run here, these alone are the Laws to which the Subjects
of this Kingdom owe obedience. Again, the Laws of both these kingdoms differ in
regard of their quality and nature; For the laws of the Kingdom of Christ are
Eternal, Substantial, Indispensable, but Laws made by humane authority, are but
light, superficial and temporary. For all the humane authority in the world can
never enact one eternal and fundamental Law. Let all the Laws which men have
made be laid together, and you shall see that they were made but upon occasion,
and circumstance either of time, or place, or persons in matters of themselves
indifferent, and therefore either by discontinuance they either fell or ceased
of themselves, or by reason of alteration of occasion and circumstance were
necessarily revoked; Those main fundamental Laws upon which all the Kingdoms of
the world do stand, against theft, against murder, against adultery,
dishonouring of Parents or the like, they were never brought forth by man,
neither were they the effects of any Parliamentary Sessions; they were written
in our souls from the beginning, long before there was any authority Regal
extant among men. The intent of him who first enacted them was not to found a
temporal, but to bring men to an eternal Kingdom: and so far forth as they are
used for the maintaining of outward state they are usurped, or at the best but
borrowed, So that in this work of settling even the Kingdoms of this world, if
we compare the Laws of God with the Laws of men we shall find that God has as
it were founded the palaces and castles, and strength of them, but men have
like little children built houses of clay, and dirt which every blast of wind
overturns.

The third head by which they may be seen is in the notes and marks, by which
they may be known: For the Kingdoms of the world are confined, their place is
known their subjects are discernable, they have badges and tokens, and Arms by
which they are discovered; But the Church has no such notes, and marks, no
Herald has as yet been sound that could blazon the arms of that Kingdom.
AEsculus the Poet in his (...) describing the captains, that came either for
the siege or defense of the City of Thebes in Be^^tia brings them in, in their
order every one with his shield, and upon his shield some device, and over that
device a Motto or word according to the usual fancies of men in that kind; but
when he comes to Amphiraus, he notes of him that he had no device in his
shield, no impress or word, and he gives the reason of it; because he affected
not show, but to be that which others professed. But to carry marks and notes and
devices, may well beseem the world which is led by fancy and show; but the
Church is like Amphiarus, she has no device, no word in her shield, mark and
essence with her are all one, and she has no other note but to be. And but
that learned men must have something to busy their wits withal these large
discourses de notis Ecclesiae, of the notes and marks by which we may know the
Church might very well lie by as containing nothing else but doctas ineptias,
Laborious vanities, and learned impertinences. For the Church is not a thing
that can be pointed out: The Devil could show our Savior Christ all the
kingdoms of the earth and the glory of them, I hope the Church was none of
these; It is the glory of it not to be seen, and the note of it to be
invisible; when we call any visible company of professors a Church it is but a
word of courtesy. Out of charity we hope men to be that which they do profess,
and therefore we so speak as if they were indeed that, whose name they bear,
where and who they are that make up this kingdom, is a question unfit for any
man to move: For the Lord only knows who are his. It is but popish madness to
send men up and down the world to find the Church; It is like unto the
Children of the Prophets in the second of Kings, that would needs seek Elias or
like the nobles in Jerusalem, that would needs go seek Jeremie the Prophet,
but could not find him, because the Lord had hid him: For in regard of the
profession; The Church (as our Savior speaks) is like a City set upon an hill,
you may quickly see and know what true Christianity is, But in regard of the
persons the Kingdom of Heaven is, as our Savior again tells us like a treasure
hidden in a field. Except the place of their abode, and their persons were
discernable, who can tell, we go thus to seek them, whether we do not like
false hounds hunt Counter (as the hunters phrase is) and so go from the game,
when Saul went to seek his Fathers Asses, he found a Kingdom; Let us take heed
least the contrary befall us, least while we seek our Fathers Kingdom thus, we
find but Asses. Will you know where to find the Kingdom of Christ, our Savior
directs you in the Gospel, The Kingdom of Heaven, says he, comes not by
observation, neither shall ye say, Lo here, or lo there, but the Kingdom of
Heaven is within you: Let every man therefore retire into himself and see if he
can find this kingdom in his heart; For if he find it not there, in vain
shall he find it in all the world besides.

The fourth head wherein the difference of these kingdoms is seen is outward
state and ceremony; for outward pomp and show is one of the greatest stays of
the Kingdom of this world. Some thing there must be to amaze the people, and
strike them into wonderment, or else Majesty would quickly be contemned. The
Scripture recounting unto us King Solomon's Royalty tells us of his Magnificent
buildings, of his Royal throne, of his servants, and his attendants, of his
cup-bearers, of his meats, and these were the things which purchased unto him,
the reputation of Majesty, above all the Kings of the earth. Beloved, the
Kingdom of Christ is not like unto Solomon in his Royalty, It is like unto
David when he had put of all his Royalty, and in a linen Ephod danced before
the Ark: and this plain and natural simplicity of it, is like unto the Lillies
of the field, more glorious then Solomon in all his Royalty. The Idolatrous
superstitions of Paganism stood in great need of such Pompous Solemnities, Ut
opinionem suspendio cognitionis aedificent, atque ita tantam majestatem
exhibere vide antur quanta^ praestruxerunt cupiditatem, as Tertullian tells us;
For being nothing of themselves, they were to gain reputation of being
something by concealment, and by outward state make show of something
answerable to the expectation they had raised: The case of the kingdoms of the
world is the same: For all this State and Magnificence used in the Managing of
them is nothing else but Secular Idolatry, used to gain veneration, and
reverence unto that which in comparison of the Kingdom we speak of is mere
vanity. But the scepter of the Kingdom of Christ is a right scepter, and to
add unto it outward state, and riches, and pomp, is nothing else but to make a
Centaure, marry and join the Kingdom of Christ with the Kingdom of the world,
which Christ expressly here in my text has divorced and put a sunder. A thing
which I do the rather note; because that the long continuance of some
ceremonies in the Church, have occasioned many especially of the Church of
Rome, to think that there is no religion, no service without these ceremonies,
Our books tell us of a poor Spartan, that traveling in another country, and
seeing the beams and posts of houses squared and carved, asked if the trees grew
so in those countries? Beloved, many men that have been long acquainted with a
form of worship, squared and carved, trick't and set out with show and
ceremony, fall upon this Spartans conceit, think the trees grow so, and think
that there is no natural shape and face of Gods service but that. I confess the
service of God has evermore some ceremony attending it, and to our Fathers,
before Christ may seem to have been necessary, because God commanded it: But
let us not deceive our selves, for neither is ceremony now, neither was
sacrifice then esteemed necessary, neither was the command of God concerning
it, by those to whom it was given, ever taken to be peremptory; I will begin
the warrant of what I have said out of St. Chysostome; for in his comments upon
the tenth of the Hebrews, he denies that ever God from the beginning required,
or that it was his will to ordain such an outward form of worship; and asking
therefore of himself (...) how then seems he to have commanded it, he answers
(...) by condiscending only, and submitting himself unto humane infirmity, now
this (...) this condescending of God, wherein it consisted Oecumenius opens.
For because that men had a conceit, that if was convenient to offer up some
part of their substance unto God, and so strongly were they possessed with this
conceit, that if they offered it not up to him, they would offer it up to
Idols: God says he, rather then they should offer unto Idols, required them to
offer unto him. And thus was God understood by the holy men themselves, who
lived under the shadow of those ceremonies: for David when he had made his
peace with God, after that great sin of his opens this mystery. For thou
requirest not sacrifice, says he, else would I have given it thee, but thou
delightest not in burnt offerings; The sacrifice of God is a broken spirit, a
troubled and a contrite heart, O God, do thou not despise. After the revolt
of Jereboam and the ten Tribes from the house of David; there were many devout
and religious persons in Israel, and yet we find not that they used the
outward form of worship, which was commanded. El as and Elizaeus two great
prophets in Israel, did they ever go up to Jerusalem to worship, Obadia^^ a
great courtier in King Ahabs Court, and one that feared the Lord exceedingly;
the seven thousands which bowed not their knees to Baal, when came they up to
the Temple to offer. A thing which doubtless they would have done, if they had
understood the commandment of God in that behalf, to have been absolute
indeed; if we live in places where true religious persons do resort, and
assemble for the service of God, it were a sin to neglect it. But otherwise it
is sufficient, if we keep us from the pollutions of that place to which we are
restrained. Quid juvat hoc nostros templis admittere mores? why measure we God
by our selves, and because we are led with gay shows, and goodly things, think
it is so with God? Seneca reports, that a Pantomimus, a puppet player and
dancer in Rome, because he pleased the people well, was wont to go up every day
into the Capitol, and practiced his Art, and dance before Jupiter, and thought
he did the God a great pleasure. Beloved, in many things, we are like unto this
puppet-player, and do much measure God by the People, by the World.

FINIS,
A SERMON On 1. SAM. 24. 5.
And it came to pass afterward, that David's heart smote him, because he had
cut off Saul's skirt.
TEmptation is the greatest ^^ Occasioner of a Christians Honor: indeed like
an Enemy it threatens and endeavors his ruin; but in the conquest of it
con^^ists his Crown and Triumph. Were it possible for us to be at league and
truce with this Enemy, or to be (...) without danger of Gunshot, out of its
reach, like the Candle in the Gospel that is put under a bushel, the brightest
part of our glory were quite obscured. As Maximus Tyrius spoke of Hercules, if
you take from him (...) the savage beasts that he slew, and the Tyrants whom he
suppressed, his journeys and labors, (...) you lop and cut off the manifest Arms
and Limbs of Hercules renown. So, take from a Christian his Temptations, his
Persecutions, his Contentions, remove him from the Devil, from the World, (...)
you deprive him of the chief matter and subject of his glory. Take Job from the
Dunghill, David from Saul, Daniel from the Lions, the blessed Martyrs from the
rack, from the fire, from the sword, and what are they more then other men. As
Sampson tells Dalilah in the Book of the Judges, If my hair be cut, then my
strength will go from me, and I shall become weak, and like unto another man;
so Beloved, these things are as it were the hair wherein their strength lay,
shave that away, and they shall presently become weak, and like unto other men.
But Temptations are of two sorts: some are like professed and open Enemies, which
proclaim open war against us, like Goliath they publicly come forth and
challenge us. And such are the outward Evils that befall us, Loss of Goods,
Sickness, Disease, Dishonor, Infamy, Persecutions, and the like. Others there
are of a more secret, close, and retired nature, like unto Traitors, that bear
the behavior and countenance of Friends; that espy out their advantage and set
privily upon us: the most troublesome kind of Enemies, per quos nec licet esse
tanquam in bello paratos, nec tanquam in pace securos: with whom we can have
neither peace nor war, and against whom we can neither be provided nor secure,
these are our own corrupt Thoughts and Imaginations, which secretly lie in our
hearts, and watch their times to set on us, as the Philistines did in Dalilahs
chamber to surprise Sampson. For let a man but descend into himself, examine
his own soul, take as it were an Inventory of the passions, affections,
thoughts of his own heart, look but what the number of them is, and let him
make account of so many enemies. Tot venena, quot ingenia; tot pernicies quod
and species, tot dolores, quot colores; as Tertullian rimes it. A sort of
Enemies by so much the more dangerous, because that all those outward enemies,
of which I but now spoke, cannot come so near as to raze our skin, or endanger
one hair of our head, if these give them not way: from these ut aspis a vipera
venenum, as the Asp borrows borrows poison from the Viper, do those other
Temptations borrow all their power and strength to hurt us. For let us take a
survey of all the outward afflictions, miseries and calamities, which have
befallen all the Saints of God in Holy Scripture, and let us suppose them to be
all set and bent against some one alone, yet notwithstanding, as the three
children in Daniel walked in the midst of the fire untoucht, or as our S^^viour
Christ passed away through the midst of the people, that were gathered together
to mischief him, and throw him down the Hill, so shall he be able to pass from
them all without any hurt or harm, if some discontented, or distrustful, or
despairing, or proud, or angry, or impure and lustful thought do not betray him
unto them, and as it were open a door, and let them in. David who is here the
subject of my Text, had very much ado with both sorts of enemies, and by his
own experience found, that this latter rank of secret and privy enemies in
strength far surpassed the former. For whom neither the Lion nor the Bear, nor
Goliath, nor Saul, nor the Philistines could ever fasten upon, or drive to any
inconvenience, one lustful thought forced to Adultery and Murder, one proud
conceit stirred up to number the people, and drew from God great inconveniences
and plagues both upon himself and his Kingdom. How careful then ought we to be,
and to stand on our guard, and keep a perpetual watch over our hearts,
diligently to try and examine our thoughts, Nunquam securo triumphantur otio,
sed tantum sollicito premuntur imperio, August. Nor while we live shall we be
able perfectly to master, or securely to triumph over them: the only way to
suppress and keep them down is, to have a perpetual and careful jealousy of
them. Now of this Religious care and watchfulness over our own thoughts, has
the Holy Ghost recorded for our use a notable example in these words, which but
now I read, And it came to pass, etc.

To relate unto you at large the occasion of these words, and the story from
whence they depend, were but to wrong you, for I cannot think so meanly of your
knowledge in Scripture, as that any of you can be ignorant of so famous a
passage. Yet thus much for the better opening of my way unto such doctrines, as
I shall draw from this Text, I will call back unto your memories, that Saul
hunting after David to kill him, unwittingly stepped into a Cave where David was;
David having now his enemy in his hand, and opportunity to revenge himself,
lets slip all thought of revenging, and only cuts off privily the lap of his
Garment. For this deed so harmless so innocent the Scripture tells us that his
heart smote him, that he suffered great anguish and remorse in Conscience for
it. That which I will require you to note, is the tenderness of Conscience, and
strange scrupulousness in David for so small an action; for it will yield us a
great Lesson. I say it appears not by Scripture, that David intended any
mischief or treason to Saul, or that he harbored in heart any disloyal thought
against him. This purpose of cutting off the lap of Saul's garment was no other
then to purchase to himself a harmless and honorable testimony of his
Innocence, and to prove unto Saul, that there was no likelihood that he sought
his blood, whom he spared, having him at so great an advantage. Yet
notwithstanding, as if the rending of Saul's garment, had been the wounding of
Saul's body, or the shedding of his blood, David stands amazed, and is
affrighted at so honorable, so innocent a thought. His heart smote him, says
the Scripture. As men that have been at sea, and endangered through the raging
of winds, and tempests, and floods, when afterward the weather is cleared up,
the winds allayed, the seasmoothed, and all calm, yet scarcely dare they set
sail again, and trust to so uncertain, so fickle an Element: so seems it to
have fared with David in this place. He was a man subject to the same passions
with other men, and doubtless, through the raging of unruly and misorderly
affections, he had many times been in danger of spiritual shipwreck; wherefore
licet in morem stagni fusum aequor arrideat, and though now he could discover
no tempest in his heart, though the face of his thoughts were as smooth as
glass; yet when he looks upon such fair and calm affections, his heart misgives
him, and he dares not trust them: magnos hic campus montes habet, tranquilitas
ista tempestas est. The care he has over his own heart fills him with
suspicions, and still he thinks, something he knows not what, may be amiss. But
I must come unto the words. And it came to pass afterward, etc.

In these words we will consider these three things.

1. The Person, David, And David's heart smote him. 2. David's Sollicitousness,
his care and jealousy, very significantly expressed in the next words; His
heart smote him. 3. The cause of this his care and anxiety of mind in the last
words, Because he had cut off Saul's skirt.
In the first point, that is, in the Person, we may consider his greatness, he
was a King in expectation, and already anointed. A circumstance by so much the
more considerable, because that greatness is commonly taken to be a Privilege
to sin: to be over careful and conscientious of our courses and actions are
accounted virtues for private Persons, Kings have greater businesses then to
examine every thought that comes into their hearts. Pater meus obliviscitur se
esse Caesarem; ego vero memini me Caesaris filiam. It is the answer of Julia
Augustus the Emperor's daughter, when she was taxed for her too wanton and
licentious living, and counseled to conform herself to the Sobriety and Gravity
of her Father. My Father, says she, forgets himself to be Caesar the Emperor:
but I remember myself to be Caesar's daughter. It was the speech of Enxius the
Poet, Plebs in hoc Regi antest^^ loco; licet lachrimari plebi, Regi honest non
licet: Private men in this have a privilege above Princes; but thus to do
becomes not Princes: and if at any time these sad and heavy hearted thoughts do
supprize them, they shall never want comforters to dispell them. When Ahab was
for sullnness fallen down upon his bed, because Naboth would not yield him his
Vineyard, Jezabell is presently at hand and asks him, Art thou this day King of
Israel? When Ammon pined away in the incestuous love of his Sister Thamar,
Jonadab his companion comes unto him, and asks, why is the Kings Son sad every
day? so that, as it seems great Persons can never be much or long sad. Yet
David forgets his greatness, forgets his many occasions, gives no ear to his
companions about him, but gives himself over to a scrupulous and serious
consideration of an Action in show and countenance but light.

Secondly, as the Person is great, so is the care and remorse conceived upon
the Consideration of his action exceeding great, which is our Second part: And
therefore the Holy Ghost expresses it in very significant terms: His heart
smote him, a phrase in scripture used by the Holy Ghost when men begin to be
sensible and repent them of some sin. When David had committed that great sin of
numbering the people, and began to be apprehensive of it, the Scripture tells us
that David's heart smote him, when he had commanded Jeab to number the People.
Wherefore by this smiting we may not here understand some light touch of
Conscience, like a grain of powder presently kindled and presently gone, for
the most hard and flinty hearts many times yield such sparks as these. He that
is most flesht in sin, commits it not without some remorse; for sin evermore
leaves some scruple, some sting, some lothsomness in the hearts of those that
are most enamored of it. But as Simeon tells the blessed Virgin in St. Lukes
Gospel, Gladius pertransihit animam tuam; a sword shall pierce through thine
heart; so it seems to have been with David. It was not some light touch to raze
only the surface and skin of the heart, but like a sword it pierced deep into
him. To teach us one lesson, that actions spotted, though but with the least
suspicion of sin, ought nor carelessly to be past by, or slightly glanced at,
but we ought to be deeply apprehensive of them and bestow greatest care and
consideration upon them.

The third part of our Text contains the cause of David's remorse in the last
words. Because he cut off Saul's skirt, in the two former parts we had to do
with greatness: there was 1. a great Person, and 2. great Remorse, can we in
this third part find out any great cause or reason of this, so to make all
parts proportionable? Certainly he that shall attentively read and weigh these
first words of my Text, and know the story, might think that David had
committed some notable error, as some great oppression, or some cruel
slaughter, or some such royal sin, which none but Kings and great men can
commit. But beloved this my Text seems to be like the Windows in Solomon's
Temple, broad within, but narrow without: or like a Pyramide large and spacious
at the Basis and ground of it, but small and sharp at the top. The Person and
Remorse, which are the Ground and subject of my Text both are great and large,
but the cause which is the very crown and top of all, that is very small, yea
peradventure none at all. For whether it be that my self accustomed to greater
sins, and now grown old in them, have lost all sense of small and petty
errors, or whether indeed there be no error at all in this action of David,
but only some fancy, some jealousy arising out of that Godly and careful watch
he kept over all his ways, or whatsoever else it was that caused this scruple
or remorse in David, it is a very hard matter to discover, and yet
notwithstanding that we may make more open pass unto such Doctrines as I shall
raise out of these words, let us a little scan and consider what it was in this
action that made David thus strangely scrupulous.

And first of all was it for that he had touched and taken that which was none
of his own, and therefore might seem to fall within compass of the Law against
injury and purloyning? This seems not probable: for when afterward in the like
case he came upon Saul as he was sleeping in the Camp, and took from him the
Spear and the pot of Water which stood at his head, we do not read that his
heart smote him, and yet he took what was none of his.

Or 2ly. was it that he did wrong and dishonor Saul in mangling his garment?
Indeed the Jews have a tradition that this was the sin of which David was here
so sensible. And therefore say they, whereas we read in the first of Kings,
that when David grew old they covered him with clothes, but he gat no heat,
this was the punishment of his sin committed against Saul: God so providing
that garments should not be serviceable to him who had offended in wronging
Saul's garments. But this I must let go as a fable.

Or 3ly. was it that he had unadvisedly given way to some disloyal thought, and
at first resolved to revenge himself on Saul, having him at the advantage,
though afterward he repented? Indeed St. Chrysostom thinks so; and therefore
on those words at the latter end of the verse next before my Text, And David
arose, he notes (...) See you ^^ot, says he, what a tempest of rage and anger
begins to rise in him; for he supposes him to arise in heat and fury, with a
resolution for blood: but it pleased God in the way, to make him relent and
change the purpose of revenge into the Action of cutting off his skirt: and
that this smiting of David's heart was nothing else but his repenting himself
for giving over hasty entertainment to such a rebellious thought. But beloved,
who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? David's thoughts were known
only to God and himself. Since therefore God gives not this as a reason of
David's remorse, but another thing; far be it from me, that I should wrong David
so far, as to burden him with that, with which none but God can charge him. I
rather choose to follow St. Basils rule: (...) let the Scriptures be understood
as they lie. The Scripture tells us, David's heart smote him, because he cut of
the skirt of Saul's garment, and not because he had conceived against Saul any
thought of blood. But what cause then shall we give of David's remorse, none
other, Beloved, but that Religious and careful jealousy which still he had
over his own thoughts, which made him pietatis affectu etiam quae tuta sunt
formidare, Hieron. To suspect all things be they never so safe, and never to
think himself secure from the contagion of sin. It was with David as it is wont
to be with men that are often troubled with sicknesses and diseases,
suspicionibus inquietantur, medicisque jam sani manum porrigunt, and omnem
calorem corporis sui calumniantur, Senec. Disquiet themselves with every little
alteration in their Bodies, repair to the Physician when they are well, and
think every heat to be an Ague fit. Horum corpus non est parum sanum, sed
sanitati parum assuevit: these men are not sick, but they do not know what it
is to be in health. In the same state is David, he had been often infected with
Spiritual weakness and disease, and therefore he suspects every motion of his
heart, and takes every thought to be a temptation. Hujus animus non erat parum
sanus, sed sanitati parum assuevit, his Soul was not sick of any sin, but he
did not know what it was to be in Spiritual health.

For us and for our use has the Holy Ghost registered this example of scruple
and tenderness of conscience. Let us return to our selves and see what lessons
we may learn hence for our behoof. Men usually are either grown old in sin, and
therefore their eyesight is decayed, they cannot ea^^ly see and discern
smaller sins: or else as Hagar in the Book of Genesis, laid Ismael afar off
from her, that she might not be grieved with the sight of him: so we labor to
lay our sins far out of kenn, that the memory and sight of them might not
exasperate and trouble us. For the cure of both these infirmityes I have
borrowed out of the Lords treasury a Spectacle or Optic Glass, which if we use
it, will restore our decayed eyesight and quicken and make us read our sins in
the smallest print; and let them^^ly never so far from us, yet will it present
them unto us in their true quantity and greatness. Toward the better use of
which Spiritual Glass, one lesson would I especially commend unto you; to be
perpetually Jealous and suspicious of your thoughts, and to be quick-sented,
easily to trace the footing of sin, to be easily sensible of it, when we think
our selves to have done amiss: a lesson naturally arising, as I take it, out of
David's example, commended unto us in this place. Now how absolutely behoofefull
it is for us to hold a perpetual Watch over our hearts, and be jealous of such
thoughts as spring out of them it will appear by these Reasons.

First, because that sin is of such a ^^ly insinuating nature, that it will
privily creep in, and closely cleave to our thoughts and intents, though we
perceive it not. For as waters though of themselves most pure, will relish and
^^avour of the Earth and soil through which they pass. So thoughts in
themselves good, passing through the corrupt and evil ground of our hearts,
cannot but receive some tincture, some dye, some relish from them. When David
had an intent to build God an house, he doubtless conceived no otherwise of
this his intent, then of a religious and honorable purpose, and in outward
appearance there was no cause, why he should doubt of Gods acceptance yet we
see this purpose of his misliked by God, and rejected, and the reason given,
quia vir sanguinum es tu, because thou art a man of blood. How sh^^ll we then
secure our selves of any thought, if such an intent as this, so ^^avouring of
Zeal, of Sanctification, of love unto the glory of God, have such a flaw in it
as makes it unprofitable; and how necessary is it that we bring all our
immaginations and intents to the fire and to the refining pot, so thoroughly to
try them, and bring them to their highest point of purity and perfection. Be it
peradventure, that the action be in it self good; if it be liable to any
suspicion of evil, it is enough to blast it. It is the Holy Ghosts rule given
by the blessed Apostle, that we abstain from all show and appearance of evil,
that we refrain as much as possible from all such actions, as are capable of
misconstruction. What is more lawful, then for the labourer to ^^ave his hire,
then for those that labor in the Gospel, to live by the Gospel? Yet we see
St. Paul refused this Liberty, and chose rather to work with his own hands;
only for this reason, because he would not give occasion to any, that would
misinterpret his Action, to live at others cost and feed on the sweat of others
brows. What befalls Princes many times and great Persons that have abused their
Authority, the people rise and suppress them, deface their statues, forbid
their coin, put away all things that bear any memory of them: So seems our
blessed Apostle to deal here^^look what actions they be which bear any
inscription, any image and title, any show, or spot of sin, these has he
thought good even to banish and qui^^e prohibit. Our profane stories tell us,
that when Julius Caesar had divorced his wife; being asked why he did so, since
nothing was brought against her to prove her dishonest, his answer was, that
she that will be Wife of Caesar must not only be free from dishonesty, but from
all suspicion of it. Beloved, St. Paul tells the Corinthians that he had
espoused them unto one Husband, that he might deliver them as a chaste Virgin
unto Christ. And God every where in Scripture compairs his Church unto an
espoused wife, and himself unto an Husband, a Husband far more jealous then
ever Caesar was. How careful then must that Soul be, that intends to Marry it
self to such a jealous Husband, to abstain not only from all pollution of sin,
but from all suspicion of it. Last of all it is Tertullians speech: Quanto
facilius illicita timebit, qui etiam licita verebitur. It is wisdom sometimes
to suspect and shun things that are lawful. For there are many actions in
themselves good which yet to many men become occasions of sin and scandal. For
it is with our Actions as it is with our meats and drinks. As, diverse meats
fi^^ not diverse constitutions of Body; so all Actions accord not well with all
Tempers of mind. As therefore what Dish it is we easily Surfeit of, though it be
otherwise good it is wisdom totally to abstain from: so look what actions they
be in which we ^^ind our selves prone to sin, it is good spiritual Physic to
use abstinence and quite to leave them. For if our Savior command us to pluck
out our eyes, and pare off our hands, if once they become unto us cause of sin,
how much more then must we prune away all inward thoughts, all outward
circumstances, which become occasion of offense unto us.

A 2d. reason, why I would persuade you to entertain a jealousy of all your
thoughts and actions, is a natural overcharitable affection, which I see to be
in most men unto their own ways, and which is st^^ange; the worse they are,
the more are we naturally inclined to favor them. The Reason is because the
worse they are, the more they are our own. When question was sometime made, Why
good herbs grow so sparingly, and with great labor and pains, where as weeds
grow apace without any culture and tilling; it is was answered, that the earth
was a natural Mother to the one, to the other she was a Stepmother; the one
she brought forth of her self, to the other she was constrained. Beloved, it is
with our hearts as it is with the Earth, the natural fruit of them is weeds
and evil thoughts, unto them our hearts are as mothers, injusta virescunt,
they spring up in us of themselves without any care or manuring: but as for
good thoughts if they be found in our hearts, they are not natural, they are
set there by a high hand, they are there by a kind of spiritual inoculation
and grafting, as men graffe Apples and kind fruits upon Thorns and Crabs. No
mervail then, if like choice herbs and fruits they grow so tenderly, and need
so much care and cherishing. As therefore Parents, though their own children be
very deformed, yet love them more then others, though more beautiful: so
corrupt and evil thoughts are naturally dearer unto us then good, because we
are as Mothers unto them, to the rest we are but Stepdames. Two notable Fruits
there are of this overcharitableness to our own actions. First a willingness
that we have to flatter, to deceive and abuse our own selves by pretenses and
excuses. There is a plain, a downright, and as it were a Country reprobate,
one that sees his sin and cares not much to excuse it, and is content to go on,
and as it were in simplicity to cast himself away. There is a more witty, more
refined, and as it were a Gentlemanlike reprobate, one that strives to smooth
and guild over his sin, to deceive others and himself with excuses and
apologies, (...) as St. Basil speaks, to take great pains, and with the expense
of a great deal of wit and art to damn himself. When Saul, being sent against
Amalek, had spared Agag and the best and fattest of the prey, at Samuels coming
to visit him, how does he wipe his mouth, as if all had been well, and trimly
composes himself to entertain him, Blessed art thou of the Lord, I have
performed the commandment of the Lord. And when Samuel had showed him his
error, how quickly has He his excuse at his fingers ends: We have spared the
best of the Sheep and of the Oxen to Sacrifice unto the Lord, Et Deo adulatur
and sibi lenocinatur, as Tertulian speaks, he thinks to gull Almighty God with
fair and flattering pretenses, and becomes a baud to his own vice, nimium idem
omnes fallimur, it is the common error of us all, a^^nd in most of our Actions
we do as Saul did, endeavor to put tricks upon our selves. Beloved, were we
not partial, but rigid censurers of our own thoughts, this corrupt fruit would
quickly rot and fall away. Again their is a 2d. fruit springing out of this
favor and dotage on our own actions, an error as common though, not so
dangerous, for we are content many times to acknowledge that something is amiss
in our actions, we will confess them to be sins, but we accoun^^t of them as
little sins, sins of a lesser size, not so fearful, easily pardonable. There
is a sinner who by committing some great and and heinous crime ( crimen
devoratorium salutis, as Tertulian calls it, such a sin as with open mouth
devours salvation) does as it were with one step leap into Hell? and of this
kind of sinners the number is fewer. But abundance there are, who avoiding
great and heinous sins, by committing lesser sins, as they think, can be
content to go by degrees and as it were step by step into Hell. Beloved let us
a little put on the spectacle I but now spoke of, that we may see whither any
sin be so small, as we take it. I know there is difference of sins. Our Savior
tells us that there is a beam and there is a more: but withal this I know,
that the best way to keep us from sin, is minima pro maximis cavere, to loath
even the least, as if it were the greatest; if we look through this Glass it
will make us think every more a beam. Sins in themselves are unequal, but in
regard of us and of our endeavor to avoid them, they are all equal. Fly from
evil, says the Psalmist: he tells us not, that there is one greater evil
from which we must fly, and another less from which it is enough if we do but go:
but he bids us fly, and to make haste alike from all. To think that a sin is
less then it is, may be dangerous for it makes us the less careful to avoid
it: but to mistake on the other hand, and think a sin greater then it is, this
is a very profitable error. Utinam sic semper erraremus; would God we did
always thus err; for besides that there is no danger in it, it makes us more
fearful to commit sin. Our Savior reprehends the Pharisees in the Gospel
because they could strain at gnats but swallow Camells, but yet it is true,
that men learn at length to swallow Camells by swallowing Gnats at first. Nemo
repent fuit turpissimus, no sinner so hardy as to set upon the greatest sins
at first. The way by which men train up themselves to the committing gross and
heinous sins, is by not being at first conscientious of lesser sins, Et sane
nescio, says Paulinus in St. Hierom, an possimus leve aliquod peccatum dicere
quod in Dei contemptum admittitur: who dares call any sin little, that is
committed against God; small contempts against great Princes are accounted
great oversights; for what is wanting in the thing is made up in the worth of
the Person. How great a sin then is the smallest contempt that is done against
God? Prudentissimus ille est, qui non tam considerat quid jussum sit, quam
illum, qui jusserit; nec quantitatem imperii, sed imperantis cogitat
dignitatem. It is the best wisdom for us, not so much to consider, what is
commanded, as who it is that commands it; to consider, I say, not the
smallness of the Law, but the greatness of the Lawgiver. Sins comparatively may
be counted greater or lesser, but absolutely none can be counted small. To
conclude then this point; Charity suspecteth no harm says St. Paul: true, but
we must note, that some virtues in us concern our selves, as Faith, Hope,
Temperance, and the like: some virtues concern not our selves, but others; but
such an one is Charity. Charity that wills Christians to think well of all
others, can have little room upon our selves. Let us then make use of this
Charity toward our Neighbors; hope the best of all their actions; but let us
take heed how we be overcharitably minded to our selves. Caesar professed, that
he would rather die then, suspect his friends; and he sped accordingly: for he
dyed by the treachery of those Friends whom he suspected not: Let us take heed
how we be overkind unto our own thoughts how we think it an error to be two
suspicious of them. (...): peradventure those Sons of our own hearts whom we
least suspect, will in the end prove those who shall betray us. But I come to a
third Reason. A third reason why I shall advise you to this jealousy over your
own thoughts, is the difficulty of discovering them betime, and ing of what
spirit they are. For our heart is like that Field in the Gospel, in which the
Husbandman sowes good Corn, and the enemy sowes tares. God infuseth good
thoughts, and the Devil ill. Now as weeds many times at their first budding
are hardly known from good herbs; so at the first springing and budding of our
thoughts a hard matter it is, to know the weed from the good herb, the Corn
from the tare. As Judah in the Book of Genesis, knew not Tamar, till the fruit
of his sin committed with her began to show it self: so till the fruits of our
thoughts and purposes begin to appear, except we search very narrowly, we can
scarcely discover of what rank they are. Tunc ferrum quod latebat in fundo
supernatabat aquae, and inter palmarum arbores myrrhae amaritudo reperta est.
Then the iron that lay in the bottom, will swim at the top of the water, and
among the pleasant Palmtrees will be found the bitterness of mirrh. We read in
the 2d. of Samuel that when the Arc was brought from Kirithjearim, the Oxen
that drew the cart shook it, and Uzzah reaching out his hand to save it from
falling, for his good service was laid dead in the place. Doubtless Uzzah his
accompanying the Ark was a sign of his love unto it: his love unto it begat in
him a fear to see it in danger: his fear to see it in danger bred in him a
desire to keep it from danger. See beloved, what a number of Golden thoughts
are here: yet as we read in the book of Job, when the servants of God came and
stood before him, Satan also came and stood amongst them: So in this chorus and
quire of these Angelical thoughts the Devil finds a place to rest himself in.
For this desire of Uzzah to save the Ark from danger, made him forget what was
written, that none should touch the Ark save only the Priests: the breach of
which precept brought that fearful judgment upon him. You see Beloved that
though the course of our thoughts be like Jacobs Ladder, and God himself be at
one end of them, yet Satan, if he can, will be the other. Let us learn by this
example of Uzzah, betimes to discover our thoughts, and not to suffer them to
grow till their fruit betray them. Indeed our Savior has given us a rule, You
shall know them by their fruits; but we must take heed that we extend not this
rule to far. Uzzah felt the fruit of his thoughts to his own cost. It is never
good trying conclusions there, Ubi paena statim sequitur errorem. Let us learn
to decipher our thoughts then, when we may do it without danger, whilst they
are in semine whilst they are yet but budding and peeping above ground, done^^
Sarculo tantum opus est, non Securi, whilst yet there is only need of the
weedhook, and not of the hatchet.

A fourth reason yet there is, for which I would counsel you to hold a strict
hand over your thoughts, and it is, because that from outward sins we can
better preserve our selves, then from our sins in thought. Beloved, there is a
transeunt sin, and there is an imminent sin, there is a sin that is outwardly
acted by the service of the body; there is a sin that requires not the help of
the body, but is committed inwardly in the very thought and Soul, a speculative
or an intellectual sin. Outward sins are many ways passed by, means may be
wanting, company may hinder, time and place may be inconvenient; but for
speculative sins, or sins in thought, all times, all occasions, all places are
alike: (...) says Saint. Basil: A man, says he, of great gravity and
countenance sits in the midst of the marketplace, with many hundreds about
him, and looking upon him, yet notwithstanding this man, (...) (...) even this
man in the midst of all the company fancies to himself what he desires, and
in his imaginations goes unto the place of sin, or rather retires into his own
heart, and there he finds place and means to commit (...) a sin that has no
witness but God. If we retire to our private Chambers, these sins will follow
us thither, and as Baanab and Richab did by Isboseth Saul's son, they will find
us out upon our beds, and slay us there. If we go to the Church, they will
find us out there, and as Adramelech and Sharezer slew Sennacherib whilst he
was worshipping his God; they will set upon us even in the midst of our holiest
meditations and prayers: neither Chamber nor Church, no place so private, none
so holy, that can give us Sanctuary, or shelter us from them. S. Hierom
confesses thus much of himself, that when he had forsaken the world, all
outward occasions of sin, and gone into the Desert, and shut himself up in a
poor Cell, and macerated his body (...) with watchings, with fastings, and
perpetual prayers and religious exercise, yet could he not be secure from them.
Pallebant orajejuniis, and men's desideriis aestuabat in frigido corpore: his
body was now grown pale, and meager, and cold, but yet his heart burnt with
unlawful desires. Again they are sins of quick and easy dispatch, they are done
(...) as S. Basil notes; in a moment of time, without labor of body, without
care of mind: One wanton look makes us guilty of Adultery, one angry conceit
guilty of Murder, one covetous conceit guilty of Robbery. Whatsoever is
outwardly committed either with difficulty of circumstance, or labor of body,
or danger of Law, that is inwardly committed in the soul without any trouble at
all: Thirdly consider but the strength of your thoughts, and you will see there
is great reason to keep them low; for there was no man yet that ever was foiled
but by them, and not by the outward acting of sin. For the outward action is
but the Cortex, the bark of the sin: but the very body and substance of sin is
the wicked thought. Beware of men, says our Savior, when he gave his Apostles
counsel how to provide for their safety in times of outward danger: but if we
will provide against inward dangers, we shall not need to beware of men, or of
any outward force whatsoever. Let every man beware of himself, for in this case
every man is his own greatest enemy. To draw then to a conclusion: That sins of
thoughts prevail not against us, our way is by a jealous care first to prevent
them; and to this has the greatest part of my discourse hitherto tended.
Secondly if we have suffered them to gain a little ground upon us, let us
betimes take the rains into our own hands and pull them back again, and cast
out our Adversary, whilst he is yet weak. (...) says S. Chrisoft. such are the
souls of holy men: their recovery is so quick, that they may seem to have risen
before they fell. It is a great sign of spiritual life in us to be quickly
sensible of the first track and footing of sin. For as bodies of the best and
purest complexion have their senses quickest; so that soul which soonest
perceives the first sent of sin, is of the Divinest temper. Our books tell us,
that Dionysius the Tyrant was grown so gross and fat, that though men thrust
bodkins into him, he could not feel it. Beloved, there is a sinner like unto
this Dionysius. David tells us of him, when he describes unto us a sinner whose
heart is fat as brawn. That we fall not therefore into that like (...)
stupidity and senselesness, our way is to catch these young Foxes, and strangle
them in the nest: Nolo sinas cogitationem crescere, says S. Hierom, suffer not
your thoughts to increase and gather strength upon you. For as the man that
touches only at but iron, and stays not on it, burns not his hand, so the
first glances of evil thoughts harm us not; the harm is, if by consent, though
never so little, you stay upon them. To be free from all onset of evil thoughts
is a matrer impossible, whilst we have these hearts of flesh. Ille laudatur
qui^^ut coeperit cogitare sordida, statim inter^^icit cogitata, and allidid ad
petram, petra autem est Christus. That man is praise worthy, who as soon as any
unclean thought, any child of Babylon is born in his heart, straightway
strangles it in the birth, and dashes it against the rock, which Rock is
Christ. Thus, etc.

Mr. HALES LETTERS From the SYNOD of DORT TO THE Right Honorable Sr. DUDLEY
CARLTON, Lord Ambassador, etc.
Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
MAy it please your Honor: We arrived at Dort this last night betwixt six and
seven of the clock; our passage was without any impediment at all, and
wheresoever we were to take boat still we found some ready to put off, as if
they had waited our coming. Immediately upon my arrival I went to My Lord
Bishop, and as soon as I had done my message unto him, I forthwith went to
Monsieur Bogermannus, who humbly thanks your Honor for your great courtesy
toward him, and promises to acquaint your Lordship by me with whatsoever
passes in the Synod: had he known of so convenient means of writing to your
Lordship, I suppose he would have written: but when I spoke with him I knew not
so much my self. Festus Hommius and Polyander I have not yet seen, and it will
be the afternoon ere I shall speak with them, because this morning they have a
sitting. Whatsoever has past in the Synod formerly, your Lordship shall
understand by a packet from my Lord Bishop; whatsoever speeches or other
passages are to be copyed I shall this afternoon get of Mr. President, and I
will not fail to send your Honor the transcripts of them, when Daniel returns.
What shall be disputed of or decided in the next Sessions at the Synod I will
at large inform your Lordship by the next messenger, mean time I humbly take my
leave.

From Dort this 14/24. of November. 1618. Your Lordships Chaplain, and bounden in
all Duty, Jo: Hales.

Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
YOur Honor shall here receive enclosed an index of all the acts of the Synod
since the beginning, till the 16/26. of this present. It is not that which I
required, but is so much as Festus Hommius (whose writing it is) could spare
your Lorpship. My desire was to obtain not only the bare conclusions, but the
whole manner of proceeding, with all particulars propounded and concluded in
the Synod^^ but it seems this was thought nimis grande postulatum. If I can
come so far to persit my notes of all the former sessions, as that I shall be
able to express them in form as I did the session on Saturday last, and by
Gods help will express the following sessions, I will in time acquaint your
Lordship with it. Mean while I come to the session on Monday morning, the
16/26. of this present.

It had been in some of the Former sessions determined that there should be
chosen six Divines for the Translation of the Bible, three for the Old
Testament, and three for the New with the Apocrypha: and likewise Revisors, one
out of every Province, to whom the work being done should be brought to be
revised and censured. In this present Session they proceed to the choice of
them. The manner of election was by Scrutiny: the Deputies of every Province in
Scripta exhibiting one. The S^^rutators were two of the Seculars, D. Simon
Schottus, Secretary of Middleburrough, and President this week, and Martinus
Gregorii, these calculated the voices and pronounced the election. And first
for the translation of the Old Testament were chosen these three, Ioh.
Bogermannus, Guil. Baudaritus, and Gerson Bucerus: for the translation of the
New, were chosen Iac. Rolandus, Hermannus Fauckelius, and Petrus Cornelii. From
these they proceed to the nomination of the revisors. Here arose a doubt
concerning the province of Utrecht. For because they are equally divided three
Contra-Remonstrants, and three Remonstrants, they could not agree upon the
nomination of a Revisor for that Province, which thing bred a demurre in the
Synod. The Praeses required the judgment of the Synod, what they thought fit to
be done. Some thought they might be altogether past by. For there would be
Revisors enough, though that Province chose none. Others thought fit it should
be deferred till the end of the Synod, and then some one of that Province
should be chosen communibus suffragiis totius Synodi. A third sort de^^ermined
that it should be deferred till that Province were reconciled in it self, (which
it was hoped would be at the end of the Synod) and then they should name some
one of their Province to be approved by the rest of the Translators and
Revisors; and this sentence past for current. So that for the present there is
no Revisor for the Province of Utrecht. Another doubt yet was moved, for one of
the Provinces, had named two paribus suffragiis: the question was who should
stand. It pleased the Synod to put it to Lots. And so the Praeses wrote their
names in two little Tickets of paper, each by it self, and rould them up, and
deliverd them to Martinius Gregorius; that which he took, stood, that which he
refused, was presently torn. The Revisors for the Old Testament were these, ex
Geldria Ant. Tysius; ex Suyd-Hollandia Io. Polyander: ex North-Holl. P.
Plancius, ex Zelandia Iod. Larenus: ex Frisia Sibrandus Lubbertus: ex
Transisulania Iac. Revius: ex Groaning. D. Gomarus: ex Drentia Onias Boethus.
The Revisors for the New Testament were these, Ex Geldria Seb. Dammannus: ex
Suyd-Holl. Festus Hommius; ex Northoll. Goswinus Geldorpius: ex Zelandia Ant.
Walaeus, ex Frisia Bern. Fullenius, ex Transisulania Jo. Langius, ex Groaning.
Ubbo Emmius, ex Drentia Jo. Cuperus. It was farther enacted, that if any of the
Translators should die, or by Sickness became unable for the Service, that then
he that was next him in number of voices in the Scrutiny should succeed in his
place: If any of the Revisors should die, or be sick, power was given to the
Praeses, the two Assessors, and the two Scribes to depute another in his room:
and so this Session concluded; in which though little was done, yet was it long
adoing, by reason of the Scrutiny.

Upon Tuesday the 17/27 of this present, the Deputies met in the morning, where
the first thing that was proposed was concerning those of Drent. For whereas
the day before they had named two Revisors for the Translation, they now upon
better advice require to be excused in that behalf, because in their Province
the Belgic Tongue was not well known. Which Petition of theirs was accepted.
In the second place it was thought good, that since all the business concerning
the Translation was determined of, there should be a repetition made in the
Synod of all that had passed about it: to this purpose, that if any thing were
either omitted or misrelated, it might be rectified: forthwith followed a
Narration of all that had been done, where some small exceptions not worth
relating were stood upon. In the third place was proposed the defect of the
Afternoon Sermons and Catechizing, especially in the Country Villages; and the
Synod was moved to deliver it self concerning Remedies of this Defect. What had
been heretofore decreed in some of their Synods concerning this matter was
publicly read. The Impediments were, First the negligence of the Pastors;
Secondly Combinations, that is double Benefices, when men having two Cures
could not sufficiently attend both: Thirdly the difficulty or reclaiming the
Country people on the Sundays either from the Sports, or from their Work. The
Synod beginning to consider of means to cut off these abuses, Festus Hommius
amongst other things complained that through the negligence of the
Remonstrants, it came that Catechizing was so much decayed; which words of his,
it is thought, will be an occasion of some choler, though for the present they
passed uncontrolled. Many delivered their opinions how the forementioned
hindrances of Afternoon Sermons and Catechizing might be removed. First by
imploring the help of the States General, that it would please them by their
Authority to prohibit that ordinary profanation of the Sabbath by working or
playing: Secondly by requiring the like help of the particular Magistrate in
every Town and Village: Thirdly by taking away those Combinations: Fourthly by
providing of sufficient Schole-Masters in every Village, who should not only
teach Grammar, but instruct Youths in the principles of Religion: Fifthly that
the Pastors should not omit afternoon Sermons by reason of the negligence of
their Auditors, but should perform them, though they brought to the Church none
but their own Family: that the Pastors and Deacons and Seniors should deal with
their Friends and Acquaintance and bring them to Church with them. Sixthly that
if any Pastor neglected to perform this Duty, he should be subject to
Ecclesiastical Censure. Seventhly that the Deputies of other Nations should be
requested to make overture of their Customs in this behalf. Lastly that
diligent enquiry should be made throughout all the Classes, whether Catechizing
and Afternoon Sermons were observed. It was decreed that in every Parish there
should be two Sermons every Sunday, of which that in the Afternoon was to be
Catechetical. That the Ministers should give good example by bringing their own
Family to Church; that the help of the Magistrate should be implored; that
Combinations should be taken away. When all was done, then was that required
which should have been done before: the Deputies of other Nations were desired
to deliver their Customs in this behalf. Where first my Lord Bishop showed that
with us in England the Magistrate imposed a pecuniary Mulct upon such as did
absent themselves from divine duties; which pecuniary Mulct generally prevailed
more with our people, then any pious admonitions could. Those of the
Palsgrave's Country showed that each Sunday they had two Sermons, and such as
were absent, were first admonish't by the Clergy, and if this sufficed not,
they required the help of the Civil Magistrate. Those of Geneva told us, that
in the Churches in their Cities they had every Sunday four Sermons, etc. Those
of Breme that they had three Sermons, of which one was Catechetical; and to
avoid profanation of the Sabbath, it was not lawful to celebrate any
Marriage Feast, or such like upon the Sunday, till six a clock in the Evening.
Many other things of this nature were related, of which a great deal I could
not understand. When all had spoken, the Praeses told them that this proposal
was not made because in the Belgic Churches there had not been order taken for
Catechizing and Sermons, but because the Laws formerly made in this behalf were
neglected: and that now means was thought of to bring them in force again. And
so they brake up.

I received your Honors Letters of the 16/26 of this present, in which your
Honor requires to be informed of such Proposals as Episcopius lately madein
behalf of the Arminian Party. The thing is this. Shortly after that the Letters
of Citation were sent to the Arminians, Episcopius with other of the
Remonstrants came privately to the Deputies of the States, and exhibited a
Remonstrance, in which they required especially these things. First that all of
their Party throughout the Provinces might be allowed to make one Body, and out
of it depute such as they thought good, whom they might send to the Synod to
plead in their behalf. Secondly that it might be lawful for them instead of
some of those who are written unto, to substitute others. Thirdly that
Utenbogart and Grevinchovius might have safe Conduct and free access to the
Synod. The Delegates immediately sent for the Praeses, the two Assessors and
the two Scribes, and required their opinion in this business. For the first
point, the Clergy men thought it not to be granted, as being feared would be
prejudicial to the Belgic Churches. The Deputies for the Seculars answered,
that they had given Episcopius this answer. For the two later, the Clergy
thought that if it pleased the Seculars it might be done. Reply was made by the
Seculars, that they were men infamous, tumultuous, on whom the Church censure,
for Grevinchovius had extended, and therefore they would permit them no place
in the Synod. So was Episcopius and his Company dismissed. This was a thing
done only in private: the Synod had no notice of it, neither is it recorded in
any public Register. What more passed between the Seculars and the
Remonstrants at this meeting is not known, and the Clergy know no more then it
pleased the Seculars to impart. Of this I heard nothing, till by reason of your
Lordships Letters I enquired into it.

Whilst the Synod was sitting on Tuesday morning, there came in News of the
death of one of their Company, Henricus ab Hell, Senior of the Church of
Zutphaw, who died in the time of the Session. I am desirous to know whether my
Letters upon Monday containing the Saturday Session came to your Lordships
hands. I intended them by way of Roterdam, but Daniel tells me he delivered
them to a Gentleman that went immediately for the Hague, marie what he was he
knew not, this has made me a little jealous. I beseech your Honor, by the
next that comes from you hither, by word of mouth to let me know. Mr Praeses,
Festus Hommius, Polyander, Tronchinus of Geneva required me to remember their
Love and service to your Honor: and so for this time I humbly take my leave.

From Dort this 18/28 of November. 1618. Your Honors Chaplain, and Bounden in
all Duty Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, and my very good Lord,
UPon Saturday, the day after my coming to Dort, I went to Festus Hommius, and
delivered him your Honors Letters, upon perusal of which, he liberally
promised me an Index of all whatsoever had past in the Synod until my coming to
town. The time of making his promise good was Sunday morning. When I saw it
came not at the time, after dinner I wrote a little note unto him, to put him
in mind of his promise, but yet I heard nothing of him. I suppose this falls
out by reason of his multiplicity of business, not that he would slight your
Lordship; though I remember in the speech that passed between him and me, he
told me that their passed among the brethren of the Synod a consent de non
eliminandis, etc. of not divulging of any passage till all was done, which I
interpreted as spoken only upon the by, not with any intent of hindering any
intelligence which should be given your Honor. I dealt with Mr. Praeses and
with Festus for a Copy of Martinus Gregorii his oration: the answer from them
both was the same, that he would not at any hand be entreated to deliver a
Copy of it, no not so much as the sum of it: whether it was because of some
matter that was in it, as that he spoke somewhat roundly in disgrace of the
Spanyard, or that the Politics have some end in it, or that he himself is
desirous to have it thought that he delivered it only ex tempore, or for what
other reason I know not. As concerning what has passed in the Synod, till I
hear farther from Festus, I will acquaint your Honor with what past there
since my coming.

On Saturday the 14/24 of this present, in the Morning the Deputies met, and
debated some things of no great moment, concerning their intended TRANSLATION
of the BIBLE. The first thing proposed was, whether the name JEHOVAH should be
retained untranslated, or rendered by the Dutch word Here, as the Greeks (...)
the English Lord. The Praeses thought sit it should be rendered Here, because
the Holy Ghost in the New Testament, citing some things out of the Old, renders
the Hebrew Jehovah, by the Greek (...) according as the Septuagint had done.
This past for current, till it came to M^^rtinius of Breme, who divided the
sentence, and thought that it might ordinarily so be rendered, if some places
were excepted. And to this purpose he cited some places of Scripture, where the
word Jehovah had a peculiar energie and force, which the Belgic Here could
not attain unto. To the same effect did others speak: and great disputation
would have arisen about this point, as whether the Name Jehovah had any points
of its own, or borrowed his points from Elohim and Adonai, and the like, but
that the Praeses still cut them off. It was at length by the greater part
concluded, that it should be rendered by the Belgic Here, which was always to
be expressed in Capital Characters, and concerning this the Reader should be
advertised farther in the Preface. And when there should be in any place some
peculiar force in that word, which the Belgic word did not express, of this
the Reader should be admonished by a marginal gloss.

The second Proposal was, whether the Hebrew proper Names, should be retained,
or translated likewise into Dutch. It was concluded they should be retained,
for avoiding of all unnecessary novelty and alteration. The third proposal was,
whether the ancient Division of Chapters should remain, for many Hebrew Copies
differed from our Common in this point, and sometime the old division did seem
somewhat inconvenient, as that somewhere it brake off in the midst of a
matter, somewhere in the midst of a sentence. It was concluded that the old
division should remain. For there would arise great confusion in quotations, if
the number of Chapters and Verses should alter. As for the variety of other
Copies, and inconvenient division, of this the Reader should be advertised in
the Margent. The fourth proposal was, whether there might not be added some
Appendices to the Bible, as Chorographical and Topographical Tables,
Geuealogies, and the like. It was thought fit they should, provided that in the
Tables and Maps there were no pictures and babies, for avoiding superstition.
The fifth proposal was concerning the appointing of persons fit for the work of
the Translation. The Praeses willed that every Province should exhibit by Bill
the Names of those, who they knew in their Provinces were of sufficiency for
the Translation, which forthwith was done, and the Names that were exhibited
were all pronounced in the Synod: but out of these who should be chosen for the
work was differed, until the next Session appointed upon the Monday following^^
and so with prayer they brake up the meeting.

As I have done in this Session, so will I do in all the rest, if I shall get
convenient place where I may stand and note. For, for any thing I see, mine own
notes must be my chiefest help. The matters are but small, but I suppose they
will amend when the Arminian Party shall make their appearance. Here is your
Honors old Friend come to Town, and passes under the name of a Doctor of
Physic. He is to dine with my Lord Bishop this day, but I have discovered him
unto his Lordship what he is. I have presumed to keep Daniel with me longer
then I determined at my departure; the reason is, because I am unskilful of the
streets, and I have not Dutch enough to enquire my way: I will shortly send him
home. What shall be done in the following Sessions, I will not fail to inform
your Lordship by the next Messenger, in the mean while I humbly take my leave.

Dort this 16/26 of November. 1618. Your Honors Chaplain, and bounden in all
Duty, Jo. Hales.
I have sent your Honor a Catalogue of the Synod Printed here with us.



Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
ON Wednesday the 18/28 of November, those of the Synod met in the morning.
This Session was only deliberative, for they concluded nothing. The proposal
was, what form of catechizing both for children and youths should be thought
fittest to be put in practice in the Belgic Churches. The Praeses first spoke
many things learnedly of the necessity of Catechizing, that it was the basis
and ground of Religion, and the sole way of transfusing the principles of
Christianity into men: that it was very ancient, practiced by the Patriarchs,
by the Apostles, by Origin, and approved by the consent of the fathers: that
from the neglect of this came the ignorance of the common sort, and that
multitude of sects amongst them, of Papists Anabaptists, Libertines, etc.
whereas if an uniform course of teaching them their first principles had been
taken up, there would not have been so many differences: that there was now
greater necessity then ever of reviving this custom, because of the Jesuits who
mightily labor in this kind, as appeared by some of their acts lately in
Frisia, etc. Next were the Deputyes for the strangers called upon to deliver
what forms of Catechizing were in their Churches put in use: which they did,
and gave them to the Praeses in writing. After these, the Professors, and the
other Deputyes spoke their minds, and almost all gave them up in writings,
which were immediately pronounced in public by the Scribe; and such as spoke
memoriter, promised to set down their opinions in script^^, and deliver them to
the Praeses after dinner. The principal heads on which they insisted, were
these: that there might be three degrees of Catechizing, one Domestical, to be
practiced by Fathers and Masters in their familyes: another Scholasticall to be
used by Scholemasters in public Schools: and a third Ecclesiastical to be
practiced by the minister in the Church, that so fathers might fit their
children for the Schools, the Schools for the Church: That therefore parents
and masters should be admonished to look to this duty in their familyes: That
Scholemasters should be chosen, such as were skillful themselves to catechize,
and that they should be careful to bring their scholars to catecheticall
sermons; that from sermons they should presently call them to the Schole, and
there examine them how they had profited: The minister of every parish together
with the Seniours and Deacons should monthly or quarterly visit the Schools,
and know the Scholars proficiency in this behalf: that the Ministers before the
times of the Communion should repair unto private Families, and Catechize: that
the Magistrates would be pleased to provide stipends for Schole-Masters, so to
make them the more cheerful: that there should be variety of Catechizing
according to the variety of the age, one for Children, which should contein the
Lords Prayer, the Creed, the Commandments, the Doctrine of the Sacraments, etc.
that for such as were elder, other things should be added according to their
capacity: that to take away confusion one form of Catechism in each kind
should be used; that the Jesuits Catechismes of Lessius, Canisius, Ledesma,
etc. should be abolisht. All this and more by sundry men was exhibited in
writing, and read in the audience of the Synod.

That which hitherto has been done concerns only the manner of Catechizing, as
for the matter of the Catechism, that was not now thought fit to be spoken of,
but was put off till the end of the Synod. When all had spoken their pleasures
the Praeses signified, that he together with the Assessors and Scribes would
compare all these Writings together, and out of them all gather one form of
Catechizing as they thought best, and exhibit it unto the Synod to be approved
of, or altered to their liking. And so the Session ended. Amongst the rest,
there were some particulars told. One of the Deputies of Geldria, to show the
force of private Catechizing, related that amongst them there was a Minister,
who when he first came to his Living, found his Church quite empty, because all
his Parishioners were Papists; and therefore if he would preach, he was to
preach to the bare Walls: but he takes so much pains as to go to every of his
Parish privately unto their houses, and there by familiar conversing with them,
and expounding unto them the grounds of Religion, he so far prevailed with
them, that in the compass of a year he gained them all to come to Church, and
by this means has scarce a Papist in his Parish. But doubtless the most
effectual way of all the rest to bring young persons to learn their Catechism,
was that which was related by one of the Helvetian Deputies. For he told us
that in his Country the manner was, that all young persons that meant to marry
were to repair, both he and she, unto their Minister, a little before they
meant to marry, and by him to be examined how well they had conn'd their
Catechism: if they had not done it perfectly to his mind, he had power to
defer their Marriage till they had better learnt their Lessons. I was much
affected to this course when I heard it; and I thought that doubtless it was a
speedy way to make all young persons, excepting my self and two or three more
that mean not overhastily to marry, to be skillful in their Catechism. The
Synod shall be ill advised, if they make no use of it.

Mr. Dean this day is to make a Latin Sermon in the Synod-house, and after that
there are certain Supplications exhibited to the Synod to be considered of.
What they are, and what they contein I will inform your Honor by the next
convenient Messenger. I have suffered Daniel to come home, and supply himself
of some necessaries, but to return to me again upon Saturday, except your
Honor shall otherwise appoint. His lodging and diet are provided, and he will
be serviceable to me this ill wether, to be sent in business, my self not being
so well able in dirt and snow to trace the streets. But this I leave to your
Lordships consideration, and for this present I humbly take my leave.

From Dort this 19/29 of November. 1618. Your Honors Chaplain, and bounden in
all Duty, Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, my very good Lord.
UPon Thursday, 19/29 of this present, the Synod being met together, Mr. Dean
of Worcester made in the Synod-house a polite and pathetical Latin Sermon; the
portion of Scripture he chose for his Theme was the 17 verse of the 6th of
Ecclesiastes, Noli esse justus nimium, neque esto sapiens nimis. After a witty
coming upon his text, how it should come that Righteousness and Wisdom, which
are every where commended unto us, should here seem to receive a check, he
showed how men might seem to be too just; First the Seculars, when sitting in
place of Justice they stood too strictly in keeping the Letter of the Law, and
then by inflicting too heavy punishments, when in equity lighter would serve:
next in the second word sapiens nimis, he taxt the Divines for presuming too
far in prying into the Judgments of God, and so came to reprove the curious
Disputes which our age has made concerning Predestination; that this Dispute
for its endlesness was like the Mathematical line, divisibilis in semper
divisibilia; that it was in Divinity, as the Rule of Cos is in Arithmetic. For
the ending of these Disputes his advice unto the Synod was, that both parts
contending should well consider of S. Paul's discourse in the ninth to the
Romans, and for their final determination both should exhibit unto the Synod a
plain perspienous and familiar paraphrase on that Chapter. For if the meaning
of that Discourse were once perfectly opened, the question were at an end. From
hence he came to exhort them to stand to the former determina^^ions, which had
hitherto most generally past in the Reformed Churches, in these points: and
told them that it was an especial part of his Majesty's Commission to exhort
them to keep unaltered the former Confessions. How fit it was to open so much
of their Commission, and thus to express themselves for a party against the
Remonstrants your Honor can best judge. After this he brought a very
pathetical conclusion, consisting of a vehement exhortation to peace and union,
and so he ended. The Praeses gave him thanks for his good pains, and then told
us, whereas it was once purposed to lay open before the Synod certain Libelli
supplices (which I mentioned to your Honor in my last Letters) he might not
now do it, for some reasons which he then concealed. And so he dismissed the
Synod without doing any thing farther. What these Libelli supplices contain, is
unknown. Some imagine it to be from the Remonstrant party; others more probably
think, that the subject of them were certain Gravamina of the Country
Ministers.

Mr. Deans Sermon was taken well, for any thing I can yet learn to the
contrary; but your Lordship shall understand, there was a little doubt made
concerning these Latin Sermons. Mr. Praeses, when the Letters were directed to
the Arminian party, requested the Foreigners that they would be pleased to
bestow in their Courses some Latin Sermons to entertain the Synod till the
Arminians made their appearance; and first commended this unto the English. My
Lord Bishop refused it because of the sudden warning: but Mr. Dean would needs
undertake it. But certain of the Exteri came to the Bishop, and showed him how
dangerous this might be. For it was, as they thought, a very hard matter so to
walk, as not to touch upon some points that are in Controversy, which could not
be without the offense of one party. My Lord Bishop and the other two, for this
reason thought the motion very inconvenient: but Mr. Dean would by no means
apprehend of it, but as of a business very fit to be done. It seems this was
the general conceit of the Foreigners, which was the cause that there was in
this kind nothing done till now, notwithstanding that the motion was made a
pretty while before my coming to Dort. But how well this example is approved,
it will appear, if others of the Foreigners do follow it. Here is a rumor of
a certain Jesuitical book, lately set forth in disgrace of our Synod. I have
not yet seen it, but I understand it is in the hands of the Praeses unto whom I
had repaired to have looked into it, but that I conceive him to be exceeding
full of business. As soon as I can learn what it is, I will acquaint your
Honor with it. We have much speech of a strange Comet of an unusual length
seen this morning. I saw it not; and peradventure it is no News unto your
Lordship, if it have appeared in the Horison of the Hague. My Lord Bishop and
his Company remember their Love and Service to your Honor, and thank you for
your Letter of English News, which they here return. I have sent according to
your Lordships Will six Catalogues of the Synod, printed with us in Latin. And
so for this time I humbly take my leave.

From Dort this 19/29 of November. 1618. Your Honors Chaplain, and bounden in
all Duty, Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
UPon Friday the 20/30 of November. the Deputies met in the Morning: where first
of all, there were recited the Judgments of some concerning the manner of
Catechizing which was yet depending, who had not delivered their minds in
writing the day before. In this was there nothing extraordinary, save only the
advice of the Remonstrants of Utrecht. For the Deputies of that Province gave
their Judgments severally, the Contra-Remonstrants by themselves, and the
Remonstrants by themselves. These first blamed the common Catechism passant
amongst them, as being too obscure for the Simple, and too long for the Memory.
Secondly they thought it not necessary that there should be a threefold
Catechism, for one well learnt might serve for all the rest. Thirdly, they
would have a Catechism so made, that the Answers might be nothing else but bare
Texts of H. Scripture. For they thought, that if Scripture alone were taught,
and not any men's glosses, it would be a more immediate means to gain the
Anabaptists and other Schismatics to accept of the Catechism. Fourthly, they
thought fit that in the Preface to these Catechisms, there should be a note
given to this purpose; that these kinds of writing by Catechisms, etc. were to
be esteemed only as the Apochryphal Scriptures. To the third point some little
thing was answered to this purpose, that this was a mean utterly to extirpate
all other Forms of Catechizings out of the Church, there never yet having been
any form of Creed or Catechism so conceived. Yet there might be a time
hereafter for the Synod to consider of it, when they pleased. After this
followed the Form of Catechizing, which the Praeses and Assessors had agreed
upon. My purpose was to have taken an extract of it and sent it to your Honor,
and I dealt with Festus Hommius about it; but his answer was, that he was to
communicate about this with the Praeses, and that it was in the hand of Sebast.
Dammannus his fellow Scribe. To Dammannus I was not known, neither did I
understand of any acquaintance he had with your Honor, and therefore I let it
rest. The sum of it was this. That there should be observed a threefold
Catechizing. 1. At home by the Parents. 2. In the Schole by the Schole-master;
A third in the Church by Catechetical Sermons: then, that there should be a
threefold Catechism, one for Incipientes, containing the Lords Prayer, the
Creed, the Commandments, the Doctrine of the Sacraments, and the Church
Discipline. A second for the Middle sort, which should be a brief of the
Palatine Catechism: a third for Youths, the Palatine Catechism it self. That
every one that was admitted Scholemaster should be bound to teach no other
Catechism, and that all other Forms should be abolisht: that if either
Scholemasters in the Schools, or Ministers in the Church, should refuse or
neglect to Catechize, they should be subject to censure, etc. When this Form
was read, the Provinces were in order asked what they would have altered or
supplied. Those of Geldria thought it fit that the Minister before his
Catechetical Sermon, should not only take the words of the Catechism (as the
custom had in most places been) but likewise some Text of Scripture upon which
the doctrine of the Catechism was grounded. For, as it seems, the custom is in
Catechistical Sermons, not to take a Text of Scripture, but a portion of the
Catechism for their Text and Theme. It was answered that this custom had been a
long time laid down, and could not now conveniently be recalled: the same
Deputies proposed, whether it were not fit, that whereas in the Decree there is
mention made of a censure to pass on those who neglected it, there should be
some particular form of Censure set down by the Synod. The thing being put to
voices, it was decreed, that it should be left to the Judgment of the Classes
how they should be censured. The South Hollanders thought it necessary there
should be public catechizing in the Church by way of Question and Answer. It
was answered, that this could not be by reason of the frequency of Sermons.
Those of Overisell proposed somewhat concerning the form of chatechetical
Sermons. It was answered that this should hereafter be thought of. Which answer
is a civil way which the Praeses uses, when he means to put by an impertinent
question. Last of all, those of the Walon Churches required that this Decree
should not prejudice them, who had already accepted of Beza's Catechism in
their Churches. Now whereas there were three Catechisms proposed, of which
there was but one in being, namely the Palatine, they consulted of deputing
some, who should make the other two. The matter being put to Scrutiny, there
were chosen these six, Polyander, Gomarus, Tysius, Lydius, Fauchelius,
Udemannus. Here the Praeses proposed to the Synod, that they would think of fit
means for the Education and training up of those who should enter the
Ministry: but those of North Holland proposed a doubt, wherein the Church of
Amsterdam required the determination of the Synod. The matter is this. The
Merchants of Amsterdam having Traffic into the East Indies, took into their
Families many of the Youths and Infants of that Country, but doubted whether
they were to be baptized or no. The question was thus proposed, Whether the
children of Ethnic parents adopted into the F^^milies of Christians were to be
baptized, if so be they who did offer them to be baptized did undertake that
they should be brought up in the Christian Faith. But both these questions were
put over to the next Session, and so the Synod brake up. This afternoon the
Duchess of Tremullio came to Town. The English went to entertain her, where my
Lord Bishop made a speech unto her in Latin, which by her Chaplain was
interpreted unto her, who likewise in her name returned answer. But of the
particulars of this entertainment, I suppose My Lord Bishop in his Letters
relates more fully to your Honor, then I can; for I was not there.

On Saturday the first of December, stylo novo, the Deputies being met in the
morning, the question concerning means of education of those who should be
fitted for the Ministry was proposed; where, because they found it to be a
greater matter then it seemed when at first it was proposed, the Provinces
requested further respite, excepting the Zelanders and South Hollanders, who
there delivered up their Judgments in scripto. The substance of what the
Zelanders delivered was this: that it would please the States General to
appoint that a certain number of Youths might be bred up for the Ministry at
the charge of the public purse. That the wealthier sort would send such of
their children to the Schools, as they thought fittest to make Scholars. That
out of these should be chosen youths of ingenuous Parentage and Manners, of
good wit, of strength and health of body, which should be sent unto the
University. That in the University there might be distinct Colleges for every
Province, and in these Colleges there might be Regents and Supervisors, which
might prescribe unto Youths a Method of study, and not suffer them to wander in
variety of study, and not persit themselves in some one kind. That there might
some time be prefixed for their abode in the University, as five or six years.
And because many upon two years study seek for preferment in the Church, and
others on the contrary stay in the University over long; for remedy of both
these there might a time be fixed wherein the whole course of study should be
absolved. That these Students every year should give an account of their
proficiency to their Parents and Benefactors, and such as bred them up: that
after this they should go and visit foreign Churches and Universities to see
and observe. That at their coming home they bring with them the Testimonies of
the Pastors and Governors of the Churches and Universities wherein they have
been, and exhibit them to the Classes where they are to live; and expect their
calling to the Ministry. That they should publicly in the Church read the
Scriptures before the people, for this would make them known to the Church,
embolden them to speak to the multitude, and mend their voices and delivery.
That by consent of the Classes they be permitted to be with the Pastors, to
confer with them in Cases of Conscience, to go with them when they visit the
sick, that thus they may learn how to deal in these cases, and how to conceive
prayers upon occasion. That to fit them for the Church Regiment, which is a
thing not learnt in Schools, some months before their Institution, they
converse in the greater Cities, to be present in the Presbyteries and the
Meetings of the Deacons, to understand how Voices may be asked and gathered,
how Church Discipline is to be exercised, and what in diverse cases is to be
done. That they be examined how fit they be to reform men's manners. That it
were fit that even in Universities Youths were trained up in Practick Divinity
and Cases of Conscience. The substance of what the South-Hollanders delivered
was this. First that Youths should stay at least two years in the University,
and publicly read the Scriptures in the Church. Secondly, that after this they
publicly dispute of some difficult question in Religion. Thirdly, that they be
examined of all the Articles in Religion, and if they give satisfaction, then
they may be admitted ad Propositiones, (what these are I know not) and after a
years exercise in them, they may be examined by the Classes, who if they find
them fit may give them leave to exercise themselves in Catechizing and
Preaching. That to learn Church Government they be admitted to Consistories and
Classes to see what there is done, so that what there they see they keep in
silence. That they leave not the studies of Divinity to meddle with other
things. That they may have leave to Baptize, if the necessity of Rural Churches
require. Yet they must expect a year ere they be admitted, which is not to be
done without sufficient Testimony that all has been done which is required.
The rest of the Provinces required respite till Monday: and so they past to the
Question which was proposed in the Name of the Churches of Amsterdam,
concerning the Baptizing of the Children of Ethnic Parents. The English first
exhibited their minds in Writing to this effect. That Infants, if they were
justly taken, as, if they were given, or bought, or the like, (for it might not
be lawful fraudulently or violently to take them from their Parents) ought to
be baptized. For so it is recorded of Abraham, that he circumcised every one in
his house, even those whom he had bought with his Money: but if they were
Adulti, they might not be Baptized till they made Profession of the Christian
Faith. With these agreed the Bremenses and the Professors. On the contrary the
Helvetians and South-Hollanders concluded, that the Infants of Ethnic Parents
ought not to be baptized, till they came to be of years to declare their Faith.
Their chief reason was, because Baptism was a Sign of the Covenant: but the
Infants of Ethnic Parents are not born within the Covenant, and therefore they
cannot be partakers of this Sign. Here was a little indirect dealing betwixt
the Helvetians and the Bremenses. The Helvetians Scribe had by some means or
other suffered a copy of the reason for their opinion to be brought aforehand
to those of Breme, who openly in the Synod house, in scripto refuted them:
which thing is feared will cause some choler. And this was all that this day
was done concerning this question, and so both the questions yet depend. The
Synod did the sooner end, because they were at eleven a clock to go to the
Funeral of Henricus ab Hell, who died lately, as I think I told your Honor.
The Solemnity was no more but this. Some of the chief of the Town together with
the whole Synod went to the House where he died, accompanied him to the Church,
laid him in his Grave, and went home again, almost in as little space as I have
told it you. The Duchess of Tremullio was at this Session, and as I hear,
spoke very well of the Synod, commending it both for Piety and good Order.

The Remonstrants are now every day expected. We understand that they are
already met together at Leyden. Mr. Praeses came this day to my Lord Bishop,
and under Benedicite told him, that it was thought the Remonstrants would
become Suitors to the Secular Deputies, for some greater respect in the Synod,
then it is likely otherwise they should have: and that for this they would use
the English as Mediators. Then, that they would call in question the right of
his Presidentship, as being made only by the Provincials without any respect
had unto the Foreigners. To this my Lord Bishop replied, that for the first,
since they were Members of the Synod, they would not do any thing clancularily
without the Consent and Privity of the whole Company. To the second he
answered, that hitherto they had acknowledged him for their Praeses, and so
they would continue to do, notwithstanding any objection might be fancyed, so
that of them he might secure himself. And this is all has happened since Friday
Morning, at what time I addressed my last Letters unto your Honor: and for this
time commending your Lordship to Gods good Protection, I humbly take my leave.

Dort, December. 2. 1618. Stylo novo. Your Honors Chaplain, and Bounden in all
Duty Jo. Hales

Right Honorable, and my very good Lord,
MY Letters containing the acts of our Synod upon Friday and Saturday, I
dispatched this morning unto your Honor by a Soldier whom I knew not, and he
delivered them to a Skipper whom he knew not, and whether or no they came to
your Lordships hands I am uncertain. There are to come with them Letters from
my Lord Bishop to your Honor. Upon Monday the third of December. the Deputies
being met, they prosecuted the two questions before left undecided; First of
the Baptizing of children born of Ethnic parents: secondly, of means
considerable how to breed up those who are to enter the Ministry. In the first,
concerning the adulti, the Synod agreed, that if they made profession of the
Christian Faith they might be baptized, etiam invitis parentibus. Their reason
was, because that after children came to be of years, in case of Religion they
depended not from the power of their parents, but might make their own market.
All the difficulty was of infants, and children not yet of discretion to make
their choice. The English, the Professors, those of Hassia, those of Breme, of
Zeland, of Freesland thought it necessary they should be baptized, if they were
rightfully adopted into Christian Families, and that their parents had
altogether resigned them into the hands of the Christians. They grounded
themselves upon the examples of Abraham circumcising all that were of his
Family; of Paul baptizing whole households, of the primitive Church recorded in
S. Austin, who shows, that anciently children that were exposititii were wont
to be taken up by the Christians and baptized. Now such were the children of
Ethnic parents; for it was never esteemed lawful for Christians to expose
their children. All the rest were peremptory that they were not to be baptized,
till they came to be of years of Discretion, to make profession of the Faith.
The North Hollanders themselves, whose business it was, and who moved the Synod
in it, were expressly against it; whether they were bought, given, taken in war,
or howsoever. Their reasons were, because they are immundi; because they are
extra foedus, of which Baptism is a sign; because Adoption could entitle them
only to terrene, not to an Heavenly inheritance, etc. So that if plurality of
voices carry it, the negative part prevails. The Praeses required some time to
compare the opinions together, and so for that time forbear to pronounce
sentence. And because the examples of Abraham and Paul were much stood upon by
those who held the affirmative, he proposed these two things to be considered
of. First, whether it were likely that in Abraham's Family, when he put
circumcision in act, there were any Infants, whose Parents died uncircumcised.
Secondly, whether it were likely that in the Families baptized by Paul, there
were any Infants, whose Parents died unbaptized: and so he past away to the
second Question, concerning the manner of training up those who were to enter
the Ministry. In my last Letters to your Honor I related at large the advice
given in this point by the Zelanders and South Hollanders. It was now proposed
to the Synod, whether they did approve their counsel, or except against it.
Some thought it was unlawful for men not in Orders to preach publicly, or
baptize; (for the South Hollanders in their advice, had determined they
should,) others thought it unmeet, that they should be present in the
Consistories and meetings of Deacons, or that they should read the Scriptures
publicly in the Church (which was the joint advice of the Zelanders and South
Hollanders.) Lastly, it was doubted whether the Synod could make any Decree in
this Question; because of the several customs in several Provinces, which it
lay not in the power of the Synod to prejudice. So that instead of deciding
this one doubt the Praeses proposed five more to be considered of. 1. Whether
men not in Orders might make public Sermous. 2. Whether they might baptize. 3.
Whether it were fit they should come into the Consistories. 4. Whether they
should read the Scriptures publicly. 5. Whether the Synod could make a Decree
in this business, for the reason above mentioned, or only give advice. The
Synod had begun to speak to the two first, and it was the general opinion that
they might not baptize. In the point of preaching they differed. Some thought
absolutely it might be permitted them: others on the contrary thought no: some
took a middle course, thinking they might preach privately before a select
Auditory, who were to be their Judges how sufficient they were for that end:
some that they may do it openly, so that it were understood they did it not cum
potestate solvendi and ligandi. But when part of the Synod had spoken their
minds, because the time was much passed, they brake up, and put off the
determination to the next Session.

Here is a rumor that some of the Remonstrants are come to Town, who they are I
cannot yet learn. I shall to morrow make inquiry, and by the next Messenger
acquaint your Lordship with it. In the mean time I humbly take my leave.

Dort this 3. of December. 1618. Stylo novo. Your Honors Chaplain, and bounden
in all Duty, Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
UPon Tuesday the fourth of December. Stylo novo, the Deputies being met in the
morning they proceeded to determine of those doubts, which were moved the
Session before. In the matter consulted concerning the training up of those who
were to take upon them the Ministry, there were five questions moved. 1.
Whether it were fit they should preach publicly. 2. Whether they should
baptize. 3. Whether they should come to the Consistories and meetings of the
Classes. 4. Whether they should read the Scriptures publicly in the Church
before the people. Lastly, whether they should make a Decree to bind all
Provinces necessarily, or only to advise them. To the first two the Exteri had
given their answer in the former Session. For the question of Baptism, no man
stood upon it, but all accounted it unlawful, for men not in orders to take
upon them to baptize: the doubt was concerning Sermons. Jo. Polyander thought
it very fit that such as intended the Ministry, before they were admitted
should practice preaching. First because it was the practice of some of the
Belgic Churches. Secondly, because it took from them that (...), that
subrustick shamefastness of many men, by which they feared to speak unto the
people. Thirdly, because it was convenient that they should be known for men
fit for that duty, before they should enter upon it. Fourthly, that they might
approve themselves to their Parents and Benefactors, who had been at the charge
of their Education. Provided that it were with these conditions: first that it
were done with consent of the Classes: Secondly that it were practiced only
when the Church was unsupplied, either by the death, or absence, or sickness of
their Pastor, or in case of like necessity. With Polyander did Wallaeus of
Middleburgh agree, and grounded himself upon the practice of the Jews, amongst
whom not only the Levites, but others also publicly taught the Law, as it
appears by the story in the Acts, where Paul and Barnabas coming into the
Synagogue, the Rulers called unto them, that if they had any word of
exhortation, they should speak unto the people. Contrary unto both these was D.
Gamarus, who held it utterly unlawful for any to preach before they were
admitted to the Ministry. First, because they had no Mission; and who can
preach except he be sent. Secondly, because they had not the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven. Thirdly, it was granted that they could not baptize: now
Christ has put Baptism and Preaching together, Go teach all Nations baptizing
them: and quae Deus conjunxit home ne separet. Last of all, though there had
been a custom in some places to the contrary, yet fitter it was that custom
should conform it self to Truth, then Truth to custom. With Gomarus agreed
Thysius, and thought his argument drawn from Mission to be unanswerable; and
for mine own part I thought so to. D. Gomarus is a man of great note; but I
never heard him speak with any strength of reason in the Synod till now. What
Silrandus his opinion was concerning the point I know not; for he does so
favor his voice, that I can never tell what he says: and I imagine I have no
great loss of it. After the Professors was there little said, which was not
said before, only Lydius of South Holland thought certainly to confute Gomarus,
and told us, that such men might preach, and that they had Vocation so to do.
For first that inward Vocation which they had from the Spirit, and then their
Examination and Admission by the Classes was warrant for them sufficient to
preach, though they had no particular charge. For this good News did Mr. Dean
of Worcester publicly applaud D. Lydius in the Synod. I mervail'd much with my
self to see Mr. Dean and Lydius so wide of the mark. For there was no question
of those who were admitted by the Classes, but only of such who fitted
themselves to be admitted. The Examination and Admission by the Classes is the
very form of their Ministry, and not their being placed over a particular
Church. And thus much at length did the Praeses tell us. When all had spoken,
Mr. Praeses pronounced that it was concluded by the Synod, that it should not
be lawful for them to baptize: but for the matter of Sermons, it was thought
good by the Synod, that it should be left to the Judgment and Discretion of
the particular Classes. In the third question concerning the Admission of the
Proponentes (as they call them) to the Consistories, little was said, and so in
the fourth, concerning the public reading of Scripture in the Church; Some
thought fit that the ancient custom of Anagnostae in the Church should be
revived: others thought it some disparagement to public Reading, that it was
committed to Tradesmen, and many times to men unskilful, that knew not well to
read: In both these the Synod determined nothing, but left them free to the
discretion of the Classes; and the later was to be left to the Liberty of the
Proponentes, whether they would read or no; and that they were not to be
enforced to it, it they would not. In the last question whether they should
make any necessary Decree binding all, or only by way of Counsel, my Lord
Bishop being asked what he thought fit, made answer, that they were to
distinguish betwixt things necessary, and not necessary. Things absolutely
necessary should be absolutely decreed: other things should be left arbitrary.
Which sentence passed by the major part of voices, and was Synodically
concluded. Here the Deputies for the Remonstrants of Utrecht exhibited to the
Synod in Writing a Bill, containing some exceptions against what hitherto had
passed in the matter of the Catechism. First they misliked that any such form
should be forced upon them. Secondly, that all Scholemasters should be so
strictly bound to that form, as that it should not be lawful to recede from it.
For this did prejudice all other forms now current, and might discontent the
Lutherans and others, who had admitted of another form. Thirdly, they charged
the Praeses with some indirect dealing. For whereas he had, whilst the
business was in fieri, solemnly protested, that there was no intent concerning
the matter, but only concerning the form of Catechizing, yet in the issue they
had confirmed the Palatine Catechism, which contained as well matter as form.
Fourthly, they misliked the Decree concerning the not premising of a Text of
Scripture before catechetical Sermons. Lastly, they required that this their
dissent might be registered. To this the Praeses replied, that the Synod had
only expressed it self what it thought fittest to be done. As for the necessity
of Execution, that was not in the power of the Synod, but of the States
General, who when all was done, might either pass or recall what they thought
good. Secondly to the point concerning himself, he answered, he had done so,
and thought it fittest so to do (but the Synod thought otherwise) and since
there was a matter of Catechism to be concluded, they thought they might
confirm this as well as any other: and this was not so confirmed, but that it
was in the power of the Synod to alter what they please. To the point of
premising a Text of Scripture before the catechetical Sermon, he answered that
the determination of the Synod was not to take that custom away there where it
it was in use, but only to prohibit the urging of it there where it had a long
time been disused. To the last, concerning the Registring of this their
dissent, he answered, he saw not how this could be granted them; since the
States General had concluded, that what passed by a major part of voices,
should alone be accounted the Act of the Synod: and by the same proportion
every one that passes not his voice with the major part might require his
dissent to be registered. After this the Praeses signified that concerning the
question of the baptizing of Ethnicks children put up by the Church of
Amsterdam, he required yet farther respite; because of the opinion of some of
the Synod, which was somewhat ambiguous and obscure. He was therefore to
confer with the Authors of it, and therefore desired that the resolution
might be put off till the next Session: and withal he commended to the Synod
the consideration how the liberty of printing so promiscuously all kind of
scandalous and libellous Pamphlets might be represt, and so he dismissed the
Synod.

The Remonstrants are in Town, but because they keep themselves private, and
have not presented themselves unto the States and Deputies, there is no notice
taken of it. And so commending your Honor to Gods good Protection, I humbly
take my leave.

Dort this 4. of December. 1618. stylo novo. Your Honors Chaplain, and bounden in
all Duty, Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, my very good Lord.
UPon Wednesday the 5. of December, stylo novo, the Deputies being met in the
morning, the first thing which was done, was the admission of a Senior or Elder
for those of Groninga, whose number as it seems was not yet full. The thing was
transacted in Dutch, and yet the consent of the English was asked: at which I
did not a little muse. Next followed the advice of the Helvetians, what course
was to be taken with those, who are to enter the Ministry; in which there was
no great matter from what before was intimated. The Palatini promised the like,
and therefore the Praeses required yet farther respite before they did conceive
any form of Decree in this behalf. Then followed the Decree of the Synod
concerning the question moved by those of Amsterdam, about the Baptism of
children born of Ethnic Parents. The Decision consisted of two parts. The
first concerned the Adulti, and it was this; That such as were of years and
capacity should be diligently taught and catechized, and then, if they did
desire it, they should be baptized. The second concerned Infants, and it was,
That till they came to years of Discretion, they should by no means be
baptized. A strange decision, and such as, if my memory or reading fails me
not, no Church either Ancient or Modern ever gave. When it was objected, what
if they were in danger of death; their answer was, that the want of Baptism
would not prejudice them with God, except we would determine as the Papists do,
that Baptism is necessary to salvation. Which is as much to undervalue the
necessity of Baptism as the Church of Rome does overvalue it. Here followed a
recitation of all that had been done since the business of the Catechism had
been set on foot: amongst the rest was registered the exceptions of the
Remonstrants of Utrecht, and it was added, atque iis est a Praeside
satisfactum. Those of Utrecht excepted against that word satisfactum: they had,
said they, an answer given them, but no satisfaction. For they persisted in
their former opinion: and forthwith that word was altered. Here was a doubt
moved, whether it were not fit that some of the especial Reasons brought by the
Synod in the Question of the Baptism of Infants should not be added to the
Decree. It was answered, That Reasons were obnoxious to cavil and exceptions,
and it was not for the Authority of the Synod to Reason, but to Decree. After
this the Praeses signified to the Synod that the time prefixed for the
appearance of the Remonstrants was now expiring, and yet nothing was signified
concerning their appearance neither to the Secular President, nor
Ecclesiastical. Wherefore naming them all, he thought good to cite them to
appear. It was answered by those of Utrecht, that they did provide and would
shortly be forth coming. In the mean while to take up the time, Mr. Praeses
thought good to commend to the Synod the consideration and redress of those
abuses which were in Printing. Every man was suffered to print what him listed,
whence came abundance of blasphemous, heretical, obscene and scand^^lous
Pamphlets. Many here delivered their opinions, others required farther time to
think of it. The English first thought fit that the States General should be
requested to take the care of this into their hands. That there should be
Censors to approve all such Books as should go to the Press. That no man should
print, but such as were known to be of the Reformed Religion. Unto this advice
diverse things were added by others; as that there should be a set number of
Printers: that they should be sworn: that there should be certain Laws
prescribed unto them: that they should print no Heretical Books, especially the
Books of David Georgius, H. Nicolaus Socinus: that no libels, no unlawful
pictures, either obscene, or made to any man's disgrace, should be permitted:
that no Book should be printed without the names of the Author, Printer, Place,
except the Synod or the Magistrates did in some cases otherwise think good:
that there should be care that the Correctors for the Press were good Scolars:
and many other things of the like nature. Then were there read certain Canons
made in some Synods before, concerning this business. Theodatus of Geneva told
us, that in his travails, at Venice he had observed that there was a College
of sundry persons, secular and spiritual, to whose care was committed all the
business of Printing. He thought it fit there should be such Colleges here
erected. When all had spoken that would, the Praeses told them that Adrian
Smoutius had written a little Book in the Belgic, Tongue unto the Synod, and
sent the copies of it to him to be distributed. And so requesting them to take
in good part the good will of the man, for want of more business the Synod
brake up.

At length are we coming to the main battle. The Armies have been in sight one
of another, and have had some parley. The manner was this. Upon Thursday the 6.
of December. stylo novo. The Synod being set in the morning, the Praeses
signified, that there had come unto him in the name of the Remonstrants these
four, H. Leo, Niellius, Matthisius, and Pinakerus, to give notice that the
Remonstrants were ready according to their Citation; but because they had but
lately come unto the Town, that yet convenient Lodgings were not provided,
their papers, books and stuff were confused, therefore they required respite
either till Saturday, or at least Friday morning. The President of the
Politics replied, that they should come, and personally make appearance before
the Synod, and there propose their minds, and if the Synod approved their
causes, they might be deferred. Upon this were two of the Deputies of Utrecht
sent forth, to give them warning to provide for their present appearance. In
the mean while, till they came, the Praeses thought fit, that such as in the
former Session delivered not themselves concerning the Reformation of abuses in
Printing, should now do it. Here was little delivered, besides what was said
the day before, only some few particulars, as that order should be taken to
repress this longing humor in many men of coming to the Press: that there
should be no Impression of the Bible at any time without leave had: Foreign
Books brought out of other Countries should not be distracted here without
peculiar leave, after their being perused by the Censurers: to ease the
Censurers, that they might not be troubled with reading too great a multitude
of improfitable books, it was thought fit, that the books should first be
brought to the Classes, and what they approved should be brought to the
Censurers, etc. In the mean while the Remonstrants came, all that were cited by
Letters, and were admitted into the Synod. There is in the midst of the
Synod-House a long Table, set, as it seems, for them; for it has hitherto been
void, no man sitting at it: here Chairs and Forms being set, they were willed
to sit down. The Praeses told them, that he had commended to the Synod their
Suit of being a little respited: but it was the will of the Deputies for the
States, that they should come before the Synod, and propose their cause
themselves. Episcopius standing up, spoke to this effect. First he prayed God
to give a blessing to this Meeting, and to pour into their minds such
conceits, as best fitted men come together for such ends: then he signified,
that according to their Citation they were now come ad collationem
instituendam, concerning that cause, which hitherto with a good Conscience they
had maintained. As for the point of delay, true it is they spoke to the Praeses
concerning a respite until Saturday or Friday, by reason of that great
distraction of their books and papers, and want of convenient lodging, but not
as a petition to be moved in that behalf unto the Synod; but only as a thing
which out of common equity they might have presumed on without acquainting the
Synod with it. For they were ready, even at that present to begin the business
they came for, without any further delay. But this they left to the Deputies
Secular and Ecclesiastical to determine of. Then were they requested to
withdraw a little into a chamber near the Synod House; and immediately was it
proposed unto the Synod, what time was to be set for to begin. The time prefixed
was the morrow after. Jo. Polyander took hold of those words, ad collationem,
and told the Synod, that it was fit the Remonstrants were told the end of their
coming, and the manner of proceeding which should be taken with them,that they
might know what they were to look for, and so provide. They were to be
informed, that they came not to conference; neither did the Synod profess it
self an adverse party against them. Conferences had been heretofore held to no
purpose. They ought to have heeded the words of the Letters by which they were
cited. They were called, not to conference, but to propose their Opinions with
their Reasons, and leave it to the Synod to judge of them. The Synod would be a
Judge, and not a party. Then were they called in again, and all this was told
them. Episcopius answered, that for the word Collatio he stood not on it, and
how they would carry themselves it should appear the day following. Mean while
one thing they would request of the Synod: that is, that Grevinchovius and
Goulartius should be sent for to the Synod as Patrons of this cause. That they
had this last week exhibited a Supplication to the States General to this
purpose, and received this answer, that they should put this matter to the
Synod, and if the Synod thought it fit to be granted, they would not be against
it. Neither did they propose this to seek delays. For they were ready, whilst
these men should be sent for to proceed to the action. Only they thought fit,
that to maintain their cause they should be sent for, who could best do it.
Then were they again dismissed: and one was sent to them, to call for their
Supplication to the Lords, and the Lords Answer. To this they returned, that
the Lords gave this answer, not in writing, but by word of mouth: and for the
copy of their Supplication, they called not for it any more. Then was the thing
proposed unto the Synod, and the Secular Deputies replied, that they would
return their answer on the morrow: and the same was the answer of the Synod.
Mr. Praeses thought that Grevinchovius might be admitted, salvis censuris
Ecclesiasticis: yet notwithstanding he thought good to acquaint the Synod with
the quality of this man, and thereupon he produced the Act of the Provincial
Synod of South Holland, wherein it was witnessed, that the Synod, because he
did refuse to appear when they cited him, and because of many blasphemies in
his Book, and of many reproachful speeches against the Magistrates and against
the Ministers, had suspended him ab omni munere Ecclesiastico. From this
Grevinchovius had not appealed to the National Synod, and therefore it was in
the power of the Synod to do what they thought fit. Then were the Remonstrants
again called in, and it was signified unto them, that on the morrow they should
understand the will of the Synod concerning their motion made, and so were they
again dismissed; and the Session ended, the Praeses having first premised, that
all other things yet depending, as the Decree concerning the Proponentes,
together with the Remedies concerning the abuses in Printing, and what else
soever, must be deferred, and the business in hand alone attended.

My Lord Bishop was desirous that Mr. Carleton should stay this day, to see the
coming of the Remonstrants. I would have had him stay to morrow likewise, that
he might have seen the manner of proceeding with them; but he would not. Here
is speech that Scultetus is to make the next Latin Sermon; but when we know
not. There is a rumor that Vor^^tius is gone from Tergoue, but of this I
suppose your Honor may have better information then I can give; therefore
ceasing to trouble your Honor any longer I humbly take my leave.

Dort this 6. of November. 1618. stylo novo. Your Honors Chaplain, and bounden
in all Duty, Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
IN my last Letters to your Honor, I related a doubt concerning the Deputies
for the Remonstrants of Utrecht; whether they were to be a part of the Synod,
or in the number of the Remonstrants, who were cited to appear before the
Synod. The reasons of that doubt, which then I understood not were these.
First, because in their Credential Letters they were charged to defend the
cause of the Remonstrants. Now it could not be that they should be both
Defendants and Judges in the same cause. Secondly, it was objected that their
case was the same per omnia with Episcopius, who was to have been of the Synod,
if he would have brought his Credential Letters, as the rest of the Professors
were. But he refused it, because in the Remonstrants cause he was to be a
party, except he would have laid by the Defense of that cause. Thirdly, when
the question was of citing the Remonstrants out of each Province, it was then
concluded in the Synod, that out of the Province of Utrecht none should be
cited to appear, because of that Province there were some already, and
therefore it was superfluous to cite any more. In the judgment of the Synod
therefore they were in numero citatorum, as far as concerned that cause, and
not in the number of the Members of the Synod. Unto these Reasons were they
cha^^ged to give their answer upon Saturday, and then to resolve whether they
would forsake the words of their Credential Letters, and so remain Judges, or
else stand unto them, and become in the number of the citati. Wherefore upon
Saturday, the 8. of December, stylo novo, The Synod being met in the morning,
the Deputies for the Remonstrants gave up their Answer in scripto to these
Reasons. And to the first concerning the Clause in their Credential Letters,
they answered, that they were not so limited, but that in their private
instructions they had leave to do otherwise, if they thought good. To the
second, concerning the Parity of their case with Episcopius, they answered,
that their case was quite another; for they were sent from their Provinces as
Members of the Synod, which plea Episcopius could not make. To the third,
concerning the intent of the Synod at the Citation they answered, that they
never so understood the words of the Synod, neither did they know but that they
might show themselves for the cause of the Remonstrants, and yet sit as Judges,
since they were there to defend their opinion no otherwise then the
Contra-Remonstrants were to defend theirs: and therefore they were purposed to
take the oath, and to keep their places. The Praeses then required them to show
that clause in their private instructions, wherein that reservation was which
they pretended. They stuck a little at first to bring forth their instructions,
but at length seeing there was no other remedy they consented to do it,
provided that no more should be read then what they would suffer: which was
granted them. In the mean time whilst they were providing to produce their
instructions, there were read in the Synod the letters of the Provincial Synod
of South Holland, directed to the National, to this purpose: that whereas
Theophilus Ryckwaerdius, one of those who was cited among the Remonstrants, had
lately been by them convented for certain misdemeanors the Synod would be
pleased to give him leave to return and make his answer to such objections as
they had to charge him with. The thing was put to the determination of the
Synod. The Deputies of the States thought fit it should be left to his own
discretion to do as he thought good. Others thought it not fit he should be
sent from the greater Synod to a lesser. Others thought it was necessary he
should immediately be sent away to make his answer, since it was question of
behavior and manners only, and not of doctrine. In the end it was concluded it
should be left to his own discretion, to do as he thought good. By this time
were the Remonstrants of Utrecht ready to show their instructions, which they
there openly produced, but to no purpose at all. For all they could show was
this, that they had commission to defend their cause, or to labor, at least
for an accommodation or tolleration of it: but that they had power to pronounce
decisively de veritate aut falsitate sententiae, that did not as yet appear.
The thing was acted with much altercation on both sides. At length it was
agreed, with some reluctance on the Remonstrants party, that it should be put
to the determination of the Synod, whether they were to be accounted as Judges,
or only as citati. Some favorably thought that their private instructions were
not too narrowly to be sifted, but if they would suo periculo take the oath, it
should be sufficient. Others thought that an oath was a greater matter then
should so easily be permitted, although men did offer to take it, there being
so good cause of doubt, as now there was. Others examining there Credentiall
letters, and the words of their private Commission, and finding no authority
given them to define de falsitate sententiae, if it should appear to be false;
and that the lowest point they could descend unto, was a Tolleration, concluded
they could be no other then citati. As for their plea, that they came to defend
their opinion no otherwise then the Contra-Remonstrants did for theirs, it was
replied, first that they did the Synod wrong to make this distinction of
Contra-Remonstrants and Remonstrants: for in the Synod there was no
Contra-Remonstrant, and no man was called thither under that name, whereas they
in their letters came under the name of Remonstrants. Again, No man came with
charge to defend any opinion, but were free to pronounce according to truth
wheresoever it should be, which was not their case. In the end the judgment of
the Synod was given up, that they could not be of the members of the Synod in
this cause (for in any other they might) but only as citati. Yet
notwithstanding that they might see the equity of the Synod toward them, it was
permitted them to keep their places upon these conditions: first if they would
quit their defense of the cause; Secondly if they would give no advise or
counsel directly or indirectly to the citati, and by no means meddle with them
in their cause: thirdly, that they did not divulge any of the Acts and Secrets
of the Synod (which Clause was a mere Formality. For who can expect that that
should not be divulged, which is done in the sight of so many Spectators?
Fourthly, that they should not be troublesome to the Synod, by any intempestive
interpellations. This if they would promise, they should take the Oath, and sit
as Judges; otherwise, no. Unto this were they charged immediately to give their
answer. They again required respite. It was answered, that this request was
needless, the case being so plain, and injurious to the Synod in detaining them
from their business by frivolous delays. They persisting still in their Suit,
the thing again was devolved unto the Synod, whether they should give their
Answer presently, or have farther respite. It was concluded that they should
repair to Mr. Praeses the same day at five of the clock in the Evening, there
without farther delay, roundly to deliver their resolution. Which thing yet
they did not. They came indeed at the time appointed, but gave no Resolution,
neither yet have done, for any thing I can hear. And this was all was done that
Session. I mervail much that the Province of Utrecht, being the strength of the
Remonstrants, could find no wiser men to handle their Cause. For as they did
very foolishly in bewraying their private instructions, so in this whole
altercation did they not speak one wise word. This Session the Remonstrants
that were cited appeared not all.

Episcopius is reported to have put a trick upon the Seculars. For whereas in
his speech he had said some things concerning them, in that Copy which was
exhibited, signed with all their hands, there is no such thing appears. He had
committed it only to his Memory, as foreseeing the Copy might be called for.

Mr. Praeses remembers his love and service to your Lordship, and has sent you
a Copy of the Book which Adrian Smoutius dedicated to the Synod. The greatest
News, for ought I perceive, is, that it is dedicated to the Synod; for else
there is little that concerns them. I have troubled your Lordship with very
long repetition of a petit matter: but it was all the argument of the Session.
I trow, to morrow we shall have other manner of stuff. And so ceasing to
trouble your Lordship, I humbly take my leave.

Dort this 9. of December. 1618. stylo novo. Your Honors Chaplain, and bounden in
all Duty, Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, my very good Lord.
ON Monday the 10. of December, stylo novo, the Deputies met in the morning,
where the first thing determined, was the question as yet depending concerning
the Remonstrants of Utrecht. They had according to their appointment come to
the Praeses and Assessors to give their Answer, which was merely dilatory,
containing their answers to such reasons as the Synod on the Saturday Session
had brought to prove them in the number of the Citati. But having better
bethought themselves, upon the Monday a little before the Morning Session, they
delivered their Resolution to the Praeses, to this effect, that since nothing
else would content the Synod, they had resolved to leave their place of Judges,
and to adjoyn themselves to the other Remonstrants which were cited: and so
they did. After this fell in some speech concerning a supplication lately
exhibited by the Remonstrants unto the Exteri: and because it seemed to contein
some aspersions against the Synod, there was question made whether or no it
should be publicly read and stand: but this motion died, and there was nothing
done in it. A Copy of this Supplication, I think, my Lord Bishop lately sent
your Honor. Then Mr. Praeses signified unto the Synod, that without farther
delay he thought it fit, the Remonstrants should be put in mind of the end of
their coming, and that they should put up their minds in writing, concerning
the five points in question, and that forthwith. For he doubted it not, but
they came very well provided to do it: and more, that some years past, they had
provided certain considerations to be at hand, whenever they should be called
for, with which the World was not yet acquainted. This thing he remembered
Monsieur Barnevelt sometime told him in private conference, and the
Remonstrants themselves have told the World as much in their pressior
declaratio, which they joined to their Edition of the Conference at the Hague.
Then were the Remonstrants called in, and told, First of their indirect
dealing, in pretending themselves to have but one Copy of their Oration,
whereas it was known they had another, and in delivering up a broken Copy:
then of the end of their being convented by the Synod. But by the way one thing
was urged somewhat unnecessarily. The Remonstrants had given up, (as I told
your Honor) their speech signed with all their hands. When those of Utrecht
had joined themselves unto them, they were urged to put to their hands also: to
which they replied, they had not as yet read it. Here Episcopius took occasion
to clear himself of that impuration lately fastened upon him, that he had abused
the Delegates, in giving them a counterfeit copy of his speech: protesting he
was not so ill qualitied, as that in so great a matter, and that before God and
so grave a Congregation he would deal doubly, and dishonestly: that he never
affirmed that he had one only Copy, but that he had none fairly written; for
he confessed he had another, and that the reason why he requested either the same
Copy again, or at least a Transcript of it, was, because there was some
difference betwixt the two Copies, and they had not yet perfectly compared them
together. The Praeses answered, that what was laid to their Charge, was nothing
else but that which the Synod verily understood to have been done, and he
thinks, that if the Memories of those in the Synod were consulted with, they
would all confirm it. About this was there likely to have been some altercation
farther, but the Secular Praeses willed them to leave that and pass to their
business. Here Episcopius besought the Synod that he might have leave to speak
some things by way of Proeme ere they came to the Action. It was at first
denied him, but he did so earnestly entreat, that at length he had leave to
speak his mind: and so forthwith there was recited e Scripto a long and
tedious speech of two hours, at the least: consisting of two general heads:
First of Exceptions they had against the Synod tanquam in judicem
incompetentem: Secondly of a conceit of their own, what manner of Synod they
thought fit it should be, which was to compose these controversies in hand.
Their reasons of Exceptions were many, and manifoldly amplified and confirmed:
but amongst them all there were two especially insisted upon. First, it was
against all equity and nature that the adverse party should be Judge: the Synod
was here the adverse party, and therefore they could not be Judges. Secondly,
those who had made an open Schism and Faction in the Church, and had separated
themselves from their brethren, could not be their Judges: but of this Synod a
great part were Authors of Schism, and the rest Favorers and Abettors of it:
they could not therefore be their Judges. In the prosecution of which Reason
they did not spare very liberally to bestow on the Synod the name of
Schismatici and Novatores, and schismatum Fautores, and other goodly titles of
the same nature. The second part of their Oration was a mere Chimaera saltans
in vacuo; a strange fancy of such a Synod as never was, nor can be. I had
thought to have taken an abstract of it, but the tediousness of it deterred me.
I will give your Honor a taste or two of it. There were but two ways of
instituting a Synod for the ending of these quarrels. The first was, by seeking
out every where certain select men, who all this time of contention had taken
part with neither side; but kept themselves unpartial. Secondly, if a Synod of
such could not be found (as I think it could scarcely be found in the
Netherlands, though the Sun it self should seek it) then such a Synod should be
framed, as in which should be an equal number of both parties, each with their
several Praeses and Assessors; and they should debate the matter betwixt
themselves: and if they could not agree, (as it is likely they would not) what
then, thought I? shall they part as they came? No forsooth. The Civil
Magistrate, tanquam Deus e machina, he must come in, and prescribe the
Moderamen, from which neither party must appeal. Provided always, that he
labored only for Accommodation, and not to determine decisively for on part.
(...). And so I awoke. Of the same thread was the whole piece of their speech.
When they had well and thoroughly wearied their Auditory, they did that which we
much desired; they made an end. The Praeses made a brief answer to this effect.
For the point of Schism says he, it is not yet fit time to discuss. But when
it should in the Synod be made plain what had been the received Doctrine of the
Church, then it would appear who they were that had made secession from it, and
so were guilty of Schism. If you refuse us because we are your Adversaries,
whom would you have deputed as Judges? your selves, or the Papists, or the
Anabaptists, or the Libertines, or some other faction in these Countries? Let
us be Sscismaticks, let us be Scribes and Pharisees, and worse; yet you may not
deny this Synod to be a lawful Synod. For first it was done by the Civil
Magistrate who had authority to do it. Secondly, such as were there were
deputed by the consent of the Provinces. Thirdly, they had all taken their
oaths to judge uprightly. This is enough to make us your Judges, and common
Charity should make you to hope we would judge uprightly: at least it should
make you resolve thus far, if we should decide truly, you would subscribe unto
it, if otherwise you would patiently bear it. If you were in our places, so
deputed, so sworn, and we were to be judged by you, we were to do the like.
Here followed some wrangling to no great purpose, and so the Session ended.

The same day after dinner the Deputies met again; where first the Praeses
commended to the Synod the consideration of that reproachful Name of Schism,
which the Remonstrants did so openly and so often brand them with. For it was
Episcopius his palmarium argumentum, the Synod was all either Schismatics or
favorers of them, and therefore could not be their Judges. It was much that
they should grow to that boldness, as that openly they should call the Synod,
the Seculars, the chief Magistrate, yea the Prince of Orange himself,
Schismatics. For what had formerly been done in the matter of Secession and
Division of Churches was done by their consent and approbation. He required
therefore the Synod to deliver themselves what was to be done. Diverse spoke
diversely. Lydius of South Holland relating the story of what had been done in
the time of separation, cleared them of Schism; and showed first, that the name
of Schism was used craftily by them, as for a reproach, so likewise for a
farther end they had for themselves. For a Schism is only a breach of Charity
and peace of the Church, the Doctrine remaining entire. If there were a
separation by reason of Doctrine Heretical (as here he thought there was) it
was not to be called a Scism. Now the Remonstrants did therefore use the name
of Schism, that they might persuade the world, that the difference was only in
certain points indifferent, in which it mattered not which end went forward, by
this means to make their way open to a tolleration. Again, the separation which
was made, was made upon good reason. For they were forced unto it by the
Remonstrants violence, as in particular he did show. At length he and the rest
of the Synod concluded, that they should roundly be put in mind of their duty,
and to speak more respectively to the Synod. Upon this the Remonstrants being
called in, the Praeses signified what the Synod disliked in them, and what
behavior it expected at their hands: and withal willed them to attend the
Decree of the States. Episcopius would have answered, but he was prohibited.
Then immediately followed a decree of the States to this purpose; that whereas
the Remonstrants had hitherto made many dilatory answers, to the injury both of
the Eclesiasticks and Seculars, it was decreed by them, that they should lay by
all frivolous Excep^^ions, and dilatory answers, and forthwith proceed to set
down their mind concerning the Five Articles, for which end they were come
together. Then began Episcopius to purge himself, and declare, that in the
imputation of Schism they included not the Seculars, they only charged the
Eclesiasticks: and if the Seculars had a hand in it, they meddled not with that.
The Praeses urged them to give their answer, whether or no they would set down
their minds concerning the points in controversy: they still excepted, that
the Synod were not their competent Judges. The Praeses asked by whom they would
be judged? they replied, they would not answer this, it was sufficient that the
Synod could not be their Judges. They were willed to remember they were Citati:
they replied, Citatorum est excipere de competentia judicis. The Praeses of the
Seculars willed them remember that they were Subjects; they replied, the
Magistrate could not command their Consciences: being again willed to give
their answer, whether or no they would exhibit their minds concerning the five
Articles, they required first to have their exceptions answered; when no other
answer would be given, they dismissed them, and appointed that of the Synod two
should be chosen Delegates, who should immediately go to them, and in the name
of the Synod warn them to lay by all other answers, and at the next Session
Categorically answer, whether they would exhibit their minds concerning the
points in Controversy, or no: that so the Synod might know what they had to do:
and so they brake up: this morning therefore we look what will be done. And so
for this time I humbly take my leave, commending your Honor to Gods good
Protection.

Dort, December. 1/11. 1618. Your Honors Chaplain, and Bounden in all Duty Jo.
Hales
Of the Remonstrants of Utrecht, two only have joined themselves to the Citati:
the third, which is an Elder, professes to submit himself to the judgment of
the Synod, if they shall decide according to his Conscience; and that if it
please the Synod to give him his Oath, he is ready to judge neither as
Remonstrant nor Contra-Remonstrant, but accordingly as it shall please God to
open him the truth in the Synod.



Right Honorable, and my very good Lord,
ON Thursday the 4/14. of December. the Synod being sat, and repetition made,
according to the custom, of what had past in the former Session, the
Remonstrants being called in were asked whether or no they had set down in
writing their opinion concerning the first Article. Forthwith they exhibited to
the Synod their opinion subscribed with all their hands. The copy of this your
Lordship shall receive here with these letters. The paper being read, the
Praeses asked them all one by one whether this were their opinion, to which each
man answered affi^^^atively. The Remonstrants being dismissed the Praeses
proposed to the Synod, whether it were not fit that they should be sent for one
by one and examined singly as concerning their tenent. His reason was, because
he understood that they made themselves an Antisynod, and had among themselves
ordained a Praeses, two Assessours, and two Scribes according to the form of
the Synod: and so they did all things communi consensu like a little Synod: to
this some answered that they thought it fit: some that those only should be
singled out who were carried away with respect to their company, and if they
were alone would think and do otherwise: others thought it utterly unfit
because it might seem olere artificium aliquod, to savor of a trick, whereas
it best became the Synod to do all things candide and sincere: others would
have no man examined alone but when all the rest were by: others left it to the
judgment of the Praeses to do as he thought good when occasion served: which
last sentence as it seemed stood good. After this was there a general
exception against the manner in which they had proposed their sentence: that
they had done it confuse, di^^tracte, and obscure: that they had intermingled
things impertinent and belonging to other questions: that the most of their
proposalls were negatives what they did not hold, and not affirmatives what
they did; whereas their appearance there was to show what they did hold, not
what they did not hold. And it was discovered that this their proceeding by
negatives was, that they might take occasions to refute other opinions, and not
to confirm their own; whereas by the decree of the States they were called
thither ut sententiam SUAM dilucide, perspicue etc. exponerent and defenderent
not that they should oppugn others. That it had been their custom very
liberally to examine other men's opinions and to be sparing in confirming their
own. That if they did refuse to deal more plainly in expounding their mind, the
Synod should take order that the state of the question should be taken out of
their books, especially our of the Hague conference, and so they should be
questioned whether they would stand to it or no: that they did maintain amongst
them an implicit faith, and it was usual with some of them, when they were
pressed with any reason they could not put by, to answer that though themselves
could say little to it, yet such and such could say much, which was enough for
them. When all had spoken their pleasure, the conclusion of the Synod was, that
they must reform the manner of propounding their mind: that they must give up
their answer in affirmatives, as much as was possible: that this form of answer
was not according to the Decree of the States: and this was the effect of that
Session.

On Friday the 5/15 of December. there was a short Session in the morning. The
matter propounded was, whether it were not fit that the Remonstrants should be
required to give up their minds concerning all the five points before the Synod
proceeded to examine or determine any thing. The reason was, the connection of
the points mutually one with another, for which cause it was hard to determine
of one, except their mind in the rest were known. The Secular Lords and the
Synod liked well of the proposal. Those of Geneva thought it best to take
their opinions out of their books: to which the Praeses answered, that it could
not be, because they were called thither by their citatory. Letters to propose
and defend their own opinions. That they could not complain of the Synod for
calling on them thus at once to deliver themselves. For the Synod doubts not
that they were provided, since themselves had long since given it out in their
books and private speeches that they were provided. The Remonstrants then being
called in, were told that it was the determination of the Synod that they
should deliver their opinions at once concerning the five points; and for this
they had given them time till Monday. For this would prove better for the Synod
and for themselves. Then that they should deliver themselves in affirmatives as
much as possibly might be. For by their negatives they delivered not their own
opinions, but diverted upon others. The Confessions and Creeds had always been
framed by affirmatives; thus or thus we do believe; not by negatives. To this
they replied, Attendemus ad ea quae a Domino Praeside dicta sunt and
considerabimus. Then did the Praeses signify that on the morrow there should
be a Latin sermon in the Synod house. Scultetus is the man that makes it. And
this is the effect of what was done at that time and so ceasing to trouble your
Lordship any farther at this time, I humbly take my leave, resting.

Dort this 15. of December. 1618. stylo novo. Your Honors Chaplain, and bounden
in all Duty, Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
THe seventh of December, stylo novo, being Friday, in the morning the Synod
met; the first thing that was done, was the pronouncing the Decree of the
States concerning Grevinchovius and Goulartius to this effect, That whereas the
Remonstrants had petitioned to the States, that Grevinchovius and Goulartius
might be admitted into the Synod, there to defend the Remonstrants Cause, the
Lords for good causes thought they neither ought, nor could grant it; yet thus
much did they graciously permit, that they might freely come in private, and do
them what help they could; and if they thought, that in any thing they saw
further into the Cause then their Brethren, they might have leave to exhibit
their mind in writing to the Synod. Provided, First, that they had leave of
the Synod so to do. Secondly, that they did not seek any frivolous delays:
Thirdly, that they promised to submit themselves to the Decree of the Synod:
and last of all, that the Church Censures respectively passed on Grevinchovius
and Goulartius be not prejudiced; but stand still in their full force and
virtue. This Decree was consented unto by the whole Synod. Here the Praeses
admonisht those of Utrecht to provide themselves, and resolve what they would
do; whether they would profess themselves parties for the Remonstrants, or keep
their places, and sit as Judges; if they would express as parties, then must
they cease to be accounted part of the Synod, and be accounted as Episcopius
and the rest that were cited. They required that time might be given them to
deliberate. The Praeses eagerly urged them to give their resolute answer. They
replied it was a greater matter then might so soon be dispatched. So far they
went, that at length they fell on some warm words. For when two of the
Remonstrants Deputies by chance spoke both at once, the Praeses admonisht them
to speak modestius and ornatius. For men here speak one by one, and not by
pairs. But here the Secular Deputies struck in, and thought fit they should
have time of respite till the morrow: yet so that in the mean time the Synod
should proceed: Then were the Remonstrants called in, and the Decree of the
States concerning Grevinchovius and Goulartius read unto them: Episcopius
standing up required that a little time might be granted to them to speak, and
forthwith uttered an Oration, acrem sane and animosam, and about which, by
reason of some particulars in it, there will grow some stir. The effect of
the Oration was this.

THat Religion was the chiefest note of a man; and we were more distinguished
by it from other Creatures, then by our Reason. That their appearance before the
Synod was, ut illam etiam Spartam ornarent, that they might endeavor something
for the preservation of the Purity of Religion: That Religion was nothing else
but a right Conceit and Worship of God: That the Conceits concerning God are of
two sorts; some absolutely necessary, which were the grounds of all true
Worship; in these to err might finally endanger a man; Some not absolutely
necessary; and in these sometimes without great danger men might mistake; That
they defcryed many conceits passing in our Churches which could not stand with
the Goodness and Justice of God, with the use of the Sacramen^^s, with the
Duties of Christian men; These had given occasion to the Adversaries abroad to
accuse our Churches, and lay upon them many strange imputations, That therefore
their endeavor had been none other but to remove these imputations, and to
provide, as much as in them lay, that the Conceits of some few might not pass
for the general Doctrine of our Churches; But this their endeavor had
hitherunto had but ill success: And as in a diseased body many times when
Physic is administered, the humors which before were quiet are now stirred,
and hence the body proves more distempered: so their endeavors to cure the
Church had caused greater disorder, yet in this had they not offended. For they
labored to none other end, but that the Church might not be traduced by reason
of the private conce^^s of some of her Ministers. That in this behalf the world
had been exceedingly incensed against them: but this Envy they esteemed their
Gloriam and Palmarium; That for this they did not mean to forsake their Cause,
and were it so that they should lose the day, yet would they joy in it, and
think it glory enough, magnis ausis excedisse. That this their stirring was not
de lana cap^^ina, of small, frivolous, and worthless matters, of mere qui^^ks
of Wit, as many of the common sort were persuaded, that out of this conceit it
was that they had been so exceedingly roughly dealt withal, yea they might say
soevitum fuisse against them, as against unnecessary Innovavators in the
Church: First matters were handled against them clancular^^ly, and by stealth,
after this they brake out into open but false accusations, and after this into
wrath, into scoffing and bitterness, till at length effractis moderationis
repagulis, every one came with open mouth against them, tanquam in publici odii
victimas. [Here followed a grave and serious invocation of Christ as a witness
to the truth of what they said] True indeed it was, that in their Books many
things were to be found amiss. For a very hard matter they thought it for
minds exasperated semper rectum clavem tenere. That for the settling of these
things, there could but three courses be thought of; either a National Synod,
or a mutual Tolleration of each others Opinions, or the Cession and Resignation
of their Calling and place in the Church. To quit them of their calling and to
fly, this were a note of the Hireling: as for a Synod, which they much desired,
remorabantur qui minime debebant, and it was pretended that the condition of
the Times would not suffer it. There remains only a mutual Tolleration, of the
possibility of which alone they had hope. And for this end they did exceedingly
approve of the Decreeof the States of Holland, and West-fryzeland, which they
thought confirmed by the examples of Beza's dealing with some, of their own
dealing with the Lutherans, of the Advice of the King of Great Britain: But
all this was labor lost; for there was a buzze and jealousy spread in the
heads of men, that under this larve, this whifling Suit of Tolleration there
lay personated more dangerous designs: that behind this, tanquam post
siparium, there lay intents of opening a way to the Profession of all the
ancient Heresies: and that the Remonstrants could pro tempore, Conscientiaesuae
imperare quod volunt, upon this began men's minds to be alienated from them:
which thing at length brake forth into Schism and open Separation. Now began
their books to be more narrowly inquired into, every line, every phrase, every
word and tittle to be stretched to the uttermost, to prove them Heretics.
Witness that late work, entitled Specimen Controversiarum Belgicarum, whose
Authors credit and good dealing had already in part appeared, and hereafter
farther would appear. That all Fundamental points of Divinity they had
preserved untouched. For they knew that there were many things of which it is
not lawful to dispute, and they abhorred from that conceit of many men, who
would believe nothing but what they were able to give a Reason of. That what
they questioned was only such a matter, which for a long time had been, without
danger, both pro and contra disputed of. They thought it sufficient if the
chief points of Religion remain unshaken. That there had been always sundry
Opinions even amongst the Fathers themselves, which yet had not broken out into
separation of minds, and breach of Charity. That it was impossible for all
wits to jump in one point. It was the Judgment of Paraeus a great Divine, that
the greatest cause of Contentions in the Church was this, that the Schoolmens
Conclusions, and Cathedral Decisions had been received as Oracles, and Articles
of Faith. That they were therefore unjustly charged with the bringing in of a
Sceptick Theology: They sought for nothing else but for that liberty which is
the mean betwixt servitude and License. That now they appeared before the
Synod, whether as cited, or otherwise, they were not careful. They had been
present howsoever had it been lawful. They required the Foreigners not to
judge of them as they had heard abroad, but as they now should find them. That
they profess they oppose themselves, first against those Conclusions concerning
Predestination, which the Authors themselves have called Horrida Decreta.
Secondly, against those who for the Five Articles so called have made a
Separation, never expecting any Synodical Sentence: Thirdly, against those who
cast from them all those who in some things dissent from them. And yet to raise
the controversy greater, is the question of the right of Magistrates added
above all the rest, which they maintained against those, who taught the
Magistrate should with a hoodwi^^kt obedience accept of what the Divines
taught, without farther enquiry. These are the points for which we have
contended. Give unto us that respect which your selves would look for at our
hands, if you were in our case; we have not ambitiously sued to any: the Favor
of God alone it is which we have sought; Look not upon this small number which
you see, Unus Patronus bonae causae satis est. It Is not the smaller number that
makes the Schism. If a major part carry the right, what think you then of the
Province of Utrecht, where the greater parts are Remonstrants: From you does
the Schism proceed, First here in this Synod, by making so an unequal a choice
of Deputies with so small a number of Remonstrants. Secondly by proceeding
against us abroad, not expecting a Synodal Decree, by cashiering and subjecting
unto Censures the chief Patrons of our Cause, eos apud quos sunt aquilae
nostrae: and peradventure, even at this very hour you proceed against some of
ours by suspending, discommuning, by expelling them from their Churches, etc.
But yet we cast not away our Swords; The Scriptures and sollid Reason shall be
to us instead of multitudes. The Conscience rests not it self upon the number
of Suffrages, but upon the strength of Reason. Tam parati sumus vinci, quam
vincere. He gets a great Victory, that being conquered gains the Truth. Amicus
Socrates, ami^^us Plato, amica Synodus, sed^^ magis amica Veritas.

These are the Fragments of Episcopius his speech, as far as my Memory and
broken notes could supply me; I suppose what Errors I have committed by leaving
out, misplacing, misrelating, Mr. Ames, when he comes to your Honor will
rectify, this and much more for an hours space, he delivered with great grace
of speech, and Oratorial gesture: The Praeses signified unto him, that because
there were in his speech many things considerable, he was therefore to deliver
the Copy of it: Episcopius replied, that he had none handsomely written, if the
Synod would have patience, he would cause a fair Transcript to be drawn for
them; But this excuse would not serve. Fair or foul deliver it up he must, and
so he did: The Deputies for the Politics signified, that since there were many
things in it, which did as well concern the Seculars, as Eclesiasticks, they
were to give it up subscribed with all their hands: which forthwith was done.
Then did the Praeses tell them how much they were beholding to the Synod, that
had so patiently heard them, notwithstanding that they had no leave granted
them to speak, and that they ought to have expected the Mandate of the Synod.
To this Episcopius replies, that he had required leave before he began to
speak; True, said the Praeses, but you stayed not till leave was granted you;
besides, says he, you are to know that no man may, no not of those that are
the members of the Synod, offer to declaim without leave first had, and without
manifesting the Argument and drift of his speech. After this followed a Form of
Oath prescribed by the States, which all the Members of the Synod were to take,
the Articles of it were these two, That only the Word of God should be taken
for their rule to end their questions, and that they had no other purpose but
the peace of the Church. First the Praeses took his oath in this order,
standing up in his place, he said, Ego promitto coram Deo, (thus, and thus) ita
propitius mihi sit Servator Christus. Then the Provincials took every one in
his order, standing in his place, and pronouncing these words, Idem promitto
coram Deo and sancto Servatore, only the Remonstrants Deputies of Utrecht took
not the Oath, because as yet they had not determined, whether they would make
themselves parties or Judges; After the Provincials did the Foreigners in
order do the like, and so the Session ended. And with it I think is time for me
to end, and commend your Lordship to Gods good Protection.

Dort this 7. of December. 1618. stylo novo. Your Honors Chaplain and bounden in
all Duty Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
UPon Saturday 5/1^^ of this present, the Synod being sat in the Morning,
Scultetus made unto them a pious, and pathetical Sermon. In the beginning he
signified, first how it joyed him to speak unto them Post eruditissimum virum
Josephum Hallum, Decanum Wigorniae meritissimum. Secondly, that he saw that
day, that which his Majesty of Great Britain, and the Prince Elector his
Master had so long desired to see, namely a Synod gathered for the settling of
the Churches peace in these Countries. He took for his Theme the 122. Psalm. I
rejoiced when they said unto me, Let us go up unto the house of the Lord, and
so forth unto the end of the Psalm. Where first having showed the occasion of
this Psalm, that it was the Removal and bringing of the Ark unto Jerusalem, he
considered in the whole Psalm three things. First, that it was Summum hominis
gaudium, to see the Peace and flourishing of the Church; which he showed by
many Reasons, and confirmed by the examples of the Duke of Wittemberg, who at
the Council held at Worms a hundred and twenty years since, when others
discoursed of many Privileges and conveniences of their Lordships and
Territories, openly protested it to be his greatest felicity, that he could in
aperto campo, and in sinu Subditorum suorum dormire: and of Theodosius the
Emperor, who at his death did more comfort himself that he had been a Son of
the Church, then the Emperor of the World. Secondly, that it was Summum
hominis Votum to pray for the peace and flourishing of the Church: which he
confirmed by the examples of the Apostles and of Christ himself. Thirdly, that
it was Summum hominis studium to procure the peace of the Church^^ where
speaking of the present occasion, I am no Prophet (says he) yet I think I
foresee, that the peace of the Belgic Churches would be a means to settle the
peace of other Churches. He therefore wished that the States, the Prince, the
Delegates, would all propose unto themselves as their end, the peace and
flourishing of the Churches amongst them, as he doubted not they did in calling
this Synod. There was not in this Sermon any Doctrinal point discust, nor any
particular touched, which ^^ght minister News. It was only a Pathetical
exhortation to all sorts, as much as in them lay to procure the Churches peace.
When he had done, the Praeses publicly in the name of the Synod gave him
thanks, and protested himself to have been very much moved with his speeches.
Besides this there was nothing done that Session.

Upon Monday 7/17 of this present, the Synod coming together in the Forenoon,
there were two out of Wetteraw from the Counties of Nassau, Bisterfeldius a
Preacher, and Jo. Henricus Al^^tedius, Professor of Divinity in Herborne came
as Deputies from the Churches in those parts, to be admitted as parts of the
Synod. The Letters from the States General, and then their Credential Le^^ters
from their Churches first being read, the Oath was read unto them, and they
took it. Then did the Praeses in the Name of the Synod welcome them, and told
them the end of their coming, and what these Churches expected at their hands
Then were the Remonstrants called in, and willed to declare their opinion
concerning the rest of the Articles: which they did at large, and added some
Apologies for their proceeding by Negatives (which I could your Lordship
formerly had been the Exception of the Synod against the manner held by them in
the first Article.) I will not give a brief of what they then delivered,
because I resolve to send your Lordship the perfect Copy of it, as soon as I
can come to copy it out. When they had done the Praeses asked them, whether
they were provided to deliver up their Considerations concerning the Confession
and Catechism, for the Synod expected it. They answered that they expected not
the Synod should call for them. The Praeses replied, this could not excuse
them, for they had often told the world in their Books, that they had paratam
sylvam considerationum in that kind: and that the Synod should better judge of
each part, when it had learned their opinion of the whole. They required leave
to withdraw a little, and think of an answer. In the mean time the Praeses
proposed to the Synod, to consider how well the Remonstrants had stood to the
Decree of the Synod, concerning the proposal of their Tenants in Affirmatives,
he thought that they had offended more against it, and that purposely in
bringing their Apology for so doing: in censuring the opinions of other
Churches for blasphemous, etc. Howsoever it was their judgment that they
should propose their sentence in Negatives, yet they ought not to have
proposed, but to have submitted their judgment to the judgment of the Synod.
The Remonstrants returning, gave answer to this effect: that though they might
require time to give up their Considerations, yet they thought they were not
bound to give them up, till the five Articles were discust; since their
Citatory Letters so ran, that first the Articles, then their Consideration
should come in place: that they thought it some wrong done them to have this
order now perverted. The Praeses answered that no wrong was done them; for
their Considerations should not yet be sifted, till the five Articles were
concluded. And so the order in their Citatory Letters should be kept. That long
since in a Synod at Delpht they had promised to deliver them up in a Provincial
Synod there, and therefore now after so many years they could not be
unprovided. Here the Praeses Politicus charged them to obey their Decree, and
to do as the Praeses and the Synod required. The Praeses Eclesiasticus then
admonisht them, that they were not to account of themselves as a College, and
so still to give answers in commune, but they must answer particularly every
one for himself, and thereupon he asked every of them in order, whether they
had any such Consideration or no: some answered they had, some that they had
some few of no great moment, some that their Considerations were not written
down, some that they had none at all. When the Praeses had said, jactatum
fuisse by them long since, that they had sundry Considerations ready; Corvinus
excepted against the word jactatum; the Praeses replied, He used not the word
to disgrace them, but only as a Frequentative, to signify that they had often
boasted of it. When some Litigation was here fallen, Martinus Gregorii (one
that sits close upon the Remonstrants skirts) cut it off, and commanded them to
be quiet. The Remonstrants here signified, that such Considerations as they had
were only in the Dutch tongue. The Praeses replied, they should have leisure to
translate them. Then did the Seculars pronounce a Decree charging them to
provide themselves singly one by one, he that had many to give up many, he that
had few to give up few, he that had none to give up none, and that whether it
were in Dutch or Latin. The Remonstrants required some time; for, says
Episcopius, we came imparatissimi ad hanc rem. First there were given them to
two days, then three, then four: within which space every man alone by
himself, was to give up his Considerations: and this was the effect of the
Session.

The answer of the English Divines to the Remonstrants exception against the
Synod, I will send your Lordship in my next Letters, together with the
Remonstrants answer upon the later Articles. Harman the Post came to Dort on
Sunday about three of the clock, and went for England on Monday about ten of
the clock in the morning. Mr. Dean of Worcester is very crazy and sickly of
late, and keeps his Chamber, neither has he been in the Synod some of these
last Sessions. I hear he purposes to come to the Hague, to see if he shall have
his health better there. Here is a Rumor that the Remonstrants are a little
divided amongst themselves; and that Corvinus complains that what he has done,
was because he suffered himself to be drawn on by others, how true this is I
know not; I heard Scultetus tell my Lord Bishop so much, and that Meierus of
Basil, should say that Corvinus had signified so much to him. My Lord Bishop is
a little displeased with Mr. Amyes for putting into his hand Grevinchovius his
Book, in the Preface of which there are cited out of a Writing of Mr. Amyes
certain words very reproachful unto Bishops. Other News here is none, and
therefore for this time ceasing any further to trouble your Honor; I humbly
take my leave, resting

Your Honors Chaplain, and bounden in all Duty, Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, my very good Lord.
ON Thursday 10/20 of this present, in the morning the Synod being met, the
first thing done was the Admission of the Scottish Deputy in this manner. He was
brought to the Synod House by the two Scribes, and met at the door by two of
the Deputies for the States, and by them conducted to his Seat, which is a
little seat made under the English Seats, where he sits alone; when he was sat
the Praeses welcomed him in the Name of the Synod. Then were the Letters from
the States read, which were to stand instead of Synodical Letters; for
otherwise the custom is here, that he that comes to be a Member of the Synod
brings Letters of Credence from the Church that deputes him. After this he
delivered himself in a short speech to this effect. That the reason of his
coming he had delivered unto the States at the Hague, namely the Kings
pleasure: that he therefore once minded to have said nothing, but he could not
obtain so much of himself, especially when he heard what gentle Welcome the
Praeses gave him, and he was desirous to show himself thankful for such great
Courtesy; That the Scotch Nation had evermore so linkt it self to this people,
that it has always labored to endeavor the peace of this State, and now it
was ready to do as much for the peace of the Churches amongst them. That they
had very straightly bound unto them the Scottish Church ( demeruistis Eclesiam
Scoticanam) by this so kindly welcoming him. That his years were not many, but
he hoped ere he departed to make amends for that; That the King at his coming
away did charge him, verbis sublimibus, above all sphere of Conceit and
apprehension to exhort them unto peace, and with a short passage to that
purpose he ended. The Praeses thanking him for his good Counsel gave him his
Oath. And so they past away to other business.

Tomorrow I trow we shall have more matter, for then the Remonstrants are to
give in their Exceptions, against the Catechism and Confession, and so at
length we shall come to the Question. For this time therefore I humbly take my
leave of your Honor, resting

Your Honors Chaplain, and bounden in all Duty and Service, Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, and my very good Lord,
UPon Thursday the 17/27 of this present, the Deputies being met in the
morning, the Remonstrants were called in, and willed to give up their
Considerations upon the Catechism, according to the injunction laid on them on
Friday last. Episcopius, Corvinus, Duinghonius, Poppius, Pinakerus and Sapma
gave up altogether in common, and excused themselves, for not giving up one by
one, as was enjoind them, because their Considerations being altogether the
same, they thought they might exhibit them altogether; Niellius, Goswinus,
Matthisius, and Isaacus Frederici, gave up singly, every one by himself, the
rest gave up none at all. What these Considerations were I know not; for they
were not published. Then did the Praeses require them coram Deo to answer
directly and truly, First whether or no these were the Observations which they
gave up to the States of Holland; to which was answered, that as far as they
could remember they were, and some others besides. Secondly, whether they had
any more Considerations besides these; to which they all answered, No^^ Here
Scultetus stood up, and in the name of the Palatine Churches, required a Copy
of these Considerations upon the Catechism. We have says he a command from our
Prince to see that nothing be done in prejudice of our Churches. The Catechism
is ours known by the name of the Palatine Catechism, and from us you received
it. The Observations therefore upon it concern us, we require therefore a
draught of them, with purpose to answer them, and submit our answer to the
judgment of the Synod. This request of the Palatines was thought very
reasonable. These Considerations (I speak of those on the Confession; for those
others I saw not) are nothing else but Queries upon some passages of the
Confession, of little or no moment: so that it seems a wonder unto many, how
these men, which for so many years past, in so many of their Books, have
threatened the Churches with such wonderful discoveries of falsehood and error in
their Confession and Catechism, should at last produce such poor impertinent
stuff. There is not, I persuade my self, any writing in the world, against
which wits disposed to wrangle cannot take abundance of such exceptions. After
this did the Praeses put the Remonstrants in mind of the judgment of the
Synod past upon the manner of propounding their Theses on the Articles. Two
things there were misliked. First their propounding so many Negatives.
Secondly, their urging so much to handle the point of Reprobation, and that in
the first place; whereas the Synod required they should deliver themselves, as
much as was possible in Affirmatives, and begin first from Election, and from
thence come to the point of Reprobation in its due place. He required them
therefore to signify whether they would follow the Judgment of the Synod, or
their own. They answered, that they had given up their reasons to justify
their proceeding, and otherwise to proceed their Conscience would not permit
them. For, says Episcopius, the point of Reprobation is that quod maxim nos
aegre habet: that he could not endure that Doctrine concerning the absolute
Decree of God; that God should peremptorily decree to cast the greatest part of
mankind away, only because be would. Corvinus answered, that he could not
salva Conscientia versari in Ministerio, till that point were cleared. Isaacus
Frederici, that praecipu^^m momentum was in that question: others, that in the
question of Election they had no seruple; all their doubt was in the point of
Reprobation: and therefore their Conscience would not suffer them to proceed
farther in disputation, till that matter were discust. To this answer was made,
that the Synod did not refuse to handle the matter of Reprobation, but thought
it not fit to have it done in the first place. But when this would not content
them, the Praeses proposed unto them, whether they were resolved so to proceed,
or else to relinquish all farther disputation. They replied, they resolved to
break of all farther Treaty, if that matter might not be handled. It was told
them, that it should be treated of in its due place, but the question was only
de modo procedendi, whether they should handle that first or no. Episcopius and
some others of them gave answer, that for the order they did not precisely
stand upon, mode de tota re agatur: but this answer they stood not unto. For
when the Praeses told them again, that it was the pleasure of the Synod, first
to handle of Election, and then of Reprobation as much as should seem
necessary, and for the Churches good, and withal charged them to answer
roundly and Categorically whether they would proceed according to this order:
they answered, No. Then did the Praeses require them to withdraw, and give the
Synod leave to advise of this: The sum of that which past in the mean time was
this: That their pretense of Conscience was vain, since it was not of any thing
which concerned Faith or good manners, but only of order and method in
disputing, which could not at all concern the Conscience; that the Disputation
must begin from Election. First because the order of Nature so required, to
deal of the Affirmative before the Negative; and again, because that all
Divines, who ever handled this Question, did hold the same order; and the Holy
Ghost in Scripture had taken the same course. That they should be assured in
the name of the Synod, that they should have Liberty to diseusse the question
of Predestination throughout. That whatsoever they pretended, yet the true end
of their so hotly urging the question of Reprobation, was only to exagitate the
Contra-Remonstrants Doctrine, and to make way for their own Doctrine in point
of Election: I^^dius observed, that it had been the Custom of all those who
favored Pelagianism, to trouble the Church, with the question of Reprobation.
D. Gomarus that saw that his Iron was in the fire, (for I persuade my self that
the Remonstrants spleen is chiefly against him) began to tell us, that
Episcopius had falsified the Tenent of Reprobation: that no man taught that God
absolutely decreed to cast man away without sin: but as he did decree the end,
so he did decree the means: that is, as he predestined man to death, so he
predestined him to sin, the only way to death: and so he mended the question,
as Tinkers mend Kettles, and made it worse then it was before. In sum the
Synod caused a Decree to be penned to this purpose. That it should be lawful
for the Remonstrants to propose their Doubts, both in the Question of Election,
and of Reprobation: but for the order in disputation, which of the two should
come first, they should leave that to the Synod, who thought it fitter to give,
then to receive Laws; and that whereas they pretended Conscience, it was but
vain, since there was nothing in Scripture against this Command of the Synod;
nay that it was more agreeable with Conscience to obey then to withstand. Then
were the Remonstrants called in, and after a short admonission better to advise
themselves, the Decree of the Synod was read unto them. And when they began to
urge their Conscience, the Praeses Poliricus spoke to this purpose: that there
had heretofore been many Decrees made by the Delegates, but they had been all
neglected, he therefore strictly warned them, that no man should dare to
withstand any Decree either of the Magistrate, or of the Synod, either by open
opposing against it, or by sullen silence, under pain of penalty according to
the will of the Lords. When Episcopius had said aegerime ferimus, and would
have said somewhat more, he was enjoined silence, and so the Session ended, Mr.
Praeses telling us, that the next Session we should come to the question, si
per Remonstrantes liceret.

Now concerning Monsieur Moulins Proposals, of which your Lordship required to
know what I thought, I will deliver my self in my next Letters to your Honor.
In the mean time commending your Honor to Gods good protection I humbly take
my leave.

Dort this 17/27. of December. 1618. Your Honors Chaplain and bounden in all
Duty Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
UPon Friday 18/2^^ of December. in the morning it was long ere the Synod met. At
length being come together, there were read the two Decrees; one of the States,
another of the Synod, made the former Session: the reason of the repeating was
the absence of some the day before. Then did the Praeses signify, that that
very morning, immediately before the time of the Synod, he had received from
the Remonstrants Letters satis prolix^^s, which concerned himself and the whole
Synod; the perusal of which Letters was the cause of his long stay. The Letters
were sent to the Secular Delegates to know whether or no they would have them
read. Whilst the Seculars were advising of this point, there were brought in a
great heap of the Remonstrants Books, and laid upon the Table before the
Praeses: for what end it will appear by and by. The Secular Delegates signify,
that they think not fit that the Letters should be publicly read, and that the
Remonstrants should immediately be called in. They being entered, the Praeses
asked them whether they were ready to obey the Orders set down by the States and
the Synod: They require to have their Letters read: but the Seculars willed
them, instead of reading their Letters, to hearken to a Decree of the States,
and forthwith was read a Decree sounding to this purpose: that the States
strictly commanded, that nothing should be read or spoken in the Synod in
prejudice of the Decree made yesterday; but that they should without any
further delay come to the business in hand. The Remonstrants reply, that except
they may most freely propose their minds in both the parts of Predestination,
both Election and Reprobation they refused to go further in Conference, for
that their Conscience would not permit them. The Praeses replied, that for
Liberty of proposal of their opinions they could not complain; for the Synod
had given them Libertatem Christianam, aequam, justam: but such an absolute
Liberty as they seemed to require, of going as far as they list, of oppugning
before the Synod what opinions they pleased of learned men, this they thought
unfit. And as for Conscience, they knew that the Word of God was the rule of
it. Now what part of Scripture had they that favored them in this behalf, or
that did take any order and prescribe a Method in Disputation. By thus stiffely
urging their Conscience they did exceedingly wrong the Decrees of the States
and Synod, as if by them something against the Word of God, some impiety were
commanded. When the Praeses had thus said, he began to propose unto them
certain Interrogatories concerning the Five Articles. Your Honor may be
pleased to call to mind, that in one of my former Letters I showed, that
because the Remonstrants had given up their opinions very perplexedly and
imperfectly, the Synod had thought good that the Praeses should propose them
certain questions out of their own Writings, so the better to wrest their
meaning from them. This was the Praeses now beginning to do; and this was the
cause of the bringing in of the Books. The Interrogatory proposed was this,
Whether or no they did acknowledge that the Articles exhibited in the Hague
Conference did contein their opinions? Episcopius stepped up, and required that
it might be lawful for them to set down their own Tenants, and not be forced to
answer thus to other men's Writings. H. Leo in choler told the Praeses, that he
did evidently see, that it was the drift of the Synod, to discredit them with
the Magistrate, and that for his own part he would rather leave his Ministry,
then make any answer to these Interrogatories. The Praeses here advised him to
bethink himself seriously, whether his Conscience could assure him that this
was a good cause of leaving his Ministry; because he might not proceed in
Disputation according as he thought fit. Wezekius answered, that he would not
submit himself to this examen, and, nisi posset liberrime agi, he would not
answer at all. The same was the sense of Hollingerus his answer. Episcopius
plainly told them, nisi in omnibus liberum esset to do as they thought good,
they would go no farther. For we are resolved, says he, agere pre judicio
nostro, non pro judicio Synodi: then one of the Seculars stepped up, and willed
those words should be noted. The Praeses then told them, that the true cause of
all this their indisposition was, that they forgot themselves to be Citati, and
that they were not acquainted with being commanded. They were to remember, that
they stood before God, before their Magistrate, and that their cause was the
cause of the Church, whose peace would not be procured by this behavior. They
might remember what they told the Foreign Divines in their Letters to them,
that there was of late a great Metamorphosis in the State. Non estis nunc
judices and Domini rerum, sed Citati: but as it seemed, they were resolved to
suffer, omnino nullum judicium de iis fieri. Episcopius here urged his
Conscience. Add Verbum Dei then says the Praeses, show us upon what Text of
Scripture you ground your Conscience, otherwise you wrong both the Magistrate
and the Synod. Corvinus answered, that that scantling of Liberty, which the
Synod gave them, did not suffice their Consciences. Poppius likewise required
larger Liberty, and that he might not be dealt withal by Authority, but by
Reason. The Praeses answered, that in Conscience he could not give them greater
Liberty, then they had already given them, and therefore asked him if he would
answer to the Interrogatories. He stoutly replied, Malo quidvis pati. Sapma
replied to the same purpose, and over and above added, Ut nostrum judicium non
satisfacit Synodo, ita nec Synodi Judicium nostro. Rickwardius told the Synod,
that they dealt not charitably with them, and openly protested, as Episcopius
had before done, non agemus pro judicio Synodi, sed pro judicio nostro. The
Praeses replied, vocem hanc esse intollerandam. Niellius excepted against this
proceeding with them capitatim, and required that they might consult in common
what answer to give. For my self, says he, I am a man of no ready speech, and
unfit for sudden disputation. Too great advantage is taken against men, by this
kind of proceeding. Many members of the Synod, were they thus singled out to
give a sudden answer, might easily peradventure be put to some distress. Nullam
esse causam tam justam, de qua non facile possit triumphari, si de ea agatur
tantum pro arbitrio adversarii. The Praeses told them that here was nothing
required, but that they would give a reason of their Faith, which they had for
this many years taught in their Pulpits, and in their Writings, and therefore
they could not be unprovided to give an answer; and for that they mentioned the
Synod as an Adversary, they had been already taught sufficiently by the
Foreign Divines that the Synod could not be counted pars adversa: they
answered, that they required a copy of the reasons given by the Foreign
Divines, that they might consider of them; but they were denied it. Here was by
one of them, I know not whom, a reply made, that the Remonstrants in refusing
to proceed except they might freely handle the point of Reprobation, did no
other then the Contra-Remonstrants had formerly done in the Hague Cenference,
who there openly refused to proceed, if they were urged to have the same point
handled; notwithstanding the command of the Magistrate. Festus Hommius replied,
that the narration was falsified; for the Contra-Remonstrants did not simply
refuse to deal in the point of Reprobation; neither did the Magistrate command
them to do it, as now he had commanded them. And thus much did some of the
Secular Deputies stand up and give witness unto. Episcopius here urged some
words out of the Conference, to prove what was said; but what these words were
I could not take. The Praeses went forward to propose the Interrogatories:
Goswinus and Neranus answered as their fellows had formerly done. Isaacus
Frederici urged for himself, that when he was removed from being a Member of
the Synod, he was commanded conjungere se Citatis: this he could not do, if
thus he was enforced to answer for himself alone. The Praeses answered, that by
the Decree of the States they were accounted no College; but only as they were
cited, so were they to answer Capitatim and by Poll. And as for Isaacus, since
he knew that the Synod accounted of him as of one of the Citati, he could not
be ignorant that his quality was the same with theirs. Isaacus answered that he
had evermore been averse from sudden disputations, and therefore he meant not
to answer. Here it was denied by some of the Remonstrants, that the States had
made any Decree that they should thus give answer capitatim. The Delegates for
the Seculars stood up, and signified viva voce, that they had decreed it.
Episcopius answered, that the Scribe ( Heinsius) used some such words, but he
took it to have been only some phrase of Heinsius, not any Decree of the Lords.
Heinsius replied that he did nothing but what he was commanded. Episcopius
protested, that till that hour he never heard that by any Decree of the States
they were enjoined to answer thus singly, and by Poll. Poppius signified that
he thought it a thing very unbefitting both his age and his Ministry, to submit
himself to such a Pedagogica collatio, as sometimes by Martinus Gregorii it had
been styled. The Praeses then asked them all in general, whether they did
persist in this their Answer. They all replied, Yea. The Remonstrants therefore
being dismissed, the Praeses required the Synod to think what course they would
take to proceed, protesting that he thought that all Liberty befitting was
grantunto them: and calling in the Remonstrants again, and advising them to
consider what they did: they all replied, that they were resolved, non
capitatim, sed conjunctim respondere. The President of the Politics commanded
them, that without peculiar leave granted, none of them should go out of the
Town. The Praeses Eclesiasticus advising the Synod to think of some course of
gathering the Remonstrants opinions out of their Books, since they could not
get them from themselves, dismissed the Company.

The same day after dinner was there a Session, but very private, neither was
any stranger permitted to be there. Wherefore a Relation of that Session I must
give only upon hearsay. Which I would now have done, but that I hasten to the
Session this morning. And I understand that the Synod will dispatch some of
their Company to the States General, to signify how matters stand, and to know
their further pleasure. I will here therefore shut up my Letters, reserving the
rest of the News till the next occasion, and commending your Honor to Gods
good Protection I humbly take my leave.

Dort this 17/27. of December. 1618. Your Honors Chaplain and bounden in all
Duty Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
THe State of our Synod now suffers a great crisis, and one way or other there
must be an alteration. For either the Remonstrant must yield, and submit
himself to the Synod, of which I see no great probability: or else, the Synod
must vail to them, which to do, farther then it has already done, I see not
how it can stand with their Honor. How the case stood at the last Friday
Session, your Honor may perceive by my letters written upon Saturday. Three
things there were mainly urged by the Synod, and as mainly withstood by the
Remonstrants. The first was the point of order to be held in discussing the
articles: whether the question of Reprobation were to be handled after the five
articles, as the Synod would have had it, because it is none of the five
points, and by order from the States nothing ought to be determined of till the
five be discust: or whether it should be handled in the first place, as the
Remonstrants would have it, because, as they pretended, their doubts lay
especially there, and that being cleared, they thought they should show good
conformity in the rest. The second thing, was the putting of interrogatories,
which thing they much disdained as Predagogicall. Third was the Liberty of
disputation which was to be given the Remonstrant, whether it were to be
limited and circumscribed by the discretion of the Synod, or large and
unlimited, accordingly as it pleased the Remonstrants. So strongly in these
points did the Remonstrants withstand the Synod, that on Friday last it was
verily thought they would have gone their way, and left the Commissioners to
determine without them. But the Synod bearing an inclination to peace, and
wisely considering the nature of their People, resolved yet further, though
they had yielded sufficiently unto them already, yet to try a little more, the
rather to stay the clamor of the Country, and cut off all suspicion of
Partial dealing. And for this purpose called a private Session on Friday in
the Evening, to mollify some things in thein Decrees and Proceedings. From that
Session all Strangers were excluded, and what I write, I do only upon Relation.
The sum of it was this. The Praeses much complained him of the perplexity he
was in, by reason of the Pertinacy of the Remonstrants. For, says he, if we
labor to keep them here, they will be but a hindrance to us, as hitherto they
have been, if we dismiss them, we shall hazard our credit among the People, as
if we purposed only to do what we please. Whatsoever it is that here we do, is
by some that come hither and write all they hear, presently eliminated, and
carried to them which has caused many hard, reports to pass of us, both with
them and otherwhere. He therefore commended to the Synod to consider whether
there might not be found some means of accommodation, which might somewhat
mollify the Remonstrant, and yet stand well with the Honor of the Synod. And
first, to make way, they read the Letters which in the morning by public
Decree, of the States were forbidden to be read ( a pretty matter in so grave a
place, to break those edicts in the Evening, which but in the Morning had been
so solemnly proclaimed) and to speak truth, their Decrees, have hitherto been
mere matter of formality to affright them a little, for none of them have been
kept; as being found to be Powder without Shot, and give a clap, but do no
harm.) The Letters being read they began to deliver their minds. Some thought
the Synod had been too favorable to the Remonstrants already, and that it were
best now not to hold them if they would be going, since hitherto they had been,
and for any thing appeared to the contrary, meant hereafter to be a hindrance
to all Peacable and orderly proceedings. Others on the contrary thought fit
that all should be granted them which they required, to su^^cease the
Interrogatories, to let them speak of Reprobation in what place, in what
manner, and how much they pleased, since this took from them all pretense of
exception, and Prejudiced not the Synods power of determining what they
pleased. A third sort thought it better to hold a middle course and under
color of Explanation, to mollify some of their Decrees. This sort prevailed,
and accordingly it was concluded that the Decree of the Synod (of this decree I
gave your Honor the sum in my Satterday Letters) made in the Morrning, should
be more largely and Significantly drawn, and withal in it should be expressed
how far it pleased the Synod to be indulgent unto the Remonstrants in the
points in Question. The Foreign Divines were requested, that they would
conceive some Reasons by way of Answer to these late Exceptions of the
Remonstrants, and give them up in writing the next Session, to try whether by
these means they might make them a little to relent. This is all was done that
Session, which though it seem but little, yet being handled with much and long
Speaking among so many, took up a long time,

On Monday the 21/31 of December. in the Morning the Synod being set Johannes
Polyander made a Latin Sermon. His Theme was the seventh verse of the two and
fiftieth of Isaiah. O quam specioc^^ in montibus, etc. he spoke much of the
greatness of Eclesiasticall Function; First in regard of their dignity in the
word Speciosi, Secondly of their industry, in the word Montibus, which argues
them either to be Pastores or Speculatores; Thirdly of the suavity of their
Doctrine in the word Peace and Good things; After this he fell Pathetically to
bewail the torn State of the Belgic Churches: and to commend the diligence of
the Synod in endeavoring to establish their Churches Peace. This was the sum
of his Sermon, it being only a passionate strain, and containing nothing much
Remarkable either for Doctrine or News. The Praeses in the Name of the Synod
gave him great thanks: and signified that he had many causes Sperare optima
quaequ^^e de Synodo: but that Gods good Spirit was indeed amongst them, he
gathered especially by this Argument, that so many Learned and Pious Sermo^^s
had in this place been lately made and so He dismissed the Company.

Concerning Monsieur Moulins proposition of which your Honor required my
opinion, thus I think, His project consists of two heads, of a General
Confession, and of a peaceable treaty for Union with the Lutheran Churches. I
imagine that the Generallity of the Confessions must not include the Lutheran.
For if it does, then are both parts of his proposition the same: it being the
same thing to procure one general Confession of Faith and a Union. Supposing
then that this Confession stretches not to them, I will do as Jupiter does in
Homer, (...). I will grant him one part, and deny ^^him the other. For a
general Confession of Faith, at least so far as those Churches stretch who
have Delegates here in the Synod, I think his project very possible, there
being no point of Faith in which they differ. If therefore the Churches shall
give power to their Delegates, to propose it to the Synod, I see no reason but
it should pass. But I did not like the intimation concerning Church-Goverment.
It had I think been better not mentioned: not that I think it possible that all
Churches can be Governed alike (for the French Church being sub cruce cannot
well set up Episcopal jurisdiction) but because it may seem to his Majesty of
Great Britain, that his excepting the point of Government might not proceed so
much from the Consideration of the Impossibility of the thing, as from want of
love and liking of it in the Person. Now for that part of the proposition which
concerns the Lutheran, either it aims at a Union in Opinion or a mutual
tolleration. The first is without all question impossible. For in the point of
the Sacrament and the dependences from it, as the ubiquity of Christ's manhood,
the Person of Christ, the communicatio idiomatum, etc. Either they must yield
to us, or we to them, neither of which probable. Their opinions have now
obtein'd for a Hundred years, ever since the beginning of the Reformation, and
are derived from the chief Author of the Reformation. It is not likely
therefore that they will easily fall, that have such Authority and so many
years to uphold them. But I suppose, Monsieur Moulins intended only a mutual
tolleration; and be it no more, yet if we consider the indisposition of the
persons with whom we are to deal, I take this likewise to be impossible. The
Lutherans are divided into two sorts, either they are Molliores, as they call
them, or Rigidi What hope there may be of moderation in the first I know not,
but in the second we may well despair of. For they so bear themselves, as that
it is evident they would rather agree with the Church of Rome, then with the
Calvinist. He that is conversant in the writings of Hunnius and Grawer^^s, will
quickly think as I do. The first of which has so bitterly written against
Calvin, that Parsons the Jesuit furnished himself by compiling Hunnius his
Books. If the whole lump be Leavened, as those two pieces, which I but now
named, they are certainly too sower for moderate men to deal with. The French
wits are naturally active and projecting; and withal carry evermore a
favorable conceit to the possibility of their projects. Out of this French
conceit I suppose proceeded this of M. Moulins.

Mr. Deane went away to the Hague, giving notice to no man. I understood not
till dinner that day, of any intent he had to go. I wished him an ill journey
for this discurtesy; but I hope he had a good one. I fear I well wearied your
Honor with these my long Letters, I will therefore take my leave, commending
your Lordship to Gods good protection.

Dort, 1. January, stylo novo. 1618. Your Honors Chaplain, and Bounden in all
Duty Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, my very good Lord.
WHat has lately been done at the Hague in the business concerning our Synod,
and what Decree the States have made to restrain the exorbitancy of the
Remonstrants, I suppose is sufficiently known unto your Lordship, as a thing
done in your presence. So much thereof it as shall serve the present purpose I
will take, and leave the rest to your, Honors better knowledge. Upon Thursday
the third of January, stylo novo, the Commissioners being met, and the
Delegates ready to declare the pleasure of the States, the Remonstrants being
called in, two of them were found wanting, Isaacus Friderici, and Henricus Leo:
for Isaacus it was answered, that he had leave on Friday last, of the Praetor
of the Town to go abroad: for Leo it was answered, that they knew not where he
was. Having sent for Leo, and awhile in vain expected him, the Delegates
proceeded to declare the will of the Lords, and signified that the States
allowed the Proceedings of the Synod, and commanded the Remonstrants to obey
for the present, and whatsoever Decrees hereafter the Delegates and Synod
should enact; and if they refused to obey, they should expect both Civil and
Eclesiasticall censure. If this served not, yet the Synod should go forward,
and gather their opinions out of their books and writings; That the
Remonstrants should be commanded to remain in the Town, and be ready to appear
whenever the Synod should summon them, and answer plainly and directly to
such Interrogatoryes as it should please the Synod to propose them. This first
was read in Dutch, and afterward for the information of the Foreigners it was
put into Latin. The Praeses then put to them that Question, which in one of the
former Sessions he had proposed, viz. Whether or no they did acknowledge the
Articles set down in the Hague Conference to contein their opinions, and
amongst the rest, that first concerning Election, which by the Scribe was read
unto them out of the Book. Episcopius beginning to make answer, Martinus
Gregorii commanded that their answers should be taken and set down in their own
words. Episcopius his answer was this. Omnibus in timore Domini expensis, and
adjunctis etiam ad Deum precibus, non possum impetrare ab anima mea, ut aliam
agendi rationem sequar, quam eam quae ultimo responso meo exhibita est. This
their answer, of which he speaks, was given on Saturday last, as I have
informed your Honor, and it was this, that except the Synod in antecessum, as
they spoke, would beforehand promise them, that they should have free Liberty
to propose their own opinion of Reprobation, and refute the Contra-Remonstrants
Doctrine in that point together with the Doctrine if all those whom the
Contra-remonstrants held for Orthodox, and that as far as they pleased without
receiving any check from the Synod, they were resolved to go no further. The
same was the answer of the rest, with some alteration of words, for they were
questioned one by one, every one by himself. Hollingerius answered, that he
could not eam recipere legem, eamque ingredi viam, which tended openly to the
ruin and oppression of the better cause. For by so doing he should greivously
wound his Conscience before God, and cast irreparabile scandalum before the
true worshippers of God. Imitabor itaque exemplum Christi: Silebo, et omnem
eventum commendabo illi qui venturus est adjudicandum vivos and mortuos.
Neranus spoke after the same manner, and added, that the Reasons why they thus
thought themselves bound to answer, they had exhibited this Morning to the
Secular Delegates. Poppius gave answer thus, Respondeo, cum debita erga summas
Potestates reverentia, me invocato sanctissimo Dei nomine, and retota etiam
atque etiam expensa apud animum meum, non posse des^^iere ab ultimo meo
responso. Exhibuimus rations Dominis Delegatis in quibus etiamnam acquiesco,
certo persuasus id quod facio Deo Optimo maximo and Christo Jesu probatum iri.
Martinus Gregiiro advised him here to bethink himself a little whether or no he
spoke not these words in Passion (for he seemed to be somewhat Choleric.) He
replied, that he spoke them with his best advice. The Praeses perceiving that
they were resolved not to Answer, concluding the questions which he had
proposed, thought that the Synod might without scruple accept of the first
Article in their Remonstrance at the Hague, for their proper tenent. He
proceeded therefore to propose unto them another Interrogatory: Whether or no,
that Decree which they spoke of in that first Article, did contein the whole
Decree of Election, and so were the main ground of Christianity; or whether
there were not some Decree besides this. The behavio^^r and answers of the
Remonstrants carried the same Copy of Countenance with the former, and Poppius
plainly answered, Quia conscientiae meae a Synodo non habetur ratio, non
expecto ab ea instructionem in veritate: ideoque consul^^um non est respondere.
The Praeses then citing some Texts out of Johannes Arnoldi, and Arminius, and
the Hague Conference, concluded that it was their opinion, that besides that
Decree mentioned in the Conference, they acknowledged no farther Decree of
Election. In the third place this question was put the Remonstrants: whether
when they taught, that God chose Man propter fidem praevisam, this were not
rather to be called an Election of ( Faith) then of the person; since the
person was chosen for the qualities sake. But they were still the same. Neranus
was the man that gave it, but it was the common answer of them all: Si liceat
nobis de Reprobatione, and Contra-Remonstrantium sententia super ea agere
quantum nobis conscientia nostra and Eclesiarum nostrarum aedificatio
persuadebit su^^ficere, and boc nobis in antecessum promittatur, libentur ad
quaesita respondebimus: si minus, silere malumus. Now because they had often
appealed to their Reasons exhibited in Scripto to the Secular Delegates that
Morning, the Delegates thought good to read the writing in the Audience of the
Synod. It contained almost no new thing, but was a repetition of their old
exceptions, that their Liberty was prejudiced, that the Synod was pars adversa
(and for farther illustration of this, they reckoned up all the sharp speeches
that either Scultetus or the Divines of Geneva, or any other had used against
them) that their Consciences would not allow of this manner of proceeding, etc.

This last Night was there a private meeting, not by way of Session, but only
it was a Conference to which some of the Graver and Discreeter of the Synod
were called. The end was only to advise what course is best to be holden in the
following disputations. It was thought fit that the Remonstrants should always
be present at their meetings, and questions should be proposed them: but the
Synod should proc^^ed whether they answered or no: and so they concluded of a
course to gather their opinions out of their Books. Mr. Amyes will inform your
Lordship more largely peradventure in some farther circumstances, his sudden
and unexpected departure has made me scrible up this, more ^^udely and
concisely then I had intended, because I was loath to miss of so good a
Messenger. Wherefore I cease any further to trouble your Honor, and remit you
to Mr. Amyes larger Relation.

Dort this Fourth of January. 1619. stylo novo. Your Honors Chaplain, and
bounden in all Duty and Service, Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
UPon Wednesday the ninth of January, stylo novo, the Synod met not at all.
Time was given the Deputies to advise of the Theses which were to be handled:
only at Night the English went in private to the Praeses to consult what manner
of proceeding were fittest to be used. What counsel they gave him I know not:
but this I see, that the course he takes is not altogether so well approved by
them. Upon Thursday the tenth of January the Commissioners met in the Morning
in private, where Mr. Praeses proposed unto them four things to be considered
of. First, whether or no the Theses proposed by him formerly did not perfectly
contein the opinion of the Remonstrants. Secondly, An electio sit una an
multiplex, that so he might exclude the Remonstrants Division of Election in
Revocabilem and irrevocabilem; completam and incompletam, etc. Thirdly, An
electio sit ex fide and obedientia, an potius ad fidem and obedientiam. For
this is one main point of difference: the Remonstrant teaches, that God foresaw
only who would believe, and so ordein'd and Elected only to Glory: the
Contra-Remonstrant teaches, that God ardein'd who should believe, and so
predestined and Elected both to Grace and Glory. The fourth thing proposed
was concerning the means how true believers become sure of their Salvation.
After this the Synod was requested to deliver themselves concerning a Method of
proposing and examining the Theses proposed. The greatest part of them liked
well of that form which the Praeses proposed. The English, the South-Hollanders
and Festus Hommius conceived severally a form of Theses, every man according to
his discretion, and exhibited them to the Judgment of the Synod, and had them
publicly read: this was the sum of that meeting. A Copy of the Theses drawn
by our Englishmen I will send your Honor, as soon as I can procure the sight of
them.

The same day at Evening the Deputies met in private as before. They continued
yet their consultation upon the point of manner of proceeding. The Praeses
invented certain new Interrogatories and propounded them to the Synod, to know
their minds whether it were not fit to propose them to the Remonstrants. There
was great doubt whither this were a thing fit to be done, since it is not
likely that the Remonstrants behavior in this behalf will be any other then
hitherto it had been. This question, as it seems, was the greatest part of
their consultation. It was at length Concluded that the Remonstrants should be
called in, and the Interrogatories put to them, the next Session. This Morning
therefore we look for an open Session, where we shall understand the last
nights Interrogatories, and the whole business of that Session. For I must
Confess, I do not well conceive what was then done, or to what purpose. I
perceive there is some variance about their form of proceeding: Mr. Praeses is
desirous that the course he has thought of may take place; the English and
others, that some more ready and compendious way may be taken. What will be the
Issue of it, I cannot yet conjecture as soon as I can understand any thing, I
will acquaint your Honor, till when I humbly take my leave.

Dort this 1/11 of January. 1619. Your Honors Chaplain and Bounden in all Duty
and Service, Jo. Hales.
I suppose Mr. Amyes can better inform your Honor of this last nights business.
He has been much with the Praeses, and I imagine understands most of his
intent.



Right Honorable my very good Lord,
YOur Lordship by your kind Letters does engage me so far, as I should think
it not the least part of my happiness, if I could but hit on any way whereby I
might express, in any proportion, my thankfulness for the same; but since that
cannot be, acknowledgement of non solvendo must pass for satisfaction. In that
Letter which I wrote to my Lord of Buckingham, (wherein I mentioned your
Lordships wonderful kindeness to me) I entreated his Lordship to move his
Majesty, that either by my Lord of Canterbury his Letters, or Mr. Secretaries,
^^ being joined with the English, we might make up one Collegium Theologorum
magnae Britanniae: Now this last week my Lord sent me word, that he gave my
Letter to the King, who did read it over, and liked the motion well, and so
accordingly gave order for it: he sent me word likewise, that the King had the
Episcop^^i Theses which I sent, and that he was mightily incensed at them. So
my very good Lord, I^^am well satisfied in that point; for we have now divided
the business among us D. Ward his part assigned to him is, Impugnatio Decreti
de salvandis fidelibus, and unico Decreto praede tinationis: My Lord of Land
aff his part is, Responsio ad Argumenta Remonstrantium, quibus prius illud
decretum conantur stabilire: Dr. Goad his part, Impugnatio Electionis
peremptoriae ex fide praevisa: and demonstratio hujus Propositionis, quod fides
sit fructus Electionis, which does coincidere with the other. D. Davenant his
part is Orthodoxae sententiae assertio, and vindicatio rationum ii
Contra-Remonstrantium ab objectionibus Remonstrantium in utroque membro. My
part is, Solutio omnium argumentorum quae afferunt Remonstrantes contra
Orthodoxam sententiam. The confusion here in handling of business is very
great; they do not know how to put any thing to Committees to agree of
business, and then afterward to propound it to the Synod to be approved or
disproved; which has been the custom observed in all Councils and Synods: but
nothing is known till it be propounded in the Synod, and then there are almost
as many several voices as heads; if your Lordship would give your advice to
some of the Estates in this kind, it may be they would apprehend it, and we
should bring business to some issue. The Palatine Divines and we have met now
three times, and we have agreed on the same Propositions, and have resolved to
call one of every College of the Foreign Divines, and communicate the same
with them; that so, if it be possible, all we strangers may set up, and throw
down the same Conclusions. For the Provincials, for any thing I can see, they
are so far set against the Remonstrants, I wish not their persons as well as
their opinions, that I am afraid they will not like well of our moderation. For
the Dismission of the Remonstrants, since your Lordship is pleased to take
notice of it, I hope I may without offense say that it was such, as certainly
did the Synod much wrong On Friday when they seemed to yield, then the Exteri
Theologi could not be heard for the continuing of them in the Synod. Nay the
trick which was put upon them was a little too palpable; For the Delegates had
their Decree of Dismission written before they came into the Synod, yet our
voices were asked, hoping it should have been answerable to their Decree: but
finding it was otherwise, without so much as laying their heads together for
consultation, they published a Decree which they brought written with them into
the Synod. On Monday the late Acts of the Remonstrants incredible obstinacy
being read; the Theologi exteri gave suffrages for their dismission; only one
to wit Steinius gave a bitter sentence; their voices being asked only, who are
not above a third part of the Synod, they were called in and dismissed with such
a powdering spe^^ch as I doubt not but your Lordship has heard with grief
enough, I protest I am much afflicted when I think of it. For if the
Remonstrants should write, that the President pronounced a sentence, which was
not the sentence of the Synod, they should not lie. The Civil Lawyers and
Cannon of France, who write much about the formalities omitted in the Council
of Trent, urge Exceptions of less moment then these; so neither was there
above a third part of the voices asked, ex quibus sententia ferri ^^quit:
neither was the sentence conceived in writ, and approved by the Synod, and the
bitter words in the Sentence were not the words of any of the suffrages, unless
that some of them were spoken by one man only. Your Lordships Censure of that
Sentence is just and honorable. Mr. Dean of Worcester at his going from hence,
with the Remembrance of his service to your Lordship, desired me to signify to
your Lordship, that he could not possibly meet with Deodatus. The Remonstrants,
(as Heinsius but now told me) have sent a very virulent and bitter writing to
Mr. Bogarmanne, it may be now we shall hear of it at the Synod, whether we are
going: so with the remembrance of my humblest Ducie and service to your
Lordship and your worthy Lady, I must conclude a Petitioner, that your Lordship
would ever be pleased to reckon among your true observers

Dort, this 13 of Febr. 1618. Your very dutiful, and faithful Servant W.
Belcanqual.

Right Honorable, and my very good Lord,
IT has pleased the Synod at length finally to discharge themselves of the
Remonstrants, and to proceed according as they had projected by gathering their
opinions out of their Books. The manner of their dissmission was this. Upon
Monday the 4/14 of January the Commissioners being set, the Praeses Polyticus
made a short speech to this purpose. That they had hitherto labou'rd as much as
in them lay to have the Decree of the Estates to be kept, and to bring the
Remonstrants to some reasonable resolution. And for this purpose had upon
Saturday last in the Afternoon, covented them and advised them to give up their
opinions, quietly, orderly, freely, and to refute the contrary as much as they
thought fit, reserving always to the Synod Authority to judge of what was
convenien^^, what was sufficient, without which it could be no Synod. That they
had undertaken in their behalf, that the Synod should so manage the b^^siness,
that they should have no just cause to complain. But all this labor was lost,
neither would they be brought to relinquish their former plea; for in a writing
exhibited unto them they signified so much in effect, in which writing they
referred themselves to such conditions as had been by them partly scripto,
partly viva voce formerly required. Wherefore they thought fit that it should
be proposed to the Synod to judge whether or no there had not been sufficient
order taken to give contentment to the Remonstrants, if at least any thing
could content them. Yet they thought it convenient once more to call the
Remonstrants before them, to see whether they would leave their holdfast and
submit to the Synod. If no, then they should without any farther delay proceed
to judge of their opinions by collecting them out of their Writings, This was
the sum of that speech. The wrighting mentioned by the Praeses Politicus in his
speech was then read first in Dut^^h, then in Latin, in which the Remonstrants
declared that they would submit themselves unto the Synod upon such conditions
as had formerly been required, otherwise no. After this was the Synod requested
to deliver their opinions, whether order sufficient to content the Remonstrants
had not been taken. It was judged generally that more could not be granted them
then had already been, which was they thought abundantly sufficient. Scultetus
did in brief give as it were a history or rather an inventory of the
Remonstrants behavior since their first appearance before the Synod, and
showed how contumeliously they had handled it, how they had contemned the
Decrees of the Seculars and of the Synod, that they had abused them with lies,
deceitful speeches, etc. And concluded that it was unfit the Synod should
farther condescend unto them. When the Foreigners had spoken, it was thought
sufficient, nei^^her did the Praeses proceed to ask the judgment of the
Provincialls, knowing belike before what it was The Remonstrants then being
called in the Praeses signified to them that upon Friday Morning they had given
good hope of peacable dealing, and at least in show seemed to forgo such
conditions as they had formerly claimed, he was now in the name of the Synod to
requre them to answer Categorically, yea or no, an veluit simpliciter and sine
condition parere Decreto Ordinum and Synodi and ita simplicitur venire in rem
praesentem. The Remonstrants for answer require that they may be permitted to
read a short writing which they had conceived. It was answered that it needed
not, there was no more required, but their yea or no, but they persisted in
their proposal, the Writing was taken and delivered to the Seculars to be
perused, and they commanded to withdraw. There writing was read, wherein having
signified; how welcome the moderation held by the Foreigners lately was unto
them; whereas they were enjoined to obey the Synodicall Decree, or look for
punishment, their answer was that it could not stand with their Conscience to
promise Obedience to all Synodicall Decrees, since many of them stood not with
Common AEquity, and as for Mulct and Punishment, they left it to the Discretion
of those to whose Government they were subject; they would provide their
patience. That they intend not to contest with the Synod concerning order: that
they promised to submit: but with such conditions as they had heretofore
mentioned. Thus as the Praeses said what they gave with the one hand, with the
other they took away again. The Remonstrants being again called in, they were
asked every man whether they acknowledged this answer, they all replied, they
did, and so were commanded to subscribe their Names to it, which forthwith was
done. The Praeses then Bespake them on this manner. The moderation of the
Foreigners which you so much extolled, proceeded out of their Error which to
day having understood, they have pronounced concerning you another sentence.

Upon Friday last when you seemed to disclaim all illimitted Liberty, and gave
hope of some Conformity, they dealt with the Synod in favor of you: but to day
understanding you to abuse the Synod, and fly back again to your former claim,
they all with one consent think you indignos esse quibuscum diutius res agatur.
One amongst them there is who has taken the pains to Map out your behavior
since your first footing in the Synod. Pretend you what you will, the true
cause of this your indisposition is this, that you take the Synod for the
Adverse part, and account your selves in Equal place with them, this conceit
has manifested it self in all your actions. Theses upon the question in
controversy you gave up, but so confused, so nothing to the purpose that no use
can be made of them. The Decrees of the Synod you have openly contemned. The
Interrogatories put you, you have refused to answer. Your Ci^^atory Letters
notwithstanding the sense of them was expounded by those who gave them, and
therefore best knew it, you have interpreted as you list, and professed that you
will proceed according to your own judgment, and not according to the
judgment of the Synod. At length on Friday last you seemed to lay by your
claim of illimited Liberty and give some hope of some conformity; but all this
in your writing now Exhibited you have retracted. The Synod has dealt mildly
gently and favorably with you, but sinceritati, lenitati, mansuetudini Synody,
fra^^des, arts, and mendacia opp^^s^^istis. I will dismiss you with no other
Elogie then one of the Foreigners gave you, quo cepistis pede eodem cedite,
with a lie you made your en^^rance into the Synod, with a lie you take your
leave of it, in denying lately that ever you protested your selves provided to
give answer on the Articles, or to have had any such writing ready, which all
the Synod knows to be false. Your actions all have been full of fraud
aequivocations and deceit. That therefore the Synod may at length piously and
peacably proceed to the perfecting of that business for which it is come
together, you are dismissed. But assure you the Synod shall make known your
pertinacy, to all the Christian World, and know that the Belgic Churches want
not arma Spiritualia, with which in time convenient they will proceed against
you. Quamobrem vos Delegatorum and Synodi nomine dimitto, Exite. So with much
muttering the Remonstrants went out; and Episcopius going away said, Dominus
Deus judicabit de fraudibus and mendaciis: Sapma Exeo ex ecclesia malignantium:
and so the Synod brake up.

The same day at night there was a private Session; what was done in it I
understand not yet. I conjecture it was concerning the order of proceeding. As
soon as I shall understand what was done I will acquaint Your Lordship with it,
and till then I humbly take my leave.

Dort this 5/15. of January. 1618. Your Honors Chaplain and bounden in all
Duty Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, my very good Lord.
SInce the Dismission of the Remonstrants there has not been any public
Session, and as I Conjecture for a while will not be. They are altogether in
Consultation concerning their order of proceeding, and in gathering materials
out of the Remonstrants Books, whence they may Frame their Theses and
propositions which must be the subject of their disputation. This they purpose,
as I conceive, to do through out all the Five Articles, before they come to the
open discussing of any one, for they are past from the first, and gone one to
the second. So that till this Consultation be ended there will not be any great
occasion of news.

Against Mr. Praeses so rough handling the Remonstrants at their Dismission
there are some exceptions taken by the Deputies themselves. The Foreigners
think themselves a little indirectly dealt withal, in that it being proposed
to the whole Synod to pass their judgment concerning the behavior of the
Remonstrants, the Provincials were not not at all required to speak, and by
these means the envy of the whole business was derived upon the Foreigners.
Whereas on the contrary when the like question was proposed formerly, and the
Foreigners had spoken very favorable in ihe Remonstrants behalf, the
Provincials stroke in, and established a rigid sentence, against the Foreigners
liking, So that there is little regard given to the judgment of the
Foreigners, except they speak as the Provincials would have them. Again upon
the Tuesday Session in the morning, there being a repetition made, according to
the custom, of the late Synodical acts, when they came to the act of the
Remonstrants Dismission, Lud. Crosius of Breme signified that he perceived that
Mr Praeses in that business had been paulo commotior, and had let slip, verba
quaedam acerba, which might well have been spared; that in so great an act, as
that was, a little more advice and consideration might have been used. The
Synod ought to have been consulted with, and a form of Dismission conceived and
approved of by all, which should in the name of the Synod have bin pronounced,
and registered; whereas now the Synod stands indicted of all that unnecessary
roughness which then was practiced. It had stood better whith the Honor of the
Synod to have held a more peaceable and passionless order. The Preses replied,
that for Dismissing the Remonstrants without a Synodical form, it was from the
Secular Lords, who willed him immediately to proceed, What his apology was for
his passionate speeches I know not. The Session was in private, and I have
nothing but by relation. I hear nothing yet from Mr. Preses concerning the
French project: as soon as I shall hear ought, I will not fail to acquaint your
Honor till when I humbly take my leave.

Dort, 6/16 January, 1618. Your Honors Chaplain, and Bounden in all Duty Jo.
Hales.
The bringer of this Letter is Sir John Berks Son.



Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
YOur Honor shall here receive the Decree of the Synod mentioned in my last
Letters, containing the form of proceeding which they will hold in discussing
the Articles. The morning they mean the Deputies shall spend in private, after
dinner in open Synod the chief places of Scripture upon which the Remonstrant
grounds himself shall be opened, and answers framed to the Arguments drawn from
thence. According to which resolution they began to proceed upon Thursday the
^^/17 of Janu. in the Evening. The question proposed then was, An praeter
Decretum de salvandis fidelibus, nullum sit aliud Decretum Electionis. The
Remonstrant affirms there is none, and for this produces certain places of
Scripture. The Contra-Remonstrant grants that there is such a Decree, but
withal contends that this is but a Secondary Decree. For God (says he) first
resolved upon the Salvation of some certain singular persons, and in the second
place decreed to give them Faith as a means to bring the former Decree to pass.
But before this question came on the stage, other things were done at that
time. The Synod therefore being met, at the time mentioned, First the Letters
from the States concerning D. Goads Admission were read, and after that, some
were sent to his Lodging to conduct him to the Synod. In the mean time were
there Letters from Mr. Dean to the Synod produced and read, together with a
form of Valediction and farewell, by him conceived. I suppose Mr. Dean
acquainted your Honor with the thing whilst he was with you, which is the
cause I have not sent a transcript of it: as soon as I understand your Lordship
has not seen it, I will cause a Copy of it to be taken. It was then concluded
by the Synod that the Praeses, and Assessors, together with the Seculars
Scribe, should, after the Synod was ended, repair to Mr. Dean, and take their
leave of him in the name of all the rest, and by him commend their love and
service unto his Majesty, and render him humble thanks for his princely care,
All which the same night was done. Now was Dr. Goade come to the Synod, and
according to the manner, conducted to his seat, where being sat, he made a
short speech, which being ended, the Synod proceeded to dicusse the question
above metion'd. The Decree is, that the Professors shall expound those places
of Scripture, on which the Remonstrant builds. Wherefore Jo. Polyander who is
the Senior Professor, being absent, Sibrandus Lubbertus who is the next in
order, took the question, and answered such Texts as were urged by the
Adversary, one out of the 3. of John, 36. Qui credit in filium habet vitam
aeternam: qui non credit non videbit vitam, sed ira Dei manet super eo. Another
out of the 1. to the Ephesians. 4. Elegit nos in Christo ante jacta mundi
fundamenta: A third out of 11. to the Hebrews Impossible est sine fide placere
Deo. The sum of Sibrandus his answer at that, time I can not give. For being
misinformed that it would be but a private Session, I was not at it. Besides
Sibrandus no man spoke any thing that night. As soon as he had done, it was
signified by the Praeses that the Campenses, who were lately cited, were now
ready to make their appearance. It was concluded, that because the business of
the Synod should not be interrupted, certain out of the company should be
appointed to hear the cause and make relation of it to the Synod: so the
Praeses concluded the Session with a prayer, in which he prayed for Mr. Deans
Health, and for the good success of his journey. This was the sum of what was
then done, and so I end, committing your Honor to Gods good protection,

Dort, this 8/18 of January. Your Honors Chaplain and bounden in all Duty and
Service, Jo. Hales.

The Synodical Decree of the sixth of January, concerning the manner of handling
the Five Articles.
COllatis diligenter per D. Praesidem, Assessores and Scribas ex praescripto
illustrium D D. Delegatorum suffragiis omnibus, tum Scripto tum viva voce heri
ac nudiustertius in veneranda hac Synodo dictis super modo agendi circa examen
and judicium quinque Articulorum: compertum est plurimis placere, ut singula
quamprimum Collegia ad examen illud instituendum judiciumque formandum serio se
accingant. Ac primo quidem loco in manus sumant primum Articulum. In cujus
examine, ut and deinceps in coeterorum, ad interrogatoria and Theses a D.
Praeside dicta^^a, ut and postea dictanda, quilibet in primis attendat. Si quis
tamen plura, quae ad sententiam Remonstrantium proponendam and explicandam
facere possunt, quae forte in Thesibus and interrogatoriis istis indicata non
sunt, addere velit and possit, id cuique liberum relinquatur: and ut privatim
singula collegia ante Meridiem de hoc examine cogitabunt; ita post Meridiem ne
Synodus intermissa, ac nulla Auditorum Spectatorumque ex omnibus passim oris
quotidie accurrentium ratio haberi videatur, publicus, nisi omnino res ipsa
aliud postulaverit, conventus celebrabitur: in quo potissima Remonstrantium
argumenta maxim ex Scripturis desumpta, ipsorumque adeo ad contrariae
sententiae argumenta maxim ex Scripturis desumpta responsiones proponentur and
excutientur, praeeuntibus D D. Doctoribus ac Professoribus nunc nostratibus,
nune exteris ad Arbitrium D. Praesidis: relicta interim singulis liberate
dictis addendi, and suam etiam ^^e praepositis argumentis sententiam dicendi.
Quare necesse quoque erit ut quilibet serio de argumentis istis and
responsionibus apud se cogitet ac meditetur. Dabit autem operam D. Praeses
singulis Sessionibus, ut ea de quibus proxima Sessione erit agendum universae
Synodo significet. Ac si quis fuerit, qui de quoquam, quod forte a D. Praeside
monitum non fuerat, judicium Synodi audire sua vel aliorum causa desideret,
ejus, si privatim D. Praesidem appellaverit, ratio habebitur, prout ipse
adhibito consilio Assessorum and Scribarum, ac si opus fuerit plurium, ex usu
Synodi, aut rei qua de agitur, esse existimaverit. Judicium formatum de
quolibet Articulo, additis rati^^nibus quibus subnixum est, Praesidi privatim
exhibebitur asservandum, donec de omnibus judicium Articulis judicium formatum
and similiter exhibitum fuerit.

Right Honorable, and my very good Lord,
UPon wednesday the 6/16 of January there was no Session at all in the morning,
in the evening there was one, but in private. In this they have concluded the
question about their manner of proceeding. There was a form conceived and
concluded upon, and transcribed by all the Deputies. They concluded likewise
their Theses upon the first Article, which they purpose publicly to discuss.
It was late in the evening ere this Session was done, so that I could not get
the Copies of either of these, but in my morrow. Letters I will not fail by
Gods grace to send your Honor the transcripts of them. Besides, there were some
things of smaller weight advised of. First, whether in delivering of their
judgments upon the Articles in Controversy, the Foreigners should begin, as
hitherto they had done. The Provincials at first strained courtesy, and
thought it no point of good manners, to take Precedence of the Foreigners: but
it is concluded, they must, as being better tried in these Controversies then
the Foreigners are, and therefore meet it was they should give them more time
to advise. The second thing proposed was concerning their Auditory. For they
questioned whether they should admit of hearers, or do all in private. Old
Sibrandus was very hot against the Auditory, and thought it not fit that any
care should be had of them, as being only Mulierculae, and pu^^enli juvenes
incauti. There is some reason of this complaint of his, for many youths, yea
and Artificers, and I know not what rabble besides thrust in, and trouble the
place. As for women whole troops of them have been seen there, and the best
places for spectators reserved for them. Which thing must needs expose the
Synod to the scorn of those, who ly in wait to take exception against it. But
the Synod has determined in favor of their Auditory, that Sessions
consultatory and Provisionall shall be private, but Sessions wherein they
discuss and conclude shall be public. Meetings hereafter will not be so
frequent, for men will take more time to advise. This is the sum, as far as I
can learn, of what was done at that time. To morrow your Lordship shall receive
farther information, till which time I humbly take my leave.

Dort, this 7/17 of January. Your Honors Chaplain and bounden in all Duty, Jo.
Hales.

Right Honorable, and my very good Lord,
UPon Friday the 8/18 of January in the Evening, the Synod being met, Doctor
Gomarus answered some parts of Scipture, laid hold of by the Remonstrants,
after the same manner as D. Sibrandus had done the night before, the places by
him discust were for the more part the same which in the former Session had
been handled. The order of discussing these arguments is by continued discouse
after the manner of La^^in Sermons, or rather of Divinity Lectures, such as are
read in our Schools. In one thing the Discretion of both these Doctors was much
approved. For both of them holding that extreme and rigid tenent, which Beza
and Perkins first of all acquainted the World with, yet notwithstanding they
held an unpartiall and even course, and never stroke upon it. When Gomarus had
spoken toward an hour and half, my Lord Bishop delivered himself concerning
the meaning of the same places of Scripture, and after him certain other of the
foreign Divines. After this same Copy will all the news be yet this ten days
or more, and these evening Sessions are only to entertain the Auditory, not to
determine any thing at all. Each company must in private conceive and set down
in writing their opinion concerning the Articles; and when they have so done
the Writings must be exhibited to the Synod, and out of them must be gathered
the Conclusion which must stand for good. This is a thing which will require
some good time, and in the mean while besides these Theological Lectures,
there shall be nothing done publicly in the Synod. The same day at night
Bisterfieldius, one of the Deputies lately come out of Nassau died. When his
Funeral will be I know not. Upon Friday Morning Mr. Dean took his journey
toward Middlebourgh. Upon Saturday their was no Session at all Mr. Balcangual
commends his Service unto your Honor, and required me to signify to you thus
much, that he had lately spoken with Musius, but understood nothing by him
concerning the matter which your Lordship is privy too. He willed me moreover
to inform your Honor, That whereas you lately spoke to Mr. Dean to deal with
Deodati, Mr. Dean by reason of his indisposition of Body, and sudden departure;
found no means to talk with him. Thus with humble recommendation of my Service
to your Honor, I take my leave.

Dort, this 11/21 of January. Your Honors Chaplain and bounden in all Duty and
Service, Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, and my very good Lord,
THe Errors of public actions (if they be not very gross) are with less
inconvenience tolerated then amended. For the danger of alteration, of
disgracing and disabling Authority, makes that the Fortune of such proceedings
admits no regress, but being once howsoever well or ill done, they must for
ever after be upheld. The most partialls spectator of our Synodal acts can not
but confess, that in the late dismission of the Remonstrants, with so much
choler and heat, there was a great oversight committed, and that whether we
respect our common profession of Christianity, Quae nil nisi justum s^^adet and
lene; or the quality of this people apt to mutine by Reason of long Liberty,
and not having learnt to be imperiously commanded, in which argument the Clergy
above all men ought not to have read their first Lesson. The Synod therefore to
whom it is not now in integro to look back, and Rectify what is amiss without
disparagement, must now go forward and leave events to God, and for the
Countenance of their action do the best they may. For this purpose have they
lately by Deputies appointed for that end, made a Declaration of all their
proceedings unto the States General, from whom they have procured a Decree for
Confirmation of them, which Decree upon Monday the 11/21 of Jannary was
publicly, first in Dutch then in Latin, read at the Synod in the Evening. The
particulars of it I shall not need relate as being sufficiently known to your
Honor. The Decree being pronounced, Heinsius first signified that it had been
before in private made known to the Remonstrants, and then in the name of the
Delegates warned the Commissioners of the Synod, Ut quam mat^^rime and
celerrime de istis controversiis statuant, ut possint tandem afflictis eclesiis
Belgicis subvenire. I was very glad to hear that admonition, and it gives me
hope that our Synod shall have end not long after Easter at the Farthest. After
this did Tysius, another of the Professors discuss three other of the
Remonstrants arguments taken out of the Hague Conference, according to the same
form as Sibrandus and Gomarus had done before. This being done the Praeses
required Jo. Polyander and Wallaeus to provide to do the like upon Thursday
next in the Evening (for before that time there is to be no public Session)
and requesting the Company the next Day to accompany Bisterfieldius to his
Grave (which accordingly was done at the time appointed) he dismissed the
meeting. So that till Thursday next we are likely to understand no more news of
the Synod.

I spoke upon Tuesday with Mr. Praeses concerning Moulius project. His an^^wer
to me was this, that he communicated the thing with some of the discreeter of
the Synod, and that he had required my Lord Bishop and Scultetus to conceive a
form of public Confession. Which as soon as it should be concieved and
allowed of by those, who should in that behalf be consulted withal, he would
send a Copy of it to your Honor, to be sent to his Majesty, by him to be
revised and altered according to his pleasure, and so from him to be commended
unto the Synod publicly. Which course he thinks will take good success. As
touching the point concerning the Lutherans he thinks it not fit that any word
at all be made. I dealt with Mr. Praeses concerning a Copy of M. Deans
Valediction to the Synod; he answered me that he had delivered it to Dammannus
the Scribe to be copied out, and as soon as it was done, I should have it to
transcribe, so soon therefore as I can procure the Copy of it, I will not fail
to send it your Lordship. Mr. Dean at his departure had an Honorarium bestowed
on him by the States. Heinsius the Scribe came to his lodging to him, and
making a short speech unto him, presented him in the Name of the States with
munusculum as he called it. What or how much it was no man knows. Thus
commending your Honor to Gods good protection, I humbly take my leave.

Dort, this 12/22 of January 1619. Your Honors Chaplain in and Bounden in all
Duty, Jo. Hales.

Right Honurable, and my very good Lord,
UPon Tuesday she 12/22 of this present in the Evening, for, for the debating
of certain particular points in controversy belonging to the first Article, the
Synod came together in private. It has been lately questioned, how Christ is
said to be Fundamentum Electionis. The Doctrine generally received by the
Contra-Remonstrant in this point is, That God first of all resolved upon the
Salvation of some singular persons, and in the second place upon Christ as a
mean to bring this Decree to pass. So that with them God the Father alone is
the Author of our Election, and Christ only the Executioner. Others on the
contrary teach, that Christ is so to be held Fundamentum Electionis, as that he
is not only the Executioner of Election, but the Author and the Procurer of it:
for proof of which they bring the words of the Apostle to the Ephesians, the
first Chapter, elegit nos in Christo ante jacta mundi fundamenta. The
Exposition of this Text was the especial thing discust at this meeting,: and
some taught, that Christ was Fundamentum Electionis, because he was primus
Electorum, or because he is Fundamentum Electorum, but not Electionis, or
because he is Fundamentum beneficiorum, which descend upon us; others brookt
none of those Restraints. D. Gomarus stands for the former sentence, and in
defense of it had said many things on Friday. This night Martinius of Breme
being required to speak his mind, signified to the Synod, that he made some
scruple concerning the Doctrine passant about the manner of Christ's being
Fundamentum Electionis, and that he thought Christ not only the Effector of our
Election, but also the Author and Procurer thereof. Gomarus who owes the Synod
a shrewd turn, and then I fear me began to come out of debt; presently, as soon
as Martinius had spoken, starts up, and tells the Synod, ego hanc rem in me
recipio, and therewithal casts his Glove, and challenges Martinius with this
Proverb, Ecce Rhodum, e^^ce saltum, and requires the Synod to grant them a
Duel, adding that he knew Martinius could say nothing in refutation of that
Doctrine. Martinius who goes in a quipace with Gomarus in Learning, and a
little before him for his Discretion, easily digested this affront, and after
some few words of course, by the wisdom of the Praeses matters seemed to be a
little pacified, and so according to the custom, the Synod with Prayer
concluded. Zeal and Devotion had not so well allayed Gomarus his choler, but
immediately after Prayers he renewed his Challenge and required Combat with
Martinius again; but they parted for that night without blows. Martinius, as
it seems, is somewhat favorable to some Tenants of the Remonstrants concerning
Reprobation, the latitude of Christ's merit, the Salvation of Infants, etc. and
to bring him to some conformity was there a private meeting of the Foreign
Divines upon Wednesday morning in my Lord Bishops Lodging, in which thus much
was obtained, that though he would not leave his Conclusions, yet he promised
moderation and temper in such manner, that there should be no dissension in the
Synod by reason of any opinion of his.

Upon Thursday the 14/24 of this present, the Synod being met in the Evening,
Jo. Polyander and Wallaeus undertools the defense of some places of Scripture
brought by the Contra-Remonstrants against the exceptions of the Remonstrants:
the places of Scripture were, Luke 10. 20. Gaudete quia nomina vestra scripta
sunt in Coelis. Apocal. 21. 27. inscripti in libro vitae. Romans 9. 11. Ut
propositum Dei secundum Electionem maneret, and 11. 5. Reservatio secundum
Electionem: and Romans 8. 13. Quos praedestinavit ut conformes fiant imagini
Filii sui, eos eriam vocavit. Act. 13. 48. Crediderunt quot quot erant ordinati
ad vitam aeternam. Upon these places these two spoke almost three hours.

It was expected that as the rest of the Professors hitherto have done, so
Doctor Davenant the next Professor should speak in public: It is said that
he shall do it this day in a private Session (for there is no public till
Monday, and what will then be done I know not.) What the meaning is of this
Audience only in private, I know not. But of this I will say more in my next
Letters to your Honor, till when I leave your Lordship to Gods good protection.

Dort this 15/25 of January 1618. Your Honors Chaplain, and bounden in all
Duty Jo. Hales.
Your Honor shall hear receive a Copy of Mr. Deans farewell, I fear me it is
a little imperfect, for I understand it not in some places. If I can hear of
another copy from Mr. Praeses who promised me one at the beginning of this
week, and find it to be perfecter, I will again transcribe it.

The Dean of Worcesters Valediction to the Synod.
NOn facile mecum in gratiam redierit cadaverosa haec moles, quam aegre usque
circumgesto, quae mihi sacri hujus Conventus celebritatem toties inviderit,
jamque me prorsus invitissimum, a vobis importune avocat and divellit. Neque
enim ullus est profecto sub Coelo locus aeque Coeli aemulus, and in quo
tentorium mihi figi maluerim, cujusque adeo gestiet mihi animus meminisse.
Beatos vero vos quibus hoc frui datum! Non dignus eram ego ut fidelissimi
Romani Querimoniam imitari liceat, qui pro Christi and Ecles^^ae suae nomine
sanctam hanc provinciam diutius sustinerem. Illud vero (...): nempe audito quod
res erat, non alia me quam adversissima hic usum valetudine, serenissimus Rex
meus, misertus miselli famuli sui revocat me domum, quippe quod cineres meos
aut sandapilam vobis nihil quicquam prodesse posse norit, succenturiavitque
mihi virum e suis selectissimum, quantum Theologum! De me profecto, (mero jam
silicernio) quicqui^^ s^^, viderit ille Deus meus, cujus ego totus sum. Vobis
quidem ita feliciter prospectum est, ut sit cur infirmitati meae haud parum
gratulamini, quae hujusmodi instructissimo succedaneo coetum hunc vestrum
beaverit. Neque tamen committam, (si Deus vitam mihi ac vires indulserit) ut et
corpore simul et animo abesse videar. Interea sane huic Synodo ubicunque
terrarum sim, votis, consiliis, conatibusque meis quibuscunque res vestras me
pro virili serio ac sedulo promoturum sancte voveo. Interim vobis omnibus ac
singulis, Honoratissimi Domini Delegati, Reverendissime Domine Praeses,
Gravissimi Assessores, Symmystae Colendissimi, tibique Venerandissima Synodus
Universa, aegro animo ac corpore aeternum valedico: rogoque vos omnes obnixius
ut precibus vestris imbecillem reducem facere, comitari, et prosequi velitis.



Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
UPon Tuesday the 19/29 of January, at the Evening Session, the point of
Reprobation was Scholastically and learnedly discust by Altingius, one of the
Palatine Professors. His discourse was the most sufficient of any that yet I
heard. He began from the Definition, and proceeded to how far God had a hand in
it, and how far man is the Author of his own Destruction, and lastly answered
the Remonstrants arguments. He spoke about an hour and half. I would willingly
have given your Honor an account of his speech, but it was in the Evening, and
the Auditory are allowed no candles, so that I could not use my tables. And
thus have they discust the first Article; though I could have wished that the
question of Reprobation had been yet farther opened and stood upon, it being a
point of large extent, and especially insisted on by the Remonstrant. As for
Synodical Resolution in this first Article, that we must yet expect, till all
the rest be examined as this has been. There is no open Session till Friday
next after dinner; and then is it their purpose to enter upon the Second
Article, of Universal Grace: at which time Mr. Balcanqual, and Cruciger of
Hassia are appointed to speak, according as the rest have done before, to this
question, Whether the death of Christ were intended indifferently for all, or
only for the Elect? Upon Wednesday the 20/30 of January, in the evening was
there a private Session, wherein, belike for the making of better speed, they
consulted whether they should go on to examine the rest of the Articles after
the same manner they had done the first, or else bethink them of some more
speedy order. After a long disceptation, even so long that Jo. Polyander put
the Praeses in mind of the exceeding sharpness of the Weather, they at length
concluded, that they would go on in the same course they had begun. And this as
yet is all the News that is passant, wherefore ceasing farther to trouble your
Honor, I humbly take my leave.

Dort this 21/31 of January. 1619. Your Honors Chaplain, and bounden in all
Duty and Service, Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, and my very good Lord,
UPon Friday the 15/25 of January, there was a meeting of the Synod partly
public, partly private. As the Provincial Professors had done, so was D.
Davenant, who is the first Professor of the Forraigners, enjoined by the
Praeses to do. The intent of his discourse at that time, was to overthrow
certain distinctions framed by the Remonstrants for the maintenance of their
positions, and evasion from the Contraremonstrants Arguments. The Remonstrants
usually distinguish upon Election, and divide it, into definitam and
indefinitam, revocabilem and irrevocabilem; peremptoriam and non peremptoriam;
mutabilem and immu^^abilem, and the like. For the refutation of which
distinctions he first set down the definition of election brought by the
Contraremonstrant, and at large confirmed it: secondly he brought the
definition of election agreed on by the Remonstrant, and Argued against it: and
thirdly he directly oppugned these forecited distinctions; all which he did
learnedly and fully. When Dr. Davenant had spoken: the Auditory was commanded
to depart. For having a purpose that others should speak at the same time, and
fearing that some diversity of opinion might rise, and occasion some
dissension, it was thought fit that things should be transacted as privately as
might be. Many more of the Foreigners delivered themselves that night, and
amongst the rest Martinius of Breme proposed again his former doubts unto the
Synod, concerning the sense in which Christ is, said to be fundamentum
electionis, and requested to be resolved. But D. Gomarus at this time, was
somewhat better advised, and thought it best to hold his peace. This day will
there be a private meeting wherein every company will give up their judgments
in writing upon the first Article: and to morrow I understand they will go on
unto the second, and proceed in it, accordingly as they have done in the
former. As for any Decisive Sentence they will give none, till they have thus
gone through all the five. In this I suppose they do very discreetly. For since
the Articles are mutually linked together, it is most convenient they should
first go through them all, since a predetermination in the former, might bind
them to some inconvenience in the later, there being no place left to look
back, but stand they must to what they have once concluded. For avoiding of
this it is thought best to determine of all at once. And this is all the news
that here is current: wherefore Commending Your Honor to Gods good protection,
I humbly take my leave.

Dort this 18/28 of January. 1619. Your Honors Chaplain and Bounden in all Duty
Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
UPon Monday the 18/28 of January in the Evening, the Synod being met,
Scultetus spoke at large de Certitudine gratiae and salvtis, that it was
necessary for every man to be assured of his Salvation. The manner of his
discourse was oratoriall, the same that he uses in his Sermons, not
scholasticall and according to the fashion of disputation and Schools. For this
cause the question was neither deeply searched into, nor strongly proved. And
this is all was done that night.

I spoke with Mr. Dr. Goad concerning Mr. Brent, who answered me that he heard
nothing at all of him, and that he will shortly write unto My Lord Archbishops
Secretary to be informed farther concerning him. My Lord Bishop of late has
taken some pains with Martinius of Burnt, to bring him from his opinion of
Universal Grace. By chance I came to see his Letter written to Martinius in
which he expounded that place in the third of John, So God loved the World,
that he gave his only begotten S^^on etc. which is the strongest ground upon
which Martinius rests himself. Beyond this here is no news worth the relating,
and therefore till farther occasion offer it self, I humbly take my leave.

Dort this 19/29 of January. 1618. Your Honors Chaplain and bounden in all
Duty Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, my very good Lord.
UPon Thursday the 24/31 of January in the Evening the Synod met privately, and
as they had done in the first, so did they in the second Article. For the
speedier Direction to find the places in the Remonstrants Books, where the
particulars concerning Universal Grace are discust, there was a kind of Index
or Concordance drawn of the several passages in their writings touching that
subject. The next Day following, that is the first of February Stylo novo, Mr.
Balcanquall, and Cruciger of Hassia made entrance upon the second Article. Mr.
Balcanquall spoke above an hour, and did very well acquit himself. When they
had done the Praeses enjoined Steinius of Hassia upon Tuesday next in the
Evening (at what time will be the next open Session) to speak of the fourth
Article (for of the third there is no question) and to sound whether the Grace
of God converting us be resi^^tible, as the Remonstrants would have it. This
have chat is made in this sudden passing from one Article to another is much
mervail'd at by our English Divines: for the Colleges yet have not all given
up their opinion upon the first, and besides that the Remonstrants upon
Wednesday last were willed to give in their Arguments upon the first Article.
For notwithstanding they be excluded from personal appearance in the Synod,
yet are they Commanded to Exhibit to the Synod whatsoever they shall please to
command. Now some time will be required for the Examining of those reasons, if
they be of late invention, and such as yet have had nothing said to them. But
what the reason of this have is, will appear hereafter.

I lately writ unto Mr. Collwall to know what Order was to be taken for the
discharge of my lodging, whether your Honor were to answer it or the public
purse. I would willingly be resolved of it, because I have a desire to return
to the Hague; first because the Synod proceeding as it both, I do not see that
it is opere pretium for me here to abide: and then because I have sundry
private occasions that call upon me to return. For notwithstanding this have,
of which I but now spoke, it will be long ere the Synod will come to determine
any thing, and about that time, if your Honor shall be so pleased, I shall be
ready to come back to Dort. And so remembering my service unto your Honor I
humbly take my leave.

Dort, this first of Febr. 1619. stylo novo. Your Honors Chaplain and bounden
in all Duty and Service, Jo. Hales.

Right Honorable, and my very good Lord,
OUr Synod goes on like a watch, the main Wheels upon which the whole business
turns are least in sight. For all things of moment are acted in private
Sessions, what is done in public is only for thew and entertainment. Upon
Monday last the 4th. of February, stylo nov^^. the Deputies met privately in
the Evening, where the first thing that came upon the Stage was that old
impertinent business concerning the Campenses, at what time Scotlerus a
Remonstrant Minister who had been formerly cited to appear before the Synod,
having not appeared at time appointed, pretended sickness and for that cause he
required the Synods patient forbearance. After this they entered into
consultation concerning certain Books and Writings to be conceived partly for
declaracion of the Synods meaning in the Doctrine of the five Articles, partly
in Apology for it. And first it was proposed that there should be scriptum
didacticum a plain and familiar writing drawn, wherein the Doctrine of the five
Articles according to the intent and meaning of the Synod should be
perspicuously expressed for the Capacity of the Common sort, and that in Dutch
and Latin. The Apologicall Writings were of two sorts, first Scriptum
Elenchicum wherein there were to be refuted such Errors as had been lately
broached in prejudice of the received Doctrine: secondly scriptum Historicum,
which was to consist of two parts, first a narration of the Synods proceedings
with the Remonstrant, from the day of his first appearance till the time of his
Ejection: for the refutation of many bitter invectives which lately had been
written against the Synod in that behalf. Secondly a Relation de causis
turbarum, who were the Authors of the late Stirs in time of the separation; for
answer of Episcopius his Oration, and other Writings of the Remonstrants, in
which the whole misorder is turned upon the Contra-Remonstrant. For the
Scriptum didacticum the English were altogether against it: and so was
Vosbergius. Their Reason was, because it seemed incongruous that any writing
concerning the Doctrine of the Articles should be set forth before the Synod
had given Sentence. And indeed I must confess I see no great congruity in the
proposal, whilst matters are in controversy: Judges walk suspensly, and are
indifferent for either party, and whatsoever their intent be, yet they make no
overture of it till time of sentence come. All this business of citing,
inquiring, examining must needs seem only as acted on a stage, if the Synod
intempestively before hand bewray a resolution. But notwithstanding any reason
alleadgable against it, the thing is concluded, and Wallaeus, Udemannus, and
Triglandius are deputed to write a discourse to that purpose, with the
inspection and supervision of my Lord Bishop, Scultetus, Brittingerus, and
Deodatus. For the scriptum historicum in the first part concerning the
proceeding of the Synod with the Remonstrant, there is required the pains of
Scultetus and Triglandius in the second part de causis turbarum, Latius must
bestow his labor, with the help of Festus Hommius, of the South-Holanders and
North-Hollanders, who best of any know the whole carriage of that matter. To
the composing of the scriptum elenchicum there are deputed four of the
Provincials Professors, Jo. Polyander, Lubbertus, Gomarus and Thysius, to whom
are adjoined as helpers and Supervisors D. Davenant, Altingius and Martinius.
But the business of this writing past not without some opposition, Deodat.
altogether misliked it, Polyander requested that his pains might be spared:
Novi, says he, quam sit mihi curta supellex. But above all D. Gomarus was most
offended at the Proposal. Bella mihi video, bella parantur ai^^. And therefore
quite refusing to consent to any Polemicall writing, he advised that the
scriptum didacticum should abstain, a non necessariis and privatis, and contein
only necessary points such as pass by common consent. That they should expect
till the Remonstrant had set forth some adversary writing, and then would be a
fi^^er time to think of somewhat in this kind. I blame not D. Gomarus if he a
little recoil. For being of the Supralapsarii, as they term them, of those who
bring the Decree of Gods Election from before the fall, and seeing the Synod
not willing to move that way, but to subside in a lower sphere, he is to be
pardoned, if he deny his hand to that writing, which he supposes cannot be so
warily indicted, but he must be forced with his own pen to let fall somewhat
Prejudicial to his own opinion. The Praeses answered that it was not his drift
to force the Synod against their minds to set out such a Book; but only to
take hold of the present occasion whilst the Foreign Divines were here, and
have such a Book in readiness for use hereafter, though it were not now set
forth. He farther advised that those who were to undertake this, should have an
eye to the inclination of the Synod, and beware as much as might be, that they
touched not there where any man was sore. Whatsoever the pretense is, the
mentioning of these Books, before the Determination of the Synod be formally
set down, must needs be very unseasonable. It will make the World to think they
came resolved what to do, which though perchance they did, yet it is no wisdom
to confess it. After this did they advise concerning the Exceptions against the
Confession and Catechism, and of such as should answer them. For the
Catechism, the Palatine Divines undertook it: for the Confession some of the
Provincialls were appointed, whose names I have not learnt. The Praeses then by
the advice of the Secular Delegates, advised the Synod to think of gathering a
Synopsis and brief of all the Synodicall Proceedings, to be sent to the King of
England, and other Foreigne Princes and States, who had sent Deputies to the
Synod, that so they may understand what has been done. For this were there
appointed Altingius Steinius, the Assessors and Scribes; and for Supervisors
were named D. Davenant, Praeses. This is the sum of that Session.

On Tuesday at Even they met again in private, where every one spoke in order
what they had further to say concerning the second Article. Upon some occasion,
I know not what, the Praeses mentioned Negotium Vorstianum, Bertianum, and
Venatorianum, which I note because this is the first time that Vorstius his
cause was named in the Synod. There has not been any stay made amongst the
Foreign Divines but only in this second Article, out of which if they can well
and clearly wrest themselves, their passage out of the rest will be more
smooth. I lately told your Honor that Martinius of Breme made some doubts
amongst the rest concerning Universal Grace. Not Martinius only but Dr. Ward
in this point. For the composing the doubts of both these, that they brake not
out to any public inconvenience there has been of late many private meetings
in my Lord Bishops Lodging; where upon Wednesday Morning were drawn certain
Theses in very suspense and wary terms: to what end, whither to give content
to all parties, or to exhibit to the Synod, or what else I know not, by chance
I had a view of them, but no opportunity to transcribe them.

On Wednesday the sixth of February, there was a public Session in the Evening,
at what time Steinius of Hassia spoke to the fourth Article concerning the
resistibility of Grace, in the same manner as others had done before him. He
spoke about an hour and a half, and when he had done, the Praeses gave warning
of a public Session to be upon Monday next in the Evening, and so dismissed the
Auditory, but not the Synod, who after this sat a good space in private
consultation.

7. Febr. 1619. Your Honors Chaplain and bounden in all Duty and Servoie, Jo.
Hales.

FINIS.

