LAMPAS: OR, DESCRIPTIONS OF SOME Mechanical Improvements OF Lamps and
Waterpoises. Together with some other PHYSICAL and MECHANICAL DISCOVERIES.

MADE BY ROBERT HOOK, Fellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON, Printed for John Martyn, Printer to the Royal Society, at the Bell in
St. Paul's Churchyard. 1677.



LAMPAS: OR, A DESCRIPTION OF SOME Mechanical Improvements OF LAMPS.
THe Hypothesis of Fire and Flame I did about eleven years since publish in the
16. Observation Page 103, 104, and 105. of my Micrographia, which has so far
obtained, that many Authors have since made use of it, and asserted it; not
have I yet met with one considerable objection against it. It shall not
therefore be my business at present to discourse of, or farther explain that
Theory, which any one upon a strict inquiry into, I question not, will find
cause sufficient to confirm him in, but rather to mention some pleasant and
beneficial uses thereof, and to hint some Mechanical contrivances, for the
supplying the Pabulum Oil or Spirit by the same Degrees by which it is consumed
in the flame of a Lamp, that great dissolvent.

I do not here design to show a way how to make a perpetual Lamp, that being a
Chimera which my Hypothesis of flame does seem to destroy, for the dissolvend
must in time be dissolved: But to show a way how to make the Receptacle of a
Lamp in such manner as that it shall continue to supply the Pabulum to the
flame equally and for a very long time till it be all consumed. The
consideration of which Problem first put me upon the enquiry after a
counterpoise for Liquors or Fluids, which is also of very great use in
Hydraulicks, as I shall hereafter have occasion to manifest.

This I can do by very many contrivances, depending from very differing
Principles, all and every of which may be fitted so as to supply the Oil or
Pabulum of the Lamp in such quantity, and after such manner and proportion as
shall be desired. I shall now omit all the other ways of performing this
effect, though diverse of them are as much or more considerable than any of
these I here mention. And having promised in the 32 Page of my description of
Helioscopes to publish a Counterpoise for Liquors, I shall only explain several
ways by the help of these Counterpoises to do whatsoever can be required, as to
the manner and quantity of supplying Oil to the flame.

The chief design of the Counterpoise in this inquisition is to keep the
Superficies of the Liquor (whether Oil, Spirit of Wine, Oil of Turpentine, or
the like) whatever quantity there be in the Vessel, always to the same height,
so that the said Pabulum shall always be equally distant from the bottom of the
flame, and the Wick or flame being once placed at a convenient height or
distance above the Superficies of the Oil, shall not be deserted by the said
Superficies till the whole quantity be consumed; but it is as easy to contrive
it, to supply it by decreasing or increasing degrees, which are conveniences
that none of all the Lamps I have ever yet met with have had, that was
tolerable for use. The most ingenious is that which is commonly known by the
name of Cardans Lamp, as being published and very probably invented by Cardan,
which does in some manner supply the wasting and decay of the Oil caused by the
flames Consumption. But then it is subject to a great many inconveniences,
which make it intolerable and disused: The first is, though it does supply the
defects of the Oil to the Wick, yet it does it not constantly and equally, but
by starts and gluts; for after the receptacle by the Wick is filled, the
Superficies of the Oil continues to sink by degrees a considerable space below
the flame, before there be any more supply added from the great Magazine or
Repository, and till the Air can break in, (which it does very unequally) so
that there sometimes comes down so great a quantity that the receptacle is
over-filled, and the flame extinguished, and these gluts are more unequal the
bigger the Magazine be in proportion to the Receptacle by the flame, and the
more the quantity of the Oil be that is suspended, and the more the Air space
be above the Oil, and the more tenacious or sluggish the constitution of the
Oil is.

The second inconvenience of Cardans Lamp is that the Air is apt to rarifie it
with heat, so as sometimes to drive down so much Oil as to overflow the
receptacle, and choke the flame.

The third Inconvenience is, that the Wick by the sinking of the oil does
sooner decay the flame, being sometimes a little higher and sometimes lower
upon the Wick; for if the Wick rise up into the hollow dead part of the Cone of
the flame, the streams and coals of the Oil will be so caked together as to
dead the flame and much to diminish the light and heat thereof, whereas if the
Wick be but short, and suffered only to go but a very little within the
under-Superficies of the flame, it will not be so stopped and caked with those
feculencies. The reason of which is evident, for the flame, as I formerly
proved, being nothing but the parts of the Oil rarefied and raised by heat into
the form of a vapor, smoke, or steam, the free Air that incompasseth this
steam keeps it into a Cylindrical form, and by its dissolving property
preyeth upon or dissolveth those parts of it that are outward and next to the
Air, so as by the said dissolution it continues the heat, and produces the
light which we observe; but those parts of the body of steams that rise from
the Wick; which are in the middle, and not contiguous to the outward Air, are
not dissolved or turned into shining flame by the Air till they rise toward
the top of the Cone of flame where the free Air can come to reach, and so to
dissolve them, and thence gathering about the Wick in the Center of the Cone of
flame they choke, clog, and quite stifle it that the flame will quickly go out.
That this is so, any one may easily find if he examine the flame of a Lamp or
Candle by the help of a piece of glass: For by the transparency thereof he will
plainly perceive that all the middle of the Cone of flame neither shines nor
burns but only the outward Superficies thereof that is contiguous to the free
and unsatiated Air, and that the middle parts may be collected in the form of
Soot, or very fine powdered coal dust.

Take then a piece of Glass, whether Window-Glass, Looking-glass Plate, or the
side of a Viol, it matters not, or, which is best of all, a thin Plate of
Selenitis or Muscovia Talk, and hold it Horizontally in the middle of the
flame, so as to cut off the top or upper part of the Cone thereof, then
presently, before it be choked with soot; look down upon it, and you shall
plainly see that all the middle parts of the Flame and the Wick have no shining
power or light at all; nor are they dissolved by the Air, but remain in the
form of Soot, but that only the Superficies or outside of the said Cone does
burn, shine, and consume into and mix with the ambient Air.

In the same manner, if you hold the Glass or Selenitis perpendicularly, and
apply the side of it so as to cut the flame per axin coni, that the Air cannot
come to one side thereof, you may plainly perceive that the shining part of the
flame is only that which is contiguous to, and preyed upon by the free and
unsatiated Air, and that where that Air cannot come free without being glutted
and satiated in its way, there neither the consumption of the Oil, nor the heat
and light of the flame is produced, but only a sooty, choking, and stifling
substance.

To make then the reason of the Phenomenon observable about the lasting or
stifling of the flame of a Lamp the more clear and easy to be understood and
comprehended, give me leave to explain the manner of its production and
continuation by a Scheme, delineation, and description thereof.

Let AA then in the second Table represent a body of Oil, or any other
combustible fluid substance, the Superficies whereof BB is Horizontal, and
pretty near plain. [I say, pretty near, because it is always either Concave, or
Unequal, more or less according to several circumstances; to wit, the capacity
and the nature of the Vessel EE, in which it is contained; for if the Vessel be
small, and that the Oil has a greater congruity with it than the Air, the
Superficies of the Oil will be very much concavated especially toward the
sides of the Vessel as at CC; but if the Vessel be incongruous to Oil, the
Superficies will be Unequal as at DD, the reason of which I have long since
explained in another place.]

Let FF then in the third figure represent the Wick, which consists of a great
number of very fine Cylinders or hairs of Cotton fff twisted and laid very
close together, into, and between which the Oil (having a very great congruity
therewith) does readily insinuate it self and adhere, and is by the pressure of
the Air (much greater without than between those Cylinders or hairs) forced up
to a considerable height between them, (as to the height of an inch and half,
or two Inches) and if by any means the Oil be taken out at the top thereof, the
remaining part of the Oil in the Vessel will ascend to supply the vacancy of
the part drawn off, which is evident in Filtration. About the sides of this
Wick the Oil will be sure to ascend, and the Superficies thereof will be
concavated as at GG, because unless there be a congruity between the Oil and
the Wick there will be no ascent of the Oil therein, and therefore that
substance that the Oil does not readily adhere to cannot be a fit material for
that purpose.

Now to this Wick thus filled with Oil apply the flame of a Lamp or Candle, or
any other substance extremely hot, as a glowing piece of Iron, Copper, or the
like, and by this means the parts of the Oil in the Wick will be very much
heated, and expand themselves in vapors into the contiguous Air by the steams
hhhhh, and fill all the Ambient space of the Air HH therewith, which vapors
being very much rarefied, and consequently lighter than the incompassing Air,
are by the greater gravity and pressure thereof carried upwards by the Curve
Lines hik. These at first gush out of the Wick at Right Angles, but by the
protrusion of the Air are quickly turned into a kind of Parabolick Curve hik
The motion of the Particles in which is swiftest in kk, that is to a certain
degree of Altitude. The motion of ascent increasing somewhat after the nature
of the motion of descent in heavy bodies, I say somewhat in that nature, for if
the ascending bodies were uniformly lighter than the Ambient they would be the
same, but because the rarefaction and nature of them is varied by
Circumstances, therefore it has but part of that Analogy.

To proceed then with the Explication: I say, these steams of the Oil thus
ascending, if they are heated to a sufficient degree of heat are preyed upon,
and dissolved or burned by the Ambient Air; which dissolution has this effect,
first, that it produces light; next, that it produces heat enough to make the
succeeding parts of the steams that rush out of the Wick and follow after it to
be sufficiently heated for dissolution by the Air, the heat of which produces
the same operation upon a third, and that upon a fourth, and that upon a fifth,
and so successively so long as there are steams of Oil to be dissolved, and
plenty of fresh and unsatiated Air to dissolve. The action also of this
dissolution causes heat sufficient to raise up the succeeding parts of the Oil
into the Wick, and expand them into vapors, and so to make them fit to be
further heated and dissolved. It is further observable in the flame of a Lamp,
that those vapors that issue out of the Wick are by degrees dissolved and not
all in a moment, for the parts of the flame that are lowermost about H have a
kind of faint blew light until they come to I, where they seem to have their
brightest and clearest light and heat, the said vapors not being heated to
that degree at their first breaking out that they afterward acquire by the
farther action of the Air upon them. At I they seem to be in their highest
degree of dissolution, and from thence upwards are made one with the dissolving
Air, so that they are not but by other means discernable to the eye of the
observer; so that the shining part of this Conical shaped space of the flame is
only the outside of the Cone, it being that part where the Ambient Air preys
upon the ascending eruptions of the Oil, namely, where the Chain of small
Circles intercept the Curve lines of the motion of the ascending eruptions.

This Figure and shape of the flame and vapors may be plainly seen by the help
of a Metalline Concave placed at a certain distance and Position, and also by
observing the shadow of the Candle cast by the beams of the Sun upon a sheet of
white Paper, or white Wall, but that way of a Concave speculum is incomparably
beyond it, because it does so very plainly show the form and manner of the
steams rising above iiii, as about kkkk, etc.

The Air after it has performed the action of Dissolution, and is satiated and
incorporated with the parts of the Oil at iii, ascend by kkk, but shine not.
All the steams or eruption of the vapors of the Oil out of the Wick fff shine
not between the Wick ff and ii, but begin to be dissolved, and to shine as they
approach the fresh Air at ii, where the dissolution is completed.

The upper parts of the flame shine more than the lower, the parts having been
heated to a much greater degree by the longer space of passage they have had
through the hot Concave part of the flame, and contiguous or very near to the
glowingsides thereof at iii.

All the under parts of the Wick neither shine nor burn, but are as it were
charkd by the extremity of the heat of the Conical Superficies of the flame,
they are defended from burning at the bottom by the fresh access of new Oil
from the Vessel underneath; and the middle parts are defended from burning or
shining by reason the Air cannot approach them before it be satiated at the
Conical Superficies iii by the dissolution of the steams of the Oil it there
meets with. But the upper parts of the Wick do burn and shine, if they be
high enough, into the smaller part of the Cone of flame that the Air before it
be satiated can reach at them. And if any part of the Wick fall into the said
Conical and shining Superficies of the flame, it does both shine and consume,
and suffers the same dissolution into the Air as the steams of the Oil, and if
any part of this Wick be without this Conical Superficies at iii, it is
presently consumed and reduced to Ashes; as by many experiments differing ways
made is very plainly visible.

This plainly gives the cause why knots and Tophus's do as it were grow to the
Wick of the Lamp like so many Mushrooms on a rotten Tree, which as soon as they
are removed out of the middle and dead part of the flame are immediately
consumed by, and dissolved into the Air, and shine like a coal of fire, as
being indeed nothing else.

Hence we may give a plain Reason why upon applying any cool Superficies very
low into the flame of a Lamp, there is immediately condensed upon it a great
quantity of soot, namely, that the middle parts of the Cone of flame, being
nothing but a great number of oily steams ascending, are not fired nor consumed
by the Air, till they can come to be wrought upon by the free and unsatiated
Air. Now if the Air be so intercepted that it cannot come at them, and the
steams be cooled by the plates coldness that the Air is not able to prey upon
or dissolve them for want of a preparatory heat sufficient, they must remain in
the form of burnt Oil, or Lamp-black.

I have been somewhat the longer and more particular in this description and
explanation of my Theory of the flame of a Lamp or Candle, that so the Reader
understanding the nature and causes thereof the more fully and plainly, he may
the easier discover the inconveniences that may occur in the burning, heating,
shining, duration, etc. thereof, and the sooner and more readily and
scientifically find a cure and prevention of those inconveniences, which he
that is ignorant of can but hoodwinked grope after, and at best can but hope
possibly after long puzling himself in vain attempts and blind trials, nothing
to the purpose, he may at length stumble upon that which had he been enlightened
by the true Theory, he would have readily gone to at the first glance.

I could have further expatiated into the contemplation of this most admirable
Phenomenon of flame, producing heat and light, the two most spirituous and most
potent Agents in Nature, and the ways of Intending and Diminishing them, and
the uses that may be made of them, but that it is not my present design to
annex a discourse on those subjects, which does more properly belong to another
Lecture I shall shortly publish. I shall therefore at present proceed only to
show some Mechanical contrivances for counterpoising Liquors in Vessels, so as
to keep them running or supplying a stream always with equal swiftness,
whatever quantity there be of the said Fluid; which as they are very convenient
for perfecting Lamps for diverse uses, which they could not otherwise perform,
so in Hydraulick they are of most admirable benefit for diverse effects, hardly
to be performed without them, as I shall hereafter manifest. But first, I will
explain some few ways by which more conveniences may be obtained, and more
inconveniences prevented in the use of Lamps for Chemical, Mechanical, and
Philosophical uses than by this way of Cardan, or any other I have met with:
For this I look upon as one of the Tools to be made use of in the Workhouse or
Elaboratory of Nature, without a good Apparatus of which, be the Workman
otherwise never so well accomplished, he will never be able to produce any very
considerable effect; and with them, even a Bungler otherwise, will, if well
furnished, do wonders to such as know not the means by which they are done.

It may possibly seem very strange to some to hear, that by the flame of a Lamp
Plants may be made to grow, bear Leaves, blow Flowers, ripen Seeds; that the
Eggs of Fowls and Insects may be hatched, and brought to life and perfection;
that Metals, even the hardest, Glass, Stones, etc. may be almost in a moment
melted, softened, liquified, hardened, etc. that thousands of separations of
conjoined and naturally united bodies may be effected, and they reserved
distinct; and as many other bodies, naturally distinct, and very differing, may
be united and compounded into Homogeneous mixtures, some scarce separable
afterward; that Glass may be shaped and molded like Wax; that almost all the
sensible qualities of bodies may be increased, diminished, annihilated, and
created; and some also of the qualities insensible (otherwise than by the
effects;) and yet even these, and many more, may be effected by this Tool or
Instrument, if rightly used, as I could manifest if I had now time. But I shall
not here any further expatiate on it, possibly I may hereafter but at present I
shall only proceed to the description of one sort of those Instruments which
serve to supply the Oil or Pabulum of a Lamp conveniently by any degrees, and
in what quantity is desired. This sort does depend upon some contrivance of
Counterpoises for the Liquor in the Receptacle that is to feed the Lamp, and
may be made use of in Hydralicks as well as Lamps to feed and continue any
running stream any time desired.

These Counterpoises then of Fluids might be made to feed the flame of a Lamp
equally for any time assigned, and consequently would make a kind of Perpetual
Lamp, but the Pabulum it self will be some ways or other unapt for such an
effect; as Oil has a foulness whereby the Wick is choked or stopped, so as
that it will no longer ascend in it; Spirit of Wine will in length of time
evaporate and lose much of its nature; and other Oils have their several
defects which make them incapable of continuing the flame very long. But there
are none of these that I have met with but may be in great measure avoided by
the help of some Chemical or Mechanical contrivances, some instances whereof I
shall hereafter give, which the Theory of Fire and Flame does readily hint.

The first way then I shall now describe is by a round Box, the inward Cavity
of which is divided by a Diaphragm into two equal parts, and fitted with a
proper Counterpoise, the Axis of whose motion lies Horizontally. The
contrivance of which will be more plainly understood by the Delineation thereof
in the first place, where the second Figure represents the whole Instrument,
with its Globe, Frame, Pedestal, Socket, and lighted Lamp.

A represents the Pedestal or foot upon which the Instrument stands, which may
be made of Silver, Brass, Wood, or the like. BCDEF, the Frame fastened to the
Pedestal, and shaped in the form of a Snake, perforated at B and D to receive
the Pivots or Gudgeons of the Lamp GH, and hollow from E to F to serve to
convey the Oil or Spirit of Wine from the end of the hollow Gudgeon H to the
Wick I, to feed the Flame K; the hole at E to receive the end of the hollow
Gudgeon; H is made a little tapering, and the end of the Gudgeon H is ground
fit into it, so as to turn easily, and yet so true, as not to let any Oil there
leak out, the said Gudgeon being kept close home by the springing of the Arm B;
the Superficies of the Oil or Spirit for the Pabulum is always kept by the
motion of the said Globe upon its Axis GH, exactly in the Line LM, until it be
all consumed, which how it is done will be better conceived by showing the
contrivance of the inside of the aforesaid Globe, how the same is divided, how
filled, and how counterpoised.

Suppose then the aforesaid Globe cut in sunder by the middle Line or Circle
NO, and discovering the Inside or Cavity thereof to be represented in the first
Figure, where PAHRZP represents the aforesaid Circle, or half shell of the
Globe; O represents the middle of the hollow Gudgeon H, which is the Pole or
Axis about which the said Globe does move. HOZ represents the Horizontal Line
or Plain passing through the aforesaid Axis; PR the Perpendicular to that
Plain. Let HZ then represent a Diaphragm or Partition of the same material with
the Globe, by which the Concavity thereof is divided into an upper Hemisphere
HPZOH, and into an under Hemisphere HRZOH. Let the under Hemisphere be filled
with Oil, Spirit of Wine, etc. or the like fit material for a Lamp to burn; and
let the upper part be filled with some material of half the weight of the Oil,
Spirit, or other material, or because that will be somewhat difficult to do,
let there be a counterpoise of Lead or other ponderous matter fixed somewhere
in the Line PO, so that the said upper Hemisphere shall have half the gravity
of the under Hemisphere upon the Center of motion O. I say, whatever quantity
of the Fluid Pabulum is in the Cavity of the said under Hemisphere, the
Superficies thereof shall always be in the Horizontal Line or Plain OZ, the
counterpoised upper Hemisphere keeping it always up to that height. For
instance, supposing the said Hemisphere full, there is no doubt but that the
under Hemisphere being double the weight of the uppermost will be lowermost,
and that Horizontal Line will lie Horizontally, since it is evident, that the
Center of gravity of the whole will be below the Center of motion O, and
somewhere in the Line OR, which is Perpendicular to the aforesaid Plain. Next,
suppose so much of the aforesaid Liquid Pabulum consumed as to leave enough
only to fill the space COZBRC, and the Diaphragm be moved from its Horizontal
Position HZ, and placed in the Oblique Position COD. I say, the said upper
Hemisphere CHAPDOC shall exactly counterpoise the said under Hemisphere
CRBZDOC, so as the Superficies of Liquor shall be in the Horizontal Plain OZ.
Make AP equal to PD, and draw the Line AOB through the Center O, it is manifest
then that the Wedge COR of the Liquor does counterpoise the Wedge ROB on the
other side the Perpendicular, and that the Wedge POD of the upper Hemisphere
does counterpoise the Wedge POA on the other side of the Perpendicular, so that
neither of these have any prepollency to move the Globe out of this Posture.
Next, it is plain that the Wedge BOZ of the Liquor will be counterpoised by the
Wedge AOC, which is double the bigness of BOZ, and consequently of equal
weight, the parts of the upper Hemisphere being put of half the gravity or
weight of the under Hemisphere.

Next, suppose half the Oil be consumed, and therebe only left enough to fill
the quadrantal Wedge ZOR, I say, the Superficies thereof shall be in the
Horizontal Line OZ; for since the upper Hemisphere is half the weight of the
under, the two quadrantal Wedges POH and HOR must necessarily counterpoise the
quadrantal Wedge ROZ of the Oil.

Thirdly, Suppose that more than half the said Oil or liquid Pabulum be
consumed, and that there be only left enough to fill the Wedge BOZ, I say, the
counterpoising upper Hemisphere now made the under, and placed in the Position
AHCRBOA shall exactly counterpoise the said Wedge of Liquor, so as that the
Superficies thereof shall be in the Line OZ; for the Wedge ROB of the aforesaid
upper Hemisphere does counterpoise the Wedge COR on the other side of the
Perpendicular, and the double Wedge AOH and HOC will counterpoise the Wedge BOZ.

Nor can the Superficies of the Liquor be any whit higher or lower than the
Line OZ, for it be any whit higher as at OF, the Liquor must necessarily
overpoise the aforesaid Wedge AOC, by all the weight of the Liquor contained in
FGOZF. And if it be any whit lower as at IK, the Wedge KIB must be too light
for the counterpoising Wedge AOC by the weight of the Liquor contained in the
space ZOTKZ, since I just now showed that AOC did just counterpoise ZOB, which
was the thing to be proved.

Now though in this Instance I have chosen to explicate I have made choice of a
Globe, yet that form is not necessary, but it may be made of any Figure
whatsoever that is turned upon an Axis or Poles, so as wheresoever the said
Figure be cut by a Plain to which the Axis is Perpendicular, the Superficies of
the said Figure shall describe a Circle, the Center whereof is in the said
Axis, whether the said Figure be a Cylinder Cone, or any other Conoeidical,
mixed, or otherwise, regular, or irregular figure. Such as the Figures ABCDEFG,
which represent the Section of the said Vessel through the Axis.

The second way for the poysing the Liquor, and keeping the Superficies thereof
always to an equal height, is this:

Make a Concave Receptacle for the Oil or Liquor of a Hemispherical,
Semicylindrical, Semiconical, or of any other half-round hollow Figure, where
the turned Figure is cut in two parts per Axin, and whereof the Axis is placed
Horizontal, and the plain Section per Axin likewise Horizontally, so as it may
be filled with any Liquor up to that Plain; and that the Liquor may not be apt
to dash, be shaken, or filter over, it will be convenient to extend the brims
of that Receptacle somewhat above the half-Round, that there may be about half
or three quarters of an Inch of space above the Superficies of the Oil vacant
or empty. And that upon whatever Plain the foot stand, the Plain per Axin may
stand Horizontal, it will be good to suspend the Receptacle in the same manner
as a Sea-mans Compass is suspended, within a frame: Fix this Receptacle, or the
Frame that is to keep the Receptacle, Horizontal upon a convenient Pedestal;
and fit within the Hollow or Concavity of the Receptacle a half-round solid
poise, turned of the same form with the hollow of the Receptacle, and cut
exactly through the Axis in two equal parts. Let this solid poise be made
exactly half the weight of the Liquor that is to be poised, and fit to it two
Pivots or Pins at each end of the Axis, which may be exactly in the Poles of
the half-Round, and fit to those Pins make two holes in the Centers of the Ends
of the Concave Receptacle, in which the Pins may freely move, and suffer the
half-Round poise to move round within the hollow of the Receptacle, according
as the quantity of the Oil or Liquor is increased or diminished. Fit to this
Receptacle a neck and socket fit for the Wick and flame of the Lamp, and the
same operation will be performed by this as by the first contrivance; to wit,
the Oil will be kept always to the same height in the Receptacle.

This will be easier understood by explaining a Designation thereof which is
shadowed forth in the fourth Figure: Where

AAA represents a Pedestal, which may be made with three claws or toes to make
it stand the steadier and evenner upon any Plain or Table.

BB represent one of the Semicircular Arms that are fixed to the top of the
Pedestal, this has two holes in it at the ends or extremities, as at C is one,
the other hole being in the other arm which goes behind the Globe, and
therefore cannot be seen, is supposed to be Diametrically opposite to this at
C. These two holes are the Center holes in which two small Pins or Centers,
fastened into two opposite points of the Hoop or Frame are made fit to move, by
which means the said Hoop is preserved in an horizontal Position.

DD is this Hoop or Frame, which is made to incompass the Vessel or Receptacle
of the Oil, and is shaped exactly like it. This is made strong enough of Brass,
Iron, Silver, or other material to bear the Receptacle, Poise and Oil without
bending, and has, as I said before, two Pins or Gudgeons at C, and opposite to
it Diametrically, or Semicircularly, upon which the said Hoop always hangs
Horizontally. It has also on each side in the middle between the aforesaid
Pivots, two Centers as at F and E to receive the ends of the Axis of the
Receptacle appearing at F and E, by which the said Receptacle is always free to
hang plumb or in its Perpendicularity, so as that the upper edge thereof at FF
will always lie Horizontally.

One of these Pivots, namely, that on the Right hand is the Pipe to convey the
Oil to the Socket of the Lamp I, in which is fitted a Wick of Cotton to serve
for the flame, KGG represents the Vessel or Receptacle of Oil, which is here
described Hemispherical, that being the most capacious uniform Figure, but may
be of any other, qualified as those I mentioned in the first contrivance. The
Brims of this are extended somewhat higher than a Semicircle, namely, to FF, to
keep the Oil from flashing or filtring over. This is always kept full with Oil
or other Liquor to the Horizontal pricked Line LL, which passes through the
Center or Axis of its Cavity by the Counterpoise moved on the Center C.

HHH represents that Counterpoise which is made exactly half the weight of the
Oil or Liquor, and the Center of gravity of it must be somewhere in the Line
MM; and it ought to be fitted as exactly into the hollow of the Receptacle as
it is possible, that there may be left as little space as may be between its
unequal sides and the Concave of the Receptacle, but yet so much must be left
that it may move very freely upon its Center C a whole Semicircle. This done,
and the Receptacle being filled with Oil, the same effect will follow as in the
first contrivance, and the Demonstration of it being much the same, I shall not
now spend time to explain it. But rather proceed to the description of a third
way of keeping the Liquor counterpoised to the same level.

The third way then is:

Take any round Vessel, whose Concavity and Convexity is turned upon an Axis,
and suspend that Vessel upon two small Pivots (but yet big enough to bear the
said Vessel filled with Oil, etc.) fastened in the Poles of that Axis; and leave
or cut open a sixth part more or less as you please of the side thereof, that
thereby any thing may be put into or taken out of the Cavity of the Vessel;
then poise the Vessel exactly on those Centers, that no side be heavier than
the other; then fit into it a float of Brass, Silver, Tin, Lead, etc. Unequal on
the under side, so as just to fill to the Cavity of the Vessel. And on the
upper side, Plain, or Unequal, or any other convenient Figure, it matters not
much. Make this float as heavy as you can at the bottom, and as light as may be
at the top, but yet of such weight as may well float upon the top of the Oil,
etc. Let one end of this be fastened by a wire or string, so as that end thereof
may always touch that point of the Concave of the Vessel to which it is tied,
and that the rest thereof may turn and follow the sinking of the Oil; and
through the end of it, near the place where it is fastened, let a Pipe go
through it to receive the Wick, which Pipe has no communication with the
Cavity of the hollow float. This done, fill the Vessel as full as convenient
with Oil, and light the Wick, and you shall find that as the fire consumes the
Oil, the Vessel will turn upon its Poles and keep the Superficies of the Oil
always at the same distance from the flame that it was put at at first till the
whole be consumed.

This will be made more conceivable by a figure and explanation thereof, which
therefore take as follows in the fifth figure.

ACBB represents a hollow Vessel, the Cavity whereof is very exactly turned
upon an Axis whose Poles are in P, the space between A and B in the side
thereof is left open into the Cavity of it. This Vessel is suspended upon its
Poles at P, so as to be free to move round upon them, and exactly poised as no
one side thereof be heavier than another. To the hollow of this Vessel is
fitted a float D of Brass, Latton, Silver, Lead, etc. whose underside is made
of a Convexity just fit for the Concavity of the Vessel, as may be seen at KDI,
and the upper straight or Plain. Let this float be made somewhat lighter than
the Oil or Liquor on which it is to swim, so that a part thereof may float
above the Superficies thereof. Let one end thereof E be fastened to the side of
the Vessel a little below the Brim B; through the end of this float is put a
Pipe and Wick h, for the flame i, then pouring in Oil by the open side AQB,
fill the same till it carry the float up to touch the hollow of the Vessel;
then light the Wick, and you will find that the Lamp will consume the Oil, and
this contrivance will continually supply it till the whole be consumed, and the
Poise be moved to touch the Concave of the aforesaid Vessel; for when the
Vessel is filled up to fg, the float D will touch at O and E, and the Cavity
above fg being empty, the Vessel will be as is described in the Figure, the
open part AB being upwards. And as the flame consumes the Oil, the side of the
Vessel B will descend downward toward B1; and so by B1, B2, B3, to B4, where
the whole quantity of Oil will be consumed, and the bottom of the float will
touch the hollow side of the Vessel; in all which gradual wasting of the Oil
the Superficies thereof will lie at the same distance below the upper side of
the float D that it had at first, and consequently at the same distance from
the bottom of the flame. The reason of all which will be very easy to be
understood by any one that shall seriously on this Delineation consider that
the float D must necessitate the Vessel ACB to move on its Axis B according as
its Oil wastes, because one end thereof E being fastened to the brim of the
Vessel B, the other end O being loose will as the Oil wastes descend toward N,
whence the end E must hang heavier on the brim B, and consequently must move it
down toward B, till the upper side fg of the float be reduced to a Parallelism
with the Superficies of the remaining Oil, and the end E have no gravitation on
the brim B, which motion will be continued as the Oil wastes; and the brim B
will be moved downwards by the points B1, B2, B3, to B4. I shall not therefore
spend any more time in the Geometrical demonstration thereof, but proceed to
explain a fourth way by which the Flame and Superficies of the Oil keep always
at the distance they were first put at.

The Fourth way then is, the making the Socket of the Wick to swim upon the top
of the Oil, so that the Socket may sink as well as the Oil, by reason it is
sustained by that, and by that only. The Vessel or Receptacle is generally made
of Glass, and it is best of a Hemispherical Figure, the light casting itself
through the body of the Oil as well as of the Glass. This is so plain and
obvious, and so commonly used and practiced, that I need not spend more time in
the explanation or demonstration thereof, but proceed to describe a Fifth way.

The Fifth way then is much upon the same principle with the Fourth, but avoids
several inconveniences to which that is subject: For whereas the Flame in the
Fourth is necessitated to be within the capacity or the Receptacle in this
Fifth, it may be at any distance, and so is made much more convenient to be
come at, and to be dressed and trimmed. Take then a Vessel of Glass,
Cylindrical is best, as a Glass Bottle, and fit to it a Siphon, long enough to
draw the Oil from the bottom of the said Vessel, make the one end of this
Siphon extend at what distance you think convenient for the placing the flame
of the Lamp, and so order it that it may always draw from the Receptacle by its
arms to feed the flame, which it will do if the end of the Siphon be made where
the Socket of the Lamp is placed to return or bend upwards again. So that the
Plain of the upper Superficies of the Oil may cut that end of the Siphon where
the flame is between the top of the mouth of it next the Socket and the return
thereof upwards; then by a counterpoise so suspend this Siphon that it may
follow the Oil as it wastes, and fit into the return of the Siphon a Socket and
Wick for the flame to be continued. A contrivance somewhat of this kind you
have in diverse Authors, and therefore I shall spend less time in the
description thereof. Let AAAA in the Sixth Figure then represent a large
Cylindrical Viol of Glass through the mouth B of which the Cavity thereof may
be filled with Oil, and also the end D and float C of a convenient Siphon may
be put in. This Siphon DDDPG must be made long enough that the float C may
reach the bottom of the Vessel when the Oil is spent, and the other end thereof
must be so curved that the knee of the Siphon P may be below the Superficies of
the Oil OF, and yet that the Socket H made for holding the Wick for the flame I
may be somewhat above it, this Siphon DDDPG with its Socket and float should be
so counterpoised with a weight M, hung over a Pulley K, by a string L, that the
float may not sink deep into the Surface of the Liquor, but swim as it were at
the top. This done, if the Wick I be lighted, the Surface of the Oil will be
kept always at the same distance below the flame that it was first put at.

In the first, third, fourth, and fifth ways the flame of the Lamp descends
equal spaces with the Superficies of the Oil in the Vessel, and therefore
though for some uses it be very convenient, as in annealings, where things are
to be cooled by degrees, yet for many other it is not; Especially in Lamp
Furnaces, where the same heat is to be continued, and in some cases gradually
increased. For such cases therefore the first and second ways will be very
convenient. In some other cases the sixth and seventh ways, which do much the
same thing.

The sixth way then is this: Through an arm or Siphon (like the Branch of a
Lamp hung against a Wall) fixed in any convenient place, the Oil from the
Receptacle is continually and equally supplied to the flame of the Lamp by the
raising of the Receptacle as fast as the Oil wastes, so as to keep the
Superficies of the Oil always in the same Horizontal Plain. The Receptacle is
raised by a Counterpoise hung upon a Fusey, which Fusey is a part of an
Archimedean Spiral.

Let CC then in the seventh Figure represent the Receptacle for the Oil, being
a Cylindrical or Prismatical Vessel, of what Bigness or Length you please; to
this by two Ears at LL fasten two Lines or Ropes KK, the ends of both which are
fastened to the Wheel or Pulley G, though one of them do run over the Pulley F.
Fit into this Receptacle is made a Cylindrical or Prismatical Plug AA, which is
fixed in some convenient place, so as not to rise or sink, and through the
middle thereof passes a Siphon BBB, the one end whereof extended like the
branch of a Candle or Lamp sustains the Socket D for the Flame E, which is fed
with Oil through the Siphon BBB by the rising Receptacle CC.

To the side of the Pulley G is fastened a Fusey H, made with very great care of
one Revolution of an Archimedean Spiral, not beginning from the Center, but
from some convenient distance from it, where the weight I hanging, may just
counterpoise the Receptacle CC, when quite empty of Oil, the other hanging
counterpoise (Tangent to the largest part of this Spiral) must be so far
distant from the Center of the Wheel G, that the same weight I may just
counterpoise the said Receptacle filled top-full of Oil, and the Fusey must be
filed true to a Spiral, drawn with great care of one Revolution between those
two points. I say here of one Revolution, because I have supposed the Wheel or
Pulley G big enough, by one Revolution of it to draw up the Receptacle the
whole space it is to be raised; for if the said Pulley be so small as to
require two, three, four, or more Revolutions, then must the piece of the
Spiral between those points be drawn of two, three, four, or more Revolutions
proportionably, which being very Artificially and Mechanically performed, the
Receptacle CC will be raised by the same Degrees by which the Oil is consumed
at E, and the upper Superficies thereof shall always be in the same Horizontal
Line MM. The Geometrical and Mechanical Reason of which being so very plain, I
hope I shall not need to spend any more time in the explication thereof than
only to say, that by means of the Archimedean Spiral-Fusey the Power of the
weight I upon the Pulley G decreaseth in the same proportion as the weight of
the Oil in the Receptacle CC is diminished by its consumption.

The seventh way then is, by a Cylindrical or Prismatical Plug fitted into a
Cylindrical or Prismatical Receptacle, and let down into it by a Counterpoise,
hung upon a Spiral Fusey, the Oil is so raised in that Receptacle as always to
stand Brimfull, or to the same Horizontal height till the whole Oil be consumed.

The contrivance of this way will be very easily understood by any one that
shall peruse the Delineation in the eighth Figure, and examine it by this
following description.

Let AA in the eighth Figure then represent a Cylindrical or Prismatical
Receptacle, standing fixed upon a Table or Pedestal, from the side of which
issues a hollow Arm or Branch BB, bearing the Socket for the Wick C, where the
flame D is continued. Into the Cavity of this Receptacle is fitted a
Cylindrical or Prismatical Plug EE, big enough to fill the whole capacity
thereof, and yet not so close but that it may freely slip up and down the
Cavity of the said Receptacle without sinking. Let this Plug be made
considerably heavier than the Oil of the Receptacle; that is, let the
Counterpoise L, hanging upon the little Wheel M just reduce its gravity to be
equal to that of the Oil; then let the point I, where the Perpendicular
touches the Spiral, be so far removed from the Center of the Wheel H, that the
counterpoise L may just take off its whole gravity, and suffer it to have no
degree of gravity or pressure downwards. Then draw the Spiral nop according to
the direction I gave in the former way, and the effect will be produced. The
Geometrical and Mechanical Demonstration of which is very plain to any one that
shall consider, that, As the Plug EE by sinking into the Receptacle AA so far
as to raise the Oil to the Horizontal Superficies MM will lose its gravity by
the same Degrees by which it sinketh into the Receptacle, and that is always
proportionable to the diminishing of the Oil in the Receptacle by the flame: So
the weight L will lose its power upon the Wheel H, by the same degrees by which
the Plug descends, by reason the Line by which it is suspended becomes a
Tangent to a proportionately shorter Radius of the Spiral, of the Rays of the
Spiral.

I know indeed that both in this and the former Fusey there lies an objection
against the true form of the Spiral, because the Line KK of the weight L does
not touch the Spiral in a point level with the Center, but in one somewhat
above it, and in this latter somewhat beneath it; but though that be a seeming
material one, yet as to practice it signifies very little. For first, it will
not be difficult to prove that this may be Mechanically drawn true enough, that
there shall be no sensible error, and if the error be not sensible, it is no
error in practical Mechanics. Next, were it the true Spiral, yet it would not
be more Geometrically Delineated than this which is here required, and at best
it would prove but a Mechanical approach, which is sufficient for the effect to
be produced by it.

These two last contrivances do keep the flame of the Lamp always in the same
place, and of the same strength and fullness. But the succeeding ways, though
they maintain the flame in the same degree of strength and nourishment, yet by
their motion upwards they may be made to increase, and intend the heat produced
by them in the bodies posited above them, which is of great use in many
Chemical and Philosophical Experiments.

The eighth way then is this: Make a Cylindrical or Prismatical Receptacle for
the Oil exactly like the former, with its Arm, Socket, Wick, etc. and fit into
it a Cylindrical or Prismatical Plug, as in the former, that may be able to
fill the said Receptacle. Fix this Plug fast into some Wall or Standard, so
that it shall not be able to stir; Then by the help of two Lines fastened to a
Counterpoise at one end, and the other to the Ears of the Receptacle, so
counterpoise the said Receptacle that it shall have no weight or gravity
downwards, but hang in a perfect equilibrium; I say, whatever quantity of Oil
there be in the said Vessel, the Superficies thereof shall always be in the
Plain which is equal to the top of the Oil when the Vessel is filled as high as
is desired, which will very plainly appear to any one that shall examine and
consider well this following description, and compare it with the Delineation
of the Instrument in the ninth Figure, where AA represents a Receptacle for the
Oil of any convenient capacity, made Cylindrical or Prismatical, to which is
fastened a hollow Neck or Arm BB for bearing the Socket C, to which through its
Cavity (being made hollow) is conveyed the Oil or Pabulum for the continuance
of the Flame D; into this Receptacle fit a Cylindrical or Prismatical Plug, so
as it may pretty equally fill the said Cavity of the Receptacle, yet not so as
any ways to hinder the sliding on upon it of the Receptacle. Let this Plug then
be fixed by the top in any convenient place Perpendicularly, and setting the
Receptacle underneath it, Counterpoise the same when filled up with Oil by a
Counterpoise I, which is fastened to the two strings FFFF, by which the
Receptacle is to hang, which two strings for their more easy sliding to and
fro move upon the two Pulleys or Truckles GG, that are fixed to the same frame
to which the Plug EE is fixed; which being so adjusted, as fast as the flame D
consumes the Oil out of the Receptacle AA, the Counterpoise I raises the said
Receptacle on upon the Plug so far till the top of the Oil be equal to the
height it was at first counterpoised at, to which height it always keeps it
till the whole be consumed.

This last way of poising the Liquor or Oil does make the Superficies thereof
run higher and higher as the quantity thereof is more and more consumed, which
for diverse Expedients in Mechanics, Natural Philosophy, and Chemistry is of
excellent use, as I may hereafter have opportunity to manifest upon many
occasions where I shall make use of them; and it would be, I fear, too tedious
to the Reader to have them here enumerated.

But because it may not possibly be ungrateful to him to have some uses of this
Principle here hinted, I shall now specify a few, and hereafter add many more,
together with a great number of other Poises for Liquors which serve for very
differing effects in their kinds, not less considerable, but rather somewhat
more strange, as being yet farther removed from the common practices and
discourses of Hydraulicks.

The first use then that I shall mention of this Liquorpoise shall be in
Hydraulicks, viz. to make a Cistern of whatever bigness and depth is required
to deliver all its water at the top, or so near unto it as it shall be desired:
By which means nothing of the Descent of the water falling into the Cistern is
lost, but without any labor or trouble the whole quantity of water that is
delivered at the top into the Cistern is re-delivered again out of the Cistern
at the top. This may be done by the first, second, and seventh ways of poising
Liquors; this, that, or the other, of which may be more convenient to this,
that, or another effect or operation to be performed by it, which must be
chosen and applied with judgment, according to the occasion, and the
circumstances of it. Every of the three, though they all agree together in the
producing the effect of keeping the Superficies of the water to the same Level,
and there delivering it, have yet each of them their several proprieties, which
makes some one of the three more proper and adapted to one design than either
of the other two, and each of the other two in some other effects and
applications may be much more usefully applied than the first. By this means
the whole depth of the Cistern is gained, and all that water that was used to
be delivered at the bottom is now delivered at the top, and consequently gains
the advantage of the Perpendicular height of the Cistern to be employed, for
any use, for turning an Automaton, or conveying the Stream farther, or to a
higher level.

A second effect performable by these Poises may be for delivering any quantity
of water with an equal degree of swiftness, so as to continue an equal supply
of water till the whole Cistern or Receptacle be emptied, the spending of the
water in the Cistern not at all abating the stream without, the Counterpoise
always keeping the Cistern full, and maintaining the current till the last.
This may be useful for sawing or grinding stones by an Engine; for gauging of
Glass Tools, or grinding glasses by an Automaton, in all which cases there is
need of a constant and equal supply of water and sand; as also for washing and
Fulling of Cloth; it may also serve for various sorts of Clepsydras, or
measuring the quantity of time by the quantity of the current of water, as I
shall by and by show. And thirdly, for maintaining any slow and constant
motion, as that of a Jack, or Clock; an Engine for continually stirring of a
liquid body, or shaking, tumbling, and turning of dry Solids and powders, of
which sort there are a great number of uses in Chemistry for the operations of
Digestion, Calcination, Pounding, Grinding, Trituration, Searcing, and the
like; which operations being certainly, evenly, and constantly performed by an
Engine supplied by such a stream of water will far exceed the same kind of work
done by the hands of men, especially in such operations where the Labor and
Diligence is to last diverse days and nights together without any intermission,
which are Requisites not at all strange to Chemistry, and which will weary the
diligence of the best Laborant and his Attendants.

A third effect performable by these Poises is the making a perpetual and
constant stream in imitation of that of a natural Spring or Fountain in the
Earth. This may be done if the Cistern be once in twenty four hours recruted
and supplied with a new access of water from some Pipes, which is usual enough
here in London, and elsewhere, where there are Waterworks and Conveyances of
water. For as the wasting of the water in the Cistern does no ways abate or
diminish the stream of the water from the Cistern, so the new access of other
water for a supply to refill the Cistern does not at all accelerate it, but the
stream remains equal; And hence, consequently constant, and, as it were,
perpetual.

A fourth effect is, the delivering any quantity of water to any degree of
swiftness, and the whole quantity of the water by the same degree. This is
performed by tapping the Cistern at any part of the depth thereof, for
according as the Vessel is tapp'd lower under the Surface, so will the motion
of the water be swifter; and here the depths must be in a duplicate proportion
to the Velocity desired: As for instance, the Cistern being tapped with a hole
of a quarter of an Inch bore, at the depth of an Inch below the Surface, is
found to deliver a certain quantity of water in a minute; if it be desired that
through a Tap of the same bore there should be delivered twice that quantity,
the Cistern must be tapp'd at four Inches deep; and if thrice that quantity in
the same time, it must be tapp'd at nine Inches deep; and so forwards, as is
already demonstrated by Mersennus, and other Authors. For since the pressure of
Fluids upon the parts thereof increase, in the same proportion with the depth
below the Surface. And since the forces requisite to accelerate motions must
always be in duplicate proportion to the Acclerations, it follows, that the
perpendicular depths of the Tap under the Superficies of the water must be
always in duplicate proportion to the Velocities required.

The plainness and certainty of this truth in Hydrostaticks, long since so
fully and excellently demonstrated by Stivinus of all Fluids, and so highly
improved of late in the particular applications thereof by many more modern
Authors, who have writ most learnedly and clearly thereof, as well as
experimentally and practically, makes me much admire at the learned Doctor
More, who in his Enchiridion Metaphysicum, in the 11, 12, and 13 Chapters, and
in a Book, newly published, called, Remarks upon two late ingenious discourses,
etc. does not only deny this Gravitation in the parts of Air, but of Water,
quicksilver, and other Liquors. And instead thereof, to solve the Phenomena,
would introduce into the World a Principle, which he terms an Hylarchick
Spirit, which at command acts and performs whatsoever is necessary to solve all
the Phenomena of Mechanical, Hydrostatical, and, in a word, all Physical
motions and effects.

In answer to whose Doctrine about Hydrostaticks I shall only urge this one
Experiment of the Velocity of the current of Fluids, tapp'd and running at
several depths under the Superficies of that Fluid; which can no ways be solved
by the Hylarchick Spirit, and we must be fain to come to the Mechanical and
plain Rules of motion, and to allow every particular of that Fluid to press
with its own gravity where ever placed. And this I will prove from his own
words in his Enchiridion* Metaphysicum, page 113. where explaining very
ingeniously the Hypothesis of Gravitation of the parts of Fluids one upon
another by the similitude of six men standing in a Line, and pressing against a
Wall, (which men he marks with ABCDEF, and the Wall with G) He says, that A the
first man cannot press F the last against the Wall G, but by pressing B against
C, and C against D, and D against E, and E against F; nor can A press B against
C, nor C press D against E, nor E press F against the Wall G, but at the same
time it must be understood that B presses D toward F, and D presses F toward
the Wall G, for AC and E, says he, are here put for Des Carts Materia
Coelestis, pressing the parts of the water within the pores, and BD and F for
those parts of the water pressing the bottom of the Vessel. But, says he, that
B presses D, and D presses F appears from this, that casting out E and F, D
does run to the Wall G, and casting out CDE and F, B also will run to the said
Wall. And so, says he, the state of the matter would be if Gravity did proceed
from the mere Mechanical motion imparted to the Terrestrial parts of the Fluid
by the Materia Coelestis of Des Carts, to wit, the Elements would actually
gravitate in their proper places. But since there is no such thing, it is a
sure sign that Gravity does arise from a higher cause, which higher cause he
elsewhere supposes to be an Hylarchick Spirit. This from so plain reasoning is
a strange Conclusion, and contrary to all experience.

Now though, I confess, I suppose Gravity to be otherwise performed than as Des
Carts has supposed, yet do I believe his Suppositions so Rational and
Ingenious, and so much above the Objections brought against them, and so much
better than any other I have yet met with, as no wise to deserve to be esteemed
feda deliria, as the learned Doctor is pleased to term them, page 125.

It shall not be my business to defend Des Carts Principles at the present,
nor to set up any new Hypothesis instead thereof, but only to urge this
Experiment of the running of a Liquor swifter and swifter, according as the
hole through which it runs is deeper and deeper placed below the Surface of the
said Liquor or Fluid, and that the Velocities of those streams are always in a
subduple proportion to the Altitude of the Fluid above those holes; whence it
is evident, that the force that makes that Fluid run is always in the same
proportion with the Altitude of the fluid parts above those holes; and
consequently, that the motion of them is exactly according to the plain and
obvious Rules of Mechanical motions. And consequently for the solving all the
Phenomena of Hydrostaticks there is no need of any other Principles than the
plain Mechanical Principles, which supposes every Terrestrial Body to have a
Gravity in it, which is always the same, and always communicates its Gravity to
the Terrestrial Bodies subjected under it, and not only its own, but the
Gravity of all other Bodies above it, which have communicated their Gravity to
it, and that this Gravitation is always the same, and acts continually by
continual repetitions indefinitely swift. And that this gravitating or
communicating of its weight, together with the weight of all other Bodies
communicated to it, is no ways differing from all other communications or
propagations of motion, which the Doctor must confess to be merely Mechanical,
if at least he will admit of any such thing as Mechanical motion. For I cannot
conceive any Reason why the Doctor should not allow for instance the parts of a
Cylinder of Lead to press upon one another as much when they are kept melted in
an Iron Cylinder into a Cylindrical form part over part as when the Lead is
cold and divided into several parts, and laid one over another in the same form
that they were kept in by the incompassing Iron Cylinder. Since if the Iron
Cylinder and melted Lead, and the Iron Cylinder and cold Lead be weighed, it
will be found that they have both the same weight or gravity downwards, and do
communicate continually the same force, pressure, endeavor, impetus, strength,
gravity, power, motion, or whatever else you will call it to the Scale. And I
suppose the Doctor will grant, that if the cold Cylinder of Lead, weighing ten
pounds, be divided into ten shorter Cylinders, that are each a tenth part of
the whole, and do each weigh a pound alone, every one of the upper shall
gravitate upon every one of the lower; and that the tenth, with the other nine
upon it, shall press the Scale with ten pound weight, and consequently, that
the tenth does not only communicate its own gravity of one pound, but the
gravity of all the other nine above it, which is nine pounds; and, if the tenth
be taken away, and the ninth be put to touch the Scale, with the other eight
upon it, it is certain that the ninth will not only communicate its motion, or
press the Scale with its own weight of a pound, but will communicate the motion
to, or press the Scale with the weight of eight pounds more, or of all the
eight Cylinders superincumbent, and the like Ratiocination may be upon the
eighth, seventh, sixth, fifth, fourth, and second, but the last will only press
the Scale with its own weight, unless we take in the consideration of the
weight of the Air, which in this Ratiocination is not necessary. Since then I
think it cannot be denied but that the whole ten standing in a Cylinder one
over another, the tenth is pressed by nine, and presses with ten pound weight;
the ninth presses with nine, and is pressed with eight; the eighth is pressed
with seven, and presses with eight, and so onwards, and that the pressure of
the lowest downward is always proportionable to the height of this Cylinder.
Supposing these to be all melted in an Iron Cylinder, but kept in the same
position and situation, and finding the whole to keep the same weight, why
should we not believe that each of those parts will exert the same effects, as
to gravity, on those beneath it as the same parts cold, and in the same posture
did; since if the Cylinder of the Fluid be shortened by 1, 2, 3, or 4, tenths of
its height, the same abatement of weight or gravity will appear. Having
seriously perused all the Ratiocination that the Doctor has produced, both in
this late Book, and in his Enchiridion Metaphysicum, I cannot find any
convincing reason against it, but what seems grounded upon some pre-conceived
Notions and Hypotheses which I cannot understand; and I cannot see how he can
avoid acknowledging this to be a Mechanical motion, if at least he will allow
any Mechanical motion at all, since it does so perfectly, and in all
circumstances so exactly conform and agree with the Laws of Mechanical motion,
that I do not know any difference, nor any one Phenomenon of Hydrostaticks or
Gravity but what may be clearly solved by the common Rules of Mechanics.

But to pass by all other Mediums to prove this Gravitation or pressure of the
parts of Fluids one upon another, I shall only insist upon this one Experiment
of the Velocity of Fluids, vented or running at several depths below the
Superficies of that Fluid. In which it is observable, that the quantity of
water running within a certain space of time is always in a Subduple proportion
to the height of the pressing Fluid above the hole. That is, the quantities of
water are in proportion to one another as the square Roots of the several
Altitudes. As for instance, it is the observation of Mersennus in his
Hydraulicks, that a Tap of an Inch bore, four foot under the Superficies of the
water will yield a pound or pint of water in 13 Seconds of time; now, if it be
desired to make the water run through a Tap of the same bore twice as fast,
that is, to yield a quart or two pounds of water. This new Altitude must be
made to the former Altitude, as the square of two to the square of one, that
is, as four to one; whence it will follow, that the Altitude of the water above
the Tap must be made sixteen foot to make the Tap run a quart of water in 13
Seconds of time. And if it be desired to have the Tap run a Gallon or eight
pints in 13 Seconds, the proportion of the new Altitude to the first must be as
the square of eight to the square of one, that is, as 64 to 1, whence the
Altitude of the water must be 256 foot, and the like for any other quantity or
Velocity desired. As if it be desired that the Tap should only run half a pint
in 13 Seconds, the Tap must be placed at one foot under the Superficies, which
is a quarter of the former Altitude. Now this is exactly according to the
General Rule of Mechanics. Which is, that the proportion of the strength or
power of moving any Body is always in a duplicate proportion of the Velocity it
receives from it; that is, if any Body whatsoever be moved with one degree of
Velocity, by a determinate quantity of strength, that body will require four
times that strength to be moved twice as fast, and nine times the strength to
be moved thrice as fast, and sixteen times the strength to be moved four times
as fast, and so forwards. This is most certainly true in the motion of Bullets
shot out of Cannons, Muskets, Pistols, Wind-guns, Crossbows, Spitting-Trunks,
and the like; as likewise in the motion of Arrows shot with Bows or Ballistae;
of Stones thrown by the hand, or with Slings; of Pendulums moved by Gravity or
Weights; of Musical Strings; of Springs, and all other vibrating Bodies; of the
motion of Wheels, Flies, etc. drawn and turned by Weights or Springs; of the
motion of Perpendicularly or Obliquely falling Bodies; and in a word, of all
other Mechanical and Local motions, allowance only being made for the
impediment of the Air or other Fluid Medium, through which the Body is moved.
Now if the Doctor will contend for an Hylarchick Spirit to perform all these,
he may plausibly enough contend for it also in the Experiment of the
Gravitation of the parts of Fluids one upon another.

We see then how needless it is to have recourse to an Hylarchick Spirit to
perform all those things which are plainly and clearly performed by the common
and known Rules of Mechanics, which are easily to be understood and imagined,
and are most obvious and clear to sense, and do not perplex our minds with
unintelligible Idea's of things, which do no ways tend to knowledge and
practice, but end in amazement and confusion.

For supposing the Doctor had proved there were such an Hylarchick Spirit, what
were we the better or the wiser unless we also know how to rule and govern this
Spirit? And that we could, like Conjurers, command this Spirit, and set it at
work upon whatever we had occasion for it to do. If it were a Spirit that
Regulated the motion of the water in its running faster or slower, I am yet to
learn by what Charm or Incantation I should be able to incite the Spirit to be
less or more active, in such proportion as I had occasion for, and desired; how
should I signify to it that I had occasion for a current of water that should
run eight Gallons in a minute through a hole of an Inch bore? If the Doctor
should tell me, that I must make the Tap at such a depth under the Superficies
of the water, and then the Hylarchick Spirit will make the water run as I
desire, I would then inquire how he comes to call that an Hylarchick, or
matter-governing Spirit, which is rather commanded by matter, and subjected to
its Laws, and is necessitated to act exactly according to the quantity and
position of matter, by what means soever it be so placed? This Principle
therefore at best tends to nothing but the discouraging Industry from searching
into, and finding out the true causes of the Phenomena of Nature: And
incourages Ignorance and Superstition by persuading nothing more can be known,
and that the Spirit will do what it pleases. For if all things be done by an
Hylarchick Spirit, that is, I know not what, and to be found I know not when or
where, and acts all things I know not how, what should should I trouble my self
to enquire into that which is never to be understood, and is beyond the reach
of my Faculties to comprehend? Whereas on the other side, if I understand or am
informed, that these Phenomena do proceed from the quantity of matter and
motion, and that the regulating and ordering of them is clearly within the
power and reach of man's Industry and Invention; I have encouragement to be
stirring and active in this inquiry and scrutiny, as where I have to do with
matter and motion that fall under the reach of my senses, and have no need of
such Rarefied Notions as do exceed Imagination and the plain deductions of
Reasons therefrom.

For what is clearer to be seen and tried by Experiment, and what more easy to
be imagined and understood than that a Cylinder of water, or any other
Homogeneous substance of twice the height should have twice the gravity or
pressure: of thrice the height, thrice the pressure: of ten times the height,
ten times the pressure: of 100 times the height, 100 times the pressure, and
consequently, to imagine that as in all other Mechanical motion, four times the
pressure will double the Velocity, nine times the pressure will treble it,
sixteen times will quadruple it, and 100 times will decuple it, and so forward;
So in this Experiment the same pressure will perform the same effect, and a
proportionate pressure a proportionate effect. And since we find that the
effect does most exactly answer the Theory (as most certainly, evidently, and
undeniably it does) why should we doubt of the cause which is so certain and
Regular a Concomitant, that it is always present when the effect is performed?
And where ever it is present, (if other Circumstances hinder not) the effect
certainly follows. I could have gone over all the other Ratiocinations of the
Doctor for an Hylarchick Spirit to perform the effects which do clearly belong
to Mechanical motions and powers, and are performed and regulated exactly
according to the quantity and quality of matter, and according to the general
and universal Laws of motion; and not otherwise. But that is not my present
business, but rather to explain how this contrivance of Poises does serve to
make a Cistern or Vessel to run any quantity of water required in any space of
time. And that to run the whole quantity either with an equal Velocity or
stream, or by any desired degrees to be accelerated or retarded from the
beginning to the end, which for some occasions in Mechanics is of great use,
and has not been explained by any Writer of Hydraulicks hitherto.

I should have here left this Digression, but that I find a little further in
the aforesaid Doctors Enchiridion, to wit, in the nineteenth Chapter, in the
fifth, sixth, seventh, and eighth Sections, continued from the 246. to the 256.
Page, some Animadversions upon an Explication of Colors which I did formerly
publish in my Micrographia, from the confutation of which he endeavors to
assert this Hylarchick Spirit. But in this he does Canere triumphum ante
victoriam, and seems to make very slight of that which he neither has hitherto
by all he has said in his Enchiridion Metaphysicum, nor can by all other
Arguments he can produce answer. For if the Doctor had pleased to have
considered the Objections I made against the Hypothesis of the Rotation of the
Cartesian Globuli, with a little more seriousness and deliberation, he would
not, I conceive, have believed that one that understood the Objection would be
satisfied with so slight and insignificant answers, as he is pleased to make to
them. His Answer then to the first Objection which I brought against this
Hypothesis, which was raised from Experiments made with thin plated bodies,
producing colors, though the refracting Superficies were parallel, is no more
but this: That it is not every second Refraction of the Ray in a Parallelipiped
that does destroy the Rotation generated by the first, but only that which
entering at one side, passes through, and goes out again with the same
refraction it entered. In which case only, says he, the Rotation of the
Globuli, generated in the first Superficies, is destroyed in the second. But,
says he, a Ray falling upon a Parallelipiped, and being reflected from the
second Superficies, suffers a double Refraction in the same Superficies, the
one at entering, and the other at going out again; both which Refractions, says
he, do promote the Rotation of the Globuli the same way. This he says very
positively; but gives no reason for it. Nor indeed could he, since it is
expressly contrary to Des Carts Principles, and to all the Phenomena of such
Parallel sided bodies until they come to a certain degree of thinness: For if
his Affirmation were true, then must all Reflections from the Quicksilver, or
foil of Looking-glasses, especially if a little oblique, make the Object
spread, and become colored in the same manner as Objects do which are looked
at through Prismes. But this is contrary both to Experience, and the Laws of
Reflection; for the Refractions in the Parallelipiped B are the very same with
the Refractions in the Parallelipiped A, the Reflection at D making the Ray to
be refracted at F, in the same manner as if it were refracted at G by GH, and
the Parallelipiped were twice as thick, and consequently the color generated
in E must be destroyed in F, and consequently produce no colors, as really it
does not in plates beyond such a thickness; whereas if the Refraction at F did
promote the Rotation, as he affirms, then must the reflected Superficies IK not
be Parallel to OF, but inclined to it with an Angle at LM. Then GN would
represent FO, which is impossible, and contrary to the Laws of all reflection,
as he might have understood if he had considered my Demonstration about the
Reflections of a Globe. Nor will the Doctors adding, Sed de hac prima
objectione non est quod sumus adeo soliciti, cum sit in materia magis incerta
ac inequali cujus interna contextura videatur Globulorum motus variis modis
posse mutari. For since all transparent bodies whatsoever produce the same
effect, that Subterfuge of supposing some strange invisible texture in the body
of Muscovy Glass, differing from that of other transparent bodies, will prove
but a lame help, for this interna contextura must be common to all transparent
Bodies. And why it should do it at one time, and not at another, the Doctor
does no where show, nor seems to understand.

Next, whereas in the seventh Section of the said nineteenth Chapter he says,
Verum in materia illa idonea Gutta scilicet Pluvia, si nullus Demonstratio is
Scopo subsit error, actum est de Globulis Cartesianis. Sed videtur (says he)
ingeniosus demonstrator non satis intellexisse scopum quo collinneare debeat
ipsius Demonstratio. To which I answer, that I perceive by the Learned Doctors
endeavors to refute it, that he neither understood that, nor the Laws of
Reflection and Refraction according to Des Carts Hypothesis. Neque enim satis
erat probare (quod agnosco eum fecisse site and eleganter) Refractiones in
gutta pluvia ita fieri, ut si in duobus pellucidi Parallelipipedi Lateribus
oppositis, factae essent, sed oportebat praeterea evicisse quod eodem modo
refringatur radius in utrisque Locis quo in Parallelipipedo A refringitur, hoc
est ut Radius BC quamvis oblique, perpetuo tamen currat versus eandem
extremitatem tam in F quam in D Parallepipedi A puta versus extremitatem E, nam
in hoc casu Rotatio ad D dissolvitur iterum ad F ut supra dictum est; sed
Demonstratio Ingeniosi Micrographi huc non attingit; sed probat secundam
refractionem in opposito Latere fieri ad modum refractionis in Parallelipipedo
C ubi Radius BN primo refringitur in D and procurrens versus extremitatem E
ibique inflexus pergit postea versus alteram extremitatem G and Refringitur in
F, quae refractio non diluit Rotationem prioris refractionis in D, quippe quod
tendentia Radii sit in partem oppositam. If the Learned Doctor had better
consulted Des Carts Doctrine, or the common Laws of Reflection and Refraction,
he would have been of quite another mind, and would not so positively have
asserted a Proposition so positively contrary to the Principles of Des Carts,
and all Experiments. For if what he affirms were so, then (as I urged before)
according to Des Carts Doctrine, and the Doctrine he would defend, the Image
from a Looking-glass must be returned colored, and the same also from a plain
sided Prisme, where the refracting sides are Perpendicular or equally inclined,
but contrary ways to the Reflecting Superficies. But this is contrary to
Experiment, he must therefore once again consider how to find out a Reason why
there is no color generated, where, according to his Assertion, there is so
great a refraction, and a doubly promoted Rotation made in both the refracting
Superficies the same way, and both so much promoting the said Rotation of the
Globuli. He might therefore, if he had pleased, have suspended his Conclusion.
Adeo ut Doctrina Cartesiana de Globulis eorumque Rotationibus nihil
periclitetur ab hac Demonstratione quae quamvis satis elegans sit and concinna,
debitum tamen scopum non omnino attingit, until he had a little farther
considered the nature of Reflection and Refraction. Now, because I find that
the Learned Doctor is not the only person that has not rightly apprehended
this Theory, give me leave to explain a little more particularly the manner
thereof: Suppose we then in the three Figures DE and F, that the space between
the two Parallel Lines ac and bd does represent a Ray or Radiation of light;
Not a Mathematical Line, but a Physical one of some Latitude, between which
Lines is propagated a motion, or something equivalent thereunto, which serves
to produce the effect of light. This motion we suppose to be propagated by a
Pulse or Wave in all uncoloured Rays at Right Angles with the Line of
Direction, but in colored Rays more or less obliquely according to the greater
or less refraction. We will suppose the stroke of the Pulse to be the length of
the space between 1 and 2, or 2 and 3, or 3, and 4, etc. and consequently, in a
uniform medium the pulse will continue the same, and the expansion of it will
be Perpendicular to the Line of Direction or progress; but when it comes to the
Refracting Superficies cd, Obliquely the side of the Pulse c touches the
refracting Superficies first, and being propagated into the refracting medium
by a longer and quicker Pulse, it is propagated to 4 below c before the other
side of the Pulse touches the Superficies at d, the Pulse therefore 44, 55, 66,
etc. becomes Oblique to the tendency of the Radiation; and by the Superficies
of it is reflected by 77, 77, 77, till it touches the second refracting
Superficies gh; where it is observable, that the same side of the Ray that
entered first the Superficies cd enters first into the Superficies gh, in the
same manner as if it had proceeded on by the straight Lines fm el till it met
with a Parallel Superficies lm to the first cd; for the Ray between the two
Parallel Lines fh, eg, has the same inclination and respect to the Refracting
Superficies hg, that the Ray between fm and el would have to the Superficies
ml, supposing there were no Reflecting Superficies at of. I shall not need, I
hope, more particularly to demonstrate every part of this Explanation, the very
observing the Delineation of the Scheme being enough to make it plain to any
one never so little versed in Geometry, from which he will plainly perceive
that what I endeavor to demonstrate was really so, and that I did understand
what scope my Demonstration aimed at, so far as to hit the Mark, which was to
show that Colors were generated, where, according to Des Carts own
Principles, there could be no Rotation of the Globuli. Now, though the Learned
Doctor would not admit of this Demonstration to be sufficient to do the work,
yet he says, Page 252. Veruntamen dissimulandum non est, non pauca me meapte
opera excogitasse quibus pro persuasissimo habeo eorum motus and rotationes
modis pure mechanicis semper fieri non posse. And in prosecution of the
destruction of this Rotation of the Globuli, which he has hitherto seemed to
defend, he adds four several Arguments, I shall not now stay to repeat them.
But whosoever will please to read what the Learned Doctor has suapte opera
excogitated against the Cartesian Hypothesis, and set down in the 252, 253,
254, and 255. pages. And compare them with what I have said in the
forementioned place, to wit, at the latter end of the 60. and the beginning of
the 61. pages of my Micrographia, may plainly find the Arguments brought by the
Doctor do very little, if at all, differ from those I there published.

I could heartily therefore have wished that the Learned Doctor had made use of
some other Mediums to prove the Existence of an Hylarchick Spirit, and not have
meddled with Arguments drawn either from Mechanics or Optics; for I doubt,
that such as understand those subjects well, will plainly see that there is no
need of any such Hylarchick Spirit; and if there be no need of it, but that all
the Phenomena may be done without it, then it is probable that there is none
there, for Natura nihil agit frustra. It had been much easier to have proved
the existence of it by Arguments drawn from subjects we less perfectly
understand, as from the generation, nutrition, vegetation, and propagating of
Vegetables, and animal substances; for there the manner of the progress of
Nature being infinitely more curious and abstruse, and further removed beyond
the reach of our senses and understandings, one may more boldly assert strange
things of this Hylarchick Spirit without fear of control or contradiction, and
from whence possibly it may never lie within the power of Reasoning to banish
him.

But to leave this Digression, and return to the use of these water-poises.

A fifth effect may be for washing and refining of Earth, Clays, Powders, and
the like; the clear water by these contrivances being made to run over gently
at the top, and so leaving all the settlement from the water at the bottom.

By any one of these, with a receptacle Cistern added to it, the stream of
water from that Cistern may be accelerated or retarded by any degrees
desirable. This does depend partly from the proportion of the Tap of the
Receptacle Cistern to the Tap of the counterpoised Cistern, and partly from the
shape and make of the Receptacle Cistern, by the proportion and shape of which
the stream of Liquor through the Tap of the Receptacle Cistern may be modulated
at pleasure, as any one, a little versed in Hydrostaticks, will easily perceive
and demonstrate.

A sixth effect may be for governing the heat of Lamps for Distillations,
Digestions, Fermentations, Putrefactions, Dissolutions, hatching the Eggs of
Birds or Insects; accelerating, and seasoning, or timing the growth of Plants;
nealing of Glasses and Metals by the gradual access of the heat, so as to make
them fit for stronger degrees, or by the gradual recess to bring them out of
the greater degrees to make them tough and capable to receive the cold of the
Air.

It would be too long to give instances of contrivances for every of these
operations but the skilful Mechanist, Philosopher or Chemist will easily supply
his own desires by some one of these I have instanced in, or at least by a
composition of them. I shall therefore only add a description of a Clepsydra or
time-keeper or two, and so leave this subject for the present.

A description of a new sort of Clepsydra.
THis contrivance is nothing else than that Two of the second sort of Vessels
are so contrived as to run into each other and to empty themselves and be
filled alternately, and their bigness or capacity and the hole through which
the Liquor is vented are so proportioned as to be emptying the space of an
hour, which is easy enough, and may be adjusted to what accurateness is
desired. Then the unequal Superficies of the Cylindrical poise is divided into
sixty equal parts by straight Lines drawn upon its Surface Parallel to the
Axis, and to each other; these lines by the sinking or turning of the said
poise denote the minutes, and if smaller Divisions of time be desired, the
spaces between them may be divided by other smaller Parallel Lines denoting the
parts of each minute to what niceness is desired. One of these Cylindrical
Receptacles may be fixed, and the other by an easy apparatus may be made to
rise a little when it is topfull, and fall a little when quite empty below the
Level of the other that is fixed: The Chanel between them, through which the
water is to run out of the one into the other, may be a small pipe with a hole
in it of a bigness proportioned, as I said above, to let the Liquor run out of
one into the other in the time desired, and its ends may be fastened to the two
Receptacles by a part of the neck of a bladder or gut, so that it may be
limber, and may always have a Declivity into the Vessel that is to be filled;
the Declivity need not be above half an Inch. The Liquor used in it may be
Water, Oil, or any other Liquor that does not easily evaporate: But the best of
all is Quicksilver, because it does not with keeping evaporate at all sensibly,
which I have carefully observed for these fifteen years last past. Nor does it
grow thick or foul by the alteration of the Air, nor do I find it sensibly
alter by the heat and cold, at lest not comparable to the great changes which
other Liquors suffer by the alterations of those qualities. It is an excellent
material for measuring time in a standing Machine; and there may be hundred of
ways contrived to make it measure the space thereof as accurately as a
Pendulum; and I have many times admired that Tycho Brahe, who was otherwise so
curious and exact in the contrivance and make of his Engines and Instruments,
was yet so defective in his contrivances of measuring time by Quicksilver, when
there were so many obvious and easy ways of doing it, as he seems to complain
in his works. I have made trial of several with very good success, and found
some of them even beyond expectation certain, of which I may hereafter upon an
other occasion add the descriptions, when I publish the various ways of making
exact Time-keepers or Watches. In the mean time, being now speaking of
Time-keepers, for variety sake I shall mention.

A New Principle for Watches.
THis is a way of regulating both standing Watches, and movable Watches, either
for the Sea, or the Pocket, which some ten or twelve years since I showed the
Royal Society, when I showed them my contrivances of the Circular Pendulum,
which is since published by Monsieur Hugenius, which is also mentioned in the
History of the said Society, p. 247. lin. 20. This was by a fly moving
Circularly instead of a balance, whose motion was regulated by weights, flying
further and further from the Center according as the strength of the Spring of
the Watch had more and more force upon its Arbor. The Weights were regulated
from flying out further than they ought to do by the contrivance of a Spiral
Spring, drawing both the said Weights to the Center of the motion or fly, in
the same proportion as I then demonstrated Gravity to attract the weight of a
Circular Pendulum, moved in a Parabolical Superficies, toward the Center or
Axis of its motion. The Weights were so contrived as always to counterpoise
each other. The Skeleton of this fly you have represented in the Figure. The
particular explanation of the parts, and the Geometrical Demonstration of the
Principle both of the Springs, and of the flying from the Center, I shall
explain in the Theory of Springs, and in the description of Time-keepers and
Watches.

(...). Arist. Quaest. Mechan. An Observation about the Seed of Moss.
SInce the publishing of my Micrography, I have met with an Observation, which
though it be of one of the smallest compound bodies I have hitherto taken
notice of, yet does it afford a hint of very great concern in Natural
Philosophy; And it does seem to make clear the cause of a Phenomenon, that
has appeared dubious, not only to me, but to many other more knowing
Naturalists. I have often doubted, I confess, whether Moss, Mushroms, and
several other small Plants (which the Earth seems to produce (...)) were the
offspring of a Seed or Grain; and I have been apt to believe, that they were
rather a secondary production of Nature; being somewhat the more inclined to
that opinion, because having formerly examined the small knots or Seed-cods of
Moss with a single Microscope, I could not perceive any thing in them that I
could imagine to be Seed, at least not so great a quantity, as seemed necessary
to maintain so numerous a Progeny, as was every where to be found of it; that,
which then came out of them, seeming to be rather a pulp or pith, than any
thing like the Seeds in other similar Cods. But being since somewhat more
inquisitive, I did examine several of the abovementioned Knobs or
Seed-vessels, and found that there were seeds in them, no less wonderful for
the greatness of number, than the smalness of bulk. Taking then some of the
ripe and brown or reddish one of them, and pressing them pretty hard, I found,
that there was a small dust went out of them, which seemed to vanish into the
Air. Pressing and squeezing others of these upon a black plate, and examining
the powder with a Microscope, I found it to be a great heap of exceeding small
Seeds, Globular, and pretty transparent. It is the smallest, I confess, I have
yet seen, and, it may be that has hitherto been discovered. And, unless that be
a plant, which I discovered growing on the blighted leaves of Roses, and that
those small bodies be seed vessels; or, unless those Knobs, I have discovered
on the top of mould, be the like; I cannot presently imagine where there should
be found a smaller. For, I find, that there will need no less than thirty six
hundred of them to be laid one by another in a line, to make the length of an
Inch; and, to cover the Superficies of an Inch-square, there will need no less
than nine hundred and threescore thousands, besides twelve millions, of single
Seeds if laid quadrangularly, but if laid triangularly, there will need no less
than two hundred and fourscore thousand, besides seventeen Millions of single
grains. And the number in a gain weight of them cannot be less than one
thousand three hundred eighty two Millions and four hundred thousand single
grains, about eighty of these square Superficies of Seeds being laid one upon
another in the Trigonal order, making, as near as I can guess, the thickness of
a piece of fine Paper, a square Inch of which weighs a grain. And though this
may seem a most incredible narration; yet I would desire such as are apt to be
too censorious, to take the pains togather a few of these Seed-vessels, and
examine them as I have done, and then speak what they find, and believe no more
than their own sense and reason will inform them, and they may easily see, that
what I have asserted, will be rather short of than exceed the real numbers. Now
if this Shell of the Seed be thus small, how much smaller must needs be the
rudiment of the Plant that lies enclosed within it? And how easily may such
Seeds be drawn up into the Air, and carried from place and place, even to the
tops of the highest Towers, or to places most remote, and be sowed by the
passing Air, or falling drops of Rain, on the boughs or branches of Trees,
sides and tops of Walls, Houses, or Steeples? And it is not in the Art of man
to leave Earth exposed to the common Air, and to exclude the entrance, or
prevent the sowing of these imperceptible Seeds; and therefore it is not to be
wondered at, that, if any earth, though never so pure, be exposed to the Air and
Rain, though at the top of a Steeple, it will produce Moss.

Further inquiry may possibly instruct us, that there may be Seeds of Mushroms,
Mould and other Vegetables of as small, if not smaller, bulk, which may be
dispersed and mingled with the Air, and carried to and fro with it, till washed
down by the falling drops of Dews or Rains; which, if they chance to light on a
convenient soil, do there Vegetate and spring up; but dye and perish, if the
ground, they light on, be not natural and agreeable. But whether this
conjecture hit right, further observation must determine.

This discovery I made the year after the late Fire of London, to wit, in the
year 1667 there being then vast quantities of it to be found every where
dispersed among the Ruins left by that Fire, which made me, I confess, very
much wonder at first how such vast quantities should come to be then so
suddenly rooted, and was the occasion of my more strict examination of it. This
I presently showed to many of my Acquaintants, and the next year 1668. upon the
eleventh of June I brought an account of it into the Royal Society, where I
suppose it may yet remain upon their Register; and it was not a little
surprising to all that saw it, when they considered how exceedingly small each
particular Seed was, and yet how infinitely vast the number of them was
produced by each Plant. How prodigiously small the first beginning and rudiment
of that Plant must be that was produced by it; now, though indeed the Plant it
self be one of the smallest, yet this Seed of it was much smaller in comparison
to the Plant than the Seeds of most other Plants compared with theirs. But
about two years after this I received from a very good friend of mine at
Bristol, the Ingenious and Inquisitive Mr. W. C. a Relation of some later
discoveries of his, which seemed much to outstrip even this, whether the
comparative magnitude of the Plant, and of the Seeds, or the number of the
Seeds, or the curiosity of the Seed-boxes, or the strange way of sowing and
dispersing, or the place and manner of the Seeds production be considered. As
they were sent to me by him in a Letter from Bristol, dated September 30. 1669.
take them in his own words and description.

NOtwithstanding my many other Avocations, variety of discoveries do almost
every day enlarge my experience; but more especially this last Week I was very
happy in the detecting of that which all the Philosophers and Physicians of
former Ages, have been ignorant of, as we may well imagine from what remains we
have of them. My Discovery in short was this, that all the kinds or species of
Ferns together with all the like Capillary Plants their Congeners are (though
generally denied to have any at all) more abundantly prolifical in Seeds than
any other Plant beside, especially the common Female Ferns or Brakes, and those
more elegantly formed (I mean chiefly in the little Vesicles containing the
Seed) than many others, among the hundreds I have observed. To make it
demonstrable to you, I have now sent you both the Plants with the Seeds on
them, and the Seeds of the same Plants apart in Papers by themselves, which I
took off from other Plants of the same kind, having plentiful parcels of each
(excepting of what I have not sent you) this being the season of perfecting
their Seeds. I thought to have sent you draughts of the Seed Vessels, as they
appeared presently after gathering, but could not. I presume some of the
Vesicles or little boxes may remain whole, so that by your Microscope you may
see their true figures and distinctions, some of them being more flatted on
each side the little ring or embossed girdle encompassing them, others more
swelling.

Also those little rings or bands encompassing the boxes are different, in some
of the kinds broader and flatter, in others rounder, and standing up higher,
yet all agreeing in the principal parts of their form. I purpose to draw the
figures of them all as they appear by the Microscope, together with their
Seeds, and to add descriptions of all circumstances considerable, and join them
to the rest of my draughts of that kind. Some particulars most considerable I
now give you in the folfollowing account.

1. The little boxes containing the Seeds are in most of these Plants not half,
and in some not above one third, or one quarter as big as a very small grain of
common white sand; appearing like little bladders infolded with rings or bands,
shaped like certain little worms I have met with, which may be referred to the
Teredo's and Eruca's.

2. As near as I could compute, some of these bladders contained about 100
Seeds, which were so exceeding small, as to be wholly invisible to the naked
eye, and indiscoverable without a Microscope.

3. The Leaves of both the Ferns, especially the common Female Fern, (which is
more abundantly stored with Seed than any of the rest) and the other I now send
you, being kept close without bruising, and soon after gathering exposed to the
Sun, or dry Air, the bands of as many of them as are ripe, will contract
themselves and break, and fling their Seeds all about, after the same manner as
some other small Plants, such as the Persicaria Siliquata, and some of the
Cardaminas are observed to do. This I have observed with a single unequal glass
as well as with the Microscope, but with the latter only I could discover the
falling of the Seed. And a pretty quantity of the Seed being rubbed or brushed
off from the Leaves upon a fine piece of Paper or Parchment, and sweeped
together into a heap, many of those boxes breaking together, and justling one
another would make the heap seem, as it were, full of Mites or living
Creatures, even to the bare eye; and if the place be free from noise, and the
Ear be close applied, the crackling of them upon breaking may easily enough be
heard, and upon running over the Paper with a Microscope the Seeds will be
found dispersed, and thrown at a great distance.

4. The figures of the Seed-vessels, as also of the Seeds of all the Ferns and
those their Congeners, called Capillary Plants, are very near of the same shape
and size, notwithstanding the vast disproportion between them, as particular
common Fern, Wall Rue, Hearts Tongue, and Osmond Royal, the first three of which
being very remarkable for their unlikeness to each other, and the last chiefly
for its excelling so many thousand times in magnitude that of Wall Rue. Which
observations may seem to confirm the opinions of some learned Botanists that
the affinity of Plants are to be judged by the figures of their Seeds.

5. That Osmund Royal, which excels all the other Ferns both in greatness,
comeliness, and virtues, and which has been accounted barren, with the rest
has Vessels and Seeds of the same figure with the other, and very near of the
same size, the extreme smalness of which, even to invisibility, and the
greatness of the Plant, one root whereof, with all the growth out of it, I have
found weighing ten pounds and better, is surpassingly more wonderful than that
of Moss Seeds; of which I have some kinds of them bearing Seeds, that a great
number of them, with their Roots, Stalks, Leaves, and Seeds, do not weigh a
Grain. Besides, I have found of the common Female Fern some which have been
from the Roots to the utmost top of the Leaf nine foot high, and within these
three days measured the common broad-leaved Male Fern six foot and an half
long; some of the Leaves of which are among those I now send you.

6. But that which appeared most admirable, both to me and some other Gentlemen
that were witnesses of it with me, was the many differing kinds of small living
Creatures, wholly invisible to the naked eye, and even through largely
magnifying spectacles, though some of them were to be seen through a deep
Unequal glass; but with a Microscope, when the Plant was newly gathered, they
might be seen nimbly running up and down among the Seed-vessels, and some of
them were so small as not to be above twice as big as the small Seeds in the
bladders; a description of some of which I may hereafter send you.

I have enclosed in the box sent you twelve sorts of Plants of this tribe,
being the greatest part of the number, and only seven sorts of the Seeds; those
wanting are the Cetrach, Wall Rue, Maidenhair, and Polypody, of which
notwithstanding you may satisfy your self in the mean time till I can send
them green by those small parcels of the Plants which you will find amongst the
rest, though by keeping they are withered.

The Seeds of the Ferns through a very excellent Microscope appeared of the
bigness of a small Vetch or Seed of Lentiles to the naked eye, and some of them
shrink like the sides of white Pease, with small regular knobs and hollows.
Those of Polypody are differing in color and shape being yellowish, as the
others are brown, red, and formed like the Seeds of the smaller Medicas that is
of a Kidney shape. All the rest I found very near of the same form. I cannot
omit what I observed in Cetrach, which Plant I have heretofore often
considered, and wondered at the ill-favored roughness on the under side of the
Leaf, appearing like the fleshy side of tanned Leather, being wholly ignorant
what Nature meant in it, but now by my Microscope I find it a very pleasant
object differing from all the rest, wherein the curiosity of Nature (in a Plant
so abject as that appears) is shown beyond imagination. This, when fresh
gathered, and not bruised, appears through the Microscope like fine thin
Membranes, such as the Wings of Flies, chequered with figures after the manner
of Honeycombs when the cells are full of honey, and closed with Membranes,
amongst which, as in so many Cells, lie the Seed-vessels, shaped as before is
mentioned. I doubt not but you have read the strange stories and fabulous
conceits of Authors about Fern Seeds. But Parkinson is more Orthodox in some
things than any of them: For he positively concludes from Genesis 1. 11, 12. that
all Plants have their Seeds, and consequently Fern; where if he had staid, he
had asserted a general truth: But in coming to particulars, he affirms as great
an untruth, in saying, fol. 1036, and 1037. that the Seed is ripe at Midsummer,
according to the old traditional Fable, and tells how it may be gathered;
whereas now is the very season of their seeding, and at Midsummer this and the
rest are not come to their full growth, before which no Plant seeds. That
dustiness which he speaks of, and calls the Seed, is no other than what is
found on diverse other Plants, being an irregular Dust, and is not found on the
borders of the dents of the Leaves on the under side, on which the Seed grows,
but all over sprinkled on both sides, and not found when it is fully grown.
This he affirms of the Male Ferns, which are all differing very notably from
the common Female Fern, concerning which the fabulous tradition is held. But
after in the following Chapter of the Ferns and their Relatives now sent you,
he seems to give over his Scripture Proposition, and, speaking of the Seeds,
says no more but that they have spots, dashes, scales, or marks on their
back-sides. And of the Osmund Royal (speaking of the bush at the top of the
Plant) says it is accounted as the Flower and Seeds. And of the Lochitis aspera
says plainly they have none at all. Of this last I am yet to enquire, but doubt
not I shall find that it has Seed like the rest. Of all which Gerrard and
Johnson his Corrigitor gravely concludes (having indeed no demonstrable ground
to the contrary) that some have been too rash in affirming Ferns to have Seed.
I intend next Summer to observe whether these hitherto unknown Seeding Plants
have Flowers. In the mean time

I am, etc. W. C.
Bristol. September 30. 1669.
Maculae in Sole.
DUring this last great heat of weather in June I observed a very conspicuous
Macula with its immediately incompassing Nubecula, and some other less
conspicuous Spots at a further distance pass over the Disk of the Sun, and
found that it was nearest the middle when the heat was greatest, that the heat
increased as it came nearer the middle, and decreased as it departed from it.
It may be therefore worth observing for the future whether the like weather do
not happen upon the next appearance of the like Macula, since it seems not very
improbable to suppose that the body of the Sun it self may be much hotter when
such eruptions appear, those Maculae often times ending in Faeculae. And the
rather because I am informed that this extraordinary heat has not been
peculiar only to England, but very general to Europe; what it has been to
other parts of the world further intelligence will inform us.

Upon a second appearance of Spots in the Disk of the Sun at the latter end of
July and the beginning of August, when at one time, to wit, July 29. there
appeared about six greater and smaller in one knot with their proper Nubecules
or Umbra's, the heat of the weather again increased to a very great degree, and
abated as they drew toward the Limb, and grew fainter. But it has now since
the disappearing, viz. on the fourth of August, been exceeding hot also, though
I do not find any Spots this seventh of August; it may therefore possibly be
that other parts of the body of the Sun may have an extraordinary inflammation
which may cause so fervent and lasting heats as have happened this Summer. At
least this Hint may deserve some farther Inquiry, for though probably it may
not be attained to predict the appearances of those Spots, yet possibly the
appearances of the Spots may serve to predict the future constitution of the
weather. At least it seems worthy remarking that the greatest heat that has
been in the Air this year was on that day of June when the first Spot was near
the middle of the Sun.

POSTSCRIPT.
THe Publisher of Transactions in that of October 1675. endeavors to cover
former injuries done me by accumulating new ones, and this with so much passion
as with integrity to lay by discretion; otherwise he would not have affirmed,
that it was as certain that none of my Watches succeeded, as it was that I had
made them several years ago: For how could he be sure of a Negative? Whom I
have not acquainted with my Inventions, since I looked on him as one that made
a trade of Intelligence.

Next whereas he says I made them without publishing them to the world in
Print, he prevaricates, and would have it believed that they were not published
to the world, though they were publicly read of in Sir John Cutlers Lectures
before great numbers at several times, and though they were made and shown to
thousands both English and Foreiners, and writ of to several persons absent,
and though they were in the year 1665. in the History of the Royal Society
published to the world in Print, because, forsooth, they were not printed in
his Transactions.

Thirdly, whereas the Publisher of Transactions makes a long story of my seeing
his Journal De scavans, and my desiring to transcribe that part of it which
concerned this matter, as if I had requested some singular favor thereby. I
answer,

First, that he knew I designed presently to have printed it with
Animadversions, but he endeavored to prevent me, designing first clancularly
to get a Patent of it for himself, and thereby to defraud me.

Next, I say, I had a right without his favor to have seen, perused, and
copied it, as I was one of the Royal Society, the intelligence he there brings
in being the Societies.

Then it is denied that the Describer of Helioscopes well knew that the
Transcriber of Intelligence would publish it in his Transactions, though it was
believed if the publishing it would injure me it would not be long concealed;
which was the sole reason of Printing in the same Transactions, viz. 112. a
Letter which he had several years before.

Thirdly, Whereas he asserts that several discoveries of the Accuser had been
vindicated from the usurpation of others. It is answered, the clean contrary is
upon good grounds suspected from the Publication of a Book about Earthquakes,
Petrifactions, etc. Translated and Printed by H. O. the manner of doing which
is too long for this place. Such ways this mis-informer has of vindicating
discoveries from the usurpation of others.

To his upbraiding me with his having published some things of Mine; I answer,
he has so, but not so much with mine as with his own desire, and if he send me
what I think worth publishing I will do as much for him, and repay him in his
own coin.

Lastly, Whereas he makes use of We and Us ambiguously, it is desired he would
explain whether he means the Royal Society, or the Pluralities of himself. If
the former, it is not so, as I can prove by many Witnesses; if the later, I
neither know what he is acquainted with, or what has been imparted or explained
to him.

So not designing to trouble my self any further with him, unless he gives me
occasion, I dismiss him with his -- Speque metuque
Procul hinc procul ito. Ho.


FINIS.

