MR Hooker's First, Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Seventh, and Eighth
Books made in New England.

THE APPLICATION OF REDEMPTION, By the effectual Work of the Word, and Spirit
of Christ, for the bringing home of lost Sinners to God. The first eight Books:
In which (besides many other seasonable, and Soul-searching Truths) there is
also largely showed, 1. Christ has purchased all spiritual good for HIS. 2.
Christ puts all HIS into possession of all that Good that he has purchased. 3.
The Soul must be fitted for Christ before it can receive him: And a powerful
Ministry is the ordinary means to prepare the heart for Christ. 4. The Work of
God is free: And the day of Salvation, is while this Life last, and the Gospel
continue. 5. God calls his Elect at any Age, but the most before old Age. 6.
The Soul is naturally settled in a sinful security. 7. The heart of a Natural
man is wholly unwilling to submit to the Word that would sever him from his
sins. 8. God the Father by a holy kind of violence, plucks His out of their
corruptions, and draws them to believe in Christ.


By that Faithful, and known Servant of Christ, Mr. THOMAS HOOKER, late Pastor
of the Church at Hartford in New England; sometimes Preacher of the Word at
Chelmsford in Essex, and Fellow of Emmanuel College in Cambridg.

Printed from the Authors Papers, written with his own Hand. And attested to be
such, in an Epistle, By Thomas Goodwin, And Philip Nigh.

London: Printed by Peter Cole at the sign of the Pringting-press in Cornhil,
near the Royal Exchange. 1656.

To the Reader.
READER.
IT has been one of the Glories of the Protestant Religion, that it revived
the Doctrine of Saving Conversion, And of the new creature brought forth
thereby. Concerning which, and the necessity thereof, we find so much
indigitated by Christ and the Apostles (in their Epistles) in those times: But
in a more eminent manner, God has cast the honor hereof upon the Ministers and
Preachers of this Nation, who are renowned abroad for their more accurate
search into, and discoveries hereof.

First, For the Popish Religion, that much pretend to Piety and Devotion, and
does dress forth a Religion, to a great outward Gaudiness, and show of (...)
and will worship, which (we confess) is entermingled with many spiritual strains
of self-denial, Submission to Gods will, Love to God and Christ, especially in
the writings of those that are called Mistical (...). But that first great and
saving Work of Conversion; which is the foundation of al true piety, the great
and numerous volumns of their most devout writers are usually silent therein.
Yea they eminently appropriate the word Conversion and thing it self, unto
(...) man that renounceth a Secular life, and enters into Religious orders
(as they call them) and that Doctrine they have in their discourses of Grace and
free will about it, is of no higher elevation, than The (...), and (...) of late
and his followers.
what (as worthy Mr. Perkins long since) may be common to a Reprobate; though
we judge not al amongst them. God having continued in the midst of Popish
Darkness many to this day, and at this day with more Contention than(...) (...)
not scandalous in their lives, having in (...) Knowledge, the Form of Truth, by
(...); adding thereunto some outward (...) Duties. Such Persons we mean, as
(...) were in our Pulpits, plainly (...), but Civil, Moral (...) (and (...)
really but such kind of Professors of (...), as Mutatis mutandis, are found
(...) Turks of Mahumotanism; who (...) the Principles of that (...), and are
devout in Duties to God, (...) thereby, through the mere (...) of Natural
Devotion, and Education, (...) Laws and Customs of that Religion; (...) also
through Moral Honesty, are not (...) in their Lives.) Such like (...) amongst
us, have been, and that (...) a New (...) of Religion, with (...) also from
others (the Ignorant (...) Profane) professedly received (...) the Communion
of Saints, as visible Saints. (...) Principle, and Practice, has (as it (...)
needs) weakened and embased the (...) purer stamp of the Doctrine of (...) (as
then held forth with such evidence of difference from these (...) Profession)
not only by encouraging such boldly to take on them to be (...) (as it were) by
Authority; but also by having checked, and flatted the spirits (...) themselves
that would teach it, seeing that this Real Application in Practice, and
Principle, to such Moral Christians as Saints, is a manifest Contradiction unto
al (...) can be Doctrinally said in the Pulpit to the contrary, concerning the
power (...) this great work in true Saints. And (...) the Profession of
Religion has been levelled, and diffused into that bulk and commonness, that
the true marks of saving Graces, are (as to the open discerning) much worn out,
and will be more and more, if this should obtain.

Or else (as great a Cause as any other) a special Profession of Religion being
(...) Mode, and under Countenance: Hence many have been easily moved to see
what might be in Religion, and so attend to what is said about it; and upon
listening thereto, their spirits have been awakened, and surprised with some
light, and then with that Light they have grown inquisitive into what this or
that Party of Religion holds; what the other, or what a fourth. And thinking
themselves at liberty (as the Principle of the times is) to choose (as men in a
Market) what that Light will lead them to; they accordingly fall in, either with
this, or that particular persuasion: and this is al of many men's Conversion.
And yet because such become zealously addicted to such, or such a (...) (some
of the Professors of each of which, others that differ, own as truly Godly)
therefore they are presently adopted, and owned as Saints, by the several
Followers of such Opinions: And each sort thinks much, that those who embrace
their Opinion, should not be accounted, and esteemed Religious (...) all
others, that do sincerely (...) the power of it. Thus men Tithe (...) and
Cummin, and leap over the great (...) (...) Regeneration, namely, (...) for
sin, the (...) sense of their Natural Condition, the Difficult work of Faith,
to (...) them, Union and Closing with Christ, Mortification of lusts, etc.
which works where they are found, and visibly held forth, none are to be
disowned for other Opinions consisting with the (...); yet so, as without
these, no Opinion, of what Elevation soever, can, or does constitute a man
Religious.

Now look, as when among the Jews, Religion had run into Factions, and Parties,
and the power of it thereby, was (...) lost; God then set down John (...)
amongst them, a sour and severe Preacher, and Urger of the Doctrine of (...),
and preparative Humiliation for sin (which he comparatively to what was brought
in by Christ, terms the Baptism of Water) though withal it is said, that in
the Close of his Doctrine, (...) pointed unto Christ; Saying unto the people,
that they should believe on him that should come after him; that is, on Jesus
Christ. Yet this he did but (...) at: for the full (...) of his Dispensation ran
in that other Channel. Of whose Ministry (...) is also said Luke 1. 16. 17.
That (...) of the Children of Israel should he turn to (...) Lord, their God.
And shall go before him (namely Christ) in the spirit and power of (...) to turn
the hearts of the Fathers to their Children, and the Disobedient to the (...)
of the just to make ready a people (...) for the Lord. The meaning whereof is,
he came to restore the Doctrine of (...) Conversion, and in that point (...)
bring and reduce the Children of the (...) back again unto the same (...) and
ways (necessary to Salvation) (...) which the Fathers, and all the (...)
Saints of the old Testament (...) been brought in unto God. And (...) by that
means to become of the same Religion (saving Conversion being the (...)
practick Foundation and Center (...) all Religion) that the Godly Jews (...)
old were of. So what know we, but (...) God (in some lesser, proportionate
(...), both in respect of persons and times) may have had this in the eye of
all wisely designing Providence to set out this great Authors works and
writings (amongst the labors of others also) upon this very Argument, to bring
back, and correct the Errors of the spirits of Professors of these times (and
perhaps by urging too far, and insisting too much upon that as Preparatory,
which includes indeed the beginnings of true Faith, (And a man may be held too
long under John Baptists water) To rectify those that have slipped into
Profession, and Leapt over all both true and deep Humiliation for sin, and
sense of their natural Condition; yea and many over Christ himself too,
professing to go to God without him. However, this we may say (without
diminution to any other or detraction from the Author himself, in respect of
his more raised knowledge of Christ and Gods free Grace) That if any of our late
Preachers and Divines came in the Spirit and power of John Baptist this man did.

This deeply humbled man, and as (...) raised, both in Faith and (...) with
Christ, the Author of (...) Treatises. He had been trained up (...) his Youth,
in the Experience and (...) of Gods Dispensations and (...) this way; and
versed in digging (...) the Mines and Veins of Holy (...), to find how they
agreed with his (...) (...). His Soul had (...) the intricate Meanders, and the
(...) (through temptations) (...) of this narrow passage and (...) into Life
(and few there be that (...) it.) And by deep reflections upon (...) step of
Gods Procedure with (...), has descried those false and (...) by-waies, which
at every step, (...) man (who errs in his heart, not (...) the knowledge of Gods
ways) is apt to (...) astray when they have but inferior (...) of the Spirit
on them, from (...) way of Life, which only those do (...) that are un-erringly
guided by the (...) Spirit (peculiar to the Elect) into (...) ways of Peace.

And whereas there has been published long since, many Parts and Pieces of
this Author, upon this Argument, Sermon-wise preached by him here in England
(which in the preaching of them did enlighten all those Parts) Yet having been
taken by an unskilful hand, which upon his recess into those remoter parts of
the World, was bold without his privity or consent to print and publish them
(one of the greatest injuries which can be done to any man) it-came to pass his
genuine meaning, and this in points of so high a Nature, and in some things
differing from the Common Opinion, was diverted in those printed Sermons from
the fair and clear draught of his own Notions and Intentions, because so
utterly deformed and misrepresented in multitudes of passages; And in the rest
but imperfectly and crudely set forth.

Here, in these Treatises, thou have his Heart from his own Hand, his own
Thoughts drawn by his own Pensil. This is all truly and purely his own, not as
preached only, but as written by himself in order to the Press; which may be a
great satisfaction to all that honored (...) loved him (as who that was good,
and knew him, did not?) especially (...) that received benefit by those (...)
imperfect Editions. And we cannot but look at it as a blessed Providence of
God, that the publishing of the same by others (in that manner that has been
mentioned) should have provoked him, and that by the excitation of the Church
(whereof he was the Pastor in New England) to go over again the same Materials
in the Course of his Ministry amongst them, in order to the perfecting of it by
his own hand for public Light, thereby to vindicate both himself and it from
that wrong which otherwise had remained for ever irrecompensible.

And hereby it came to pass (that so far as he has proceeded) this Subject
came to have a third Concoction in the Heart and Head of him that was one of
the most experienced Christians, and of acutest Abilities that have been living
in our Age. He Preached more briefly of this Subject first, whilst he was (...)
and Chatechist in Emanuel College in Cambridg. The Notes of which, were then so
esteemed, that many Copies thereof were by many that heard not the Sermons,
written out, and are yet extant by them. And then again, a Second time, many
years after, more largely (...) Great Chelmsford in Essex; the (...) of which,
was those Books of (...) that have gone under his Name. And Last of all; now in
New England, and (...) in, and to a settled Church of Saints, to which the
Promise is made of being The Seat and Pillar of Truth; and (...) which all
Ordinances set as the Load stone in the Steel, have the greater power and
energie: In which the Presence of Christ breaks forth, and all (...) Springs
are found therein.

And truly we need not wonder (...) God set his heart and thoughts a work (...)
much, and so repeatedly about this Subject. We see that the Holy Ghost
himself, the Author of this Work of Conversion, does sometimes, and that in an
(...) manner, go over the whole of that Work again and again in the hearts of
Christians, whom God means to make great in his Church: as in Peter, when (...)
art converted, etc. who was yet (...) already. And to the Disciples, Except ye
be converted, etc. And the (...) of the Holy Ghost upon them, at, and (...)
Pentecost, was as a New Conversion (...) them, making them to differ (...) much
from themselves, in what they were before, as wel-nigh they themselves (...)
before truly wrought on) did (...) differ from other men. The (...) of God
himself goes over this work (...) in all the parts of it: As to (...) anew, to
draw to Christ, to change and (...) the heart to higher strains of (...). And
when so, then his Second (...) excels the First, that it comes not into mind;
and his Third the Second, (...) it cease (as it were) to be remembered (as the
Prophet in other works of wonder speaks) for thereby he every (...)
Spirituallizeth the heart still more, (...) it from Hypocrisy, and makes it
(...) refined; causes the heart to come forth from each new Cast and moulding
with a deeper and fairer Impression (...) his Image and Glory. If then the Holy
Ghost (the Writer of his Law in the Heart) set that high value upon that Work
(...) his, that he vouchsafes to take (...) pains to write it over and over
again in the same Tablet; Let it be no Diminution to this great Author, but let
us bless God rather for the Providence, that the same Divine Hand and Spirit
should set him this Task, to take the Doctrine of (...) Work into a second,
yea, a third Review; and thereby make it as it were, the (...) the Work of his
Life.

Only thus it is, That the other Great Points, as Union with Christ,
Justification, Adoption, Sanctification, and Glory (which Subjects, as he was
able for, so his heart was most in them) he has left unfinished: And so
thereby (as is most likely) multitndes of precious, yea glorious thoughts,
which he might have reserved (as often falls out to Preachers and Writers) for
those higher Subjects, as the Close, and Center, and Crown of what forewent, as
preparative thereto, are now perished, and laid in the dust with him. None but
Christ was ever yet able to finish all that Work which was in his Heart to do.
Farewell.

Thomas Goodwin, Philip Nigh.

Eleven Books made in New England, by Mr. Thomas Hooker, and printed from his
Papers, written with (...) own Hand; are now published in (...) volnms, two in
Quarto, one in Octa. vo. VIZ.
The Application of Redemption by the Effectual Work of the Word, and Spirit of
Christ, for the (...) home of lost (...) unto God.

The First Book on 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. The Second on (...). 1. 21. The Third on
Luke 1. 17. The Fourth on 2 Cor. 6. 2. The Fifth on '(...). 20. (...). 6, 7 The
Sixth on Revel. 3. 17. The Seventh (...) Romans 8. 7. The Eight on John, 6. 44.
The (...) on (...). 57. 15. The Tenth on Acts, 2. 37. The Last, viz. Christ's
Prayer for (...), (...) John 17.

There are Six more Books of Mr. Hookers, now printing in two Volums.

The Contents.
BOOK I. On 1 Pet. 1. 18. Ye were redeemed by the Blood of Christ.
Oct. Christ has purchased all spiritual good for His. 5 For Explication,
three things: What this Spiritual good is. All that we lost in Adam; all that
we need, and (...) desire to make us happy. How Christ has purchased this, by
laying down (...) sufficient price for it, viz. His Death and Obedience. (...)
two, hence. 8 1 Instruction: See how difficult it is to obtain the least
spiritual good. Nothing to be had without this Purchase. 2 Reproof to two
sorts: 1 To those that have interest in this Purchase, (...) improve it not 2
To those that catch at it, having no right (...) unto. 3 FOR HIS, here
consider, (...) 1 The special respect in which they come to have (...) in
Christ's merits. (...) on Sinners. (...) Elect. (...) But as the Seed of the
Covenant, such as shall (...) leeve. 2 Christ has purchased FOR THEM. 1 In
their room. 2 For their good. Reasons why Christ has purchased only for His,
(...) the Faithful, not for all. (...) (...) 1 The (...) of God is satisfied
only for them. 2 Christ prayed only for them. 3 They only shall be saved. 4
They (...) have the means of Salvation made (...) (...) to them. Many have not
so much as (...) means. (...) sour, hence (...) 1 (...) (...) (...) three
things: 1 (...) (...) challenge any spiritual good to (...) (...) before he
believe. (...) For 1 No man has Christ but by Faith. 2 Believers (...) are in
the Covenant of (...) 3 (...) are in the state of (...) 2 The Spirit of God
death not witness to any (...) interest in this spiritual good, before and (...)
Faith. Because 1 It Is a falsehood, cross to the Covenant of (...) 2 An (...) is
incapable of knowing receiving such a witness. Inferences hence 29 1 It Is a
delusion to say you may have Christ before Faith: this is the ground of
Profaneness and (...). 2 There are no absolute Promises in the Covenant of
Grace, but such as do either express or imply the condition of Faith. And yet
it is a Covenant of free Grace. 3 The (...) of Christ never gives evidence to
any man of his good Estate, without respect to a qualification, viz. Faith and
Grace. Because 41 1 This work of Evidencing, is a work of Applicacion. 2 The
Spirit never Evidenceth without tha Word. 3 The Spirit always (...) by
applying of a general Promise, wherein particular persons are included. 4 This
would be to charge the Spirit with witnessing a falsehood. 5 The Spirit ever
witnesses as the Covenant of Grace does. 6 The Spirit witnesses in the same
respect as the Father intended, and Christ purchased. 7 The Evidence of
spiritual Knowledge and Assurance of Faith, arise upon the same ground. Hence
see the excellency, and blessed condition of Believers. 54 Confutation: it
dasheth the dream of universal Redemption 57 Objections Answered. Exhortation,
to provoke our hearts 66 1 To get Faith. 2 To have all at Christ's Command, and
lay out all for his praise.

BOOK II On Matthew. 1. 21. He shall save his People from (...) sins.
DOCT. Christ puts all his into possession of all (...) Good that he has
purchased. Two Branches. Branch 1. Redemption and Application are of (...)
extent. For (...) 1 The Spirit applies Redemption to all, and (...) such as the
Father intended, and Christ (...) sed it. (...) 2 Application was the end of
purchasing. 3 If the Application were narrower than the (...) chase, then
Christ should have died for many (...) should have no benefit by his death.
Uses three, hence. 1 Consutation of these false Opinions. 1 Christ died for
all. 2 Christ died for all in point of Impetration, (...) not of Application. 3
That the Application of mercy depends upon liberty of man's will. 2 Instruction:
See the Reason why the work of (...) cation prevails so powerfully, though
sinners (...) it. Christ having redeemed them, will and does (...) that
Redemption to them. Direction to distressed sinners: Look to the purchase and
blood of Christ. (...) 2. The Manner bow this Application is wrought. Three
things implied in that. 81 No man can make Application of any spiritual good in
Christ to himself. 1 Nor by power wrest it. 2 Nor by Justice claim it. 3 Nor
able to receive it. 4 Nor willing to be made able. Uses four, hence, It dasheth
the (...) of such as conceive they have power to take Christ and Grace when
they will 92 It discovers two dangerous mistakes about the work of Application.
1 When a man catches at the general offer of mercy and Christ without getting
a special title thereunto. 2 When a man takes hold of Christ from self-love,
for self ends. 93 See the folly and madness of men who are unwilling to be made
happy. See the Justice of God in the destruction of such as will not have
Christ. (...). The manner and Order how this (...) good made ours. The soul for
whom Christ has purchased, 1 Is made capable of it. 2 Has a right unto it.
(...) 3 Is estated in it. (...) 4 Has liberty to use all as it is own. Uses
five, hence. Admiration at the riches and freeness of Gods grace in Christ. 95
He works that in all his, which he requires of them. 2 Humiliation in the sight
of our own vileness, (...), unworthiness. (...) 3 Encouragement (...) (...) the
hearts of the (...) sinners sinking under (...) apprehension of their own 1
(...) not able to reach this work. 2 Crossness to it, and (...) against it. 4
Direction showing the (...) way how to set (...) the work of Application. 1
Look at Christ first, all our good being laid up (...) him. 2 Look at all
Graces, either as leading to Christ, (...) coming from him. 3 When we would
have our Graces acted, (...) to them, but to Christ as the Author and (...) of
all. (...) 5 Exhortation to the Faithful. 1 Make sure, keep sure your Evidences
for Christ. 2 Challenge and make use of all the good things (...) Christ. 3
Grow rich upon the revenues of the Gospel. III. The Causes of Application.
(...) 1 The Principal Cause is (...) himself. 1 The (...) is satisfied by
Christ. 2 Christ as Mediator and Head of the (...) Where that of Christ, from
whence (...) issues, is the Resurrection of Christ (...) Use, Hence distressed
sinners should look to the (...) surrection of Christ. 3. The Spirit sent from
the Father and the (...) make this Application. 2 That Power by which the
Spirit works in (...) tion, is an Almighty power. (...) Rea ons two (...)
Because 1 Of that Hellish opposition in us against it. 2 That good that is to
be communicated, is a (...) natural good. The Instrumental Causes are those
means which the Lord is pleased to appoint and (...), viz. The Word in the
Ministry of it. 133 1 The Power resideth in Christ and his (...). 2 From thence
it is in the Word. 3 From thence to the Administration thereof by the (...).
(...) four, hence. Information 1 The Work of Application is not wrought by
moral (...). 2 It is (...) 136 Trial whether we have found the impression of
Gods Power by the means. Support unto sinners sinking in the thoughts of 1 The
(...) between this work and them. 2 Their opposition against it. Exhortation to
attend upon God in his own means 138 1 Slight not any, but try every Ordinance.
2 Fear (...) we should fall short of Gods Power in an (...). 3 When the Lord
works by an Ordinance, take heed of withdrawing our (...) from under his
working power.

BOOK III. On Luke, 1. 17. To make ready a People (...) for the Lord.
DOCT. 1. The soul must be fitted for Christ, before (...) can receive him. 144
1 What this Preparation is, in four things 1 Arenouncing the Authority of (...)
(...) 2 Of our own abilities (...) 3 Of our own worthiness (...) 4 A readiness
to side with Christ (...) 2 The manner of this (...). 1 The soul is passive
herein 2 It Is an act of the Spirit dispossessing sin. 3 This being done, Faith
certainly follows 4 The soul prepared, yields wholly to Christ (...) Reasons
why there must be such a Preparation. (...) taken from 1 The testimony of
several Scriptures. 2 Else the soul should be implanted into Christ (...) it is
in a state of Nature. 3 The soul must be cut off from the root of old Adam
before it can be (...) into Christ, the (...) Adam. Uses five, hence. (...) 1
Instruction: Christ cannot be united to the soul (...) in its (...). For 1 Such
a one cannot receive the Spirit. 2 He is in the state of Cendemnation. 3 He
does oppose Christ. 4 He is under the Covenant of Works. 5 He is under the
Power of Sin. 2 It discovers the folly of carnal men, who conceit they may have
Christ without any preparation for him. 3 Trial whether we have come to Christ
in the right way 166 The difference between restraining and preparing Grace 166
Gods ends in restraining men 1 To show his Dominion over the worst of men 2 To
provide for the Societies of men. 3 That he may put his Servants to a narrower
search. Gods end in preparing Grace is, That he may implant the soul into
Christ. This (...) Evidence against four sorts, 1 Such as (...) this Work: as
170 1 (...), secure sinners. 2 Presumptuous Atheists. 2 Such as come to Christ,
and yet renounce (...) their corruptions 3 Such as come to Christ, and renounce
not their own abilities. 4 Such as renounce not their own worthiness. 4
Encouragement to distressed (...), such are in way, of preparation, therefore
in way to Christ. 5 Exhortation, to prepare for Christ 1 Consider how sinful
and miserable we are (...) must prepare 200 2 Who it is we must prepare for.
Here consider, 1 The worthiness of Christ's person. 2 The good he brings with
him. 3 He beseeches you to receive him. DOCT. 2. A plain and powerful Ministry,
is the ordinary means to prepare the heart for Christ. 20; 1 Plain in Words.
Matter. 2 Powerful, as delivered with 1 Evidence of Reason 212 2 Zealous (...)
213 Reasons two. (...) 1 Such a Ministry discovers the secrets of sin. 2 It
over-powers Corruption, and sets an awe upon the spirits of men. Uses three,
hence 216 1 (...) may see the reason of the little success they find, viz. Want
of plain and powerful preaching 2 See the fearful estate of such as have lived
long under such a Ministry, and yet not prepared for Christ. 3 Exhortation.
Attend upon the Word that the end of it may be attained, viz. Preparation for
Christ.

BOOK IV.
On 2 Cor. 6. 2. In an acceptable time have I heard thee, in the day of
Salvation have I succored thee. 221 DOCT. 1. The Work of God is altogether
free. 1 In appointing 2 In revealing 3 In blessing the Means. 229 Reasons
three. Because 1 (...) we have can purchase it. 2 Nothing we can do, can
procure it. 3 There is no Promise made to a Natural man. Uses three, hence.
Matter of 1 Thanksgiving (...) the (...) of Grace. 2 (...) to (...) sinners in
the sight of their sins and (...). 3 Exhortation to such as want, and are
seeking mercy to stay Gods time, and wait his pleasure. DOCT. 2. While this
life lasts, and the Gospel is continued, that is the day of Salvation. 1. The
time of this Life, the time of getting Grace. 241 Reason, Because after this
Life 1 The Sentence past is irrevocable. 2 The condition of a man is
unchangable. 2 While the (...) is (...). (...) Reason, (...) (...) Gods (...),
In regard 1 Of the Causes and means which are then afforded 2 Of the effect and
work it self, which is then wrought. 3 Of the subject, the persons wrought
upon. Uses three, hence. 1 Learn, That long life is a great blessing. 2
Caution, To fortify our selves against self-murder. 3 Exhortation, to improve
the time of Salvation. 1 It is a Season 251 2 It is a short one, but a day. 3 A
Season not of our, but of Gods acceptance. 4 It is a day of Salvation.

BOOK V.
On Matthew. 20. 5, 6, 7. He went out about the sixth, ninth, and eleventh hour,
and hired Laborers. DOCT. God calls his Elect at any Age, but the most before
old Age. (...) 1 God calls his at any Age, some in younger, some in elder years.
(...) 1 To show the freeness of his Grace. 2 To show (...) Power. (...) God
calls the most before old Age, viz. In their younger or middle (...). Reasons,
Because that is the fittest Age in regard of 1 The Subject. For 1 The Faculties
are then most capable of being wrought upon 2 Corruptions are not so strongly
rooted. 2 The End why Grace is given, viz. the Glory of God Uses three, hence
271 1 Instruction: Be not rash in censuring the (...) Estate of any. Though we
may judge of their present state by their fruits. 2 Consolation to support aged
sinners, though it is not ordinary, yet possible they may be converted then. 276
3 Exhortation to younger men, take (...) present time, defer not till old Age:
if you do 1 Either you will never attain it. 2 Or it will be uncomfortable if
you do. Motives to provoke such. Consider 1 What good you may do while you live
2 What Comfort you will have at your death. 3 What your Glory will be in
Heaven.

BOOK VI.
On Revel. 3. 17. Thou say thou art rich, when thou art poor and miserable,
etc. DOCT. The soul is naturally settled in a sinful security 285 1 The sinner
(...) (...) (...) in his Condition. 2 He (...) no (...) (...) (...) present. 3
He (...) none (...) (...) future. 4 Hence (...) puts his condition beyond
question. 5 And therefore (...) scorns, 6 And openly (...) an alteration of his
estate. Reasons three, taken from 292 1 The (...) of sin 2 The (...) (...) the
soul 3 (...), and Self-ease. Uses four, (...) 295 1 See the reason why sharp
and soul-saving preaching (...) (...) little acceptance, Because it awakens men
out of security. 2 It Is the (...) plague for a man to be let alone in his sins.
3 (...) as never were (...) and awakened to (...) (...) of their (...) (...),
(...) yet in it. 4 (...) to (...) (...): Such should 1 Suspect their (...). 2
(...) about it. 3 Yield, that (...) the present their condition (...) (...).

BOOK VII.
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) the slesh is enmity against the
Lord, and is not subject to his Law. DOCT. The frame of the whole heart of a
Natural man, is wholly unwilling to submit to the Word that would sever him
from his sins. 305 1 He seeks not after truth. 2 He is loath to meet with it. 3
He stops the passage of it. 4 He does what he can to defeat the power and
evidence of it. 5 He will professedly oppose it. 6 He will privily (...) the
stirrings of the Truth in his Conscience. Reasons four, taken from 315 1 The
Corruption of the will 2 The Revenging Justice of God. 3 The power of Satan 4
The (...), and near alliance between the heart and sin. Uses sive, hence 1 It Is
the heaviest plague for a Natural man to have his own corrupt will. 2 The will
of a Natural man, is the worst part (...) him. 3 The (...) of a carnal man,
(...) cross to sense and reason. 4 Trial of our estates by our (...) or
unwillingness to part with sin. He that is willing 331 1 He is speedy and (...)
in improving (...) (...) 2 He takes delight in those means that (...) and work
most. 3 He is not content till his sin be removed. 4 He takes not up his stand
till he come at God. 5 Exhortation: Labor for willingness to part with sin. 343
1 The greatest and hardest work lies with the will. 2 Beleaguer the heart with
the evidence of Truth. 3 Look up to God that he would work upon the heart.

BOOK VIII.
On John, 6. 44. None can come to me, but whom the Father draws. DOCT. God the
Father by a holy kind of (...) plucks his out of their corruptions, and draws
them to believe in Christ. 349 This work of Attraction is a transient work;
(...) both these, 1 Plucking from sin 2 And drawing to Christ are handled
together For Explication, six Particulars, The sorts of drawing two 1 By moral
Suasion 2 By Physical (or internal) operation. This latter is meant here 353
The proper Nature of this drawing, it is the motion or impression of the Spirit
upon the Soul, not any habit in it, or act put forth by it, to (...) with the
Spirit. 355 The means how God works, and by which he draws. These are four 355 1
By a hook of Instruction, showing a man that he is out of the way to Heaven. 2
By the Cords of Love, showing that Christ and Mercy are, 1 Able to (...) him 2
Willing to save him 3 Are freely offered for that end 4 The Lord waits to see
when the sinner will come 3 By the Iron Chains of Conscience 1 Warning. 2
Accusing. 3 Condemning. 4 By the hand of the Spirit himself. How the holy
violence in drawing the Soul from sin to Christ, may be discerned, in four
Conclusions: 373 1 The will of man (as such) is a subject capable of sin and
Grace successively. 2 The faculty of the will, cannot actually will a Spiritual
good without a spiritual power 3 The corruption of the will, utterly
indisposeth it to receive a spiritual power. 4 Though no force is offered to
the faculty of the will, yet the corruption of the will must be removed by a
holy violence: that so it may (...) a spiritual power, and so put forth a
spiritual act. 377 Reasons of this are four. Because 1 The corruption of the
will, will not go away of it self. 2 The Spirit of Grace that works upon the
soul, drives out corruption as its contrary. 3 By Converting Grace, the
Dominion of sin is subdued. The unwilling will is made a willing will: The true
meaning of that 388 4 By it also Satan is cast out of the soul, he will not go
away by entreaty 5 How the plucking of the soul from sin, and drawing it to
Christ, is accomplished. (...) 1 Satan's Commission is now called in by Christ.
2 Satan's right and claim to the soul is taken from him. 3 He is also put out of
that possession he had in the soul. 4 The soul is now acted no longer by sin
and Satan as formerly, but the bent of the heart is under the hand of the
Spirit. 6 Why this work of Attraction is ascribed to the (...). (...) 1 This
work is common to all the three Persons. 2 Yet it is chiefly attributed to the
Father. Reasons two. Because 1 The manifestation of his displeasure is most
suitable here to drive the sinner from his sins to Christ. 2 The Father has
sent Christ: that is, 1 He has appointed him to, 2 Fitted him for, And 3
Accepted him in the work of Redemption. Uses three, hence. 1 Instruction, in
six Particulars. 408 1 Conversion proceeds from God as the alone cause of it.
For 1 It is not in him that wills or runs, but in God that shows mercy. 2 Grace
gives power to act, (...) must (...) before any concurring act. 3 As in Natural
Generation and Corruption of the soul from Adam, it is wholly passive; so in
Regeneration. 2 Conversion depends not upon, is not resolved into the Liberty
of man's Will. For if it did, then 412 1 A man made himself to differ. 2 The
will of man is (...) above the Grace of God 3 God should be deprived of the
praise of his mercy. 3 Conversion depends not upon, nor issues not from the
congruity of means For, 1 Then it might lastly be resolved into a Natural
cause. 2 Some that have been suited with most means, have continued most
opposite 3 All means in themselves are unable to draw the sinner to Christ. 4
The power of Grace in Conversion, is irresistible, i. e. it takes away the
power of (...), so as it shall (...) frustrate the Grace of God. 5 When there
is (...), there is (...) (...) Grace. Because 427 1 When there is sufficiency
of Grace, there are all the Causes working. 2 There also the power of
resistance is removed. 6 All men have not sufficient help of preventing Grace.
(...) 1 Sense and Experience give evidence of it. 2 None come to Christ, but
whom the (...) draws. 3 All are not given to Christ. 2 Consolation 435 1 To
support the hearts of unconverted (...) against the 1 Temptations of Satan 2
Snares of the world 3 Corruptions of their hearts. 2 To the Faithful who have
found this (...) God will go on in it. 3 Exhortation (...) 1 To the Converted,
Labor to draw others from their sins to Christ. 1 Do what you can your self. 2
Bring them to Christ in the use of means. 2 To the (...), Come and lie under
(...) drawing hand. 1 Present thy self before God in the use of means. 2 Leave
not the Ordinances till you find (...) Power of God therein.

The Names of several Books Printed by Peter Cole in (...), London, and are to
be sold at his Shop at the sign of the Printing-press in Cornhil, near the
Exchange.
Eight several Books, by Nich. Culpeper, Gent. (...) in Physic and Astrology.
1 The Practice of (...), containing seventeen several Books. Wherein is
plainly set forth, The Nature, Cause, (...), and Several Sorts of Signs;
Together with the Cure of all Diseases in the Body of Man. Being chiefly a
(...) of The works of that Learned and Renowned Doctor, Lazarus Riverius, Now
living; (...) and Physician to the (...) King of France. Above sifteen (...) of
the said Books in (...) (...) been Sold in a very (...) Years, (...) been eight
times printed, though all (...) former Impressions wanted the (...) Causes,
Signs, and Differences of (...) Diseases, and had only the (...) for the Cure
of them; as plainly (...) by the Authors Epistle. 2 The Anatomy of the Body
(...) Man, (...) is (...) (...), the several (...) of the Body of Man, (...)
(...) very many (...) Brass Plates than (...) was in English before. 3 A (...)
(...) the (...) (...), (...) by the (...) of (...) of London. Whereunto is
(...), The Key to Galen's Method of (...). 4 The English (...) Enlarged; (...)
an (...) Discourse (...) the (...) Herbs of this Nation; herein is (...) how to
(...) a man's (...) of most Diseases (...): to Man's (...), with such things as
grow in (...), and (...) three (...) charge. (...) in the (...) Book is (...),
1 The (...) of (...) all Herbs, (...) (...) and (...). (...) The (...) of
drying, and (...) them and (...) (...). 3 The way of making (...) keeping (...)
(...) of useful (...), made of those Herbs. The way (...) (...) the (...)
according (...) the (...), and Mixture of (...) (...) and the part of the Body
(...) 5 A Directory for Midwives, or a Guide for (...). Newly enlarged by (...)
Author in every sheet, and (...) with diverse (...) Plates. 6 Galen's Art of
Physic, with a large Comment. 7 A New (...) both of studying (...) practicing
Physic. 8 A Treatise of the Rickets, being a (...) common to Children; (...)
is (...), 1 The Essence, 2 The (...), 3 The Signs, 4 The (...) of the (...);
Published in Latin by Dr. (...), (...). Bate, and Dr. (...), translated into
English. And (...) by N. Culpeper.
A Godly and Fruitful Exposition, on the first Epistle of Peter. By Mr. (...)
(...), Minister of the Word of God at Dedham in Essex.

The Wonders of the Lodestone. (...) Samuel (...) of (...)

An Exposition on the Gospel of (...) (...) St. (...). By (...) Ward.

Clows Chyrurgery.

(...) of Salvation.

(...) Engagement for the (...), by John Goodwin.

Great Church Ordinance of (...).

Mr. Love's Case, (...) (...) Petitions, Narrative, and Speech.

(...) (...), or a persuasive to peace.

(...). (...) Saints submission, and Satan's Overthrow.

(...) Man's Practice in (...) Time.

Mr. Symsons Sermon at Westminster.

Mr. Feaks Sermon before the Lord Major.

Mr. (...) Treatise of Hell.

-- of Christ's Genealogy.

Eaton on the Oath of Allegiance and Covenant, showing that they (...) not.

Eleven Books of Mr. Jeremiah (...) lately published; As also (...) Texts of
(...) upon which they are grounded.
1 (...) Rare Jewel of Christian (...) tentment on Phil. 4. 11. Wherein (...)
showed, 1 What (...) is, It is an Holy Art and Mystery, 3 (...) (...) of it, 4
The Evil of (...) (...) sin of Murmuring, and (...) Aggravations of it. 2 (...)
Worship, on Levit. 10. Wherein is showed, 1 The right (...) of the (...) of God
in general; (...) particularly, In Hearing the (...) (...) the Lords Supper,
and Prayer. 3 Gospel Conversation, on Phil. 1. 17. (...) is showed, 1 That the
Conversations of Believers must be above (...) could be by the Light of Nature,
(...) Beyond those that lived under the Law, 3 And suitable to what Truths the
Gospel holds forth. To which is added, The Misery of those men that (...) their
Portion in this Life only, on Psalm. 17. 14. 4 A Treatise of (...)-Mindedness,
Wherein is showed, 1 What (...) is, 2 The great Evil thereof, on Phil. 3. part
of the 19. Verse. Also to the same Book is joined, A Treatise of
Heavenly-Mindedness and, (...) with God, on Genesis 5. 24. and on Phil. 3. 20. 5
An Exposition, on the fourth, fifth, (...), and seventh Chapters of the (...)
of Hosea. 6 An Exposition on the eighth, ninth, and tenth Chapters of Hosea. 7
An Exposition on the eleventh, (...), and thirteenth Chapters of (...), being
now complete. 8 The Evil of (...), or the (...) Sinfulness of Sin, on Job, 36.
(...). 9 Precious Faith, on 2 Pet. 1. 1. 10 Of Hope, on 1 John. 3. 3. 11 Of
Walking by Faith, (...) 2 Cor. (...). (...).
(...) several Books of Mr. William Bridge, Collected into one Volumn. Viz.
1 The Great Gospel Mystery of the (...) Comfort and Holiness, opened (...)
applied from Christ's Priestly Office. 2 Satan's Power to Tempt; and Christ's Love
to, (...) Care of (...) People under Temptation. 3 Thankfulness required in
(...) Condition. 4 Grace for Grace; or, the (...) flowing of Christ's (...)
(...) all Saints. 5 The Spiritual Actings of (...) through Natural
Impossibilities. 6 Evangelical Repentance. 7 The Spiritual Life, and (...) of
Christ in all Believers. 8 The Woman of Canaan. 9 The Saints Hiding Place in
(...) of Gods Anger. 10 Christ's Coming is at our (...) night. 11 A Vindication
of Gospel (...) nances. 12 Grace and Love beyond (...)
A Congregational Church is a (...) tholick Visible Church. By (...) Stone in
New England.

A Treatise of Politic (...) wherein (...) Questions

(...) Answered, 1 Whereof (...) made, and for what ordained. 2 (...) there
Kings and (...) have (...) Absolute Power over the People. Whether Kings and
Governors be (...) ject to the Laws of God, or the (...) of their Country. 4
How far the (...) ple are to obey their (...). Whether all the people have, be
(...) Governors. 6 Whether it be (...) to depose an evil Governor 7 (...)
Confidence is to be given to (...).

The Compassionate (...).

Dr. Sibbs on the Philippians.

The Best and Worst (...). (...) (...) Sedgwick.

The (...) and Cruelty of the (...) (...). By Matthew (...) comen.

A Sacred (...). By (...) Martial.

(...) Military (...),

The Immortality of Man's Soul.

The Anatomist Anatomized.

King Charles his Case, or an Appeal (...) Rational Men concerning his (...).

Mr. Owens stedfastness of the (...)

Vindication of Free Grace; (...) to prove, 1 That we are not (...) as holy,
but that we should be (...); and that Election is not of kinds, (...) persons 2
That Christ did not by (...) Death intend to save all men, and (...) those whom
he intended to (...), that he did not die for them only (...) would believe,
but that they (...) believe. 3 That we are not (...) properly by our believing
in Christ (...) by our Christ, believing in him 4, (...) which differenceth one
man from (...), is not the improvement of a (...) ability restored through
(...) to all men in general, but a (...) of Grace wrought by the (...) of God
in the Elect. By John (...)

Six Sermons preached by Doctor Hill Viz.
1. The Beauty and Sweetness of an (...) Branch of Peace, and Brotherly (...)
budding. 2. Truth and Love happily married (...) the Church of Christ. 3. The
Spring of strengthening Grace (...) the Rock of Ages Christ Jesus. 4. The
strength of the Saints to (...) Jesus Christ their strength. 5 The Best and
Worst of Paul. 6 Gods eternal preparation for his (...) Saints.
The Bishop of Canterbury's Speech (...) the Scaffold. The King's Speech (...)
the Scaffold.

The Magistrates Support and (...). By Mr. John Cordel.

The Discipline of the Church in New England, by the Churches (...) Synod there.

A Relation of the Barbados.

A Relation of the Repentance and Conversion of the Indians in New England; By
Mr. Eliot, and Mr. Mayhew.

The History of Montross: and his Actions for Charles the First. His passions
for Charles the Second King of Scots.

The Institutes of the Laws of England by John Cowel, Octavo.

A description of the Grand Signiors Seraglio; or the Turkish Emperors Court.
By John Greaves. Octavo.

The reigning error Arraigned at the Bar of scripture, and Reason. By Franscis
Fulwood. Octavo.

The state of Future Life. By Thomas White. Twelves.

The Royal and delightful Game of Picquet, written in French, and now rendered
into English. Octavo.

De Copore Politico: or, The Elements of Law, moral, and politic. By Thomas
Hobbs of Malmsbury.

The History of the Rites, Customs and manner of life, of the present Jew
throughout the World. Octavo.

The London Dispensatory in Latin in Folio.

The London Dispensatory in Latin in Twelves.

A Poem upon the late Fight at (...) between the two great Fleets of England
and Holland.

These several Books of Physic and Chyrurgerie will shortly be printed in
English.
Riverius Observations, with (...) hundred and seventie other (...) and
Observations of other men.

Riolanus Anatomy.

Bartholinus Anatomy.

(...) the Works of (...) (...), (...) some few, not proper for (...).

The Idea of Practical Physic, being (...) complete Body of Physic.

And (...) (...) Works.

These Books of Divinity will speedily be printed.
Mr. Buroughs, on 1 Cor. 5. 7. and 18, 19. 29. And fifty nine Sermons on
Matthew, 11, 28, 29, 30.

(...) Books of Mr. Thomas Hooker, being the substance of many (...) preached
in New England.

There will speedily be printed these Several pieces of Mr. (...) of (...). Viz.
1 Scripture Light the most sure Light: compared with, 1. Revelations and
Visions. 2 Natural and Supernatural Dreams. 3. Impressions with and without
Word. 4. Light and Law within. 5. Divine Providence. 6. Christian Experience.
7. Humane Reason. 8. Judicial Astrology Delivered in three Sermons on 2 Pet. 1.
19. 2 Christ in Travel: Wherein, 1 The Travel of his soul. 2. The first and
after effect of his Death. 3. His (...) rance of Issue. 4. And His (...)
therein. Are opened and cleared in (...) Sermons, (...) Esaias, 53. 11. 3 A (...)
up (...) the (...) in case of 1. Great sin. 2. (...) of (...). 3. (...) of
(...) 4. (...) of Assurance. 5. (...) 6. Temptation. 7. (...). 8. (...) (...)
bleness. (...). (...) from the Condition it self. (...) in thirteen Sermons on
Psalm, (...) 11.
His Four Sermons concerning
1 Sin against the Holy Ghost. 2 Sins of Infirmities. 3 The fifth Monarchy. 4
The Good and means of (...) meant.
Francisci Tayleri, Capitula (...) Hebraice and Latin edita. Una (...) (...)
sensum (...) (...) cilium Experimentibus.

Francisci Tayleri, (...) Jeremiae vatis, Denuo e (...) (...) braicis
translatae, cum Paraphrasi (...) daica, Masora magna and parva, Commentariis
Rabbi Shelomoh, (...) and (...) Ezrae, (...) Buxtorfii (...) magnis excerptis.

The Application of Redemption, by the effectual work of the Word and Spirit of
Christ, for the bringing home of lost Sinners to God.
(...) Introduction to the Work.
1 PETER, 1. 18, 19. (...) as much as you know that you were not Redeemed with
Corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, but with the Precious blood of Christ,
etc.
AMongst all the heavenly Truths of the Gospel, which the (...) Christ has
Revealed and Commended to His Church, out of his holy Word, there is none more
precious, then that wherein the Application of the rich Redemption purchased by
him, is (...), and made good to the hearts, of those who (...) to the Election
of his grace; as giving a (...) to all the rest of the Doctrine taught and
learned, (...) putting the Soul into possession of all those treasure grace,
which were only promised on Gods part, (...) hope apprehended by the Sinner
before: In a word that which gives life to the fainting heart, in the (...) of
Gods free grace.

For what availes it the hungry to hear of fat (...) choice wines, and rare
(...), and not to know (...) come at them? What profits it the condemned (...)
factor to hear tell of a Pardon, and the Party (...) give it, if yet he be
ignorant, what way he should (...) procure it, for his own deliverance? So
here, (...) vailes it the forlorn Sinner, sitting down under (...) tence of
Condemnation, and fainting away for (...) and forgiveness, to hear of the rich
mercy of a (...) sufficiency of the merits of a Christ, and the (...) demption
provided by both; and yet see no way to tain them or the deliverance of his
Soul by them? (...) knowledge of the mercy adds rather to the (...) his misery
and distress, to think there is so much (...) to be had, and he has so much
need, and yet (...) liends no way to get it, no well grounded hope (...) tain
it.

The truths themselves which properly (...) this place of Divinity, and lay
forth the (...) Gods grace, and the work of his Spirit in the Soul, wonderful,
for secrecy, sweetness, and power (...) as they ever have and do at this day
exercise the (...) able judgments that are or ever were; so were (...) be
handled by a head and heart fully fitted to (...) good a matter, and expressed
by a tongue as the (...) a ready Writer, (as the Psalmist speaks) I (...) would
appear that, as the difficulty is great, so the fit would be equal, and the
comfort unmatchable (...) would issue from the open discovery of those (...)
ries.

For my self (being privy to my own weakness) it (...) suffice in a familiar
manner to accommodate my (...) (though it may be somewhat rudely) to the (...)
of the meanest: and in the manner of my (...), in order to that end, attend the
Method (...):

First, By a short and familiar description we shall

Secondly, We shall choose such Texts, in which all

Lastly, We shall knit the whole frame together by David has it) How the Lord
goes in his (...), where the prints and footsteps of God be, in (...)
proceeding with the Soul in this great Work.

To press on to our (...) purpose: Know then (...) must, after Adam by his Fall
and Apostasy, had (...) away from God, and that gracious estate in (...) he was
Created according to his Image; having (...) undone himself and his posterity,
being all (...) Children of wrath, under the Curse of the Law, (...) they could
not avoid being just, nor bear being (...), as issuing from the infinite
displeasure of an (...) God: whose Law they had broken, and (...) the Seal of
the Covenant under their feet. (...) the recovery of him and any of his out of
this (...) condition, two things were requisite to be done (...) to Gods
righteous dispensation in the way of Providence.

First, There must be a Redemption (...) the death and obedience of Christ,
that Gods (...)

Secondly, There must be an Application of Redemption unto the Souls of such
for whom (...) paid, that so they might have the good and (...) that, which
Christ had performed and God (...) in their behalf; and both these must be done
for (...) Sons of Adam, who ever shall see (...) face (...) grace or glory. For
such is that help (...) condition (...), (...) which Adam had brought (...)
(...) his (...), that as he has no (...) of own to do any (...) that may
redeem himself (...) his (...); (...) (...) (...) (...) of his own (...) ply
that to himself (...) is (...) (...) (...), further (...) he is fitted by the
preventing grace of Christ (...) In the Former of these we have the (...) of
(...) (...) open before us; In the Latter; we come to Possession of them: The
Former shows the (...) this Second the Appropriation of it unto such, such only
unto whom God has intended it, (...) whom it has been made by Christ. (...)
(...) (...) Head and (...) of (...), (...) (...) (...) the (...) Sweet of the
(...), (...) we (...) ((...) helping) (...) little to pursue in the (...)
Exercise, as long as the Lord is pleased to give (...) liberty. To begin then
with a Description of Doctrine of Application, it may be this, in brief.

Application is that special part of our (...) very from our lost Condition,
(...) that Spiritual Good which. Christ (...) Purchased for Us, is made Ours;
for His, is made Theirs.
To omit the further Consideration of the first part the Description, as that
which contains the common (...) of this part, as in reference and cohaerence
with (...) other: That wherein the Pith lies, and which (...) our purpose may
be resolved into these Two (...) and Observations.

First, That Christ has Purchased all Spiritual Good for His.

Secondly, All that Spiritual Good that Christ has Purchased for his, he does
undoubtedly put Them into the Possession of it, and make it Theirs.

For the First of these the Doctrine is, That Christ has Purchased all
Spiritual good for His: Doct.
(...) be Three Particulars to be attended for the (...) of this Point.

1 What this Spiritual Good is. 2 Why Christ Purchased it, and How. 3 For Whom.
This Spiritual Good intended, is the heap of Grace David thus discovers it,
Psalm. 31. 19. Oh! How (...) is that Goodness which thou have wrought for Them,
and laid up for Them, and laid out for Them (...) trust in thee before the Sons
of men! So the Apostle also, Ephesians. 1. 7. In whom we have Redemption through
his Blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace wherein
he has abounded toward us.

I would not, I should not, in a way of orderly proceeding descend to
Particulars, for that were to (...) things out of place; I am now only in the
general Doctrine, which lies open in a Community for the (...) of it to all
that comes after, and therefore nothing proper to this place but that which
carries that Community with it; The Severals I shall reserve to their particular
places: Only thus much we may say (...) the further manifestation, All that
Spiritual Good we lost, all that we do want or can need, all that (...) can
desire, all that we can receive for our everlasting welfare, this is that
plentiful Redemption which (...) meant here, Psalm. 130. 7.

Why is it said that Christ has Purchased (...) the (...) Blood of Jesus: You
were Redeemed (says (...) Apostle) not with Silver and Gold, (these were (...)
too mean quality, and too base a condition, being (...) and tramitory things,
and therefore no (...) answerable to those everlasting, and spiritual, and
(...) good things we look for) but with the (...) Blood of Christ, which is of
endless infinite and (...) virtue and efficacy, and in which the Lord rests
(...), this is a full Purchase.

For any Power by strong hand to wrest away (...) sinner from under the
Almighty hand of God it (...) impossible, for Justice to lay aside it self and
not (...) (...) have her (...) righted in a righreous way was (...); therefore
that Gods Justice might (...), and our good procured, there was necessity (...)
an equal price should be laid down for it, and (...) was the blood of Christ.
In a word, The (...) (...) Obedience of Christ was the full Purchase; The (...)
out of Justice is bound to manifest the Glory of (...), because that is to give
every one his own; and (...) must require satisfaction where any breach (...)
been made by any transgression and swerving (...) the righteous Will of God.
While therefore (...) Savior by his Death satisfied the breach of the (...),
and for all the sins that ever any of His should (...) guilty of; and by his
Obedience fulfilled all (...), and perfectly pleased God: He fully (...), by
way of purchase and complete payment made (...) Divine Justice, the removal of
all that evil we (...) deserved, and the enjoyment of all that good we (...),
and could desire; and that by a valuable (...) tendered into the hands of
Divine Justice in (...) behalf.

Thus we are said 1 Cor. 6. 20. to be bought with a (...). And Job 33. 24. the
Lord is said to set free the (...) through the righteousness of his Son, he
(...), Deliver him because I have found a Ransom. (...) the Ransom and Payment
is tendered to divine (...), for to it the Soul stands Prisoner; As the (...)
is the King's Prisoner not the Jaylors, so the (...) stands bound to divine
Justice, and is God's (...), he is neither the prisoner of Satan (who is (...)
Jailer) nor of Sin (which is the Prison properly) (...) so far as they receive
Commission from (...) (...) to require Satisfaction in her behalf. And (...)
when Justice is satisfied neither of them have right (...) power to retain the
Soul.

Therefore the Scripture styles them redeemed from (...) earth, Rev. 14. 3. And
He gave himself that he (...) deliver us from this present (...) world, Gal. 1.
4 (...) again, Rev. 5. 9. He was slain and (...) bought us (...) his blood unto
God the Father. So that by way of Purchase he has bought us from our selves,
that is, Redeemed us from the tyranny, authority, and (...) veraignty of our
own lusts unto which we were (...) bondage, 1 Cor. 7. 23. He has bought us
(...) price from being the servants of men: that is, (...) the slavery and
servitude of men's humors and (...) When the Law is satisfied, the Dungeon and
(...) can detain the Prisoner no longer.

Thus, However it is out of free mercy and (...) grace that Redemption is given
to us, (for its out (...) mercy that Christ is given, that he gave his life,
(...) both are bestowed upon us and not upon the world) yet in regard of the
Lord Jesus (...), and the (...) payment he has laid down out of his own (...)
cost and charges, his own blood, its justice, it (...) be bestowed upon him,
and by justice it may be challenged as that which he has (...) in a (...)
proceeding.

Instruction. We may here see, how great and (...) Use. 1.
a work it is, to obtain the least Spiritual Good that appertains to the
everlasting welfare of our souls, were it but the giult of the least sin that
should be removed, were it but the power of the least (...) that should be
brought under, one smile of Gods countenance, and one blessed look of his face
and favor toward a poor wtetch, were it but a saving and a heavenly thought of
a man's mind, the least spiritual motion or stir of our hearts in any sincere
affection to the Lord: It is not all the Policy or Parts of men that can
procure it, not all the power of created Nature in heaven or earth that can
accomplish it, not all the (...) of Pearls, mines of Gold and Silver in the
(...) (...) (...) that can purchase this; no, if it were (...) from a vain
Conversation, from a Tradition, from a Delusion, you must be redeemed from it
by the (...) blood of Christ: So the text. God will not (...) any good of the
Covenant of Grace, but he (...) well paid for it, and it comes at such a rate
that all (...) and all Creatures are not able to reach the (...), Psalm. 49. 8.
The Redemption of the Soul is (...), it cease for ever: Men and Angels must
(...) it alone, only the Lord Jesus the God of glory in (...) all the treasures
of Grace are hid, he is able to (...) the purchase, and it has cost him
sweetly (...) full dear, no less than his very heart blood.

Reproof. It checks a double Practice. Use. 2.


First of those that have interest in this purchase and

They sit down appaled and (...) with the (...) (...) their sins so (...), so
loathsome, with the (...) of Gods holiness, and (...) (...) (...) as that they
dare not believe it, dare (...) think it, that either the pardon of their sins,
(...) (...) their persons, (...) the least look of Gods love (...) be
vouchsafed to them. Another while they sit (...) discouraged under the pressure
and pursuit of (...) (...) and policy, the violence and strength of (...) own
corruptions, their sins live and are mighty, (...) therefore they conclude they
can never overcome: They stagger again in the assurance of Gods love, and (...)
they dare not say but they would be Christ's, and (...) his Death and (...) shed
is theirs, they will not (...) away that. Why? Have you laid down the purchase?
Take possession then into your hand: Have you tendered the payment? Take the
Commodity, (...) is your own; nay, your due. Say, Lord, I and all (...) I have,
and all I can do are worthless and vile, I am (...) base sinful creature, that
need all spiritual good and comfort, and yet deserve nothing but the contrary;
But here is the precious Blood of thy Son which thou (...) (...) upon me, it is
a full purchase every way answerable to thy justice, this precious blood is
(...) of precious Faith, precious Peace, (...) Grace, its pardoning, purging,
pacifying blood; (...) beseech thee therefore, though I be a sinful (...)
Creature, through the blood of Jesus pity me; though polluted and loathsome
through the (...) of the blood of Jesus cleanse me. So the (...), Let us draw
near with a true heart, in full (...) of Faith, having our hearts sprinkled
from an (...) Conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water, Heb. 10. 22.
Eye the worth of this Blood above all our unworthiness; the Holiness of this
above all the unholiness of our hearts and lives. He that knows (...) what the
purchase will come, and has the sum in sight and under his hand, he can lay it
down upon the (...), pay it, take it, here is one there is the other.

So Paul, Romans 8. 34. Who shall lay any thing (...) the charge of Gods elect?
it is Christ that (...) died: Here Is the Blood of Jesus which thou art well
pleased with, have accepted of, therefore Lord give me my due, that comfort,
that peace, that wisdom, that assurance, which I stand in need of. So again,
Gall. 6. 14. (...) be it from me that I should rejoice in any thing (...) in
the Cross of Christ: He rejoiced in nothing but this, therefore far be it from
him, that he should (...) rejoice in this.

It crusheth the confidence, and dasheth the (...) (...) never lay down the
payment; A way that God (...) appointed, a course that justice never permits,
(...), mercy it self will not allow; There Is no precious (...) without precious
blood, No Redemption from (...) blood and filth in which we lie by reason of
our (...) evils (when I saw thee in thy blood, I said, (...)) but only by the
blood of Jesus. So the Apostle (...). 9. 22. The Book, the People, the
Tabernacle, (...) Vessels, the Ministry, all things by the Law was (...) with
blood, and without shedding of blood (...) no remission, No entering into the
Holy of (...) but by the blood of Jesus: Mercy it self through (...) virtue of
the blood of Christ is communicated, (...) it self through the virtue of the
blood of Christ (...); unless therefore thou can bring the (...), the
payment, the blood of Jesus with thee, (...) dream to receive any good at the
hands of the (...).

3. For Whom.
This is the Third Particular to be considered in viz. The Parties for whom
(...) Purchase is made: The Doctrine tells us, Christ (...) purchased all
Spiritual Good FOR HIS: (...) we are to attend.

1 What is that Formalis ratio, that special respect (...) which they come to
be considered as having part in Christ's merits. 2 The meaning of that Particle,
what it imports, to purchase FOR HIS.
To the First (...) Answer plainly, That this Purchase this precious blood of
Christ was shed (...) Sinners, BUT NOT AS SINNERS. Its true, Romans 5. 6. That
Christ died (...) the ungodly: That is, When they are such, and (...) they are
such (verse. 8. While we were yet Sinners Christ died for us) but not (...)
such, That is (...) the special respect unto which the death of Christ (...)
appropriated in a peculiar and proper manner. (...) an old rule, A (...) ad
omne, That which agreed firstly to a thing under such a respect; agrees to all
(...) have that respect, and therefore if our Savior should die for sinners as
sinners, then he should die for all sinners, and therefore for all men, because
all are (...) When our Savior professed. Matthew. 9. 13. He (...) not to call the
righteous, but sinners to (...), i. e. there is none righteous; all men being
sinners, (...) such sinners as are secure and carnally confident (...) their
own righteousness, Christ came not to call them; Though then this respect is
not to be excluded, (...) there is something more to be added, 1 Timothy 1. 15.
Christ came to save sinners, of whom I am (...) (says Paul:) Such sinners as
are, or shall be (...) sensible of their sins in a right manner, being lost
(...) point of pardon, and grace and peace, such sinners Christ came to save.

Besides, However Christ died for none but the Elect, and none but they shall
receive any benefit (...) Christ, yet I take it, Election is not that special
respect that Christ looked at in his death and sufferings, it is not low
enough, it lies not level to that (...) which Christ and his have one toward
another.

But Christ died for a sinner who is of the seed of the Covenant, and shall
believe, qua peccator (...), and therefore I do not exclude the respect of sin,
(...) require that with an Addition, Cum peccator sed (...) crediturus, as may
appear in this expression. As Adam being a common person and root of all
mankind, and in their room, he sinned for himself and all his, that is, all
those that were to proceed of him by natural generation, so that if there were
any (...) should not have been begotten of him, as they (...) not of his
nature, no more should they be (...) or his fault: So it is with the second
Adam, (...) a common root suffered and obeyed for all his, (...) is, all those
that should come of him and be (...) by spiritual generation, so that if there
were any (...) did not partake of his spirit in effectual Vocation (...) Faith,
neither should they have benefit by his (...), so that if the Lord should in
his Election (...) and create thousands of men (...) in holiness, (...) so save
them by a Covenant of works in yielding (...) obedience, they should never be
partakers of (...) death and obedience of Christ, or have the virtue (...)
applied to them though Elect.

A sinner then under the Covenant of Grace, the (...) of the Covenant for whom
he undertakes to make him selfdenying and believing, and so one of the
posterity of Christ, for him Christ dies, and this I choose (...) than that
consideration of Elect as Elect, for these Reasons.

1. Because the merits and mediation of our Savior to be Elect, is before or
without any such respect: God Electing of his, out of his mere good will and
pleasure, not looking to our sin or Savior, Ephesians. 5. 23. Christ is the Savior of
his Body, verse. 25. Christ loved the Church and gave himself for it, that is
the called and believing; and this is the reason Paul and the rest of the
Saints (...) themselves into the company of Believers; He gave himself (...)
us, Tit. 2. 14. John, 17. 20. I pray not for the world, but for those that
shall believe on me. 2. In what relation Christ looks at his as the Head of the
Covenant, in the same he looks at his in the work of Redemption and purchase,
for that he performs as head. But as he is head of the Covenant, (...) looks at
his as Members called by him, and to be (...) ted to him: Therefore in that
relation he laid (...) his life and blood for them. 3. By this means we may
perceive a more easy passage
Hence men are made justly faulty and guilty (...) their own death in not
believing nor relying upon Mediator thus graciously offered in the second (...)
nant, through their own corruption and hardness (...) heart neglecting their
Savior: Though it be as impossible to believe as to fulfill the Law, yet because
(...) comes through their own original sin, whereby (...) refuse belief in the
one as obedience to the other, they are punished for both.

Hence also that cavil is crossed whereby they (...) load our Doctrine of
special Redemption with (...); In vain it is (say they) to persuade a Reprobate
to believe, for if he could attain it, he is (...) come within the compass of a
person rightly qualified for Redemption, for he is not elected: Now Election is
the Lords work only, and not man's, no not in innocence, and therefore in vain
to labor for it, when (...) was and is impossible to attain it. Whereas this
gloss is hence plainly confuted; For if Christ died for all that shall believe in
him, whosoever shall or will believe in him, shall not spend his labor in vain:
If he say, he cannot believe: Answ. The fault is his own, let him but lie under
the stroke of the (...) (...) resistance, and he shall receive it.

FOR HIS: The meaning of that Particle is (...)

1. In their room, in their stead, 2 Samuel 18. last, Would God I had died for
thee: Romans 5. 7, 8. Christ (...) for us: we being sinners should have died and
suffered our selves; but Christ did this for us, he died in our room. 2. For
their good: He died for us to redeem and save us, to make us partakers of that
his obedience and suffering for our good and benefit: Coloss. 1. 24. I rejoice
in my sufferings for you (says Paul) he suffered for their good, comfort, and
encouragement: And thus Christ laid down his life for his sheep, Joh. 10. 11.
that they might have life and salvation thereby. It Is true in both, the second
issues from the first, the first is the ground of the second.
The Reasons of the Doctrine come now to be scanned.
Christ died and merited either for his, and the faithful Reas. 1.
only; or for all indifferently. If for all; then (...) shed his blood,
suffered the pains of the first and the second death, and performed whatever
was due unto Divine Justice in the behalf of the unfaithful; and such which are
and shall be damned, and that in their stead as their surety; for that is the
meaning of those phrases, He laid down his life for his sheep, Joh. 10. 11. He
gave himself for his Church, Ephesians. 5. 25. that is, he suffered and performed all
in their room as their surety, Heb. 7. 22. And that he must be their surety,
and in their stead perform all, may appear diverse ways.

1 For as the first Adam was a common person and head of the first Covenant,
and did covenant with God for himself and his, so that what he performed or
failed in, they were all subject unto the same condition, and should in the
same manner partake thereof: So the Lord Christ the second Adam, he is the head
of the second Covenant of Grace, and therefore engaged himself unto God the
Father, as a common pledge for himself and his posterity that shall come of
(...). 2 What the Lord Christ (...) and performed that the Law exacted, and the
Father required of him even when he endured the direful indignation of God the
Father, and bore the sierceness of his fury seizing upon him: But the Father
could neither in Equity exact these punishments, or in Justice (...) them upon
him for any desert of his own, for any thing he had that was evil, or any thing
he did commit which (...) contrary to his righteous Will, and holy Rule of the
Law: Being wholly (...) from all sin, he should be freed from all plagues and
death, which is the (...) of sin: where there is no (...), no sorrow, no (...)
can be: His punishments which he endured, and God exacted (for there was
nothing done, but according Act. 4. 28.
to his counsel) were for sin, therefore for (...) sins imputed to him,
therefore he was surety in (...) room, therefore if he suffereed for all, he
had the (...) of all imputed, and so was surety in the place or all. 3 Lastly,
The necessity of this consequence (...) appears: For whom the Lord Christ is
not (...) for them there is no salvation to be expected: for (...) it be
conceived that our Savior should willingly endure Joh. 10 18.
such torments, though never required of God (which is false, for he had a
command to lay down his life) or, that he should have done it merely of his own
pleasure, not undertaking for any, not tendering of it in any man's name or
stead; he could require nothing at the hands of God the Father, and God the
Father might in Justice deny him or any other any recompense; For if a man will
freely give so much money out of his own liberal (...), though it countervail a
debt due unto me, yet being tendered in no man's name, I am not bound to cancel
any man's bond, or remit his debt: the Answer is, It was not paid for (...).
It Is then clear, if Christ died for all the wicked, (...) he suffered and died
as a Surety in their room and (...).
(...) that he did not: For if he paid all as their (...), then God in Justice
cannot exact the payment (...) r hands, nor inflict the plagues upon their
(...). require two payments for one debt; to punish the (...) and Surety for
the same offense, that Justice Christ should be satisfied in the behalf of all
(this (...) beloved Son in whom I am (...)) and Matt. 3. 17.
(...) that satisfaction should again be required, Justice (...), yea, common
sense abhors. The damned and (...) are now paying the debt in Hell, (...) God
in Justice requires it, therefore his Justice (...) not satisfied, therefore
Christ did not satisfy for (...).

(...) God the Father intended the benefit and (...) Reas. 2.
of all by the death and bloodshed of Christ, and (...) also undertook and
discharged it for that end, (...) that seriously and thoroughly, then the Lord
Jesus (...) use those means which might be most useful and (...) to attain it;
then he would pray for them (...) his sufferings which he did intend for their
good, (...) be made available thereunto, for that is an (...) and ever speeding
means. But Christ professes (...), nor would not pray for the world, John, 17.
9. (...) for them, I pray not for the world; and the (...) proves it, for what
Christ prays for, that he (...), John, 11. 22. 42. I know that thou hear me
(...): but this is not obtained, therefore was (...) desired, therefore not
intended by Christ, (...) for this end our Savior did not lay down his life,
undertake his sufferings: For what he suffered, that he intended, his own end
was most serious in own intention; that he intended, he desired; that he (...),
he obtained: that he obtained not, he desired not, and that he intended not,
therefore for that (...) he did not suffer.

If it be said, He did pray for those that (...) Object.
him, and yet many of those were not saved, nor (...) prayers heard, Luke, 23.
34. Father, forgive (...) they know not what they do.

His Crucifiers were of two sorts: 1 (...) Answ.
Scribes and Pharisees; most of these knew what (...) did, for they sinned the
fin against the Holy (...) Mat. 12. 24. to 33. 2 Other poor ignorant (...) who
were swayed by the sinful example of (...) Governors, and like the blind
followed the blind (...) they fell into the ditch, shed that blood that (...)
them; they were the cause of his death, that was (...) means to bring them to
life and happiness, 1 Cor. (...) 8. Had they known it, they would not have
(...) the Lord of Glory. Now many of those shared in (...) blessing of our
Saviors prayer, Acts, 2. 37. (...) assuredly that you have crucified the Lord
of (...) they heard, and were pricked in their hearts, (...) the word, and the
remission of their sins, (...) were added to the Church. They pierced the (...)
of Christ to take away his blood, Christ pierced (...) hearts to take away
their sins; Christ's prayers (...) much more than Peter's preaching; they (...)
his destruction and death, and he then wrought (...) salvation: He sent his
prayers to Heaven, (...) Luke 23. 34.
forgive them, the Lord sent down his grace, and (...) obtained the remission
of Their sins.

If Christ died, and by his death merited (...) Reas. 3.
for all, why then are not all saved? for the (...) God is satisfied, that will
not hinder their (...) sin and Satan are subdued and vanquished by his (...)
and they cannot hinder it, Heb. 2. 15. By (...) destroyed him that had the
power of death, that (...) the Devil, and delivered them who through the (...)
(...) death were all their lives long subject unto (...). Those for whom Christ
died, their salvation (...) be frustrate, nor they deprived of it; God will
(...), sin and Satan cannot hinder it: but all are not (...), therefore for all
salvation is not merited by the (...) of Christ.

The old shift and pretended plea of the Papists and Object.
(...) to put by the dint of this Argument is this; (...) is (say they) a broad
and wide difference to be (...) between the merits of Christ, and the
application (...), the death of Christ is sufficient, quoad (...), non quoad
applicationem; it is available (...) obtain salvation for all men, but that the
good and (...) which is obtained is not applied, the (...) of that is in men's
unbeleef: As in a Medicine (...) and prepared and appointed to cure, but some
(...) not take it: As a ransom to deliver, but some will (...) receive it.

The Reply is this: That this pretense is in truth a Answ.
(...) of words, but reaches not the main strength (...) force of the Argument
alleged, which stands still (...), as it shall thus appear: for I demand, If
He saves his people from Matt. 1. 21.
(...) sins; Then from all sin original actual, then from infidelity, they are
saved from that, and (...) Gal. 1. 4.
that cannot hinder.

Besides, if Christ be no otherwise a Savior than only

So that the Seed of the Woman did not break the Serpents head, Genesis 3. 15. It
was not certain that (...) Savior should see his Seed, Isa. 53. 10. Our Savior
Christ was mistaken, when he said, I have other (...) Joh 10 16.
those also I must bring, they shall (...) my voice: they might reply, But we
may choose, and Christ must (...) us leave.

It hence follows, That our Savior Christ is not so Adam to destroy; Its not in
the Will of Adams Posterity to stop the guilt and filth of his (...) to seiz
upon them to their condemnation, but the first Adam will undoubtedly pollute
and condemn all those that he Covenanted for; and (...) the second Adam cannot
save and sanctify all that he (...) for, contrary to the triumph of the
Apostle, Romans 5. 15. If through the offense of one, many be dead: much more the
grace of God, and the gift by grace, which is by one man Jesus Christ, has
abounded unto many.

It hence follows, Christ has purchased a right to all thereof undoubtedly to
be bestowed, contrary (...) Job. 17. 19. For their sakes I sanctify my self
that (...) also may be sanctified, Ephesians. 1. 3.

Lastly, How deeply injurious and dishonorable is Cor. 15. 56. from that
Commission which Divine Justice puts into its (...)?

If Christ Merited and Purchased Redemption for Reas. 4
All, then he Wills and intends seriously that all should (...) saved, then he
will afford the means to attain it, for (...) end and the means (the end in
intention, and the (...) in execution) go both together, and none in (...)
sever them, much less will the Lord, who is (...) Author of all wisdom, Romans
10. 17. Faith comes (...) Hearing, and Hearing by the Word of God.

But Sense and Experience of all men of all ages makes it beyond question, That
God gives not the means of Salvation to All, Psalm. 147. 19. He has given his
word unto Israel, he has not dealt so with (...) Nation: Paul makes it the
privilege of (...) Jew, to them was committed the Oracles of God, Romans 3. 2.
They alone Called, they alone in (...), they alone honored with all the
Privileges of all Acts 17. 30.
Gods Ordinances. Yea, the Lord neglected the (...) condition of the Gentiles
in former ages, he Ephesians. 2. 12.
(...) not after them, cared not for them, nay, they (...) without God, without
Christ, without Hope, a far off, not within the ken and call of Salvation.
(...) such is the condition of many Nations of the (...) at this day, who have
not so much as any means of (...) granted unto them, nor any sound of the
Gospel of Christ amongst them: Now, do any in (...) prepare Physic for the
good of another, and yet (...) Patient never have it, never hear of it?

The Answer which is here made by Papists and (...) Object.
is this, That though God does not afford equal external means of Calling, yet
he calls all, (...) therefore they make a double kind of Calling. 1 (...)
diately by the Law. 2 Immediately by the (...) Not that the Law can cause Faith
in Christ (...) but only in way of preparation by these degrees, (...) Lord
has left the work of the Law and the (...) of his Image in the nature of man,
and withal has (...) forded him so much, and so many helps out of (...)
creatures to manifest his goodness and majesty to (...) that if he use this
stock well, he out of his bounty (...) afford him the Gospel and other saving
means to (...) him to Faith and so to Happiness, and to this (...) that place
is usually alleged, Romans 1. 19, 20. (...) which may be known of God is
manifest in them, (...) If they use this light of Nature well, God will (...)
them the light of Grace; when they abuse that (...) have, its just with God to
withold what they (...) and to take away that he gave.

To this I Reply: The Ground of the (...) Answ.
1 False. 2 Vain.

False, Because it crosses that Liberty which (...) (Deuteronomy. 7. Deuteronomy. 9. 5. 6.
The Lord set his love upon thee, (...) (...) (...), for thou art a stiff necked
(...) Ephesians. 2. (...)
he set up a partition wall between them and (...) merely out of his own good
pleasure: whereas (...) to this Opinion had the Gentiles used their (...) well,
they might have pulled down the partition (...).

2 Its contrary to that experience we have of Gods (...) in the sending of the
means that many times (...) who abuse them most they enjoy them, those who
(...) have used them (...) they want them, Matt. 1. 21. (...) to thee Corazin,
Woe to thee (...), (...) the great works been done in Sodom and (...) which have
been done in thee, they would (...) repented in sackcloth and ashes.

As its a false, so its a vain Conceit: Because no man (Romans 1. 21.) so as to
(...) God as God, but no natural man did, or ever will (...) this.

Instruction. From the Doctrine delivered we may (...) to Answer some Cases of
Conscience which (...) Use 1.
our Spiritual Estates, and Comforts.

First Case of Conscience.
Whether a man can challenge any interest in any Quest.
Spiritual Good in Christ, or can bring in any proof (...) himself of any
Spiritual Good received or (...) to him from Christ before he believe?

By no means: It is a conceit cross to the Covenant Answ.
of God, the Scriptures of Truth, the grace of God in Christ, and unto the
(...) of that plentiful and great Redemption which our Savior Christ has
wrought for his. For God never decreed any good, (...) ver intended any good
but for believing Sinners, (...) suffered and performed all that he did only
for (...) sinners as be the seed of the Covenant, and shall be (...) gotren of
him by spiritual regeneration, 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4 1 Pet. 1. 3.
He has begotten us again to a lively hope, to an (...) heritance immortal
that fades not away, and (...) serves us through faith unto salvation: The
(...) must be begotten and born, before he can be Heir (...) the (...) (...):
So here.

The Doctrine formerly delivered does (...) dash this Imagination and (...): If
Christ (...) sed all for Believers as (...), then they must be such (...) fore
they can challenge and take this Purchase as (...) own, it is the Condition
that Christ requires (...) which he communicates all that saving and (...)
good. Take these Arguments for the further (...) of this Truth.

The First is taken from 1 John 5. 12. He that (...) Argu. 1.
the Son has life, in him are hid all the treasures (...) Wisdom and Knowledge,
yea of Grace and (...) and therefore it is said, (...) Father (...) given (...)
us eternal life, and that life is in his Son, v. 11. (...) is the Fountain of
all blessings that has them, the (...) that communicates them; The Spirit
(...) all of God to the Saints, but the Spirit takes all (...) the Son before
he so does, Joh. 16. 14, 15. He is (...) accomplishment of all promises in him,
they are (...) and Amen: 2 Cor. 1. 20. All Promises, all (...), all Life is in
Christ: Therefore He must be had (...) they can be enjoyed. But there is no
enjoying of (...) but by Faith, 1 John 12. To as many as (...) (...) he gave
power to be the Sons of God, to as many as (...) on his name: We have him not
before we (...) him, we receive him not before we believe in (...) upon this
condition God gives his Son, John 3. 16. God so loved the World that he gave
his only begotten Son, that as many as believed in him should not perish but
have everlasting life: God gives him to none but such as believe, God gives
Salvation by him to none but by this means: Joh. 17. 3. This is eternal life to
know thee the only true God and Jesus Christ whom thou bast sent: This is the
knowledge of Faith, and it is said to be life, because it is the only means to
bring and derive life from God in Christ to us: So that

They who alone have Christ, they only have life.

But Believers only have Christ.

Therefore they only have title unto life.

Those only have title to Life and Salvation who are Argu. 2.
under the compass of the Covenant of Grace: For there are but Two Covenants
under which all men are, (...) the Covenant of Works, or the Covenant of Grace:
Romans 6. 14. Sin shall not have dominion over you, because ye are not under the
law, but under grace; Gal. 3. 17. the law which was 430 years after, cannot
make the Covenant of God in Christ of none effect.

The Covenant of Works was, Do and live: The Covenant of Grace, Believe and
live. Adam had the stock in his own hand, and might of himself by Grace
received, have wrought out his own Salvation: All the fallen Sons of Adam must
receive it from (...), because they have it not of themselves.

But (I assume) no man can be under the Covenant of Grace that is not under the
Condition of Faith, for (...) is that only which brings him into it, and
estates him (...) it; and therefore Gal. 3. 9, 20. this is made the proper
difference and indeed the full description of (...) in these estates, they
which be of Faith are (...) with faithful Abraham: They which are in (...)
Covenant of Grace are said to be such as are of (...) of the stock and lineage
and generation of Faith, (...) (...) wrought by the Spirit and Word the Soul
(...) (...) unto Christ thereby, and so has its (...) birch and Being by
Faith, Faith giving subsistence (...) him as he is a Christian: But verse. 10.
They that (...) of the Works of the law (that is, those that are (...) the
power of the breach of it by Adam, they) are (...) the Curse, they act by the
power of the breach (...) the Covenant of Works, and therefore are under (...)
just judgments of God denounced against such as (...) and die therein. Hence
then I Reason,

They who are not under the Condition of (...) Covenant of Grace, they cannot
be assured groundedly of their good estate.

But they who are not Believers are not under (...) Compass and Condition of
the (...) of Grace.

And therefore they cannot be assured of (...) good estates.

They who are really and in truth in the state (...) Argu. 3.
Condemnation, they cannot have any grounded evidence of their Salvation and
Comfort therefrom: because these two are opposite one to another professedly
contrary one against the other, and therefore can (...) more possibly agree
together, then to be darkness (...) light, to be in Hell and Heaven together.
But he (...) is without the grace of Faith, he is Condemned already: he is now
under the Sentence and Doom (...) utter Condemnation, (...). 3. 18. He is cast
in all (...) Courts in Heaven and Earth, the Law condemns (...) because he does
not Do it, the Gospel condemns (...) because he does not Believe it, he cannot
satisfy (...) (...), nor yet comes up to the Condition of the (...): Therefore
Faith is said to be counted for (...), Romans 4. 9. and Romans 3. 30. It is one God
(...) justifies the Circumcision by Faith, and the (...) through Faith: It is
the common way, (...) indeed the only way whereby Justification is (...) to all
the Sons of men who shall ever be made (...) thereof: This is the (...)-going
link of Paul's (...), Romans 8. 30. Whom he called, them he justisied, (...) whom
he justified them he glorified: Its as (...) to be Justified before we be
Called, as it is for (...) man to be (...) before he be Justified: and this
(...) Calling out of World Sin and Self unto God in Christ, undoubtedly
includes the Work of (...) in it, and ever leaves spiritual and saving (...)
and qualifications upon the Soul. Hence (...)

He that is really under the state of Condemnation, cannot challenge any
interest in eternal life, or have any evidence that his estate is good.

But he that Believes not is Condemned already; Called he is not, Justified he
cannot be in this Condition.

Therefore he can Challenge no Interest in, nor has any grounded Assurance of
Eternal Life.

A Second Case of Conscience.
Whether the Spirit of God does not, or may not by Quest. 2.
a special and immediate revelation, witness some spiritual good (as pardon of
Sin, Adoption, Justisication) to a man before he does Believe? Its true, a man
himself cannot by discourse make it good to himself, or to another, unless he
have Faith: But may not the Spirit of God witness to him without and before
Faith?

The Answer is Negative: The Reasons (...) Answ.
Two.

That which is a Falsehood, and an Error, (...) Argu. 1.
the Covenant of Grace, the Spirit of God never (...) nor will, nor can
testify that: For he is the Spirit truth, he cannot be deceived himself, he
will not (...) ceive us, he is the Spirit of God he cannot lie (1 (...) he
cannot tell it, much less give approbation or (...) (...) thereunto. But the
former (...) made appear undeniable, That it is a Falsehood and an (...) to say
any man living has right to or can challenge (...) spiritual good in Christ
before he does Believe: (...) is no such thing to be found in the Word of (...)
Therefore the Spirit will never testify that.

To affirm that the Spirit should say to any (...) that he is in a state of
Grace, when he is in a state (...) Sin, that he is justified when he is
Condemned, (...) little less than Blasphemy.

If the Spirit does reveal a man's good Estate to (...) Argu. 2.
it is for this purpose that he may know it, and he (...) enable him to receive
that intimation that he may discern it; else the one of these Two will follow,
(...) Spirit should reveal this for no end, if no good (...) got by it; or else
not attain his end if the party (...) not be able to understand what it does
reveal; If (...) former, he should not be a wise Worker; If the (...) he was
not a powerful Worker: But know and understand this Testimony the Soul cannot,
by any power either of Nature, or Corruption, 1 Cor. 2. 14 The natural man
receives not the things of the spirit of God, neither can he know them because
they (...) spiritually discerned: Nay, Romans 8. 7. The (...) of the flesh is not
subject unto the law, therefore (...) unto the Lord, nor his Spirit.

If it be beyond Nature or Corruption, then it (...) be Grace that must help a
man to discern it, and (...) (...) must be a qualification, and the first (...)
of this k nd of saving knowledge must be an (...) unto Faith, if not Faith it
self. Fides est ex (...) notitia. This is eternal life to know thee the (...)
true God, Joh. 17. 3.

Two Inferences from the former Cases of Conscience, thus Resolved.
These Two Cases being thus cleared, (1 That an (...) has no right to any
spiritual Good in Infer: 1.
(...): And, 2 That the spirit of God does never (...) known this to such a
Soul) Hence its clear: (...) manner and order that men have devised to make own
the mind of God to a man, and to give comfort the Soul in distress, being cross
to these truths now (...), is an Erroneous and False way: As for (...), You
being in distress about your Sins, and (...) under the Spirit of Bondage, you
must first lay (...) in the bottom, lay him in the foundation, Christ (...)
first be yours, and so united to you, and your (...) forgiven by him, before
you have any Faith or (...) qualification wrought in you; This Opinion (...)
says, That Christ may be united to the Soul, and (...) be Justified and
Adopted before he have any (...); it is a dangerous Opinion, a desperate (...);
that I may say no worse of it. Mark what (...), here is the plot of all
profaneness, the ground of looseness and famalism: A man may have Christ (...) be
Justified and Adopted while he is without (...), and therefore while he is
under the power of Sins and the Spirit of God may witness this; And (...)
though a man fall into any Sin, or live in any sin (...) it be, he may have
recourse to this (...), this witness of the Spirit, and that's enough; If a man
say, Prove it: Are you in a state of Grace? Is Christ yours? Prove it then.
Prove it? (say they) that I cannot do, but the Spirit witnesses this to me: Ay,
but prove this witness of the Spirit, that it is from God according to his
Word: They will be forced to confess, I cannot prove it neither to my self, nor
to another, only thus, I must believe it, and you must believe me: I was in
trouble and distress about my Sins, and then there was a voice from Heaven, the
spirit did witness to me, That Christ was mine, and my Sins were pardoned, etc.
This is a Spirit of Delusion, the Devil is there; Whatever the Spirit of God
says, it is that which the Scriptures say: Therefore if you have a testimony
which is not to be found in the Scripture, nor can be proved and made good by
the Scripture, it is the testimony of the Devil, not (...) the Spirit of God:
for the Spirit of God, and the Word of God, ever go together; therefore if you
say you Have a witness of the Spirit, and the Word say, No: I Will say, It is a
Delusion. Infer: 2.


Secondly; Hence it follows also: There are (...) Promises wherein any saving
good is Revealed or Evidenced to the Soul, but either they are such (...) God
promises to work the Condition, or suppose the Condition already wrought:
either (...) mentioning a qualification, or necessarily implying (...)
including the same, out of other places to be collected where the same is
professedly handled.

All spiritual good (Redemption, Justification, Salvation) purchased by Christ,
were intended only for them that do believe; therefore there is no Promise in
the Scripture, but does evidence this.

Sometimes you have the Covenant laid down in (...) lump (as it were) in a
brief Expression, as in a (...) sum comprehending all the whole frame, and then
(...) several actions in their distinct order and manner (...) Gods working are
to be attended and conceived, as though they had been more fully, and in the
several branches set forth unto us: Take a taste of some few, Genesis 3. 5. The
seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head: The head of Satan, implys
Three things, Acts 26. 18.
Policy, Power, and Poison: To break this head is to crush and confound all
these: The Policy and and Power of Satan is overthrown in the work of vocation,
when the Soul is turned from darkness to light, from the power of Satan to God:
the venom and poison of Satan is taken away; partly in the (...) and punishment
which is done away in Justification, partly in the stain and pollution of sin,
which is removed in Sanctification; All these Christ does in (...) hearts of
all his, and some of these all the Saints of God must have evidence of before
they can gain evidence that they are within the compass of this Covenant. Thus
the Apostle John disputes, 1 John 3. 3. to 5. Every one that has this hope
purifieth himself as Christ (...) pure: Why? For sin is the transgression of
the law, and Christ was manifested to take away our sins: therefore (verse. 6.)
whosoever abides in him sins not: Christ came to take away sin, and
therefore he that abides in Christ cannot abide in sin; and verse. 8. The Son
of God was manifested to destroy the works of the Devil.

So again, Jerem. 31. 33. I will be their God, and they shall be my people:
Zach. 13. last, I will say it is my people, and they shall say thou art the
Lord our God: Here again is the sum of the Covenant comprised, and all the
particulars with the manner of the work included and presupposed, as the
Apostle once for all expounds these and the like passages, 2 Cor. 6. 16. I will
be their God and they shall be my people, wherefore come out from among (...),
and be ye separate and touch no unclean thing, and I will receive you, and will
be a father to you, and ye (...) be my sons and daughters says the Lord (...).
If they touch no unclean thing, but be separate (...) Sin, Self, and the
Creature, and so come out of (...) these in preparation, and come to him in
effectual vocation, then he will be a father to them in his Christ, and make
them his Children in Adoption, and then he will write his laws in their hearts,
and renew them to that Holiness which in Adam they lost, and so enable them to
walk in his ways. And therefore when the Lord promises by the (...) Isa. 43.
25 I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for my own names sake, and will
not remember (...) sins: that is, I do justify thee freely when I have made
thee to believe by my free grace; For it cannot be conceived that the Lord
would pass the Sentence of Absolution upon her while she remained in the (...)
of Unbelief: For then that of the Apostle should fail, Its one God that
justifies the Jews by Faith, and the Gentiles through Faith, Romans 3. 30.
Therefore look the 20 and 21 verse. of this Chapt. (for we must not have one
place justle against another) and there you shall (...) it is said, I will do
this and that for my People, my Chosen, which are Believers, and of them and
unto them it is said, verse. 25. I will blot out thy sins for my own sake: The
resolving of these Cases, and information of these Doubts, infers undeniably
thus much, That there is no Absolute Promise that either gives or maintains
assurance of our good estate, but such only wherein God engages (...) to work
the Condition, or else does of necessity imply it wrought.

It will be said, That the Covenant of Grace is free, Object.
and issues out of the free Mercy of God in Christ, and therefore the Lord has
not in it any respect, to any thing we have or do.

Its all confessed, and yet there is no prejudice at Answ.
(...) accrews to the Cause in hand.

Free Grace is the Fountain of all: It makes the Ephesians. 2. 8. By Grace (...) ye
saved, through Faith.

And though God both require and work the (...) Faith is the Gift of God) Yet
it not for our Faith, or for the worth of any Grace (...) is in us, that we
have life and salvation but by (...), and those, as means and ways by Grace
(...) and provided to give life. (...) is of (...) Grace, does it not therefore
require (...) in (...) Party that is Justified, nor yet suppose him to be
(...)? The Apostle openly contradicts such a (...), Romans 8. 30. Whom he called,
them he justified: (...) is also of Free Grace, and yet does it (...) suppose
Sanctification and Holiness in the Party (...) must possess it? Without
Holiness no man shall (...) the Lord, Heb. 12. 14. As my Glorification does
(...) hinder the freedom of my Justification because it (...) before it, so my
Justification does not hinder the (...) of my Vocation because Vocation goes
(...) it, but only shows the order and manner of Gods (...).

Third Case of Conscience. Quest.

Though a man can have no Right to any Spiritual without any respect to (...),
or any gracious Qualification existent in the (...)?

I Answer: So marvelous, secret, and unsearchable Answ
are the Dispensations of the Spirit unto the Soul (...) as the wind blows
where it (...), thou hear (...) John, 3. 8.
sound of it, thou know not whence it comes (...) whither it goes: So it is
here; The hidden (...) ousness of the manner of the Spirits work in the (...)
of it, is so hard to discern, that to make any approach so as to discover the
way of God, and to undermine an Error entrenching thereabout, by (...) of
Reason, is more than ordinarily (...) and therefore for our better proceeding
in Answer (...) this Question, I shall Endeavor to do these (...) Things.

1 State the Question, and open it in the (...) thereof. 2 Give in such
Arguments as we conceive (...) plainest Evidence with them to settle (...)
Truth. 3 Answer some such Objections as are of greatest weight.
For the right (...) of the Question, in (...)

There are Three Particulars to be Opened for the right understanding of this
Conclusion.

First, What is meant by Evidence? Answer. (...)

First, That God by his Spirit manifests his (...) and our Good, and that we
either do, or may (...) it for our Comfort; For its the aim of the (...) to
understand this Evidence with Application (...) the truth to our own particular
estate. For we (...) not now what the Word is in it self, or what (...) Spirit
does in the ordinary dispensation thereof, (...) that is light in it self, and
makes all things (...) indifferently at all times, Ephesians. 5. 13. but here we
(...) this Discovery and Manifestation of the Mind (...) God as it comes home
to our Particular that (...) (...) and hearts may be settled: As Luke 24. 32.
He opened the Scriptures, verse. 45. He opened their (...) that they might
understand the (...): and so the truth was more clear and their sight (...)
clear, 1 Cor. 2. 12. He has given us his spirit (...) we may know the things
that are freely given to (...) of God: 1 John 5. 20. He has given us an (...),
that we may know that we know him.

Secondly, This right discerning on our part is not (...) a certain knowledge,
or science of that good (...) is thus witnessed to us, but an assurance of
Faith, whereby the heart embraces it as true to it, (...) good for it: The one
of these is a help to the (...), sanctisied reason, or reason exercised about
(...) truths, is an instrument appointed by God in the and of his Spirit, to
beget this act of Faith; for (...) exercised about the Word and Work of the
(...), it brings in the light of the truth as a mighty (...) with more strength
and plainness to the heart, (...) draws out this act of divine Faith, whereby
it (...) this as a truth of God. For look what the (...) of another man may do
in the use of the Word (...) Ordinance, that my Reason used in such a manner
(...) to God may do. But another man by the (...) of Reason or strength of
Argument out of the (...) may convince my Conscience, nay settle and (...) my
heart, in assurance of a truth which formerly I saw not, and therefore it is
said, Acts 14. 22. they confirmed the souls of the Disciples, exhorting them,
etc.

True it is the Grace and Habit of Faith is presumed, and was wrought before by
the (...) power of the Spirit which raised Christ from the dead; (...) being
wrought, the truths of God under the exercise of (...) Reason, will not only
settle our judgment in knowing, but our assurance of Faith in (...) firmly
believing and embracing; for first truths (...) to the understanding to be
judged, before they be (...) up and presented to the heart to be believed Psalm.
9. 10. They that know thy name will trust in (...) This is eternal life to know
thee, Joh. 17. 3. (...) 2 Pet. 1. 3. Through the knowledge of our Lord (...)
Savior: For a blind hood-winkt Faith is the (...) of Apostates and Papists, of
Deceivers and (...) but not the Faith of Gods Elect.

Secondly, This Evidence, is laid out according (...) Its (...) aright to what
spiritual benefit we shall have, Or, (...) the possession or partaking of what
we do enjoy (...) Christ, and these are rather some spiritual privilege or
blessings received and manifested by our (...) tions, than the Qualifications
themselves, as the (...) terms of the Question do undeniably determine.

Hence its plain (according to the Opinion of (...) that hold the (...) of the
Question (...) ed) It is not touching the (...) of Faith in (...) Soul, because
this Evidence in the Question, (...) Faith wrought; Again, its not touching any
(...) (...) on or Qualification of Grace to be wrought in (...) Soul, For I
take (...) to be an everlasting truth.

The (...) never does give, nor can there be any vidence that God will work the
first Condition Grace, or the first Grace in the Soul before it be (...), for
as we heard Evidence carries Two things (...) it, 1 God reveals his Will to, or
work upon the (...). 2 There is both Science issuing from that (...) wisdom
that has been set up in the mind, and (...) of Faith, which embraces that
truth and (...) (...) firmly, being so clearly and firmly assented (...): Hence
it follows necessarily, and (...),

That which presupposes the first Grace wrought (...) the Soul, and is an
effect of that, that cannot be (...) before the first Grace be wrought; but
Evidence (...) presupposes spiritual science and assurance (...) Faith;
therefore it cannot be before the first Grace, (...) before Faith be wrought
(...) the Soul: Hence that (...) the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2. last. Who knows the
mind (...) the Lord, but we have the mind of Christ, because (...) have the
Spirit of Christ, and that cannot be had without Faith, Gal. 3. 14. That we may
receive the Promise of the spirit through Faith.

Those Promises then, which imply the working of (...) Condition of the
Covenant, or the first Grace, do (...) Three things: 1 What God alone can do as
(...) to his peculiar Prerogative. 2 What (...) will do for his; that is, Such
as shall come of his Son Christ the second Adam, 3 What the means (...) manner
is by which he will do it. As,

The seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents Genesis 1
(...): I will take away the heart of stone, and give (...) an heart of flesh,
etc. That is, I alone can do Ezekiel. 3 2
(...), and I will do it for those that are the Seed of the Covenant (for still
such Promises have an eye to the Covenant of the Church and the Faithful (...)
it, as, (...) will Circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, Deuteronomy. (...)
6.
etc. And by the manifestation of the Fullness and Freeness of this Mercy of
mine I will work it. There is an irresistible light which the Lord lets into
(...) mind at the first call, which makes way for Faith and is a direct act of
Knowledge which turns the (...) of the Soul to look to that fullness of power
and (...) of mercy, by which the heart is drawn to (...) but the reflect act of
evidence by which we are assured of what God has done to us and for us, (...)
whereby we see that we do see, is after this, and implies the thing done before
we see it.

The issue is, The object of this Evidence (we now speak of) is not gracious
Qualifications wrought (...) to be wrought, but our right to or possession of
(...) Privileges, as thou art my Son, thy (...) (...) accepted, thy sins are
pardoned. But how (...) should be brought to these, or have thy heart framed
to receive these, that is not attended at all; the spiritual Privileges which
we have or hope (...), mainly attended in this work of Evidence, are Pardon and
Forgiveness in our Justification, our Adoption, and Acceptance to be Sons, and
the Reconciliation of our Persons to the Lord, and our happiness (...): These
are the spiritual Benefits which are here considered, and about which the (...)
is meant.

The Third term to be opeend in the Question is, Immediate Evidence without
respect to Faith or any saving Qualification] Its called, Immediate, in this
Dispute, not because it is without the word or not by means of the Word, for to
deny that would be too loathsome (...), but immediate in respect of (...)
condition going before out of which it might (...) For however the Question
propounded, grants (...) Faith and Grace is there, yet the Evidence must be had
without eying or attending any thing of a Qualification; I (...) a double
Pretense which (...) this kind of Curiosity.

First a fear least they should prejudice the freeness

1 A Conceit directly and expressly contrary to (...) very letter of the Text
and intendment of the (...), Romans 4. 16. Therefore it is of Faith, that it
might Romans 4. 16.
by Grace: and if the being of Faith in the relying (...) Christ in the act of
it do not hinder free Grace, (...) less will the seeing of it. 2 Besides if a
(...) attended would (...) free Grace, then the Covenant of the Gospel (...)
not attend, and by name expressly require (...), or else it should not be a
Covenant of (...). 3 Its Free Grace, that makes and works the (...), and when
its wrought there is nothing given (...) it, or the Party who believes, for his
Faith, but (...) its an Empty hand to take all from Christ for (...) both the
Party and it self in its imperfections (...) pardoned.
A Second Pretense is, That I cannot know (...)

1 A man may be in a good estate in Nature before (...). 2 A man may know that
he is so, without the (...) or seeing of Faith or Grace.
The Revelation comes and says, Thou art a Son (...) God, thy sins are
pardoned; and if you once get (...) a Revelation, though your Faith and Grace
be (...) you may repair hither, this will serve; before you do know this, you
can never know the (...) of your Grace and Faith. And in truth, I suspect here
is the Mystery of this Opinion, the very Hinge upon which all the rest turn.
And therefore though in words they will say, This Evidence cannot be before
Faith; that is, In time, yet in Nature it may be; though this Evidence and
Faith are coexisting, and coappearing together in time, they exist and appear
together, yet this Evidence may be before Faith in Nature; An Opinion which is
desperately dangerous. For,

That which contradicts the Gospel is false: (...) to say a man may be in a
good estate before Faith, contradicts the Gospel. He upon whom the wrath (...)
God (...), he is not in a good estate: but he that believes not, the wrath of
God remains upon him, Joh. 3. 36. He that is not within the state of the
Covenant of Grace, he cannot know himself in a good estate; but without Faith
no man is in the estate of the Covenant of Grace: For they only who are of
Faith, are within that Covenant, Gal. 3. 9.

As my Election is, so is the Evidence of my Consolation; Object.
but my Election is without any Eye to Works.

If (...) be the meaning, As my Election is of (...) (...).
(...), so also is my (...) and the Evidence thereof, of free Grace; it is
true. But if this be the meaning, (...) as Election depends upon no Means, nor
Works, no more does the Evidence of my Consolation, its very false: It amounts
to this, If the Decree of God be independent, then is the Execution; then which
nothing is more contrary to Scripture and common Experience: 1 Pet. 1. 9.
Receiving the End of your Faith, the salvation of your souls: Romans (...) 13.
Filled with joy and peace in Believing. In a word, We are Justified and Saved
freely; and yet both by Faith: and yet we are not Elected by Faith.

Gather up the meaning of the Question briefly.

1 (...) Evidence is meant, The Spirit witnessing, and I (...): This discerning
is by Science of Knowledge, and Assurance of Faith, the one helps the other. 2
It is concerning these Spiritual Privileges, Justification, Adoption,
Reconciliation, Glorification. It cannot be touching the working of Faith or
any Qualification to be wrought, because it is without respect to any
Qualification, and must in their apprehension Evidence none. Nay there can be
no Evidence (that is) neither science of spiritual Wisdom, or assurance of
Faith, that God will work the first Condition of Grace. Because they are
Effects of the first Grace and presuppose it. 3 Lastly, This Evidence is
immediate not in regard of the Word according to which it is dispensed; but in
regard of any Qualification which is neither expressed on Gods part, nor
attended on my part, though it may be there.
Now we see the plain meaning of the Question: I affirm it to be an Erroneous
and dangerous Assertion: and therefore do Oppose this against it. Viz.

The Spirit of God never gives such an immediate Evidence of Spiritual
Privileges without a respect to a Qualification.

The Arguments now follow.
The First is taken from the nature of this Work: Argu. 1.
his work of Evidencing is a work of Application, (...) to be referred, and
according to that to be (...), for the Privileges themselves Justification,
Adoption, etc. carry the marks of Distinction and (...) from the World, and do
appertain only to such as the Lord has taken for his own, Deuteronomy. (...) last,
Who is like unto thee O Israel, a people (...) by the Lord? And in this regard
they are called (...) peculiar, taken in from the Common of the (...) Acts 26.
18. He turns them from Satan to God, and then they receive forgiveness of sins
and (...) among them that are sanctified by Faith in him: When the Soul is
called, and turned to God, (...) there is an Application of all spiritual good.

Hence the Reason follows thus:

No work of Application is without respect to a Qualification; but Evidencing
is a work of Application: without an act of Receiving there is no Application,
for the applying of any thing to another, ever in common sense, implies some to
whom it must be applied, and who must receive it; But (...) (...) to a
Qualification there is no act of receiving (...) Privileges, therefore without
respect to a (...), there is no application of them: If the very act of
Receiving be performed by a Qualification, then without respect to this, there
is no Receiving: But the very act of Receiving is done by a Qualification, 1
Cor. 2. 14. The Natural man receives not the things of the spirit of God,
therefore there must be more than Nature. Joh. 1. 12. To. (...) many as
Received him he gave this Power and Privilege to be the Sons of God, even to
as many as believe on his name; Receiving and Believing are all one. Thus then,
Without a Qualification of Faith, there is no Receiving; and without Receiving
respected, there is no applying of any Privileges; (...) without applying, no
Evidencing; therefore (...) respect to a Qualification there is no Evidence
(...) by the Spirit, nor enjoyed by the Soul. Argu. 2.


If the Spirit of God give immediate Evidence of these Privileges without
respect to the Condition (...) Qualification, (...) it gives in Evidence (...)
the Word.

But the Spirit never Evidenceth without the Word (...). 14. 26. When the
Comforter is come he will teach (...) all things, and bring to your remembrance
(...) I have said unto you: but he will teach (...), nor evidence nothing else
but what Christ has (...) in his Word. If there be no Word but the Word (...)
a Conditional Promise by which the having of (...) Privileges of Justification
and Adoption is (...): Then the Spirit witnesses without a (...) if it
evidence without respect to a (...). But there is no Word, but that of a (...)
Promise (viz. wherein the Condition is either (...) or understood) wherein our
Justification (...) Adoption is Evidenced. Mark 16. 16. the (...) (...) the
Gospel is clear, He that believes shall be (...). As it is Romans 3. 30. God is
one and the same, (...) the manner of Justification is one and the same, (...)
never justifies any but by Faith; and (...) (...) certain there is no Promise
in the Scripture but (...) it does express or imply a Condition. Isa. 43.
(...). I will blot out thy sins sor my names sake; Here (...) no
Qualifications, you will say, whereas if you (...) but look into some Verses of
the Chapter going (...), as verse. 20. he speaks to his People, His (...), these
are said (...). 21. to be such as he had (...) for himself: and verse. 22. he
calls them Jacob (...) Israel; that is, The Israel of God (as the Apostle (...)
them, Gal. 6. 16.) true believers. Hos. 14. 4. I (...) love them freely;
therefore here is no (...) because none expressed? But mark the 1, 2, and (...)
verses, you shall find who those are that the Lord (...) freely, such as having
fallen by their iniquity, Return to the Lord, saying, Take away all iniquity,
(...) shall not save us, in thee the fatherless sind mercy: that is, Those that
have such Qualifications as these, they are the Persons whom the Lord (...)
freely. It is impossible it should be (...) Romans 4. 23. As Abraham was
justified so must we but he was justified by Faith, and therefore there (...)
no Promise revealing Justification or Adoption, but either it does expres or
imply this condition of (...).

When the Spirit does Evidence my Justification Argu. 3.
or Salvation out of the Word, it does it one or these Two ways; Either by the
Application of some general Promise in which each Particular, and so myself as
a particular am included; Or (...) there (...) some special Word appointed,
appropriated to me alone, and is spoken to none but me; as Isa. 45. (...). Thus
says the Lord to his anointed to Cyrus, etc. None was here intended but Cyrus.
This second, (...) a Familistical Dream, and forces men to Revelations without
the Word; because there is no such expression to be found in the Word, (...)
therefore sober-minded men who have their senses about them dare not entertain
it, perceiving indeed (as the (...) is) that such a Conceit is little better
than a Frenzy: The first way then of Evidencing must needs be taken. Whence I
Reason,

Whatever is testified to the Soul by way of Application of the General to the
Particular, or by way of Collection of the Particular from the General, that is
ever done with respect to a Condition. As it thus appears by Induction, the
Evidence must needs run in this manner. Either

All men are Justified, but thou art a man, therefore thou art justified. Or,

All Sinners are justified, but thou art a sinner, therefore thou art
justisied. Or,

All Self-denying believing sinners are justified, but thou art such a one,
therefore thou art justified. The Two First here are false; only this Third
(...) last is true, and that carries a Qualification (...) it. If a man fly to
Election, and say,

All the Elect are justified, that is false. Or thus, (...) the Elect shall be
called and justified, that is no (...) of Evidencing neither, for (as was
showed (...)) there can be no Evidence (i. e. Science and (...) of Faith) of
the working of the first (...) before it be wrought: therefore there is no
(...) way but the applying of a General, including a (...) to my self in
particular; as, All that (...) (as Abraham) are justified; but I am one (...)
them. This is good.

To make the Spirit testify a falsehood, and my Argu. 4.
(...) to receive it, is unlawful: to charge untruth (...) the Spirit is
blasphemous; to bring my self into (...) by-path, that is erroneous. But to
make the (...) testify that Pardon and Adoption belongs to any (...) falls
upon any subject, without respect to a (...), is to make the Spirit testify a
falsehood: (...) it is to make it testify cross to a rule of Truth which the
Spirit of God has given in the Word. For the Rule of Truth is plain, Romans 8.
30. Whom (...) called, them he justified; and them, he glorified. Therefore to
say the Spirit will witness to one (...) (...) not called, is to make him
witness against (...) Rule, Joh. 1. 12. To them that receive him, he gave (...)
to be the Sons of God: Its a staple Rule. Therefore no man is a Son before he
receive Christ, therefore to make the Spirit to witness to a man (...) (...) is
a Son of God when he has not received Christ, would make him speak Cross to
this Word of Truth.

Look how the Covenant of Grace testifies a man's (...).
good estate, and the interest he has to any spiritual good in Christ, so the
spirit of Grace does (...) it; fo the Spirit of Grace, and the Covenant of
(...) go hand in hand; and otherwise how could it (...) true, That the Gospel
should be sufficient to make (...) man perfect and complete in the spiritual
(...) of his Soul, as well as in those things, which (...) mainly and merely
Essential to eternal life, 2 (...) 3. 16. And here is the limits and bounds of
that comfort the Spirit is sent to bring, its confined (...) this compass, Joh.
14. 26. I will send the (...), and he shall bring all things to your
remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you: when he comes (...) a Comforter,
when that is the main scope of (...) Commission to make known all the grounds
of Comfort to the Saints, and to let in the good of them into their Souls when
he remembers them of all (...) and teaches all things appertaining thereunto,
(...) ads no more, but recals what Christ has said: Besides that testimony
which is beyond the Gospel should not be tried by the Gospel, for that which
(...) beyond the measure, cannot be measured by it: (...) Gospel is the Rule of
our Faith and of our Comfort, and if this testimony was beyond the reach of the
Gospel, it could never be judged by it: This would not only set open a Gap to
all Delusions, but break down the banks, that the sea of all sottish
Imaginations may break in upon the mind and apprehensions of a man, and carry
them away with mighty violence without control.

But the Covenant of Grace does (...) our interest in these Privileges, ever
with an eye and respect to some spiritual (...). It is the tenure of the Gospel
according to the very letter, and naked terms of it, Mark. 16. 16. Go preach
the Gospel, (...) that believes shall be saved, they, and they only, and none
but they, therefore it follows he that (...) not shall be (...): Jer. 31. 33.
This is the (...) that I will make with the house of Israel, I will (...) my
laws in their hearts, and in their inward (...) will I put them. Look to the
Covenant as made (...) Adam, Genesis 3. 15. as renewed with Abraham, He believed
and it was counted for righteousness, Genesis 15. 6. And so it is in the whole
frame of the (...), still the Covenant of Grace gives witness to (...) man's
good estate with respect to Faith, therefore (...) the Spirit of Grace does
testify also.

If God the Father intended these Privileges (...) Argu. 6.
to such under such a respect or Condition, Christ (...) all these benefits for
such alone, and the (...) applied them only unto such, then the (...)
witnesses the Possession of those spiritual (...) unto such only. Because the
witnessing of (...) Spirit is of equal extent with Gods intent in (...) these,
with Christ's intent and purpose in (...) these with its own work in applying
(...). Whatever respect makes a thing an adequat (...) of a work in such a
kind, all works of that (...) are ever applied to that thing under that (...).
The King gives a Charter in His Royal Grant (...) such who are Freemen of such
a Corporation, (...) that bought it Purchased only for such, there is (...)
ground in true right and reason why they should (...) bestowed upon any but
such; nor can any apply Privilege aright unless he do apply it with an eye
(...) such a Condition that must stear the whole course (...) a righteous
proceeding in that kind. That which (...) the Formalis ratio of the subject in
Application (...) must needs be attended in every work of (...) either of
Comfort or Privilege if (...) the Rule aright. But it has appeared in brief
(...), That such who shall be the seed of the (...) to them God the Father
intended these (...) Privileges, Joh. 3. 16. God so loved the world that he
gave his only Son, that whosoever should (...) in him should not perish but
have eternal life: (...) them as such Christ Purchased these. Joh. 17. (...) I
pray not for the World, but for them that shall (...). And so the Spirit
applies, as when Paul (...) appointed to (...) the Gentiles, this was his
(...), He was to turn men from Satan to God, that (...) they might receive
remission of sins and (...) So the Spirit by the Ministry of the Word makes
(...) of these Privileges, and never otherwise and therefore never gives other
witness.

Upon what ground the Evidence of Science (...) Argu. 7.
Knowledge of my Justification and Adoption (...) according to truth, upon that
ground arises my (...) of Faith; for both these (I told you in (...)
Explication) were included, and must be (...) in the work of Evidence; and its
as (...) out of the Principles of right Reason, and Experience, and Scriptures
also: that alone which my (...) judges, my (...) embraces: there is nothing
(...) come to the Will, but by the Understanding: what (...) Eye sees not, the
Heart affects not. No light come into this Room, but by this Window: Look
therefore, what the Understanding apprehends, and (...) it apprehends it, so is
it presented to the Heart, (...) so by the Heart is it entertained, Joh. 4. 10.
(...) thou known thou would have asked him water, (...) he would have given
thee water of life: So the (...), Joh. 4. 42. Now we believe, because (...)
have heard him, and know that this is the (...) of the World: this is clear.

But now, My Knowledge and Science if true (...) sound, it ever issues out of
the Concurrence and (...) together in my Apprehension, of a (...) Qualification
(...) the Privileges, and (...) Privileges received thereby: For its a ruled
(...) (...) the common Course of Reason, That Knowledge (...) Science, (that
is) sound judgment of a truth, ever issues out of a simple term, or one thing
as one, (...) it self (...).

Instance: I express in word, or attend in my (...), Pardon; (that word or
term) Adoption (...) (...): take them several and asunder: Here (...) no
Judgment can be (...), nor can any that hear, (...) or conclude (...) the
having or not (...) of any of these. So again, Sin, Faith, (...): I cannot
judge what these are, or in whom (...) are, there is neither Knowledge, nor
(...), nor Comfort comes hence. But dispose and (...) them together; As,

[ An Unbeleever is Pardoned:] I judge this (...) now, because (...) things are
joined together (...) natures agree not, and the expression is not as (...)
things be, (...) i s a false Proposition, or (...) cross to the Scripture, He
that believes not (...) condemned, Joh. 3. 18. [ A Believer is (...):] The
(...) Answers the nature of the (...), and (...) truth a d meaning of the
(...), and therefore its true: I so judge it, and so (...) it, and so only, if
I either know it aright, or (...) it aright. And (mark) this knowledge issues
(...) the right apprehension of both parts as they (...) together, which (...)
be but only by a (...) Qualification.

The Sum then is, If the right and true Knowledge of the Application of any
spiritual Privileges (...) from the attendance of the (...) subject and
quality with which it is disposed, then my Evidence and Assurance must arise so
too.

But so my Knowledge arises, therefore so my Assurance must arise also.

The like you may say, (and it will be seasonable and exceeding useful to
consider it) No (...) or witness can be attended without the thing (...), and
that according to the mind of the (...) or (...); you must take one with
another to make up an Evidence: to look upon those simple expressions; Pardon,
Mercy, Redemption, and run away with them, and the sweetness in them, and (...)
look at the right disposition of them according to the witness of the Spirit,
and mind of the testifier, its not possible to have either sound Faith or (...)
in this way, because I cannot have true Knowledge thus,

Thou Unbeleever, Uncalled, Art Pardoned. (...) false: Before thou know the
right disposition (...) these together, thou can not pass a right Judgment,
or have a right Evidence, Christ came to (...) sinners, believing, humbled
sinners: That is true.

To come to an End, Hold these Principles in the Severals, and so you shall be
able to see the frame (...) the (...) how it lies.

1 None but Parties Qualified, viz. (...), are the subjects of these (...),
Joh. 3. 16. Joh. 3. last. 2 The Spirit never witnesses these (...) but
according to this meaning: He always means those who are (...) true subjects
of these Privileges, and (...) only; according to the meaning of the Word. 3
We cannot know the Testimony of the Spirit-unless we know it according to (...)
meaning.
Therefore we must of necessity know the qualification of the Person Receiving
as (...) as the Privilege and Blessing Received: I must know my self [ a
Beleever] as well as [ Justified, Adopted] because this is the meaning of the
Word and Spirit.

This may suffice for Arguments to confirm the truth propounded: We shall now
remove a stumbling stone or two out of the way: and omitting all others, I
shall only Answer Two Objections which carry either (...) or seeming
probability with them.

From that of 1 John 5. 7, 8. There be three that Object. 1
(...) record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and (...) Spirit, and these
three are one: And there are (...) that bear witness in Earth, the Spirit,
Water, and Blood, and these three agree in one.

Here (say some) are several sorts of (...), one distinct from another, one
before another, and one more excellent than the other, and therefore (...) one
may be without respect to the other, the witness of the Spirit without
attending either Water or Blood, either Sanctification or any saving Work.

If there were no Doubt moved, no Question Answ.
Controverted, by way of any seeming Collection from the place, the very
Mysterious depths of the (...) herein delivered drives all Interpreters to a
stand, and puts the most Judicious beyond their thoughts: so that there is more
(...) to (...) the mind of God in the words, then to make Answer to the
Objection hence collected: We will (...) Shortly open the meaning of the Words.
2 Then (...) what may be truly Collected from them; and (...) it will appear
that the Objection fetched from (...) will find no footing in this place.

The scope of the Apostle in verse. 4, 5. is, That (...) Christ is the Son of
God, and that Faith which (...) the world, must look to him, and rest (...) him.

This he (...) to me to prove and explicate in both the parts of it in verse. 6.
And secondly amplyfieth it in the following 7. and 8. verses. His proof is
taken from (...) type of his Priestly-Office, the truth whereof he accomplished
in the great Work of Redemption.

He that comes by water and blood, he is the son of God: But Jesus Christ came
by water and blood. His coming implys, 1 His Fathers Sending, 2 (...) Own
Undertaking that great Work of our Recovery not only by Water, as the Levites
who were washed, Numb. 8. 6. 7. but by Blood also as the Priests, Levit. 8. 6.
22, 23, 24. By [ Water] I conceive is meant, The Holiness of his Nature, in
which he was Conceived, and for which end he was overshad owed by the Spirit.
By Blood is meant that Expiation and Satisfaction he made to the Law of God by
shedding his Blood: So that He, that had all that, and (...) all that, which
was shadowed by the Priests, He is that Jesus the son of God for (...).

And the Spirit bears witness, because the Spirit is Truth] This seems to me,
to be the fairest sense, and to be preferred before all that I can see brought.
By Spirit] in the First place is meant Gods (...) the Holy Ghost. By Spirit] in
the Second place I do think (...) is meant: For so you shall find the word
used, 2 Cor. 4. 13. Having the same Spirit of Faith. So that the Spirit of God
coming from the Father and the Son would testify by the aspertion of this
Water and Blood that my Faith is true, when it assures my heart that this Jesus
is the Son of God.

2 He amplifies this proof by bringing in the number of witnesses, and the
manner of their witnessing: For their number they are Six; The Father sending;
The Son coming; The Spirit certifying, in this (...) manner of working they are
distinct, and herein appear to be distinct witnesses; and this their witness is
from Heaven, signifying where they are, and from whence they express their
witness: The Father speaks from Heaven, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased, Mat. 3. last: The Son professes so, often of himself, That he
came out of the bosom of the Father, John, 1. 18. John, 3. 13. No man can
ascend to Heaven, but the Son of man, who came down from Heaven: John, 6. 38. I
came down from Heaven, not to do my own will, but the will of him that sent
(...): Lastly, in Mat. 3. last, The Spirit of God descended down upon him in
the likeness of a Dove: these speak from Heaven, and their expressions are
(...) in the word without us whether we believe or no. Three again speak and
witness from Earth, for Christ dwells in us here on Earth: the Spirit, Water,
and Blood: There is no doubt but by Water is meant Sanctification; by Blood,
Justification; all the Question lies upon the third, What is meant by Spirit?
Under correction, I take it, It Is meant of Faith: for (besides that 2 Timothy 1.
7. all graces are called the Spirit, we have received the Spirit of Power, of
Love, and of a sound mind) this is expressly so named 2 Cor. 4. 13. we having
the same Spirit of Faith: this is most safe, and most suitable to the analogy of
Faith, and the intendment of the Text.

There are but Three great Works unto which all the rest may be referred,
Vocation, Justification, Sanctification: all these in us give in witness and
evidence, That Jesus the Savior of the World, must be the Son of God, sent of
him, who sends also his Spirit into our hearts, to work thus in us, and by
these works to evidence to us, Himself, and his Office.

The Truths then which according to the right meaning of the words, may hence
be collected, are these:

There be six Witnesses.

Three of these witness from Heaven, and their

Al these agree in this as the thing winessed: (...)

The witness of those from Heaven is greater than

But touching the witnessing of my good (...) without respect to a gracius
disposition or qualification, there is not a syllable in the Text that sounds
that way, or carries any appearance to that purpose.

If every Work of Grace, or the truth of a gracious Object. 2
qualification be witnessed by the Spirit, and is lastly resolved therinto, So
that I Believe the work of Grace in me to be true, because the Spirit
witnesses it, then I must have an absolute ground to Believe the Spirit.

I will open this Phrase: [the witness of the Spirit Answ.
on an absolute ground] Either its meant (...) the witness of the Spirit is
attended without any respect to a work that is witnessed, then its false and
absurd, that I should discern the witness of the Spirit without any respect to
the thing witnessed (...) made known to me by it: for (as has been (...)
before) witness and the thing witnessed go both together.

Or its meant thus: That when I have received the witness of the Spirit to my
self, then I (...) prove it upon an absolute ground.

Has Christ purchased al spiritual good for His, Use 2
for Believers? Hence then we may see the (...) of the faithful, and the
privilege of those that (...), above all people upon earth: To you the Father
intended all the treasuries of grace and glory: in your stead Christ suffered,
performed all that the Law required and Justice exacted; for you it is, he has
purchased all that good that you need, does not that please you? al you can
desire does not that quiet you? nay all that you can receive through al
eternity does not that satisfy? There is none like unto you, never the like
was done for any as for you: It was Moses Collection, and caused his wonderment
in the Consideration thereof, Deuteronomy. 33. 29. When he had recounted, the
wonderful Preservations the Lord had wrought, Privileges he honored them with
and bestowed upon them, he breaks forth into these expressions: Blessed art
thou O Israel, who is like unto the O People! Saved by the Lord. That was in
the Type and Resemblance only, but here is the Truth and Substance of Shadows
those Shadows, Accomplished in the Purchase of Christ, or his faithful ones
who are: Saved, not from the Oppression of a Pharaoh, but from the Power of
Darkness, and Dominion of the Devil, not delivered from the house of Bondage
but from the bottom of Hell: Blessed are ye, O ye believing Souls, your
Excellency is incomparble, your Privilidges are inconceivable. Who is like
unto you O People! thus blessed and saved by the Lord. The Wicked are not, the
World is not, it is not so with them they have the Gleanings, you have the
Harvest, they may have Rivers of Oil, but you the Rivers Psalm. 16. 11.
of Pleasures at the right hand of the Lord: Nay, now while you are in this
World, Al is yours, All 1 Cor. 3 22, 23.
that the Obedience of Christ could procure, All that the Blood (the precious
Blood) of Christ could Psalm. 8. 7 3.
Purchase, precious Grace and Peace, precious Comfort and Assurance, precious
Holiness and Glory, Excellent things are not only spoken of you, but done for
you, you blessed Believing Souls. Hence it is when Moses would plead the
Privileges of the Saints, he stands upon terms of comparison (...) challenges
all the World to show the like Eminency of Gods love upon Earth, again Deuteronomy. 4,
33 34 35 36 37. Did ever People partake of such Good as (...) Purchased for
you? has God essayed to go and take (...) himself a Nation from among the
Nations shall I say by Tempations, Signs, and Wonders to bring (...) out of
Egypt? No no: it was not from the house of Bondage, from the tyranny of Pharaoh
nor from Death and Miseries outward, but from the bottom of Hell the tyranny of
Sin, the power of the Devil from everlasting Death and Condemnation; (...) this
(not by making Water become Blood, but) by making Happiness to become Misery,
God to become Man, and Life it self (Christ Jesus the (...) of Life) to die,
that he might restore thee to Life and Glory: Go therefore ye blessed Believing
Servants of the Lord go on comfortably, and the blessing of Heaven go with you,
know your Privileges and be for ever quieted and contented (...). Fret not you
at the prosperity of the Wicked be (...) troubled at their Pomp, since your
portion is far (...), and of incomparable Excellency: When the Luke 15. 27, 28.
Father had entertained his prodigal Son after (...) return with a Gold Ring,
change of (...) and (...) fatted Calfe, the elder Son began to mutter (...)
(...) show his (...), the answer was reasonable (...) exceeding satisfactory,
Son, thou art ever with (...) and all that I have is thine, Luke 15. 31. So
here Suffer the Dogs to gnaw the bones, and (...) to have their scraps, let
(...) have the Gold Ring to adorn them and the fatted Calfe to feed and (...)
upon, but know, (al you Believers) all that is (...) Earth, all that is in
Heaven; all that the Father (...), that (...) has; all the Mercy of a Father,
the edemption of a Jesus, the Consolations of the (...), al these are yours,
you cannot have more, you (...) be better: me thinks you should not be, I (...)
almost said you cannot, but be for ever (...) and Contented.

And now, al you that sit by, and here of all this: (...) thinks your hearts
should sink within you, (...) that never knew what it was to be Humbled, (...)
to be Called, and to Believe in Christ: (...), al is gone before you; Believers
have al; (...) therefore, and arise to follow hard after (...) Lord that you
also may be Humbled, that you (...) may be Called. and Comforted and for ever
(...) by Jesus Christ. This will be the plague of Luke 1 28.
(...) damned in Hell. They shall see Abraham, and (...) and Jacob, and all the
Saints of God in Heaven, (...) themselves cast out, You shall see al those poor
(...) whom you have known in the Towns and (...) where you have lived, you will
see them go to Heaven, and your selves cast out; O therefore (...) you would
give God no rest nor your own (...) no quiet, til you have got a believing
heart; Why have Believers all this? have they Christ and (...) and Pardon and
Peace and Glory and (...) and all? say, Lord why not I a Believer too? (...) I
see no reason but you may, God affords you (...), and you may be wrought upon
by the Means (...) ought I know, therefore seek earnestly to the (...) that you
also may be brought in amongst the (...) of Believers, for whom all this good is
Purchased by Jesus Christ. Use. 3.


The Doctrine delivered dasheth that dream, and (...) that false opinion,
wherewith many carnal hearted men are easily and willingly taken (...), who
fondly persuade themselves, that Christ died for all: and Purchased both Grace
and Glory mankind indifferently, for Cain as well as Abell, Esau as well as
Jacob, for Judas as well as Peter, that all that spiritual good that any of the
Saints ver share in, it was al intended to them, al (...) sed for them al
provided for their good; but the out of the perverseness of their own wills,
(...) that Physic that would have cured them, (...) upon the blood of the
Covenant that was shed (...) their Redemption; A conceit cross to the (...)
formerly delivered and thereby confuted and (...) demned: but an opinion it is
which (...) derogates from the Justice of God, the (...) of the Lord Jesus: the
glory of his Free (...) which is Childrens bread, and appointed ouly (...)
peculiar kindness for his own People; and yet by (...) erroneous imagination is
prostituted under the (...) of a company of profane beasts.

This universalitie of Redemption, makes way (...) universalitie of Corruption:
and these sensual (...) deceiving men make the gate of Mercy and (...) so wide,
that so they find room not only (...) themselves, but to carry their sins to
Heaven (...) them also. But such shall one day find by (...) experience they
befooled themselves, and fell (...) of their hopes and expectations, when they
(...) know to their terror, that the Lord Jesus was (...) so lavish of his
blood as to spil it in vain, (...) he should miss of his end or they of their
good (...) whom it was shed: though they ery never so (...) knock never so
hard, Lord Lord open (...) (...) they (...) have no other answer but that,
(...) from (...) Mat. 7. 23.
know you not (...) workers of iniquity. Math. 7. 23. I never prayed for you,
I never dyed for you. (...) is that which will sink the hearts and dash the
(...) of al unbeleeving self deceiving Creatures: Is there (...) rich Grace,
plentiful Redemption, abundant (...), Merits unvaluable in the Lord Jesus?
True, (...) that is thy misery, thou shall see it, but never be (...) partaker
thereof. Thou shall not taste of those (...) dainties the Lord has provided for
his (...) Luke 14 24.
as long as thou remainest in that unbeleeving (...); thy doom is set, thy
sentence is past. (...) 3. 18. He that believes not is condemned already, is
cast in all the Coutrs of Heaven and Earth, the (...) cannot the Gospel will not
save thee; a body (...) appeal from Justice to Mercy, but if Mercy (...) him,
who shall comfort, who can releeve (...)? what ever he does where ever he is the
wrath God abides upon him, thou art not within the (...) of Mercy nor the
compass of that Redemption (...) Lord has wrought. Nay that thou may see
(...) thou art, and what to hold to; the Lord (...) has sealed up thy
destruction by a sollem oath (...) can never be repealed; He has sworn he
that (...) believes shall never enter into his rest. Heb. 3. (...). That which
God says barely he many times (...), so the first Covenant Do and live, a man
may (...) do himself and yet live, but he that will not (...), God swears (and
his oath is unchangable) (...) he shall never enter into life. That a man may
(...) with reverence God himself cannot save a man (...) never shall Believe,
because he cannot deny (...) and his oath. Rest thou may in thy vain (...)
in thy carnal confidence, sit down secure in (...) self-pleasing humor, but
thou shall never enter to Gods rest of Pardon Peace Comfort and (...): but
shall be in a restless fear and dread, (...) and discouragement which will
pursue the (...) endless disquiet, and the powers of Heaven (...) a fford thee
releif in this condition if thou (...) herein. There is no peace (says God) to
the (...). Isay. 57. last,

But if this be so: and you pale in the precious (...) Object. 1
demption of Christ, into such a narrow (...) you will straiten it, and the
comforts of sinners (...) much: and extend as much mercy to Devils (...)
Unbeleevers: for by this means you make the (...) probates in as desperate a
condition as the (...) themselves, being wholly void of al help and (...) of
Salvation, either in themselves or any (...) they cannot save themselves and
the Lord will (...) save them. A Blasphemous Cavil.

I Answer: The consequent part of the reason Answ.
unsound and blasphemously false as shall appear (...) sundry Considerations.

The merits of our Savior, and the complete (...)

Hence all that Believe of this nature may be (...)

To many Persons of this nature God afford and that Adam could do and we in him.

The Gospel does not require a Man should (...)

But the fallen Angels differ in all these regards.

For theirs being the sin against the Holy Ghost no case took upon him the
nature of Angels. Heb, 2 (...). (...) in no wise, it was in no case comely or
(...) enient.

Their nature not assumed, for them no (...) (...). 2. 11 12. etc. And
therefore no possibility they (...) receive any good by Christ if possibly they
(...) Believe.

Therefore the Lord neither provides nor offers any

That which is only true in the objection is this, at the wicked being dead in
sins and trespasses, it no more possible for them to help themselves by (...)
own power ont of this condition, than it is (...) for a Devil, For with Man
there is no (...), no more than there is with Devils: and (...) negation admits
no degrees in regard of the (...) of their nature. But the riches of Gods (...)
on His part in taking our nature entering into (...) with His in it, providing
means, and (...) with Men for their good by the Covenant, and (...) no more but
the bare receiving of that (...), al these show great ods.

But Christ's merit is infinite, and of infinite (...), Object. 2
therefore is able to save al Angels and al Men, it not?

The consequence of the reason is false, which will Answ.
appear by the right understanding how Christ's (...) rits are infinite, and how
the sufficiency of (...) can reach all.

Christ's merits are said to be infinite, then, (...)

The merit of him who is an infinite God, and of (...)

Then had he suffered any outward evil as (...) cution, the spilling of some
drops of his blood (...) would have sufficed, for that had been the (...) of a
party who is infinite, and yet justice (...) that which requires not only
payment from an (...) nit Person, but in the same kind and nature also, (...)
that upon such conditions as the Covenant (...) red, before agreed and now
exacted.

Merits from such an infinite Person performed (...)

That which I would leave to your thoughts (...) be expressed in two things
thus,

1. Christ's death is sufficient to save al (...) they shall Believe. 2. It Is
not sufficient to save one Man (...) (...) Believe.
Its sufficient to save al if they Believe; and (...) (...) to be the meaning
of that phrase which is (...) amongst judicious writers, That if God had (...),
and Christ intended to save many (...) more, he needed not nor intruth should
have (...) any other or any more punishment: so (...) he must have suffered for
the substance of the (...) and second death to save one sinner; and no (...) he
needed to have suffered if he should save al (...) World, or another World of
Men. The ground (...) is this, Because our Savior being the head the second
Covenant as Adam of the first, a (...) Person in the room of al such whose
persons he (...); His merits, the very same individual (...), death and
obedience are apylyed and do (...) appertain unto al, as Paul had al, so Adam,
(...), Noah, had al, and the same death and (...) belongs to any other Believer
as well as to (...). For as Adams actual sin was equally imputed (...) al, his
original equally convayed: So Christ's (...) and righteousness to al His. Adam
must (...) sin before he can condemn one, and if (...) it condemns many
thousands as well as one. Christ dies to save one, and no more to save (...)
thousands. For the sufficiency of our (...) (...) must be (...) as we do the
sufficiency of (...) cause, which is ever considered according to (...) end at
which it looks, and for which it (...), (...) that it does not exceed: it is
not to be attended (...) to the thing in which it does appear: (...) end of our
Saviors sufferings and merits was save his seed, and such for which he had
(...) and should believe whether never so many never so few, but for all that
come within that (...). As a full tide or stream is sufficient (...) (...) al
Vessels that come upon it and yet not (...) to carry one Vessel that is not
(...): So here: The Ocean of Gods love and Sea of Redemption (...) Christ is
sufficient to carry and convay all that (...) unto eternal Salvation, but not
sufficient (...) save one that does not Believe. And therefore (...) any
Orthodox Divine the meaning of this (...) Sufficient for all Is the
sufficiency of Christ's (...) in the room of al? Is the sufficiency of (...)
death intended and performed for the spiritual (...) of al? they will al
renounce both the senses: (...) what reason they will put upon these words (...)
than that I have now expressed, I cannot tell: (...) only looking at the
internal virtue of Christ's (...) with this condition, there is value enough in
it (...) save all that come within this condition of (...) ving: As the sin of
the first Adam was sufficient (...) infect Milions of Worlds, if they should
(...) of him by natural generation, and yet not (...) to infect one if he did
not so proceed.

But why then are Reprobates commanded (...) (...) Object. 3
leeve, and punished for not Believing? (...) which any is bound to Believe
that is a truth, (...) each Reprobate that hears the Gospel (...) (...) to
Believe that Christ dyed for him: (...) (...) that is a truth.

This is an old deceit, which has much (...) Answ.
the World and wherein the enemies of Gods (...) have seemed to triumph: and
yet in truth it (...) fallacy, a false form of reasoning. But to let (...)
pass, we shall examine whether the (...) of it (...) true.

The first part [ That which any is bound to (...) is true] may admit many
senses.

A man is bound to Believe upon a (...) ground: Either 1. Of Charity, Or 2. Of
(...) taintie, I am bound sometimes to Believe that (...) Charity which in it
self is not, and in the issue (...) (...) true: But upon Certainty things
revealed and (...): here I am bound to Believe nothing but (...) is a truth.

Again, another sense is this: The object upon (...) my faith is placed is a
truth or true (...).

But to the second part: That Christ dyed for me:

If it be replied, that therefore a Reprobate is (...) bound to Believe.

I Answer, the consequence has no color of (...): I am not bound to believe
this falsehood (...) I am not bound to Believe. The command to (...) carries two
things with it, First that I must (...) al means appointed by God to get faith,
(...) when I have got it I must put forth the act (...) in resting upon and
receiving from the Lord what (...) need. The sum is: Because a Reprobate is
bound (...) use al means appointed by God to get Faith, and (...) he has got
it, he is bound also to exercise (...) faith by resting upon Christ, therefore
he is (...) also to Believe this proposition that Christ (...) for Reprobates:
this consequence is cross to (...) and in truth to common sense.

What ever therefore can be said to the contrary, (...) it is that unbeleif
makes a man incapable of (...) of the spiritual good which Christ has (...)
and is willing to communicate unto His. So the (...) determins this cause Jer.
17. 5, 6. Cursed (...) the Man that trusts in the arm of flesh, and (...)
heart (...) from the living God: he shall be (...) the heath in the Wilderness
he shall never see when good comes. Art thou such a one? set thy heart at (...)
then; There is mercy enough, saving good (...) in Christ, and its coming to
this and that (...) thy Neighbor, thy Child, thy Servant who (...), they shall
have it, they shall partake in it, (...) thou shall never see it, never share in
it, Romans (...) 32. Its that which the Apostle describes the condition of such
Men by, They are shut up under (...), so that there is no way for any means to
(...) upon them, to come at them, or to do good (...) them: all the passages are
not only stopped but (...) tercepted by the power of Satan and infidelity (...)
the Soul: the soul being shut up under that, (...) shuts out the power of the
Word, it works not, (...) motions of the spirit they persuade not, al (...) al
judgments, al ordinances, al means, they (...) not come at the Soul, and
therefore its not (...) that any spiritual good either Pardon or Peace (...) or
Comfort should ever come in.

Exhortation. 1 To provoke our hearts to (...) Use 4.
Faith: 2 How to carry our selves when we (...) it.

First this should whet our desires and provoke (...) endeavors. since there
is al good Purchased (...) Christ, and al for those that (...) Believe; (...)
would not now be a Believer? above al our (...) get Faith since we are sure to
gain so much by (...) be the time, trouble, or prayers, pains what (...) will
be, its worth our labor though it cost (...) so much in the getting, it will
quit cost when (...) we have it, first or last you will find it.

It was said when the Jews prospered and (...) led in the time of Mordecai,
they had joy and (...) ness and a good day and many became Jews; (...) Esther,
8. 16. 17.
would undergo the same condition that (...) might have the same comforts. And
its an (...) (...) which nature has left upon the minds and hearts (...) all
Men, the places which have Privileges Profits (...) Endowments annexed to them
carry the (...) of (...) Men after them, good is the Loadstone of a Man's (...)
and labor, and where most of that appears, our (...) go thither with most
earnestness and (...). So you know, how the Chief Captain spoke (...) Paul
concerning the Roman Liberties, with a Acts, 22. 28.
(...) sum obtained (...) this freedom, that deliverance (...) this fredome,
they were little, not the dust of the (...) if they be compared with freedom
from Hell (...) Death, Sin and Guilt; and with those (...) unconceivable
benefits of Grace and Glory; have (...) but Faith, thou have interest in all
these; (...) give no sleep to thy eyes nor flumber to thy (...), give God no
rest, nor thy own Soul no quiet, get (...) though it be with a great sum, great
diligence, (...) endeavors, vehement desires, leave not before (...) have it,
and then be sure to keep it thine (...) welfare lies upon it.

Each Man has his aim, and there he is eager, but (...) others look at what
they like, labor thou for this; (...) the coverous Man have the World, the
loose Man (...) Pleasures, and the ambitious Man his Honors, (...) do thou
say, Lord give me Faith. If thy (...) heart conceive it will cost the setting
on, the loss of (...) eye or a hand, some darling content that must be (...)
and cast away before thou can come to it; (...) thy self, and help thy soul
over all these (...) difficulties, with the daily eying of that (...) (...)
that is to be had in Christ, whom thou shall have (...) Faith. As Hamor and
Shechom his son (...) and prevailed with the Shechemites to cut off the (...)
of their flesh, (though it carried an (...) Genesis 34. 20, 21, 22, 23.
of harshness and difficulty,) upon this plea, (...) nor their Cattle their
Substance and every Beast of theirs be ours; only let us consent to them in
this, and they hearkened to him, though it was hard. Genesis 34, 23. So deal thou
with thy own soul, shall not the blood and Merits of Jesus, shall not that
Pardon and acceptance he has procured, that great Redemption he has wrought,
the Glory he has (...) be ours? shall not every grace of Christ be ours to
sanctify and adorn us? every Comfort and those Joys unspeakable and glorious
be ours torefresh our hearts? only consent O my soul to Believe: (...) be thou will say, this work is (...), passing thy power, and beyond thy strength, true,
be it never (...) hard to thee and not possible, yet it is not hard to him who
has hardness at command, he has done it for others, who can tell but he may do
it for thee? only let others experience provoke thee and their success
encourage thee to seek for it. As (...) did for the blessing when he knew it
was in his Fathers hand to give, and that Jacob had received it, see how he
presses on Cen. 37. 34.
with earnestness and tears, that he might not go away empty, O my Father says
he bless me also. So lay thou, Lord I know thou have done it for others, I
know thou can do it for me, such proud ones have been humbled, such
unbeleeving ones have been converted, settled, comforted and for ever saved; O
bless me also, convert me also, call me effectually, and cause me also to
Believe.

That which was the command of Christ to that man in Mark. 5. 36. Is the
exhortation to thee, only believe, let this be the pearl in thy eye and
pursuit; thou see how comfortable it would be to have those scores of thine
quit, thy sins pardoned, and thy heart settled in peace, only Believe and it is
done, thou surveyest the great Redemption that Christ has Purchased, the
Kingdom immortal undefiled and that fades (...) away, (...) the Lord has
prepared for His: only Believe and it is thine; thou find the power the
plague of those noysom distempers and hellish temprations which unfit thee for
any work, make thee wearish in it, nay weary of thy life, only Believe in
Christ, and they are conquered and for ever subdued.

(...) thus: Were there an engine of that use and strength that were it but
skilfully handled it would perform al things which otherwise were impossible
to be accomplished: there need no reasons to press, no arguments to persuade
men to get it: I can do nothing without it, I can do every thing if I have it;
So it is with Faith, Mark 9. 23. All things are possible (...) (...) that
believes, thou think that the wrath of God is so fierce, his justice so
strict, they can (...) (...) suffered it is not possible they should be
undergone, corruption is so strong, discouragements so great, It Is (...)
possible to overcome; but Faith says, nay, to that; All things are possible to
him that can believe, because he has Christ to whom all things are possible
(...) therefore as blind Bartimaeus said touching his sight (Mark 10. 48, 51.)
say thou touching thy Faith, (...) the Lord should put that question to thee,
What (...) thou have? say, O Lord that I may believe, that I may receive the
grace of Faith, whereby I may (...) able to receive Christ and all Spiritual
good in (...).

The second part of the Exhortation; Is to provoke All are yours, (...) you are
(...) and Christ is Gods: all (...) (...) through Christ to us, all from us by
Christ (...) (...) returned again to God. And the duty is double.

1. Have all at his command; 2. Lay out all to his praise.

1. First have al at his command, all the graces, all the abilities we have
received, all the blessings of this (...) we do possess, they should all be
laid up, and reserved for the Lords use that they may (...) hand in (...) to
(...) his good pleasure when ever he (...) call for them. As the spowse Cant.
7. last. At our gates are all manner of pleasant fruits new and (...) which I
have laid up for thee O my beloved. (...) the Lords propriety upon them, and
(...) his Image and superscription upon them, as they in (...) (...), 44. 5.
One shall say I am the Lords etc. So (...) (...) the Lords and these graces,
these abilities, (...) liberties, these conveniences they are all the Lords. So
Christ he assumed our nature, took upon him the (...) of a servant he did all
and suffered all, and (...) gives the reason and shows the aim at which he
looked in all that he did: John, 17. 19. For their (...) I sanctify my self:
So do thou say, I have all, I do all I get these I keep these good things (...)
Christ's sake that I may more and (...) (...) to him without destraction. (...)
Cor. 7. 35.
2. As we should lay up all for him, so we should lay out all for his praise,
when ever (...) occasion (...) (...), any (...) (...) it, that we may (...) 2
Cor. 5. 15. So the (...) we live no more (...) selves, labor (...) for (...)
(...) but live only to (...) who has (...) all Spiritual good for Us.
BOOK II.
Matt. 1. 21. He shall save His People from their Sins.
APPlication was the Second Part of Man's Recovery, whereby all that Good which
Christ has purchased for His, is made Theirs. The Sum of this Description we
resolved into Two Divine Truths, which take up the Nature of it.

1 First, Christ has purchased all Spiritual Good for His. That we have
finished. 2 The Second now follows, for which we have (...) these words; in
which we shall attend only so (...) as serves our purpose in hand.
Christ puts all His into the Possession of all that Doct. (...)
Good He has Purchased for Them: So much the (...) letter of the Text sounds.
Salvation we know (...) the substance and marrow of all that Good which we have
or hope for, here, or in another world; it (...) the removal and absence of all
evil, that might (...) the presence and confluence of all such (...), which
either we want or desire, or can receive to make us happy; they are all
comprised in this word Salvation: And this our Savior (...) purchased, not to
lay it up, and to keep it by him; but to lay it out in the behalf of his, not
alone to provide it, but to bestow it actually upon them. It is his Name; it
was his Office, and he does the work, he does (...), actually save his People
from their sins. 1 Cor. 1. 30. (...) is said to be made of God to us (not only
so in (...), and the sight of God, but he is made to us) wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctisication and Redemption; and therefore the Apostle gives thanks to God who
(...) blessed us with all Spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ Ephesians.
1. 3. So that all the treasuries of all kinds of blessings withal advantages
are by Christ Communicated to his. Hence the Prophet sets out the Particular
inventory of those special favors which the Lord doles out unto all (...)
servants and followers to suit them in their occasions and necessities Isay.
61. 1. 2. the Lord has (...) me to preach good tidings to bind up the broken
hearted, to proclayme liberty to the (...) the opening of the prison to those
that are in bonds to give them the oil of joy and Gladness for the spirit of
(...), that they may be clothed with the garments of praise. He not only has
made a (...) of gladness but he puts it on and clothes all his servants Heb.
7. 25.
with it, In a word hence it is Christ is said to be a perfect Redeemer to save
to the utermost not only to offer Salvation and redemption, to present it
before them but to make it good to their hearts and consciences to their
everlasting comforts. There are two branches of the Doctrine, the explication
of them severally will show the breadth of this truth.

1. The extent of this Application or the parties who do partake of ir; (Theirs
Or Ours) namly, all such for whom these good things were purchased. 2. The
manner how they come to be made partakers hereof the Description told us (it was
made theirs) the Doctrine, (they are put into the possession of them) (...)

First, Touching the Largness and breadth of this Application, its here to be
attended according to the purchase by way of paritie and proportion; Redemption
and Application are of equal extent. Christ purchases for his, and Christ
applies unto his, and to his only; al they have this; but only they have this
(...) of those that ever Christ purchased grace and life (...), shall (...) of
it, and none but those shall be made possessors of it: both these go hand in
hand: Those, (...) those, and those only for whom Christ (...) this, to them,
and to all them, and only to them Christ applies this: This is the paritie and
proportion and equal extent of these two Redemption and Application.

See this made good by some few Arguments. Argu. 1.


Look we at the manner of the three persons working, that will give in Evidence
unto this truth: this work of application is attributed in a special manner
to the spirit, because his manner of working does therein Specially appear, he
works from the father and the Son, and this is the last work. The Father as the
Will Determines it, the Son as the wisdom of the Father he disposes of this
work, the holy Ghost as the power of the Almighty Consummates the action.

For whom the Father appointed this redemption for them Christ purchased it, to
them the Spirit applies it; If the Spirit should not apply it to all for whom
Christ purchased it that might argue want of power, if to any other but such
that might argue want of tuth.

Application of the purchase is the end of purchasing Argu. 2.
for therefore redemption was purchased for those for whom Christ had
undertaken it: that as they needed it and he intended it for their good so they
might partake of it for their everlasting good and benefit. thus the current of
the Scripture runs as a mighty stream, 1 Pet. 3. 18. for Christ also once
suffered for sin, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God.
Titus. 2 14. He gave himself for us that he (...) redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works,
(...) 1. 4. who gave himself for our Sins that he might redeem us from this
present evil world: I add (...) more but that John. 17. 19. for their sakes I
(...) my self, that is, he prepared himself on (...) for his death and (...),
that by virtue thereof they also might have their corruptions subdued, and their
hearts purified by the truth: and hence it is, the (...) of the (...) of Grace
contains not only the manifestation of Gods mind and counsel, touching what
is done for us, but what he will work in us, and (...) to us by the power of
his grace, Ezekiel. 36. 26. (...) (...) (...)
will Power clean water upon you and cleanse (...) from all your filthiness, a
new spirit I will give you, and a new heart will I work in you, and Jer. 31.
33. I will write my laws in their hearts, and (...) my spirit in their inward
parts, and therefore (...) lives forever to Save Perfectly all that come unto
(...) by him Heb. 7. 25. Iftherfore this be the end of (...) Purchase that it
might be made good upon the souls (...) his children, either Christ must miss
of his (...) and not have his end, or else they must of (...) have all this good
which the Father intended to (...) and Christ purchased in their behalf, and
for (...) Special benefit.

(...) the (...) of Salvation by the death and (...) (...). 3.
(...) of (...) be (...) than the Application thereof so that Christ should die
for many that shall (...) (...) (...) by his death it would exceedingly (...)
(...) the virtue of the merits of Christ, and the (...) (...) the work of our
redemption, for then it (...) follow.

The Sufferings and obedience of our Savior (...) (...) of less virtue and
(...) to save men than the (...) (...) guilt of Adams transgression was to
condemn (...): For Adam did not only purchase the curse and (...) by the
breach of Covenant, but convey it (...) that Certainly to all his posterity,
so the Apostle; (...). 2. 3. we were Children of wrath by nature (...) well as
others. All in whose room Adam (...) and so sinned, all they had his sin
imputed (...) (...) inflicted without fail; But if Christ fully (...) life and
blessing for those in whose stead (...) (...) as a Surety, but Leaves the
Application of it (...) (...) Liberty of their own wills, his merits should
(...) of (...) power and efficacy for the recoverie and (...) of his, than
Adams sin was for the (...) of his (...). Which the (...) (...) Adam a tipe of
Christ (...). 5. 14. 21. For if through (...) offense of one many be dead, nay
death reigned (...) Adam to (...), and that our Children also (...) sinned not
after the similitude of him, much (...) (...) Grace of God and the free Gift by
Grace (...) unto many to (...) and life that (...) Sin Reigned unto death So
Grace might reign (...) Eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord.

Confutation: Learn we in wariness and (...) Use 1.
to hold this wholesome word of truth, this (...) which is according to (...),
whereby (...) may be fensed and have our hearts (...) (...) many dangerous
errors; whereby the vain (...) (...) the carnal hearts of the sinful sons of men
are easily (...) and taken aside; all which will vanish away (...) the evidence
of this truth (...) the smoke (...) (...) wind, and the Snow before the Sun;
And (...) we should with more care attend to (...) (...) some infectious
Disease begins to Spread, if there (...) some choice antidotes which are of
Special (...) and virtue to preserve against such malignant (...) each man
will be sure to have it always in his (...) ever ready in his hand: Such is
this Saving truth (...) once taken in and rightly understood and (...) will
fortify both mind and heart from the infection (...) such false opinions which
are exceeding prejudicial (...) Gods free Grace, and the comfort and peace of
(...) own souls.

Hold this truth then Redemption and Applycation are of equal extent. For whom
Christ (...) to them Christ applies.

First then: Hence that vain conceit falls to the viz. that Christ died for all
in point of Impetration but not (...) Application; that is: he Purchased
Redemption for all, but the Application is not unto all, the (...) he laid
down, but the application in (...) he left to themselves and their own free
wills in the last resolution. As though God in Justice should exact a payment
and that to the full of the Surety and never let it redound to the benefit of
the party.

As though our Savior should so fail in wisdom as to lay down his blood a full
price for the redemption and reconciliation of men: when he well forelaw they
would not or could not get any good thereby; in a word, this device is dashed
from hence: If for whomsoever Christ purchased, to them it is applied the
Impetration and Application are of equal extent.

Hence again it follows by undeniable Evidence, (...) is not applied to all:
some only shall be (...) saved by his Death, therefore he died but for (...):
Application is not to all, therefore (...) was not for all.

Hence again it is clear: The Application of Mercy

We may hence see the reason of that miraculous Use, 2
Dispensation of the Lord Jesus in the work of his Grace upon the sinful (...)
of men, whose salvation (...) has (...) in his everlasting Counsel and (...)
which he made with his Father: here lies the (...) of the wonderful
mysteriousness of that (...); That it prevails most powerfully for the good
(...) sinners when they do most of all oppose it: when (...) seem to be (...)
in their wretched courses, (...) down in their sinful distempers, and furthest
(...) from the ways and hopes of life, entrenched (...) daily custom and long
continuance in the strong (...) of their prevailing corruptions and lusts of
their (...) and lives: when there is many times no (...) bility, nay, not
appearance of any possibility in (...) that ever they should receive any
spiritual good, (...) being so opposite against it; and yet suddenly, (...)
unexpectedly, and that by very weak means ((...) times) the Lord Christ most
effectually applies (...) Word and Work of his Grace to their souls. (...) we
to sit down in silence, and look at the (...) power of the purchase of Jesus,
the precious (...) of the (...) blood of Jesus, which, though (...) and unseen
to the eye of the world, yet in its (...) will undoubtedly accomplish the end
intended. (...) very man should observe it, and say, such a poor (...) wretched
creature, that out (...) God and his (...) and all the means of his own good,
that then the (...) should meet with him, and stop him, and turn (...) and call
him home to himself; O the Virtue of (...) Blood of Jesus! the power whereof
nothing can (...) pose, the efficacy and success whereof nothing (...) hinder;
he has purchased the good of this (...) creature, and therefore nor Hell, nor
Sin, nor (...) nor (...) can ever prejudice it. It Is the (...) which our Savior
usually gives of the powerful, (...) wonderful communication of himself to
sinners, (...) in that 17. chapter of John, (...). 2. That he (...) give (...)
life to as many as thou have given (...) verse. 6. I have manifested thy Name to
those (...) thou have given me: (...). 8. I have given unto (...) thy words,
and they have received them: and (...) 12. Those that thou (...) me I have
(...), and (...) of them (...) lost: i. e. Those whom the Father (...) mended
to the care and keeping of Christ (as if (...) should say I will have all these
to be (...) and (...) fied) our savior he undertakes to purchase and (...)
fect redemption for them, and it therefore (...) he gives them his word and
gives them (...) to (...) he will not loose them and they cannot (...) (...)
they are given into the hands of Christ, nor (...) (...)
(...), nor temptations, nor Delusions shall ever (...) to take them out of his
hand. Upon this (...) it is our (...) puts the necessity of the (...) of
sinners that belong to him. John 10. 16 (...) other sheep, which are not of
this (...) (not (...) called yet (...) up in the (...) (...) of mercy when the
Lord Jesus undertook for (...)) them also I must bring and they shall hear my
(...). And let it be observed by any whom the (...) has effectually brought
home to himself if (...) Look into their first (...) in all the dealings of
(...) Lord the (...) of him self in the ways of (...) ordinances (...) (...)
toward them (...) shall generally and easily observe some impressions (...)
power of the prayer and the virtue (...) the blood (...) purchase of Jesus, by
all judgments corrections, (...) (...) their faylings or performances what
(...) good or (...) has (...) them what ever good or (...) has been done by
them: the Lord has either (...) or restrained, reformed convinced quickened to
(...) endeavors, and overwrought all, and never left (...) till the stroke was
struck indeed to the full.

Hence (...) a Saint of God can say that the Lord (...) been (...) with him
from the time of his (...), and all along in the places where he lived (...)
strange horrors and strokes of conscience, (...) strange sins that he fell into
(...) and then (...) (...) and (...) for them, Grace (...) wrought yet that's
true, but its working, the (...) (...) of the blood of Christ is now at (...),
and will never leave the Soul for which Christ (...) (...) there be a full and
effectual application of (...) saving good: see all this and in a holy (...)
(...) wonder at the (...) and (...) of the (...) of Jesus Christ.

To direct the hearts of distressed and (...) Use, 3
sinners, how to demean themselves in the work (...) Application for their own
succor and relief; look (...) to this purchase and blood of Christ if ever you
(...) have the work go forward.

When some times the means of Grace are (...) and leave some sad impressions
and remembrances (...) their own conditions upon them, what they are (...)
what they should be how far short they fail of (...) which the Lord requires,
the rule and their (...) Comforts may justly call for at their hands; (...)
their consciences are struggling within them, (...) present them with Direful
apprehensions of the (...) of their sins and the punishments which they (...)
diserved; when they feel the Lord also striving (...) them by the Convictions
of his spirit, and the (...) expression of his heavy Displeasure by reason of
the sins, and yet are at a stall and a stand in their (...) spirits, they can
make no work of it, forward (...) cannot go, and backward they dare not go,
(...) they have that cannot repent, they cannot part (...) their sins, nor give
way and welcome to the (...) tie of the truth that might work upon them, nor
(...) power of the promises of the gospel which might (...) their souls to
the Lord Jesus: and here the (...) may stand long. And it is hard but one time
or (...) God meets with every man that lives under the (...) there are many
knocks that men have in their (...) that all the town knows not of: I must not
do (...) nor be thus, I must either be another man or a (...) man, and then the
man is at a set backward he (...) not forward he will not. What will you do
now O Look to the power of the blood and purchase (...) Christ that is the
effectual means to attain this (...) it never fails to bring application
with it as suits (...) (...) good pleasure of the Lord: no (...) but this can
(...) it and this never fails to attain this end, (...) let the eye of thy soul
look thither still. Do not (...) trouble thy self, to pry into Gods
counsels, (...) suffer thy self to be bewildred in such curious (...) as to
search the depths of Gods everlasting (...) whether thou were elected or no:
thou will (...) thy self there because that way is unlawful (...) thou
medlest with that which belongs not to (...) Secret things belong to God. But
this is (...) Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
that as the blood of Christ has purchased all good (...) the end of this
purchase is the application of it which (...) will never fail to attain; Thou will say, O that I (...) that the blood of Christ had purchased for me; (...)
with that; for thou shall never have the work of grace or the knowledge of grace
but by the virtue of this blood therefore you must look to this to work (...),
if you would have both. What God will do (...) that to him, this is the means
he has appointed (...) the attainment of this end, therefore look thou to that
As the Leaper said to our Savior if thou will Matthew. 8. 2.
(...) can make me clean, here only cleansing (...) is to be had thither he
looks, there he waits and Submits, that is his Duty, whether God will give it
or no that is in the liberty of his own free will, that (...) Leaves to him,
So do thou; whether God will do (...) for thee or no, that is his prerogative,
if he give thee nothing he ows thee nothing, but that Christ has purchased it
for this end, and that I should expect it from hence that's his will and my
duty.

We have done with the extent of this application Branch
to whom it appertains, we are now to enquire into the second branch of the
Doctrine.

2. The manner how it is wrought.
The principle says thus. It Is made theirs] the Doctrine thus. They are put
into possession of all saving good by Christ.] Here three things are employed.

1 They cannot make it their own (...) they cannot put themselves into
possession. 2 The manner and order how this is done. 3 The cause that does it.
Of these we shall speak in their order.

1. It is not in any Man's power to make (...) of any Spiritual good which
Christ (...) Purchased, to himself; for if he could, he (...) do it some of
these ways.

Either by force we must take it, rush by (...) into the right and possession
of the Lord Jesus, (...) wrest by strong hand everlasting happiness from (...)
whether he will or no. But that is impossible, (...) what is the clay to the
Potter? So the Prophet ex Isay, 45. 9
presses the difference; the interogation shows (...) impossibility of the
opposition: they may (...) Jer. 18. 6
with his will but they cannot cross it, (...) the (...) Who has resisted his
will? and therefore the Lord (...) Romans 9. 19.
the Vineyard determines it by his absolute good (...) sure, Mat. 20. 14, 15. I
will give to this last (...) thee, may I not do what I will with my own?

As by force we cannot take it, So by justice we (...) When we (...) done all
we can we are (...) Servants (...) have done no more than we should. Luke 17.
(...) Nay we do much that we should not do, Psalm. (...)

3. If (...) should strictly mark what is done (...) miss Lord who could
abide it.

We of our selves are not capable of this, (...) John 1. 5. (...) (...) shined
in (...) (...) the darkness (...) ded it not. John 14. 17. I will send the
Spirit whom the World cannot receive. 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural man receives
not the things of the Spirit, neither can he receive them. (...) and therefore
Jo. 8. 37.
our Savior complains that his word found no place in them, all the room was
taken up already, as our Savior when he came into the World, so when (...)
comes into men's hearts; yea if a natural man might (...) Heaven for the
taking, if it were put into his hand (...) were not able to hold it. So the
young man when he (...) as free an offer and as fair terms as ever were (...)
to any, Go and sell all that thou have, come (...) Mat. 19. 21. 22.
me and thou shall have treasure in Heaven, it (...) said he went away
sorrowful, he would none of the Kingdom of Heaven upon those terms, he
neither (...) nor could receive it.

A man would not be made capable, he would not (...) God enable him to receive
that grace which being (...) thou found me O mine enemy? The carnal 1 Kings,
21. 20.
(...) is not subject to the Law of God nor indeed can (...). Romans 8. 7. So
Augustine consessed, that when (...) prayed against his lusts, he secretly
wished that (...) would not hear his prayer.

It dasheth the vain imagination of a company of (...) Use 1
ignorant creatures whom Satan carries (...) down to Hell, by a false conceit
of their (...) to compass and contrive their own spiritual (...) according to
their own humor; They put (...) opportunities, slight al offers of life and
means (...) grace, proceed fearlesly in the pursuit of any (...); what ever
best suits their own carnal (...), presuming vainly of their own power to help,
as they list and like best, when and (...) they will. Tell them of the (...) of
the work, shortness of their time, uncertainty of their lives; how (...) and
irrecoverable their hazard and loss will be, and therefore they should (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) and take greedily each opportunity that is presented
unto them. They (...) their retreat hither, and here they (...) themselves,
against all fears that might surprise, terrors that might take hold upon them,
threatenings of the (...) which might shake their hearts in their (...) (...).
They have found a nearer way and (...) would not put themselves to unnecessary
(...) though they begin late they can do (...) with (...) (...) bour, and much
(...) and yet do it well; what (...) (...) (...) out his days in melancholy
(...) sink his heart in sadness and discouragement, (...) his (...) of her
present content and delight, and (...) themselves more miserable than they need
when (...) years grow on, and their eyes grow dim, (...) (...) strength (...)
them, then they will cry (...) (...) (...) seek pardon, and repent of their
(...) (...), (...) (...) (...) of Christ, and then (...) is (...). (...) thus
they conceive (...) is (...) (...) (...) either to (...) mercy or (...) (...),
to (...) or take eternal (...) (...) Salvation as they list. True they cannot
(...) (...) nor are they able to purchase it, but (...) has (...) rited
eternal Life and God so freely (...) it to (...) man that will, they put it
beyond (...) peradventures (...) make no doubt of it, but to make (...) their
own as (...) (...), And by this selfdeceiying (...) (...) (...) men suddenly
drop down to destruction, (...) they do indeed (...) where they are and what
(...) do.

But, what a desperate folly is this? so to (...) man's soul, as to put the
weight of eternal Life and Salvation, and all the hopes thou have merely upon
(...), so that according to the course thou have plotted it is utterly
impossible thou should (...) of any good For;

First thou know not whether thou shall live, it is (...) in thy hand to
maintain thy own natural life; for

Imagine, God give thee life, and thou have ability Luke 23. (...). (...) is
said one of the Thieves reviled Christ, when (...) was to die he fell a railing
afresh upon our Savior (...), saying, if thou be the Christ save thy self
(...) us; One would have thought the place of (...), and the ghastly looks of
Death now presented (...) his eyes, might have put other words into his (...),
other thoughts into his mind, but he could (...) leave his life than his
blasphemy. So a (...) going to dye, a Minister coming to him stirred (...) up
to cry to the Lord and to look to Heaven for (...), he professed, (though he
was then going to (...) Gallows) that he would not do it, O says he I (...)
rejected counsel in my life, and I cannot take (...) at my death.

If yet the rack of conscience does constrain thee toward thy latter end to
vent out those hideous apprehensions of Gods displeasure, and thy own misery,
and therefore thou art now restless in seeking for mercy, it shall be al in
vain and without (...). John. 8. 21. The rebellious Jews who disdained Christ
and al his counsels, and refused his mercy when it was tendered to them at
their doors, Christ says to them, You shall seek me but you shall not find me,
but shall dye in your sins, you lived in them, and you shall dye in them,
though you leave your lives your sins will not leave you, they shall rot with
you in your graves and rise with you to judgment, and go with you to Hell,
whither I go ye cannot come, therefore you cannot come to Christ and Grace, for
if they might do so, they might come to Heaven; It was one part of the folly of
the foolish Virgins. To sleep away their time and never sought to get oil into
their Lamps until it Mat. 25.
was too late, and then they cried to their fellows (...) us some of your (...)
for our Lamps are gone out, some of that faith and repentance which formerly
they conceived they could find at every shop, but they had little enough for
themselves, and therefore bid them go into the City and buy, but al was in
vain, they missed of their oil and missed of their entrance also into the
Bridegrooms Chamber: Thou art one of these deluded creatures, thou think
either thou can make oil or buy oil when thou list, thou will find too late
that thou do egregiously befool thy self, when though thou knockest never so
hard cryest never so loud thou shall find no acceptance, nor gain any
entertainment from the Lord. Nay our Savior that he might crush such (...)
conceits he (...) down the conclusion peremptory that it might for ever
silence such imaginations, after the young man had the offer of eternal life,
and trampled it under seet, and our Savior had told them it was easier for a
Camel to go through the eye of (...) needle, than for a rich man to enter in
at the Kingdom of Heaven, they replied, Who then can be saved? He answered
plainly, and beyond all question, Mat. 19. 26. With men it is impossible; if
all the Angels in Heaven would come to help, if all the Ministers on Earth
should labor to persuade, it would be impossible that of thy self thou
should entertain the offers of Grace. If thou supportest thy heart and thy
hopes also upon this, what thou purposest, what thou intendest to do, know, it
is impossible that ever thou should be good, or partake of any Spiritual
good for thy (...) welfare. It Is not in thy power to live, to have (...)
ability to seek, or a heart, if able, or success in seeking; nay, it is
impossible thou should be made partaker of any Spiritual Good, if thou will
go no other way to gain interest therein.

Ground of Trial and Examination, whether ever Use. 2.
we had any saving and Spiritual Good applied unto us in a right manner; In our
temporal Estates in Civil Proceedings amongst men, it is not enough to lay claim
to Lands and Inheritances, unless by a Legal course they be conveyed and settled
upon us, otherwise a man may be unsettled and shaked out of all before he be
aware. It is so in our Spiritual Estate: Those high and happy Privileges which
Christ has purchased, (...) great Salvation he has wrought and tenders also
in the Gospel; it is not enough to claim it, and catch at the comforts and
benefits that come thereby, unless they be conveyed and settled upon us in a
Gospel way, otherwise the Devil may sink our hearts, and shake all our hopes,
when we least suspect it. Thou say, the Pardon that Christ has purchased,
the Holiness that he has promised to bestow upon His, that Grace and Life,
that rich Mercy and plentiful Redemption which he has revealed so fully, so
freely tendered to His; thou say it is thine; I say, How came thou by it?
How came thou to be made possessor of it? Thou will hapily Answer, Though
long it was before I either knew or considered what Sin or (...) meant, yet the
Lord at last by the Ministry of the Word, and the Work of the Spirit, made me
see the (...) of my heart and life, the terrors of my conscience were like a
continued wrack night and day, and the wound thereof was so dreadful, that I
found it beyond the skill (...) power of means to do me good until the Lord
Christ and his abundant Mercy, and rich Redemption which he had wrought was
proclaimed, and there I heard and found there was no Name under Heaven whereby
I might be saved, but only the Name Acts, 4. 12.
of Jesus, and so I took the Promises of the Gospel, cast my self upon Christ,
and hung upon free Mercy for the supply of all that good I desired and wanted.

You take Christ? you hang upon free Mercy? but how came you by the power which
did enable you so to do? You say, you took the Promises, but who gave them you,
or gave you a hand to lay hold upon them? True, Mercy is free and sufficient,
the Promises are precious and saving, but if they never come to be thine but as
thou by thine own power did make them thy own, certainly thou will in the
issue fall short of them, and of thy own comfort and all.

Unless he who provided and gave thee Promises, do provide and give thee a
heart (...) to take them, thou will never take possession of them; unless
Christ comprehend thee, thou will never apprehend him, Phil. 3. 11. Thou art
utterly mistaken if thou do not find Application beyond thy strength as well
as Redemption: This mistake in imagining that we can make the Application,
arises especially upon a double ground, which is most dangerous and least
discerned.

First, When from the general offer of the freeness Christ, and invitation
thereunto from the Lord with (...) instant and overbearing importunity and
(...) Deuteronomy. 5. 21.
of compassion, Oh that there (...) such hearts in (...); turn ye, why will ye
die? As I live says the Ezekiel. 33. 11.
Lord, I desire not the death of a sinner: the heart (...) to be tickled and
affected at the goodness of the (...), as being beyond its expectation, that
there is (...) a possibility of relief and succor, and therefore (...) at it,
out of a misguided apprehension, that it lies (...) common for all comers, not
looking for any special (...) the soul must have before it come to share (...).

This was the wound of the stony ground Hearers, Matt. 13. 20, 21.
(...) received the Word with joy, and yet had no root: Christ Jesus came into
the world to save sinners; Oh that is a word for ever to be received, Scarlet
sinners may be pardoned, the heart is tickled with it, and so catches at it,
merely out of their own (...): This (...) false Application, and this I take to
be the cause of the blind presumption of the unwelcome guest; Mat. 22. 12.
Friend, how came thou in hither, not (...) thy Wedding Garment? He heard of
the (...) provided, and that the Lord kept open doors, and therefore he
adventured to crowd in amongst the company, therefore our Savior challenges
him, How came thou in? If Coming here, was (...), why should he be blamed?
whether was not the wound therefore in a disorderly manner of believing and
coming? He came in his own strength, and did not look to Christ to give him a
heart to believe, it answers not the guise and wear at this Wedding, which is
that the Lord must as well guide us in our coming and order that, as well as
order the dainties he prepares, and (...) us unto.

The Second Ground of mistake in our Application, terror and astonishment let
in upon the (...), together with notice and conviction, it is only in Christ
that must and can do us good. Out of these common insightnings, and legal
terrors, the soul is stirred (out of a natural (...) to procure it is own
safety) to catch at that comfort and supply, whereby it may succor and releeve
it self out of these pressures which are too heavy for it.

Now as long as those fears and the noise of those direful threatenings of the
Lord continue in the view of the soul, and as long as it does not discern its
own falsness in this imagined and self-deceiving application, out of self love
to self ends, all that while in a blind kind of boldness it may pretend to hang
upon Christ and free mercy.

But when either the legal stroke cease that he feels not a need of the
balsom, or that he fails of his end, and this groundles application (which is
nothing else but a presumption,) fails, then all this work falls to the ground,
and his hopes and heart fails him and all, he will then say, I applied mercy to
my (...), but God never did; I caught at a promise and Christ, but God never
gave him to me; And this is the cause why thousands (...) short when it comes
to a dead lift, their conversion, the promises and mercy they have laid hold
upon come to nothing, the truth is they took a Christ but God never applied him
to them: O Application is a wonderful work!

Thus Esau who despised the birthright and blessing Genesis 27. 34.
indeed, yet out of self love for self ends he seeks the blessing with tears,
but not with a faith of Application, 2 Col. 12.
a faith of Gods operation.

For the root of faith is in the Lord Christ issuing from the work of his
spirit, and therefore he must apply himself to us, before we can apply him to
our own hearts. As the beams of the Sun must come down to the waters, before it
can draw up the water in clouds and vapors: So here, The Root of this
Application being in Christ when we cannot keep our selves, yet he keeps us by
the power of God through Faith unto Salvation, he keeps us, and keeps our
faith: I have prayed (said Christ to Peter) that thy faith fail not; he keeps
us to a Kingdom, and keeps a Kingdom for us, he puts us into possession, and
none can put us out.

Hence we may observe the madness of the (...) hearts of men, which transports
them beyond all the bounds of reason, carries them against the Principles of
Nature and common Sense; which makes them not only miserable, but unwilling to
be made happy. Was there ever any sick man that was not content to be healed,
and any in prison and pressures that was not willing to be delivered? any
helpless that was not desirous to be eased and succored by another? yet this is
the hellish and unreasonable venom of a distempered and sinful heart, that
loves its poison, delights in its bolts and prison, destitute of all Spiritual
good, has neither hope nor help in its self to get or receive any, can do no
good for it self, and yet is unwilling that God should do any good fot it, or
make it capable of receiving any; famish they do, and would not have meat
provided that might sustein them; perish they do, and yet would not have the
power of the Word work kindly and effectually upon them for their safety and
deliverance, it is not a sickness only, but a Spiritual madness; if men carry
themselves so when they are sick, we say, it is a Frenzy: thus Isay, 30. 10,
11. They say to the Seers, see not; to the Prophets, prophecy not, (...) not,
counsel not, but cause the holy one of Israel to cease from us: This is the
temper of every Natural man in this world.

This serves to justify the equal and righteous proceedings Use 4.
of the Lord in the utter (...) and destruction of the ungodly, and the Enemies
of his Grace; at the great day of Judgment when they shall be full of their
(...), and full of their plagues, cast out of the presence of the Lord, or the
least expression of any gracious (...) attribute of God, nor bounty to pity
them, nor patience to bear with them, but they lie under the power of their
sins, and the infinite displeasure of the Almighty. This is that will stop all
mouths, and answer all cavils, they have no more but what they would have, they
want nothing but what they were weary of. You would be proud and stubborn, and
rebellious, and you shall be so; you shall have your belly full of your
abominations, and now you have your wills; you were weary of the Word that
would reveal your sins, convince your consciences, subdue your corruptions, the
truth was your only trouble, you were troubled with Counsels, Reproofs, (...),
Ministers, that you could not have your full swing in your sins; God will ease
you of that trouble; you shall never see the face of a Saint that may counsel
you, never hear the voice of a Minister to reprove you, never have the Word to
work upon you; you have said to the Almighty, (...) Job, 21. 14.
away from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy (...); now you have your
desires. They that (...) me, love death, Prove. 8. last: you have what you
loved, you could not help your selves (you say) but you would not have the Lord
make you capable of any help. Thus every mouth is stopped, and the Lord
justified out of the Consciences and Confessions of the wicked themselves.

2 How this good is made ours.
For the manner and order of putting us into (...) of all this good it will
appear in Four Particulars.

The Soul is made capable of all that Spiritual good No man can receiv any
thing except it be given him from (...), that is not only the thing but the
receiving of it must be given unto him; Math. 13. 11. To you it is given to
know the Mysteries of the kingdom, but to others it was not so, for in hearing
they should bear and not Perceive, seeing they should See and not understand
their eyes were blinded and their hearts were hardened, and so they were
incapable of any good, Coloss. 1. 12. Giving thanks unto the Father who has
made (...) meet to be partakers of the (...) of the Saints as who should say,
they were not fit nor meet before they were made so.

As he makes them capable of this: 10 he gives them he that has the Son has
life, first we must have aright unto Christ, and then to all that is in him, In
him are hid all the treasuries of wisdom and holiness: if once a man have a
right in the (...) all the metal Gould and Silver is his that is there, (...)
may digg bouldly and take freely, it is his own; buy once the Ground, then all
the springs that run (...) all the trees that grow there, and all provision
(...) arise thence are his. Christ is the mine of mercy, and (...) Oar of
Grace, and Salvation, the wellspring of (...) and happiness, all the promises
are (...) and Amen in him, in him accomplished, by him performed this is Gods
manner, first he gives his Son and with him all things, that's his order in
giving and it should be ours in receiving; It Is Satan's policy to make the
Saints be at a loss when they look for pardon and grace, and peace and comfort,
within themselves and then to Christ, and so (...) his labor and Looks in
vain, but we should Look up to Christ the author and finisher of our Faith
Heb. 12. (...) God has blessed us with all Spiritual blessings, but it is in
Christ Ephesians. 1. 3. In him these blessings are contained by him dispensed, and
from him received. And therefore the Apostle issues all here, This is the
witness of the Father touching his Son he has given us eternal life, and this
life is in his Son, 1. John, 5. 11. this is the Tenure of the Saints which they
hold in Capite.

The Soul then stands Seized of, and actually estated jus ad rem but jus in re,
Romans 8. 32. If he has given us his Son, how shall he not but with him give us
all things else, he is the heir who has all, have him and have all; when the
indentures are Sealed then there is Deliverie of the Land, and the Emolument
thereof comes to him from that Day forward, So here the rents and Revenues of
the Gospel come in to us when once we have Christ, 1 Cor. 1. 30. He is made of
God unto us, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption; if once he
be made ours, all in him will be made ours also; 1 John, 16. Of his Fullness, we
all receive Grace for Grace.

The soul has now liberty to (...) and improve Gal. 2. 19. That I now live it
is by the faith of Jesus, Phil 4. 13. I can do all things through Christ that
strengthens me; he has provisions about him to live comfortably and
contentedly in all conditions; I can be rich, and I can be poor; I can abound,
and I can be abased: Men's Patrimonies and Possessions may help them to be rich,
but to learn them how to be poor they will not, nay, rather indispose them; and
God would have us not only live Christianly, but comfortably, Heb. 6. 17, 18.
He has sworn that he will bless us in his Christ, that by two immutable things
we might have strong consolation; nay, To grow up in him in all things, Ephesians. 4.
15, 16. that we may grow rich in peace and comfort, and assurance, in grace and
holiness, and all the good things of Jesus Christ.

And this is the Order of Application: He first makes us capable of, then gives
us a right unto, then estates us in, and lastly gives us the use and
improvement of all Spiritual Good in Christ. Thus it is made Ours.

This should make us see and affect our hearts with Use 1.
a holy admiration at the riches of Gods mercy and Psalm. 21 3.
freeness of the Covenant of Grace in Christ, who prevents his with Blessings
of goodness, and that in the midst of their undeservings, when out of the
stubbornness and crossness of our hearts we oppose his Truth and Holiness, he
does us good when we neither will, nor desire our own good.

He not only provides a gift, but a hand to take (...), he requires the
condition which is exceeding reasonable, and works (...) the condition he
requires, tenders us mercy which we could not have conceived, and that is not
all, but gives a heart to entertain it, that (...) Christian might be and
breath in mercy.

When Adam though adorned with all (...) that was compatible (...) a creature
in his condition, having the stock left in (...) hand, he undid himself (...)
his Posterity, being left to the mutability of his (...) will, though holy and
righteous, how suddenly (...) irrecoverably becomes he miserable: But this is
(...) incomparable excellency of the Covenant of Grace the Lord not only makes
provision for lost man ((...) though it was no small favor, yet it would never
(...) done him good) therefore he made it his also. (...) dam should have had
all conveyed to him by a (...) of Justice, by his own improvement and obedience
and hence he lost what he had and hoped for. It (...) just God should require
service from Adam, it (...) just he should give him grace to do it (for else
(...) should have required (...) from his Creature, which had been contrary to
the wisdom and holiness (...) the Creator) It was also just that when (...) had
done what was commanded and covenanted (...) him for ((...) was just (...) say)
that then he should accept of work and reward it, for to him that works wages
is due of debt, Romans 4. 4. but it is (...) in (...) of the Covenant of the
Gospel. All (...) merely and only out (...) the Covenant of Gods free favor;
when we lost and forfeited all we had, and (...) ourselves for what we needed,
and were unwilling out of the wretched and hellish distemp^ers of our (...)
(...), either to have any thing, or to be made capabl of (...) thing, that
grace might appear to be grace indeed, (...) does (...) for our good, not only
beyond our desert (...) what we have besides Hell, is mercy) but beyond (...)
desire.

That thou may forever each day that passes (...) thy head, remember it to
the Lord, and leave (...) upon record in thy own Conscience; say, Had (...)
(blessed Lord) given me the desire of my (...), and left me to my own will, its
certain I had (...) in Hell long before this day, when in the days (...) my
folly and times of my ignorance, when out (...) the desperate wretchedness of my
rebellious (...), I was running riot in the ways of (...), When I said to the
Seers, See not; and to the Isa. 30. 10, 11.
Prophets, Prophecy not, to Christians, to (...), to Governors, Admonish not,
Counsel not, (...) not, Stop me not in the pursuit of sin, The (...). 8. 5.
(...) was I took hold of deceit and refused to return, (...), resolved in the
secret purpose of my own soul Psalm. 81. 11.
would none of thee, I would not have that Word (...) thine reveal or remove my
corruptions, I would (...) of thy Grace that might humble me and purge (...),
none of that Mercy of thine that might pardon (...), none of that Redemption of
thine that might (...), (...) thou then (...) me at my word, and (...) me what
I wished, and sealed up my (...), saying, (...) thou for ever filthy, forever
(...), and for ever miserable, thou would neither (...) holy nor happy, thou
shall have thy will, sin (...) (...), and take thy Portion with Devils, (...),
it had been just with thee, and I justly (...).

But to bear with all my baseness, to put up all (...) wrongs and provocations,
to strive with me (...) good when I took up Arms against thee, (...) strove
against my own good; nay, when I (...) Mercy, and then to take away that
resistance, and to cause me to take Mercy, and make it mine, when (...) us dall
the skill I could to hinder my own salvation, Oh! the height, the depth, the
length, the (...) of this Mercy!

It was Gods expression of his own kindness toward the (...), Ezekiel. 16. 4. 6.
In the day of (...) Nativity I saw thee in thy blood, and then I said (...),
Consider but thy self and thine own ways, and thou will sind it thy Condition,
and therefore take up thy stand again here in admiration; when there was no
means to help me, no man to pity me, and I had not a heart to pity my self;
when I lay w. ltring in my blood, wallowing in my sin, when I said (...) would
die, then thou beheldest me and said, Live (...) poor Creature, Live: Oh that
Mercy! for ever to be adored, Come down ye (...) Angels from Heaven, and
magnify that Mercy through eternity; (...) would (...) perished in despite of
Mercy, and the Lord made me take Mercy in despite of my heart.

Train up thy self thus, and diet thy soul with (...) daily admiration of this
rich Mercy of the Lord, (...) with (...) daily bread; its Mercy that gives,
Mercy that conti ues, Mercy that perfects al spiritual good for thee (...) in
thee, and will do so to all (...) (...) As they in the rearing of the frame of
the (...) Temple, All the people cried, Grace, grace, grace, Zach. 4. 7. when
it was not power nor policy, for the whole Nation was poor and despicable,
wholly (...) and unable to begin or to carry on such a (...) Grace then laid
the foundation, and Grace never left until it added the topstone; so here, It
was mere Grace that provided salvation, that (...) it, offered it; made thee
able to receive it; therefore thou should walk in the wonderment of this
Grace and Mercy, all thy life long.

Hence also is matter of Humiliation and daily Use, 2
Self-denial while we live in this World, which may help to pull down our proud
hearts, and Peacockfeathers, and lay us low in our thoughts, in the
apprehension of our own vileness and baseness, (...) own weakness and
unworthiness: When we feel our hearts to be puffed up with the vain
apprehension of our own worth, parts or performances, what we are, and what we
do; look we back to our first beginnings and (...) aright of our own
wretchedness, and nothingness, yea, worse than nothing, in that we not only
wanted all good, but we had it within us to oppose all good, and that will
cause us to sit down in silence, abased for ever; when empty Bladders are grown
unto too great bulk and bigness, to prick them is the readiest way to lessen
them; when our empty and vain minds swel, with big thoughts, and high
overweening conceit of our own worth, learn we to stab and pierce our hearts
with the righteous judgment of our own natural vileness, which will (or at
least may) let out that frothy haughtiness that lifts us up beyond our measure,
tell thy heart and commune with thy conscience, and say, It is not my good
Nature that I am not roaring amongst the wretches of the world in the road and
broad way of ruin and destruction, that I am not wallowing n all manner of sin
with the worst of men, it is not my good nature, no thank to any thing that I
have, that I am not upon the chain with Malefactors, or in the dungeon with
Witches, for what ever Hell has, it is in this heart of mine naturally, a Cain
here, a Judas here, nay, a Devil here.

The time was (O that with an abased heart I may ever think of that time) I
never looked after the spiritual good of my soul, whether I had a soul or no,
what would become of me and it, was the least of my care, the farthest end of
my thoughts, nay, loath I was to hear of, or know these things when they were
(...), unwilling to receive them, or give way to them when they were offered;
how did I stop mine Ears, shut mine Eyes, harden my heart? what ways, means,
and devices did I use and invent to shut (...) the light of the truth, and to
stop the passage and power of the Word, that it might not convince me, that it
might not reform me, might not recall me (...) my (...) how often have I
secretly wished that either the Word were taken out of the place, or (...) from
(...), that it might not trouble me in my sinful distempers, and when (...) had
least good I had most ease, and took greatest content; Oh that such a vile
wretch should thus live, and yet live! to be thus sinful! Oh that I might for
ever be abased for it. As in sores, when the proud (...) increases, there is
no way but a Corrosive to eat (...) down: This consideration of our own (...),
may be like this Corrosive to eat down the pride of our hearts. Thus Paul
frequently in the remembrance of his former wretchedness, bleeds kindly and
(...) in the abasement of his spirit, he mentions not his Apostleship which
might exalt him, but presently he remembers his (...) which might abase him, 1 Timothy 1. 12. I thank Christ Jesus our Lord who has enabled me for that he
counted me faithful, and put me to the Ministry, who was before a (...), (...)
and injurious, verse. 13. Hence again he observes it was Gods way that he might
not be exalted Ephesians. 3. 8.
above measure, to buffet him with the sense and assaults of his own
weaknesses, 2 Cor. 12. 7. and thus far he did glory in, and take pleasure in
his (...), not to have them, but to use the consideration of them as a wholesome
Corrosive to pull down those proud swellings: As a man sometimes takes pleasure
(...) the powder of Scorpions, or Mercury Water, because (...) a Medicine
against some poysonful humors; and (...) he directs, Ephesians. 2. 11, 12. Remember
that you were dead in sins and trespasses, Gentiles in the flesh, without God,
without Christ, without hope: If a man conceit that his make or metal is
better than other men's, Let him look into the Pit whence he was Isa. 51. 1, 2.
dug, the Rock out of which he was hewn, he will (...) see cause to conclude
he was as hard, as stubborn, (...) proud as any other, as unteachable, as
unframable (...) any other: And here that Question has place, What have thou
that thou have not received? yea, (...) degree lower, How came thou to be
able to (...) it? stake down thy heart in this Determination, (...) answer, I
have received nothing further than (...) has enabled me, and I have nothing
unless he (...) it, I do nothing unless he quicken me to the (...) of it; the
remembrance of (...) plagues of (...) heart and nature should (...) me for ever
to be (...), I am what I am by mercy, let that have the (...) of all, which is
the worker of all the good I (...); as men pull away the steps and stool from
(...) a man if he stand too high, so (...) should pull away (...) swelling
conceits which lift us up in our own (...); It Is not I, but the Grace of God in
me; 1 Cor. 15. 10.
(...) I any power to be humbled, to believe, to be (...)? No, it is not I, but
Free Grace, that is the (...) and Worker of all, let Grace therefore have (...)
honor and praise of all.

Here is matter of cordial refreshing to support the Use. 3.
(...) of sinners, from sinking into desperate (...), when they see the
weakness of their own (...), not able to reach this work, the stifness of (...)
own wills, as ready and resolute to oppose it and (...) of both, an utter
impossibility to attain it, or any (...) good unto themselves, their hearts
and hopes cannot but fail so far as they look to themselves; but when they look
to this, that as it is beyond their own po were, so it is not their own work,
this may be some support, It is in (...) hand and must proceed from his power,
who can do what he will in Heaven and Earth and in thy heart also, therefore
repare hither and rest thy fainting spirit here.

In regard of a man's weakness, the well is deep and Jer. 24. 7. I will give
them a heart to know me, hither our Savior resolves this work and rests
himself here Mat. 11. 25. I thank thee Father Lord of Heaven and Earth, that
thou have hid these things from the wise of the world and revealed them unto
Babes even so Father, for so it pleases thee. And it is Gods promise, Isay, 42.
16. The hlind shall see and the deaf shall hear. It Is his ordinary proceeding,
He calls the foolish and things that are not, to bring to naught things that
are. 1 Cor. 1. 28. Therefore thou should press God with his own promises,
mind him that this is his prerogative, say, Lord it is not in man to Jer. 10.
23.
direct (...), to humble himself, to convert himself, but it is with thee, and
its thy promise to give me a heart to know thee, thou call things that are
not, Gal. 4. 9.
I am not wise nor humble nor holy, I am not able to know thee let me be known
of thee that so I may come to the knowledge of thee.

But happily thy stifness is more and worse and more cavils removed the truth
made clear, thy (...) settled, what should be done; but Oh! the (...) stifness
of this wayward will, that has (...) al promises and distrusted them, al
threatenings (...) slighted them; so that the distressed sinner will (...), I
have a heart that cannot repent or believe, that (...) receive grace, that
cannot give way to the power of Gods ordinances or make choice of any good,
(...) that I am even weary of my heart and of my life (...): Yet, God can pluck
away this unteachableness (...) thy heart though thou can not take away thy
(...) from it; Of his own good will he has begotten (...) Jam. 1. 18. Its not
in the will of Satan nor in thy own will to hinder it if God will do it, it is his
work he has challenged it to himself, and has engaged himself do it for all
His, I will take away the heart of stone, Ezekiel. 36. 26. Say thou, Lord I cannot
do it, and (...) truth I should not do it, for that were to arrogate more than
I should, and to press into the privilege of the Almighty I only wait upon thee
and bring my heart to thee, that thou would bring me to thy self, (...) the
Leaper said Mat. 8. 3. If thou will thou can make me clean, I have neither
will nor power, I can (...) do it nor receive it, but thou can do both for me
and work both in me; It was the ground of (...) which the Lord gave to his
people in building the material Temple, when they looked at the greatness of
the work, and their many oppositions, Zach. 4. 7. Who art thou O great mountain
thou shall become a plain, difficulties are compared to mountains, when a man
sees a mountain lie before him, he thinks it is inaccessible, and impossible
for him to go over it, so when a man sees the pride and stubborness and
rebellion of his own spirit, he thinks (...) is impossible for him to subdue
these, but if the Lord will he can say unto it, who art thou O great mountain?
and though it be mountainous pride and stifness and corruption yet he can make
it become a plain, when he will humble thy heart and set up the power of (...)
grace within thee; As when the Angel came to (...) Peter the Iron Gate was
opened, so though all the (...) we can take cannot pull the iron Gate off a proud
heart off the hinges, yet when the Lord will come the iron Gate will give way of
it is own accord.

Here we have also a rule of Direction, showing the Use 4.
right and the ready way how to (...) forward the great work of (...) on our
souls when ever the Lord is striving with us in the ministry of the Gospel;
look how God offers Christ and al spiritual good in him so we should attend
his mind, and so receive it.

The Directions here for quickening our hearts and enlightening our minds are
three.

First look to Christ; first make sure of him, as he He first Romans 8. 32.
gives his Son and all things with him, We first receive his Son, and al
spiritual good through him; The Mat. 13. 44.
wise Merchant bought the field, and being po sessed of that, the Pearl that
was hid therein was (...); Christ is the heir of all, and if we have him we
have all, They said it (...), this is the heir come let us (...) (...) and the
inheritance shall be ours, Matt. 21. 38. But this we may and should say (...),
this is the heir come let us love him, let us possess him and then all the
inheritance of grace and glory shall be ours; The woman looks first at the man,
and then she well knows, if she have him, his means is hers also she cannot
want it, if he have it; So it is here, Christ Jesus is the head and (...) of
his Church all the great things of life and grace and glory are al in his hand,
in his having, and his giving, once have Christ and have all, therefore eye a
Savior look to him and make sure of him above all.

Look at all graces as either they lead to Christ or This one thing I do, I
press forward after the (...) the price of the high calling of God in Christ
Jesus, still we should look at him, that we may have (...), and enjoy him this
should be the mark we (...) aim at the goal we should run for, look at (...)
duties as they are means to bring us to him, and to (...) saving good from him,
say to the great work (...) contrition humiliation vocation whence come you,
whither go you? they will all say, to bring you to (...), (...) so look at them
so attend to them. Again, sanctification holiness obedience whence come you?
why from Jesus Christ, here they all center; (...) always the way to Zion, the
way to Christ, (...) to come to him how to receive spiritual good from him;
whom seek you? A Christ: why are you (...)? why pray you? and why weep you? It
is (...) a Christ, thus if we make Jesus Christ the center of all graces and
duties, then they will become truly (...), and truly comfortable to our own
souls.

When we would have our graces either increased or finisher of our (...) and
leave our hearts and graces with him; the Wheel drives the Mill, but the Stream
drives the Wheel, the Sail carries the Ship, but no longer than the Wind
carries the Sail. So (...) is here, Ephe. 6. 10. Be strong in the Lord and the
power of his might, else there is neither power nor might (...) strength to be
had from our own graces or abilities in the time of need, They that wait upon
the Lord shall renew their strength as the Eagle, they shall (...) changes of
strength, renewed resolution, courage and constancy in a Christian course,
whereas the strongest without so doing will grow weak and feeble.

Exhortation, All the faithful are hence to be Exhorted, Use 5.
to know their duty, and to deal with these Spiritual good things, as men use
to do with their Possessions, Christ has made them yours, now you may, you
should, you ought to use them as your own, There is never a humbled believing
Soul but Christ has put him into possession of al Spiritual good, as if he
should say, Christ and Wisdom 1 Cor. 1. 30.
and Justification, and Sanctification and Redemption, in him and with him and
from him these are all yours; go your ways then and use these as good (...)
are wont to do with their (...), and look what a man would do when he is come
into his possession, so do thou with all that good that Christ has made thine.

The care of good Husbands about that which (...) their's discovers it is self
in three things.

Men that are prudent will see their estates settled, (...) in Readiness and
Safety.

1 In Safety, tender and choice he is in this, above (...) things else in the
(...), why his whole estate lies (...) it, it is al he has to show; and he will
not leave (...) at six and sevens cast them in a blind corner, so (...) dust
and silth may blur them, or the moth (...) them, or children rear them, No: If
there be (...) Box fitter than another, one Lock or Chest surer (...) another,
there he lays them and locks them (...).

2 Not only in Safety but in Readiness, he does (...) content himself to say, I
am sure they are safe, (...) I cannot find them,. I have forgot where I left
(...), and laid them, No: They are never to seek, (...) can find them in the
dark and (...) them (...), and which is more, though a man cannot read a (...)
yet if he be a prudent man he can (...) tell upon what tenure he holds them,
how they were convayed to him how estated upon him, that if he be forced to try
it by Law he can maintain his own, why do you do so now (I speak to Believers)
God has put you into possession of all spiritual good, once in Christ then you
are Justisied, Adopted, (...), Glorified, why do this then, make these sure,
and keep these sure (...) your own comfort.

First make sure your Evidence for Christ and all saving good in him: 2 Cor.
13. 5. Examine your selves prove your selves whether you be in the Faith or no,
know ye not that Christ is in you, except you be to be reproved, as who should
say, this is that all (...) to try to and find out, and you too or else you are
to blame: you should try it make it good to your selves in all Courts, by the
Law, and by the Gospel, by the tenure of the Prophets and Promises, and by all
the truths of God in the whole word of God: you ought to do thus and wise men
will do so, Gal. 6. 4. Let every man prove his own work; for if a man (...) but
seem to himself to be something when indeed he (...) nothing, he seems only to
be called, and to be humbled, and to believe in Christ when it is not so
indeed, your hearts and hopes and expectations will deceive you at last,
therefore prove it, make it clear, get Evidence undeniable of it, then you may
rejoice and be comforted, you may go triumphing to your (...) and so to Heaven:
But what a misery is this, that many men, after many years profession, and when
sickness and death comes upon them sometimes (...) they are ready to go out of
the World, and yet, they have nothing to say or show for Heaven; therefore do
not rest until you have made sure your Evidence for Heaven and Happiness, that
you may be able to say I am sure Christ and al Saving good is mine.

Secondly, when you have made sure your Evidence, then keep it sure, maintain
it and keep it by you for ever, let not Satan, nor Temptations, (...)
Corruptions, nor Discouragements, nor carnal reason, take away your Evidence
from you, but that you may have them to use when you have need of them.

(...) is such a Childish heedlesness that a man should ever be at a loss for
his Spiritual estate; As though one should live in his Possessions, and if he
go but a mile out of the Town, and the day grow soggie, he cannot tell where he
is though he be upon his own ground; when a man should be able to (...) and
sind his Evidences at midnight, as Paul 2 Timothy 1. 12. I know whom I have
trusted, so Job when it was (...) with him in his Temptations and Desertions he
could then say, Job 19. 25. I know that my Redeemer lives, He is a Redeemer
and he is mine, and though I am a dying man, yet He lives. And as a good woman
said when Satan troubled her house, I was here (...) the Devil came, I had
possession first, and I (...) be here when he is gone; So a Christian should
(...), Christ (...) put me into possession of al Saving (...), and therefore
though the Devil come and (...) me (...) his I emptations, yet he shall not put
me (...), I will hold my Evidence and keep my possession (...) with standing all.

By a holy and blessed kind of boldness you should what God has done for Zion,
(...). 48. In those glorious (...), (...), Deliverances, Mercies (...) to his
(...) in former times, mark how the Psalmist (...), and so every Believer may
and should (...), as in the last verse. This God is our God: He (...) my God, al
his Attributes, his Wisdom, his (...), his Love, his Mercy are mine, he will
quicken (...) and comfort me and save me as well as he has (...) his People in
former times, David thus makes use of his portion in God here, and so should we
(...) after David.

The Lord had said unto Joshua, I will never (...) thee nor forsake thee, Josh.
1. 5. The Apostle in (...) 13. 5. Shows how every Christian should apply (...)
to himself; implying that what ever Promise a (...) leever reads and meets
withal in the Gospel, he (...) and should (...) it to himself, and say, this
Faith fullness and (...) (...) the Lord is mine, he will (...) more leave me nor
forsake me, than he did Joshua (...) than he has done any or his Servants in
former (...) And so all that Power which was expressed in (...) Conversion of
Paul, all that Mercy which was (...) toward Manasseh in humbling him so
mightily, (...) pardoning him so garciously, all that is mine; (...) not you
such Children as to suffer Satan to (...) you of your own comforts, or to
attend what (...) reasonings may cast in, to fear you from (...) your own, even
all the Spiritual good which (...) Christ has Purchased for you and giveu to
you.

It Is the part of a good husband to grow rich out (...) plentiful Redemption,
and so mean, and under consolation, it is a sign you do not improve the riches
of the Gospel, you play the ill husbands with your Possessions; Then shall we
know if we follow onto know the Lord, Hos. 6. 2. then shall you know what it is
to be effectually called, what it is to have assurance of Gods Love, if you
follow on to know the Lord; Hence the Apostle exhorts, Work out (...) salvation
with fear and trembling. Do not (...) bungling at it now and then, but work it
out thoroughly, and then you shall have according to your hearts desire.

3. The Causes of Application.
Having done with the Manner how this Application is wrought, we are now to
enquire the Causes of it, which are wholly without our Selves, being that we
are not only unable to receive any Spiritual (...), but professedly (...)
thereunto and to any thing that might take away that (...); If then the question
be what be the Causes of Application? I will Sum up the Answer in this (...).

God himself by his almighty power is the Principal Cause, and only those
means so far as he is Pleased to appoint them and use them are the instrumental
Causes of this work.

There are Three particulars to be Distinctly observed and considered in this
Conclusion.

1 God himself is the Principal Cause of this work of Application. 2 That power
by which he works in Application is an Almighty Power. 3 Those means that the
Lord appoints and uses are the Instrumental Causes of it.
I begin with the First of these.

God himself is the Principal Cause of (...): the Persons, yet that the manner
of working of each of them may more easily appear, we will (...) (...),

God the Father: who is First in Order of Woking, (...). 5. 10. The God of all
grace, who has called us into his eternal glory by Christ Jesus: which is
meant of God the Father, as appears by the Opposition. 2 (...) Justify, (...).
8. 33. It is. God that justifies, Who shall condemn? It (...) Christ that died,
which is also meant of God the Father; (...) God is there distinguished from
(...). 3 To Reconcile, 2 Cor. (...). 19. God was in Christ reconciling the
world to himself, by not (...) their trespasses unto them: 4 To Adopt, Ephesians.
1. 5. Having (...) us to the Adoption of Children by Jesus Christ to himself. 5
To Sanctify, 1 Cor. 1. 30. He has made Christ to be Sanctification unto us:
And, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. (...) he that (...) us throughout, in soul, body, and
(...): And this is the cause why Grace, Mercy, and Peace, ((...) very (...) of
Paul's Salutation) is sousually wished from God the Father, and from the Lord
Jesus Christ; partly because God the Father is the fountain in the (...), and
first in this Work; and partly because the (...) of a (...) is never quieted
until God the Father (being the Party directly offended) (...) the Assurance of
his Favor under the Acquittance of his Spirit.

The Lord Jesus has also a special hand in this Application, and that in a
double respect,

1 As he is the second Person of the Trinity, the Wisdom of the Father to whom
the dispensation of the great work of our Salvation was committed,

But, 2 and especially, (which most concerns our purpose) our Savior Christ is
said to make al Spiritual Good ours, As Mediator, God and Man; the Head of the
Second Covenant from whom the influence of (...) and special Virtue is derived
unto all the Members, as the Root from whom the Sap of (...) Grace issues unto
all his Branches; He was (...) Typed out by Zerubabel, in the building of the
(...) Temple, He lays both thefirst, and the last stone. Zach. 4. 9


More particularly the immediate dispensation of this Work as it comes from our
Savior, proceeds from his Exaltation, or Resurrection, (because that is the
first step wherein that Exaltation is expressed and discovered to us.)

When I say the immediate dispensation of this Work, the meaning is, That
though the Lord Jesus is the Author, yet that of Christ, or that in Christ,
that in Christ whence the (...) nextly issues is his (...); The Lord Christ in
the virtue of his Death and Merits, Purchases al Good: in the virtue of his
Resurrection he (...) and actually conveys all this Spiritual Good to His: This
Work of Application falls off from thence nextly and immediately: As the Whole
man is said to See, but by his Eye; to Affect or Desire, by his Heart; to Go,
by his Foot; and to Speak, by his Tongue: So we say of the Actions of our
Savior, He takes away the guilt of our Sins, but that is by his Death or (...)
Obedience, in virtue whereof our Offenses committed are satisfied for: It is
through him that we are Conformable to the Holy Law of God, but that is by the
Holiness of his Nature and his active Obedience: In the One, we Answer the
Image of God; in the Other, the Will of God. So from Christ it is we die to
sin, but that is by (...) Death of Christ, Romans 6. 6. So here, by the same
Christ it is that the Application of all Spiritual good is made to us, but its
done by (...) of his (...): I take that to be the sense of the Spirit (...)
that known place a little to be weighed, Romans 4. 25. Who was delivered to death
for our offenses, (...) was raised again for our Justification: that is, (...)
was delivered to Death as a Sacrifice to (...) (...) our Sin; so the word sin
is taken, Isa. 53. last, and Levit. 7. 7. we read of a sin offering; that is, A
Sacrisice Expiatory to take away the guilt of our Sin And he was raised again
for our Justification: (...) is, To apply this Purchase for our Justification,
(...) that the perfect Righteousness of Christ might (...) imputed to us.

And because this Consideration is of more (...) ordinary Consequence, and fits
the discovery of (...) truth: The next Cause being the Conduit to (...) vey all
knowledge; we shall a little clear it, out (...) the place (...), and the full
Sense will (...) (...) up in this Order:

1 Christ's Resurrection is not our Justification. 2 Nor yet does it only serve
to declar it. 3 Therefore it remains, (...) it must (...) to apply Christ's
Merits to us.
First, Christ's Resurrection is not our (...); The Law required it not, it was
no part of the Command, nor any (...) of God to enjoin any man to (...) again:
neither did our sin call for it at our hand (...) point of Satisfaction, for
the terms of the Curse (...) thus, The day thou eatest there of thou shall die
(...) death, Genesis 2. 19. That only (...) Answers the Law and divine Justice,
for that only we are Justified: (...) Resurrection Answers not the Law nor yet
(...) thing of divine Justice; for that which the Law never required, by that
it never can be Answered: But (...) Law requires a man, either to do that he
may live, (...) to die if he sin; but it never requires him to rise (...),
that is no part of the Command, or the Curse, or (...): Therefore the
Resurrection of Christ (...) no part of Payment which is imputed, or for which
(...) are Justified: We owed Two things, Doing, (...) Dying; these answer the
whole Debt, the Law, (...) Justice of God.

Though the Resurrection of Christ be no part os Cor. 15. 17. and he makes it
one of those (...), whereby he urges them that deny the (...), If Christ be not
risen, your faith is vain, (...) are yet in your sins: Whereas if this (...)
may stand, That the Resurrection is barely a (...) of Justification, a man
might show Paul's (...) to be a weak one: For, it does not follow, (...) a man's
Faith might find success without it, (...) the Resurrection of Christ does not
give a being (...) Justification, but only declare it; as they say: (...) the
Text says, If Christ be not Risen, you are yet (...) your Sins; yet in the gall
of bitterness, and bonds (...) iniquity; your sins are not pardoned, not
subdued.

Therefore (if it be no part of the Payment (...) which we are justified, and
yet more than a bare declaration

Not only the text is clear (...) it, but the nature (...) Reas.
Application calls for it in a special manner, For by the (...) of man we are
liable to a double evil: 1 (...) the revenging Justice of God. 2 To the (...)
and Power (...), Satan, and Death. For when a (...) had (...) himself into the
hands of divine Justice, it was (...) righteous with the Lord to (...) up the
Soul to the Authority and Vassallage of (...) and Satan: Now therefore when our
Savior Christ by his Death and Obedience answered divine Justice and so took
away the first evil; it was then (...) with the Lord to free lost-man (through
Christ) from the Second evil, the Authority and Tyranny (...) Sin: Mark that
place, Act. 2. 24. Whom God (...) (...) up, having (...) the sorrows of death,
(...) it was (...) (...) he should be (...) of it. (...) cannot be meant of
being holden by the bonds (...) death, as if (...) were bound to (...) (...)
(...) of God when he was in the (...); for he that (...) satisfied the (...) of
God could not stand bound to it any (...); but when (...) had suffered for
(...) (...) in the Garden and on the (...), he had then fully satisfied; for
the Law of God required no more (...) Doing, and Dying; so that Christ might
have (...) again as soon as (...) he was laid in the Grave, but (...) he lay so
long was for another reason.

But the (...) here is, How he can be said to be (...) from the pains and
sorrows of Death when (...) Body was in the Earth, and his Soul in Heaven (...)
say from a sorrowful and painful Death; I (...) that is true: Yet under favor I
would say thus (...) more, It was a kind of pain and grief to the man Christ
Jesus (as to any (...)) that his Body was in (...) Grave when his Soul was in
Heaven which did (...) to be united together; the keeping of these two (...) is
a (...) to them, they are (...) friends made to be together, the Souls of the
Saints now (...) in Heaven (...) to have their bodies (...) (...): Now then,
when Christ had fully satissied (...) Justice, and removed the displeasure of
God, it (...) not possible he could be held by the sorrows of (...); it was not
(...) that his Body and Soul (...) be held asunder then. To clear it yet more
(...); (...) may be considered in a double regard.

As it is a punishment, the (...) whereos may (...) Justice. 2 As it is a part
of that Tyranny (...) Satan by sin does exercise upon a man; It is (...) Death
and Obedience of (...) takes away the (...) of Death in the (...) sense; but it
is he (...) of Christ that takes away the power and (...) of Death in the
Second sense: Again (...) that Sin also has a double (...).

1 As an Aberration or Transgression of the Law (...) with the guilt and
punishment that follows (...) it. 2 As part of the Tyranny that Satan
exercises over the Soul, there (...) a hellish authority that (...) exercises
over the Soul by reason of Sin: Sin (...) the first sense our Savior Christ had
imputed to (...), the guilt of our Sins was charged upon him and the
punishments of Sin was suffered by him, by which means he answered Gods
Justice, and so came to justify us: (...) the tyranny and authority which Sin
and Satan does exercise over the Soul, that (...) away by the Resurrection of
Christ.
This being laid for a ground it is always required at the Sureties hand, not
only to pay the Debt for the Debtor, but to bring the Debtor out of Prison in
despite of the malice of (...) Jailer, and strength of the Prison; When
therefore Christ who is our Surety had laid and paid a full price for our Surety
to God the Father, and had fully answered that Debt which we stand bound unto
by reason of our offense, so that now Justice was well pleased with us, and the
Anger of the Lord appeased toward us; yet now, the soul is in Prison under the
power of Sin and dominion of Satan, therefore it is requisite that God the
Father having taken a payment must let the prisoner go free, and the Lord Jesus
must undertake also to Redeem the soul from the power of Sin, and dominion of
Satan, though they be never so strong, therefore God the Father raised up his
Son Jesus Christ and together with him he raised us also. The soul by reason of
sin comes to be forfeited to the divine Justice of God, to be a Prisoner to
revenging Justice, (for the Malefactor is the Kings Prisoner not the Jaylors,)
now Christ by his death satisfying Justice, he frees the soul from the
authority of revenging Justice, but when the soul comes to be fetched out of
Prison, though Gods Justice be satisfied, yet Sin and Satan keeps the soul in
Prison and will not let it go, unless by strong hand, therefore Jesus Christ by
an Almighty power raises up himself from the dead, and by the power of his
Resurrection he rescues the soul from the power of Sin and Satan; when Justice
is satisfied the Lord Jesus says, I have satisfied for that soul, therefore
Satan and Sin let him go; they say, we will not let him go, and they try al
conclusions to hold him fast; Now the Resurrection of Christ steps in, and the
Lord Jesus being raised from the dead by a strong hand, he breaks the Prison
which is Sin, and (...) the soul from the power of Satan who is the (...), and
in (...) of them both he takes the soul (...) them, and then puts it into the
(...) of al (...) good,

So that now the Authority of Sin and Satan is (...) away which hindered the
(...) of (...) (...) good things; and (...) is done by the (...) of Jesus
Christ.

Hence it is that al special works of Grace (...) in the communication of
saving good to the soul, (...) are all given to the (...) of Christ.

1 Our Effectual Calling, Ephesians. 1. 19. the work (...) (...) is there expressed
on this manner, That ye (...) know what is the exceeding greatness of his (...)
(...) to usward, who (...) according to (...) working of his mighty power;
(...) whence (...) all this? it is showed in the next verse, ver. 20. (...) he
wrought in Christ when he raised him (...) the dead, and set him at his own
right hand, etc. (...) the same Power whereby God the Father raised Christ, and
whereby Christ raised himself, by he (...) same Power the Lord Jesus works the
heart to (...).

2 Justification is attributed to the Resurrection (...) Christ; besides that
place, (...). 4. last ((...) and opened before) the Apostle in 1 Pet. 3. 21.
(...) (...) Baptism saves us (not the putting away (...) the filth of the
flesh, but the answer of a good (...) toward God) by the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ: That is, not the outward act of Baptism, (...) Christ fignified by it,
the answer or demand of (...) good conscience is an effect of the Application
(...) (...) Blood of Christ to the soul, for when the soul is (...), a good
conscience says, I (...) (...) sins are (...), my person accepted; Conscience
owns (...) challenges this, but whence comes this? the Apostle here tells us,
by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ: That is, the Resurrection of Christ is the
special means whereby way is made (...) the (...) of the dea h and obedience
(...) Jesus Christ, to the soul, and by (...) whereof the (...) comes to be
justified.

3 Hence again we are said to (...) adopted by the Resurrection of Christ, 1
Pet. 1. 3. He has (...) us again to a lively hope by the Resurrection of
Christ, from the dead.

4. Hence also Sanctification is commonly, constantly attributed to the
Resurrection of Christ, Romans 6. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

The reason of all these expressions is, because the Resurrection of Christ is
the chief cause to make (...) (...) (...) Application of all Spiritual Good to
the soul, and therefore we are called, justified, adopted, (...) by (...) of
his Resurrection.

And there is a (...) of (...) (...) (...) Explication from this (...) ground,
Matt. 28. 18. when (...) (...) from the dead, he said, All (...) Heaven and
Earth is given unto me; he received (...) power at his Resurrection: by his
death and obedience, he had purchased all the binding and condemning Power of
Divine Justice, and all the power of Mercy, nay, power over all Blessings and
Mercies, and Creatures, they all became his: But when he rose again, he then
received all power over Hell, and Sin, and Death; whereby he is able to
vanquish these Enemies of our Salvation, and to rescue the Soul for which he
has died from the hands of all these, because he has (...) (...) power over
al things in Heaven and Earth, (...) dispose of them for his own glorious ends.
(...) again, Revel. 1. 18. Christ being (...) (...) the dead, is said to have
the Keys of Hell and Death; that is, he has a Sovereign Authority (...)
dispose of Hell and Death, to deliver his Servants (...) Hell and Death; and
therefore also he has (...) to dispense Grace as he will, and how he will;
(...) hence it is also that the communication of Grace (...) been from the
beginning, and shall be to the end (...) the World; and (...) (...) there was a
larger (...) of the Spirit after the Resurrection of Christ than (...), (...),
7. 39. The holy Ghost was not yet (...), because fesus was not yet glorified;
the Spirit (...) given (...), but the (...), and abundance, and (...) of the
Spirit was not given till after Christ's (...); for all that was given to all
Churches, (...) all (...), from the beginning of the World, was (...) virtue
(...) Christ's Resurrection; but now the (...) it (...), there was a greater
measure of the Spirit (...), and when Christ (...) to Heaven, then was (...)
larger measure than before, and when the Jews shall (...) called, there shall
be a greater measure still.

Hence also Christ having (...) Hell, and Sin, (...) Death, by his (...) he is
armed with all Authority to send out (...) to his Churches, and (...) Presence
and (...) to go along with them, Ephesians. 48. 11, 12. When he ascended up on high,
he led Captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men; he gave Apostles, Pastors,
and Teachers, etc. Christ's (...) is one degree of his Exaltation, and the
fullest (...) largest expression of his Kingly Authority to provide (...), and
to come along with them is from (...): so that here you have as it were a Key
to open several Scriptures.

The Frame of this Truth may be discerned in these Particulars:

The Lord Jesus as the second Adam, the Head of

That he may communicate al Spiritual Good to his

If he must crush all that oppose, then he must have

Therefore he must have that Power that must raise (...) hour and power of
darkness, Luke 22. 53. Christ when he was to die, said, this is your hour, and
the power of darkness. God the Father gave leave unto, and left him in the
hands of Sin and Satan, and they did what they could do to hinder the Work of
Redemption by Jesus Christ, and Christ felt it, and professed it, that all the
Power of Hell, and Sin, and (...), was let loose upon him, and they brought him
down to his grave, and there they would have kept him: But the Lord Jesus by
the Power of his (...) raised up himself from the power of darkness (under
which in some sort he then was) and raising up himself, with himself he raised
up us (...); for as he suffered as our (...), so he rose again as our Surety,
and so we were raised with him.

Therefore when Christ will come and make Application

When the hard heart resists the Power of the Word, and says all Threatenings,
all Promises, all Commandments shall not prevail with me, and when Sin and
Satan (...) themselves to the uttermost to keep the soul still in the Gall of
bitterness, in the bonds of iniquity, the Lord Christ comes from Heaven, and
shows (...) Power (...) his Resurrection, give way Sin, give (...) Satan, that
soul is mine, and they all give way, (...) thence comes the prevailing virtue
of the Word (...) the soul for its effectual (...) home to God. (...) you (...)
the Frame of this Truth.

The Lord Jesus by the Power of his Godhead, did (...) up himself from under
the Power of Sin and (...), and Death; (...) he had a Sovereign (...) Power
over Sin and Satan, therefore he is able (...) conquer and to (...) Sin and
Satan where ever (...) meets them.

The Spirit of God also has a hand in this great

Conceive it thus: A Malefactor that has committed high Treason against his
Prince, and being taken, he is imprisoned in the strongest Hold, the deepest
Dungeon, without hope of release; imagine a man comes and satisfies the wrath
of the King, and answers the Law, so that the King says upon satisfaction
given, the Law is fully answered, no wrong is done: If he shall so do, the King
is bound, not only to be (...) in (...) of himself, and the wrong done to (...)
and his Law, but he is also bound to give his (...) Hand, Authority, and
Commission to him that paid for the Prisoner, that he may go and fetch the
Prisoner from the Dungeon, and (...) him away with him; Imagine that the Jailer
grows sturdy and stiff, he (...) the Prisoner is prositable to him, therefore he
(...) and says the Prisoner shall not depart; now he that has Authority from
the King must be able to break the Prison doors, and then to slay the Jailer,
and by force to deliver the Prisoner from the bondage he was in. Thus it is
here; every sinner is a Prisoner to Divine Justice, Sin is the Prison, and the
Devil is the Jailer that holds him in bondage by reason of the power of Sin,
and by virtue of Commission from Divine Justice; Christ Jesus has come and
paid our debts, satisfied Divine Justice, and answered the Law; that God the
Father has professed, This is my beloved Mat. 3. 17.
Son, in whom I am well pleased, the Law is performed, my anger fully appeased,
and my mercy procured; therefore all those sinners for whom thou have died and
obeyed, shall be redeemed from the power of Sin, and authority of Satan; and
now God the Father gives him a full Commission to (...) those sinners from the
hands of sin and Satan: But now, when Christ comes for the soul, Satan and sin
refuse, they will not let the sinner go; therefore Christ by the virtue of his
Resurrection, and by the power of his Spirit, he does rescue the soul, whether
sin and Satan, and a man's heart will or no, he will have the soul, and humble
him, and call him, and justisie him, and (...) him, and glorify him, and then
deliver him up to his Father at the great day.

Direction: How to help the souls of poor Sinners Use.
that are under the work of Application, either (...) in it or in Preparation
to it, here is Direction to you al, in the greatest streights whatsoever.

When the Lord gives intimation to sinners, that they are not in the right way,
and he begins to be (...) with them, and our Savior Christ comes as the High
Sheriff when he would put a man into Possession of his Land, that is Possessed
by those that have no right to it: The High Sheriff comes with his Company and
knocks at the door, now all that are within come and make resistance and labor
to keep him out as much as they can; So when our Savior Christ comes and says
to a desperate rebellious sinner, that soul of thine was never made for Sin or
Satan, but thou must come and should come out of thy sins, and come to me,
says Christ; when the Word is thus (...) with Life and power, now the soul is
in an uproar, now the soul resists this Work, he makes all the doors and bolts
fast, and he that comes in he dies upon it; But the Lord presses in still upon
the soul, he must he will conquer and subdue it to himself; now the sinner sees
nothing but Hell, and Death, and Damnation before it, die he must and that for
ever if he stand out: and now he sees he should yield and submit, he sees now
the body of death that hangs upon him, the power of his lusts that prevails
with him, and he finds his heart shut up under unbeleef, under the chains of
pride and vainglory and earthlimindedness; and the Devil presents
impossibilities to his view; can thou think that ever those sins of thine
should be pardoned, or that ever that soul of thine should be delivered from
under the power of them; Now (Brethren) here the soul's at a stand, above al,
the stifness and stubborness of a man's own will, no Threatenings, no Mercies, no
Afflictions, no offers of Grace can prevail, but a man will have his sins though
the Devil have his soul, he finds his heart so (...), he must have his sin and
his will though he (...) for it. Ay, now what will you do? The Cause (...) this
work of Application is (...) of your self in Christ Therefore send your
thoughts and keep your (...) upon the Resurrection of Christ, set your eye,
keep your eye there for ever; see a passage or two from Scripture here. Rev. 1.
18. I was dead, but (...) am alive, and I live for evermore, and I have the
Keys Hell (...) Death says Christ: Thou art (...) Prisoner of Hell (...) up
in the chains of pride and infidelity, and the Devil keeps thee under Lock
(...) Key as it were, and thou do shut out the means (...) Grace.

Why behold Jesus Christ who dyed and has (...) again, he has the Keys of
Hell and Death, (...) when thou do say, good Lord is it (...) that (...)
this proud heart of mine should have any good, that ever these sins of mine
should be pardoned or subdued. O look now to the Resurrection of the Lord
Jesus, beseech him that only can do it, that has a commanding power over Hell
and Sin and the Devil, beseech him that lives for ever, that opens and no man
shuts, that he would open thy heart and (...) thy soul from Sin and Satan; cry,
Lord here is a proud heart, a dead heart, and an unbeleeving heart, O let that
power of thine unlock my heart and (...) me of all the evils of my Sins, and
possess me of all the good things of Jesus Christ: therefore have an eye still to
the Resurrection of Christ.

But you will (...), It is not possible, it is that Jesus that I have sinned
against, resisted, despised, and the hour and power of darkness is upon my
soul, Legions of Devils dwells here, prevailing over me and drawing me to sin,
Ay (Brethren,) yet Christ by the power of his (...) can do it for you, Acts, 2.
24. It was not possible that he should be held by the bonds of death; when our
Savior Christ was dying upon the Cross having the guilt of the sins of all the
Elect upon him, all the Devils in Hell came about him then, but it was not
possible that he should be overcome by them; therefore look thou up to him and
say, Blessed Lord (...) thou that wast once under the power of darkness but it
was not possible thou could be held by it, O behold and see and have mercy,
I am under the power of darkness, under the power of sin and Satan, and I
cannot get loose, yet if thou will please to open the Prison doors and to bring
me forth, if thou will open my heart nothing can shut it. Thus you must have
recourse to Jesus Christ as risen from the dead, having al power in his own
hands, if indeed you would (...) the work of Application to be a saving and a
(...) work.

You that are brought to Christ, look hither still; when you find Satan too
subtle for you, and (...) too strong for you, be sure to keep your eye here,
and keep your faith here, look to Christ, and to his death, and to his
obedience, But look to his Resurrection also. Col. 2. 12. You are buried with
Christ in Baptism, wherein also you are risen with him, through the faith of the
operation of God who raised him from the dead. That is our Faith should be
(...) upon the Resurrection of Christ as that by virtue of which we shall rise
with Christ, and get power against our sins; You that have mighty distempers
strong corruptions, you must look to (...) power that raised Christ from the
dead; this is the skill of faith, like the Apothecary when he knows the Disease,
he goes to the right Box, and applies the right Remedy; So here thou have a
dead heart, a vain mind, a heart that can not apply any saving good to thy
self, look not now to the Justice of God; that will condem thee; but look to the
operation of a God that (...) quicken and raise up thy dead heart, as he did
(...) (...) Jesus Christ: be (...) you set your faith upon (...) operation of
God which raised Christ from the dead: without this al our Preaching and your
Hearing were in vain, as the Apostle (...) 1 Cor. 15. 14. (...) (...) Ministers
on Earth had (...) and Preached, and (...) and done what they could, if (...)
had not (...) again al had been in vain, we might have flung (...) against the
wind, the Devils would have laughed (...) us al, you Preach and you Pray? as
when (...) shoot (...) shot against a Castle they do but laugh at them for it.
So here, If Christ be not risen our Preaching is in vain, and your Faith in
vain; You (...) for (...), and we Preach to commuicate Grace, we would have you
quickened and you come for that (...), now that that must give success to al is
the (...) (...) Christ, or else al is in vain; So likewise (...) (...) one to
thee as if Christ had not risen at al, if thou (...) not the power of it in thy
own soul; O therefore when you come to the Ordinances of God, look up to the
Resurrection of (...), that the Minister may speak and pray, and that you may
hear and attend by the power of the Resurrection of Jesus, that (...) (...)
dead heart of thine may find a raising quickening (...) from Sin and Death to
Grace and (...), by the (...) of (...) (...).

The Second Proposition.
Having dispatched the First, we come to the Second

That, that power by which the Lord (...) (...) Application is an Almighty
power.

This work of Application looks to God as the Author (...) it, not in regard of
any common (...) (...) providence, whereby he leads out the act of every
Creatues abilitity to it is end in all the several kinds (...): Acts, 17. 28. In
him we live and move: The strong man faints if God withdraw, the weak is strong
if God assist: Nor yet in regard of that (...) which the Lord vouchsafe^th to
the work of grace (...) wrought; But (...) puts forth an Almighty power upon
the soul when he is pleased to bring it home (...) himself, the Cause is
ordinary, but the Work it (...) is extraordinary, there is a mass of Miracles
met (...) when a sinner is Converted: It was a Miracle when the Blind was made
to See, the Dumb to Speak the Deaf to Hear, and the Dead to Live, but in (...)
al these are met together, the Blind mind is Enlightened, the Dumb mouth is
Opened, the Heart (...) was shut up under hardness is Opened and (...), and the
Dead soul is restored to Life again. Mat. (...). 5. That power whereby Christ
was raised from (...) dead is an Almighty power, but that he puts (...) (...)
the woking of faith in all that belong to him. Ephesians. (...). 18. His exceeding
great power, according to the (...) of his mighty power in you that believe, as
(...) wrought in Christ in raising him up from the dead: Hence the working of
grace is called a Resurrection. Rev. 20, 6. John, 5. 20. The dead shall hear.
(...) voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall (...). So again, Ephesians.
2. 1. 2. You that were dead (...) sins and trespasses, has he quickened.

Look we not only at the Weakness, but the hellish Reas. 1
Opposition that a man has naturally against al good; (...) will appear it must
be more than an ordinary power (...) gives a being to grace in the soul: let
the best obects be presented, the most persuasive and strongest (...) pressed
to a man under the power of his sins, (...) these will never prevail with him.
Let God come (...) Heaven and preach to Cain, Genesis 4. 6. 7. Let our Savior
preach to and weep over Jerusalem, with many tears, O Jerusalem how often would
I have gathered thee, Mat. 23. 37. Let Judas live in the Family of Christ, yet
if there be no more but an ordinary power, Cain will be Cain, and Judas will be
Judas and go to Hell for all this. For,

1 The Sovereignty of Man's (...) Will is such that it exceeds all created
power in Heaven and Earth: Amos, Chap. 4. See what conclusions the Lord there
tries upon the rebellious Israelites, I (...) given you cleanness of teeth and
want of bread, (...). 6. I have witholden the rain from you, verse. 7. I (...)
(...) you with blasting, verse. 9. I have sent among you the (...), and
overthrown you as Sodom, verse. 10. 11. And still this is added at the end of
every instance, Yet ye have not returned to me. Rev. 16. 11. They blasphemed
the God of Heaven because of their pains and sores, and they repented not; Dan.
9. 13. All this evil is come upon us, yet made we not our prayer etc. The
Seventy years Captivity was ended, but their repentance was to begin: When the
Jews had travailed forty years in the Wilderness and been spectators of the
wonders of God, yet they wanted a heart to turn unto their God, Deuteronomy. 29. 4.
There is nothing but God that made the Will, that is above the Will, and can
bow it, and frame it to the obedience of his own Will.

2 Besides the strength of the corrupt Will, look we at the power of Satan,
that has possession of the soul: Mat. 12. 29. The Devil is said to be as a
strong man that keeps the house till a stronger than be comes and binds him, he
improves al his policy and power to the utmost to keep the soul under the power
of it is sins, and there is no created policy or power above that of Satan: He
is only subject to the Almighty power of God to be driven out and (...) thereby.

Look to the nature of that good which the soul is Reas. 2.
to be made partaker of, It Is a supernatural good, That which eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, nor can it enter into the heart of man, what the Lord has
prepared for those that love him. 1 Cor. 2. 9. (It Is meant not only of the
things of glory, but the things of grace.)

Now a man is naturally and wholly corrupted and possessed with sin, Jo. 3. 6.
That which is born of (...) is flesh, that which comes by Generation is but
either nature or corruption, Gal. 5. 19. The flesh lusts against the spirit:
Therefore it is beyond the power of the flesh to close with the spirit because
contrary thereunto; therefore Paul concludes it, Romans 7. 14. The law is
spiritual and I am carnal sold under sin; Again, that which must lift up Nature
to act above its self, must be something above nature, for nothing can act
beyond its own sphere and compass; Trees grow but they have not sense, Beasts
have sense but not reason, Devils have (...) but they cannot close with God;
That that must cause the Dog not to return to his vomit again must change the
nature of a Dog into a Lamb: It Is beyond the power of darkness to bring light,
so (...); It must be as the Apostle expresses it, 2 Cor. 4. 6. God who
commanded the light to shine out of darkness, that must shine into our hearts
to give the light of the glory of God in the face of Christ. (...) is the (...)
of power, not only to work something out of nothing, but something out of that
which is contrary to it; And therefore this work of the Application of
Redemption to a lost sinner, is harder than the work of Creation it self, for
as the Lord had nothing then to help him, so he had nothing to hinder him in
Creating the World; but here the Lord must take (...) the heart of stone, he
must turn the heart of flint into a heart of flesh, he must cause light to
shine out of darkness, and work one contrary out of another.

Why then are commands so frequent it Scripture; Object.
as, make you a new heart and a new spirit. Ezekiel. 18. 31. Turn ye, turn ye, why
will you die, Ezekiel. 33. 11. Believe in the Lord Jesus and thou shall be saved.
Acts, 16. 31. If a man have no power to turn himself, to what purpose are these
commands, if there be need of an Almighty power to work these, why are they
required of us?

1 These and the like commands of God in Scripture, Answ.
do show; not what we can do but what we should do; not what our ability is but
what our duty is, and what would be acceptable to the Lord if we could perform
the same. 2 When the Lord gives a command together with the command he gives a
power unto al his Elect to enable them to obey the command, as when he
commanded Lazarus to come forth, Jo. 5. 20. 3 When we are commanded to return,
to repent and believe, the meaning is not that we of our selves, by our selves
and our own power should do this, but thus, that we should be content that the
Lord should work in us what he requires of us; we should lie under the stroke
of the truth, and receive the powerful impression of the spirit and be content
to be made able.
The Third Proposition.
We have heard, 1 That God himself is the Principal Cause of Application: and 2
That the Power which he puts forth in this Work is an Almighty Power.

Now Thirdly, Those means which the Lord is pleased to appoint, and to use, are
the instrumental causes of Application: This meets directly with that vain
conceit of the Familists, Does the Lord do all the Work? it seems then a man
may sit still and do nothing, nothing is required of us, there is nothing for
us to do. It was a wise speech of one of the Ancients, He that created thee
without thy self, will not save thee without thy self; know therefore we must,
God by his Almighty Power, is the Principal Cause, and those means that he has
appointed are the Instrumental Causes. These are:

First, The Word accompanied by the presence and operation of the Spirit: Isa.
59. 21. My Word and my Spirit shall never depart away from thee: The word he
has sanctified and promised to accompany for this great Work, and it is the
Word of the Gospel mainly which makes this Application for our good; He has
left an Impression of his own (...) upon it: It is called the Ministration of
the Spirit (...) of Life, 2 Cor. 3. 6, 7, 8. but the Law is a killing Letter,
it shows a man what he is, and what he (...), but the Gospel shows the means
which the Lord (...) appointed for the revelation and communication (...) all
Spiritual Good. Again remember this, The Word is but an Instrument or means,
and therefore it (...) no further than the Lord Christ works with it (...) the
operation of his Spirit: hence it is called the (...) of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6. 17.
and Romans 1. 16. The Gospel is the Power of God unto Salvation, as (...) Lord
puts forth his Power in and by the Gospel.

Secondly, It is the Word in the 'Ministry of it, the Word rightly (...) as the
Apostle speaks, 2 Timothy 2. 15. that is, (...) the Word is rightly opened, and
rightly applied, works then more powerfully, because (...) (...) to the Will of
the Principal Agent, and according to the weakness of them to whom it is
delivered, as the chewing of meat fits it for the Stomach, and therefore it
nourishes more, the pounding of (...) makes it smell more: so it is with the
Word when opened and applied according to the mind of God, it (...) the savor
of Life unto Life, 2 Cor. 2. 16. so (...) Romans 10. 17. Faith comes by hearing
of the Word of God: it is not meant that faith comes by hearing of the Word
read, for that kind of preaching is (...) meant for which a man is sent ((...).
15. How can they preach, except they be sent?) but for bare reading no man had
need to be sent. 2 Cor. 5. 17, 18. God (...) in Christ, reconciling the world
to himself, and has committed to us the Word of Reconciliation; that is, the
Lord has delegated the dispensation of his Word (in a way of Explication and
Application of it) to (...) faithful Ministers. Only here observe Gods Order.

1 The Power resideth first in Christ and his Spirit. 2 From Christ and his
Spirit, it comes to the Word. 3 From the Word to the Administration thereof by
the Dispensers; where you find most of the Word, and most evidence of the
Spirit, there you shall find the work to go on powerfully and successfully for
the bringing home of souls to God; It is not all Eloquence, (...) humane
Excellency in the world, but where a man walks with God in the use of his
Ordinances, as when Paul was preaching, God opened the heart of Lydia, Acts,
16. 14. The Word is like a BurningGlass; that which burns and heats is not the
Glass, but the beams of the Sun that pierces through the Glass; so it is the
Power of Christ in a Promise, in a Command, that makes it pierce to the heart,
Gal. 2. 8. He that wrought effectually in Peter to the Ministry of the
Circumcision was mighty in me toward the Gentiles: alas what is Paul, or Peter,
or Apollo (as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 2. 5.) but Ministers by whom you
believe as the Lord gives to every man, (...) are (...) Instruments which stir
no further than the (...) will move by them, nor can do no more than the (...)
will work by them.
Word, Prayer, Preaching, Sacraments; these are (...) weak in themselves, yet
are they mighty through God, to bring in the souls of men in obedience to the
Lord. Thus I have done with the Explication of this general Conclusion
(together with the particular Propositions contained in it) that God himself
(the Father through Christ by his Spirit) by an Almighty Power is the Principal
Cause, and the Ministry of the Word the Instrumental Cause of the Application
of all saving good. Let me ad some Uses that flow from (...).

Information, in Two things. First, Hence we Use 1.
learn, That the (...) of the work of Gods Grace Isa. 57. 19. I create the
fruit of the Lips peace peace, to him that is near, and to him that is far off:
it is a creating Power that must be put forth, Ministers do speak in vain else.

Hence again, it is certain the work of God in Application quickens (...) with
Spiritual Life, when we were dead in sins and trespasses, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2.

It Is true, there is nothing but Nature and corruption in a man, and by virtue
of that, a man opposes and resists the work of Grace: yet so to resist as to
frustrate the work of God, it is impossible: God were not Almighty, if sin and
Satan could hinder his Work.

Trial of our Conversion: Observe whether the Use 2.
work of Application come from Heaven or no, if so, it leaves the (...) of an
Almighty Power upon the soul: as Christ said, The Baptism of John, (...) it
from Heaven, or from man? So I say of Application, Is it from Heaven, or from
your self? (...) is certain, if it be not from the Almighty Power of God it
will never bring thee to God neither in this world, nor the world to come: If
the soul can say, it was not the power of Men, or Means, or Ordinances; I had
all these, I understood all these, and yet was the same man still, I had the
old pride and lusts still, they lodged in my bosom, and came out as occasion
served as a dog returning to his vomit, till the Lord came from Heaven and
broke in mightily upon my heart, and there was no resisting of him.

If you say, Must every one see the working of this Quest.
Almighty Power in his own soul?

This Work may be really and savingly wrought Answ.
though the Saints do not generally see and (...) (...), and how there is an
impression made upon the (...) the Almighty Power of God; even as (...) are
grown, though it be not observed how.

We see the Power of God in other things. Object.


They are Natural and outward, this inward and Answ.
Spiritual: Take the influences of the Heavens, and (...) Minerals and
wonderful things that are wrought (...), yet there is not one of a thousand
that are (...) to discern, and discover these: But this Influence of the (...)
Power of God in the conversion of a (...), is far more secret and Spiritual,
such as we are (...) able to reach. It is the prayer of the Apostle for the
Ephesians, Chap. 1. 17, 18. that they might know the working of his mighty
Power in working Faith; it is the most mysterious of all the works of God, it
shakes the (...) of the ablest Divines upon Earth.

Comfort to releeve the hearts of sinners against desperate Use 3.
discouragements, when the floods of iniquity (...) in amain upon the soul, the
sinner looks to his (...), to Gods Ordinances and Providence, and (...) the
Work of God that should be wrought in him, and (...) what ods and disproportion
there is between his Soul and that blessed Work that should be in him; why
truly this is the only help to a soul in such a case: with man it is
impossible, but not with God, for with him all things are possible, Matthew. 19.
26. Though there be such a vast disproportion between thy own ability and this
Work, that thou should never attain (...) if thou were left to thy self; yet
know, that Christ by the Almighty Power of his Spirit is able to do it for thee.

But the soul will say, the truth is, there is not so much disproportion, but
there is as much opposition in my soul to the work of Grace; why should God
ever give me that mercy which I would not have, and that Grace which my soul
has so much opposed this is another depth: Why yet know thou, that Gol can
overwork all these, and will do so for thee if thou seek unto him; But know
this to thy ever lasting terror, That if thou do (...) thus in the hardness and
opposition of thy heart against Christ and his Grace, that this Power of the
Lord that would convert thee, will put forth it self to confound thee to thine
eternal ruin.

Exhortation: Not to defer the time (...) Grace, but Use 4.
every soul of us with trembling hearts to attend upon the Lord in the use of
means that he may be pleased to work his own good Work in us: It Is that the
Apostle exhorts unto, Phil. 2. 12. Workout your (...) with fear and trembling;
and he gives the reason of it, For (says he) it is God that works in you to
(...) and to do of his own good pleasure; that is, it is in Gods hand to help
us, or to forsake us, either (...) make the means effectual for our saving
good, or else to withdraw his presence and blessing from them, while we do
enjoy them.

(...), Be (...) fearful not to slight any Ordinance Naamans (...) said to him,
Go and try it, he that now counsels you to it, may bless it, and work by it if
it please him.

Secondly, Tremblingly fear to fall short of Gods Elisha did, Where is the Lord
God of Eliah? Here is the Word, and here is the Ordinance, but where is the
Lord God of this Word? the God of Preaching and Praying? It is not in the
Minister, or the means to do good to my soul, but Lord speak thou the word, and
it shall work upon my soul, as he said 2 Kings, 4. 29, 30. As the Lord lives,
(...) will not leave thee till thou go with me; do thou so, when the Lord gives
thee means, say, I will not leave the Lord until he make this Counsel, this
Word, this Ordinance effectual for my saving good.

Be also tremblingly fearful when the Lord works God is there; now the Lord is
working, be you sure to follow the blow, and give not over wrastiing (...)
striving with the Lord until he bless you with the (...) working of his Word
and Spirit, and so apply unto thy soul all Spiritual Good in Jesus Christ.

BOOK III.
LUKE 1. 17. To make ready a People prepared for the Lord.
HAving dispatched the Nature of Application in the General: The Parts thereof
come to be Considered in the next place.

These are Two, 1 A Preparation of the Soul for Christ. 2 An Implantation of
the Soul into Christ.


That so having the Son we may be sure to have Heb. 1. 2.
life, 1 John 5. 12. possessing him who is the heir of all, we may be possessed
of all both Temporal and Spiritual Blessings with him: But before the Soul can
be engrafted into the true Vine Christ Jesus, it must be prepared and fitted
thereunto by the powerful work of the Spirit of God upon it, being not fit to
receive a Christ by Nature, and unable to fit its self thereunto, by any
liberty of Will, or any sufficiency natural it has: When then these Two Works
are imprinted upon the Soul, the Sinner comes to take full possession of a
Savior, and to have all those Spiritual good things which Christ has
Purchased, applied unto him: And thus these Two taking up the whole Nature of
Application, it is manifest they must be the Parts of Application, as reason
inforceth.

The First, is thus Described: Preparation is a fitting of a sinner for his
Being in Christ.
The words of the Text will afford us full ground for the Handling and
Discovering of this Truth, To prepare a People fitted for the Lord: Which words
make known the main Task that was imposed upon John the Baptist, and that great
Work of his Ministry, (being the Forerunner of our Savior Christ) wherewith he
was betrusted, and for which he was Johannis Ministerium, nec plane
Propheticum, nec plane Apostolicum, sed intermedium quoddam Ministerium fuit.
Calvin. Instit.
every way fitted with Gifts and Graces proportionable; Therefore its said in
the beginning of the Verse, He shall come in the Spirit and Power of Elias. i.
e. He shall have that large measure of gracious and Ministerial Gifts, that
special presence and assistance of the Spirit of the Lord accompanying of him,
as sometimes Elias had; that so in the corrupt and declining state of the
Church, which was now exceeding great, he might set things in a better frame,
build up the Breaches made, taking off those Dissentions, Errors, and
Divisions, which had spread over the Body, and eaten into the Bowels of the
Church of the Jews like a Gangrene or Cancer. And therefore as it was foretold
of him, so it was performed by him Matthew. 17. 11. He did restore all things:
Namely such was the lively and overruling power of his Ministry, that he
wrought the Hearts of the Children, otherwise (...) and rebellious to the
wisdom of the just men, that laying aside all carnal wisdom of the (...) which
was enmity against God, and caused (...) and strifes among men, they came to
judge (...) of things that were excellent, to set the greatest Price and
account upon those things which were of greatest worth, the Truth of God, his
Will and Ways, warily to observe the seasons (...) these are Dispensed, and
Revealed; And so with readiness to attend thereupon, and to entertain those
opportunities and means of Grace and Good, whence follows a mutual agreement
between the (...) (...), and these their converted Posterity: They long before
expected a Savior, (...) now fitted (...) Receive the Lord Christ their
Savior, now (...).

In the Words there be Three divine Truths which (...) will take notice of, in
which the Pith of the foregoing Description is expressed.

1 All men by Nature are unfit to Receive Christ. 2 There must be a Preparation
therefore made for that end. 3 The Ministry of Elias is the means to do this.
The First of these though proper enough for this (...), yet we shall reserve
the (...) thereof, (...) we come to discover the manner of Gods (...), in
drawing of a sinner to himself, where the (...) fastening to his Corruption,
and the Lords (...) him from it, being handled together, will (...) way the one
for the other, and give light the (...) to the other; we shall therefore defer
the further (...) of that, till we come to that place: Proceed we now to open
the Second Point; That is,

The Soul must be sitted for Christ before it can receive Doctr.
Him, or Salvation by Him: This is the Scope of the Place, the Way and Order of
the Lords approach; where there is no Preparation made, there is no Expectation
of a Savior to come: Thus it was Prophesied, Mal. 3. 1. (...), I will send my
Messenger, and he shall Prepare the way before me, and the Lord whom ye seek
will suddenly come into his Temple; Thus was it accomplished by the Baptist, to
whom the Word of the Lord came, and he came (...) in the (...) about Jordan,
saying, The voice of one crying in the Wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the
Lord, and make his paths straight, Luke, 3. 4. A similitude taken from Earthly
(...), our Savior he is the King, and he was now to come in his own Person, and
in the Ministry of the (...), and thereby into the Souls of his People; And
(...) the Baptist makes Proclamation, Not for their (...), so much, as for
their Hearts, that the (...) (...) thereof might be dislodged: And the (...)
fit to entertain the Lord Jesus: And that this was a Spiritual Preparation, the
nature of Christ's Kingdom (...) being (...) (...) world, Joh. 18. 36. And the
(...) of his Proceeding being professedly (...) to the pomp of Earthly
Potentates, will evidence (...): For, (...) shall hear his voice in (...)
(...), Matthew. 12. 19. But the Baptists Sermon, who (...) knew the (...) of his
own (...), puts it out of doubt: For so he ads, (...). 3. 1, 2. Repent (...)
(...) kingdom of Heaven is at hand: As the (...) (...) says, Prepare ye the
way of the Lord: (...) (...) he had said, Repenting is Preparing. And (...), 3.
5. Every 'Mountain shall be made low, and (...) (...) thing straight: The sense
of which words that it could not be literal but Spiritual, the accomplishment
of them in Experience, is proof most pregnantly undeniable. The Sum is, The
Heart is the high way, while the Gospel is Preaching, Christ is coming; the
Heart must by Repentance be fitted for Christ, offering himself in that, and
then Christ will come by that means thereunto.

In this Preparation (for the Explication of it) we are to attend Three Things.

1 Wherein it Consists. 2 The manner of the Work. 3 The Reasons of it.
For the First of these,

What this Preparation is, or wherein it (...).

Generally: It is a renouncing of whatsoever might cross the coming and
entertaining of our Savior Christ into the Heart: And it is the fitting of the
Soul (...) Faith, and for being in Christ by Faith: Particularly it shows it
self in Four Things.

The First is the Renouncing the Authority of The old man, Ephesians. 4. 22. And for
their nearness our earthly members, Col. 3. 5. born and bred with us, which
make and (...) the Corrupt disposition of our Hearts; This Combination must be
broken, this League (...); else there is no place for the Presence of a (...).

True, These noysom Distempers will be as Tyrants still, Usurpiug Authority
over the Soul, but they are not acknowledged as Lawful (...), by the Soul
rightly prepared for the Lord: But the sinner rightly fitted, shakes off the
yoke and (...) from under the (...) of these Distempers, (...) though he be not
able to wage War and to mortify them, by any power received; (...) he
withdraws his (...) from his Lust, and stands ready, to entertain a deliver;
This (...) Work the (...) here (...) by the Evangelist, implies (...) non (...)
perfect onem sonat (...) concinnitatem (...) ad (...) aptantur, says Calvin in
Locum. And the Original in the Prophet Isa ah, 40. 3. imports no more: both
showing the same thing, even an utter Emptiness that ought to be in the heart:
Thus also is this Work (...) and set out in the (...) thereof, Every mountain
shall (...) (...) low, It is not paving but levelling, not a bringing in of
some (...) ability so much which this Preparative stroke (...) stamp looks at,
(take it strictly (in hoc signo (...), as they say) but a removing of all that,
out (...) the way which might stop or stay our Saviors coming, for (...) he
Professes, Matthew. 10. 37. He (...) loves Father or Mother more than me, is
not (...) of me: Not (...), that is, Not fit to (...) him, or Mercy by him: As
we use to say, A fusty Vessel is not worthy of precious Liquor: A dusty Cabinet
not worthy to have a Diamond put into it. That is, They are not fit to Receive
these, (...) the Things will be spoiled, not (...) (...) them.

The Soul is brought to Renounce (...) Ephesians. 1. 6
his Grace) will not suffer, and therefore he will have this Coast cleared also
before his coming: And the Soul must be emptied, not only of those things,
which out of the intr (...) Evil of their nature do cross the Nature of Grace,
as Sins and Corruptions; but also of all that confidence in any spiritual
sufficiency (...) (...), by which, while we would seem to share with him in the
Work of our Conversion, and ease (...) of some part of the Labor, we do indeed
take some part of the Honor from him, concerning which (...) has said, That he
will not give his Glory to (...), Isa. 42. 8. The Lord Jesus as he will not
suffer (...) Corruption never so strong to hinder his Work, when he will
accomplish it, so neither will he suffer (...) of our performances or
abilities, be they what (...) will, to join Purchasers with him in the (...) of
Grace, as though he were not either able or willing to be the Author and
sinisher of our Faith Heb. 12. 12.
(...). No, no: We must not ad of ours, but in (...) case take all of him, and
from him; not bring (...) own wisdom with us, but become fools, that we 1 Cor.
3. 18.
(...) be wise; and that is the way which God has (...) to gain information,
not think to ioyn our (...) with Christ, and so become Copartners with (...),
(I speak of the first Work of Conversion) to (...) our selves Holy, Just, and
Wise, but (...) 1 Cor. 1. 30.
our selves we must look that he should be made Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and (...) to us.

Hence the Apostle, Phil. 3. 9. professes he desired (...) to be found in
Christ, not only as not having his (...) sins, but not having his own (...),
which (...) by the Law.

A Real Renouncing of our own worthiness of that the Second Covenant of Grace
made in Christ, whereby it is differenced from that of the Law made with Adam;
Namely, That Holiness and Righteousness wherewith the Nature of man was
beautified in Paradise, though it was not so natural as issuing out of Original
is justitia and data fuit, and debita naturae Adami, in primo foedere. Ferrij
vindiciae contr a Jesuitas.
the Principles, out of which he was compounded and made, yet by all Orthodox
Divines it is in this sense judged natural Non sic in foedere secundo. Data hic
gratia, sed nullo modo debita.
in that in Gods wise Providence and righteous appointment, it was due to
Nature; It being cross to the wise proceeding of the infinite wise God, to
require Obedience from a Creature if he should not have given ability to the
Creature to perform it: It Arguing weakness and unskilfulness at the least, in
the Workman to make a thing for an End, and not make it able to attain the End
(...) which it was made: But in this Second Covenant of the Gospel, it is far
otherwise; when we in our first (...) had misspent the stock the Lord had
bestowed upon us, we were unworthy to be betrusted with any more: and hence it
coms to pass when the Lord will lay hold upon the proud heart of a Sinner and
draw him to himself, he sinks his Spirit with the sense of his own
wretchedness, so that he sees and confesses freely that he is undone without
Mercy, and yet conceives it is not possible that ever such a worthless worm
should partake thereof, acknowledges it is just with God to deny to give, nay
to offer Grace to him, that has slighted, rejected, opposed Grace from day to
day; He knows he cannot procure or Purchase Gods favor, challenge he dare not,
without it he concludes he must perish, and yet deserves by his own confession
he should never obtain it; Dan. 9. 7, 8. O Lord, Righteousness belongs to thee,
but unto us confufion of face, nothing but shame and confusion belongs to us,
no mercy nor grace, Ezekiel. 36. 31, 32. They shall loarh themselves in their own
eyes; and not for your (...) do I these things says the Lord; be ashamed and
confounded, O house of Israel. In a word, then is a man truly worthy that is
fit to hear of, and to receive mercy, when he is rightly, really become (...)
of his own unworthiness.

The soul now stands ready to side it with Christ for Joab sent to David to
come and take the City, 2 Samuel 12. 28.
so the soul stands ready, that if Jesus Christ would come and take possession
of it, and do that for it, which it cannot do it self; this is that that it
would have, the soul is content that Christ should do all; as suppose a City
that is Garrisoned with Enemies, they cannot get them out themselves, but they
are willing that the General should come with his Soldiers and drive them out,
and place another Garrison there: so the soul is content that Christ should
dispossess whatsoever opposes him, and do whatsoever is pleasing to himself,
Isa. 26. 13. O Lord our God, (...) Lords besides thee have had Dominion over
us, but by thee only will we make mention of thy Name; as if the soul should
say, I cannot subdue my sins my self, but let Christ do what is good in his
eyes; the soul is content that Christ should work upon it, and do all for it.

The Second Particular to be attended for the Explication

The soul of a sinner is merely patient herein; it is wrought upon him, not
wrought by him, by any power he has inherent in himself; so the phrase and
language of Scripture, Jer. 31. 18. Turn me, and I shall be turned: and verse
19. After I was turned I (...): that also includes as much, Gal. 4. 9. we know
God, (...) rather (in this first Work) are known of him.

And therefore it is no work of Sanctification, properly, and as it is taken in a
narrow and strict sense; for the sinner be ng justified by Faith, and having
the Spirit of Adoption dwelling in him, has received a principle of life
whereby he comes to be active, Act. 15 9. Having purified their hearts by faith.
This only is in way of preparation to fit us for our being in Christ, that I
may receive this power; this is to make room for faith and Christ, that having
received him, I might be enabled by the power of the Spirit to run right, which
is Sanctification: Hence then, go no further than this work: the sinner as yet
is not a good Tree, nor can he bring forth good Fruit, but is in way of
preparation to be made one; yet this work as it comes from the Spirit, is good
and pleasing to God, because the Spirit is a good tree, and is the Author of
this, I only am the receiver of it, and therefore it is none of my fruit
properly, nor am I said to do any thing to please God by this, because it is
done in me, not by me; As it is in the infusion of the Grace of Faith, look at
it, as the soul is the subject of the Work, the act it self comes from the
Spirit: and as a fruit of the Spirit it is good and accepted of God, yet I
cannot properly be said to please God in it, because it is not an act done by
me.

Hence those feeble Objections fall to the ground, and are wiped away with a
wet finger.

If there be any saving Preparation before the infusion Object.
of Faith, then the soul brings forth good fruit, and is a good tree without
Faith: And Secondly, then there is something which pleases God, and then the
soul pleases God without Faith.

The Answer is easy, and at hand: These saving Answ.
Preparations are no acts of mine, therefore not my fruit, nor can I be said to
do any thing to please God by them, because they are (...) in me, not by me,
and the soul may have a good work wrought upon it, and be the receiver of it
though not the Author of it; but as they come from the Spirit of God who is
holy and blessed, so are they good fruits, and truly pleasing to God.

This Preparative Work imports not so much any gracious habit or spiritual
quality which is put into the soul, as a principle by which it is enabled to
act that which concerns its everlasting welfare: but its rather an act of the
spirit of Christ, whereby it does fling down those strong holds, dispossess the
power of Satan, and quit the soul from those overpowering and prevailing claims
which Satan and Sin (...) over it, as to exercise their tyranny and authority
upon it; The soul sues out a divorce; now that is to weaken, and wholly to
remove the claim of marriage, and authority which the party challenged thereby
to act upon the party and overrule her, and yet (...) divorce is neither
marriage nor matrimonial love, but making room for the right and possession of
the spirit by faith; as Hos. 3. 3. Thou shall not before another, so I will be
for thee. Acts' 26 18. To turn men from darkness, and from the power of Satan.
It Is a cutting off of the branch that it grow not upon its old root, and
receive not sap and influence therefrom. For in the Fall of Man, there was a
double work of Sin, First a turning of the soul from God; Then Secondly a
settling of the soul upon the root of Adams rebellion, by a delivery of it up
into the hand and power of perverted mutability, whence comes a daily
influence, and intercourse of the power of sin, and of Satan by sin, acting of
it as he will; now this cutting off the soul by preparation, breaks off the
continuance, and growing to the root of (...); which being interrupted and
intercepted, it cannot act and carry the soul as formerly.

When this Preparation is fully wrought, Faith is in ultimata dispositione: for
there is a legal preparation which may befall Reprobates, it is a plashing of
the soul not a total cutting off the soul from sin, which makes corruption
couch more close, but will never kill it, nor is appointed by God for this end,
to make way for the form of Faith, but for other ends, (as shall appear in the
use of the point.)

But there is also an Evangelical Preparation, wherein the Lord intends to fit
the soul fully for faith, and its implanting by faith into Christ: and this end
he does never, he can never miss; For there is no Efficient that spends his
time and labor in preparing the matter but he will bring in the form, unless
either he wanted wisdom in beginning that which he should not perfect, or
wanted power in making a preparation for that, he could never bring to
perfection, but neither of these can befall the Lord. Mal. 3. 1. When the soul
is prepared, then the Lord presently comes into it.

Hence that Cavil is crushed, as being a (...) Object.
merely coined to cast a blemish upon this truth, say they who deny this Work,
imagine a man in this Preparative Work should die, whither should he go? to
Heaven he cannot, (...) he has not life not having Christ; to Hell he cannot,
because he has a (...) Work wrought upon him.

The Answer is, he is in a state of Salvation Preparatively, Answ.
and shall certainly possess it, because he cannot but have faith and be united
to Christ, and so saved by him, The like may be said of such as are Justified,
what if they should die before they be Sanctified, no impure thing shall see
Gods face, the Answer here and there will be alike.

This Preparation makes the sinner give way to Jer. 3. 10. It is said they
turned not to the Lord with all their hearts but fainedly, there is some secret
lust reserved in the heart that is the bane of all Hypocrites, but this
Preparative Work fetches off the heart from al secret distempers, there is
none reserved, but the soul is willing that the Lord Christ should take away
every thing that hinders; A reservation of any lust will not stand with
Preparation; a sad Preparation fetches off the whole soul.

Three Reasons why there must be such a Preparation.
First let the Testimony of the Scriptures be heard which will evince it; and
Secondly the force of Argument which will conclude it undeniable.

The Scriptures are pregnant which speak to this point, I shall insist mainly
upon three.

John, 5. 44. When our Savior had in the foregoing verses discovered the
unteachable stifness of the hard hearted and rebellious Jews, that though they
had the Preaching of John the Baptist who was a shining and a burning light to
point out our Savior to them; they saw the works of our Savior daily before
their eyes that might convince them; yea, (...) the Scriptures the Records of
the counsels of God, which might show them the way to life in Christ and
persuade their hearts to embrace it; yet our Savior upbraids their rebellion to
their faces, Ye will not come to me that you might have life, verse 40. But the
question might grow what might be the cause of this incorrigible perverseness of
their spirits, for if another came in his own name they would hear him, but
though he came in his Fathers name they would not receive him. verse 43. He
answers therefore in verse. 44. How can ye believe which receive honor one of
another, but seek not the honor that comes from God only? Where these Two
things are plain.

1 When the poyse of corruption and the body of death so far prevails, that we
seek our selves, and set up our own persons, in the eyes and hearts of others:
when we would study to please men, and to seek applause and approbation from
them, and satisfy our selves therein, and so set up our selves in their
esteem: our Savior professes and that peremptorily, how can ye believe? that
is, it is impossible ye should believe, as if he should say, these two are so
contrary, as Heaven and Earth one to another, they cannot meet together in one
heart; and therefore this is made the first step to Christianity, If any man
will be my (...) let him deny him self and follow me, Matt. 16. 24. Where there
is no denying of a man's self, there can be no following of Christ.

That God should give al to me, work all by me, and take al from me, this is to
seek the glory that comes from God only, this is my honor, when I am willing
that God should honor himself upon me and by me.

2 If seeking honor from man and faith cannot stand together, then the
sovereignty of this sinful distemper must be renounced, as cross to Grace and
Christ, before we can receive Faith or Christ by Faith.

The like place you have John, 6. 44. Uttered Pharisees despised the Person and
quarrelled with the Word of our Savior Christ, Is not this Jesus the Son of
Joseph whose Father and Mother we know, how is it that he says I came down
from Heaven? verse. 42. That which they saw not, understood not, that they would
not entertain; our Savior shows the reason of this wretched rebellion of heart,
No man can come to me unless the Father which has sent me draw him, unless the
Father who has called our Savior, and committed the great Work of Salvation to
him, and sent him to that purpose, by a holy constraint draw the rebellious
(...) out of himself to Christ, he will not he cannot come unto him; coming is
Believing; drawing is Preparing; when God the Father lets in his heavy
displeasure into the soul of a sinner to force him to seek out to Christ for
present relief, there is else no way but perrishing, this is that that causes
him to go out to Christ. It is hence plain.

1 Unless a man be Drawn there is (...) Coming. 2 He that is Drawn will
certainly (...) Without Preparing there is no Believing, and he that is
Prepared, will undoubtedly come and Believe.
It Is the scope of that (...), and the very aim of the No man can enter into a
strong man's house before he first bind the strong man, and then (...)
possession of the house, 12. Matt. 29. The house is the heart the strong man is
Satan, who takes possession thereof, and rules in the soul by means of (...),
the binding of this strong man, is taking away of the over ruling claim, and
challenge, that Satan by (...) lays to the soul, and by virtue whereof he acts
it and carries it to the commission of evil, (...) (...) while our Savior by a
superior right of (...), by (...) precious blood, lays claim to the soul, this
soul is mine: he binds Satan's hands, brings to naught and disanulls his claims,
and so spoils him of (...) that rule and tyranny he exercises in the soul.

It Is the meaning of that order appointed by God in the work of Conversion and
(...) the soul to himself, Acts, 26. 18. To (...) them from darkness (...)
light from the power of (...) to God, first from the one, then to the other.

Take also Two Reasons of the Point.
If there be not Preparation before implantation, Reas. 1.
then the soul is implanted into Christ while it is in the state of Nature,
under the command of Sin, and Power of Satan, and settled in it self; For upon
this ground, and by this grant to be implanted into Christ, and to be at the
same time unprepared do stand together.

But that is utterly impossible as apparently contradicting the Principles of
Reason, for then it should be under the power of sin and Christ at once; in the
Kingdom of Light and Darkness together; in Hell and Heaven (...) the same time;
a Subject to our Savior, and a Subject to his corruption; and so a man might
serve two contrary Masters, fully (...) to the Verdict of our Savior Christ,
You (...) serve two Masters, Mat. 6. 24. (...) at the same time should be
affirmed of the same thing. If it be light, then it is darkness.

The Second Reason is taken from Romans 11. 24. Reas. 2.
where the Apostle speaking of the Calling os the Gentiles, speaks thus, If
thou were cut out of the (...) Tree, which is wild by Nature, and were contrary
(...) Nature grafted into the true Olive Tree: Every sinner is as a branch
which grows Naturally upon Adams rebellion, as upon the wild Olive; the true
Olive is the Lord Jesus, the Second Adam, and Head of the Covenant of Grace;
our calling is our engrafting into Christ the true Olive, our preparation is as
it were our cutting of us off, by the knife of the Law.

If cutting in Nature, is and in reason must be before engrafting; then
Preparing is before implanting, but cutting is before engrafting in Nature and
in Reason, Ergo, preparing is before implanting.

These Scriptures, and these Reasons may suffice to give in Evidence for the
settling and establishment of this Truth.

For Application, this Doctrine serves to Instruct, Reprove, Examine, and
Exhort.

For our Instruction: Hence we should receive it, Use 1.
and believe it for an everlasting Truth, That Christ cannot be united to the
soul, while it continues in the state of Nature and Infidelity: The Doctrine
formerly delivered, and the Reasons alleged for the proof thereof, do force
this Conclusion beyond gainsaying: For if the sinner must be prepared and cut
off from his Natural condition, before his Implantation, then while he is in
his Natural and corrupt Estate, there can be no union and communion with the
Lord Jesus; so the Apostle disputes, 2 Cor. 6. 16. What communion is there
between Light and Darkness, Righteousness and Unrighteousness, Christ and
Belial? wherefore he says, Come out from among them, and be ye separate, and
touch no unclean thing, and I will be your God. We must come out of our
distempers and corruptions before Christ will come; if we touch any unclean
thing, Christ will not touch us; that is, unless we be divorced from all our
(...), so as not to touch them with the touch of a marriage affection (so the
Apostle 1 Cor. 7. 1. It Is not good for a man to touch a woman; that is, to be
married to her) we must thus be divorced before we can be married.

And we are the rather to have our hearts and judgments established in this
Truth, because the contrary Opinion, to wit, That Christ may be united to the
soul remaining in the state of Corruption, is a brooding Error, that brings out
a whole nest and company of delusions with it, which will pollute and pervert
the Judgment, and defile our Practices in our daily Conversations.

1 This maintains the sinner in a careless and remorsless security, and fondly
persuades, that which is so pleasing to the flesh, that a man may keep his
lusts and his Christ, his comfort and his corruption together than which
nothing is more contentfull to a carnal heart: A Christ and a Lust, A Christ
and a proud heart; A Christ and a World; A Christ and a peevish Nature; Oh such
a Christ pleases us well, but such a Christ will never do us good. 2 This
makes a man bold to adventure upon the commission of the grossest evil, this
makes him fearless to continue in it, makes him negligent and regardless by
godly sorrow and saving repentance to recover out of it, he passes not, he
cares not, to take his poison and to drink it in, as his daily diet; he carries
his (...) about him and that which will undoubtedly cure him: he may yet
maintain union with Christ, and communion with his cursed Lusts. 3 This makes a
man slight in holy servises, so as neither to put a price upon them, nor to see
an excellency in them, or judge aright of the necessity of such performances,
he becomes sleepy and heartless in what he does; he is sure of a Christ, that
will answer all, and therefore he troubles not himself with holy duties; if he
stumble upon the doing of them, so: if he neglect the doing of them, so: he
has a way to help all, he can have a Christ, (he conceives) without these; and
therefore he makes no great matter whether he do these or no. 4 Nay if he may
have union to Christ while he is in his corruption, if so: he is then in a good
estate; for he that has the son (...) life, 1 John, 5. 12. Therefore he may
have evidence of his good estate without the sight of any saving qualification,
because he may have a Christ and so be in a good estate without any saving
qualification.
And therefore this Evidence must needs come from an immediate revelation from
Heaven; for there is no appearance no manifestation of it on Earth, either in
our hearts or lives in what we have or do; and therefore then our good estate
may be sure unto us by Christ, when we have nothing but sin, and do nothing but
commit sin.

And hence because both graces and gracious actions may be wanting in this
union to Christ, (because separable from it) thererefore the want of them
cannot infer the denial of a good estate, nor the presence of them conclude
the certainty of a good estate; because they are not proper and peculiar to
such a condition, for then they could not be severed from it, which they may.

And thus, this one Delusion like an Egyptian fog, darkens the whole Heavens,
even the bright beams of the Sun of the Gospel, and the everlasting Covenant of
Gods free grace; cuts the sinews of sincerity, and eats out the blood and
spirits of the power nd presence and life of Grace; and under a pretense of
advancing Christ and Free Grace, destroies his Kingdom, and frustrates the
coming of Christ into the World: For he came for this end, 1 John, 3. 8. To
destroy the Works of the Devil; the Apostle concludes it, verse 10. as a proof
beyond all question or exception, the child of the Devil is manifest in this,
He that hates his brother, and works unrighteousness, is the Child of the
Devil, and yet upon this grant, and according to this ground, a man may do both
these, and yet be united unto Christ, and so be blessed of him.

Look we therefore at these so desperate (...), not as Rocks and Sands where
men may suffer Shipwreck and yet be recovered; but like a devouring Gulf, or
Whirl-pool, whereinto whosoever comes, there is no hope nor help to come out;
as cutting a man off from the careful and conscientious use of the means
appointed by God in the Gospel to recover him: As a Ship that is foundred in
the midst of the main Ocean without the sight of any succor, or hope of Relief.
Besides then the Arguments formerly alleged, I shall propound some other to
fortify against this so dangerous a Deceit.

Reasons to prove that Christ cannot be united to the Soul while it is in its
Natural Condition, and the state of Unbeleef.
Taken from John, 14. 17. Christ says he would Reas. 1.
send them another Comforter, even the Spirit of Truth whom the world cannot
receive: Every man while he is in his corrupt and natural condition, he is one
of the World, Ephesians. 2. 2. When in times passed ye walked according to the course
of this world: verse. 3. Among whom also we had our Conversations in times past,
in the lusts of the flesh; How otherwise could they be called (...) of the
World, unless they were in it.

They who cannot receive the Spirit, cannot receive the Lord Jesus, nor union
to him; but men Naturally cannot receive the Spirit, therefore they must be
called out of the World, and from the Power of Satan, and so be prepared, and
then receive Faith, that so they may receive (...).

But Conversion being a Creating Work; a Work Object.
of Creation needs (...) preparation to (...), or for it, (...) his Word is
(...); he calls men his people who are not his people, and by calling them so,
he makes them to be so.

Preparation is required to the implantation of the Answ.
(...) into Christ: not (...) regard of God or his work upon us, as though he
needed any help to the execution of his holy will; but in regard of the thing
wrought in us; for he working all things according to the Ephesians. 1. 11.
counsel of his own will, and the rules of his Infinite Wisdom, he needs not
any help, in his work: yet it is (...) his perfection and sufficiency to go
against the wise Order set down in the Dispensation of his Providence for the
bringing about of this work; the causes of a thing do not help God in Working
or Creating, they are necessarily required to make up the thing wrought or
created: there is nothing in a blind eye (...) may help God to restore it to
sight, yet God according to reason must put a power and ability of sight or a
(...) faculty, before he will, nay indeed can, bring forth seeing: God can turn
Water into Wine, but in reason he must destroy the Nature of Water, and then
make Wine: for it implies a contradiction to say that Water should remain
Water, and yet have Wine made out of it: So it is in the soul, he can change a
proud and unbeleeving heart into a (...) heart: but he must first destroy the
power of unbeleef (...) (...) can bring in faith.

He that is under the power of infidelity and corrupt (...). 2.
Nature, he is under the guilt of his sins, and in the state of condemnation,
John 3. 18. He that believes not is condemned already, and verse. 36. The wrath
of God abides upon him: But he that is in Christ, to him there is no
condemnation, Romans 8. 1. This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased,
Matthew. 3. last; and for his sake with all that are in him: Now to be in the
state of condemnation, and acceptance together; in the state of Life and
death; to have the wrath of God abiding, and the good pleasure of God resting
upon a party at the (...) time, (...) a perfect contradiction, and so
impossibilities in reason.

Where there is nothing but opposition and resistance (...). 3.
between two, there can be no union; for all union implies (...) and agreement,
there must be a mutual accord (...) things on both hands, before they can be
made one: Amos, 3. 3. Can two walk together except they be agreed? love tends
to unity and (...) the cause of it, and that ever presupposes some I keneis.

But (...) man remaining in the state of Unbeleef and Corruption is wholly
opposite to Christ, and the work of his Spirit: he is wholly Flesh, John, 3. 6.
And the flesh lusts against the spirit, and these are (...): Gal. 4. 17. the
wisdom of the flesh is (...) against God, it is not subject, nor can be subject
to the Law: so far from closing with the work of the Spirit, as it is not able
to bear it. The Scribes and (...) rejected the counsel against themselves: i.
e. to their own (...), Acts, 7. 51. Ye stifnecked and (...) hearted, ye have
ever resisted the Spirit of the Lord. Paul did no more than every Natural man
would do; Being mad (says he) I persecuted that way: The way of Christ, and so
Christ himself.

In a word: It Is said of all, and it is true of all, the best of the Saints,
take them in their Naturals, ye were darkness, Ephesians. 5. 10. darkness cannot but
oppose light. He that is acted wholly by the power of Infidelity, he must
resist the work of Faith, and so the receiving of Christ by it.

There are but Two Covenants that ever God made Reas. 4.
with man touching his everlasting Estate; The Covenant of Works, or of the
Law; the Covenan of the Gospel, and so of Grace; and these two Covenants are so
opposite that the one (...), the other, If it be of Works, it is no more of
Grace, else Works were not Works; If it be of Grace, it is no more of (...),
else Grace were no more Grace, Romans 11. 6. Hence they are severed as far as
blessing and cursing, Gal. 3. 9, 10. So then, they which be of Faith, are
blessed with faithful Abraham, For as many as are of the Works of the Law are
under the Curse. Now all men by Nature are Members and Heirs of the first Adam,
and therefore under his Covenant, and under his Curse, Romans 7. 5. 8. Whilst we
were in the (...), the motions of sins which were by the Law did work in our
Members to bring forth fruit unto death: Those who are in Christ are under the
Covenant of Grace and Life, for he that has the Son, has Life: Hence I (...),

To be under two contrary Covenants, of Law, and Grace, is impossible, because
so a man should be accursed and blessed at once.

But he that is in his corrupt Condition, and state of Infidelity, he is under
the Covenant of Works; he that is in Christ, under the Covenant of Grace.

Hence follows a Fifth Reason.

Who ever is under Grace, over them sin shall not Reas. 5.
have Dominion, Romans 6. 14. Sin shall not have dominion over you, for you are
not under the Law, but under Grace: (...) they who are in their natural
condition, and in the state of Unbeleef, they are under the power and dominion
of (...); therefore they are not under Grace, nor yet in Christ.

This discovers the folly, and dasheth the fond conceit Use 2.
of many carnal men, who have framed a speedy way to Heaven in their own
fancies, through which, yet never any had passage thither; to wit, they fondly
imagine they have Christ and Mercy at command, and that they can make a step to
Heaven in the turning of a hand, they (...) not make such large provision or
preparation before to tire out themselves, with tedious and heart breaking
sorrows, and daily remorse (...) their daily failings; small warning will serve
(...) men's turns: Be it, they love their lusts, and practice them; they harbor
continually their noysom distempers in their souls, express (...) also in their
lives; they crave but the (...) of (...) few hours before their (...), to fit
themselves for their departure and happiness, a few forced sighs, feigned and
formal confessions of their evils, and howling for pardon, out of the horror of
their spirits, now and then customarily adding a Lord have mercy on me, they
suppose they have made all even with God; but if they can but get the
Sacrament, they conclude all is sure, they must needs go post have to Heaven;
if they can but say they believe, Christ must comfort them, cannot but save
them. No, no (Brethren) the Word reveals none, our Savior accepts of no such
agreement, he comes upon no such terms to bring any comfort with him, unless
any man should be so far forsaken of reason and sense, as to imagine the Lord
Jesus would carry the Drunkard and his Cups, the Adulterer and his Harlots
also, the riotous Gamester his Cards and Dice, Hawks and Hounds, and all to
Heaven together, which is (...) and incredible: Oh! these men will one day
find, and that to their woe, they cozened their own souls by their own folly:
whereas sound (...) cost more, the way must be prepared, thy heart loosened,
rent and plucked away from thy corruptions, before the Lord Jesus will
vouchsafe once to look in upon thee: No Harbenger before, no King follows
after, where the heart is not (...) for a Savior, there is no hope to (...) the
presence of a Savior: It Is the condition upon which his coming is promised and
can be expected upon any sure ground. It Is the order and connection of things
(...) (...) has set in the work of Grace, Luke, 3. 8. And all flesh shall see
the (...) of the Lord. The Copulative Particle, And, tells us the sight of
Salvation depends upon that which went before; when we see the mountains of
Pride, high and lofty imaginations levelled, crooked perverseness of our own
spirits taken off, and we made meek and tractable, then there is some hope that
Salvation will appear unto us; but if any man will yet rear up mighty Bulwarks,
and strong holds of rebellion, and hardness of heart, and 1 Cor. 10.
maintain those high imaginations, sturdy distempers of pride, security and
carnal confidence; he must know whoever he be, that as yet he is not within the
ken of mercy, and though he look until his eyes (...) in his head, and his
heart (...) in his body, he (...) never come within a true sight of Salvation,
much less may he think ever to be made partaker of it; why? confer with thy own
conscience; Do thou think it fit the King should lie in the Truckle-bed under
a company of Traitors? Is it reasonable the Lord (...) should be an (...) to
thy lusts? No certainly, the gods that thou have obeyed; by those thou must be
saved: thou would have thy lusts, but reject Christ, thou shall perish with
them, but the presence of the Lord Jesus thou can not enjoy; Let the (...)
man forsake his way and the unrighteous man (...) (...) and return unto the
Lord for he will abundantly pardon. Isaiah 55. 7.

We have hence a ground of trial; whereby we Use, 3.
may gain certain evidence; whether ever we came the right way to Christ; or
that Christ is come or that we have any grounded hope that he will come unto
our souls.

If Christ fit the soul, he will certainly never loose the soul, if he prepare
it for (...) he will undoubtedly possess it by his spirit and grace.

Our Savior is not either so weak or unwise; so weak; (...) at he cannot
accomplish his work and intended end: (...) unwise that he will loose his labor
or leave his work without success; as though he had mistaken himself, and
enterprised that that either he could not or should not accomplish.

This is (...) (...) between Restraining and Preparing Grace; the Lord may
restrain a soul for other Ends, but if he (...) the soul, it is for Christ, and
he will never (...) (...) that End.

There be (...) other ends for which the Lord in his (...) (...) sees fit to
curb and keep in the (...) of (...) wicked, and restrain the rage of their
(...) distempers, why he should take of the edge and keens, and (...) the sury
and hellish fiercness that (...) in (...) hearts of wretched and unreasonable
men who are (...) by Satan according to his will, and ruled by him, even the
Prince of the Air who is an enemy to Gods glory and to mankind.

As first that the Lord might show his power, and the worst of Creatures those
infernal (...), and the worst and most violent of all their corruptions, and
that he has the reins of all their violence and rage (...) his own hand, and
orders it, and their wills and wickedness, not as they please but as he (...);
and therefore he inlargeth their commission and recals (...) Jab speaks of the
Sea: Job 38. 11.) He (...) the bounds and compass of their course which they
shall not pass thus far and no further: So to the Devil he tells (...) punctualy
how far he shall proceed, he is in thy hand only save his life. Job, 2. 4.
Which was a (...) to Satan, as though God had said, break this Bottle but do
not spill this Wine; thus the Lord (...) in Pharaoh, when the Israelites were
to go out, Exo. 11. 7. There was not a dog moved his tongue, against man or
beast, that they might know that I am the Lord.

That by this means he might provide for the subsistence Rev. 12. 13. The Lord
therefore breaks their teeth, pares their nails, and cuts short their tether
(...) they cannot do as they would. As Laban said to Jacob Genesis 31. 29. It is
in the power of my hand to do thee harm, but the God of thy. Father spoke unto
me saying, speak unto Jacob neither good nor bad. It is in the wills and power
of wicked Men and Devils to do harm to the people of God, but the Lord will not
suffer them to act that rage and malice that is in their hearts and so not to
do that hurt which otherwise they could and would. So to Abimelech the Lord
whispers his displeasure in the (...) Genesis 20. 3. And so restrained him from
that which his own heart would have carried him unto.

That he might indeed put his Servants to a more (...) themselves as the (...)
(...) and walk (...) a jealousy and a suspicious fear over (...), and return
and search and (...) and question with themselves: Am I no other? No better?
(...) I as such? Then I shall fall and perish as (...). 1 John, 2. 19. Had they
been of us (...) would never have gone out from us. There must be heresies and
that amongst you (...) (says Paul to the Corinths) that they that are sincere
hearted may be tried. 1 Cor. 11. 9. When there is fall e Coin goes up and down
each wise man examines, what he has, and what he takes.

Now those upon whom legal terrors and these restraining strokes are laid for
(...) and the like ends, in the counsel of the Lord: In the issue the strength
of their corruptions (like waters that are stopped) break out with greater
violence, the Lord lets loose their distempers upon them: and commonly, these
blows leave them at a greater distance from the Lord Christ, than ever before,
and many times, a Reformation of a man's own, is but a Preparation for Sin. He
that is otherwise cannot be hid. 1 Timothy 5, 25. It had been better for them
never to have known the way of righteousness then after they have known it to
turn from the holy commandment, and so to return with the Sow that was washed
to wallow (...) (...) (...) again, and with the Dog to his (...) (...). Dogs
that lick up their vomit grow more filthy than ever, so such as these, grow the
most (...) (...) (...) adversaries to Christ and his Gospel that (...) Earth.
They seemed to be prepared by God, (...) it was (as I say) for other ends, than
for Christ and when these ends are attained in Gods secret Counsel, he usually
plucks up the stake and lets loose their tether that they may hurry headlnog to
everlasting ruin.

But if the Lord do not only curb a sinner, or hack and rough hew him a little
by the word, but cut him off, as a branch or scion fit for a savior he will
never let him lie and wither. Look then to those sinful lusts, those special
and beloved corruptions unto which thy heart has been so strongly tied and
linked, and whereby Satan and thy corrupt heart have entrenched themselves, and
set up as so many strong holds against the Lord Christ, the work of his spirit
and power of his truth, as being in league and confederacy with these noysom
distempers; Have thou felt the tyranny and treachery of them, that bondage and
bitterness unto which thou art brought, that thou longest, and breathest after
relief and deliverance, Isay 59. 20. The Redeemer shall come out of Zion who
are those? to them that turn from transgression, If the Lord turn thy soul he
will Redeem thy soul, and if ever he Redeem thee he will turn thy soul from thy
transgressions, he will make a divorce between thy soul and sin; Have thou
found the strong man bound, those temptations which formerly were so sweet thou
could not (...) them, those corruptions which were so natural, that thou
could not but yield obedience yea willingly religne up thy self to the
authority and right of (...) they challenged over thee, and thou wentest as an
(...) to the slaughter and as a fool to the stocks: But now thy heart is
revolted from that right and power these corruptions and temptations had over
thee, and thou waitest only for a way of escape, now thou art for a Christ, and
he will be for thee, for such as thou art alone.

And therefore this gives in heavy Evidence against sundry sorts of men, as
such who as yet never came into the suburbs of Salvation, never made entrance
or preparation toward the enjoyment of Christ, and therefore are far from ever
coming to the participation or (...) of him.

The first are those which slight this work as a

1 Such as they who are in a dead sleep of senseless (...) conclude their
condition good, because they never knew what a good condition meant, and
therefore conceive they need not be troubled, they should not be altered from
it. They observe no Mountains, discern no crooked paths nor see their own sins
nor the danger of their own condition, and therefore fondly conceive they need
be no better they should be no other: and if men could be as well contented with
them as they are with themselves, they see no reason but that they might sit
down in quiet, without trouble and distraction, and yet I will to Heaven also.

It Is a needless and rigid curiosity of some singular humorous men, that
require more than needs, that they might be counted more than ordinary, they
cry out (as they) Ye take too much upon you, ye sons Numb. 16, 3.
of Aaron, are not all the Congregation of the Lord holy? they wonder why men
should be so troubled for their sins, distressed in the apprehension of their
own condition, they count it a blessing they never yet knew what it meant and
hope they never shall.

Thou that never saw thy (...) for a Christ, art not yet in a way to be
(...); thou who never faults the ways which might stop the passage of Christ,
thou art never like to mend them upon these terms. This was Laodiceas temper,
(...). (...). 16. Thou say thou art rich and wise, and wants nothing, and
know not that thou art poor, and naked, and miserable, and indeed have
nothing; nay, thou art cut out for confusion, fited and prepared on purpose for
an everlasting rejection, Isay, 6. 10. Mark how, when the Lord will prepare a
people for utter desolation, and shut them out from sharing in mercy, he sends
the Prophet with Commission, Go (says he) make the ears of this People heavy,
their eyes dim, and their hearts fat, that seeing they may see and not
understand, hearing they may hear and not perceive, lest they be converted, and
I should heal them: as if he should have said, if they never see, if they never
be made (...) of their sins and selves, they will never be converted, and so
never saved: 2 Cor. 4. 3. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that perish:
There is not a thought that the King will come on progress when there is no
Harbenger to make preparation before.

2 To this rank of those who slight this way and work of God, are your
presumptuous Atheists, when the terrors of the Law are denounced, and the power
of the Truth in the dispensations thereof is planted on (...) to make battery
against the strong holds of the (...) corruptions of men's hearts and lives that
they might (...) down before (...) Christ and (...) up all to him. These
wretches defeat the power and stroke of the Truth by their (...) conceits; It Is
true ((...) they) the Lord requires the soul should sue out an everlasting
divorce between it self and sin, such emptiness and such underness; It Is but a
white at which we should aim, not which we can hit; a Copy after which we
should write, but though it be scribled and blurred it will serve the turn; God
requires so much, but he will take less: he threatens, and it is wisdom indeed
to affright sinners, and in a Spiritual policy (as Fathers do) terrify, but he
intends not Execution, it is but to awe men, not to condemn men. Let all (...)
presumptuous Atheists hear, and fear, and tremble at what the Lord has said in
Deuteronomy. 29. 19. He that bears the words of this Curse, and shall bless himself
in his heart, saying, I shall have peace though I walk in the stubbornness of
my heart to ad drunkenness to thirst. Such a one is a subject prepared on
purpose for the everlasting wrath of God, for the Text says in the next verse,
The Lord will not spare that man, but the anger of the Lord will smoke against
him, and all the Curses that are written in the Book of God shall be upon him,
he shall cut him off, and root him out from amongst the number of his People.

Another sort are such, who though they are not the Lord in the sight of their
Natural condition. And thus as Travelers when they meet with deep ways, and
soul and long lanes that are hardly passable, they make bold to cut a way for
(...), and break over the Fence and Hedge to avoid the (...) of the travel, so
they make a way of their own, not keep the Kings Road. So here, when this way
of preparation is too narrow and tedious a passage, they have contrived a
narrower course and compass (...) their own; They will catch at a Christ, and
press on for mercy and to take hold of a Christ, and not come by this coast of
breaking the league with (...), and renouncing the (...) of any (...) besides,
and in a misguided mistake, they (...) they have carried the cause. This was
the guise of the stony ground, Matt. 13. 20. He (...) received the seed into
stony places, the same is he that hears the Word and immediately with joy
receives it. They should first have ploughed up the stones, there should have
been brokenness of heart; they should have received the Word with sorrow first,
and then afterward with joy; and therefore this sudden and disorderly coming,
brings as sudden and shameful departing away; therefore it follows in the 21.
verse, Yet has be not root in himself, but dureth only for awhile, and in the
time of temptation falls away. As it is with the corn upon the House top, it
flourishes and fades speedily, but no man fills his hand with it. Object.


But would you not have a man to believe? is it not a duty which God reveals
and commands upon no less hazard than the loss of eternal life? He that
believes not is condemned already, John, 3. 18. This is the sin of all sins,
which the spirit convinces the world of that they do not believe, John, 16. 8.
Can a man do so necessary a duty too soon? or has he allowance to neglect it,
and not believe at any time? why? would you not have a man to believe at some
times, when God commands him to believe at all times? Answ.


No: God forbid: There is no allowance for unbeleef at any time. It Is his duty
for ever to (...) it, the Ministers duty to exhort unto it, and require it.
Believe (...) he can: but that he will never be able to do it, to be married to
Christ and sin also, to be under the (...) of corruption, and (...) command of
the Lord Jesus; to grow upon two stocks at one and the same time it is not
possible. And when the Lord in his word so strictly enjoins it, and his (...)
call upon men to believe, the aim and intendment of both is, to (...) them to
use (...) means and take that (...) whereby they may come and believe: First to
make room for Faith, before they can receive Faith; first go out of themselves
and (...) before they can go unto a Savior: and therefore this is not to hinder
the work of Believing, but to further it, and that unto the utmost according to
the mind of God.

A Third sort who miss the way to the Lord Jesus, are such who indeed attend
(...) work in the right place, but spoil it in the doing; make an entrance but
never come to any perfection, yea pervert it (...) by their rash and unskilful
proceeding: There be some quarrels and babbles raised between the soul and a
man's sinful distempers, they begin to be at ods and contention, and therefore
upon a push they purpose to part dwellings, because of some hard measure that
they find unexpectedly from their beloved lusts: the venom thereof vexes his
spirit, and the sting of those terrors, and the righteous plagues which are now
deserved and so presented before the veiw of the soul, makes him sal out with
his corruptions, as having expected other and more pleasing dealing at
theirhands, and that upon their (...) and pretenses made, but (...) he feels
the bitterness thereof, and therefore can (...) judge of them by his own sense
and experience. and thus the terror and trouble and hart-smart which his sin
has wrought in him, setts him busily and resolutely to the reformation and
amendment of it. and in this turn, there may be no Sin, he Sees or knows,
but in his own apprehension, he would renounce all; no Service or duty but he
does approve and practice all: selfe-terror setts him a work for (...) own
honor or quiet; and pitch him at what narrownes you will he will Come to it.
And as the dint of the blow is, and the power and strength of the ordinances
under which he lives, and the Constant houlding himself to the use and
exercise of holy duties continue, this may continue long, and cause both
Confidence and comfort with it. And this is a dangerous and desperate mistake
being a preparatiue for a Child of the law i. e. to a legal reformation, not
for the implantation of the soul into Christ: and here millions perish.

When by self terror occasioned by the sting of Sin, the Sinner is set upon
reformation, and that with much violence, with a kind of thorownes and
stricktnes to procure his own safety, self love meeting with terror setts a
man upon amendment of himself for self ends, as his own salvation and honor.
That preparation which sets a soul upon reformation, so that he attayns his end
and ease there, so that there is deep silence about a Christ nor yet sight and
sense of the need of him, its certain, its naught. for it issues only from
this principle and when that fails, both his duties and comforts come to an
end; This was the guise of that young man, Matthew. 19. 20. who could say to our
Savior, I have kept all the commandments from my youth, what lack I yet? he
lived in a reformed way and rested there when yet his heart was not loosened
from his (...) Corruptions and therefore when he came to the trial he would
rather part with (...) and heaven and happiness then part with his (...). I his
was also the frame of those hipocrites, Isay. 50 36. who fasted and afflicted
their souls and yet did not loose the bonds of wickedness. A saving
preparation though it be not a principle of life yet it makes way and room for
the coming of a Christ that will (...) a principle of life into the soul this
is the end of it, and if it cease before it come (...) it misseth its end.

A fourth sort are such who have weltered long in Luke. 7. 4. he is (...) for
whom thou should do this. So they think of themselves, since they sorrow
and seek and attend upon him according to his will, they cannot (...) with
patience to think they should miss. These men have not renounced their own
worthyness, and would inded (...) in upon the prviledge of the Lord and not
make it free; and so not grace.

How shall the soul know it (...) thus look to Quest.
much to its own worthiness?

I answer in two things. 1. If it (...) snarle at Gods Answ.
dealings, and quarrel with his (...), and privily (...) and repine when they
see others have more and better then they: I see others have been humbled and
pardoned, and comforted; but I go on still in a disconsolate way: the Saints of
God have sought the Lord, and found him gracious to their souls; they have used
the means, and found a blessing upon them: but I pray and fast, and use all the
means of Grace, and yet I feel no power, receive no profit, nor benefit to my
own soul, and there is a secret conceit that God does them wrong: As she said,
If it be so, Why am I thus? Genesis 25. 22.

2. We may know it by a sinking discouragement of heart. When the soul wearied
with delays and differings, and expectation, sits down in a (...) condition;
because he cannot have what he will, he will cast away what he has, and
conceaves he may be careless of what he might attain. As David said, I shall
one day perish by the hand of Saul, 1 Samuel, 27. 1. All men are liars, Psalm.
116. 11. Alas! Iam not fit to Pray or to Hear; I find my heart worse after it,
none was ever in such a case as I: better never to use the means, than never to
have benefit by them; better never to enjoy the Ordinances and Privileges of
God, than to get no good by them: How now! Better never use the means? It would
be better, and best of all, if you were deeply humbled and abased in the sight
of your own vileness. As the Apostle says, What if God will not? What (...) he
will never pardon your sins or show mercy to your soul? If he give you nothing,
does he (...) you any thing? You think your worthiness is not attended, you
secretly think the Lord has forgot himself, your parts and performances, your
(...) and prayers, diligence and endeavors, ought upon due, to be remembered
and recompensed.

No: Thank your proud heart; you are not prepared for the presence, the peace,
the comfort; the coming of a Savior, and therefore you want him. Do you think
your self worthy to be condemned when you think it much to be denied, deserted,
punished, nay, but desayed in the dispensation of Gods goodness: He must please
your pallat and suit your mind and humor at a beck: No, no, mend your self if
you be in so hasty a mood, the Lord will make you know that you are unworthy
of mercy: He will not bribe you, nor be beholding to you to wait upon him for
his mercy, yea, be thankful to him that you may wait; and wonder that you are
not past praying, hearing, and waiting, and all.

A ground of Encouragement to a poor distressed Use 4.
sinner, when Devils assault, (...) grow strong, Conscience accuse, and the
venom of the vengeance of the Almighty drinks up a man's spirits, so that the
sinner knows not how to bear his condition, nor yet how to help himself out of
it: so that he is at his wits end: His Friends pity him, and the Parents
conceave their Child is undone, they never thought to have seen this day: Why
so? It is the best day that ever his eyes saw; he is now in Gods way, the Lord
now seems to lay hold upon him, and to intend good to him; be not afraid of the
work, but be afraid he should miss and spoil in the working. As in Childbed,
when throws come thick and strong, there is most hope of a speedy and happy
delivery, but when her throws leave her, her life leaves her, so it is in the
new Birth. Stormy gales at Sea toss a man most, but soonest land him. Therefore
do not so much fear the blow, as be thankful and be willing to follow the blow;
nor so much desire to be eased, as not to be deceived; not so much to have the
work over, as to have it made good upon thy soul; labor to get into, and keep
in that frame prophesied of in all (...) Converts, Jer. 50. 4. Going and (...)
with their faces toward Zion, they shall (...) the Lord their God.

Exhortation. Suffer then the Exhortation of Use 5.
the Baptist, the voice of him that cries in the Wilderness to sound in your
ears, and to sink into (...) hearts; Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his
paths straight. As ever we (...) to share in the Merits of our Savior to enjoy
him, and his presence and everlasting happiness by him; address we our selves,
bestir our souls in the use of all means to (...) a Savior, and then we may
(...) expect him, and we shall not miss of our expectation. There is no lack on
his part, he is willing and ready, He that stands and knocks at the door that
he may come in: Mal. 3. (...).
Rev. 3. 20. If the door was open, he would come in without question: If the
way was prepated he has (...). 3. 1.
promised to come speedily, and certainly he would not delay his coming. I know
this manner of entertainment seems hard to flesh and blood, loath we are to
dislodge so many gainful guests, so many special friends, darling pleasures,
and sweet contentments, which we have contrived to our selves out of the
earthly comforts of this life. Hence many are content the King would go another
way, and secretly wish they had nothing to do with the Lord Jesus; there is so
much privy search to be made, so much examination to be used, such a sight of
our sins and unworthiness; yea, that which is worst of all to the corrupt
hearted, they must vomit up all their sweet morsels, shake hands, and break
league with their beloved darling delights, which they tender as their lives,
they must thrust world, and ease, prosperity, and pomp, credit, and applause
by the head and shoulders out of the doors, and turn them going: (...)
therefore I am afraid, many (...) that in secret in their own hearts, which the
Devils openly professed, What have we to do with thee Jesus, thou Son of God?
art thou come to (...) us before the time, to deprive us of our profits, to
pluck away our pleasures, and to dislodge those sweet lusts that we harbored so
long in our bosoms and bowels; learn we then to press some sound Arguments upon
our own hearts, that we may persuade and prevail with them if it be possible,
to set about this work which is so necessary.

Consider then, First, Who we be that must (...); And Secondly, For whom.

First, Let us consider our selves, a company are not worthy (as the Centurion
said) that the Lord should come under our (...). 1 King. 8. 27. There Solomon
says, Will the Lord indeed dwell on earth? Will he dwell in a house made with
hands? As if he should say, Is it possible? Can it be imagined that thou Lord
being the great God of heaven, whom the heaven of heavens cannot contain,
should once (...) to dwell in a house made with hands, in the Temple which I
have builded! And what may we say, Is it so? Can it be? Shall it be that God
will come and dwell under our roof? that he will come and dwell under our
rotten and sinful hearts, that he will dwell in our (...) and sinful souls?
Why? he will, he has said it, he has (...) it, he will perform it; and
therefore let us consider our own unworthiness to receive Christ, as a motive
to stir us up to make preparation for Christ; for the baser the place is that
should entertain him, the greater the preparation should be. We ought to wonder
that the Lord will vouchsafe to come into our sinful souls, and therefore we
had need prepare the more for his coming: The Lord has promised to come into
our souls, if we humble them, and make them fitting to entertain his Majesty;
therefore sweep your hearts, and cleanse those rooms, cleanse every sink, and
brush down every cobweb, and make room for Christ; for if thy heart be prepared
and divorced from all Corruptions, then Christ will come and take possession of
it.

A Second Motive that may stir us up to prepare

1 Consider the worthiness of the Person, in regard of whom all preparation may
seem too little; you are not to entertain an ordinary person, it is not a man,
it is not a King, it is not an earthly Monarch, but it is the King of Kings
that will come into your souls to comfort them; yea, his holy and blessed
Spirit will remain with you for ever: Therefore do all that possible may be
done to prepare for his coming and for the entertainment and welcoming of him,
when he comes. In Psalm. 24. 7. David calls (...) his own soul (for so the words
are to be expounded) Lift up your heads O ye gates, and be ye lifted up you
everlasting doors, and the King of Glory shall come in. As who should say, Be
enlarged, Love, Joy. Hope, Desire, and All that is within me, set open, give
way, for the Lord is coming; But who is the Lord? It is the Lord of Hosts, the
Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in battle, verse. 8. And with that he
knocks again, Lift up your heads O ye gates, and be ye (...) ye everlasting
doors, for the King of (...) shall come (...), verse. 9. As if he should say,
What! Shall the Lord knock? Shall the King of Glory stand? Open (...) and make
all preparation: Did David do thus? Why do you do (...) then? Christ knocks by
Promises, he knocks by Judgments, he knocks by Threats; yea, he speaks this
day unto your souls, and labors this day to make way for himself: Make
therefore all preparation, let nothing be wanting, that when he comes he may
take (...) of your souls, and be a God unto you for ever.

2 Consider all that good that Jesus Christ brings with him, and that should
move you; for all the good that we need or can desire to make us happy, he will
bring with him when he comes to take (...) of the Soul: The Lord comes into our
Souls not to trouble us and charge us, no, he comes to bring everlasting
Salvation and happiness to our Souls; Look what Christ said to (...), Luke 19.
5. 8, 9. when he went up into a Sycamore-tree to see him, Make haste and come
down Zacheus (says he) for I must abide with thee in thy house: Zacheus makes
no cavilling, nor no tarrying, but made haste and came down and received him
joyfully: And mark what Christ said unto him, This day Salvation is come to thy
house. So likewise it shall be with you, when Christ comes, everlasting
Happiness and Salvation comes with him; and therefore if you do not make
preparation for him, you refuse Salvation and Happiness that is offered to your
Souls by him. Amos 4. 12. when the Lord had sent many Plagues and Judgments
upon Jerusalem, he says, Thus will I do unto thee Oh Israel, and because I
will do thus unto thee, therefore prepare to meet thy God O Israel: I will do
thus unto thee, that is, I will send Mildews, and Pestilence, and War, and
Famine amongst you, I will draw you out with Hooks, and your Posterity with
Fish-hooks: And what follows? Prepare to meet thy God Oh Israel. If God come
against us to plague us, we must prepare to meet him; Reason then with your own
Souls; Should the Lord come in Judgment to punish us, if we ought to prepare
to meet him, then what preparation ought we to make for his coming, when he
shall not come thus in Judgment to condemn us, but in mercy to save us, in
his goodness to enrich us, in his compassion to comfort us? Then now if ever,
prepare to meet thy God O Israel: Let every heart persuade it self in this
particular, Is Christ so gracious and so merciful, does he send from Heaven
unto us, and say he will come in, Behold (says he) I stand at the door and
Rev. 3. 20.
knock, and if any man will hear my voice and open unto me, my Father and I
will come in, and sup with him: He will come in himself, and bring all the good
things of Grace and Glory with him for the everlasting refreshing of our Souls:
Why! Where are your hearts in the mean time? Therefore if ever, now prepare to
meet the Lord Jesus bringing Salvation with him.

3 Consider again, How the Lord Jesus entreats you, and beseeches you to
receive him, he that might command you, and condemn you for refusing;
beseeches you to entertain him, 2 Cor. 5. 20. We as Ambassadors in Christ's
stead, beseech you that you would be reconciled to God: that is, That you would
prepare to meet God willing to be reconciled to you in Christ, and that you
would come to his terms.

Consider our Savior Christ has taken a great journey from Heaven to Earth to
save us miserable wretched sinners; conceive you saw those (...) of blood
trickling down his cheeks, conceive you saw him upon the Cross, with his hands
thrust through with Nayls, and his side pierced with a Spear, enduring the
wrath of God for our sins, and behold now he stands at the door, and says
with the Church, Lam. 1. 22. Is it nothing to you, have you no regard? O you
that pass by, behold and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, etc.
Imagine you heard Christ say, I have suffered these and these things for you,
these hands of mine were nailed, this side of mine was pierced, this heart of
mine was melted with anguish of Spirit: Imagine you saw Christ standing and
knocking at the door of your hearts, as indeed he does, and say, Hoe all you
within there, all you proud hearts, all you covetous and malicious hearts, Have
you no regard to a Savior? a Crucified Savior? He that died for you and now
laboreth to do good to your Souls, Will not this move you to prepare your
hearts for him and let him in? Will you suffer the Lord Jesus to stand
knocking, and calling and weeping, and saying as he said to Jerusalem, Luke 19.
42. Oh that thou had known, even thou at least in this thy day, the things
belonging to thy peace; but now they are hid from thine eyes. Will you suffer
Christ to stand thus, knocking at the door of your hearts and not let him in?
Take heed of this, Christ knocks this day at your hearts, if you now give him
his last Answer, and shut the door against him, it may prove to be the last
knocking, you may hap never to see him more.

A plain and powerful Ministry, is the Doct. 2.
only Ordinary Means to Prepare the heart soundly for Christ.
Hence it is, when our Savior would have this work done, he prepares a workman
fit for it, and furnishes him with abilities, which might enable him to the
discharge thereof; the work is great, and the service difficult, and therefore
Elias is fitted with a Spirit suitable with Power answerable unto that purpose
for which he was appointed, an Instrument as we say for the nonce. John the
Baptist he also inherits these abilities, and that Minister must be an Elias,
i. e. must have his Spirit and Power in proportion, if ever this great work of
preparation follows his hand with Comfort and Success; As it was in the
Material, so also is it in the building of this spiritual temple, 2 Cor.
in which the holy Ghost does dwell: The Elect of God are like trees of
righteousness, the Word is like the Ax, that must be lifted by a skilful and
strong arm of a cunning Minister, who like a Spiritual Artificer must hew and
square, and take off the knotty untowardnrss in the Soul before we can come to
couch close and settle upon the Lord Christ as the Corner stone: Paul calls the
Saints Gods husbandry, 1 Cor. 3. 9. A powerful humbling Ministry is like the
Plow, to plow up the fallow ground, the Jer. 4.
thorny sensual hearts of sinful men to receive the immortal seed of the Word
of Promise and the Spirit of Christ thereby.

For the Opening of the Point Two Things are

1 What is meant by a plain and powerful Ministry, such as that of Elias. 2
How this has force to effect so great a Work.
The plainness of the Ministry appears,

When the Language and Words are such as those of the meanest Capacity have
some acquaintance with, and may be able to conceive; when the Preacher Cor.
(...) his Speech to the shallow understanding of the Simplest Hearer, so far
as in him lies, Non (...) quae nihil est (...) in (...) is (...), sed
ingeniosain clegantiam (...) praedicationi neque (...), neque utilem, (...).
always avoiding the frothy tinkling of quaint and far (...) (...), which take
off, and blunt as (...) were the edge of the blessed Truth and Word of God:
(...) the Apostle rejects the wisdom of Words as that which makes the Cross of
Christ; that is, The Doctrine of Christ Crucisied, revealed in the Gospel, to
lose his proper and powerful effect when it is lo Preached; where let it be
observed that it is not only the vanity and emptiness of Words which is here
condemned, but even that pompous gaudiness, and elegancy of (...), which after
an unsuspected manner steals away the mind and affection from the truth, and
stays it with it self, when it should be a means both to convey both Attention
and Affection from it self to the truth. He that puts so much Sugar into the
Potion, that he hinders the strength, and the work of it by such a kind of
mixture; though he please the Pallat of the (...), yet thereby (...) Paulus.
wrongs both the Physic, and his Health. So here Calvin ad Loc.
in Preaching.

For the excellency of Eloquence, and entising words of humane Wisdom which in
case were commendable to be used by him who is an Orator, or a Declamor in the
School, in the (...) becomes ever Fruitless, and many times hurtful and
prejudicial to the saving success of the Gospel: Hence the Apostle makes these
as Opposite, 2 Cor. 2. 4. My Speech and my preaching was not with entising
words of man's wisdom, but in the demonstration of the Spirit and of Power:
taking this for granted, as it appears in (...) of the Speech, the pomp of
entising words (...) (...) be discovered if we would have the Spirit in the
powerful work of it be demonstrated and made to appear, so much sweetness of
words as may make way for the (...) of the Gospel, may be admitted, and no
more. And as all kind of Curiosity and (...) is to be avoided, so all obscure
and unusual (...), dark Sentences and Expressions, strange Languages are much
more to be rejected, as opposite even to the end of speaking, much more to
plainness of the Preaching of the tuth. Words are appointed by God in his
Providence, to be Carriers as it were, by whose help the thoughts of our minds
and the savory apprehensions of truth may be communicated, and conveyed over to
the understanding of others, whereas by mystical and dark Sentences he that
comes to hear, can by no means profit, because he cannot conceive, and so both
Hearer and Speaker must needs miss their end, and lose their labor, since the
one does no good in his Speech, because he so speaks that the other can receive
no benefit: He that has a Pastoral heart must be so affected in dispensing the
Doctrine of Grace, as Paul was in writing, Romans 1. 7. to all that are, To all
that be at Rome, so should he labor to reach out mercy and comfort to every
soul in the congregation, by every sentence he delivers, as much as in him
lies, whereas mystical cloudy discourses which exceed the capacity and
understanding of most in the assembly, its not possible they should work
powerfully upon their Consciences. That which the Mind conceives not, the Heart
affects not: Ministers should be, and, if faithful they will be as nurses to the
people, they will prepare milk for the meanest and weakest, and meat for all;
but never give dry crust or (...) in stead of bread to any; for that was not to
feed, but to starve the Child. Hence the Apostle concludes strange Languages in
the delivery of the truth, to be a Curse sent of God upon a people, and
therefore the Minister that so Communicates the Word, he is the Messenger that
brings a Curse to the (...), 1 Cor. 14. 21, 22. In the Law it is written, with
men of other tongues and other lips, will I speak unto this people, wherefore
tongues are fore a sign not to them that believe, but to them that believe not:
whereas Prophesying should be in that openness and familiarity of Language,
that the unbeleiving, (...).
yea, unlearned should be convinced, and have the secrets of his heart made
manifest to his own Conscience, that so he may be truly humbled and acknowledge
Gods power and presence in the virtue of his own Ordinance blessed by him, 1
Cor. 14. 24. It was the complaint of God, Job 38. 2. That Counsel was darkened
by Words without Knowledge. It was not allowed in Jobs Conference and debate of
Questions with his friends, it cannot but be much more condemned in publishing
the mysteries of Life and Salvation to others: Its the scope of the Calling and
Work of the Ministry to give the Knowledge of God in the face of Jesus Christ,
2 Cor. 4. 8. To darken Knowledge therefore, is to cross Gods Honor, our own
Callings, the Comforts of the People over whom we are set, and to be concealers
of Gods Mind, not Interpreters and Revealers of his Will.

(...) is only one Plea here Objected, that carries Object.
any appearance of likelihood with it, gathered out of Eccles. 12. 10. where it
is said, The Preacher sought to find out acceptable words, and that that was
written, was upright, even words of truth: Was it Solomon's Care directed by the
Spirit, to study pleasing words to affect his Hearers? Should not his practice
be a pattern to all to imitate him in like expressions? Dare any affirm but
that he did what he ought? And shall any be so careless or presumptuous as not
to endeavor to follow that course recorded with so much Commendation by the
Holy Ghost?

I yield willingly to all the Truths which the Text Answ.
holds out unto us; but it shall appear that nothing can from thence by just
consequence be Collected, that will cross, but rather confirm, and that
undoubtedly what has been affirmed before. That the Writings of men should be
sound, their Speeches acceptable, is granted; but when are they? how shall they
be judged to be such? That Is the Doubt: which once Cleared, the Objection will
be Answered fully: Words then must be judged acceptable, not by the foolish
fancies, corrupt and carnal humors of men, but from the warrant they have from
the scripture, and the work they have in the hearts of the Hearers for their
good, as the 11. verse. of Eccles. 12. discovers; it being added as it were by
way of Explication, to evidence where that pleasantness of Speech lay, The
words of the wise are as Goads and Nails fastened by the Masters of Assemblies
which are given by one Shepherd: As though the Preacher should have expressed
himself, more freely and fully thus. If any shall ask what these acceptable
words formerly mentioned are, and how they may be (...), it is easy for any
thus to know them by their working upon the heart: as we judge the goodness and
virtue of Phyfick by its working upon the body, or in the stomach: Those words
which are as Goads to awaken and spur on the (...) and sleepy hearted to the
performance of service with greater (...) and speed: those that are as (...) so
to fast on the (...) truths of God, upon the Consciences of men, that they are
(...) (...) the compass of Gods command as Sheep within the fold.

Lastly, Those words which are endited and (...) not by (...) wisdom, but by
the Spirit of Christ, 1 Cor. 2. 4. who is the only chief Shepherd of his
Church, and whose voice should only be heard: such words should be sought out
by the speaker, such words (...) to be accounted acceptable by those who hear
them. Now how far all quaintness and (...) of speech is from this warrant of
the Lord, or this powerful work in the hearts of his people, let the sluggish
and secure courses, the loose lives and (...) of such persons, parishes,
places, and congregations, who have, and love such teachers, and such kind of
teaching, proclaim and testify to all the world.

Plainness of Preaching, appears also in the matter soot and dirt of
reproaches, and base nicknames: Sincerity, he terms Singularity; (...),
Puritanism and Hypocrisy; and so ignorant men (who judge the person by the
picture) are brought out of love and liking with (...) blessed ways of (...)
and holiness. Contrariwise, when he would cast a veil over the ugly and
deformed face of Vice, and (...) courses he is (...) to lay (...) false colors
of indifferency, (...), and pleasure; Drunkenness is good fellowship, and
neighborhood. Covetousness comes masked under the vizard of (...) and
moderation: Cowardliness is trimmed and (...) up in the (...) of discretion,
and wariness. If Ministers will not be the Devils Brokers, and followers; their
manner of proceeding must be expressly contrary: When they come to Preach, they
must make sin appear truly odious, and (...) to the open (...) of all, that all
may (...) afraid and endeavor to avoid it. Those (...) wipes, and (...) jerks,
and (...) at sin, at which the (...) profane (...) pleased, but not reformed;
are utterly (...) and (...) the Place, the Person, the Office, of the Messenger
of the Lord of Hosts. What A Minister a Jester! O searful! to make the Pulpit a
Stage, to play with (...); when he should terrify the Conscience for it? The
Lord abominates the practice, he that knows and fears the Lord should abhor it
with detestation. Thus plainly dealt Elias with Ahab, 1 Kings 18. 18. Its thou
and thy Fathers house that have troubled Israel, because ye have forsaken the
Commandments of the Lord, and followed Baalim. So also with (...), 1 King. 18.
21. How long will you hault between two (...)? If the Lord be God, follow him;
but if Baal, then (...) him. As if he should have said, Away with this patching
in (...), either a Saint or a Devil, make something of it, this is down right
dealing. And thus plainly John the Baptist who had the same Spirit dealt with
Herod. He does not beat the Bush, and go behind the door to tell him his
faults, and mince the matter with some intimations, but he speaks out, Matthew.
14. 4. It is not lawful for thee to have thy Brother Philips Wife: either thou
mnst not have that incestuous Harlot, or thou must not have Grace and Glory.
Thus again he dealt with the Sadduces and Pharisees when he saw them come to
his Baptisms. He says to them, Matthew. 3. 7. Oh ye Generation of Vipers, who
has forewarned you to flee from the wrath to come. As if he should have said,
Eggs and Birds, Parents and Posterity, you are a race of venomous, and poysonful
wretches: What? A proud Pharisee to listen to the simplicity of the Doctrine of
Grace, is it possible? If in sincerity and good earnest, you purpose to embrace
the Doctrine of truth, bring forth then fruits worthy of amendment of life,
verse. 8.

We have done with the Plainness of the Ministry,

There must be soundness of Argument, and undeniable I will know not the speech
of them that are (...) up, but the power, for the Kingdom of God stands not in
word, but in Power. Its not the (...) of words, not the sound and tinckling of
a company of fine Sentences, like apifh toys and rattles, that will commend
our Ministry in the account of God, there is no Kingdom, no Power of the work
of the Spirit, the heavenly Majesty of an Ordinance is not seen in such empty
shells and shaddows: A building with painted walls, and no pillars, would be of
little use, and less continuance: A body framed out of Colors, may be a
picture of a Bird or Beast, but a living Creature it cannot be, because it
wants the soul and substance which should give life and virtue thereunto. So it
is when a multitude of gay Sentences are packed together without the sinnews
and substance of convicting Arguments: there may be the picture of a Sermon,
but the life and power of Preaching there will not be in any such expressions.

That a Minister may be Powerful, an inward (...) Out of the abundance of the
heart the mouth speaks, and a good man out of the good treasure of his heart,
brings forth good things, Mat. 12. 35. Where then there is a heart awanting,
the chiefest part of Speech, the pith and heart of it is gone; for the several
affections out of which the words arise, make an impression, and work alike
temper of Spirit in him to whom we utter and express our selves: Thus we speak
from heart to heart, and that is the best way to be in the (...) of the Hearer,
and the only way to make our words take place and prevail: He that mourns in
speaking of sin, makes another (...) for sin committed. An Exhortation that
proceeds from the heart, carries a kind of Authority and Commission with it, to
make way for it self not to return before it confer with the heart of him that
will give attendance to it. (...) Discourses talk only with the (...), they go
no further, because they (...) no deeper then from the understanding of him
(...) speaks. The Doctrine of the Gospel is like the (...) upon the herbs, and
the dew upon the grass, (...). 32. 2. The strength and stirring of holly
affections is like a (...) wind or tempest, makes the truth delivered to press
in with more power and speed, and to soak more deeply, even to the heart root
of him (...) with (...) will receive it.

It may be here enquired for Explication of the Answ. To speak only so much
here as concerns the Place, leaving Particulars until we (...) of the several
Parts of Preparation, know we must, the preparing work of a plain and powerful
Ministry stands in Two Things.

It discovers the secrets of Sin, makes known the Heb. 4. 11. The Word of God
is (...) in Operation, sharper than any two edged sword, (...) betwixt the Soul
and the Spirit, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of (...) (...).
This was the work that Paul aimed at in the (...) of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 4. 4.
Pandling the Word of God, not deceitsully, but plainly, by (...) of the truth,
he commended himself to (...) man's Conscience in the sight of God. As though he
had said, Speak Oh ye blessed Saints of (...), was not Paul in your (...)? Did
he (...) every corner of your Consciences? (...) you cannot but acknowledge it,
your hearts (...) (...) but (...) as much.

A (...) (...) (...) (...) the Corruption, Word is spoken and blessed. The
(...) Soldiers, the refuse Publicans, all (...) and stand (...) at the (...)
of (...), Luke 3. 11, 12. they all said, Master, what shall we do? (...) a
(...) at the Bar, (...) (...) (the Judge upon the (...)) (...) (...). Hence it
is, the time of the (...) of the (...) is called The (...) and (...) day of the
Lord, Mal. 4. 5. (...) that of (...) (...), 2 Cor. 10. 5. The weapons (...)
(...) (...) (that is, the (...) Ministry (...) (...) Word (...) (...) through
(...), to (...) down strong (...), (...) cast down (...), (...) (...) (...)
(...) thought to the Obedience of (...).

(...) our Savior, the Chief Master of the Assemblies, is said to (...) (...)
(...), (...) (...) the Scribes, Matt. 7. last. Not to tell a man a (...) tale,
a toothless, sapless (...), so that the hearers (...) (...) are gone, are never
stirred, never troubled for their sins, nor quickened onward in Obedience: But
when the power of the (...), the presence and Majesty (...) the Lord (...),
appears in his Ordinances, they then carry (...) with them and bear down all
before them: (...) (...) (...) lightning, forsakes his hold, and the (...)
(...) is forced to give way to the Government of the King of Saints. Strong
Physic either Cures or Kills, either takes away the (...), or life of the
(...); so it is with a spiritual and powerful Ministry, it will work one way
or other, either it (...) (...) hardens, converts or condemns those that live
(...) the stroke thereof. For observe we must, (...) (...) Word is but an
Instrument in the hand of (...), who dispenses the same (...) to his good
(...), and the counsel of his own Will, working when, and upon whom he will,
and what he will by (...). The Sword in the hand of him that wields it may as
easily killas defend another, answerable to the affection of him that strikes
therewith: It is so with the Word which is the Sword of the Spirit, It is the
savor of life unto life, but then and to those only to whom the Lord will bless
the same; and the savor of death unto death, then and unto those when such a
(...) is denied.

Such as be Ministers may hence see the Reason, of Use 1
that little success we find, that little good we do, in the Vineyard of the
Lord: Our Pains (...) not, our (...) (...) not, with the hearts of men, not one
(...) levelled, not a crooked piece (...), not one poor Soul prepared for a
Christ, after (...) (...), quarters, years traveling in the work of the (...).

The time was Satan fell like lightning, suddenly, speedily, when the Disciples
of Christ as Sons of (...), delivered the Gospel in the power and demonstration
of the Spirit: But now Satan stands up (...) full strength, takes up his stand,
maintains his (...) in the hearts of men, notwithstanding all that (...) see
done by the most. What is the (...)? God is as Merciful as ever, his Word and
(...) as (...) as ever they were: I need (...) (...) as he, Where is the Lord
God of Elias? (...), (...), I must rather ask, Where is the Spirit (...) Tower
of Elias? We want Power, and Spirit, and then no wonder we do not, nay, upon
these (...) in reason we shall never prepare a people for the Lord. The Word of
God which is the Sword of the Spirit, is as sharp as ever it was, but our hands
(...) weak, our hearts are feeble, we have no courage, (...) power (...) follow
the blow, against the sturdy (...) (...) (...) of men: We keep these (...)
(...) much about us, (condemned by the (...)
(...), 2 (...). 4. 2.) in the course of our Ministry, (...) we are to offend
our friends, to displease great ones, to provoke the wicked, and malicious,
fear we do, lest their love should be lost, their bounty and kindness taken
away, and removed, or else hazard our own earthly comforts, and contents: Its
pity but the tongue of that Minister should cleave to the roof of his mouth,
who speaks any thing less than God requires of him; for these base and by
respects sometimes Ministers are afraid to speak to the hearts of men, and
ashamed to reprove them for those sins which they are not afraid or ashamed to
do in the face of the world. Neither do Ministers many times Convince so
soundly as they ought, nor gather in those Arguments which may make those (...)
undeniable, and men's Consciences at a stand. Again, they want that holy
spiritual affection, which they should deliver Gods Word withal unto his
people: And this is the Sum of all, Ministers do not deliver the Word with a
heavenly, hearty, violent affection, they do not speak out of the abundance of
their hearts. If they would speak against sin with a holy indignation, it would
make men stand in aw of sin; they talk of it hourly, and say, It is not good to
profane Gods Name, and his Sabboths, and to live an ungodly life, but they do
not speak from (...) hearts in this kind. A sturdy Messenger if he come to a
man's house to speak with him, he will not be put off, he will take no denial,
but he will speak with him, if it be possible before he goes away: But send a
Child of a Message to a man, if a Servant do but tell him, His Master is not at
leisure, or that he may speak with him another time, he will (...) be put off,
and go away before he (...) delivered his Message. So it is with a Minister
that (...) his Office with a hearty affection. For when a man speaks from his
heart in this Case, he will have no answer, he will not be (...) withal, he
will take no denial but will have that he came (...): If a man should say he is
not at leisure to (...) with him, or to hear him now, he will speak with him
another time, he will not go away with (...) (...), (...) he will tell him, I
came to speak with your (...), and I will speak with your hearts: He will (...)
(...) the people, Tell your hearts ye that love the world (...) the (...) and
pleasures (...), (and my heart (...) you) did you know the good things that are
in Christ (...), did you but know what a happy thing it is to have assurance of
Gods love, you would never love (...) nor delight in wick dness, as you have
done before: (...) no more (...) (...) things of the world, but for your (...).
The day is coming when the Heavens shall (...) with (...), and you shall (...)
the voice o the (...), saying, A ise ye dead and come to judgment: Where you
shall hear that dreadful Sentence, (...) (...) (...) all ye workers of (...), I
know (...) not, Matt. 7. 23. Oh this may be your case one day. And we that are
Ministers of God do mourn for you, and tell your souls, We must have Sorrow
(...) you, we came for Hearts, and must have Hearts before we go. And this is
the First Use, showing the Reason why the Ministers or God do so (...) good, It
is (...) (...) plain and powerful Preaching (...) (...) (...).

The (...) Use (...) (...) us the fearful Use 2
estate and miserable Condition (...) (...) that lived a long time under a
plain and powerful Ministry, and yet their hearts have not been (...) and
prepared for the Lord (...): It is a (...) (...) that the Lord will never
bestow any (...) Good upon that Soul. He that has lived under, a powerful
Ministry many years, and yet is not wrought upon thereby, it cannot certainly
be concluded, but it is greatly to be suspected, That the means of Gracewil
never profit that man. Look as it is with the Master Carpenter, when he has
turned every piece of Timber, and taken what he will for his turn, he tells them
that be under him, Let this be hewed, and that (...) framed and made fit for
the building: Afterward (...) finds one piece broken, and another cracked, and
another knotty: Why, what says he? There is no squaring of these, they are sit
for nothing but for burning, they are not fit for any place in the building.
Oh! take heed, when Gods Ministers have been cutting, and hewing, now
exhorting, now persuading, now cutting the heart with Reproof, and yet finds
here a cracked Heart, and there a stubborn Soul, that will not be squared by the
Word, (...) than the Lord should say, These will never be fitted and prepared
for me, they are fit for (...) but the fire. Oh! take heed of it, for he that
will not be fitted for Grace, shall be made a (...) in Hell for ever. Therefore
all you that have lived under a powerful Ministry, and yet are not prepared,
go home and reason with your souls, and plead with your own hearts, and say,
Lord, Why (...) not I yet humbled and prepared? Shall I thus be always under
the hacking and hewing of the Word, and never be framed? Such a man, and such a
man was stubborn, and wicked, and profane, and yet the Lord has brought him
home, and he is become a broken hearted Christian, What shall I think that am
not (...) and prepared for Christ by all the means that I have had? Alas! thou
may justly suspect God never intends good to thy soul: It is no absolute
conclusion, but it is a great suspicion that those that have lived under a
plain and powerful Ministry half a dozen years or longer, and have got no
good, nor profited under the same; I say, It Is a shrewd suspicion, that God
will send (...) down to Hell: Therefore suspect thy own soul and say, Lord,
will Exhortations never prevail? Will Instructions never do me good? Will
(...), and Reproofs (...) strik my heart? Why, I have heard Sermons that would
have (...) the very stones I (...) on, that would have moved the eat I sat
upon; the very fire of Hell has flashed in my face, I have seen even the very
plagues (...) hell, I have had many Exhortations, Instructions, Admonitions,
and Reproofs, and as powerful means as may be, which (...) never did me any
good. The Lord be merciful to such a poor soul, and turn his heart that he may
lay hold of Mercy in due time. Use 3


Exhortation. Is it so, That a plain and powerful Ministry is the means of
Preparing the soul of a poor (...) for the Lord Jesus? Why then, when you hear
the Word plainly and powerfully preached to you, labor that the Word may be so
unto you as it is in it self: It is a preparing Word, labor you that it may
prepare your hearts to receive Christ: And you that be Hearers, every one labor
to save the Soul of another; let the Father speak concerning his Children, and
the Husband concerning his Wife and his Family, and the Wife concerning her
Husband, Oh when will it once be, when will the time come that my Child may be
fitted for the Lord, when will it be that my poor Family, my poor Wife, my poor
Husband shall be prepared for the Lord, the Lord grant, that it may be, if not
this Sabbath, yet on another; if not this Sermon, then at the next: Labor
therefore to give way unto the Word of God, and suffer your Souls to be
wrought upon by it, for the word is powerful to prepare your hearts, but the
Minister must hew and square your hearts before they can be prepared for the
Lord Jesus, and you must suffer the words of Exhortation, (as the Apostle
says) Heb. 13. 22. So likewise suffer the words of Conviction, of Reproof, of
Admonition, and hold and keep your hearts under the Word, that you may be
wrought upon thereby. And as when men have set Carpenters a work to build an
House, then they come every day, and ask them, How does the work go on? How
does the building go forward? When you are gone home, do you so reason with
your selves, and ask your own hearts how the work of the Lord goes forward in
you? Is my heart yet humbled? Am I yet fitted and prepared for Christ? I thank
God I find some work and power of the Word, and therefore I hope the Building
will go forward.

BOOK IV.
2 COR. 6. 2. As he says in an acceptable time have I heard thee, in the day
of Salvation have I succored thee.
THe general Doctrine of Preparation being dispatched, Proeced we to a further
enquiry of the Particulars under it; And there we have to enquire,

The 1 Quality. 2 Parts of this Work.

The Quality of this (...) wherein are Comprehended those Common Affections
which firstly and properly appertain to this Place, and as the (...) and
Spirits pass through the whole Body of a man; So these general Considerations,
convey over a savor and virtue of such truths as they do contain, to all the
Particulars which follow, and (...) in reason are to be handled before the rest.

The quality of this Preparation is to be attended in Two things, 1. The
Freeness of the Work wrought. 2. The Fitness of the time wherein it is Effected.


For the Discovery of both which I have made Choice of this Text, as affording
susficient ground for this Discourse; (...) he says in an accept able time,
etc. In the handling of which words we shall endeavor Three Things,

1 What the Scope of the Text is that so it may appear it naturally fits our
purpose and the Point in hand, which comes to be (...). 2 The Sense and Meaning
of the words is to be (...) into, and such Truths to be Collected which
serve-our turn and intendment. 3 We shall pursue the Explication of each of
them in their Order.
The Scope of the Text (which I conceive worth th (...) of the former Chapter;
(...) from the Consideration of the privilege and (...) they were advanced
unto in Christ, the Apostle infers, and calls sor that newness of life, and
obedience answerable to that kindness of the Lord, and the condition unto which
(...) were advanced. (...) any man be in Christ, he must be a new (...),
bebold, old things are past, all things are made new. 2 Cor. 5. 17. And this he
shows from the author of this Grace who disposes of it, God: 2 From the
Mediator who has purchased it, Christ: 3 From the Means appointed to Convey
and Communicate it, to such for whom it was ordained; to (...), The Ministry
of the Apostles, All things are of God who has reconciled us to himself
through Christ Verse. 18. And whereas the Corinthians being heathens might
object, True, he has reconciled you Jews, but what is that to us? He adds in
(...) 19. That God was in Christ reconciling the world ((...) Believers, both
of Jews and Gentiles) to himself: and for this cause, and to this end, has
(...) the word of Reconciliation to his Apostles for their good, that while
they as Ambassadors entreated, God by them did beseech them to be reconciled
unto him: And this was done upon susficient warrant, and in a way of righteous
proceeding, for Christ who knew no sin, was made sin, even for them (...) who
should believe that they might be made the righteousness of God in him, verse.
last. Having thus showed a full and (...) ground for their reconciliation, and
also of his own Commission for that end: He further presses it in the first
Verse of (...) (...). If God be thus Gracious, Christ's (...) (...), our
Commission so Large, We (...) as (...) together with God, (...) you (...) you
receive not the Grace of God (i. e. the (...), that word of Grace that brings
Salvation to (...)) in vain, (...) receiving benefit by it, and comfort from it
to your own Conversion and Salvation. And whereas they might Reply, It is not
in our power to receive the spiritual good of this word, nor (...) in you that
are Apostles to work it, or if both were granted, its not yet the Season,
fitter opportunity will be afforded hereafter: To all these the Apostle
Answers, in the words of the text. True, the Blessing is the Lords, but the
Endeavor (...) be Ours: We must Plant and Water, its in Gods Prerogative, and
depends upon his good Pleasure to give Increase; however, the Time now fits,
the (...) are now afforded; and though we cannot Do what we should and ought,
yet let us do what we can: and though we have no Power of our selves to Compass
our everlasting Comforts, yet we have Gods own Word and most gracious Promise,
That in an acceptable time he will hear us: And that presumes then that we must
pray: In the day of Salvation he will help, and by that its taken for granted,
we must take pains: and behold now is the day of Salvation, now is the
acceptable time: let us therefore now call earnestly upon him for a Blessing,
walk painfully in doing our Duty, and let the Lord do what is Good in his own
eyes: Evident therefore it is, That the Aim of the words carries us directly
unto the first work of God upon the Soul, (...) the Prophet Isaiah expresses
in Isaiah 49. 5. 6. 8. That is the acceptable time wherein Jacob must be
brought back again to God: Undeniable also it is, That this work of Preparation
as the out-Porch and Entrance which makes way to all the rest is here pointed
out Particularly by the Apostle, when he entreats them to (...) (...) Word
(...) (...), signifying the entrance and admittance (...) the Lord when in the
power of his Ordinances he stands and knocks at the door of the heart, which is
then done when the Lord begins to lay hold upon the soul, and to grapple witn
the sinner, in awakening and wounding his (...) for his (...): And lastly
beyond all Question, (...) 49 9. (...) thou may (...) (...), Go forth: The
Scope then of the (...) (...) (...) our intended (...).

Search we then in the Second Place, the Sense of

Time.] The word in the Original imports Season, or Opportunity; which is not
so much the continuance of days, or months, or years; as the Concurrence and
meeting together of (...) conveniences which may be (...) to any work, whereof
more anon, when we handle the Point hence Collected.

(...).] Some Difference there is between the Apostle and the Prophet Isaiah,
from whom this Testimony (...) taken, but all return to one Sense: The (...) in
the Old Testament refers it to the Work (...) God, the time of his
acceptance, or good Will: The Apostle in the New Testament applys it to the
Time,

A Time accepted.] Yet so as the work of God is (...)
(...) and comprehended under it: In the (...) then it intimates Three Things.
1 The time that is appointed. 2 The Work of Grace put (...) (...) (...) for
the Conversion of any soul 3 The (...) of all, it depends upon Gods pleasure,
when he sees fit to accomplish the Decree of his Election, to Convert a sinner
effectually to himself, and out of his free good will to take him into his
(...), by calling him out of the world to the knowledge of (...); and his
saving Grace in Christ.

Day of Salvation.] For the more full understanding of the Reason of the first
word Day, we may enquire the nature and rise of it: In the beginning when the
Lord made All, and amongst the rest the living Creatures, he furnished them
with powers, and abilities for the performance of their work, he seated and set
every one of them in his proper place, as upon a stage for the acting of his
part: He set also bounds, and laid forth several periods and distances of time
for each purpose: Now the Distinctions of time, i. e. the separation of Light
and Darkness, made so many stops as it were in some or which there must be
stayed: Thus in Creating every Particular; that is added, The Evening and the
Morning were the first and second Day, etc. They had their Day of Creation, and
their Day of Operation, so long as they continue that is their Day; for the Day
and Night are the Distinction of all this Time here below, and serve as so many
stops and stays, in which each thing is stinted for its being and VVorking:
And hence it may be it is, There is no Day nor Night in Heaven, Rev. 10. 6.
neither shall there be any more Time there; that is, Distinction or Measure of
Time by Day or Night after the last Judgment, (for that must needs be the
meaning of the Text) because in Heaven and Hell, the state of things and so
their times are unchangable: Hence to man His day is his life, (...) long as he
breaths in the (...) and (...) this Sun, that's the Time allotted to him to act
his part in, to trade for his everlasting State and Condition: Hence again (to
descend yet lower) there is a special period, a stinted time, for every part of
this life, and so many courses (as I may term them) and srames of occasions
which belong to any; so many seasons and several limits of time has he
allotted to each particular: Thus the wise man, There is a time to gather, and
a time to scatter, a time to plant, and a time to pluck up, Eccles. 3. 1. And
these (...) are called Days in Scripture: Thus there are Troubles, and Trials,
Visitation, and Grace, which the Lord in the dispensation of his Providence
allots to men, and there is a day for each of these, A day of trouble, Psalm.
50. 15. A day of Trial, Heb. 3. 8. A day of Visitation, Luke 19. 42. and a day
of Salvation in this sense, as here in the Text.

Salvation.] Presumes always danger and evil, and according to the quality and
nature of the one, the other is to be considered, and conceived, here it is
spiritually to be understood in the sul sense of it, to wit, from the danger of
sin here begun in Preparation perfected in Glorification after this life: And
that Speech by way of Similitude, seems well to interpret this manner of
Speech, Heb. 3. 9. The day of temptation, when your Fathers tempted me, i. e.
that moment of time when that rebellion was expressed; so here, That moment or
instant wherein the Lord begins to put forth the work of his special Grace,
about the Salvation of a sinner, by the means he has in mercy appointed. And
thus the Apostle expounds the word in the Verse following, Behold now is the
day of Salvation; he saw it, they could not but perceive it, and all might
acknowledge (...) much, because the Word of Salvation, Acts 36. 26. viz. The
Grace of God, that is, The Gospel given by grace (...) brings salvation, did
now appear, tit. 2. (...) So that it may be truly affirmed in a savory sense,
This day is Salvation coming to such, to whom the word of the Gospel is come in
the Ministry thereof.

The Words thus Opened, The Collections which are of special weight and
Consideration, are Four.

Faithful Ministers ought to be earnest in calling upon God, and faithful (...)
the improvement of means, for the spiritual good of such to whom they are sent.
This is taken (...) (...) in the Text, How shall God (...), unless they Call?
How shall God Help, unless they Endeavor?

They who are thus (...), according to Gods Command, they may expect a (...)
success according to Gods Promise: He (...), I will Hear, I will Help.
Therefore their Prayers shall be Answered, their Labors Blessed, for God will
not falsify his Word, nor (...) of his (...).

Its in the mere good pleasure of the Lord to work upon the heart in the
Ministry of the Word when he sees fit: It Is in the day of Gods acceptance and
good Will, that the Prayers of Faithful Ministers are heard, and their Pains
made (...) for the

While life lasts, and the Gospel is continued, that is the particular Season
and Period wherein the Lord expresses his good pleasure to work graciously
upon the Souls of His. Its in this Season and day of Salvation he performs his
Promise. For as the Lord may take what time he will, so has he made it known,
it is his Will to take this time and season, when he purposes to fasten upon
the Soul of a sinner for his Spiritual good.

To omit the Two Former wholly, the Two Latter Points we intend only, to trade
in, and to entreat of. To Begin then with the First,

The Work of God is altogether Free.
Doct. 1
It proceeds merely out of Gods favor and good will, its his acceptance, not
ours: Unless he put forth that Almighty hand of his, and take us unto his
Grace; its not in our liberty nor ability to take hold of the offer of his
Mercy, or to reap any saving benefit therefrom, Rev. 21. 6. To him that thirsts
I will give of the water of life freely. Its a gift, and free also, though one
thirst, never so earnestly desire it, never so constantly endeavor to attain
thereunto, yet unless the Lord do more out of mercy, than any can procure by
any sufficiency, or worth of his own, he will gain nothing: As it was in the
Building of the Material Temple, the laying of the bottom stone upon which it
was founded, and the adding of the top stone when it was finished, and attained
its perfection: the whole multitude with one consent and one voice acknowledged
the only Cause thereof, Grace, Grace, Zech. 4. 7. Much more is it true in the
rearing up, and erecting of the Spiritual Frame in the Soul, from the first
entrance of it in Preparation, till it come to be consummate in Glorification,
all comes from the Favor and Free Grace of God.

This Freeness of this Work appears in Three Particulars.

First, Free it was for God whether he would Adams default. The Lord was not
bound to set up Adam again, when by his carelessness and neglect, he had misspent
that stock of Grace he had bestowed upon him. The Lord was not bound to Recover
and Redeem Adam from the power of Sin and Death, when through his own folly he
had cast away himself and posterity: In a word, Free it was to the Father to
(...) this Covenant, Free to Christ to Undertake it, Free to the Holy Ghost to
accomplish it. God gave his Son, Joh. 3. 16. Christ gave himself, Tit. 2. 14.
Both gave, and sent the Holy Ghost, as Commissioner from them both, to be the
finisher of this work, Gal. 4. 6. And if wholly given, then it must be wholly
free.

As its Free for God to appoint, so it depends upon reared up a wall of
Separation between Jew and Gentile, Ephesians. 2. 11. 14. That light is in Goshen,
and darkness in all the parts of Aegipt besides, Exodus 10. 22. 23. That to the
Jews were committed the Oracles of God, Romans 3. 1. But he dealt not so with
other Nations, neither have they not known his ways, Psalm. 147. last. Why Paul
is sent for into Macedonia, and forbidden to go into (...), Acts 16. 6, 7, 8,
9. The Apostles charged not to go into the way of the Gentiles, ' Mat. 10. 5,
6. not to enter into the Cities of Samaria, but to the lost sheep of the house
of Israel: His own will is the Rule of all this, and there is no other Reason
to be rendered.

There were many Widows in Israel when the (...) were shut up three years and
six months, (...) (...) great (...) was through all the Land, but (...) of them
was Elias sent, save only to that one Woman, a Widow of Sarepta, Luke 4. 25.
26. There was many Leapers in Israel, in the time of Elizeus, but none Cleansed
save only Naaman the Syrian. In a word, All these Blessings are Gods Own, and
may he not Do with his Own what he will?

Free Lastly in regard of the work of the Means; Mat. 13. compare 11. with 13,
14. The Scribes and Pharisees in Hearing, they hear and not understand; in
Seeing, they see and not perceive: that is, They attend daily, and yet do not
profit; observe daily, and yet do not prosper in their endeavors; their hearts
waxt fat, when others were humbled; their ears made heavy, when others were
bored to entertain the truth. And if the cause be enquired, our Savior answers,
Verse 11. To you (my Apostles) its given to know the Mysteries of the 'Kingdom,
but unto them its not given.

It is beyond the compass of all inferior Causes Act. 9. (...).
that can be conceived, That Paul breathing out threatening; against the Church,
coming in open field in (...), and professed Rebellion against Christ, should
have the Lord Jesus revealed to him, and in him; this (I say) is beyond the
reach of any cause in Nature, and therefore the Apostle points at a higher
hand, It pleased God (says the text) to reveal his Son in me, Gal. 1. 15. And
then also when he opposed and fiercely persecuted his Son in his Members, was
there at this time, any improvement of natural abilities, or the remainder of
the image left (...) man after his fall? was there at this time any (...)
trading with the Talents of Common Graces, which should move the Lord in way of
(...), to give (...) and spiritual Graces? Was there any (...) (...) fitness
now in the Spirit of Said to (...) and (...) the (...) of truth? (...) (...)
are groundless dreams of men, merely cozened and (...) with their own carnal
devices.

Again, That the great Doctors of the Law who were honored as Guides of others
for their Parts and (...) (...) (...), 30.
(...), should despise the Counsel of God against themselves and the (...) and
Publicans, people of most desparate and for (...) courses, should entertain the
Baptists Doctrine and Gospel: The resolution of all at last must come to this,
The (...) of the Lord shall stand, and (...) do whatsoever he will: Thither our
Savior repairs, and there (...) rests, I thank thee O (...) Lord of Heaven and
Earth, that thou have hid these things from the (...) and prudent, and (...)
revealed them unto (...) and (...): Even so, O Father, for so it (...) thee,
Matthew. 11. 25, 26. The issue then is, If it proceed from Gods free pleasure
that Means are (...), revealed, blessed, then is there a full freedom (...)
all; and it must be so for these Reasons,

There is nothing man has that can Purchase this, (...)
Simon Magus (...) (...), and its probable enough (...) would nor have stuck at
the price, had the (...) (...) never so great, Acts 8. 18, 19. And when (...)
(...) that the Holy Ghost was given through (...) on of hands, be offered them
'Money to (...) (...) that (...): But the Apostle Peter (...) with (...), Thy
Money (...) with thee, (...) (...) thou have thought that the Gift of God may
(...) (...) (...) Money (...) (...) and a (...) (...) think such a thing,
impossible (...) for ever (...) (...) it. Purchases are made by such things as
carry some kind of proportionable worth to that which is to be Purchased: But
there is nothing that can be compared with wisdom, and the Spiritual Grace in
Christ, Prove 3. 15. Much less can be accounted of an answerable Rate and value
thereunto.

There is nothing a man can do of himself whereby Reas 2
he may procure and obtain this spiritual good. Romans 9. 16. It is not in him
that Wills, nor in him that Runs: It is not said, in him that goes carelessly
about the work, but it is not in him that improves the best of his ability,
and that with speed, though he (...) in this race, but it is in God only that
shows (...). If thou should mark, O Lord, what is done a miss, who should
abide it? Psalm. 103. 3. The best are so far from obtaining favor, by any desert
of their doings, that it is well with them they are not consumed by his
displeasure for the failing of their best actions.

There is no Promise made to any Natural man (...) 3
whereby he can challenge this at the hands of the Lord: All men by nature are
children of (...), Ephesians. 2. 3. Heirs of perdition, if they have their own place
its Hell, if they have no more but their own Portion, Confusion and eternal
(...) is, that they must look for, if they have the fruit of their own tree,
the ways of their own work, its nothing but woe and misery, (...) 3. 11. All
Promises are Yea and Amen in Christ, 2 Cor. 1. 20. made and performed in him
alone, they that are out of Christ therefore, what they have besides Hell, is
(...) Mercy. The Sum then is, It man by nature have nothing to Purchase any
Spiritual good, can do nothing to deserve it, have no Promise to challenge it,
it is freely out of Gods good pleasure that any (...) of any share therein.

Here then is matter of Thanksgiving to all the (...) 1
(...) of God who have been made partakers of so (...) favor, to wit, Their
(...) should be filled with his praise, and their (...) with a (...) admiration
of this so (...) a mercy, so much undeserved, and so (...) bestowed
notwithstanding: The greater and more free the goodness of the Lord is, the
greater should our (...) be in the receiving of it. This made the Prophet stand
amazed, Who is a God like unto thee! Micah. 7. 18. Men will see something in us
to move them, and expect some good from us to persuade them to show favor, but
who is like unto our God? who shows mercy, not because we can deserve it, or
have any right to challenge it, not because we can please him, but because
mercy pleases him, and he does it only because he Will, now his Will be
done, and blessed he his glorious Name for ever. Go thy way then in secret,
thou that have found this acceptance from the Lord, in sincerity of Soul
present thy self as in his presence, and say, Good Lord! Why is it? How comes
it? That since many that have lived (...) the same Place, dwelt in the same
Family, sare in the same Seat, and heard the same Word, are yet in the Gall of
Bitterness, in the Bonds of Iniquity, yet in the Kingdom of Darkness, under the
Power of their Sins, and like to perish for them for ever: Lord! Lord! Why are
mine eyes enlightened to know the things belonging to my peace? Why my heart
touched with any saving remorse for my Sins? That I should have any desires
after thee, any longings for thee: Oh its Grace; its thy Free Grace: Otherwise
I had never been made partaker of any Spiritual good, nay, I had never known
it: Father, What am I that thou should be thus mindful of me? that thou
should thus remember me? yea, mindful of me, when I was not mindful of my
self; remembrest me when I had forgotten thy glory, my own soul, and mine own
everlasting good: Was not I as blind as ever any, and knew not? as careless as
ever any, and respected not? yea, stubborn and stout hearted; gainsaid I not,
yea, rejected thy compassions so often tendered in the Ministry of the Word,
and forced upon me by those heartbreaking Exhortations of thy faithful
Ministers, to reveal these Spiritual good things, when out of negligence I did
not know them, yea, then to press them upon my Conscience, and by the effectual
work of thy Spirit then to prevail with my heart, when at first I did oppose
and cast them behind my back; let me for ever return all praise to thy Majesty,
out of whose free mercy it is that I have been made partaker of any saving work
for the good of my Soul: Yea, I thank thee Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth,
that thou have revealed these things to babes and sucklings, and bid them from
the wise and prudent: That the Learned of the world are befooled, and thou have
taught me, a poor ignorant silly wretch; That many noble and honorable are
cashiered, and thou have accepted of a base worm, plucked me out of a smoaky
Cottage, out of a Corner of Hell, to receive me into the Kingdom of thy Christ,
to bear me in thy own bosom, here wildering up and down in this valley of
tears, that thou may glorify me with thy self when all tears shall be wiped
away from mine eyes: Oh! it is thy Free, thy Free Mercy, let my Soul for ever
bless thee, and walk worthy of thee and it, that I may serve thee with a good,
and a glad, and a free heart, as I have received freely from thine own Hand,
whatsoever either I have, or Hope for.

Here is also ground of great Encouragement to all Use 2.
distressed and disconsolate (...), who labor under the weight of the guilt of
their many sins, and sight of their own unworthiness: The right Consideration
of the former truths may be as a spiritual Cordial whereby their hearts may be
quickened to seek unto the Lord, as their hopes sustained to expect that succor
and supply which may be most seasonable for their Relief: Because, as there is
no worth on our parts that can move the Lord, so there is no vileness so great
that can hinder him, from doing what good he intends to such undeserving ones
as we be. His own good will being the only (...) of any saving work he is
pleased to put forth upon the hearts of those who appertain to the Election of
Grace. This was that which the Lord proclaims, and which he urges upon all
drooping and discouraged Spirits, to make them put on more cheerfully in the
pursuit of life and happiness, (...) 55. 1. Oh every one that thirsts, come
to the waters, and he (...) has no money, come buy and eat, yea, come buy wine
and milk without money, and without price. Its very remarkable how the Spirit
of God labors to remove that which will, and most usually does hinder the
fainting hearts of dismayed sinners, in their endeavor after Mercy: They fondly
conceit they must come with their cost, they must bring some Spiritual
abilities and (...) with them, unless they have that money, they are like to
miss of their market; they shall not be able to purchase Gods acceptance, the
Graces and Comforts of his Spirit, signified by Wine and Milk: The Lord
therefore that he might wholly dath these dreams, and take off these (...)
thoughts, he puts it beyond all Question and Doubt by a (...) (...) to the
contrary, He that has no money; that is, No Spiritual (...) or worth, let him
buy, question it not; yea, I speak it seriously, and mind what I say, therefore
I say again, without money, doubt it not; yea, I (...) as I say openly and
plainly, without money, or money worth, no in (...), no weakness, no
unworthiness shall hinder, be not needlessly suspicious, I intend not to sell my
Graces and Comforts; but to bestow them freely upon such who have an open hand
to take them, and an empty heart to carry them away: This was the ground of
Encouragement whereby the Prophet emboldned those rebellious Jews to take words
and resolution also to themselves, to press in with some hope to speed with the
Lord, Hos. 14. 2, 3. Take unto (...) words, and say, Receive us graciously: But
the Lord might have replied, You have no worth in your selves, you deserve no
favor; therefore its added, with thee the Fatherless find mercy: As if (...)
should have said, Thou do not vouchsafe mercy to sinners because of any
excellency they have, any friends they can make, any abilities they can bring,
but the helpless, friendless, fatherless, orphane souls, such as be destitute
of all succor, no eye to pity, no friend to provide, no strength to support
themselves, such find mercy with thee; such we are; therefore Lord show us
mercy; If the Dole or Alms was to be bought and purchased, then the (...) who
had most, and needed least, would (...) be possessors of it, but because its
only out of the (...) to bestow it freely, he that's poor has never a whit the
less, but the more hope to receive it; so it is here in the Dole of Grace, when
(...) thou considerest the infinite baseness of thy heart on the one side, the
incomprehensible worth of mercy on the other, and withal conceivest an utter
impossibility ever to attain it, ever to expect it; settle this Conclusion in
thy heart, as matter of marvelous Encouragement, yet mercy is free, others have
received it, and why not I Lord? If the multitude of thine (...) plead against
thee, if Satan be busy to discourage thine heart, and drive thee to despair,
Why do thou? Can thou? Expect any kindness from the Lord, since thy
frailties so many, thy rebellions so great against the offer of his mercy, and
the work of his Grace: How utterly unable (...) thou to do any thing to procure
any Spiritual good? How unfit to receive it? And is it not a folly than to hope
for it? Thou have hence to Reply, Be it I am as base as can be imagined, yet my
(...) cannot hinder the work of Gods Love, for its altogether Free. True, I
have nothing to purchase it, Abraham had not; I can do nothing to deserve it,
David could not; I have no right to challenge it at the hands of the Lord, nor
yet had Paul any thing to plead for him in the like case; and yet all these
were made partakers of mercy, and why not I Lord? Put in for thy particular,
and plead for thy self, and say, Blessed Lord, thy mercy is not lessened, thy
wisdom decayed, thy arm shortened; what thou did freely for Abraham an
Idolater, (...) a Rebel, for Paul a Persecutor, do for my poor (...) also: my
vileness cannot hinder the freeness of thy Compassions.

If it be here Replied, That this affords small Object.
ground of Comfort: for if the Dispensation of Grace depend upon Gods Free
Will, he may fail us, as well as help us; he may deny it, as well as give it.

The Answer is, He may give it as well as deny it, (...).
and that's Argument enough to sustain our hopes, and to quicken our endeavors,
put it then to the adventure: Thus the Prophet Joel pressed the Israelites to
(...) to God for the removal of a Judgment, and the Pardon of their Sins, upon
this very possibility, Rent your hearts and not your garments, and turn unto
the Lord, who knows if he will return and leave a blessing behind him, Joel, 2.
13, 14. Thus the (...) Ninivites provoke themselves to importune the God of
heaven for the withholding of the destruction threatened, Let us cry mightily
unto God, who can tell, if he will turn and repent: Jonah, 3. 8, 9.

When then thy Spirit sinks under the unsupportable pressure of thy sins, and
the expectation of the righteous Judgments deserved thereby, here is that
which will ad Comfort and Encouragement to look upward to the Lord for
refreshing: Who knows but God may? who can tell but God will yet show mercy,
therefore I will yet hope, because no man can tell but I may at last be made
partaker thereof.

Lastly, Those who want and seek for mercy from Use 3.
the Lord in the use of the means which he has appointed, they are to be
exhorted from the former truth, to arm themselves with patience to stay Gods
time, and to (...) his pleasure, if it seem good to his Majesty to withold
this Favor, or delay the work of his Grace: Beggars must not be chusers, we
must not be Carvers of Gods kindness, its a Free Gift, and therefore as he may
give what he will, so he may give it when it seems most fit to himself. Just
cause we have to wait, no reason at all to murmr against him: Have thou then
endeavored after this work of Grace, and can not attain it? Endeavor still.
Have thou begged it, and yet find not thy desires answered? Crave still with
perseverance: Its good to hope, and to wait also for the Salvation of the Lord,
Lam. 3. 26. both must go together, to wait without hope is uncomfortable, and
to hope without patience is unprofitable. We know (...) what time God will
take, it is our duty and will be our wisdom, and comfort, to attend upon him at
all (...): Say not then out of the shortness of thy spirit, I have come often,
begged much, and (...) long at the gate of grace, I find not the work yet done,
my heart not yet thoroughly humbled for my (...), (...) refreshed with the
assurance of Gods Favor: Shall I wait any longer? Oh fearful Pride! Is it come
to this? If you be in such haste, you may go to Hell time enough: What not
wait? See who will have the worst of it. God can better keep his Compassions,
than thou can want them: And as its fit he should, so its certain he will
make thee to know, thou must wait; nay, bless his Name that you may wait for
his mercy: The (...) of all men that (...) breathed have done it: So David, Min
eyes fail with looking for thy Salvation, saying, O when will thou comfort
(...)? Psalm. 119. 82. 123 Its enough we may beg the Grace of God as a (...) not
command it as a Debt: Labor we then to (...), and (...) those proud and
impatient distemper whereby we repine and quarrel at the (...) on of Gods
dealings with us, if he answers (...) Expectation to the full: Others seek, and
the (...) has bestowed, and they, have received a great (...) sure of Grace,
with little labor, and in a short (...) When we have labored long, and (...)
(...) and yet the Lord answers not our (...), nor (...) us that Spiritual Good
we need: Learn we now (...) (...) and control those boystrous (...) (...)
(...) Spirits, with that of the Apostle, Who art (...) (...) that reasonest
against God? What if (...) will not? Romans 9. 20, 21, 22. What if he will (...)
ver (...) our hearts, never pacify our Conscience pardon our sins, save our
Souls? It is (...) his (...) (...), he may do what he will, and therefore he
does us no wrong what ever he does: Fit then it is we should stay his times,
who has all times especially of Grace and Life in his own hands.

While this life lasts, and the Gospel is Doct.
continued, that is the particular Season and
The time of Grace and day of Salvation, is here discovered in the Two Periods
of it, which make up the parts of the Doctrine. 1 Grace is only to be gained in
this life. 2 While the means of Salvation are continued, that's the Season,
which the Lord usually takes to work upon the Souls of those (...) belong to
him, we shall severally open and prove both (...), and after make joint
Application of them.

Preparation and Conversion of the Soul must be Seek ye the Lord while he may
be found, Isaiah, 55. 6. The time of our living is one of Gods whiles, the time
of finding Grace and Mercy, if ever we come to share therein? The (...) of
Jacobs Ladder is here on Earth, though the top of (...) unto Heaven? The Lord
must dwell with (...) here in an humble and contrite heart, Isaiah, 57. 15.
(...) else we shall never dwell with him in that high and holy place, whither
Christ is gone to prepare a mansion for us; Now is the time of (...) and
gaining Grace, in the other world we shall enjoy the fruit and sweet of it,
here we must get the conquest if we think to wear the Crown in another world.
Reasons are Two.

Because after the parting of the Soul from the body, (...). 1
and the dissolution of the whole, Gods peremptory Sentence is passed, and the
final doom of the Soul is determined a Sentence never to be revoked, a
judgment never to be repealed, and therefore the sinner becomes irrevokably
either miserable or happy, Heb. 9. 27. It is appointed for all men once to die,
and after death comes judgment. Death and Judgment are coupled immediately
one to another: the end of the one, is the entrance of the other; as Death
leaves us, so Judgment will find us: Though the full and complete execution
of the Sentence is deferred until the great day of accounts, yet condemnation
seizes upon each part as soon as they be severed the one from the other, if
they do deserve: The body is imprisoned in the dungeon of the grave, and the
Soul (of him (...) is wicked) is taken instantly and dragged by the Devils into
torment, Luke, 12. 20. This night shall they fetch away (...) Soul.

With the Saints contrariwise, Their bodies are laid in the Grave as in a bed
of Down, perfumed with the precious Death and Burial of the Body of Christ, the
ashes thereof carefully preserved, yea, loved by the Lord: So the Apostle, Romans
8. last. I am persuaded that neither life nor death is able to separate us from
the love of God in Christ Jesus: So that the Lord loves the very dust of the
bodies of his Saints in the Grave, and receives their Souls to himself in
glory, as soon as Body and Soul are parted one from another (Luke 16. 22. The
Soul of Lazarus was by the Angels carried into Abraham's bosom) For at the
great day of accounts we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ,
that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he
has done, whether good or (...), 2 Cor. 5. 10. The Sentence we see shall not
(...) according to that men do in Purgatoty, as the Papists dream; but
according to that only which they did while they had Being and Breathing in
this Natural life.

The Condition of a man after this life is (...). Romans 8. 23. Here in this
world we (...) but the first fruits of the Spirit; but there (...) then the
full Harvest.

So contrarily, the Wicked after Death, are (...) delivered up to the tyranny
and authority os (...) Corruptions and there settled, and that (...), in a
state of rebellion, and become utterly (...) of receiving any spiritual Grace,
or (...) any spiritual Good, but sink down in (...) (...) without hope of
either. For those (...) Graces whereby the Lord in the time of life (...) their
distempers and those outward (...), Word and Sacraments wholesome Laws and (...)
Counsels and Examples which formerly (...) them from many notorious outrages,
are now (...) away: Now the Lord plucks up the Hedge, (...) pulls down the
Wall, takes away all the (...) Gifts of his Grace, vouchsafes not one (...) of
his Spirit, to strive with the Sinner any more, (...) one check of Conscience
to aw him, not the least (...) of any Good to affect him any more; (...) (...)
the reins in the neck of the Rebel, and (...) (...) loose upon him to execute
the fullness of the fierceness of his malice, to the uttermost; (...) his rage
was consined before, he could do no (...) than his Commission allowed him, he
had the (...) of his temptations set; but now he takes full possesion of the
Soul after death, and has free leave (...) exercise full dominion over it, as
much as he will (...) can: Yea, the Lord in his severe, but (...) (...), lets
in the Sea of all sinful (...) as with a mighty slow and full tide into the
(...) (...) heart, to carry him without all control or stay from ever enjoying
either Means or Hopes of (...) least expression of Gods presence, for any good
(...) any kind: There is no heart to pity the (...) Sinner, no Friend to pray
for him, no Counsel (...) advise, Reproof to stop, no Exhortation to persuade
any more, from the approving and (...) of whatever might dishonor God. In the
days (...) his Life and Vanity, he was weary of all these, because they
hindered him from having his full (...) in the ways of wickedness; Now all
these (...) Means, as so many banks which kept in the swelling and boystrous
rage of his accursed lusts, are all (...) down; the bottomless depths of all
abominations are opened; the power of all sinfulness, in all (...) (...)
thereof, seizes upon the Soul, and (...) and prevails in it to all eternity,
without lessening restraint, or alteration: For to imagine that the fire of
Purgatory should purify the Sinner, from any Soul pollution, that a Material
thing should (...) upon a Spiritual Substance such as the Soul is, yea, a
Natural thing work a Supernatural disposition, (...) a senseless, and
unconceivable Absurdity, not worthy the Consideration; much less any serious
endeavor to Confute.

The Second Part of the Doctrine is, While the Gospel is (...), that is the
season of Gods acceptance, he then puts forth the power of his grace to
prepare the heart; so the word implies in the text, an opportunity of
acceptance: It discovers (...) (...) in Three Particulars.

There is fitness of opportunity in regard of the

Thus then there is a season of Gods acceptance. when he affords means, sends
his Messengers of glad (...) of Peace, when he sets open the stall of the
Gospel before our eyes, cries his commodities in our (...), and proclaims the
offer or his rich mercy to all Comers, Ho every one that will, let him come
and take freely of the waters of the well of life and live for ever: Now is the
Season of Gods gracious working and our receiving, greatest success in his
Ordinances; this is the Exposition (...) the Apostle ads in the following
verse, behold now is the acceptable time, whiles the light shines, whilst
Wisdom cries, and Ministers call, if ever there was opportunity of Conversion
and Preparation now is the fittest of all other, for God to work it, for us to
endeavor it; When the fat things are killed, and finest wines drawn and
broached, servants sent to invite, and all preparations made ready to the
marriage feast, Luke 14. 17. Then is it time to come, to feed, to refresh our
selves; behold all is ready, only come, when the door is open, and warning
given, behold the bridgroom comes, then is the nick of opportunity to follow
hard after, if we would find entrance into the Bride chamber, ' Matt. 25. 8, 9.
But when the Feast is over, and the door shut, we may have time to come and
knock, but never shall we find entrance, or acceptance, or welcome, because the
season is past.

There is a fitness in reference to the work, which Esther to be Queen in a fit
time, for Mordecais safety, the succor and deliverance of the Nation of the
Jews; for though she might have possessed the same place, enjoyed the same
Honor, and Royal Pre-eminence, afterward; yet it had been too late to have
defeated the Policies of Haman, or procured the Preservation of her People,
from the Plots and pursuits of those who were armed for their utter ruin,
Esther 4 Thus the Woman of Samaria was then called effectually by our Savior,
John 4. when it was the pat opportunity to commuicate the notice of a Messiah,
and the work of his Grace to the Samaritans, who were as the regions of Corn,
white unto the harvest, and ready to be cut and carried; so were the People
ready to hear, attend, and embrace the glad tidings of Redemption through the
Lord Jesus.

There is a fitness in regard of the Subject, which goodness of the workman,
and holds our the work done to greater admiration. Thus our Savior is said
(...).
to come and reconcile all things in the fullness of opportunities, Ephesians. 1.
10. because the Lord Christ came then when things were at the lowest eb, the
state of the Church of the Jews in (...) extremity, when the root of David was
dry, and the branches of the stock of David quite withered, Isa. 11. 1 that is,
When the Scepter seemed to have departed from the Tribe of Judah, and a
Lawgiver from between his legs, Genesis 49. 10.

Now however the extremity of this distress was no cause of Deliverance, but
rather a hinderance in it self; and though God the Father out of his own power
and according to his own good pleasure might have sent his Son sooner, to have
redeemed his people out of their distresses, yet now the greatness of misery
made them such Subjects, wherein the glory of his rich Grace, might appear in
the perfect beauty thereof.

Hence it is many times in the Dispensation of the work of Grace, the Lord
takes the Sinner in the lowest and basest estate, in the most desparate
condition when the distress grows deadly, the case to the eye of man is beyond
cure and recovery, that so the sovereign virtue of his saving Grace might be
set forth to the wonder of the World, and to the encouragement of those who
should come to the like streights: Upon this ground it is that the Lord Christ
chose that time to convert Paul when he was in the heat of his rage, when his
fury was at the height, when breathing out threatenings against the Church, he
came armed with authority, and hellish resolution to carry all to Prison, Acts
9. In a word, while Paul proceeds furiously with a (...) intention, to oppose
Christ to persecute his Members, and in the issue to procure and hasten his own
everlasting ruin, then our Savior prevents him and pitties him, and does him
most good, while he strives to do most harm, and to make havoc of the Church,
the truth, and his soul also: yea, then works his conversion, when he most
seriously endeavors to work his own Confusion of himself, and such as professed
the Faith in sincerity; the aim of God in all the Apostle directed by the
Spirit expresses to be this, 1 Timothy 1. 16. I was a Persecutor, but I obtained
(...).
Mercy, to the end that the Lord in me might show all long-suffering to the
example of those that should believe on his Name. Such a forlorn Sinner at that
time was the fittest subject to receive the full print of Gods love and
compassion in great Letters, as it were, that he might be a pattern to all
(...), of the boundless compassions of the Lord. That as Seamen after a
dangerous wrack and miraculous deliverance, set up a Monument of their
Preservation to all that pass that way, to work fear in them to prevent
shipwreck, and yet hope of Recovery if they do.

To the like purpose is the Conversion of the Apostle in this heat of his
Rebellion set upon Record in public view: As though the Lord should say, Look
here you forlorn sinners, see a desparate Rebel running post-haste to his
everlasting ruin, and behold withal the hand of Mercy then stopping of him in
his way; Paul persecuting Christ in his Members, Christ then pitying and
preserving Paul, the one most kind, when the other is most vile and (...): Oh
the madness of a deluded Soul (...) reason! But Oh the Compassions of a Savior
beyond all compare! Be afraid you never proceed to such hellish folly, and yet
bless God, That there is such a Savior if you do. These be the Seasons of Gods
acceptance, the first here principally intended, the rest not excluded, and in
these opportunities thus appointed by God in his Wisdom, according to his good
will, he does put forth the work of his Grace, to bring home the Souls of his
unto himself.

Hence we learn, That a long life is a great blessing Use 1.
in it self, a great temporal blessing as it comes from the Lord. Why? Because
all that while a man is in the way: Mercy may meet with him, and he may meet
with it: While there is life, there is hope (unless a man have sinned against
the holy Ghost) Physicians observe all the while there is strength in Nature,
there is hope the Physic may prove profitable; It is much more for the comfort
of the Soul, while there is life, there is yet a possibility: Thy heart is
stubborn, and rebellious, and proud; but thou yet live, and the Lord lives,
and his Mercy lives, therefore it may be he may show mercy to thee: But when a
man is dropped down into the grave, and the pit has shut its mouth upon Psa.
146
him, then all his thoughts perish, then with a sad heart he may remember all
the helps he had, the opportunities

You therefore that know your bosom abominations, you have your back doors, and
your base haunts; you know your sins are not pardoned, you have not repented of
them; when you are gone home, go your ways, and bless God that you live: For,
let me tell you, This is all the hope in the world that yet you are alive, and
therefore the Lord may show Mercy to you; if your days were ended, and you
gone down to Hell, then not all the world, nay not Christ, nor the Mercy of God
it self could not save you then: therefore look as it was with a Child which
was followed by a Bear into a pond, the Child cried out to the people that were
running and came to the ponds sides, Oh help, help; and still as the Bear (...)
him, first his Arms, than his Legs, and still he cried out, Oh help, help, yet
I am alive, yet I am alive: this is your condition, believe it. Not Bears, but
Sins and Devils are upon you, they have you in their clutches, tearing and
devouring your Souls: Oh look to Heaven, and cry out unto the Lord, and say,
Lord, a proud stubborn Creature, but yet I am alive, the Devil is Devouring my
soul, but Lord, help me and deliver me, yet I am alive; bless God you are so,
and know its all you have to show for your everlasting welfare. For while there
is Life, there is Hope.

Matter of Caution and Advice, to fence our souls Use 2.
and fortify our selves against that hellish distemper of Self-murder, that
our hearts may be carried with hatred of it, and our souls preserved from the
commission of it: when partly from discontentments, and partly from terrors of
Conscience, men are not able to bear with themselves; but they will run to a
Halter or a Knife, they will put an end to their lives that they may put an end
to their sorrows; they will not live, that they may not live thus and thus. Why
Consider, Art thou sure of a better life? They will Answer, No, that's my
misery, I see all my sins before me, and Hell gaping for me, and the Devils
attending to seize upon my Soul, and it makes me weary of my life. Weary of
your life! Take heed of that, bless God for your life, and pray for life, and
seek to preserve your life what you may, for while your life lasts, you are in
the way to Mercy Dives had so much experience of the torments Luke 16 28.
of Hell, that he sends to those that were alive, Oh take heed of coming
hither, you are in a better condition than I, what ever your case be. Learn
therefore for ever to fear and fly from temptations to self Murder, as that
which would put an end to your life, and to put an end to all hopes and
possibilities of Mercy from the Lord.

But the main Fruit of the Point, which properly Use 3.
belongs to this Place, is a Use of Instruction, which ought to be observed and
settled upon the Consciences of us all. Does the Lord then usually accept of
the Soul, and do good to it while he provides and continues the means of Grace?
What then remains but we should give all diligence to attend upon his times,
take his means, and improve all to the (...) for our Spiritual good. Suffer me
here to stay a while, and urge the Collection with an Argument or Two, and yet
go no further than the Words, nor take other Reasons than the Text will afford,
for it issues amain and with a full sourse from all Particulars mentioned
before, the foregoing Truths meeting together, like so many streams, to make
this more forcible upon the Conscience, and like a mighty Current, to carry us
along to everlasting happiness.

It is a Season, and therefore to be Observed; an Redeem the time, Col. 4. 5.
Having opportunity, let us do good to all, Gal. 6. 10 If unto others, much more
to our selves: If to their bodies, especially to our own Soul; if to them in
Temporal things, than most of all our best good in Eternal blessings is to be
attended.

But the Season is not yet come, that Opportunity is not yet offered. Answ.
(...) (...), the Apostle points at it as at hand, and in view: Behold now:
while I am Speaking, and you are Hearing, while the doors of the Sanctuary are
yet opened, while we are in the land of the living, behold now is the
acceptable time. Oh let us not harden our hearts, nor shut our eyes, (...) stop
our ears, unto the voice of the Lord, but pursue opportunity present, strike
while the iron is hot, (...) our Harvest while the heat and Sunshine is upon
us, while wind and tide lasts, sail we cheerfully toward the Haven, the end of
our hopes, the Salvation of our Souls. This is the Argument which the Apostle
presses with so much eagerness, as having such apparent evidence in it. That
considering the Season, it is high time we should awake from the sleep of
security, our salvation is nearer than heretofore, Romans 3. 11. The Lord now
speaks to us as sometimes to the secure Church, Cant. 2. 10. Arise my Love, my
Dove, and come away; For lo the winter is gone. the flowers appear, the voice
of the Turtle is heard in our land, etc. I may truly say, This Scripture is
this day fulfilled in our ears, wherein the Lord Christ by the Ministry of his
Word calls, and that with all instancy, upon every corrupt (...)-hearted sinner
to come to him, to receive the word of his Grace, and the power and comfort
thereof upon his soul: Behold the foggy mists of Popery and ignorance are over,
the shaddows of (...) are passed away, the flowers grow, and the (...) (...)
apace, peace and prosperity, with abundance of outward blessings shoured down
upon us, the voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land, the sound of the Gospel,
and the glad tidings of Peace, have been, and yet (...) proclaimed in our
streets.

Arise, arise, therefore (...) secure and dead hearted Sinners, and come away.
Arise ye drunkards, come (...) from your Cups and Companies; Arise ye
Adulterous wretches, come away from your (...) (...), and beds of dalliance;
come to him who (...) kindly invites you, who promises to accept you, who is
able and willing to save you. Oh! consider opportunities will not last always,
we have no (...) of them, much less command of them; and who knows whether we
shall ever enjoy that which we now neglect? Especially, considering the Lord at
the present, vouchsafes all helps to further and persuade us to this
Preparation, dealing with us as (...) he did with the stubborn-hearted Jews by
Ezekiel, who to strike their hearts with an open Conviction that they must go
into Captivity, he is enjoined to carry out his stuff, in the most plain manner
in their sight, from one place to another, and the end is added: If it be
possible (as some translations read it) if per adventure (as the propriety of
the Hebrew bears it, all to one sense) they may consider it, Ezekiel. 12. 3. As if
he should say, There is some small hope that something may procure their
welfare, and if it be possible, this plain dealing is like to prevail: A lively
picture and resemblance of Gods special bounty to usward, who enjoy the means
of Grace above many others: The Lord has seen other Countries, but he has
settled his abode amongst us; he has passed by many Congregations, but he has
lodged with those where he has set up the Light of his Truth; the Son of (...)
has sent abroad his beams to many corners of the Earth, a glimpse of his
goodness has appeared unto many places, but his saving health like the Sun in
his full strength, has stood over our heads as it did once in Gibeon, and the
Moon in the valley of Ajalon: Some people have had many means, and many people
have had some, but almost all have met together to procure our good, and to
make up the fullness of opportunities, even the fullness of all fitness, that if
it were possible we might consider it, and (...) at the last convert and turn
unto the Lord. The Birds of the Heaven, the Sinners upon Earth, and the Devils
in Hell, know and pursue their (...) Opportunities; the one for the comforts of
nature, Jer. 8. 7.
that they may enjoy them; the other for their (...), Job, 24. 15.
that they may enjoy their lusts, though they perish for it: Ask then (thou
sluggard) of the Birds of the Rev. 12. 12.
Heaven, and they will tell thee; demand of the Beasts of the Field, they will
show thee; nay, (...) of the Devils in Hell, and they will testify how
Opportunities ought to be prized, and how (...) improve them. Will thou be more
unreasonable than the Beasts? More careless of thine own (...) Comforts, than
the Devils be to procure thy own Confusion? Shall the Lord provide all (...)
for our Good, and shall we neglect both him, and them, and our own everlasting
welfare? Woe to our sluggishnes.

Object. True, let this Opportunity (...) great, so (...) the Continuance of it
long, and therefore we may take it hereafter.

Answ. No: Its a Day says the Text, very short, Golgotha, Skins of all sorts
in the Market; young and old, aged and (...), haste unto the rend: No man yet
had a lease of (...) Life, which is as Grass, a Flower, a Bubble, and alas! how
soon does this Grass wither, this (...) fade, this Bubble break?

And our day being short, so is it almost (...), many of us have past our
highest point, the best (...) (...) time, our Evening draws on; and behold pale
(...), and feeble hands, crazy bodies, dangerous (...), which are as Har
bengers of our dissolution, (...) will soon bring us to the house of our age,
to (...) dust of death; thus is our breath but a shadow, (...) soon passes
away and we are gone: Oh! that we (...) wise to consider these things, and
because our (...) is short, and passes away, we would take hold (...) the
opportunity present.

But the young man Replies; It is a good thing (...) the Eye to behold the Sun,
Eccles. 11. 7. To (...) this Light, to enjoy the present Pleasures, to (...)
the Rose while it is in the bud, to gather the (...) whilst it is fresh, while
time and strength (...) take the pleasures of the world and enjoy the (...) of
my heart; not now to sit moping in a (...), go drooping and sorrowing for my
sins; when (...) hair grows gray, and decrepit age comes on, (...) years hence,
when my Sun grows near the setting, (...) Life begins to decline, and my
strength to decay, (...) shall than have leisure to talk of holiness, to turn
(...) a new leaf, and betake my self to my Beads, and (...) of Grace; in the
mean time these jolly (...), speak unto Preparation and Humiliation, as (...)
sometimes to Paul. Go your way for this (...), and when we have a convenient
time we will (...) for you.

Answ. Thou fool, this night may thy soul be (...) from thee, Luke 12. 20. How
know thou but the Lord may pluck thee out of the land of the living, and
send thee packing down to thy own place, give thee thy Portion with Unbeleevers
and Despisers of his Grace? and then all thy thoughts perish, thy time is past,
and Repentance too late, when the Pit has shut her mouth upon thee, how fond
to think to have leisure to Repent, when thou will not have time to Live?

2 Be it the day of thy Life continue, yet the day of Salvation may be ended;
for this is but a minute or moment of that span of time, a point or (...) of
that opportunity; If the Lord remove his (...), take away the light of his
Word, dam up the fountain of Grace, and stop the well-springs of Salvation,
thou may perish for thirst, and live to (...) the folly of the neglect of
Means, when happily thou shall not know where they be, nor yet have liberty and
ability to enjoy them if thou knew: while therefore the day of our life, and
the day (...) Salvation (the Mart of Mercy) lasts, both which are but short and
uncertain, let us be watchful to observe, and careful to take all advantages to
buy the chiefest and best Commodities, Humiliation and Faith. Especially
considering it may be any (...) particular day, as our Savior to Jerusalem, Oh
that thou had known at least in this thy day, Luke 19. 42. When the Word is
mighty, and the Spirit speaks powerfully unto thy soul, when the undeniable
evidence of the Truth convicteth thy judgment, and the keen threatenings
thereof, cuts and lanceth thy corrupt Conscience to the Core, and the Lord raps
at the door of thy heart, by the hammer of the law; Oh now follow those
motions, and cherish them, make much of a little, and suffer the blessed
Ordinance of God to have its full blow upon thy Soul; go aside and consider
seriously with thy self, Certainly the Lord came home this day unto my heart,
touched me to the quick, and met with my particular Corruptions, withstood me
to my face, and by the authority of his Truth, like the naked Sword in the hand
of the Angel stopped me in my Course, and bad me back again; assuredly this is
my part, a Portion carved out in special (...) my Soul, this (...) is my day of
Salvation, in which the (...) (...) to work the good work of his grace (...)
me: True it may be so, and for ought that thou (...) I, or any under heaven
know, it is so: Remember (...) thou had a fair offer, and take heed how (...)
do refuse it, lest thou never have the like (...). Break therefore through
all Oppositions, cast (...) (...) (...), listen to no alurements to the (...),
(...) while (...) is called to day harden not thy (...): And as Paul to his
Company (Acts) August. in his Confessions.
(...) thou never to see their faces more. I know (as one of the (...) brings
in his sins) our old (...) like old (...) will threap kindness from (...),
plead prescription and continuance, we have (...) long, taken much sweet
Counsel together, (...) much delight and content. Give us warning (...), before
you give us a discharge, let us (...) our (...) of (...) for the while, and
hereafter let (...) think of amendment: Thus the same Father when (...) had
often resolved to renounce his bosom (...), and the beloved lusts of the flesh,
still that sounded in his ears, To morrow, to morrow; as the burden of Satan's
song, To morrow soon enough, hereafter time enough; thus while he was startling
and (...) by the terrors of his Conscience, he lulled him, and rocked him a
sleep again by delays, (...) at last in a holy kind of violence and
indignation of heart, breaks through all, demurs no more, delays no longer, but
cries out, Why not to day, why not to day Lord? and from that day following God
gave him victory. Go thy ways and do thou likewise, stand not haggeling and
dallying with the Almighty, set down a resolution like the Laws of the Meads
and Persians, never to be revoked; that thou will from this (...), and ever
hereafter, wait upon the (...) of grace, and give way to the work thereof.
Dispute no more, but determine thus with thy self, Why yet am I here in the
land of the Living, yet (...) this side the bottomless pit, the Lord still
tenders the offers of Salvation, strives still with this sturdy heart of mine,
I know not how soon I may be taken from the Means, or the Means from me, or the
Blessing of the Lord from us both; while therefore the spirit speaks to my
Soul, Seek thou my face; give me a heart to echo back again, Thy face Lord
will I seek this day.

After all this, the heart still sings loath to depart, and the deluded finner
lingers after his lust, as Lot after Sodom, and therefore puts in a new Plea on
this manner: Imagine the worst, should I put off this fair and kind Call of the
Lord? Yet since it is in my power to entertain it hereafter, there is not so
much danger though I now refuse it.

Answ. Be it granted, Thy life might be prolonged, the words of the text do
most apparently dash this presumptuous conceit, Its the Season of Gods
acceptance; Its not in thy power, but depends merely upon his good Will: We
are not the Patrons of the means of Grace, much less of their work, it is not
in our Gift; the Sending and Blessing of both issues only from the good
pleasure of the Almighty: prolong not then, put not off the time, deny not Gods
gracious offer, lest thou never have offer again; he that now holds out the
golden Scepter of Mercy to receive thee, has an Iron rod wherewith he can (...)
thee to nothing, and break thee in pieces like a Potters vessel: He that has
the Keys of David, and now sets open the gate of Salvation, he can shut it and
no man shall open it any more; and when thou have stayed too long, and come
too late, thou may knock hard with the foolish Virgin, and cry aloud with
Esau, and yet receive neither Blessing, nor Birthright, and its just with God
it should be (...), that the Word which thou have despised, should (...) (...)
a dead, or killing Letter, and never work (...); the motions of his Spirit
which thou have (...), should never stir more with thee. Thus Wisdom threatens
the scorners of her Counsel, Prove. 1. 24. Because I have called and they
resused, I (...) stretched out my hand, and no man regarded, (...) they shall
call, but I will not answer; they (...) seek me early, but they shall not find
me.

Nay, it may be thou shall not only not find what (...) (...), and that with
some eagerness, which is (...) state miserable enough, but shall not have a
heart (...) much as once to seek for Mercy, as many (...) have, and Hypocrites
do; and this is a (...) next to the damned in Hell, unconceivably (...). This
was Jerusalems case just as the Lord (...) it, Oh that thou had known at
least in (...) thy Day, the things belonging to thy peace, but (...) they are
hid from thine eyes, Luke 19. 42. Christ (...) now weeping over the City,
preaching his farewell (...) amongst them, yea, now come to die amongst them:
the presence of the Means makes the Plague more remarkable, when through Gods
just judgment for their contempt of the truth, they have eyes but they are made
dim and see not, they have ears but (...) heavy and hear not, and hearts made
hard even (...) the blessed Ministry of the Gospel, and so they understand
not; they have all before their eyes, and (...) all hid from their eyes: The
like Curse the Lord usually pours out upon the hellish despisers of the
Doctrine of Grace, deliver them up to blind minds, and seared Consciences,
reprobate senses, that they who shut their eyes against the power of Gods
Ordinances, should never see nor be (...) of, either that or their own misery,
which is the (...) misery of all.

Yet all this will not content, there is one cavil which the carnal Answ. What!
(...) great? God forbid that such a Thought should be in any (...) Heart, such
a Word come out of any man's Mouth. Its no less than Salvation it self, Its
(...) day of salvation says the text, (...) loss not to be valued, not to be
recovered, will never, can (...) be repaired again; yea, I appeal to thy own
Conscience, and (...) thy self in cold blood be thy own judge: Think but
seriously (...) the Rivers of pleasure which are at Gods right hand, of (...)
Psalm. 16. last.
Kingdom (...) undefiled, and that sadeth not away, (...) and consider of that
Crown of Glory, that exceeding (...) 1 Pet. 1. 4.
weight of glory reserved in the heavens; and weigh but with (...) 2 Cor. 4. 17.
self, in thy most retired thoughts, the (...) Mercy of a God, the (...)
Redemption of a Christ, the Comforts of a Spirit (...) glorious; imagine you
heard that Sentence passed, Come ye Blessed, (...) the Kingdom, possess the
Crown, enjoy (...) Pleasures, and if thou have but the heart of a man, let it
Answer: Can thou lose all these, and account the loss little? and yet if the
day of Grace be gone once, all these go too; neglect that now, and never think
to enjoy these: An Argument able to stay any in the most eager pursuit (...)
these lying vanities, and to cause him to (...), and steer his course another
way.

As Elisha said, Is this a time to take (...)? So when (...) consider all
Opportunities, and Means, and Mercies, say, Is this a time, to follow the
World, and the Profits thereof? to (...) our selves with sinful Delights, and
forsake Christ, and his Gospel, and Salvation and all: Me thinks Nature would
(...), Reason would Persuade, It is a Day of Salvation, our Lives, (...) Hopes,
our Comforts, our Salvation, and All depend upon (...). It is the time that God
has bestowed for this end, therefore (...) sure to improve this time so, as we
may attain this end. In (...) word, It is a Day, therefore a Season; and but a
Day, (...) short; a Day of Gods Accepting; and a Day of Salvation; The Season
so Fit, the Time so Short, and the Purchase so Great, what remains then, but we
should improve this Time to our utmost, that we may Receive that Spiritual Good
from the Lord in it, that he is willing to bestow, and we stand in (...) of,
for our Comfort here, and our everlasting welfare in another World.

FINIS.
BOOK V.
MATTHEW. 20. 5, 6, 7. Again he went out about the sixth and ninth hour, and did
likewise. And about the eleventh hour he went out, and found others standing
idle, and says unto them, why stand ye all the day idle? He says unto them,
Go also into the Vineyard, and whatsoever is right, that ye shall receive.
WE have done with the Season of Salvation in regard of the means, consider we
now the time which the Lord takes in regard of the Parties, upon whom it is
wrought who do yet enjoy their lives, and the means of Grace: Amongst these the
dispensation of the Lord is diverse, dealing as it seems best to his Heavenly
Wisdom; some he calls, and converts in their younger, some in their older, but
most usual it is to bring home sinners to himself in their riper age.

For the scanning of this Point, we have made choice of this Parable of the
Vineyard: which presents to us four things at the sirst view.

1 The (...) of the Vineyard, who owed it. 2 The (...), who dressed it. 3 The
(...), when they were hired. 4 The Reward here promised and given for their
(...). Under the Letter or which words, this (...) (...) is (...), (...) ought
to be conceived.
The (...) is the Church, Isai. 5. 7. The Master and Householder, is the Lord
Christ: The (...) (...), are his redeemed ones, whom he calls by the effectual
operation of his blessed Spirit in the (...) of his Word, to be painful and
fruitful in good works as in Christ they are created unto, and (...). 2. 8
(...) or dained they should walk in. The diversity of the time of their
hiring, shows the difference of the times wherein they are converted, some
sooner, and some later, and for the right and ready (...) of this Circumstance,
let it be remembered that it was the received manner amongst the Jews to divide
their Nights into four Watches, and their Days (...) of twelve hours, into
four Stations (...), 1 (...) (...), 2. (...). (...) 27 (...), 6
or Portions, designing three hours to each part; so (...) from (...) to (...),
was the Third hour; from (...) to twelve, the Sixth hour; from twelve to three,
(...) (...) hour; from thence to five, the Eleventh (...), one hour before the
ending of the day.

To apply: The Day is as it were our Life; God (...) some of his Servants in
the morning of their youth; some at midday, in their middle age; some at the
eleventh hour, in their aged and declining time, when their Sun is near
setting, and they drawing on to the end of their days, not long (...) their
death, not long before their souls depart out of their bodies, and they depart
from the Land of the Living.

I am not ignorant that some Interpreters run another way, and conceive by
Laborers, (...) only to be understood, whether they be good or bad; and their
(...), their calling unto that (...) in the Church: He that is a Demas and
seeks (...) World, his penny, his praise, and applause, if (...); his profit
and wealth, if Covetous, and for that he makes his agreement with the Lord,
when first he makes entrance upon the work of the Ministry: When he that is
sincere hearted, and seeks the things of Christ, the penny for which he
indents, and the hire he would have, is the hearts of poor (...), the
conversion of souls, and (...) of the body of Christ are instead of all the
Tithes and (...), Livings, and Benesices he desires to look after: though the
sense is pleasant and spiritual, yet I do not think it suits with the Scope
(...) this place, nor here intended by the Spirit. For of those (...) Parable
must be understood, of whom that conclusion in the last verse of the 19.
chapter was spoken, Many that be first shall be last, and many that be last,
shall be first: This Parable being inferred for the opening and proving of
that, as the first words of the first (...) of this 20. chapter, do plainly
evidence, For the Kingdom, etc.

But they are without question, the (...) only who are there meant, such who
have left all for Christ's sake, such who shall inherit (...) life, verse. 29.
always with this proviso, Many that are first called, if they bear up
themselves somewhat too much upon their own worth, shall be last rewarded; they
who are last called, if yet they do renounce all confidence in their own
excellency and sufficiency, and depend upon the free mercy of God, they shall be
amongst the chiefest that shall be recompensed: Following then the sense which
the Scope of the Text, and the best Interpreters give; the Point which fits our
purpose, and offers it self to consideration without any forcing from the
Words, is this:

God calls his Elect at any age, but the Doctor.
most of his, he converts before old age.
He comes at any hour, but once only at the Eleventh hour, and that somewhat
unexpectedly.

There be two Parts in the Doctrine: we will handle them severally, that they
may be more easily and distinctly conceived.

1 The Lord can, and sometimes does, call at any Age. 2 But the most of his, and
that most usually, he converts in their riper years.
God calls several of his Servants at sundry times, Part I.
some young, some old, some in their tender, some in their riper years, there is
no season excepted; he that is the God of all times, can, and will do his own
work at any time: Timothy knew the Scriptures from a child, 2 Timothy 3. 15. and
drew in the sincere (...) of the Word, as Milk from the Breasts of his Mother,
and therefore is said to be nourished up in the wholesome words of Truth, 2 Timothy
1. 5. Obadiah feared God from his youth, 1 Kings, 18. 12, Lydia and the Jailer
in Acts, 16. Paul in Acts, 9. 7. and Zacheus, Luke, 19. 9. it is most propable
they were in their middle age, as their places and employments together with
their accustomed experience, and practice therein do (...); Paul indeed is
called a young man, Acts, 7. 58. yet his bringing up at the feet of Gamaliel,
the largeness and depth of his Learning and Knowledge in Arts and Tongues, 1
Cor. 14. 18. together with the Commission he was betrusted by the High Priest,
for the persecuting of the Saints, evince undeniably that he must be of ripe
years: Abraham was upon his seventy fifth year when God called him, Genesis 12. 5.
compared with Josh. 24. 2. Manasseth was converted near upon his death, about
sixty years of age, 2 Chronicles. 33. 19. But in the case of old Age, the matter is
so difficult, and so unusual, that there are very few examples of old men
converted, recorded in Scripture, as though the Lord had reserved it in his own
hand as a special exception, that the Sons of men should not ordinarily expect
it. That which is usually observed with some probability (besides the pregnant
testimony of the Text in hand) is, Amongst the many thousands, who were pricked
in their hearts at Peter's Sermon, Acts, 2. 36. Amongst all those who came to
hear with Cornelius, Acts, 10. 44. It Is said, the Holy (...) fell upon all that
(...); it is probable some among such numbers were stricken in years: As for the
Thief upon the (...), it is most agreeable to good reason by all the leading
circumstances in the Text, that he was in his best strength. The Lord takes
these times in the dispensation of his Mercy, for a double End.

To show the freeness of his Grace, that there is nothing Adam, and therefore
takes every season, that it may appear it is in his good pleasure to take what
season he will. If the work of Grace had been (...) to any time of Life, either
Youth, (...)-hood, or Old Age, alone, it would (...) been concluded (...)
carnal grounds, that there was something in the Creature, upon condition (...)
it had been given; either the tenderness of the young ones had moved the Lord to
(...) them, or the excellency of the parts and abilities of men of riper years,
could have procured it: or the policy and experience of the aged could alone
have contrived this great work of preparation and conversion unto God: but when
the Lord chooses some out of all (...), and pass by others, it is (...) evident
it is not any thing in the persons years or condition, but merely in the
compassion of the Lord that does all: This is the (...) which the Lord himself
renders of his dealing in this kind, when he would suppress the murmuring of
some of the Laborers, (...). 20. 14. who (...) that they had no more than
others, because they had been longer in the Vinyard, and had born more of the
burden, and heat of the day than others: The Lord answers, May I not do what I
will with mine own?

Again, This God does to show his Power, even (...) he will both in Heaven and
Earth, Psalm. 1 15. 3. (...) also in the hearts of his people; when the (...)
and (...) of the little (...) (...) deprive them of this favor, when the
boisterous headstrong distempers of young men cannot hinder; (...) (...) (...)
(...) of the aged in their cankered corruptions, cannot (...) (...) (...) Grace
and Salvation; but be they never so weak God can (...); be they never so stout,
God can bend, be they never so fast rooted in their rebellions, God can, and
does separate betwixt sin and their souls, and recover them: Behold, this is
the Finger of the Almighty. When the Disease has entered (...) the Bowels, and
rotted in the bones of the sick, the Physic then to cure, the Physician then
to recover, that is skill more than ordinary by the confession of all: So here
in the soul, to make the Black-more to change his hew, the Leopard his spots,
to make a gray headed sinner, whose corruptions like a canker has eaten up his
heart by daily custom, to bring him to sound contrition and broken heartedness,
therein the outstretched arm of the Lord is expressed in his utmost strength,
My Power is made perfect in weakness, says the Lord, 2 Cor. 12. 9. It Is the
perfection of Power to prevail over such difficulties. Thus of the First Part;
the Second follows.

God does call most of his, before Old Age. And part II.
therefore when he went forth at the Eleventh hour, he reproves them, before he
entertains them, Why stand ye here all the day idle? as who should say, You
have lost the season of your work, and hope of your reward: the day is over,
there is no time for you to labor, and there is no reason that I should either
hire you or reward you; it is not my usual course nor custom; yet for once go
you also into my Vineyard: Therefore the most usual time of Conversion, is
betwixt the third and the ninth hour, in our middle Age, about twenty, and
betwixt thirty and forty; many are before, some are after, but most, and most
usually, are wrought upon at this time; There is (a good pleasure, as the
Original has it) a season for every thing, Eccles. 2. 1. and this seems to be
the fittest time for this work whether we respect Man or God.

A man at this Age has better Materials, as I may Walks after the sight of his
own eyes, Eccles. 11. 9. both which exceedingly (...) the work of reason, but
when these are toward (...) full perfection, and Nature has attained her
(...) work, then the Understanding begins to show (...) self in her operations:
Invention is then most (...) to apprehend, the Judgment to discern, Memory to
retain, and the Affections tenderest and nimblest to embrace any thing offered,
and most pliable to be wrought upon: As it is with Wax, if it be made too soft,
it cannot hold any impression, if too hard, it will receive none; but when it is
in temper most pliable, then it is most fit to receive and retain the stamp. So
Infancy is too weak and waterish, it is not able to fadom or fasten upon the
depths of Argument; Age grows sturdy with (...), and will not listen to the
Reasons of those Truths its not willing to embrace: only in the middle Age,
when Reason is come to some ripeness, there is then some more convenient
advantages to be taken for the Lord to imprint the stamp of Grace upon the
soul, which the hand of his own Spirit can only do.

Look we again at Corruption: In this Age (...) (...) the burden of their sins,
being settled long and (...) upon their (...), wedged in their (...), and
incorporated into sinful customs, their hearts grow hard, their understandings
blind, and their affections overcome with the deceitfulness of sin, difficult
it is to persuade their Reason, to acknowledge the vileness of their sin, but
almost impossible to have their hearts wrought to a deteftation of it. Trees
withered and rotten, are altogether unfit to be transplanted; nor likely to
prosper if they be: So is it with aged men, like these Trees, withered in their
wickedness, yea, as Jude speaks, Corrupt Trees twice dead, Jude, 12. First by
Original corruption; Secondly by a continued and settled custom in Actual (...);
who have taken (...) root in their rebellions, they are most unfit to be
transplanted and ingrafted into the true Vine Christ Jesus by Conversion and
Faith: The Bow that is often (...), and stands long one way, is not bowed the
other way, but with much violence: The soul (proportionably) which is turned
from God, and has (...) bent by long continuance in a base course, though it is
possible it may be brought back again and put into a right frame, yet it will
cost the setting on before it can be accomplished, and a world of difficulties
must be gone through usually before it be done.

Thirdly and lastly, As this is the fittest Age in regard to express the (...)
of him who has called us from darkness to his marvelous light, 1 Pet. 2. 9.
for Grace destroys not the powers and faculties of Nature, but (...) them;
removes not abilities, but rectifies them, does not take them away, but turns
them to their (...) end and use; while then the parts of the body (...) powers
of the soul are in their prime, and best (...) then may they be improved by the
blessed Spirit (...) the Lord and his Grace, to the best advantage of (...)
Name: Thus Grace damps not, deads not the (...) ction of love, if strong and
lively, but directs it (...) God, his Truth, and Children: Grace abates not
(...) edg of Courage and Resolution, but brings as stout, and yet straggling
Soldier into his right (...) and Rank, to be employed in the defense of the
Gospel: Though God can work with any tool, yet (...) in he manifests his
Wisdom, that he will choose (...) to whom he gives great fitness to the
performance (...) those great and honorable employments unto (...) they are
designed: Hence Paul might in many other, so in this respect also, be called a
choice (...) to carry Christ's Name among the Heathens, (...) 9. 15. being his
Zeal was fiery, his Love earnest, (...) Courage resolute, his Judgment deep,
his Spirit undaunted, and fit for dispatch; all these faculties being as so
many vessels filled with Grace, prepared and guided by the Power of Gods
Spirit, might be fit Instruments to carry and convey the Gospel, and the glory
of the unsearchable Riches of Christ, to the ends of the Earth; Who sitter to
care for all the Churches, 2 Cor. 11. 28. than he that had (...) havoc of
them? Acts, 9. Who more fit to be (...) Messenger of Peace, and to breath out
glad tidings (...) Salvation to fainting souls, than he who had (...) out
threatenings against them? Acts, 9. 1. Who more (...) to pity the Saints, than
he who cut of his madness had persecuted them, and that to the death before?
Acts, 26. 11.

But in the crazy and decayed estate of fainting Age, when the whole frame
begins to shake and go (...) ruin, how unable are we to perform the meanest
service, how (...) to be employed in works of greatest weight? The members of a
man converted are called Weapons of Holiness, and Servants of Righteousness,
Romans 6. 19. but doting heads, palsy hands, feeble knees, faultring tongues are
but broken weapons, and lame Servants, utterly unworthy to be used in the
fighting of Gods Battles, or performance of his Service; how shall those hands
which hang down for faintness be able to work the works of God? how shall the
feet that cannot stir walk in his ways? or that tongue tell of his praise that
cleaves unto the (...) of the mouth, and cannot talk two ready words? To gripe
the Sum of the Point in short.

If Nature be now most pliable to be prepared to receive Grace, corruption not
now so (...) to (...) it, our abilities most able to improve it; then is it a
reasonable Truth, that the God of Wisdom, though he call some at any Age, yet
he should Convert most at this Age.

Learn we hence to take out a Lesson of Sobriety, (...) 1.
not to be too rash and Censorious touching the final estate of any in this
life, since it is never too (...) for the Lord to call, though at the Eleventh
hour: It Is the Apostles Counsel, Judge nothing before the time, that is, Judge
nothing that is secret and uncertain: determine not of any man's final
condition, because the time is not yet come; this life is a time of mercy, to
some sooner, to some later, After death, comes Judgment, when God shall lay
open the secrets, and (...) counsels of the heart; then judge and spare not, but
(...) then refer al unto the Lord: and therefore if the question be touching the
final estate of others, we should answer with modesty as the Prophet did to the
Lord in another case, Ezekiel. 37. 2, 3. When (...) Lord had showed him a field
full of dead bones (...) dry, he asked him, Son of man, shall these dead bone
live? the Prophet answers, Lord, thou know it rests in thine own will to work
this so great a work and in thine own Counsel to determine it. So, (...) the
demand be, Shall this gray headed sinner (...) come to Grace? he that has been
an old Standardbearer in the Camp of the Devil, shall he ever (...) a faithful
Soldier to the Lord Christ? can this seared Conscience ever be made sensible of
its sin (...) (...)? The answer of the Prophet will (...) us, Lord, thou only
know: It Is not for us to judge, Secret things belong unto the Lord. For (...)
to pry into the Ark of his privy and concealed Counsels, we cannot do it,
without desperate pride, and apparent danger. Thus far indeed we may go without
any breach of Charity, and the Word will (...) us sufficient warrant, to wit,
Observing the lives (...) men, Of some (of some, I say) we may conclude, and
that certainly, that as yet, they are in the state of Nature, in a miserable
and damnable condition.

Object. If it be replied, Does any man know that heart? Who knows what is in
man but the spirit of man? 1 Cor. 2. 11.

Answ. Can the spirit of a man pry into every corner of his Conscience, and
know his own condition? After he has told what he knows, I may know it as well
as himself, and sometimes better: Thus the Practice of a man discovers his
Spirit; A rotten Conversation (when the constant tenure and frame of a man's
course is corrupt and (...)) it (...) to all the world, who have wisdom to
(...), there is a refuse, and an (...) disposition within, The fool (says the
wise man, Eccles. 10. 3.) (...) to every one as he (...) by the way, that he is
a fool. After the (...) has felt the Pulse, and heard (...) complaint of the
Patient, what is the pain, and (...) the part affected, how the fits and returns
of (...) distemper takes him, he knows the disease far (...) than the man that
feels it; it may be it is (...) stone in the Reins, the inflammation of the
Liver, Consumption of the Lungs, the parts are within, and (...) cause of the
Disease also, but it discovers it self, (...) that undoubtedly many times by
Symptoms: (...) thus it is with the sickness of the Body, it is so (...) the
distempers of the soul; the Practice of a (...) is as the Pulse, if that be
commonly uneven, (...) and irreligious, it argues, it is not the fit of a (...),
but even the very frame and constitution (...) a corrupt and irreligious heart:
When a man's (...) carriage and communication leaves a noysom (...), and scent,
and (...) of profaneness behind (...), it evidently proclaims to any who have
but (...) Wisdom and Grace, that these dead works (...) from a rotten carcass
of a Body of death (...): it is, our Saviors direction and conclusion he (...)
as never failing, Matthew. 7. 16. 20. By their (...) you shall know them: An evil
tree cannot (...) forth good fruits, and a good tree cannot (...) forth evil
fruits, and therefore he doubles the (...) as that which is undeniable, by
their (...) you shall know them. The holy Apostle is (...) peremptory, 1 John,
3. 10. In this are the children of God known, and the children of the Devil:
(...) does not righteousness is not of God, and (...) that loves not his
Brother. Where there be Three Particulars suit the Point in hand.

1 There are but two sorts of men in the World, (...) Children of God, and the
children of the Devil. 2 These may be known. 3 He that is a hater of the
Saints, and a worker of iniquity, has the Brand-mark of a child of the Devil,
by which he may be discerned.
It is not then a breach of Charity to judge the tree by the fruits, the (...)
by the Symptoms, yea; it was folly and little less than madness to do other;
As the Word (...) I may judge, and so should.

But to (...) the Lord out of the Throne of Judgment, to sit upon the life and
death of men's souls, to set down men's peremptory doom further than the Word
warrants, as though we had been admitted into Gods secrets, and seen the Books
of Reprobation and Election drawn, this is hellish impiety and presumption; we
may boldly say, the tree is not a Vine that brings forth Thorns, nor that a
Fig Tree that bears Thistles; he who has a naughty life, cannot have a good
heart, He who serves 'Mammon, cannot serve God, Mat. 6. 24. He who walks after
the lusts of the flesh, must be a stranger from the life of Christ, Romans 8. 1.
has not yet his Spirit, is in the state of Condemnation, and that if he so
continue, he shall perish, but whether he shall be converted and brought home
at last by the Almighty Power of the Lord, it rests only in his own bosom,
depends alone upon his good pleasure; leave we then the Sentence with the Lord,
who will either recover him out of his sin, or most righteously judge him for it.

Of Consolation. Here Is also a Cordial to keep (...) 2.
up the fainting hearts of decrepit and aged sinners, whose noysom lusts plead
prescription of continuance as though they were beyond the Authority of any Law
to cast them out: I confess it indeed (Oh that ancient men would consider it)
the case is very desperate, and brought to the last cast; Is it not a marvelous
straight, that the great work of Everlasting Life lies upon the moment of an
hour (as it (...)) to follow the words of the Parable, (...) considering it is
not usual for men then to be (...) The little twig such may take hold on, is
this, has been done, and therefore there is hope it may done again, and this
hope it is which keeps the (...) above water; never too late to forsake our
(...), the Lord accepts at the Eleventh hour: (...) must not then suffer our
own fears, or Satan's (...) to pluck up our resolutions and (...) by the roots,
with any false shows of hopeless possibilities. When a decrepit sinner has
tired (...) in his ungodly courses, grows weary with (...) burden, of an
accusing conscience, and (...) of an ill led life, and begins to bethink
himself, is not in a right way; suddenly the Enemy (...) to his view the number
and nature of his many (...), and withal suggests the way so long, (...) the
time to return so short; better not set out, (...) not to be able to get home.
In vain now says (...) to begin so great a work of Preparation, when (...)
have so little opportunity, and so great an (...) thereunto. To what purpose is
it to strive (...) we cannot overcome? to enter upon the (...) when in all
likely hood we shall be benighted (see (...) Sun is but an hour high) and never
come to the (...) of it?

Oh shake off those sluggish discouragements, sit (...) down and perish; there
is yet hope in Israel (...) this thing; it is true, the work is hard, yet God
(...) done as much for others, and therefore can do much for thee also. Thy
time is short, thou have (...) foot in the grave, but the Arm of the Lord is
(...) shortened that he cannot help; thou have ancient (...), he has ancient
mercies, his loving kindness (...) been ever of old. When thou have neither
time (...) strength to relieve thy self, the Lord notwithstanding at the last
hour, and when thou do least expect it, and have least deserved it, who
knows but yet he may call thee into his Vineyard, listen therefore unto his
voice, make have to answer his call, and leave the success with him.

Lastly, If the Lord put forth this work of Preparation Use 3.
most ordinarily in our middle age, all those whom more especially it concerns
who are yet in the flower of their years, whose Breasts run full of Milk, and
their Bones full of Marrow, as Job speaks, they are to be exhorted in the Lord
to take the safest and the easiest course for themselves, even the counsel of
the wise man, Eccles. 12. 1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy
youth, before thy evil days come; the time that God uses to bless most, let
us be wary to improve most for our good. A wise Traveller uses to take the day
before him, and (...) accounts the middle of the day most safe for his passage;
the Rule is most true and useful also for us, while we are wildring onward
toward the end (...) our hopes, rise we early, prevent the morning watch, to
make speed to run the ways of Gods Cammandements, while the best of our
Natural abilities are about us; the middle of our age like the middle (...) the
day will be most safe for our spiritual Travel and endeavor, considering we
carry such a charge about us, even our souls and the care of their Salvation
and happiness, lest deferring till our old age and our evening shut in upon us,
we be wholly spoiled of both; for Preparation put off until our crazy time is
like never to be, or very uncomfortable if (...) be attained.

It Is not likely we shall ever share in so glorious common infirmities, troops
and multitudes of sicknesses and sorrows, which seize upon old age, and
surprise it as (...) prey, decay the Senses, enfeeble the Judgment, weaken the
Memory, as though all the passages were now stopped, and gates shut whereby
Grace should have any entrance. How shall Faith come to him by hearing, whose
Ears are become deaf that he cannot hear? How shall he search the Scriptures in
which Grace and Life are to be found, who has not an eye able to see, much
less to read them? How shall he be able to fatham the depths and mysteries of
Salvation, who is become a child in understanding, not sufficient to conceive
of the most common things? Hence it is the Prophet gives such a man for gone,
past recovery as it were, Isa. 65. 20. The sinner of an hundred years old shall
be accursed; a Curse is the Portion that is carved out unto him, he must look
for nothing else, that is his allowance; an old rotten post is only fit to be
chipped out for the fire, no ways prositable to be laid in the Building, no
not to make pins for it: He that has seen an hundred years, and yet never came
to the sight and relish of the saving work of Grace, farewell he (as we use to
speak) I will not say it is impossible for him to avoid the Curse, I must say
it is unusual.

For how justly may God deny to entertain him, who would not so many years give
way and entertainment to his Word and Spirit? What Captain will entertain a
Soldier that is not able to fight? What Master will hire a Servant that is not
able to work in his Vineyard? Why should the Lord (...) wise, choose such
weaklings, aged and decrepit, who shall not be able to strike one stroke for
him in the defense of his Truth, or set one foot forward in (...) ways of his
Statutes? As Achish spoke of David when he came to the (...) and seigned
himself mad, 1 Samuel 21. 15. What (...) I need of mad men, that you have brought
this man to me, shall he enter into my house? So the Lord may say, Have I any
need of dead men that you have brought these aged (...) ruinous carcasses
before me? shall they ever find acceptance or entrance into the Kingdom of
Grace or Glory? Has the Lord such need of Services that he must entertain in
the worst? has he such need of Sacrifices that the (...) and (...) must serve
his turn? Let men judge, Go offer now the (...) and the (...) unto thy (...),
will be accept it? Mat. 1. 8. will he not loath thy Person and thy (...) and
can the great and glorious God take pleasure (...) either? Yea, (...) others
were silent, let thy own Conscience (...) (...) in this case, when these evil
days, these dog (...) come, thou thy self shall say, I have no pleasure in
them. Caust thou for (...) present that to the Lord which thou thy self (...)?
Nay, not only thy self, but thy (...) may seem to be weary of thy service; thy
pleasures have taken their leave, the world and the delights thereof (...) gone
from thee: thy unclean lusts have forsaken thy (...) and languishing members,
blasphemy is departed from thy speechless tongue, and shall the Lord have the
Devils leavings? When thus thou art become a burden to thy self, a trouble to
others, and fit for nothing but to be fuel for the fire of Hell, how (...) is
it to desire it? how hard to conceive it? that the holy, wise, and blessed God
will make choice of thee: and therefore it is to be feared thou (...) never
(...) (...).

But Secondly, I (...) thou do attain. it, it will (...), that could not taste
his meat for age; so you will not be able to taste the sweetness of the Promises
of Grace and Christ little or nothing. A poor old man comes in, and gets as
near the Pulpit as he (...), and listens, but he says he cannot hear; he asks
(...) what was said? they tell him, Oh the great and precious Promises of
Grace, and Mercy, and Christ: says he, I did not hear them; where are they?
and takes his Book, and then takes his (...) and looks; (...) child (says he)
I cannot see: tell him of them presently after, I cannot remember them. And so
you will be unfit for any Service to God, as an old Journey-man that is but a
(...), so you will bungle at Prayer and Conference, and in all the duties of
Obedience; and when God has showed mercy to you, you will wonder, and think,
if I had a thousand lives what could I do again for God: but alas, he can do
little, but sit down as a senceless spectacle of Gods everlasting compassions,
a wonder to himself, and a warning to others not to defer (...) till old Age,
it being then so uncomfortable, and he so unfit for it: And therefore (...)
little ones that are growing up to years of understanding, you have the day
before you, if you do not take and improve the first of your time, to repent
and turn to God in, God will require it of you, believe it he will: you may
read in 2 Kings, 2. 23, 24. of a company of wicked children who mocked the
Prophet, and the Lord sent two Bears amongst (...) that devoured two and forty
of them: they might have said, my Father caught me, or I did not know what I
did, or I was but young; but none of all this would serve their turn; they had
their time to repent in, but they spent that time in sin and wickedness, and
the Lord sent Bears among them to devour them; and so he will deal with you
that are careless, impenitent, wicked children, believe it he will, God has
thousands of Devils to torment you for ever, if you go on and continue in your
Natural condition without Jesus Christ.

And you young men, your glass is now running, and as yet you have the day
before you, My heart in with you al, you that offer your selves willingly: Oh
remember your Creator in the days of your youth, before the evil days of
sickness, and sorrow, and age come upon you. (...) only say Three Things to you.

Consider what good you may do now: A young and they will bless (...) (...) in
the day of their visitation, 1 Pet. 2. (...) (...) smell of your gracious
speeches, and holy (...) will be as Lebanon, that no man (...) meets you, but
will be the better for you, and (...) you are going to Heaven every man will
mourn (...) (...) loss of you; He was a Father to me (...) (...) and he was a
great help to me says another: (...) was a means under God to bring my soul to
Christ. Thus you will not only do good to your (...), but you will do good to
others also.

(...) your death you will have more than this again: so Paul 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. I
have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the Faith,
henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness which the Lord
shall give unto me, he saw it before him, and was able to tell others of it. So
David 2 Chronicles. 28. 9. And thou Solomon my Son, know thou the God of thy Father,
and serve him with a perfect heart, and a willing mind, etc. Thus you will be
able to give a change and a blessing to your Children, and to speak something
suitable to the condition of all that come about you; as a man that has been a
good husband from his youth, he has been a gatherer, he is able to give to
every one about him somewhat; another that has been a spend thrift can scarce
pay his debts, and well if he do so. So here, a man that has been long a
gathering of Promises, Commands, Directions, Consolations, when his friends
come about him on his death bed, he knows the frame of every man, he knows one
man is worldly, another has good Parts and gifts, but he is proud, another
under discouragements; and he will speak something suitable to every man's
condition, and his dying words stick by them while they live.

And this is but the beginning, but what will the Excessive, Exceeding Crown of
Glory, he shall go loaded as it were to the Kingdom of Heaven, the Sufferings,
Obedience, Commands, Promises, Counsels of so many years, all shall be rewarded;
other men shall be honored and crowned but he especially, and when he is going
to Heaven every man gives him a lift, when he is sick the Prayers go all the
Town over for him; Lord, comfort him (says one) he has often done it to me;
Lord, strengthen him says another, he has often strengthened me: I had almost
said that a man shall increase in Glory for the Prayers of Gods Servants here,
but that they do not pray for the dead: But this is certain, A man has
counseled and prayed for such an one, he dies and goes to Heaven, it does not
work till afterward, then the Servant or the Child remembers, and they pray and
bless God for him, and his Glory is augmented by it; even as the torments of
the damned are increased by the fruits of their ill examples after they are
dead: So (...) as ever you desire to do good to your selves and others, to
provide for your own Comfort at Death, and for your Eternal Glory in Heaven, to
begin betimes for the carrying on of the Work of the Lord in your own Souls.

BOOK VI.
REVEL. 3. 17. Because thou say I am rich and increased with goods, and have
need of nothing, and know not that thou art wretched, miserable, poor,
blind, and naked.
THE General Nature of Preparation has been opened (...), and those common
Circumstances, that were of special consideration have been (...) (...), (...)
(...) the freeness of the Work, and the fitness of the Time that the Lord is
pleased to take, to bring the (...) of his (...) (...) in that Spiritual good
that was provided and stored up for them in the Lord Jesus. We are now to
enquire about the Main and Substantial Parts of this so great a Work.

And these are Two:

1 The Dispensation of this Work as it comes from God. 2 The Frame and
Disposition which is wrought in the Soul thereby.
For this Work of Preparation being a Transient Work as it proceeds from God,
i. e. a work which so passes from God unto the Creature as the proper subject
about which it is exercised, as that it leaves some real impression, some
alteration and change in the Creature, and therefore it implies necessarily as
the (...) who (...) prepare, and who are prepared, so also the manner of the
working of the one who does it, and the disposition of the other who does (...)
the impression thereof: And hence in these Two the whole Nature of Preparation
is taken up, as the Nature of the whole is fully comprehended in the Parts. The
manner of Gods Dispensation in this, may thus be conceived and described.

It Is that whereby the soul settled in the security of its sinful condition; and
wholly unwilling to be severed from it, is by (...) holy kind of violence
driven there (...), and drawn unto Christ by God the (...).

Where we may attend these Particulars:

1 The Soul Naturally is settled in a sinful security, or is dead asleep in the
security of a sinful condition. 2 It Is unwilling to be severed therefrom, it is
death to part with its distemper; it is against the (...) and the heart, to have
its corruption plucked away from it, to be awakened out of this sleep. 3 That
with a holy kind of violence it is driven out of this condition, and drawn unto
Christ by the hand of the Father.
We shall pursue these Particulars in the order propounded, and briefly handle
the two first only to make way to a clear discovery, and right understanding of
the last Point.

For the two first being apprehended in the full breadth of them, the necessity
and mysterious depth of Gods Dispensation in the last will appear with greater
Evidence, and be more easily conceived, and assented unto with greater
readiness.

For the ground of the first Point we have chosen the words of this Text, Rev.
3. 17. where we have the diverse, nay, the contrary judgment of the Lord, and
the Church of Laodicea touching their spiritual estate and condition; They fate
down well apayed in the apprehension, nay the admiration of their own
happiness, and professed they had as much as they needed, and were as good as
they desired to be: When as the Lord who knew better, and could judge better of
their condition, passes a peremptory sentence to the contrary, that they were
wretched, poor, and blind, and naked; they wanted not either wretchedness or
misery, but wanted sense of either, and that was the reason they were secure
under both.

Here then we see the guise of a graceless heart, of one (...) his Natural
estate before the Lord set upon the soul: They need nothing in their own
apprehension though indeed they have nothing; they see no evil nor danger
toward them, though they be compassed and beset on every side with sins and
plagues: Men naturally are most secure in their sins, when they are most under
the power and plague of them; see how well apaid they sit down in the present
frame of their hearts (for it is spiritually meant as appears by the opposition,
in the counsel which is administered in the following verse, I counsel thee to
buy of (...) Eyesalve, that thou may see, white Raiment and be zealous and
repent) but I say, see how they please themselves in this present condition; if
all men were as well contented with them as they are with themselves, they
would be no better, and they conceive they should be no other; they neither
need, (...) should alter their condition, nor yet be disquieted with what it
is, it is as good as they would have it. This is the meaning of the Parable,
When the strong man keeps the house, all is in peace, Luke, 11. (...). As long
as Satan has the world at will, does all, and disposes of all according to
his own mind, there is no opposition, and so no distraction, nor trouble;
wicked men go as they are led; so the Apostles speaking of the Corinths in
(...), Natural condition 1 Cor. 12. 2. all go one way, and all is at (...) they
conceit their estates as safe as any other (...) therefore it is needless (...)
disquiet themselves; so they who lifted themselves against Moses and Aaron, and
concluded their penny as good silver as theirs, (...) 16. 3. Are not all the
(...) of the Lord (...)? you take too much upon you: They imagine it is the
pride and singularity of some men, who require more strictness and a higher
strain of Holiness (...) is needful, that they may be (...) more than ordinary,
and so draw the eyes of men toward them, (...) so raise a greater account of
them than they do (...); or else it is the simplicity and feebleness of (...)
who having some men's persons in admiration (...) easy to believe more than
they should, or (...) a greater excellency than there is. As for their (...)
parts, they question it not, but their estates are good, and themselves happy:
Thus Paul professed of himself, and speaks it in the stead of all men
Naturally, as that which is incident to all, Romans 7. 9. was alive without the
Law. When he wanted the (...) knowledge of himself, and of the Law of God,
(...) then imagined his condition was such, as those who had and led the life
of Grace: But when the Law came, that the Lord by the Law discovered (...) to
himself, then indeed he did discern where he was, that sin was yet alive in
him, that he was in a deadly and damnable condition: See the Point (...) good
in Five Particulars, wherein this security is expressed in the several degrees
thereof.

A Natural (...) before the Lord come to seize upon Mat. 24. 38. they (...) and
gave in marriage, they did eat and drink, and took up themselves in the eager
pursuit (...) these present pleasing contentments, which (...) with our Natural
hearts, but knew nothing either of the (...) of their own sins, or the
heaviness of the plagues decreed and threatened: Hence this Security is in
Scripture compared to a dead sleep, Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from
the dead, and Christ shall give thee life, Ephesians. 5. 14. In a sleep, we know if
it fall heavy upon any, he sees no dangers nor enemies though he was in the
midst of them; if any evil be plotted or practiced against him he perceives it
not, and therefore it is said, They that sleep, they sleep in the night: So it
is here, though the sinner be compassed about with his own sins, and the
judgments of God ready to be inflicted on him, and the Devils of Hell ready to
devour him, yet being in a dead sleep he discerns not the danger he is in.

As they see none; so while the Lord is pleased to Psalm. 73. 7. Their eyes
stand out with fatness, they have more than heart can wish, they are not in
bonds like other men, and therefore pride compasses them about as a chain,
etc. Upon this ground it is, the fals-hearted resolve to join sides with the
proud, because they saw their proceedings prosperous, We count the proud happy,
say they, Mal. 3. 15. For Naturally, further than the Lord is pleased to
grapple with the sinner) there is a benumbed kind of stupidness of spirit takes
possession of them, they become senceless wholly or their sins, and so of the
plagues that are threatened, and treasured up for them against the day of wrath;
When the disease has mastered Nature so that it has lost its lively strength,
when it is now dying it feels not death because sense was gone before. The Soul
that is slain by sin it becomes senceless of it. As it (...) the drunkard,
Prove. 23. 35. They have stricken me, and I was not sick, they have beaten me,
and I felt it not.

They fear no evil for the time to come: senseless reason from sense and
experience, it has not been, therefore it will not be. Thus those made a
League with Hell and Death, Isa. 28. 15. They entrenched and fortified
themselves in this fearless presumption against the approach of any future
evil. And therefore in all the threatenings they read and hear, though such as
express the direful displeasure of the Lord, yet they take off the edge of all,
they imagine its nothing but a kind of policy in men who Preach these
threatenings, that so they might aw others by a prudent way of proceeding, and
partly its folly in those who believe them and entertain them as real, when
there is no such thing to be feared. This was the Conclusion of those who sat
upon the Lees and Dregs of this Security, Zeph. 1. 12. They profess, the Lord
will neither do good, nor evil.

Hence the sinner in a blind kind of deluded Confidence, will hold: He doubts
not but to dye (...), (...) go to Heaven as well as the most precise Professor
of them all. Thus they in Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20. When they heard all the Curses of
the Law, yet they blessed themselves, saying, I shall have peace.

Let men speak what they will, Preach as they please, he promises himself
comfort and success in his way; men (says he) must have their (...), and will
vent their passions and humors, but concludes what he conceives is the right,
all the world shall not persuade if there were a hundred, and a hundred
Ministers to that, they shall never make him believe but his Condition is safe,
(...) his way and person such as God will accept. So they to Jeremy, Jer. 43. 2
Thou speak falsely, the Lord (...) not sent thee to say, Go not into (...).

The things of Christ, and ways of his Grace which Cor. 2. 14. (...) he
natural man perceives not the things of God for they are foolishness unto him;
Thus the Gospel, the glad tidings of salvation, and the only way of life in
Christ, It was foolishness to the Greeks, and to the Jews a stumbling block: 1
Cor. 1. 23. To become fools that we may be wise, to cast away the robes of our
own conceaved Righteousness, worth, and sufficiency, and to go a begging to
Christ to (...) our nakedness: it is a thing (...) cross to carnal reason as
nothing more, Romans 10. 3. The Jews that (...) establish their own
Righteousness, they would not submit to the Righteousness of Christ.

Therefore if the ways of (...) be pressed and Acts 26. 9. So (...) (...), I
(...) (...) with my self (...) to do many things contrary to the Name of Jesus:
and (...) Savior Christ (...) it, (...). 16. 2. That they (...) think they do
God good service in (...) (...) opposing the ways and Servants of Christ, and
(...) in the highest degree. So that if the Lord let in any light to such a
one, to reveal either more or better to him, he stands amazed as a man new come
out of a dream, he knows not where he is, or what he has done all his life
long. If this be true, I never knew either my sin, or my self; I am of all men
most miserable: As Paul, when the Lord met him and stopped him in his way, and
broke in upon him with his Converting Grace, he falls down trembling and
astonished, Lord, (...) thou? And, What will thou have me to do? Acts 9. 5, 6,
7. He neither (...) Christ, nor himself, nor his own estate, he was as far to
seek as if he had never heard of these things; therefore the Apostle Peter
expresses it thus, 1 Pet. 2. 9. Who has called you (...) darkness to his
marvelous, light: That a man begins to wonder and marvel to see themselves so
wonderfully cozened and deluded all their days, they have often heard of sin,
but never saw it before now, they have heard of humiliation, and faith, and
sanctisication, but never understood what they were; but now they begin to see
an absolute need of them, and there never was any man whom God called
effectually to himself, but he stands wondering at his sins that they should be
so loathsome, and yet that he should love them so much; at the beauty and
excellency of Christ, that he has neglected so much, marveling at his own
pride and security in that miserable estate that now he finds himself in.

Gather up the Point then: If he neither see (...) feel any evil in his
Condition, and therefore fears no danger in it, and therefore blesses himself
in his present estate; accounting whatsoever is more required, to be
foolishness, and persecutes whatsoever seems to blemish it, then he is (and can
be no other than) abundantly satisfied and settled immovably in the security of
his carnal estate.

The Reasons of it are chiefly Three.

From the Deceitfulness and Subtilty of sin which Reas. 1
pretends nothing, promises nothing but that which is full of content to the
sinner, and therefore he pleases himself in it for the present. As the (...)
hides his sting that may poison, and shows only his speckled skin that may
please the eye, so it is with (...), it presents nothing to the view but that
which may please the flesh, either profits to enrich, or honors to advance, or
pleasures to delight, either (...) of the flesh, or the (...) of the eyes, or
the pride of life, 1 John 2. 16. As the wise man speaks of the young man led
aside with the harlot, that with her oyled words she (...) (...), and he
follows her as an Ox (...) to the slaughter, and a fool to the stocks, and
knows nothing till a dart strikes through his liver, Prove. 7. 22. As the Fisher
that shows (...) to the Fish but the Bait to allure, but hides the Hook that
will catch: So the Fowl sees nothing but the Grain to feed her, not the Net
that takes her. So it is with the Deceitfulness of sin, it promises nothing
but all the Content that we have, and would have; but the Hook that should
catch us, and the (...) that should (...) us, that is kept back for the present.

If taken from the sensuallity of the Soul of every (...). 3
man naturally, which is so suitable to the nature of (...), that it tastes
nothing but that which (...) their (...), and therefore they will not believe
there is any thing there to distaste. A sinful heart meets with temptations,
they do fit and suit one with (...), and because the soul takes content in sin,
it cannot believe that there is any thing else there, but what it now finds:
nay, sometimes though the judgment is informed, and Conscience convinced these
(...) your sins, and these will be your ruin; the (...) heart says, It is
false; I taste no such matter: As it is in a distempered body when the stomach
is (...) with noysom humors, because the bitterest (...) seem sweet to the
raste so distempered; the Physician cannot persuade, they cannot believe that
(...) are bitter. So it is with a distempered heart which tastes nothing but its
own lusts and humors, which are so incorporated into it, and (...) with it,
that let all Ministers, and Reasons, say what (...) can to the contrary; say
they, I believe it not; (...) taste it not; Its the best life in the world to
follow (...) own mind, to have my own will, and to satisfy (...) own lusts:
Prove. 10. 23. It is a sport to a fool (...) do (...): No pastime is so pleasing
to him, as to suit the carnal disposition of his heart in his sinful ways: but
he is a fool for it, that is, A (...) man.

Self-love, and Self-ease will not suffer the (...) Reas. 3
to hear of any thing that may disquiet or distemper and therefore (...) the
mind and heart with the daily fears and suspicions of terrors and
discouragements that attend a good Course, that it dare not listen in the least
measure to any thing that tends (...) way. Hence it is there is such a noise
and (...) raised against the good ways of Gods Grace, and Gods (...), that if
ever he gives way to the power of them to have his sins revealed and (...) by
them, he thinks he shall never have quiet more (...) and therefore in a carnal
Family, if one man (...) (...) and careful in his course, and have got (...)
knocks from the Word, they cry out, Their Children are undone, and they fear to
come under (...) stroke of the truth, lest they should be troubled. (...) the
meaning of that, Psalm. 36. 2. The wicked (...) (...) himself in his own eyes:
As who should say, This is the only way you are in, you may (...) quietly and
comfortably, and go to heaven (...) all this ado: Ay, do so, and be so, says
the heart And as 2 Pet. 3. 2. They are willingly ignorant A man that is loath to
rise, shuts his eyes from (...) light, and stops his ears, that he may not hear
(...) knocks at the door; so a man that would sleep (...) in the security of
his natural state, he would (...) suffer the certainty of Gods Judgments and
the terribleness of them, to come home to his soul to awaken him out of his
dead sleep.

Thus the Deceitfulness of Sin promises nothing but Good; the (...) of a man's
heart is such, (...) (...) nothing but Good, men's Self-love and (...) is such,
it will not suffer any thing but Good to be presented to the view of the soul.

These are the Grounds why a sinful Heart settles it self in security, and
blesses it self, though nothing belongs to him but misery.

Hence we may see the Reason why sharp and Use 1.
soul-saving Preaching, seems so grievous and tedious to the carnal hearts of
wicked and natural men; they hardly vouchsafe audience, but not acceptance:
What Is the cause? It would awaken them out of their sleepy security in which
they lie: To bring a Candle to a sleepy man is unpleasing but to pluck off the
Clothes, he will hardly bear it, but will let fly at you: Why will you not
suffer a man to be quiet in his bed? etc. All men are naturally in a dead sleep
of sin, therefore to bring the Candle of the Law to them, to show them their
condition, to pluck away all their coverings and hidings that they may see
their sins and themselves as they are, it is death to a man in this case: Plain
dealing and rough dealing evermore finds harsh entertainment here: still Music
is pliasing and rocks men asleep; but sound blows will awaken men, and not
suffer them to sleep in their sins, and therefore they cannot bear them; they
have itching ears (says the Apostle) heaping up Teachers to themselves after
their own lusts, and therefore they cannot endure sound doctrine, 2 Timothy 4. 3.
Such Ministers, and such Preaching as answer their desires and please their
pallats, that they and their sins and all may go to Heaven together, this they
like very well of: Itching ears must be scratched, not buffeted. You know what
he said to Elias, Art thou he that troubles Israel? And have thou found me O my
Enemy? 1 King. 18. 17. (...) had 400 false Prophets, he could endure them well
enough, because they never disquieted him in his sins; but Elias was a troubler
of Israel, because he troubled his sin; therefore he was not able to bear with
him.

Hence again, We should be persuaded and informed Use 2.
its the heaviest plague that can befall a man, That God should suffer him to
sleep in his sins and prosper in a wicked Course: Because it argues (for ought
any man knows) that God intends no good to him, nor will work no good for him;
but as if the Lord has left such a one to be a prey to sin and Satan; he is in
the hands of his lusts, and become a spoil unto them; Jesus Christ passes by
him (as it (...)) pitties him not, meddles not with him, to rescue him out of
that Condition; as if the Lord should say, I have nothing to do with him, he is
none of mine.

Therefore know this to your terror, all you that never knew what it was to be
in distress of Conscience for sin, nay when the Word has come home to you, to
convince you of your miserable estate, for you have not been able to bear it,
bate of your sleep nor rest you cannot, lose any thing of your (...) and (...)
you will not, nay, you bless your selves in this condition, thinking your case
is good enough: Mark now, The Lord Jesus sees sin and Satan have thee in their
power, hurrying thee down to Hell with them, and he passes by, and says, Let
them alone, they belong not to me, I will not rescue them nor save them, my
Word and Spirit shall not convince (...) nor work upon them; this is the
heaviest (...) (...) can befall thee in this world, Acts 17. 30. The (...) of
this ignorance God regarded not: they lived in their sins without God, and
Christ, and (...), and the Lord never regarded them so as to look after them to
recover them out of this estate: Acts 14. 16. He suffered the Nations to walk
in their own ways: It was the heavy displeasure of God toward them, he saw
they followed their own ways, and he suffered them so to do, to go on still in
the broad and the road way that leads to eternal Death: All sinners are sick
persons, and we know (...) a sad thing, for those that are sick unto death not
to be seen, not to be helped and succored, when the Physician will not so much
as look in upon them: Luke 19. 44. Jerusalem had her day of (...); she was sick
at the heart, and God came to (...) her, but she would not take his advice,
therefore the Lord left her and let her alone; this is a woeful case, when the
Lord leaves a sinner to himself and does not visit him with his saving health,
its a sign that he has no love unto, nor care to do good to such a soul.

Of Trial. Hence we way get undoubted Evidence Use (...).
to our selves, whether we are yet in our natural condition, or brought out of
it, I shall press it only negatively now: Is the day yet to dawn, the hour yet
to come, that ever thou did endeavor to come out of thy natural condition,
nay, happily thou never saw cause why thou should? But thou (...) and
conceivest that all things remain alike with thee from the first beginning unto
this day: as thou wast, thou art: thou have lived quietly, and walked
comfortably all thy life long. Truly know it if thou art not another man than
when thou came into the world, thou art but a natural man, thou art but a
damned man. Thou came flesh and blood into the world; thou came a Child of
wrath, and thou art so still; and if so be thou do live so, and die so, thou
art sure to be damned for ever, for flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom
of God, 1 Cor. 15. 50. We know says the Apostle that we are born of God, and
the world lies in wickedness, 1 John 5. 19. Brought to bed in (...) as the
Original says, thou art one that live in some base wicked courses, and lie
in the bed of security, and thou shall perish with the world. Its observable in
the Parable, when all things were at peace, the strong man kept the house,
that is certain! As its said of the City of Laish, Judge. 18. 7. They were quiet
and secure and had no business with any man: Is it so with thee? Thou art quiet
and secure, and have no business with the Word of God, thou do come, and sit,
and return again as if thou had no business with the Lord, thy Conscience not
convinced, thy affections not stirred, thy heart not affected with saving
remorse for thy sinful condition, truly know, The strong man keeps house there
unto this day.

Nay, Let me tell you this, That all may hear and fear, and be awakened; if
Christ never awaken thee, he will never give thee light; and if ever he give
thee light, he will awaken thee first. Nay, the truth is, So long as thou
live so senseless and careless, know it, Christ never came into the world to
do thee any good. Luke 19. 10. The Son of man came to seek, and to save that
which is lost: They that are sensible of their lost and undone condition, by
reason of their sins against the Lord, they see Hell gaping, God plaguing, and
Conscience accusing, being every day ready to drop into Hell, Christ came to
save such: But thou that never yet in any measure wast troubled about thy
condition, and humbled for thy sins, Christ will never seek thee, nor save
thee; nay, he was not sent to seek, or save that miserable soul of thine: God
will make thee sensible of thy evils before ever thou can have any hope that
he intends good to thee.

I will not now Dispute how far God may awaken a man, and yet not communicate
saving grace, that belongs to another place. That I Urge now, is this, That its
certain, He that never yet was awakened, or brought out of his carnal Security,
never was nor can be made partaker of Jesus Christ.

Exhortation. To all you secure dead hearted Use 4.
sinners, that have been carried on in a Calm all your days: Oh! know it, and
consider of it, a man becalmed, is drowned; (...) stir up thy self, and think
of the time of awakening, it will come; and as Mariners becalmed seek for
winds, so should you for the Gales and Breathings of the Spirit of Christ. Many
of you have been (...) up in good Families, and many of you are civil, honest,
quiet people, all things remain with you as they were from the first, until
now; you know not what Sin means, nor what Faith and Repentance means in the
power and practice of them; you have a quiet life, but a miserable life: Its
easy for a Mariner to be in a Calm at Sea, he has quiet there, but he dies
there: Women in Childbirth longs for Throws, if their Throws leaves them,
their life leaves them and all; but if they have many and strong Throws, then
they hope well: so go your ways and call (...) the Throws of Conversation: For
a Child to be born into the world, and the Mother asleep, its against Nature,
and Reason, and Sense, and Experience and all; so before ever you be born
again, before ever Christ be formed in you, it will cost you many Prayers, and
Tears, and much Sorrow; but if (...) Throws come thick, then there is hope: Oh!
therefore call for the sight of sin, and sorrow for sin, for conviction, and
humiliation, as you love your Lives and Souls call for these. You know what
they said to (...), Chap. 1. 6. when the Sea was fierce, and the Winds high,
and the Storm great, every man fell to his Prayers, and they came to Jonab,
(...) thou sluggard, arise and call upon thy God: So if God raise a storm in
your Consciences, be sure you call upon Jonab, those sluggish hearts of yours,
Awake and call upon your God.

I would advise those men that could never yet say they have any grace in their
hearts, they cannot say they have any thing more than they brought with them
into the world: they come to sit and hear, but for Humiliation, Conversion, for
the saving work of God upon their souls they know no such thing. Let me advise
you thus much: Be suspicious of your estates, certainly all is not well, all is
not right; unless I be born again, and repent, and be another man, and have
another heart and life, I cannot enter into Heaven; thus suspect your self: And
when you have done so, do not leave it there, but betake your self to some
faithful Minister or Christian, and debate your condition with them, and be
sure you quiet not your self till you come to see what you are; it may be they
may help you, and show you the state of things with you.

If it shall appear upon good ground by sound Reasons from the Word, that your
estate is naught, then go away convictedly (...) it is so: Attend not those
carnal Reasons that may take off the edg of that conviction, and hinder the
working of it, but sit down without any cavil against it; but say, the truth
is, I never saw my estate before, but now I do, I hope I shall never deny it;
Excuses and carnal Reasons have taken me aside, but now I Will hear nothing
against it; the truth is, I am a miserable sinful damned Creature: Arise with
this in the morning, (...), lie down with this at night, and walk with these
thoughts all the day long, I am a Christless graceless man; and if the Devil
say, hereafter time enough, hereafter loon enough; Ay, but say, I may die
suddenly, and (...) I am damned eternally; and if your own heart say, Am not I
as good as such an one? and shall not I hope to do as well as such an one? Away
with that too, I am a miserable damned man, give your self for gone, and hold
it here; (...) hear nothing the Devil says that my heart says, that the world
or my friends say, I am in a miserable damned condition; think so, and sleep
so, and (...) so, if you can: And when it is come to this, you may happily be
prepared for the glad Tidings of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

BOOK VII.
ROMANS 8. 7. The Wisdom of the flesh, is Enmity against God, it is not subject
to the Law, neither indeed can be.
WE heard there were three Particulars wherein the Dispensation and Gods Manner
of working upon the soul when he will prepare it for himself was discovered.

1 The Soul Naturally is settled in the security of a sinful estate. And of that
before. 2 That being thus lodged in his lust, and brought (...) bed in his
sinful distempers, it is wholly unwilling to be severed from them. 3 By a holy
kind of Violence (as it were) the soul is driven out of this condition, and
drawn (...) the Lord Christ by God the Father.
We are now to attend the discovery of this second Divine Truth; the
Explication whereof makes way for the mysterious manner of Gods dealing with
the sinner when he would bring him from under the power (...) of his lusts. And
for this purpose we have chosen this Text, as that which will afford us
foothold for our following discourse.

The Aim and Scope of the Words is by force of Argument to fortify the
conclusion formerly expressed in the foregoing verse, i. e. To mind the things
of the flesh, is death, which is thus proved: That which is Enmity against God,
will undoubtedly bring death, as opposing the God of Life and Comfort, but the
wisdom of the flesh, is enmity against God, therefore to mind this, or to be
led by this, is present death: The minor is thus again confirmed, because it
submits not to the Law, and that is not for a present push only, and out of a
surprizal of some temptation, but it is certain it will never, nay, it can never
be other, because it is beyond its power, nay, cross to its Nature so to do, so
that it has no ability nor will for to do it, nor can it of it self attain any
sufficiency thereunto.

To make way for the collection of the Point of which we purpose to speak,
there be two words in the Text to be attended for Explication sake.

1 What is meant by The Wisdom of the flesh, or to be Carnally minded: The
Original word (...), is of large compass, and in truth comprehends in this
place the frame of the Reasonable Faculties, the Understanding and Will in the
extent of their full work, what he understands and plots by Reason, the Will
effects, and this latter of necessity implies the other, for so the word whence
it comes is taken.

1 For the work of the Understanding, Acts, 28. 22. We desire to know what thou
think: they would understand his Opinion and Judgment touching the way of
Christianity, so the Apostle speaks when he would confine our Reason to the
compass of the Wisdom of the Scripture, and Gods Counsel therein revealed; he
advises, We should not be wise above that which is written, 1 Cor. 4. 6. 2
Again, It Is used, and that often, to express the work of the Will, and
therefore it is (...) translated by Care, Phil. 4. 10. I rejoiced that your
Care of me again flourishes: Sometimes by the work of Seeking, If ye be risen
with Christ, (...) those things which are above, 3. Col. 1. Or by the act of
tasting or savouring, Mat. 16. 21. Get thee behind me Satan, thou savorest not
the things (...) be of God: And therefore Beza is constrained to Paraphrase,
and lay out the compass of it in a (...) of words: That which the carnal man
savors, is enmity, that is the frame of the plotting of the minds and affecting
of the hearts of carnal men is enmity against God.
2 Enmity, as we say in the abstract, made up of nothing but malice and hatred,
and that in an extreme manner against the Lord, more than against any thing in
the world: And if it be enquired, how that does appear, and can be proved? The
Evidence is added in the next words; It is not subject to the Law: As the heart
is to the Law, so it is to the Lord; as it is to the Word of God, so it is to
God himself. It wholly shakes off the Sovereignty and Authority of the Law; and
it is not a pang only of a temptation that carries it, nor a push or (...) of
some present infirmity that overbears it, but in truth it is the very Nature of
a naughty and (...) (...); That which is born of the flesh is flesh, John, 3.
6. and nothing else but (...), and therefore it can do nothing but oppose the
Spirit, and the Law which is Spiritual; every thing will do, and in (...) can
do no (...) but its Nature. And this denial (...) only of the Act of
Subjection, but the very Power of Subjection shows the height of that
opposition, that is in the heart against the Law, and so against (...) Lord
himself, for subjection is one degree lower (...) obedience; it is possible for
a Servant not to (...) the command of his Master, and yet he may in (...) and
subjection submit himself to his authority, to bear what he will inflict upon
him with (...), though not to do what he requires of him: A Patient may be
subject in silence and meekness to (...) the launcings of the Chyrurgion, to
cut him and so cure him when he can in no wise help (...): and yet a carnal
heart will not do this, for his (...) of subjection implies.

1 It does not acknowledge the Authority and (...) of the Law. 2 It will not
obey the Rule of it. 3 It will not bear the Power of it; whereby it would
redress the sinfulness of our hearts, and reform the disorders and miscarriages
of our lives, and pluck away that sin from us that would pluck away our hearts
from God. He has no right to challenge (...) sovereignty, no reason to
exercise it, no Lawful power but usurped that does maintain it; and (...) I do
not acknowledge this right, nor obey that Rule, nor bear that Power says the
Will, it would take away my lusts, and so take away my content (...) life, and
I will rather die than yield, rather be (...) than abide my pleasing distempers
to be crossed by the Law. Hence then the Point is plain.
The frame of the whole heart of a Natural Doct.
man, is wholly unwilling to submit to the Work of the Lord that would sever
him from his sins.

I say the frame of the whole man, to the words of the Text, and interpretation
of them, each plotting of the Mind, each affecting of the Will, the (...)
current of the carriage of the inward man; and (...) is not only unable to
follow the direction of the Law and of the Lord, but not willing to bear the
power thereof, to force it to the reformation of those (...) and sins unto
which it subjects it self, and sets it self resolutely to keep. So the Lord
professed of Nimrod and his company when they had set themselves upon the
building of Babel, out of their pride and self confidence, Genesis 11. 6. Now
nothing will (...) restrained from them which they have imagined to do, let us
go down and confound their Language: It Is in vain to persuade them, in vain to
send Messengers and show Arguments never so sad and weighty to stop them, only
confound their language that they may not be able to do what they would. It Is
the Scope of that Parable, Matthew. 21. from 33. to 41. wherein the waywardness
of the hearts of the sons of men, and their desperate unteachableness is
apparently discovered: Messenger is sent after Messenger, all variety of means
provided and continued, they beat one, evil entreat another, slay a third; and
when the Son himself is sent, that Reason would have concluded that which the
Master of the Vineyard conceived, they will reverence my Son; they were most
outrageous against him, because happily he was more instant and importunate, to
press them to Sanctification, the rendering of the fruit (your fruit in
Holiness, and the end eternal Life, Romans 6. 22.) they express greater
opposition against him because he most of all opposed their sins, Come, say
they, this is the Heir, let us kill him, and the Inheritance will be ours. Nor
was this the guise of some graceless forlorn persons, but the disposition of
all men; it is part of that Curse we inherit from the Loins (...) our first
Parents, Genesis 6. 5. The frame of the imagination of our hearts are evil, and
only evil, and that continually: It Is part of that Image received from the
first Adam, and that Seed of wickedness in which we were warmed, which was born
with us, and grows up with us, and will go to our graves with us, and to Hell
afterward unless the Lord relieve and deliver. And therefore (...) expresses
the Pedigree of this perverseness of Spirit, Acts, 7. 51. Ye stiff-necked and
hard-hearted, ye have ever resisted the Spirit of God, as your Father did, so
do ye.

See this unwillingness expressing it self in the several degrees of it.

A carnal heart is unwilling to make out after the Romans 3. 11. It Is one part of
the description of a Natural man's condition, There is none that understands,
none that seeks after God: or if they do sometimes seem to express some pains
this way, to seek after the Truth, it is as a Coward pursues his enemy: he is
afraid to find, and therefore keeps aloof off, not willing to take notice of
that which may be troublesome, and therefore looks after that which least
concerns him, for the rest, he lets it lie by; 2 Pet. 3. 3. They are willingly
ignorant, content not to know, that which they will not do if they did know.

If yet the Lord bring home wholesome Counsels to beat in his Ears, they are loath
to hear of the Ear, Ioth to show their unfeigned acceptance, and readiness of
Spirit to take acquaintance of the Truth: As you may have seen sometimes a
Churl, when he has seen some body coming that might happily have deserved
entertainment, and the Law of Honesty and common Humanity might have caused him
to lodge them, he presently slips aside and turns away, that he may not meet
them, and see them, and salute them, lest he be forced to receive them: So
these men when they perceive the evidence of some troublesome Truths are like to
meet with them in the mouth (as we say) they are-not able to avoid the power of
them, and yet not able to take up the practice of them, like troublesome guests
put them to charges, and lie heavy upon them, they are desirous to make an
escape from the power of such Arguments, play least in sight, and loath they are
to meet a Truth that comes attended with constraining Reasons, Job, 22. 14.
They say to the Almighty depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy
(...): yea, Isa. 30. 10, 11. They say to the Seers, see not, and to the
Prophets, (...) not, cause the holy One of Israel to cease from us: the
presence of the Truth is marvelous grievous, they look at it as an overpassing
burden, as he of Elias, Have thou found me O (...) Enemy? Were it not for shame
they could be willingly content to give a Discharge, and Pass, for its
departure; as he to Amos, chap. 7. ver. 12. (...) away to thy own Country and
prophecy there.

If yet the Lord will continue the Truth, and him that it cannot proceed so
far, and prevail so much as it would: they will keep the truth in a (...) as we
(...) prisoners at a door, look abroad, but not at liberty; so they are not
willing the Truth should be at liberty; as they dealt with our Savior, he made
as though he would have gone further, but they (...) Luke 24. 28, 29.
him, and as it were withheld him by force: So men deal with the Truth which
is of a large extent, and would go through a man's life in his several
occasions, these men are not willing to serve the Truth, but make it serve
(...), and their turns: Thus many hold General Rules, but bring such down to
Particular Practices, in the several Branches, there they are not willing the
jurisdiction of the Truth should extend so far: Thus corrupt hearts deal with
the Truth, as sick men of weak and (...) ick eyes deal with the light, some
light they would have, but to have it come clearly and (...) upon them, they
are not able to brook that, therefore they say, draw the Curtain, there the Sun
comes full in mine eyes; (...) not drunk with Wine wherein is excest, Ephesians.
(...). 18. they yield to the Evidence of the Text, and letter of the Scripture,
therefore be not drunk with the world, do not affect that too much, (...) stay
there. To take and deta in another man's goods is open theft (...) the
acknowledgment of all, Thou shall not steal; therefore to Covenant, and not to
keep; to borrow, and not to return; to owe, and not to pay, is (...) detain
that which is not (...), therefore it is (...) theft; (...), draw the Curtain,
(...) the Sun (...) full in my face, Deuteronomy. 12. 31. Thou shall not worship the
Lord thy God as the Heathen Idolaters, (...) the Truth have his full scope now,
therefore not as (...) (...); (...), draw the Curtain a little (...) that way:
Fashion not your selves according to the world, Romans 12. 2. (...) (...) in
loose locks and long Hair, therefore not in your Garments neither, why should
you imitate their vanity in the one, or in the other, since both are worldly?

If yet the Power of the Truth, and the evidence of Numb. 23. Balaam consults
again with God after he sufficiently understood the mind of God. Now therefore
I pray you stay with me this night that I may know what the Lord will say unto
me more: why, he knew before, and the Lord had told him plainly, (...) shall
not go, thou shall not curse; he well understood Gods mind, but he would have
had him of another mind; therefore he devises ways still to try, verse 14.
here he must have seven Altars; if he might bribe God with his Sacrifices to
give him leave to go and curse them. But if he can find no allowance to
dispense with the Truth, then he begins to invent Cavils and carnal Reasonings
against it: he cannot get it by running, he will get it (if he can) by
doubling; he is not willing to yield, therefore is resolved to quarrel and wind
away from under the force of the Argument, and to make an escape, Acts, 17. 18.
They encountered Paul, they came into the field with Cavils against his
Doctrine: observe how careful an unwilling heart is to invent a shift, and how
content to take it; and if yet he fail of his hopes, and is not able to make
his party good with the (...), he unlocks all the Devils Chests, and (...) his
Skul for devices; and though the Reasons be of no weight nor worth, nor
strength, yet he is well (...) to be cozened with them, though there be scant
any appearance of a pretense, when the young man had professed all readiness to
follow the Command of the Lord, and saw nothing would serve turn unless he sold
all, overpowered with the Authority of the Truth, he left it in the plain
field, Mat. 19. 21, 22.
and went away sorrowful.

If yet the (...) that is rivetted in his resolution to Jer. 44. 16. As for the
word which (...) have spoken to us in the Name of the Lord, we will not hearken
to it; that is the short and the long: they then begun to be plain and
peremptory, Jer. 18. 12. They said there is no (...), but we will do after our
devices, and we will walk every man after the imagination of his own heart. If
they cannot undo the Bonds, they will break the Bonds of Gods Commands, Come
(say they (...). 2. 2.) let us break (...) Bonds, and (...) (...) their cords
from us: Thus the Jews when they saw the Word of the Lord to prosper in the
(...) of Paul and (...), they were filled (...) envy, and (...) against those
things that were spoken by Paul, contradicting and (...); in so much that Paul
professed they put away the (...) that would have plucked away their sins (...)
them, Acts, 13. 46. John must (...) his (...) rather than Herod will part with
his Harlot: When (...) cannot get leave of God to do what he desired, he goes
without leave, Numb. 24. 1. he (...) his (...) to the (...), as if he would
prevent Gods (...), and curse (...) before God (...) be aware of it. To have
their (...) (...) tormented and kept upon the (...), and themselves crossed in
their corrupt courses, so that either they dare not keep their lusts, or else
have no quiet if they do, they fly in the face of the Truth, it is a hard
saying, who can hear it? who can (...) it? Acts, 19. 28. see what an uproar,
and what a dust Demetrius raises against Paul's Doctrine: Masters, you know,
that by this craft we get our living; therefore what they wanted in Argument,
they would carry it in clamors, There was an (...) for the space of two hours,
Great is Diana of the Ephesians: So they dealt with the two (...), Revel. 11.
10. they were never content before they were removed, they could not have their
(...) in quiet, as long as they had their lives, for they tormented them with
their witness: the Truth is dreadful, and torments carnal men, that cannot bear
the light and power of it.

If yet the Conscience be not seared with a hot Iron, they become past feeling,
Ephesians. 4. 19. This is to hold (...) the Truth in unrighteousness, Romans 1. 18.
Truth is pressing, this ought, this should, this must be done, or else you die
for it; you see the Word pregnant, the way plain, the Duty undeniable; say
nothing says unrighteousness in the heart, I do love it, I must follow it,
therefore speak not a word more, I cannot hear it, nor bear it, as they said
Judge. 18. 25. when (...) (...) after them for his gods, Let not thy voice be
heard amongst us, left angry fellows fall upon thee: Thus you see how this
unwillingness to be subject to the Truth shows it self. They seek it not,
receive it not, stop the passage of it, defeat the Power and Evidence of it,
they professedly oppose it, and privily stifle the (...) of the Truth which may
trouble them in sinning, until their (...) be without sense, and they without
care, or purpose to reform their evil ways.

But are not the wicked many times willing to part Object. 1
with their corruptions? see how far they speak, how freely they profess, Deuteronomy.
5. 27. All that thou have spoken, we will do. Jer. 42. 5. The Lord be Judge
(...) thee and us, enquire at the mouth of the Lord for us, and whatever it be,
whether good or evil, we will do it: what more can be desired? what more could
be expressed?

I Answer in Three Things. Answ.


The Text denies not, nor does the Doctrine, that Deuteronomy. 5. 28, 29. This People
have said well, but O that there were such a heart in them; there was good
words, but they wanted good hearts, they said well, but their wills and endeavors
were not answerable, they professed fair with their lips, but dissembled with
their hearts, so the Prophet Jeremiah told them to their faces, Ye dissembled
in your hearts, when ye said enquire of the Lord for us, Jer. 42. 20.

It Is possible, nay ordinary for a corrupt heart

When it co nes to a straight and a justle, that the Balaam) he cannot pass
unless he part with his beloved lust, his Isaac, his (...), his (...), he will
then show and discover his falsness.

But are not the Servants of the Lord many times Object. 2
unwilling to bid adieu to their special and ancient (...), that have been bred
and born with them, brought up and lived with them a long time together?

There is two men in a regenerate man, a heart and (...).
a heart, a will and a will, Romans 7. last, Paul delighted in the Law of God
after the inward man, but in his lust after the corrupt man; With my mind I
serve the Law of God (says he) but with my (...) the Law of Sin; or as our
Savior, The Spirit (...) willing, but the Flesh is weak, Matthew. 26. 41. the
spiritual part is ever pressed, and ready, and wholly willing for good, for he
that is born of God so, sins not, and Paul professes, it is not I, but sin in
me; but says he, The good that I would, I do not, and the evil that I would
not, that I do, Romans 7. 18. still the heart and will of a regenerate man stands
Godward, against every sin, and for every good that he is convinced of.

The Reasons of the Point are Four, and they are of great weight.

The First is taken from the Nature of the Will of Reas. 1.
man, which since the Fall, is wholly tainted, and totally infected with
corruption, which universally overspreads the whole man; As he in another case,
the whole head is sick, the whole heart is faint, the whole man wholly possessed
with sin, no sound Job, 2. 7.
part: As Jobs contagion wherewith the Devil infected his Body and Natural man,
he was all one botch from the crown of the head, to the sole of the foot: So in
regard of thr Spiritual man, the whole man is as it were a man of sin, called
therefore the old man, Ephesians. 4. 22. As though a corrupt heart were made up of
nothing else but Apostacies, backslidings, and departings from God, and
swervings from his righteous Law, Whatsoever is born of the flesh, is flesh,
John, 3. 6.
that is sinful and sensual, and we are all of us altogether so born, and have
nothing of the Spirit of Grace in us; so the Apostle Jude, verse 19. These are
sensual, having not the spirit: The Sons of Adam are (all of us) partakers of
his Image, and hence also called the Seed of the Serpent, Genesis 3. 15. that as
each Creature and Plant answers the Seed whereof it is made, has no more in it
but that; so men's hearts are only framed and constituted out of that corrupt
(...) whereby Satan carried aside our first Parents, Paul so professes of
himself, In me ((...) is, in my flesh) dwells no good thing, Romans 7. 11.
nothing that is spiritually, savingly, and (...) good; and therefore in the old
Law, our corrupt Nature is signified by the Leprosy, which overspread the whole
man: The sin of Adam had in it this peculiar to it self more than any, nay, I
may (...) say more than all the sins that ever was committed, in that it was
the Deordination of the whole Nature of man, and that against the whole Law of
God. For Adam did not sin as a particular man (so as all the Sons of Adam do
sin) but as a common stock, as one who was in the room of all, and had the
Humane Nature as the common stock of all Mankind; so that the Nature of Man,
as one would say Humanity in Adam, as it was under the Covenant of the Law, so
it went wholly against the holy and righteous Law of God, and therefore the
whole Nature of man broke when it made a breach upon the Law: As he that justles
his finger against a rock breaks that only, he that runs his hand unjoynts
that; but if all the whole body fall from a steep place upon it, it breaks all
the whole frame of Nature in pieces: So it is comparatively between the sin of
Adam, and the sin of any of the sons of Adam: They sin personally; one is
unjust, and he makes a breach against Justice, and so far that disposition of
heart is perverted, and so unfitted for the work of Justice; but in Adam the
whole Nature of Mind, and Will, and Affections, which was the subject of all
Grace, it comes against the Law, and so brings a ruin upon the whole Frame of
Grace? Ad hereunto (to make up the Evidence) that this was indeed against the
whole Law; as that wherein he neither loved God nor himself, nor (...) neighbor:
But take it here, he made a breach upon the seal of the Covenant, and trampled
that under foot, and so consequently made void and (...) upon the Covenant
wholly, and cast it behind his back as not worth caring for: Now Reason (...)
that as the Seal confirms and ratifies the (...), and all the Conditions of it
jointly, so the (...) of that nullifies and makes void the whole Covenant. So
that this transgression of Adam let (...) a Deluge of Sin, that as in Noah's
Flood when the Windows of Heaven were opened, and the great depths were broken
up, the waters covered the face of the whole Earth that no dry Land appeared: So
(...) is here, when the deeps are broken up (as it were) the whole Law opposed
by the whole Nature of man, the Deluge of corruption spreads it self over the
whole face and frame of Nature: Therefore the Apostle first Summarily gives in
his Judgment, in the 3. to the Romans, the 9. verse, That all are under sin:
And then Particularly, They are all become abominable, there is none that does
good, no not one, their throat is an open Sepulcher, vents nothing but venomous
steams of deadly distempers; the poison of Asps is under their tongues, their
feet swift to shed blood, 12, 13, 14, 15. verse. And if all the Parts be such,
what is the heart within that acts all, vents all, fills all these? That as it
befell the Temple of Jerusalem, after the destruction of it, there was not a
stone left upon a stone; so with the soul in regard of that glorious frame of
Grace which was in it in the first Creation, there is not a stone left upon a
stone; nothing but pollution and corruption remains in the whole Nature of every
man.

But you will say, Are there no Relics left of Object.
that glorious Image of God in the Will and Understanding?

There is something left of the Law, but nothing Answ.
left whereby a man can be enabled to do any thing as an act of Spiritual Life
that may be acceptable to God: In a word, there are these Two things to be
attended, and may be observed in every man naturally at the lowest and the
worst (as I look at these poor Indians, amongst whom we live, as the very
ruins and rubbish of mankind, the forlorn Posterity of Adam.) 1 They are made
for another, and for a better. 2 They ought to yield obedience to that other,
and better: But to know the Will of God and do it, to be able to close with
God, and to do that which is acceptable unto him, this is far estranged from
all the sons of men by nature. If a man came where the Temple of Jerusalem was,
and saw some ruins of the Buildings, and the rubbish of it, he would say, This
was a glorious Temple, and here was the holy of holies, and it was thus, and so
specious and beautiful, though it be not so now: So when we look upon the
rubbish of the Image of lost Adam, we may say so, and conclude so, There was a
glorious Image of God here, and by that which is left, we may see, That man is
made for another, and a better; for this man Rules all the Creatures, they all
serve him, and therefore he should serve another and a better; the whole frame
of the soul tells a man this: But to have any ability to close with God, and to
be subject to him, that is not to be found in the nature of lost man.

That soul which is wholly acted and carried by the power of sin, is not,
cannot be willing to be severed from it, But so it is with the soul. That Is the
first Reason.

The Second Reason is taken from the Revenging Reas. 2
Justice of God, which having been dishonored and (...) by the sin and Apostasy
of Adam, it has delivered up the soul (according to his just Judgment, and
the souls just desert) unto the (...) Jer. 25. 14.
of sin: Thus the Lord rewards man according Psalm. 18. 11.
to his works, and recompenceth his own ways upon his own head. They would none
of God, they should none of him then, they would have their sins, and they
should have them. And as the Lord (...) in another like case, Man receives a
righteous and proportionable recompense to his own proceedings.

Adam turned from God to the Creature (there was in his sin, Aversio a Deo and
Conversio ad Creaturam) God also turned from him, and left him to the Creature:
He would act from himself, and the Lord left him to himself to settle upon the
deluded conceit of his own sufficiency. Adam went away from God, God withdrew
himself from him, and took away that Wisdom which he despised and would not
follow, and took away that Holiness and Righteousness by which he would not be
ruled: He plucked his Livery over his ears (as they say) because of his
Rebellion and Treachery: Stripped him naked of those glorious Ornaments of his
Image, wherewith he had at the first beautified and honored him.

But that is not all.

Adam by his transgression coming in opposition to his Holy and Righteous Will,
by the strength of his infinite Justice the Lord pushed him away from him, and
delivered him wholly unto the (...) and authority of his Apostacies and
distempers of his Spirit: As if he had said, Thou will not be guided by my
Wisdom, but have followed the temptation of Satan, and thy own device; be thou
for ever therefore deluded, and blinded; take him Ignorance and Folly, and take
possession of him for ever: Thou will not be Ruled and Governed by my Holy and
Just Will, be thou for ever therefore perverted, and led captive, by the way
ward stubbornness and Rebellion of thine own Will, take him perverseness and
stiffness of Spirit, and take possession of him for ever: Thus Sin comes armed
with Commission from Divine Justice, to do what it will, and wholly to
captivate the soul unto it self: Thus it is said, Eccles. 7. 29.
God made man right, fitted for himself and his righteous Will, and ready to be
acted by it; and while he had gone under the stream of his Providence, he
should have hit the right way, and arrived at the right end. But he found out
many inventions, He would not follow Gods invention and the way that he had
found out, that he might have found rest and peace in himself, for peace shall
be upon all those that walk according to this Rule, Gal. 6. 16. But he found
out many findings, ways of his own fancying, and finding; and God fills him
full of these findings and devices of his; and hence it is that each man is led
by his own self-deluding spirit to his own end.

It was a deep and a sweet Speculation of Austin, It was in the power of the
mutability of Adams Will, to have used his Will either well or ill, God would
not hinder him and his work, and no Creature could hinder him: and because he
did use this liberty and mutability ill, therefore God put him under the power
of that perverted mutability (...) he never should, nor could do any thing but
evil. It was not a fault to be mutable, had he kept himself under the stream of
Gods holy and (...) will, he had never been hurt; but he that will pervert his
own mutability to go against the Law, he shall ever be perverted by it. This is
the full and proper meaning of that Text, which carries a mysterious (...) with
it, Romans 7. 8. Sin taking occasion by the Commandment, wrought in me all
manner of concupiscence, for without the Law sin was dead: Namely, when Adam
went against the Law (and to Gods Justice) the Lord by an Almighty revenging
act of Justice, in way of contrary, broke him in (...), turned him aside,
pushed him away from him, bad his blindness and stubbornness take full
Commission, and exercise Authority over him for ever: Sin takes this occasion,
steps in, and while God is pushing of him away, takes advantage, and carries
headlong the sinner from God, to act al manner of evil upon al (...). Hither
belongs that also, Romans 6. 14. Sin shall not have (...) over you, because you
are not under the law, but under Grace: that is, You are not under the Covenant
of the Law broken, for that gives Commission to sin to exercise sovereign
Jurisdiction over the Sinner.

The Glass that is brittle, yet does not break; (...) does not prevail against
it while it is in a man's (...) and kept from harm, but if it fall against a
stone, the hardness of the stone severs the parts of it, brittleness takes
occasion by that blow, and steps in and shatters it al in pieces: It breaks
because brittle, for things that are not such, though they do fall, do not
break; but that would not domineer and prevail but because of that blow: so it
was with Adam, a glassie (...), a mutable man, he falling against the Law; that
opposing, pusheth him aside and delivers him up to the power of his
corruptions, and they have dominion over him by reason of that act of the Law
delivering him up to his sins. (...) is also the meaning of that place, 1 Cor.
15. 56. The strength of sin is the Law: Sin is as strong as the provoking and
opposing power of the Law, for it falls in with it, and takes occasion to act
the soul by it; and hence it is you shall ever find it, so far as we act by our
own principles as under a Covenant of works, so far sin ever prevails. This
lastly is the meaning of that text, Romans 7. 6. wherein a man is said to be
married to his sin, for the comparison holds. As long as the Husband lives, so
long the Wife is bound, and is subject to him: so while we remain in our
natural condition, under the Covenant of Works, we are in Covenant with our
sins, and married to them so, that we cannot be to any other, we are
hand-fasted and cannot part. 1 Sin claims a propriety in the soul. 2 Takes
possession of it. 3 It wholly orders and acts it. (as the woman has not power
over her self but the man) On the (...) side the Soul 1 Gives it self away to
it. 2 Submits to the authority of it. And, 3 Is wholly acted by it.

Therefore it is, That they that are in the flesh cannot please God, Romans 8. 8.
The act of Sin cannot please, but the Spiritual (...) of the Soul is acted by
Sin; therefore it cannot please God while a man is in his (...) (...).

This KEY will Open many Doors.

Hence it follows, Original Sin is not a mere Privarion, (...) not only take
away his Image, but (...) up the soul to the power of Corruption, and (...) its
discovered by the actions of Fighting, (...). 5. 7. The Flesh lusts against the
Spirit. (...), Romans 7. 21. The Law of Flesh (...) against the law of my mind,
captivating the (...), erecting and setting up a sovereignty, and height (...)
jurisdiction in the soul, there is a law of sin and (...), Romans 8. 2.

As Adam actually by his own Fault and Folly i. e. by (...) sin deserve that
God should take away the one, (...) deliver up to the power of the other: And
if (...), then also Actually; for to work a (...) meritoriously, is so to do a
thing according to (...) of Covenant our selves, and that we should (...)
another should do to us, or for us, what is suitable (...) the Covenant either
broken or kept. In a word, As Adam works his own death by (...), so also (...)
procures both the loss of the Image of God, and the (...) of Corruption to take
possession of him and (...), for both these are included in that, Thy (...) is
of thy self, Oh Israel, Hos. 13. 9.

Hence also it comes about, That the law is the 1 Cor. 15. 56. and sin as
strong as the Law, because the Law of God gives (...) to sinful distempers to
take possession of it. So (...) look what power the Kings Commission is of in
(...) hand of the High Sheriff, the same power has (...) Sheriff when he has
that Commission. So look what strength there is in the Commission from Divine
Justice, the same strength sin has, which has that Commission.

Hence again, All sins Original and Actual which follow therefrom, are
punishments of the (...) of Adam, as they come from God: Its (...) with God,
That he that will reject his Wisdom (...) Holiness, should be deprived of it:
its just, that (...) that will choose his own Delusions and (...) before Gods
directions and Covenant, should be delivered up to the power of them, and
staked (...) in them. Thou would be so, why remain so (...): And every
putting forth of Original Corruption takes occasion from this act of revenging
(...) pushing the soul away from him: But as they (...) from Adam, so they are
sins properly called. For Adam does not properly punish himself, he (...) not
the execution of any act of Justice, (...) is it (...) that he does evil, but
it is his delight, (...) takes content therein, even to depart from God, which
is the sentence of the second Death.

Hence lastly, There is no possibility that a (...) Do, and Live: That is, Do
and Do; (...) me once, and please me for ever; that is, Thou shall be enabled
for ever to please me, and to be happy in so doing.)

So contrary wise, The Curse of the breach of the Covenant is for ever to be
acted by the power of sin, (...) break it, Do not, and Die: that is, Displease
(...) by Disobedience and be so accursed, that thou (...) ever displease me.

The just punishment which is answerable to our (...) of the Lord, and our
chief good is, that (...) shall ever reject it. For if a man could please God
and so (...) his end after his Disobedience and (...) of Covenant, he might
then be happy, and (...) be in his sin, and so never be punished for it, which
is impossible.

The Sum of this Argument in short returns to thus much, That if the Will of a
man be under Commission of. Divine Justice, and is delivered up to (...) power
of Sin to be possessed of it, and acted by it; therefore it is not, nay, cannot
be willing to be (...) from its sins.

The Third Reason of the Doctrine, is taken from Reas. 3
the Power which Satan has to lead, and so to (...) all sinners wholly
according to his own desire, (...) the lord has given him allowance thereunto.
As (...) said to Satan touching Job, All that he has is (...) thy hand, Job,
2. 6. So al these that will not be my Subjects, but are turned Traitors, lo they
be in (...) hand, they shall be thy slaves. Thus he rules in the Children of
disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. Thus he (...) them at his will, 2 Timothy 2. last. He is
the strong man that maintains possession in the Soul, and the sinner goes as he
is led, 2 Cor. 12. 2. Malefactors are the Kings Prisoners, but under the
keeping of the (...): so sinners have their Mittimus, and they are put into
Satan's hand, he keeps them in the chayns of (...), and reserves them to the
(...) of the (...) day, if they be not rescued out of his hand by Jesus Christ.

The last Reason is taken from the Naturalness Reas. 4
and near Alliance there is between our hearts and our lusts, that we count it
death to part with them; nay, we cannot be without them: hence in Scripture
they are called as the members of our body (Col. 3. 5. mortify your members)
and those the dearest and tenderest, the right eye, and the right hand, Mark 9.
43. 47. They are as the skin of our hearts, Jer. 4. 4. circumcise your hearts:
They are as our selves, hence we are commanded to deny our selves, that is our
lusts, Matt. 16. 24. If any man will be my (...), let him deny himself; the old
man. Romans 6. 6. Our old man is crucified: Nay, they are our very lives, 1 Timothy
5. 6. they that live in sin: our very heaven and happiness; the young man went
away sorrowful when he should exchange his Possessions for the Kingdom of
Heaven: So that first the corrupt Will must cease to be, or else it cannot but
be willing to maintain its distempers, for every thing labors to preserve it
self, for to destroy itself is to be contrary to it self, and therefore the
corrupt Will cannot but preserve its Corruption, for it is it self, and it
cannot destroy it self. So that now to gather up al,

If the dominion of sin wholly possesses the soul, the power of Satan wholly
leads it, the naturalness of sin wholly contents it; then it is not possible
that ever the carnal heart should be willing to part with his Corruptions.
Here Is a dominion that cannot be gainsaid, a power that cannot be opposed, a
contentment that cannot be bettered; therefore there is no other expectation
but that the corrupt Will should be unwilling to be severed from its sins.

Hence we may learn: It is the heaviest plague in Use 1.
the world for a natural man to have his own will: It is the direful dread of
the vengeance of the Lord when he delivers a man up to the distemper of his own
heart, to follow it, and to have it, and to be under the power of it; and that
follows thus. To be severed from God, and never to be severed from his sins, is
the greatest plague in the world: But (...) man naturally will never be severed
from his sins, this is the desire of his heart: therefore to have this, is the
heaviest plague that can befall a man in this world. As it is in Psalm. 81. 11.
Israel would none of me, so I gave them up to the lusts of their own hearts, to
walk in their own counsels: Is it so? That as they did, thou do; and as they
would, thou would; that thou professedst the same inwardly, I will none of the
ways of God, but I will have my own will and my own lusts, then this is the
plague of God upon thy soul, thou shall have thy (...), and Hell with them too;
thou shall have nothing of God, nothing of his Grace here, nor of his Glory
hereafter. Has the Lord so ordered it toward thee, That as its said of David,
he never displeased Adonijah, never crossed him of his will, so thou have had thy
will still, and have prospered in a (...) course, this is a sign that God never
intends good to thy soul, that he has thus delivered thee up to the distempers
of thy own heart. When Physicians give men for gone, they leave them, and say,
Let him eat what he will, if he call for Milk, or Drink, let him have it, he is
but a dead man, live he cannot. Is it so with thee? That God has given thee
over, and left thee to thy self, that now thou have what thou will, and do
what thy corrupt will carries thee to. This is the most dreadful plague of al,
Thou do walk in the counsels of thine own heart, to thy own eternal ruin.

Hence its also clear: The Will of a Natural man Use 2.
is the worst part about him. The worst thing he has, and the greatest Enemy
he has, is his own Heart and Will. It follows thus, It is that which maintains
all the sinful distempers of his soul, it keeps the whole Army of Corruptions al
in their Ranks, that Victuals them, and provides for them, that hinders a man
from using the means, or from getting good by all the means of Grace: Its the
corrupt will of a man that keeps him under the power of his sin, and keeps off
the power of an Ordinance, that would procure his everlasting good. I speak it
the rather to dash that dream of wickedmen, when they do ill, and speak ill;
yet (say they) my heart is good. Its true, I cannot speak so well, nor do so
well, nor make such a show as others can, but my desires are good. No truly, If
thy Life be naught, thy Heart is worse. Its the worst thing thou have about
thee. Matt. 12. 34, 35. Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks:
And an evil man out of the evil treasure of (...) heart brings forth evil
things. There is a treasury of evil in thy heart, variety and abundance of
wickedness there: The Heart is the storehouse, a man's carriage in his life is
but the shop; men do not use to bring out al into their shop, but keep it in
their storehouse that is full still: So be it known unto you, you who in your
speeches and carriages discover it, you are desperately proud, and wordly, and
carnal, and profane; there is a thousand times more of that wickedness in your
hearts; there is a treasury, a storehouse of al abominations. Nay, the
deceitfulness of the Heart is above al; the masterfulness of the Heart is
beyond all that we can conceive: A man may discern a man's life, and perceive
what is there suitable, or cross to the Will of God; but the heart is desperate
decentful, who can know it? Jer. 17. 9. The Will of Man is uncontrollable. That
which the Apostle James speaks of the tongue, That it is an unruly evil full of
deadly poison, none can tame it, Jam. 3. 8. It is much more true of the heart,
for whatever wickedness is ve^ted by the tongue, its first in the heart; and its
there much more: men may gag a man's mouth, and fetter his hands and feet, but
Oh the corrupt will of man, who can restrain that? The truth is, it will stand
out against al Reasons and Arguments, and nothing can move the will except God
work upon it. As they said, in 1 Samuel 8. 19. When Samuel gave them Reasons
against Monarchy; they say not, Your Reasons are not good, we will Answer them,
and bring better Reasons for what we desire; No, but we will have a King. And
as the Lord says to the House of Israel, Ezekiel. 33. 11. Turn ye, turn ye from
your evil ways, why will you die? Give me the reason of it: It is not my will
you should die, I forbid it; its not suitable to reason, that gainsay it; its
not agreeable to nature that abhors it, to have your sins, and to have the
plagues of them for ever: nay, but we will have our sins whatever come of it.
This is the nature of the Corrupt will of every carnal man.

Hence again we may see how cross to Reason and Use 3.
common sense the corrupt carriage of ungodly men is, when they be left to
their own wills: we look at it, not as a part of weakness, but a madness in
truth; if a Malefactor will lie in the Dungeon, when means of deliverances is
afforded; for a man to choose his fetters, and to keep on his chains and bolts,
when he may be freed: yet this is the case and condition, yea the disposition
of men who are not willing to be severed from their sins, nor to be set free
from those chains of darkness wherewith they are fettered, and go up and down
imprisoned in the world. Sin is compared to a deadly poison; the poison of Asps
is under their tongue, Romans 3. 13. that is, Such (...) which is deadly and
venomous which admits no remedy, no cure, no recovery: Now, should (...) see
a Patient that should be offended with the Medicine that would Cure him, or
with the Physician that would counsel him, and recover him out of (...)
Disease? Or take it heinously, and grievously that any should keep him from
drinking the Poison that would destroy him? Each man would conclude that his
brain were more distempered than (...) body, as doing that which is directly
cross even to nature, which desires the preservation of it self, even in
unreasonable Creatures. Turn but the tables as we say, consider aright thine
own carriage, (...) thou will confess it is thy case, thou art the man Thou art
poisoned with the loathsome, and (...) lusts of thine own Heart, which threaten
thy everlasting ruin, and that beyond recovery in (...) course of ordinary
means; Thou art not able (...) hear the Counsel that would direct thee for
(...) Cure, nor bear a savory and seasonable (...) which would take away the
poison of those (...) distempers: Thou can not endure to be severe from that
which will sever thy soul from God: (...) can not abide the Word, or the
Messengers (...) would take away that from thee which will take (...) way thy
peace, thy comfort, thy happiness and a Thus Herodias waited for the Baptists
life, (...) he endeavored to cross her in her Incestuous (...) and loathsome
abominations, Mark 6. 19. Therefore Herodias had a quarrel, a secret grudg
again him, and would have killed him: She lay at (...) she was watchful and
covetous to observe and (...) any hint of opportunity offered to do him harm,
because he desired, and endeavored to do her the greatest good that he could. A
type of this we may (...) in the Israelites when their own hearts could tell
them, and their own experience could testify, and that unto their own sense,
it was the greatest pressure that ever they found, the (...) of the wrath of
Pharaoh, and that they sighed under it, and their groans went up to heaven. And
yet they would return to their own ruin, and to the house of bondage: And,
Would God, said they, we had died in Egypt: Aegipt typifyed the kingdom of
darkness, the state of sin and death; and Pharaoh was a type of Satan, who
exercises the fierceness of his fury upon the souls of those that are under
his power: sometimes men will cry unto the Lord by reason of the hard usage they
find from Sin and Satan, yet when God comes by his Word and the Counsels of his
Servants to pluck them out of their sins, and out of their bondage, they cannot
endure that, they will rather return again unto, and lie down under the bondage
of sin and Satan, than be delivered from it.

John 5. 40. Our Savior Christ tells the Jews there, You will not come to me,
that you might have life: Christ has Purchased it, and Promised it, and Offered
it; yet says he, You will not come to me, you will not, though you may have life
and happiness for the coming for.

Here Is also a ground of Trial. We may hence Use 4.
discern, and that undeniably, and easily, what our condition is, Whether we be
yet in our Natural estate, so far from the interest and possession of Christ,
or any saving work of his Spirit, as that indeed we have not attained any
through preparation hereunto.

We need not send up to Heaven to look into the Cabinet Counsels of Gods
everlasting Decrees: what is (...) concerning us. Descend thou into thy own
soul, thou have that in thy bosom will be the best discovery of thy condition:
Ask but honestly, plainly, and in earnest thy own heart, and that will cast the
balance, and that beyond al question. Such as thy will is, such is thy
condition; look what thou would be, that thou art in truth, and in the
account of the Almighty. The Lord cares (...) for all the Court Complements thou
can express in the ways of Christianity; he (...) not for (...) thy fair
(...), and the quaint appearances of (...); was thy carriage gilt over with the
most glorious shows of Godliness, and thy tongue tipped with the language of
heaven; this will not do the deed. This would not answer the Lords expectation,
nor thine own hopes and comforts in the issue. It was said concerning Eliab,
David's elder brother, when it was conceived that he should be the man appointed
for the Kingdom, and indeed holy Samuel was deceived in his goodly stature,
Surely this is the Lords Anointed: The Lord himself checks his judgment, Man
looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord looks upon the heart, 1 Samuel
16. 7. Look we then as God looks, and judge we as he judges, if we would have
comfort and truth in our judgment, that we may not fail in that, and so our
hopes and happiness and al fail in the issue. Thou say, Thy (...) is savory
and free, thy understanding large, thou art able to search the Mysteries of
Grace, thou know in a great (...) the things of Grace, and art able fully to
express what thou know; and thou pretendest readmess and zeal for the
service of the Lord. Thou (...) al these are thus. And I say, What is thy heart
thou look to these? I say, Look to thy heart, and then to these, that is
Gods way. The people in Deuteronomy. 5. 28. made as full and free a profession as all
the world could desire, but the Lord desired somewhat more, (...) went further,
They have well said, but Oh that (...) were such a heart in them, v. 29. It is
the heart then that gives the casting Evidence of a man's condition, and will not
deceive.

The Woman that has two Suitors that make love and express their (...) to her,
if she ask her own Spirit, that will easily speak which is the man that must be
her Husband; the Answer which will (...) it is this; Such a one has her heart,
he has got her good will, and therefore has gained the woman, (...) is his;
to give one all good language, and (...) entertainment, that is nothing, if
another has the heart. So if the Question be (which is indeed a Question of
the greatest consequence in the world) Whether art thou to be matched to thy
Sin, or to thy Savior? to thy Lusts, or to the Lord Jesus? This will put it
beyond peradventure, has some bosom lust got the will of thy soul, and holds
it to this day? thou art certainly a corrupt and carnal wretched Creature. All
thy (...) carriage and (...) entertainment, or good language (...) (...) the
Lord Jesus, it is nothing, thy lusts have thy heart, and Satan has thy heart by
means of them, and this is thy condition to this very day. It Is (...), as
experience proves it, that he that is the Owner of a Country, may be forced by
the power of an Enemy (...) in upon him, to forsake the Skirts and Borders of
it; but if yet the strong Places, (...), and Citadels be in his possession,
which command the Country, each man concludes he is Lord and (...) of the
Country still, hecause he has these (...), and strong Forts, whereby he can
command it at his pleasure. As in the Country, so in the Rule of a man's
Carriage and Conscience; possible it is, nay ordinary that there may come some
(...) Power and Evidence of Truth, and the Lord may so mightily assault the
soul with the Battery of his Word, and levy such Forces of Arguments against
the prevailing power of sin, in our practice, as that (...) may cause our
corruptions to retire and forsake the Frontiers, and outworks, the tongue, and
hand, and behavior; but if yet the will, which is the main Castle, and has
command of all, if that, I say, be still at league with our Lusts, and the
power of corruption is there entertained and acknowledged, thou art yet under
the power of Satan, and possession of thy sin. The unclean Spirit may now and
then go on walking, and be cast out from exercising that Sovereignty and extent
of Jurisdiction, as to act the hand, and eye, and tongue to the practice of
evil; but as long as his house is swept and garnished, the soul willing to give
way, and welcome to any bosom distemper, he returns again and prevails as much,
nay, more than ever, Matthew. 12. 43, 44, 45. Whatever thou have received, if
thou have not a heart against thy sin, thou have nothing will do thee good.
Whatever thou give to God, or do for him, unless thou give thy heart
unto him, and bestow that upon his Service, thou do nothing that will stand
thee in any stead: The want of this was that which Moses so heavily complained
of, Deuteronomy. 29. 3, 4. You have seen all that the Lord has done for you, the
signs and wonders that he has wrought for you, yet the Lord has not given you
an heart unto this day: As who should say, all these will but aggravate your
sins, and increase your plagues, your naughty hearts will abuse all, and bring
a Curse upon all the Blessings you enjoy: All thy Services without a heart
severed from thy sins, is but as a dead Sacrisice, which the Lord loathes: As
she to Sampson, though he pretended all love, yet this she looked at as an
evidence of want of love, because his heart was not with her; How can thou
say thou love me, when thy heart is not with me? So the Lord to all the fair
pretenses of fals-hearted Professors; How can you say you love me, when your
hearts are not with me? you will not part with your Lusts.

But you will reply, This is a hard saying, who Object.
can hear it? who can bear it? this is all we have to bear up and support our
hearts and hopes with. True it is, our Natures are naught and corrupt, our
distempers strong, infirmities many, and failings great; we cannot deny that
which our actions discover, we are too frequently and shamefully snatched
aside, and surprised by our corruptions, and our distempers overbear us; yet
the Lord knows, and we would have you to know, we would be other, we want power
against our distempers, yet we want not will to be severed from them.

So said, and so done, well and good: You profess so, prove what you profess,
and it (...); I (...).
wish it were so, and that is the worst I wish you: but try it then, and be sure
you do not fail, for you are brought to the lowest and the last cast; it is as
the Book to the Malefactor: This is the very Door of Grace, and the Gate of
Heaven, to be willing to be severed from sin: God never wrought upon you for
good, unless this be wrought in you.

The Evidences are Four.

He that is willing to part with his sin, is speedy and unweariable in seeking
and improving of those a man to break through all discouragements and (...)
that can be cast in the way, neither difficulties nor oppositions be they what
they will be, can either daunt it wholly, or put it upon delays; the hands may
be bound, the feet fettered, either want of liberties or opportunities may
prejudice a (...) practice, or the opposition may be so (...) and fell, that
may force a man for the while to cease the performance of his work, but if the
will be settled and resolved that cannot be removed: So the Apostle, Romans 7. 18.
To will is present with me: though he cannot do what he is enjoined, God
requires, and Duty (...), yet he can will what he cannot do: so the Prophet
David, Psalm. 119. 4, 5. Thou have commanded us to keep thy Precepts, Oh that my
heart were so upright, and my ways so directed that I might keep them; I do
not, I cannot do as my Duty is, but Oh that I could do so; I cannot do as I
should, yet I cannot but wish it. This you shall find when the faithful are at
the greatest under, when some spiritual damps and qualms come over their
hearts, yet these privy yernings of their hearts toward God and the ways of
his Grace will appear: As in a swound, when all the acts of the Senses are bound
up, and the Pulse is not to be perceived, yet hold a glass to the mouth of a
fainting man, and you shall perceive some (...) breathing ever: So it is when al
abilities, enlargements seem to fail; when temptations, desertions, and violent
surprizal of some venomous distempers, take away sense and feeling, power and
performance; yet you shall perceive his breathing, if you bring the soul to a
Command or a Promise, Oh that my heart were so upright, Psalm. 119. 20. My soul
breaks for the longing it has to thy Commandments at all times, (...)
David: and (...) Paul, Romans 7. 19. The good I would, I do not, the evil I would
not, that I do: I do evil, but I would not do it; I do not the good, but I
would do (...). And therefore, as blind Bartimaeus when his heart was set to
seek the recovery of his sight, as soon as he heard that Christ passed by, he
cried out, Jesus Mark, 10 47, 48, 49.
thou son of David have mercy upon me; they rebuked him, and he cried yet more
earnestly, thou son of David have mercy on me; and our Savior asked him, what
ailest thou? what was his will set upon? Oh Lord that I may receive my sight.
So it is with a sinner whose will is set to seek relief against his sins, if
there be any opportunity offered, means afforded, any occasion that may lend
relief against his sin, how speedily upon the least inkling will he listen to
it? If Christ pass by, in Conference, in Communion, in public or private, in
set seasons, or such as could not be expected; whereby the healing virtue of
the blood of Christ may be dispensed, they greedily repair thither: and if the
question be what would thou? the Answer of the soul is, Oh Lord that I may
receive power against my sin: and if he get it not he will be unweariable to
pursue the Lord, until he has attained it. So the lamenting Church they took
unto themselves words, the sum and substance of all their requests, Hos. 14. 3.
Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously; not take away the
punishments that pinch us, not the Judgments and terrors that may justly
perplex us, in the times of our necessities, but take away our iniquities: A
wicked man may have a velleity, some sleepy wish for a turn against his sin,
for the attainment of his end, but it is but for a fit, and not for the removal
of his sin, but some evil that it brings: Nay, the heart of an ungodly man
holds counsels against the holy Commandments of the Lord, and plots how he may
sitly put by the authority of the Truth that would take away his evil, Job, 22.
18. The Counsel of the wicked is far from me. There is a (...) purpose of
Spirit to maintain some distemper which cannot be in a godly man.

He that is willing to part with his sin, he takes greatest delight in those
means which either discover his sin more fully, and work most kindly upon the
heart, that godly sorrow which causes Repentance never to be repented of, and
are the most piercing and powerful to remove it from him. For it is the greatest
delight that can befall a man to have his will and desires answered: that which
the Will desires most to have when it wants, it delights most in when it has
it. It is so in the diseases of the Body, when the blood is foul and so
feverish, and fit to cause a Pleuresie, the Humors gross and (...), and molest
the stomach, so that Nature desires to be unburdened; he that hits the right
vein, and that Physic which works kindly and strongly upon the right humor:
the Patient receives marvelous ease, and Nature special relief and refreshing;
that which takes away most of the burden, bring most ease. So it is with a soul
truly willing to be severed from his sin, being burdened and infested with the
venomous pollution thereof, it finds most delight in that Ordinance that works
most kindly and effectually upon it; the saddest counsel, the sharpest reproof,
the most searching trial, that ransacks every corner of a corrupt conscience,
now a man has his Will, and is marvelously pleased with it.

So David when Abigail met him and reproved him, and counseled him against his
sin, 1 Samuel 25. 32, 33. says he, Blessed be thou, and blessed be thy counsel,
and blessed be the Lord, which has kept me this day from shedding blood; that
have kept me this day from venting this distemper, and have met me so (...) and
spoke so effectually unto my soul. (...) heart that finds his special
corruption his greatest (...) wherewith he is most pestered, is therefore (...)
willing to be rid of that, which is most (...) to him, and therefore the word
that meets (...) directly, and works most powerfully, his will, (...) Gods will
meet there fully, and therefore he is (...) pleased: When a reproof stabs him
to the (...), Oh more of that Lord; and that comfort (...) would remove his
main discouragement, he (...) the continuance of that: That exhortation (...)
would awaken his sluggish spirit, and put life (...) virtue into his soul, he
says, speak home there Lord, Prove. 2. 10. When wisdom enters into thy (...),
and knowledge is pleasant unto thy soul: Oh (...) has wished this, longed for,
looked for this, and (...) now he has his will, and his hearts desire, (...)
is pleased at the heart; when the Lord brings off his spirit kindly that was
awk and wearish in duty, (...) the best day that he has seen a long time; Oh
(...) he that I had such a heart still, ever to be in this (...), for God and
against my sins: and still he (...) in that frame; Psalm. 85. 8. I will hear
what God will speak to my soul: whereas a corrupt heart when the Word meets
with his beloved lusts (...) the heart is in league, and indeed would not only
pinch, but pluck it away by main force; it is death to him, and so distastful as
that he cannot endure it, though he can hear many Counsels, receive some
general Reproofs, and listen to many (...), yet this he bears not: It is as
though a man should rent a member from his Body, or pluck one part from
another; the sinner rises up with fell opposition here: As she said when she
had lost her Darling, and conceived that the Man of God had a hand in it, What
have I to do with thee, thou man of God? 1 Kings, (...). 18.
So what have (...) to do with that Reproof, that (...), that Admonition, that
Examination: thus (...) Acts, 22. 22. They heard Paul till he came to (...)
word that was most cross to them, and then they cried out away which him, they
could bear him (...) longer then. When Demetrius his Trade was (...) to fall,
he could not want his gain, and (...) not renounce his Idol, all is in an
uproar, Acts, (...) there was an outcry by the space of two hours, (...) is
Diana of the Ephefians; they would not (...) with their Gain, nor with their
(...). So (...) dealt with Stephen when he came close to them, (...) discovered
the rebellion of their hearts and lives; Acts, 7. They were not able to bear
it, but stop (...) Ears, and run upon him, and he must lose his (...) rather
than they be disturbed in their lusts: this (...) the guise of the heart of
every Natural man who (...) not willing to part with his sin.

If the sinner be seriously willing to part with (...) sin, he is restless, and
unsatisfied until it be (...) and taken away from him, he finds nothing that
(...) can have any sweet contentment in as long as he (...) that distemper
which is cross to his will, and Gods will also. As Haman when he had all the
caps in the Country uncovered to him, and al knees (...) before him, yet all this was nothing to him, (...) avails all this (says he) so long as I see
Mordecai (...) in the Kings Gate? Esther, 5. 13. So had he all abilities, did
God vouchsafe unto him al enlargements, had he the hearts and approbation of
all (...) in the world, to honor him, to esteem him, yet (...) dasheth all,
what avails it so long as this Pride, (...) peevishness, this frothy vain heart
remains within me? When the heart is assaulted with some sudden qualm or deadly
fume that assaults the spirits, (...) ye drive it from his heart, nothing will
do him good, Oh he is sick at the heart, now I thank the Lord it is gone from my
heart: So it is with the plague of (...) that assaults the heart, a man that
knows it, and (...) (...), and is really sick of the lusts and corruptions that
are in his heart, he can never be at quiet till he find his heart in some
measure freed from the power and poison of those sinful distempers: as Rebecca
said, If Jacob should take a wife of the Daughters of Heth, what good shall my
life do me? Genesis 27. last: So what good will my credit, my profit, my
profession, all my privileges and performances do me, if my heart be married
to any base lust? (...) my corrupt will, and my wayward; peevish, stiffness,
and malignancy of heart continue with me still.

But thou that can lift up thy head and know all these evils in thee, that
God knows and thou know there are such bosom abominations which thy heart
finds and takes contentment in, thou can live with them, talk with them, lie
down and sleep with them, and arise with them again; nay, and thy corrupt heart
is restless if it may not be pleased and satisfied with thy lusts: Amon is sick
of Incest, Ahab of Covetousness, unless they may enjoy (...) lusts, they cannot
enjoy their lives. Grace! I would not trouble my self, or spend any time to
prove that such have any grace.

When a man's sins are so far from being his vexation, that it is his vexation
that he cannot have free (...) to commit his sins, that he is vexed with the
word that discovers his evil, vexed with Conscience that checks him for it,
plagued and tormented with all that come in his way that will cross him in his
lusts: if there be a graceless heart in Hell thou art one to this very day,
thou did never know what it was to put off the will of sinning.

Observe where the will takes up its last stand, and Paul spoke of Onesimus, he
departed from him for a season that he might be received for ever; and as the
Adultress chides her mate before others, that she may enjoy him more freely
without fear or suspicion; so it is usual for a false heart to chide with his
corruptions, and to speak great words against them, when yet the secret (...)
is but to enjoy them more freely by that means: therefore let not the Devil
cozen you with colors, your confessions and resolutions, your prayers and tears
against your sins, and that in secret, and that unto God; if your hearts (...)
these but as means for your own ends, you never were willing to part with sin.

The (...) of a gracious heart is, Never to take up his stand till he come to
God and the guidance of his Grace and Spirit, Hosea, 14. 2, 3. etc. Take away
all iniquity and receive us graciously, what have I to do any more with Idols?
etc. and the heart will never more have to do with these sins, but with God; he
sees these evils, sorrows for these, (...) to have these removed that he may be
under the power of God and his Grace; As Samuel said to Israel, 1 Samuel 7. 3, 4.
If you do return unto the Lord with all your hearts, then put away your gods,
and prepare your hearts unto the Lord, and serve him only: So if you be indeed
resolved to forsake your sins, and renounce your corruptions, then abandon
them, and al occasions leading to them, and al beginnings of them, and submit
your selves, your thoughts and affections to the Lord, and to his Word, and
serve him only: Lodge thy soul here, and let it never take up its stand until it
come hither.

The last Use is of Exhortation and Direction both Use 5.
together: It should guide us, and it should persuade us, to take the right way
of Reformation: Never leave thy prayers, and tears, and sorrows, and remorse,
until thou come to thy very heart; thy tongue professes fair, and thy hand
forbears the practice of evil, but ask thy heart, Heart what say thou? Shame
may prevail with thee, Authority of men may constrain thee, and conscience may
force thee to abstain from evil; I but, what says thy Heart? art thou willing
to part with thy sin? I do not do it, I dare not do it; but Will, what say
thou? Heart, what say thou? Never cease before you be able to answer, I am
really willing to part with every sin I am convinced of. It was the great
complaint of Moses concerning the People of Israel, that notwithstanding all that the Lord had done for them, yet they had not a heart to fear him, (...).
29. 4.
and to walk in obedience before him: So (...) may say, God has crowned thee
with (...), honored thee with encouragements, thou have the Esteem of others,
thou have all Liberties and opportunities to be as good as thou should be,
but truly all these will do thee no good, unless thou have a heart for God and
against thy sin, therefore rest no where until thou have this. The great Fort
that must be taken, is the Will, or else all the rest is as good as nothing: he
that will cure a disease must not only skin it over, but must take away the core
of it, if he think to heal it thoroughly, and cure it fully: So here, it is not
enough to wash a man's mouth, and to wipe his hands, but the core of a man's
corruptions must be got away, thy soul must be brought off from the Will of
sinning, as well as from the Practice of sinning, or else thy soul will never be
brought home to God: stay not therefore till thou come hither, and be sure to
make sound work here. Men that clear ground, they content not themselves to lop
off the tops of trees, but they stub up the roots, then they make clear work:
So here, be sure you stub up the heart and will of sinning (that is the root of
all) or else all that you do is in vain; it was our Saviors expression to the
Pharisees, Luke, 11. 39. Ye fools that make clean the outside of the cup and
the platter, but your inward part is full of ravening and wickedness: they
began on the wrong side, they contented themselves to (...) the (...), their
outward conversation to manward, and left corruption in their hearts unsubdued,
unremoved, and therefore our Savior Christ calls them fools and hypocrites for
their labor: What can you say to my life? what has any man against me? if thou
have no more (...) say for thy self than that comes to, thou have nothing at
al; (...) thy heart be not cleansed from those iecret corruptions of thine.

Let me leave Two or Three Directions here, that are just in my way, not
interfering with any thing to be spoken afterward.

Know that the greatest work of Reformation, Repentance, and the comfort of a
man's spiritual condition, it lies mainly in the Will: the greatest work and the
greatest difficulty lies here, Brethren. If you look at it as a matter of ease,
that thou can do it with the turning of a hand, and make wash-work of it,
thou never knew it, and thou shall never attain it: It Is one of the Devils
greatest delusions whereby he cozens thousands, to persuade men it is an easy
matter to be Religious: No, (...) know it, unless you find it the greatest work
in the world, you will never find endeavors suitable, nor success answerable
for the comfort of your own souls. Oh therefore that every man would go home
convinced and persuaded, God has helped me to temper my tongue, and to keep my
hands, the Lord has given me an enlightened Judgment, a reformed life, but Oh
the difficult work is behind, this wretched heart of mine, the hardness of
that, the impossibility of that! conclude it therefore, and resolve upon it, it
will cost me hard work, and unless the Lord enable me, and set in mightily and
constantly upon my soul, the work will never be done: The heart is deceitful
above all things, and desperately wicked, Jer. 17. 9. there is no hope of it,
as it were, the hand, and eye, and tongue may be reformed, but the heart is
desperate, who can know it? who can mend it? who can overpower it? If thou have
found it easy, nay, if thou did never stand amazed at the difficulty of the
work about thy heart to get that severed from thy sins, thou never had the
right discerning of it to this day. Paul cried out of the Body of Death, Romans
7. last, who shall deliver me from it? not from the eye, or the hand, but from
the heart, the will of Pride, the will of Uncleanness, the will of (...), and
here he is at a stand, at an amaze with himself, who shall deliver me!

Beleaguer thy heart and will with the clear evidence

The last Direction (which may prepare us for viz. The hand of the Lord to work
this for us) When thou art persuaded this stubborn heart will cost me many a
prayer and tear, and bring me often upon my knees, it will never do else, if I
think it is easy I never knew what it was, and when thy heart is so besieged
that it finds no relief; Then Brethren look often up to Heaven, He only that
made the heart can frame the heart to the blessed obedience of his own will; all that we can do, is to use the means, and lie under the Ordinances that God may
do that for us which he requires of us. It Is the Lords own Promise, Ezekiel. 36.
26, 27. I will take away the heart of stone, and give a heart of flesh;
therefore go and cry to Heaven, and say, Lord it is not in our hands to do it,
but thou have said thou will give unto thy servants a heart to hate sin, we
come and beseech thee deny it not unto us: Look to him we should in whose hand
our hearts are that he may do that for us which we cannot do for our selves.

BOOK VIII.
JOHN 6. 44. No man can come to Me, unless My Father which sent Me, Draw him.
WE have already Debated and Dispatched TWO of those Divine Truths, wherein the
Dispensation and manner of Gods working upon the Soul in preparation was
conceived and described.

1 That he finds the sinner settled upon his (...), and in the security of a
sinful Condition. 2 That he was wholly unwilling to be severed therefrom. That
it is a Death to him to be awakened out of this dead sleep when he saw no
danger, nor feared any; but pleased himself in his Dreams and deluded (...) of
his own happy Condition. 3 The Third and last Point now comes to skanning and
Consideration, wherein indeed the Pith and Marrow of this so deep and
mysterious a Dispensation of the Lord upon the Soul discovers it self; The Two
former only made way for the more plain Explication of this last, and the more
easy Apprehension of it by those who are willing to understand. Namely,
That by a holy kind of violence he is driven out of his sin, and Drawn unto
Christ by God the Father, notwithstanding all the (...) and utter unwillingness
to the contrary.

And for the foundation of our following Discourse we have chosen these words,
which out of the very Scope of the place and intendment of our Savior, present
to our view the former Point, and (...) in full sense thereof from the very
letter of the word: I shall omit al other particulars in the verse, (...) only
single out that which directly concerns my purpose in hand. And that is this.

God the Father by a Holy kind of violence Doct.
as it were, plucks his out of their Corruptions, and Draws them to Believe in
Christ.

Before I come to handle this Point, this I would Premise by way of Preface,
That I purpose to handle both these together; both, plucking from Corruption
and Drawing to Believe, for they are both performed by the same Action, or
Motion; and therefore its most fit as they be in Nature together, so we should
discover them together. For as it is in Bodily things that are obvious to our
eye and (...), he that plucks two things asunder which were glued, by the same
motion at the same instant (...) he plucks the one from the other, he plucks
(...) brings the one nearer to himself. So here, by (...) same stroke, and at
the same time the Lord is (...) to pluck the soul from sin unto which it was
(...), he brings it nearer to himself, and it is made (...) for himself, that
so it may be united unto his (...) And these Two are required before a man can
receive that Grace that he stands in need of. As in part out of joint that is
possessed of many (...) humors, or broken splinters of bones, which (...) the
temper, and hinder the joint from his right work and returning to his right
place for a through Cure the noysomness of the former is to be removed (...)
would hinder the part from joynting and (...) to its right place, and this
cannot be done but with (...) kind of Violence, which is now our Point to be
Opened and Confirmed. For our more orderly proceeding, because the path is not
beaten by any pregnant and plain (...), we shall desire to (...) things with as
much Evidence as we can, and therefore we shall enquire,

1 How many sorts of Drawings there are, and so which (...) meant in this
place. 2 What is the proper Nature of that which (...) here understood in the
kind of it. 3 How God does put forth this, and by (...) means? 4 Wherein this
Holy violence is best (...) and rightly apprehended in this work. 5 How this
pulling of the soul from sin, and Drawing of it to Believe, is accomplished, by
this violence. 6 Why this work of Attraction is given to the Father.
These things being considered and cleared, the frame in so mysterious a
Dispensation will be discerned in some measure, as may satisfy a judicious
hearer.

To the First. There is a Double Drawing, or Constraint.

Improperly so (...); and its called a Moral Swasion, to wit, When by outward
presenting and offering, or by some vehement pressing and applying an object to
the mind, or heart, the affections come to be (...), and the will comes to be
prevailingly moved, and strongly persuaded to the work: The Properties of this
kind of Constraint, are Two,

1 The Objects or Arguments offered and propounded, infuse no power in to the
will which it had not, but only stirs up, and calls out that which was there
before implanted, to put forth it self into action. 2 When these persuasions
are offered, there is still left an indifferency; there remains a freedom in
the Will, to Refuse or Receive as she sees (...).
Thus the wedge of Gold and the Babilonish garment, it persuaded and prevailed
with Achans heart, to covet, and to hide, and then by falsehood to defend it,
Josh. 7. 21. This occasion, or beautiful bait, drew out that wretched
Covetousness that (...) there before. Thus Lydia, Acts 16. 15. by her
importunity she is said to constrain Paul, who happily otherwise intended it
not: may be, he had weighty occasions which would have carried him another way.
Thus in Luke 24. 29. It is said by pressing importunity they compelled our
Savior to stay with them, who otherwise would have gone further. Luke 14. 23.
Compel them to come in.

This the Jesuits, and Papists, and many of the School, conceive and conclude
Marvelous, peremptorily, and stiffly maintain it even to the death, That this is
the only way of Gods drawing. Namely, God opens the Eye, and stirs up the Will,
by propounding Objects of worth and greatest excellency; and this is al they
would have (...) words require. But this gloss (...) the text, nor can it stand
with the Scope of the context or intendment of our Savior; for (...) words are
added by way of correction, when the Pharisees in the foregoing Verses murmured
at the Doctrine of our Savior, with which they were willing to quarrel, because
they could not understand; and at his means, which they were willing to
despise: Our Savior to prevent the scandal which weak ones might happily take,
because people of such place and quality rejected his person and Doctrine; he
ads these words, None can come to Me, except My Father Draw him. which is,
Murmur not, be not offended that the (...) entertain not me, nor the Gospel,
its a greater work to Believe, than either the power or skill of the (...), let
them admire at their excellency as they please: But it issues out of the
purpose and good pleasure of my Father, none have power to come, unless he be
pleased to Draw (...) that they may come; Where Two things are (...).

1 There must be Drawing, before Coming. 2 They who be Drawn, will certainly
Come.
As the force of the Argument evinceth; otherwise (...) reason of our Savior
was of no force: for it had (...) easy to reply; The Father may draw many
(...) yet those never come; therefore that is not a (...) Reason why they did
not come; whence its (...) the aim of the text disanuls and (...) (...) that
(...).

They who are drawn will come and fail not: But many have these outward
swasions; The Scribes and Pharisees, who blasphemed the Lord Jesus, had (...);
and therefore these swasions and (...) offers are not the Drawing here meant.

There is as Divines call it, A Physical, or Natural

1 There is a Spiritual and Divine Power, a Divine inspiration falls powerfully
upon the will: 2 By this the will is determined, and undoubtedly carried to its
Object.
To speak familiarly, Plucking implies a Breach of the Union between Sin and
the Soul, and (...) from yiedling Subjection (...) 2 There is the turning of
the heart the right way or a right set of Soul (being formerly perverted) put
upon it. In which to speak properly the (...) puts not forth a deliberate act,
but is acted by another; As it was in the raising of Lazarus when he stank in
the Grave, not only those noysom distempers were removed, and the unnatural
(...) which attended his body chased away, but the (...) also was returned and
brought again to Union (...) his Body. So here,

The Nature of this Drawing, and special

Its the motion and powerful Impression of the Spirit of God upon the Soul, not
any habit of Grace in it, nor any act of the Soul which concurs with the work
of God in this first stroke of Preparation:

For,

The soul that is wholly possessed by the Habits of Reas. 1
Sin, is not yet capable of the Habit of Grace; (...) my flesh dwells no good
thing, Romans 7. 18. The Vessel cannot be full of filthy and puddle water, and at
the same time receive that which is pure.

It is the aim of this work to make way and room first turns from darkness, and
then to light, Acts 26. 18. Takes away the heart of stone before he gives a new
heart, Ezekiel. 11. 19.

This is the influence of Light and Virtue into this cannot be the act of the
Will and (...), since they cannot of themselves let in any (...) into
themselves. Therefore the Lord takes (...) to himself as his own Work: Hither
belongs (...) Question,

Whether Nature or Grace be the first subject of Quest.
(...)? Nature cannot, For, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The (...) man receives not the things
of God, nor can (...) (...): (...) yet Grace cannot do it; for (...) there
should be Grace, before the FIRST (...).

Grace is attended in a double Respect, 1 As it Answ.
(...) a habit or gracious quality received into the Soul:

As it is a gracious impression upon the soul, The (...) must be prepared
before any habit of Grace (...) be received: but there needs no disposition in
(...) soul to receive the work of the Spirit that must (...)? there needs no
preparation to make way (...) the work of Preparation, but there needs (...) to
make way for the habit. That which (...) the first disposition, needs no
former, not yet (...) any former.

Its not Nature, but the Soul prepared that is the (...) of the First Habit.
The Soul unprepared (...) the Subject of the Spirit that prepares it.

The Means how God works the Cords, by which

The Spirit of the Lord lets in some powerful light deluded, blinded Creature
never dreaming of (...) such matter, so that he drives the soul to (...)
thoughts: If this be the straight way to happiness, (...) have been out of the
way al my life time; If this (...) true, my Condition is miserable. Isa. 65. 1.
I (...) sought of them that asked not for me, I am found (...) those that
sought me not: Thus the shepherd pursues the wildring sheep, If he had not
found it, it (...) never found home: How many give in Evidence (...) of their
own Experience in this kind: I never doubted of my estate, nor ever (...) of
any necessity to be other, or do other; I went as others did, it may be for
fashion sake, either company carried me, or custom prevailed with me; or may
be the novelty of the thing enticed me to go, I as little thought of my death,
as ever to have my sin and shame discovered: Job 36. 9. When the Lord gets man
into fetters, then he shows them their transgressions, and how they have
exceeded.

Thus the Lord is said To stand and knock at the door of the soul when the
sinner is fast asleep, Rev. 3. 20. He dazles the apprehension by some mighty
flash of truth, like lightning darted in, which makes the soul at a maze by
reason of the suddenness, and unexpectedness, and strangness of it. This knock
makes the sinner so far to hear, and to take notice of it that some body is at
the door, and causes him happily to make enquiry, Who is there? So Acts 9. 4,
5, 6. There shines a sudden Light about Paul, and a voice heard from heaven,
Saul, Saul, Why persecutest thou me? As who should say, Thou art utterly
mistaken, thou know not, where thou art, what thou do, thou mistakest a
Friend in stead of an Enemy. And therefore he amazed and astonished, Answers,
and (...), Who art thou Lord? Thus the sinner is made to look about him, where
am I? this is not the way to Heaven. And though the soul would shut its eyes
against the Evidence and Power of the Truth, which carries a kind of amazing
virtue with it, and therefore invents shifts to defeat the work of it, yet the
Lord will follow it, and fasten it upon the soul so as that it shall not avoid
it: he that stands knocking at the door will lift up the latch, and make the
Truth break in; as the Sun rising will break through the least crevis. This is
the first means whereby the Lord comes to lay hold upon the mind and soul of a
sinner, he has the sinner in chase as it were, that he cannot get out of his
sight, or make an escape; Thus by the hook of Instruction he lays hold upon
him.

He encloseth him with the Cords of Mercy, whereby Hosea, 11. 4. I drew them
with the Cords of a man, the bonds of love; and this the Lord does to take off
those desperate discouragements which otherwise would dead the heart, and split
the hopes of a forlorn sinner, and so pluck up his endeavors by the roots,
under the appearance of impossibilities: It can never be attained, why
therefore should it be expected, or endeavored after? To abate therefore of
these overbearing (...), which otherwise would sink the heart, and swallow it
up; the Lord casts in some discovery of the largeness of his compassions, and
intimates there is no danger to be feared in coming to the Lord, because there
is none intended. When Christ stands at the door and knocks, men are afraid to
let in Enemies that intended our ruin; so it is (...) the sinner, he is afraid
of Gods Justice because of his (...) deservings. What? is Christ at the door?
Is it not that Christ, whose Grace I have refused, whose Spirit I have grieved,
whose Words I have cast (...) my back? he certainly comes to destroy me who
have destroyed his Truth, and trampled his honor (...) my feet: And therefore
the Lord lets in that Evidence to the soul as sometimes to his Disciples, Be
Matt. 14. 27.
not afraid, it is I; I come not as a Judge to condemn thee, but as a Savior to
save thee; I desire thy Conversion, Matt. 17. 7. and 28. 10
not thy Confusion. So our Savior expressed himself to (...), Acts, 9. Who art
thou Lord? (says he) I am Jesus, i. e. I am a Savior to save my Mark. 5. 36.
People from their sins; and so of thee, to save thee from thy sins: Why will thou oppose thine own Mark. 6. 50.
mercy, and so thine own safety? Why will thou persecute him that comes to
preserve thee? This Cable of Mercy is made up of four Cords, which cannot
easily be broken.

The infinite sufficiency of that saving health that plentiful redemption that
is provided and laid up in Christ. That Sea of Mercy and Grace that is able to
drown al our sins and guilts, and remove al our (...), a treasure that cannot
be spent, a fountain that cannot be drawn dry. Isa. 55. 7. Let the wicked
forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto
the Lord, and he will have mercy, and to our God, and he will abundantly
pardon: He has pardons in store, such as lie by him, they are not to seek, he
has bowels of mercy yet opened, arms of pity and compassion yet stretched out
to (...) thee. Nay, though thou coldest not imagine it, or conceive it, yet he
can do it, Psalm. 103. 10, 11. He deals not with us after our iniquities, but as
the heavens is high above the earth, so great is his mercy to them that fear
him. Psalm. 1 30. 7, 8. Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with him there is
multiplied (...), and he shall deliver him from all his iniquities. Thou have
multiplied thy sins and provocations, he has multiplied Compassions: Lo, there
thou shall see a Manasseh pardoned, a Paul (...), and yet there is room for
thee also. He never casts off any that come unto him, therefore its thy fault
only which casts off Mercy.

If yet the sinner stand murmering; behold yet Come unto me ye rebellious
Children, and I will heal your backslidings: With that, the sinner is at a
wonderment with himself; did he not say Rebellious sinners? did he not invite
such? Why may not I therefore be entertained?

Yes, The words are express, Come ye backsliding Children. If then there be
any Doubt arising, God Cleers it; any Question, the Lord Answers it; any
Hinderance, he Removes it. Jer. 3. 1. 2. 7. They say, if a man put away his
wife, shall she return again? Amongst men its usual and ordinary, if an
Adultress Wife depart away, her Husband receives her not again; Yet return unto
me, says the Lord, though thou have played the Harlot with many lovers. And
verse. 7. After thou have done all these things, yet return unto me. Then the
Soul bethinks it self, shall al these abominations be cleansed? al these
rebellions remitted? What after all this pride, and uncleanness, and
Covetousness; nay, after all the abuse of Gods Grace and Mercy, yet accepted,
yet received, yet (...). Either then now or never. He that (...) so gracious a
command, so kind an offer, its a wonder if the Lord do not cast him off, and
accurse him for ever; nay, is he not worthy he should be so?

The Lord not only offers it freely that we might Cor. 5. 17. The Lord by us
does beseech you to be reconciled, the Ministers proclaim it, but God
professes it; they desire men, and God in them (...), and entreats to be
reconciled.

This makes the bowels of a sinner to roll within him and drives him to a
stand, and almost overcomes our unkind natures: What! A King to entreat a
Traitor to be pardoned; the Judge a Theif to be acquitted; a Conqueror fall at
the foot of a Captive and his Prisoner, and desire him to be reconciled. I hat
God, the great God of heaven and earth who was offended by us, who has no need
of us, who was infinitely happy in himself without us who might with the breath
of his nostrils for ever confound us, and that justly; why it had been enough,
and enough a Conscience, but to admit such accursed dust and ashes into his
presence, (...) to hear him speak, and give him but leave to bewayl his sins
before he should have perished for them. It had been a high favor and mercy to
have given him leave to have begged mercy, though he had never granted it. But
to hear me when I call and cry, to receive me to favor when I come, that is as
much as could be desired. But that God should stoop to man, heaven to earth,
(...) to meanness, he that was offended by me, had no need of me, was happy
without me, and might have honored the name of his Justice in my everlasting
confusion, not only to hear me and receive me when I come, but to send after
me, but to beseech a damned forlorn Creature to be pardoned. This is the wonder
of Mercy more than I could have conceived, durst have begged, yea I should have
conceived it unreasonable to have desired it, nor could I have thought it, but
that the Lord has said it and done it. His will be done, and blessed be his
holy name for ever. Oh that I should live to hear of this Mercy, but wretch
that I am if I should outlive the offer of it, or not entertain it. I need not
question, that the Lord is serious and heartily willing to have the tender of
his Grace entertained, and my self for ever comforted therein and thereby. Why
he takes his Oath, not that he can change, but that he would have me be
settledly assured thereof. As I live, says the Lord, I desire not the death of
a sinner but rather that he should repent and live, Ezekiel. 33. 11. If God do not
desire my death but my repentance. Why should I desire my own death? so that
the heart of a sinner could almost be content to give way, but yet his loose
domineering lusts will not give leave.

If yet the sinner will not come away but stays still, He waits to be gracious:
He takes fresh and renewed throws of Patience and travels as it were in
expectation of the return of a sinner, Jer. 13. last. Oh Jerusalem will thou
not be made clean? when will it once be? As a Woman in travel, Oh when will the
good hour come? Oh! consider this, Is it not a shame for you to suffer the Lord
Christ to meet with you at every turn, to follow you from place to place, to
attend upon you, in the Seas where you have (...), upon the shoars where you
have landed, in the houses where you dwell, to pursue you in the fields, to hang
his pardons at your doors, and to kneel to you at your bed-sides, when you lie
down, and when you awake; Oh! when will it once be? Let this day be the last day
of sinning, of lazying in a Christian course, of carnal formality, let this
time, this night be the last night of provocation and unprofitableness under all the privileges and means of Grace you enjoy: Once at last let that proud heart
be humbled, that peevish Spirit meekned, those covetous desires, unclean
affections be changed: when will it once be? See how the Lord sends by the
Prophet, and pleads with them, and puts them beyond al appearance of any
pretense. Turn ye, turn ye, why will ye die Oh ye house of Israel? Ezekiel. 33.
11. Have ye any reason to desire, or endeavor your own destruction, against
your own reason, your own good, my will, why will you die? Plead thus with your
own hearts for your own comfort. I have reason to return, but no reason to die;
what is most for my good, and the Lord so much desires, Let me endeavor it. See
then how these cords of (...) compass about the sinner, and lie hard at him to
draw him from his sin.

The Lord proclaims his Mercy openly, freely offers it, heartily intends it,
waits to communicate it, lays siege to the Soul by his long sufferance: There
is enough to procure al good, distrust it not: He freely invites, fear it not,
thou may be bold to go: he intends it heartily, question it not: yet he is
(...) and wooing, delay it not (...), but hearken to his voice.

But if these limetwigs of Love cannot catch you,

God stirs up Conscience, and arms it with Authority done, but publicly
proclaims his (...) Charge, and Edicts, not to be contradicted or controuled
upon the pain of the severest punishments.

This is the first work of Conscience to be a forewarner, and to admonish the
soul of evil, to exercise a severe Charge, and give uncontrollable Commands
against sin: So that Corruption comes to be snubbed and checked, and the soul
kept in aw under him which it scorned before. It fares in this case with
Conscience as with an High Sheriff, or some special Officer of note in the
Country, in the absence of the King, while he is gone aside there arises a
Mutiny and Tumult of unruly persons, which tear his Commission, withstand his
proceedings, and offer in an outrageous manner to lay violent hands upon his
Person; so that as he can do nothing, so he dares show little distaste, but
express no strong opposition against them, as not having power enough to
surprise and crush them in their (...), but is compelled to sit still, and say
nothing, knowing as David said, You are too strong for me you sons of Zerviah:
He finds his party too weak to deal with them, thefrore puts up al contempts
and indignities for the while; Nay, as it is with many (...), their numbers
being many, their carriage furious and unreasonable, sometimes they strike the
Constable instead of being ruled by him; but when the King returns, renews his
Commission, and gives him more power than ever, and sends supply to aid and
(...) him, then the Sheriff lifts up his head, having got a larger (...), comes
with more undaunted courage and resolution, having got assistance (...) to
support himself; and he makes open Proclamation, That whereas there has been
such and such (...), be it known, that they are al to be (...) and commanded in
the Kings Name, upon (...) notice hereof to lay down all weapons, to still al
(...) disorders upon pain of death to any that shall (...) the Law in that case.

So it is with Conscience, when by the crowd and (...) of many accursed lusts
and corruptions, (...) eye is blinded, the edg dulled, the commands of (...)
corned, so that men make a mock of conscience, (...)? your Conscience will not
serve you, your (...) will not suffer you, to lie, to laze, to (...), to
deceive, your Conscience will not allow it, (...) you make a fool of your (...)?
what care (...) for Conscience or you either, I will do what I like, what I list
for all Conscience: Thus a company of (...) imprison the High Sheriff, or beset
his house; (...) when God shall awaken Conscience, and quicken (...), and renew
the Commission in the hand of (...), so that it comes enlightened and armed
with (...) from Heaven, he then makes open (...) to the sinner, forewarns and
threatens the (...), thou that have had no care of the (...) of God, but
slighted al Directions and (...) of his Word; be it known unto thee by (...)
received from Heaven, I charge thee in the Name of the Lord Jesus, as thou will
answer it at that great Day, upon pain of everlasting Damnation, take heed of
these sins, and lay down these rebellions, and withal shows his Warrant: and
look here 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. The Lord Jesus will come in slaming fire to render
vengeance against all that know not God, and obey not the Gospel; take heed
therefore of this disobedience against the Gospel, you will rue it eternally
else: and lo here again, Prove. 29. 1. He that being often reproved hardens
his heart, shall suddenly be consumed, and that without remedy: thou have been
often reproved for these and these evils, and still thy heart is hardened
against all Reproofs, take heed lest sudden destruction come upon thee: So
again 1 Cor. 6. 9. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor
Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor Abusers of themselves with mankind, nor
Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, (...) Extortioners, shall
inherit the Kingdom of God. Do not you know this (says Conscience) have not I
often told you of this? have not I warned you of it? and yet thou art still
guilty of these and these evils. Thus Conscience comes armed with Evidence and
Authority of the Truth; like the Angel with a drawn sword in his hand, stands
as the Watchman to give warning, he still minds and remembers the sinner of his
ways, and of Gods righteous Judgments: As sometimes Moses to Israel, Deuteronomy. 30.
17, 18. But if thine heart turn away that thou will not hear, I denounce unto
thee this day, thou shall surely perish; and if any man when he hears these
words, shall bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace though I ad
drunkenness to thirst, the wrath of the Lord will smoke against that man, and
he will cut him off, etc. This Charge and awful Command of Conscience makes the
soul shy of stirring out unto such ungodly courses, makes the corruptions skulk
in as it were, so that they dare not show their heads: this is the roaring of
the Lion, that makes al tremble and Amos, 3.
be at a stand, the direful warnings and threatenings

When now the Devil and his Instruments, the Sam. last, 10. David's heart smote
him after he had numbered the people: Though the sinner could avoid or neglect
the Command of Conscience, he cannot avoid the Stroke of Conscience: though he
could avoid the warning of Conscience, and cast away that, yet he cannot avoid
the horror of Conscience, Romans 2. 14. His thoughts accusing of him in Gods
behalf, and his accusations will be heard nay, his judgment is now aggravated,
because of the Command that was (...), As Gideon dealt with the men of Succoth,
who scorned him, when he pursued Zebah, and Zalmunnah: Judge. 8. 7. Returning he
tore their flesh with the thorns of the wilderness. So (...) after his Commands
have been slighted, and his warnings cast behind the back, he surpriseth the
sinner in the midst of his (...) and greatest Jollity; you shall answer for
these sins before the Judge of the World, and so follows him home to his house,
and to his bed, and (...) violent hands upon him, and drags him before the
Tribunal of the Lord, and there indites and accuses him; Lord, this is the
man, an Enemy to thy Majesty, a Traitor against the Truth, that has conspired
with Sin and Satan, and his secret Lusts against the blood of Jesus, and the
power of Grace and Godliness: What? is this He that has born a privy grudg
against the power of the Word, a spleen against the Saints, that has committed
such and such sins? Yea Lord, He has done so, and been so, at such a time, and
such a place, in such a company, he has been guilty of such abominations; nay
(says Conscience) you know that I know, such a night, what privy plottings,
and cunning conspiracies your heart, and your lusts, your pride and (...), and
uncleanness had, what consultations you had against the Lord: take him therefore
horror and anguish of heart, keep him in bondage and thraldom, until he be
content to repent, to take shame, and bid an everlasting (...) to (...) (...):
with that the flashes of Hell fire seize upon his soul, the venom of the
vengeance of the Lord pursues him, his Arrows stick fast in him, and the poison
thereof (...) up his (...): the galls and stabs of Conscience make him bleed
inwardly: so (...) all his friends, delights, comforts, (...), corruptions,
cannot bail him, or pluck (...) this hook of horror out of his heart: And thus
(...) poor sinner like a Malefactor goes up and down (...) his Jailer, an
accusing Conscience to attend (...); the chains of darkness, of horror and
guilt to (...) and guive him, that he becomes weary of his (...), and not worth
the ground he goes on: until he (...) to confessing, bewailing, repenting,
reforming, (...), yea, engaging himself to his Conscience, (...) that as in
Gods sight, that if he will abate his (...), he will obey his commands, listen
to his (...), and yield unto whatever either it shall reveal (...) him, or
require of him. So that Conscience seems (...) be quieted for the while, and
abates the soul of (...) overbearing horror, lets him out of prison upon (...)
sufficient bail.

When his accursed crew, the lusts with whom he parley with them, to give
entertainment to them, (...) so to be overcome by them. So that now he is (...)
deeply endeared to them as ever, follows them as eagerly, and takes as much
contentment in them as (...) do in their ancient play fellows, and (...) when
they have been long parted: 'Till (...) lays the last hook upon him, and rends
him al in pieces. As it forewarned him of sin that it might not (...)
committed, and accused him for sin when it (...) committed: so now it becomes
an Executioner (...) the final Doom and Judgment which belongs (...) him;
because against all means of redress he (...) continues in his sin, so that now
Conscience (...) not present him before the Tribunal of the Lord (...) trial or
accusation, for that is over; but as one (...) is convicted and condemned, he
drags him to (...), 1 John, 3. 20. If our hearts condemn (...) God is greater
than our hearts: Prove. 29. 1. (...) that being often admonished hardens his
heart, (...) shall perish without Remedy; thou art the man, (...) is thy
condition, this will be thy condemnation, (...) have been often admonished,
(...) such a time, (...) such a time, by a (...), a Friend, a Minister, (...)
did thy heart rise with (...) and indignation, (...) not able to abide the man,
nor to undergo the (...) nition; therefore thou (...) perish, (...) there is
(...) Remedy: with that Conscience delivers him up (...) the hands of the
tormentors; take him ye (...) spirits, depart from hence to thy grave, and
(...) thence to the place of Execution. He would (...) (...) his evil, let him
perish in it, he would not (...) reformed, let him be for ever accursed: So
that (...) sinner conceives himself past hope and help, looks (...) very hour
and moment to be turned off the (...) For as a man arrested for one debt, may
be a (...) some few pounds, many thousands are presently (...) (...) upon him,
al Creditors come in, with Bill after (...), so that as a man utterly undone,
lie he may, and (...) he must, but to be delivered he cannot once look.

So the (...) being under the arrest of Conscience for the transgression of the
Law, the Gospel now comes in upon the sinner, his Bill comes in fresh upon him,
he is arrested at the suit of Patience which (...) has abused, of Mercy, which
he has slighted, long Sufferance, which he has perverted; they al (...) for
Justice, Justice Lord against this sinful (...). So that the sinner conceives
himself in the (...) of the Devil really, and irrecoverably in Hell. Lo, says
the sinner, The Devil, the Devil; there he is, he is come for me. When he lies
panting upon his sickbed, if he do but close his eyes together to sleep, his
dreams (...) him, his thoughts (...) him, and he awakens gastered and
distracted, as though he were posting down to the pit, he (...) up, and Raves;
Why go then; I must go. His Friends pity him, weep over him, and endeavor to
(...) him, Why, you are in your bed, and amongst your dear Friends, Whither will
you go? I must go (...) Hell, Satan is sent from God to fetch me; Oh my
stubbornness, my carelessness, my contempt of the Lord and his Truth, has
justly brought me to this. Why, but there is yet Grace and Mercy; Oh! it had
been happy for me I had never had the offer of Grace and Mercy; Its Mercy that
I have rejected, and Grace that I have opposed, and cast all the compassions of
the Lord behind my back, to follow my (...) Courses. And with what face can I
beg Mercy who have abused it? crave Grace who have opposed (...)? He cannot be
saved that Mercy cannot but (...), and Mercy should be unmerciful to its (...)
if (...) should not cast away him that has cast away it: But do you now judge
so? and would you now do so as formerly? you have conceived the greatest (...)
in your sinful distempers, pleased your self in your pride, and looseness, and
vanities, taken content in your Corruptions, in casting away the holy Commands
of God: Would you give your self the like Liberty? Or can you take the (...)
Comfort in the same ways now? Oh no: I now see how sin has deceived me, and
mine own corrupt heart has couzened my self, that which was my pleasure and
delight, is now my plague, my poison: but would you be content to part with
these, and take Grace and Mercy in the room of them? Oh that I might: but there
is no reason that I should expect it, (...) God should do it. Why, if you would
have mercy, God will show you mercy: Then the Lord give me a Will, and give me
Mercy, and give me Grace whether I will or no, it would be better with me then,
than now: Hos. 2. 8.

By this time the Heart and Corruption are almost pulled asunder; therefore the
last Cord is this, The Lord by the hand of his Almighty Spirit (...) pluck it
quite asunder, that the Will of the sinner may never soulder again with his
Corruption, nor suit any (...) with them: Its the same power that raised Christ
from the dead, Ephesians. 1. 19. Its the same power that raises the dead to life,
Joh. 5. 25. The dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and those that do
hear shall live. Yea, the Lord is said to Create lips to speak Peace, Isa. 57.
19. He puts forth a creating power, when he will lead and heal the sinner. The
Lord Christ commands sin as sometimes Satan, Come out of him thou unclean
spirit, and trouble him no more: That which all the Disciples did not, could
not, Christ did there in the possession bodily, so here spiritually.

How this holy kind of Violence may best be discerned. I shall Answer to this in
several CONCLUSIONS.

The Will of a man is in it self, and in its own Conclusion. 1.
nature, a capable subject of Sin and Grace. I say, Look at it as in its own
Nature considered, both these in a right order, and according to a rule of
right (...) may be in it successively: As the same vessel is capable of puddle
and pure water, the same eye is capable of sight and blindness: So the Will at
several times, as several impressions may be made upon it, is capable of Sin
and Grace. Jer. 4. 3. Break up (...) fallow ground of your hearts: The Nature
of man is arrable ground: though now it lie fallow by (...) of the weeds of
wickedness, the brambles of Baggage, base lusts have overrun it, yet it may be
(...), the soul may be converted again: So men are called Living stones, 1 Pet.
2. 5. Though the frame of the heart like that goodly building of Jerusalem have
not a stone left upon a stone, yet the stones will (...) again.

And hence, though there be not the next passive power in a soul possessed with
sin to receive the things of God, because the soul is wholly possessed with
corruption, and so becomes wholly indisposed thereunto. It being impossible
that Two Contraries should be in the same subject at the same time; that the
body distempered with unnatural heats should receive a natural and moderate
temper at the same time cannot be, yet remove the unnatural, and the body is
capable of the natural. Hence it is the soul has ever in it a remote power to
partake of Grace. As the Soul is ever seeking of a better, but because it
cannot meet with it, it is unsatisfied, which shows it was made for a better.

Which makes me that I cannot yet see, Why there is any need to fly to the
Obed ential power, which men marvelous Judicious, betake themselves to in this
Dispute. When a Creature has not a capability in its kind and nature to
entertain such an impression further than it yields to the Almighty hand of God
to make it what he will, As Matt. 3. 9. God is able of stones to raise up
Children unto Abraham: Stones will yield to God to make them Children. But under
favor I conceive that is not here needful, That God should make a new Faculty,
or give another natural power than before, as he must do, if he make Bread or
Children of stones.

As a Wheel that runs wrong, you need not another Wheel, but another, and a
right (...) of (...).

The Faculty of the Will attended only in its natural Concl. 2.
being and ability, cannot Will a spiritual or supernatural good; but must have
aspiratual and supernatural power put into it, to enable it to put forth a
(...) work.

Because nothing can act beyond the bounds of its Reas. 1.
being and ability: The Trees grow, but move not; the bruit Creatures move, but
Reason not; Wicked men can Reason, and Will natural and corrupt things, because
they have Reason, Nature, and Corruption: And Morral things also, because they
have some (...) of the Spirit as will carry them to act seemly between man and
man; but to close with God and his Holiness, and the purity and spiritualness
of a Rule they cannot. 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural man receives not the things of
God. Prove. 24. 7. Wisdom is too high for a fool.

If the Will out of a Nature Ability, or Faculty, Reas. 2
could choose a supernatural good, then where there is this Faculty, this act
may be put forth. Then the Devils and Damned in Hell may love God above al,
make choice of the chiesest good, and close with the last end, and so might be
happy. For they have this faculty of Will; The Promise is full and free. Let
him that Wills take of the water of life and live for ever, Rev. 22. 17.

Hence its plain its a false Opinion and grounded on a false bottom and
principle; that to have an indifferency to any thing propounded, to take it or
not to take it, is that liberty which issues from the nature of the Will.
Because it issues not from the Faculty at al to will a supernatural good, no
more than from a dead man to take meat. As a Wheel does not run round because
wood or iron, but because the art of wheel-making is imprinted upon it; because
so framed and fashioned. If therefore the question be asked, If the Will be not
free in Preparation. Answ. There is no Will in the first work of Preparation,
there is the Faculty of Will, but not the act of Will.

The Corruption that takes possession of the Will Concl. 3.
and rules in it, it utterly indisposeth the soul to receive any spiritual
power from God, and consequently disenables it to put forth any spiritual or
supernatural work. It is not subject to the Law of God, neither can be, Romans 8.
7. It will not beat the impression of the power of the Spirit. Job. 8. 37. The
Word of Christ found no place in the Jews that were under the power of their
Corruptions, Acts 13. 46. They put away the Word from them: yea, Truth is a
trouble and a torment to a Carnal heart, and the nature of the thing evinceth
so much. Matthew 6. 24. Ye cannot serve two Masters, God and Mammon: Joh. 5.
44. Ye cannot believe that seek honor one from another. Romans 2. 4. The hard
heart cannot repent. Shut up, we are under unbelief, and we shut out the Lord
Jesus, who comes not unless the door be opened. It is not possible that
contraries should be at the same time in the same subject.

Though there be no force afforded to the Faculty Concl. 4.
of the Will, yet the power of Corruption must by a holy kind of Violence be
removed, before any spiritual power can be imprinted upon the soul, whereby it
may put forth any spiritual act.

First I say, There is no violence offered to the Faculty of (...) (...). For
that (as it has been proved before) is a capable subject, both of Grace and
Sin, successively and in order, as the air is capable of light and darkness,
indifferently, and the one being removed, the other is entertained with ease,
and readiness, without any compulsion, there needs none, it requires none here.
As the same wax will receive several and contrary impressions, at several times;
so the soul which has been made partaker of the image of God, is also capable
of the print and impression of the image of old Adam, when once the gracious
disposition has been defaced, it is capable of receiving the impression of Gods
Image again when once Adams image is dispossessed.

Yet Secondly, There must be a holy kind of violence offered unto Corruption,
before it can be dispossessed and removed, and so way and room made for the
entertainment of Faith and Christ thereby.

Reasons are,

Either Corruption must by violence be taken away Reas. 1
or else it will naturally and of its own accord go away, and depart from the
soul. For it has been in the former Conclusions manifected, That there must be
a spiritual power put into the will before it can put forth a (...) act. And
while Corruption takes place, there is no place of entertainment (...) this
spiritual ability; therefore Corruption must be removed by violence. Naturally
it will not go away, therefore by constraint it must be forced away. It will not
depart away of its own accord, because of the (...) and naturalness it (...) to
the heart in which it is. The Eye will not go out of the head in which it is
seated, unless it be plucked out: The hand will not fall off from the body unless
it be cut off: The Soul would not willingly forsake the Body unto which it is
received, and in which it takes up its abode, unless by some (...) (...) which
breaks the union betwixt it and the body it being driven away, and forced away.
Now our lusts in our hearts are like the Members in our bodies, Col. 3. 6. They
are tender as the eye, (...) as the hand, as dear as our souls, yea, even the
soul of our souls, and life of our lives, while we are and remain in our
natural and corrupt estate. Therefore they must by constraint be driven out,
they will not go out. yea, it is against Reason, and in truth cross to common
Sense, That the quality should of its own nature (...) from the subject, they
who have agreement one with another, should as enemies, and as (...) as be at
ods and difference go from the other: and this is the Condition and Disposition
(...) (...) the nature of man, they are in the nearest League of love one with
another, and therefore of themselves as in truth they cannot, so they would not
depart one from another, Jer. 13. 23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the
Leopard his spots? Then may you also which are (...) to do evil. They are not
spots that are taken occasionally, or sootiness that is smeared upon them, but
they issue out of their natural Constitution, and the very seed which they are
made of: and therefore their nature must be altered before they can be removed.

Look we at the Opposition between the Spirit of Reas. 2
Grace that does remove the Corruption, and the (...) it (...) that is removed:
And we shall (...) have (...) Evidence, and that (...) of the former Conclusion.

One Contrary drives away another out of the subject in which it is by
Constraint and Violence: But the work of the Spirit as contrary to Sin, drives
it out of the soul in which it is seated as in its natural subject, therefore
this must be done with violence. The first part is plain by the Principles of
(...) (...) received, i. e. That the ground of al Constraint is that crosiness
and contrariety between the (...) of things, and their actions: every thing is
(...) to that which is suitable to its own nature, our (...) its own proper
power and inclination; there needs no constraint to make the Fire burn, the
(...) (...) roar, and (...) things to descend, a Wolf to prey and raven: But
to make heavy things to ascend, the Lion to be as mild as a Lamb, the (...) as
harmleis as a Kid, there must be a strong hand of an almighty power to make
such a change, and by a kind of violence to (...) the crossness and (...) which
carries these in professed opposition. The second part is as (...) out of
pregnant proof from Scripture, which settles it as sure as Mount Zion. Romans 8.
2. The Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has freed me from the Law of
Sin and Death. There is a Sovereignty of (...) rule set up in the Soul, and
therefore it gives Law to the whole man, for that is the prerogat ve of a
supreme Commander; Now there is a Repeal of these Laws, a Crushing, and a
Conquering of the Supreme power by the Spirit of Life in Christ, which
therefore disannuls al those Edicts and Commands that Carnal sensual Lusts of
the Old man had thus set up and erected. 2 Cor. 10. 3, 4, 5. The Weapons of our
warfare are mighty through God: When the Gospel carries the power of God with
it to (...), it flings down the strong holds that (...) themselves against
Christ, and (...) every (...) to the obedience of Christ. Thus it (...) (...)
(...) Corruptions. And this is done in way of Contrariety, Gal. 5. 17. The
Spirit lusts against (...) (...), and the flesh against the spirit; and these
two are contrary. And therefore its termed a Fight and (...), Romans 7. 23. I see
another law in my Members rebelling against the Law of my mind (...) carrying
of me (...). Fighting is (...) with (...) and violence; where there is (...)
and Enmity, there is (...) and (...), not kindness and persuasion only. Such is
the Work here.

Look we at the Nature of the Work: That also (...). 3
will of necessity require as much, Whether (...) Sin, or Satan? the Dominion of
the (...) is (...), and the Power of the other (...), and (...) of these can be
brought about but by a (...) of violence.

1 The Dominion of Sin: The Lord now quels and crusheth utterly, that
sovereignty and supremacy it has formerly exercised over the sinner: So the
Apostle, Romans 6. 14. brings in this as the ground of that spiritual deliverance
from the authority of our Distempers, Sin shall not have dominion over you,
because you are not under the Law, but under Grace: When ever we be come under
the Covenant of Grace, and the Lord Jesus the second Adam (...) us and begets
us to himself, as soon as we are of the seed of that Covenant, he thereby takes
off that dominion unto which we were formerly subject, while we were under the
Covenant of the Law broken, it did break us, and deliver us to the authority of
our Distempers: This was typed by the year of Jubilee under the Old Law, when
the Slave or Servant was freed from his Masters rule and claim; and therefore
when our Savior is promised as he that should bring Jacob (...) unto God, and
so become light and salvation to the Ends of the Earth, Isa. 49. 5. 8, 9. To be
the head of the Covenant of Grace: And that which is added is mavelous
strange, To establish the Earth, and to cause to inherit the desolate places.

That restoration which comes by Christ, it brings a new face or frame upon
the Creatures, even those that are of the most despicable condition, desolate
persons, and hearts, and lives; when wicked men and their ways are like
wildernesses overgrown with weeds. Then the Lord (...) to the prisoners, go
forth, and to such as are in darknest show your selves. They that were buried
and over whelmed with the dimness of their own distempers and delusions, they
should come out of the Dungeon and Grave of darkness: Be revealed; the word is
in the Pastive: the Truth should be revealed in you, to you, to give you a
light you had not, to act you, and carry you to see that you did not: your
selves should be revealed to your selves, and your sins to your souls, the
first is a power put into them, the second an act wrought in them, and by them,
the word in the Original signifying both. So that though they might be pursued
by their sins, they should never be imprisoned more, that was not now their
state to be Prisoners, but to be free men for ever, though clouded with
darkness of their sins, yet never overwhelmed with darkness, but they should be
able to see their sins, and to see a way out of them, in which they should walk.

This is that also which is expressed by the Apostle John, 1 John 3. 5. 8. That
our Savior came to destroy the works of the Devil: Now he was the Author of
sin, and the first sinner, and therefore called the Evil One, the Father of
Lies, and that when he tells Lies, he tells them of his own, the first Original
comes from him, and al lusts are but his brood, John, 8. 44. The Lusts of your
Father ye will do; they are but the seed of Satan cast into the souls of men.
Now Christ came to destroy all these.

That which destroys corruption must needs offer a kind of violence to
corruption, for each thing desires the preservation of it self, and it is
against the will of sin to destroy it self: It Is Calvin's Expression upon the
place, The works of the Devil will never destroy themselves: therefore Christ
by his Spirit must destroy them by a strong hand: It is therefore a sleepy
Dotage, and a deluded Dream to make such an Explication; that by some Moral
persuasions presented unto the blind mind of a sinner, sin should be persuaded
to destroy it self: or (which is the (...) of that Opinion rightly expressed)
that there should be some Arguments propounded to corruption to draw out the
power of corruption, to destroy the power of corruption; In which falsehood
there is such a senseless kind of silliness, that it is a wonder that men who
arrogate the excellency of the depths of disputes, and would have the world
conceive them the darlings of Wisdom, cut out of purpose to search into the
secrets of al (...), should ever be taken aside by such a dream; but that the
Lord in his just Judgment righteously delivers men up to their own devices,
when they despise his Counsel. For better explication than that which I make,
no man can ever make of that imagination according to truth; for a moral (...)
in the proper Nature and work of it, is not to give power to the subject that
had it not, but to draw forth the power it has to perform any action; so that
when a sinner (as we have proved) is wholly acted by the power and (...) of his
corruptions, things in that are spiritual, i. e. though he has some relics
of the Image yet left within him, some common stock of Moral abilities
imprinted upon him, yet whatever his shows, his appearances, his performances
be in Civil Services, the sovereignty of corruption in the heart is such it
overrules all, to false ends, and suiting of it self, and giving satisfaction
to the flesh; so that in the (...), to stir up the sovereign power of sin in
the soul of a (...) to forsake sin, is to draw forth the power of (...) to
(...) it self, which has not the least appearance of a (...) in (...) with it.
So that I conclude this third Argument which is open and plain.

I hat which destroys the power of sin, that offers a holy kind of violence to
it. But the Lord by his (...) destroys the power of sin, therefore he offers a
holy kind of violence to it.

Hence, before we pass (for to this place this Consideration is proper) we may
see the difference between restraining Grace in the Reprobate and Hypocrite,
and saving, and effectually converting Grace.

The act of sin only in the one is hindered; the power of sin in the other is
subdued, the one curbs and confines the corrupt Nature, as a Fox in a chain, a
Wolf in a grinn, they have the same Nature still, but they have not the same
liberty to put forth their ravenous desires and (...), and therefore will do it
when opportunity serves. Converting Grace severs the subtle and cruel
dispositions from them (...), and overcomes and conquers the cruelty of their
Natures, so that as they do not, so in truth they cannot put forth such savage
practices as before: The one abates the resistance that is in the heart against
God, his Truth, and Ways for the while, makes a man's distempers recoyl and
(...) themselves, and makes them not appear for the present: But this takes
away the Sovereignty and prevailing power of resistance. As it is in War, when
a pitched field is fought, and the Bodies of both Armies meet, each standing in
the defense and (...) of its own (...); but when the day is got, and the battle
won, and the forces of the (...) not only defeated and (...), but slain and cut
in pieces, so that their strength is broken, and they utterly disabled to make
head, with any hope of recovering the field, or repairing their losses; there
may happily some scattered companies be sculking here and there, and pilfering
and molesting the State, but they have no hope to recover their power; the
Country and Kingdom falls wholly to the Conqueror. So here, when the corrupt
heart comes in professed opposition against the Lord Jesus, in the power of his
Ordinances, and the Lord is pleased to put sorth his power to the vanquishing,
and subduing the soul unto himself; the sinner gathers up al his forces as loath
to lose his delightful lusts (as sometimes the (...) against the coming of the
Ark, 1 Samuel 4. 7, 8, 9. The Philistims were afraid, and they said, God is come
into the Camp, and they said, woe unto us, who shall deliver us from the hands
of these mighty Gods? Be strong and quit your selves like men, O ye Philistines,
that ye be not Servants to the Hebrews:) So, the soul rises up in way of
resistance against the Word and Power of his Grace, but in the issue the
Dominion of these distempers is so quelled, and the power of them so crushed,
that it can never make head against the power of the Spirit; only the remainder
of those wretched lusts will be still pilfering provoking and molesting the
good Spirit of God, and work of his Grace; but can never recover the Rule it
once had; but the Country, the Heart and Conscience of a sinner falls wholly to
the dispose of Christ. Thus Saul goes into the field, has a pitched Battle
against the Lord Christ, as resolving to fight it out to the last man; but in
the end, when he saw there was no hope to prevail, instead of fiercely
resisting, he humbly gives way, and lays down not only the act of opposing,
but the will of opposing, Lord (says he) what will thou have me to do? This
seems to be the meaning of that old Sentence of Austine, which all Divines
embrace and follow, and I desire no more for the cause if it be rightly scanned
and considered; God makes of an unwilling will, a willing will: For the right
understanding of which Truth, observe these Particulars:

1 The Will is wholly unwilling to receive any (...) good, but carried out by
the power of corruption against it. 2 Willingness must be wrought where this
unwillingness is. 3 The Will must cease to be unwilling, and resistance must be
removed before submission can be brought into it: Unwillingness cannot will
Good: Aversion cannot will Conversion. 4 What will remove or take away this
unwillingness? It Is impossible it self should remove or destroy it self: There
is nothing in the Will besides that can do it, for it has no Spiritual power
to good: therefore there must be an Almighty constraining power that must by a
holy kind of violence take that away., and then another may be brought in.
But if the Will do not freely Will the removal Octject.
of corruption, then is it compelled contrary to the nature of the Will, and
the way of Gods Providence, as implying a contradiction.

It follows not: Either it freely wills the removing Answ.
of sin, or else it is compelled thereunto; I put a third, A sinner has no
will at all to it; for to will not to do it freely is contrary to the Nature of
the Will, and the rules of right Reason: But to have the work done without the
will of man, which has no hand in it, is a sound truth and a safe assertion.

These Three are apparently distinct,

1 To Will freely. 2 To Will by Constraint. 3 Not to Will at al: But to have
the work done only from the Will of anonother.
But if there be a kind of Violence offered to the Object. 2
Will of a Sinner in the removal of his sin, then the Will is compelled. But
there is a kind of Violence offered (for that's it which is affirmed) therefore
the Will is Compelled, which must not be granted.

I Answer Three Things.

1 When we say the Will is free and cannot be Answ.
forced; the right meaning is this, TO WILL, is, when a man is a cause by
Counsel of his Work, so that when Reason has dictated and discovered what is
fit to be done the will out of a sovereignty of authority and inward power
expresses her pleasure to make choice of it: To be forced to do a thing is by
a strong hand of outward Constraint against our inward inclination and
disposition to be compelled to do a thing. (...) Two cannot stand together as
being apparently contradictory the One to the other. To do a thing out of mine
own power, proper, and inward inclination: To do a thing by outward (...). For
it is al one as to say. We should do a thing out of our inward inclination, and
not out of our inward inclination: A Cause acting by Counsel, should be a Cause
acting by necessity, one Contrary should be another.

2 This act may be opposed from without: yea, act and power may be destroyed,
without any prejudice to the liberty of Will, or any way of Providence, or a
reasonable Proceeding. So the text, Ezekiel. 36. 27. I will take away the heart of
stone, and give unto them a heart of (...), a new heart and a new spirit will I
put within them. Gal. 5. 24. They who are Christ's have crucified the flesh with
(...) affections and (...). Original sin is flesh, the (...) are the actings of
it, and the affections are (...) (...) that are apt and ready to entertain such
provocations, and to break out into such (...). Its impossible that while a
thing acts by his own inward inclination, it should by outward force act
against its inclination, though its possible and reasonable that the Lord cross
both, yea, destroy both act, and inclination and al, as he will. God (as we may
speak with reverence and fear) cannot make nature remaining to act against
(...): for then, when there is the greatest Consension, there should be
greatest opposition, and one thing should be opposite to its self. The (...)
(...) are the principles of Constitution should be Causes of Destruction, which
Reason abhors; but yet he can destroy nature without any breach of Rule, or
Reason: So here, God can destroy the will and power of sinning, according to all the rules of Reason and (...), but its against both, That God should compel the
will of sinning, to be willing to destroy it self.

3 In this Work of Drawing, and in this Act of God whereby the will of sinning
is removed, the will is a mere patient and sufferer, and though the Will while
it acts by its own inclination cannot be compelled to act against it, yet it
may be compelled to bear and suffer the destroying hand of Gods power to take
away this corrupt (...) in the sovereignty of it.

As the Wills of the Devils and Damned in Hell are forced to suffer, and that
unwillingly, without any impeachment of their Freedom and Liberty of their Wills
in commission of any sin, which they daily practice. Art thou come to torment
us before the time, say they to our Savior: It was a torment to them to be
crossed and plagued, yet it could not be avoided. As it is in a sick body, the
power of the Physic which is sovereign and healing, it will by little and
little abate the distemper, and allay the violent work of the Humor, whether it
be in overmuch healing, aching, pinching, and at length consume the malignant
Humor it self: Its reasonable that the noysom Humors should bear the power of
the Physic that will consume them, but its against reason to think that they
should consume themselves.

Hold therefore these Three Things.

1 Its not against the Liberty of the Will, that the Act of Corruption should
be Opposed, and the power subdued. 2 Then the Will is said to be Compelled, not
when it suffers only force from without. But when its forced from without to do
against its own inclination from within. 3 Where the Will has no power to put
forth any Act upon any Object, there is no Will properly to speak, and there
can be no Violence or Compulsion which can be prejudicial.
Consider the Nature of this Work in regard of Reas. 4
the power of Satan: Here also a holy Violence will of necessity be required;
For Satan (as we read before) he exercises a sovereign Command over the
corrupt heart of a Sinner, rules them as he list, and takes them Captive at his
will, 2 Timothy 2. last. Now Satan will not, nay in truth he cannot be entreated,
but must be Compelled to lay down his jurisdiction. Heb. 2. 14. Through death
he destroyed him that had the power of death, that is the Devil: He destroyed
him, that is, He took off al his activity, and the sovereignty of power that he
exercised: Acts, 26. 18. Paul was sent to turn men from darkness to light, from
the power of Satan to God. That is, To bring them from under the rule and
regiment of the government and dominion of Satan: From the Claim of his power,
not from the malice of his pursuit. Luke, 11. 21. When the stronger man comes
and takes from him all his Armor: This is not done with the will and
approbation of Satan, but by Compulsion: For do but weigh a little what manner
of Construction in a common apprehension can be made of a Morral Persuasion in
this Case: Namely, The Lord Christ casts in so many Convicting Arguments into
the mind of Satan, and stirs up that malice and envy that is within him, that
he does persuade Satan to destroy his own malice and envy; yea, persuades him
to lay down his power, and to make choice, and desire that the Spirit of Christ
should exercise power in the Soul. He Conquers him only by persuading of him,
to yield willing subjection to the power of Christ, which is indeed to make
Satan a Saint, and the Devil not to be the Prince of darkness.

The Power and Rule of Satan cannot be Destroyed without violence, but in this
work Satan his power is destroyed, and himself bound and Conquered; therefore
its done by Violence.

Fifthly, Now we are to enquire,

How the plucking of the Soul from Sin, and Fifth Particular to be (...).
Drawing unto Christ is accomplished by this holy Violence.

To which I Answer, 1 Generally. 2 Particularly.


1 Generally, thus: All that hold that Sin and Satan had of the Soul, and all that authority they exercised in it is now removed, and the bent and set of the
heart is now under the hand of the Spirit of God.

The Lord comes now to manifest his claim, and to make good and challenge the
right he has unto the soul through his Christ whom he has appointed to bring
his unto himself: This is his good pleasure for the execution whereof he has
sent the Lord: Jesus. Isa. 49. 45. Therefore he is said to be formed from the
womb, to be a servant unto God the Father, to restore the preserved of Israel,
and to be the salvation of God to the ends of the earth.

Hence that of our Savior Christ, Joh. 10. 16. Other sheep I have, there is the
ground, those I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; they are mine, I have
died for them, sin and Satan shall not keep them, shall not hold them; hands off
sin, hands off Satan, I must Humble them, and Call them, and Justify them, and
(...) them, and Save them for ever. And therefore the Lord was typed out in the
Parable of the Owner, that left Ninty and nine to seek the lost sheep, Luke,
15. 4, 5. And when it could not seek its own good or Christ, or find either,
the Lord sought it up and found it, and brought it home upon his shoulder.

2 'More Particularly: The accomplishment of this Work Discovers it self in
Four Particulars.

The Lord calls in that Commission which formerly he put into the hands of
Satan, to lay hold of the heart of a sinner, as a Malefactor attached of Law of
Liberty and Life, he should be made a slave unto sin, and subject to death, and
that for ever, to be kept in the Chains of darkness until the day of (...)
great Goal Delivery, and the Declaration of the fierce wrath of God, and this
Durante been placito: during the pleasure of the Lord, or until ye shall
understand his Majesty's pleasure to the (...). For still you must remember,
That as in Courts and Course of Justice amongst men upon earth, it is so in the
Court of Heaven, and the Proceedings of the Almighty, the Malefactor is the
Kngs prisoner. The Jailer is but the Keeper or under Officer, betrusted with
the Execution of Justice, the Lord is the sole Commander of men's souls, and of
life and death, unto which they are liable by reason of their sins: This being
the Commission the Lord put into the hands of Satan and sin for the present,
unless any Express appear to the contrary: He is now pleased to signify to the
Prince of Darkness, and to the Power of Hell, and to those Damned Spirits by
the Ministry of the Word in the mouths of his Servants, and by the Hand and
Almighty Operation of his Spirit: Be it known (...) you, you Principalities of
(...) and spiritual wickednesses, that take possession of, and rule in the
hearts of the Children of disobedience, that upon the first hearing of this
holy Word and Message dispensed by my faithful Servant as a warrant under my
hand, that it is my Royal Will and Command, That you forthwith let loose that
poor (...), who has been long prisoner in the chains of Darkness: For my
Justice is fully answered, and satisfaction fully accepted: Fail not at your
(...), under (...) (...) displeasure of the Almighty. Dated at the Court of
Mercy before all worlds, published this present day and instant, according to
the counsel of mine own Will.

This puts the powers of Darkness, the Devils and his Angels to deep
Consultation what to do, they see they have no warrant now to hold the sinner
any longer, and yet they have no will to let him go. They are (...) loath to part
with him, and yet their power is gone whereby they have hitherto kept him, For
the strength of (...) is the law, 1 Cor. 15. 56. And this is to take away the
Devils Armor, Luke, 11. 22. When Justice will deliver the sinner, Satan has
no power to hold him. As our Savior said to Pilate, when (...) said, I have
power to bind thee, or to loose thee; our Savior (...), Thou had no power,
(...) was given thee from above, John, 19. 11. So Satan has no power but what
is given from above, according to the Edict of Gods revenging Justice and their
just deservings: Therefore now God the Father, through the perfect Death and
satisfaction (...) the Lord Jesus has yielded, the Edict of (...) is (...),
and therefore the Devils cannot (...). As it was said touching our Savior, when
he was in (...) (...) was impossible he should be (...), 2 Acts, 24. (...) Gods
Justice was answered to here,

When the Devils power is now gone, and that Justice has signified her
pleasure, That the Prisoner must be set loose, they then begin to pretend the
right they have, and the claim they can make yet unto the Sinner. Therefore Sin
and (...) seem (...) plead their own Cause in way of Justice, and that which
cannot be gainsaid, as that the souls, of such (...) Creatures do appertain to
them; for besides (says Satan) the Statute Law, The soul that sins, that soul
must die. The Evidence is clear from their practice and experience: Whether
these be the seed of the Serpent, because they express the nature of the
serpent in their actions, Is it not written, John, 8 44. You are of your Father
the Devil, for the lusts of your Father you will do. These are they whose
hearts if they were discerned, whose carriages if they were traced and taken
notice of, would give in Evidence that the (...) of the Serpent was in the one,
and the venom of the Serpent in the other: Why, Have they not, nay, continue
they not to do the lusts of the Devil to this day? They have the Spirit of sin
and Satan within them: and therefore they are their Children, and therefore sin
and Satan (...) a right and title to them. Is it not again writ, Romans 6. 16.
Know ye not that to whom you yield your selves servants to obey, his servants
you are. As who should say, It is a ruled case, common and confessed by the
verdict of al. If ye yield your selves to obey sin, you are the servants of
sin: therefore says sin and Satan, since we have such law on our side for our
right, we crave our right; for these have yielded themselves servants to my
temptations says Satan, and to my allurements says the World, and to my
instigation says Sin, therefore they are our Servants, therefore let us have
them still. To which the Lord Answers, and Justice also Replies, While they did
remain the seed of the Serpent, and in the state of the Children of wrath, so
long you have reason to have them, and right to challenge them, and therefore
it is you have detained them as Prisoners to your pleasure to this day: Yea,
but says the Father; The Lord Jesus whom I have sent, he has undertaken to
pacify my wrath, and purchase their deliverance, and so has done, for he has
bought them of Divine Justice, and therefore has right now to make them the
seed of the Covenant of Grace, and to bring them to himself, and life; as they
are, and have been the seed of the Serpent and estranged from me and happiness:
and therefore he has not only done for them what was required on their behalf,
but he will work in them what may be answerable to the Covenant and the
Condition of it, therefore your claim is nothing. This under correction, I take
to be the meaning of that place, Romans 8: 2, 3, 4. which is mysterious and dark,
and dazels the eyes of Judicious Interpreters, that several senses appear to
the several apprehensions of men, we will open it briefly as we pass by, and
apply it to our (...). And that which I suppose will give some light to the true
intent of the place, and will be as a Key to the Scripture and set open the
sense, that an easy apprehension may give a sad guess at the purpose of the
Spirit, is this, I suppose the words must be understood of the work (...) the
Spirit wrought in us, and the impressions of Grace left upon the Soul, not of
the work of Justification, which is wholly without us in the Lord Jesus our
Surety, and only counted ours. And this that Phrase in the 4 th. verse. seems to
me of necessity to imply. Where it is evident that the end of the former work
of Christ is made this, That the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in
us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit: Whereas in the work of
Justification, the truth of the work, the meaning of the Lord, and expression
of Scripture is other, 2 Cor. 5. last. Christ was made sin, that we might be
made the righteousness of God in him, not in our selves: That Righteousness for
which we are Justified is fulfilled for us by Christ and is in him, its not
fulfilled in us. For it is the Doctrine of the Popish Sect, who are adversaries
to Gods Grace, that we are justified for any thing wrought in us, and for which
we are for ever to renounce them. And hence it is, Phil. 3. 7. Not having mine
own Righteousness, but that which is of God in Christ: Therefore not in us
properly. This being granted, I shall shortly give you the meaning of this 3 d.
Verse. For what the Law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh, God
sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin
in the flesh: The Apostle had evidenced the state of a man in Christ by the
fruits of it, He walks not after the flesh, but after the spirit, Verse. 1. The
Question might be, How comes that about? He Answers, Verse. 2. The Law of the
spirit of life which is in Christ (as the Head) has freed me (and so al his
Body, and each Member) from the Law of Sin: that is, The Sovereign Rule of Sin
and Death. But why was the Spirit of Christ necessarily required to do this,
since the mind of God is in the Law revealed, and my Obedience required
therein? Is it not enough that I understand this, and thereby be enabled to
follow it? The Apostle answers, No: It was impossible for the Law to enable a
man to walk after the Spirit, and to be free from the Law of sin, for so the
Causal [ For] knits this Verse as a proof of the former, not because the Law
was faulty, but because our Flesh, our natures were corrupt, and thence it is
not enough, the Lord should tell and teach, unless there be some other Spirit
and Power to enable.

But how then comes this other Spirit? He Answers, (...). 3. God (...) his Son
to take our Nature upon him, who was like unto us in all but sin, and he sent
him to take our Nature (...); i. e. For the Removal of sin: And these words are
to be referred to those going before, he sent not to those after he condemned
sin. As thus, He sent his Son in the similitude of sinful Flesh, for sin, for
the removal of sin; and he condemned sin in the Flesh, i. e. In the Virtue of
the Sufferings of his Flesh he did abolish and destroy the (...) and
Jurisdiction of sin, so that sin as we may say has lost his Cause, and is as
we (...) to speak, non suited; fails wholly in all the Pleas it can or does make
for any right it has to the Soul of a sinner: As we say of a man that is Cast
in Law, that the Cause went against him, His Cause is Condemned, or his Cause
is Damned, his Claim is false and feeble, and has no force to carry the thing
he would. So here, Sin fails of its Claim, is wholly Cast in the Suit that it
makes for the Challenge of the Soul: Divine Justice delivered it into its power
because it was wronged, but must now deliver it out of the Claim and Authority
of sin, being satisfied: And from hence this will be attained, That the
Righteousness which the Law requires, may by the Spirit of Christ be wrought in
me, (...) by way of (...), hereafter in perfection.

To the like purpose is the meaning of that place also, 1 (...). 4. 6. For, for
this end was the Gospel preached to them that are dead, that they might be
judged according to men in the flesh, but live according to God in the spirit.
In the sirst Verse, from the Death and Sufferings of our Savior, he persuaded
those to whom he wrote, That they should (...) that Application by way of
proportion, That (...) who suffered in the flesh, i. e. Had their fleshly (...)
(...) by the Death of Christ, should cease from (...). This 6 th. Verse is one
proof of that, For, for (...) end was the Gospel preached to men alive when
(...) heard it, but now dead; so that those that are (...) alive, and those
that are (...), they might be (...) in the flesh; that is, their lusts of the
flsh might have sentence passed against them, and Execution done upon them, and
so be abolished, even that flesh, those lustings which are (...), according to
men, which come from corrupt nature, that so we may live in the Spirit
according to God and his Counsel, which guides us according to Gods mind: To
this place also appertains that in Romans 7. 4. Wherefore my Brethren you are
become dead to the Law, by the Body of Christ, that you should be married to
another, even to him that is raised from the Dead, that we should bring forth
fruit unto God. And Verse. 6. But now you are delivered from the Law, that being
dead in which we were held: that is, The marriage Covenant between Sin and the
Soul being broken wherein we were held: The full Comparison of which, those
words are but one part, is taken by way of Resemblance from marriage; namely,
As long as the Man lives, the Woman is bound by Marriage Covenant; he may plead
it, and she cannot gainsay it but she is his: But if the Husband be dead, than
she is free, the Law or Covenant cannot bind her, there is no Claim on the Man's
part that can be pretended, nor Right on Her part acknowledged. So is it
betwixt Sin and the Soul, who were as it were handfasted together by reason of
the Breach of the Law, being thereby delivered up in Gods (...) Justice unto
the jurisdiction and authority thereof: But when by Christ the Law is now
satisfied, and Justice answered, and the Soul delivered from under the Covenant
of the Law as broken, and the power of sin removed, the bond of the Covenant
whereby they were married, is now dis-annulled, so that sin cannot Challenge
any Right over the soul, no more than a dead Husband, nor yet should the Soul
yield to any such Claim.

As Sin and Satan can make no Claim to the Soul, Judas, and to enter into him,
Luke, 22. 3. And Judas himself is said to be a Devil. Joh. 6. last. That was
only spiritually. And what he did to him, he does to all the Children of wrath,
while they remain in their natural estate, when now the Lord Jesus comes to
bring the soul under the Covenant of Grace and to make the sinner one of the
seed of that Covenant, he casts out sin and Satan, and dispossesseth them so,
that they cannot have ingress and egress as before, nor can he say, I will
return to my house, nor take up his abode there, nor will he find it swept and
garnished that he may solace himself therein, and enjoy his habitation as in
former times, but he finds the door now shut against him: This is the meaning
of that place, Joh. 12. 31. Now is the judgment of this world; now is the
Prince of the world cast (...): and I if I be lifted up will draw all men after
(...). Our Savior in the foregoing Verses being to (...) into his Agony, and
sensible of the dreadful (...) of his Father, he prays, Father keep (...) from
this hour, but for this Cause came I unto (...) hour. Father, Glorify thy
self: that is, In his (...): And the voice from Heaven answered, I (...), and
will Glorify it: I have Glorified my self (...) thy Life, I will Glorify my
self in thy Death. (...) our Savior ads, Now: that is, When he was (...) suffer
the judgment of this world. That will be (...) when he is Crucified. The Prince
of this (...) Satan is cast out, shall be cast out from taking (...) keeping
possession of the souls of sinners. For (...) Christ be lifted up, on the
Cross, and suffer, he (...) by the power of his Death break down the (...)
wall, and draw all Nations, his Elect out of (...) Nations shall be called by
the preaching of the (...). This I take it, also is the meaning of that place,
(...). 16. 11. When the Spirit comes, he convinces (...) world of sin, that
they be miserable in regard of (...), of Righteousness, that there is Salvation
in a Christ, and free pardon; and of judgment, because (...) Prince of this
world is judged. This shows the (...) of the sovereign Government of our
Savior, so Joh. 5. 22. All Judgment is given into the hands of Christ, that is
the immediate dispensation of al sovereign Power and Rule. And this was one of
the things that Peter, in whose Ministry the Spirit after the Ascension of our
Savior Convinced the world of, Acts, 2. 36. Let all the house of Israel know
assuredly that God has made this same Jesus both Lord and Christ. So that he
will not break the bruised reed, which is done in Contrition, when the soul is
bruised with the sight and sense of sin, and yet is indeed wholly helpless and
weak, yet he will not break it by despair, until (...) bring judgment unto
victory, make his Government and Dispensation Victorious.

The Soul comes now not to be acted by the motions

Hence Christ is said by Death to destroy him that had the Power of Death, that
is the Devil. Heb. 2. 14. To destroy him (in the Original) is to take off the
Activity of Satan, and by a deadly blow to stay the prevailing virtue of any
temptation, as that it shall not sway the soul to its bent, though it may hinder
the soul and dull the acts of it in the daily exercise of spiritual Duties.
Look as it is in a Bowl that is strongly biased one way, and so carried to the
mark, however by many rubs and ruggedness of the way, it may be turned aside
and justled out of the right tract, yet it sets toward the mark, and is carried
that way, and will fall that way by the force of the byas that does over-sway it.
So it is here, The Spirit of the Lord that lays hold upon the soul, is like
the weight of this byas, that is fastened to it, and closes with it: So that
however the strength of temptation or corruption may by a (...) violence justle
the soul out of the way, and out of that right and righteous proceeding in
which (...) ought to walk, yet the over-swaying hand of the Spirit will keep the
bent and set of it toward the Lord and his Truth. 1 John, 3. 8. Christ was
manifested that he might destroy the works of the (...); that he might Analise
and unravel, and undo (...) it were, and take in pieces that frame of
wickedness which Satan had set up in the heart, and turn it up-side-down. When
the Soul was turned from God, unto sin, and the Creature, Christ came that
(...) might be turned from sin and the Creature to God again: The word is the
same with that Joh. 2. 19. (...), destroy, or take down this Temple: And here,
1 John 3. 8. (...): So to loosen one tied in Bands. So the Lord Christ does the
works of Satan; Satan may grapple with the Soul, and lay violent hands upon the
Heart, but bind it he can never more, or make it a servant to himself. Sixth
Particular in Explication of the Point.


Quest. 6. Why is this Work of Attraction given to the Father; as in the text,
None can come to Me, but whom the Father Draws?

I Answer. This Work as all Actions which pass upon the Creature and leave some
change there are equally and indifferently wrought by all the (...) in the most
Glorious and Blessed Trinity, and so are truly understood of al, and truly
given (...): but only they are in several places in an (...) manner attributed
unto some because of some peculiar Consideration that may be attended by (...)
of some Circumstancees in the place; and so the intendment of the Spirit, and
aim of the Text, may rightly be attended and conceived in this place; (...)
shall a little explicate and unfold both, that al mistakes may be prevented.

This Work of Drawing is Common to all (...)

That which issues from the Deity and (...) firstly, that must indifferently
belong to all the Persons: For as all the Persons have the same individual
Essence wholly and equally communicated, they are al one God. The Unity of the
Godhead is a of it, and al in a like manner at once given to them (...) And
thence it follows, That as the same Essence, (...) the same both Attributes and
Actions which appertain to the Godhead, or be done by the Godhead are wholly
and jointly affirmed of all the Persons They al are Infinire, Eternal,
Omnipotent: (...) Create, Redeem, Call, Convert, Sanctify; because these
Actions are Creatures, therefore (...) the first Being, but from the First;
therefore from the Godhead: and therefore are truly said to (...) done by all
that have the Godhead, and are truly said to be God, and so by all the Persons.

Again, Look we to the language of the Spirit (...) the Scripture, we shall see
that either the very (...) of the text so speaks as here, or else the same
thing in the same (...), in some variety of Explication (...) given unto al.

That which is here said of the Father, our (...) speaks upon the like occasion
of himself, Joh. 12. 31. And I, if I be lifted up shall draw all people to me
The same word here and there is used: The (...) work also intended, though not
in the same expressions, is affirmed of the Holy Ghost, Joh. 16. 9, 10. I will
send the Spirit, and he shall Convince of Sin of Righteousness, of Judgment:
This Conviction is the special work of the Spirit in this great (...) of
Attraction.

Lastly, Its a known and received Principle of (...), That the Persons differ
each from other, (...) in some Internal and Incommunicable relative (...),
whereby the Personallity of each is (...), and the Person distinguished, as
begetting (...) the Father, to be begotten to the Son, to proceed (...) Both to
the Holy Ghost: And so the Order (...) Manner of the Working of each which of
(...) follow herefrom, as the Father works of (...) and first in Order, the Son
from the Father and (...) in Order, the Holy Ghost from Both, and (...) last in
Order. And therefore observe from (...) before we pass, That it is a dangerous
Deceit, (...) a desperate Mistake, so to appropriate this work (...) the
Father, and some other actions to the Son, (...) Holy Ghost, as that we should
thereby bring in (...) Ranks and Conditions of Christians. As (...) Example,
From this Fancy men have forged such (...) of the Works of the Persons, and
such (...) suitable of Christians who receive such (...); As they Attribute
Drawing to the (...), Liberty to the Son, Power to the Spirit: and (...), such
are under the Fathers Work: such under (...) Sons Work but yet are not attained
to the work (...) the Holy Ghost. And such who are to be under (...) work of
the Spirit and so to be sealed, they have (...) all the former: Whereas in
truth, and according (...) the simplicity of the Scriptures, al these works
(...) saving, and al of them wrought by all the (...), and he that is under the
work of the Father in (...) of these, is also under the work of Christ, and
(...) Spirit in them al. For as Drawing (before) is (...) to al as well as the
Father, the like we may say of Liberty, and Power. Does the Son set us free?
(...). 8. 31. So does the Spirit. For, 2 Cor. 3. 17. Where the spirit of the
Lord is, there is freedom: The law of the spirit of life has freed us from the
law of sin and death. Romans 8. 2. Does the spirit seal us? Ephesians. 1. 13. So does
the Father also: 2 Cor. 1. 12. He that consirmeth and seals us is God who
has given unto us his holy spirit: So likewise our Savior who has the two
edged sword in his hand. Rev. 2. 17. He gives the white stone and the new name
that no man knows: That is the secret of Adoption, and seal of Sonship; yea, it
is general, What ever he sees the Father do, even those things the Son does
also. Joh. 5. 19. We must be (...) and wary therefore that we be not taken
aside (...) that Delusion.

Though this Work be wrought by all, yet it is attributed (...) send the Lord
Jesus: I shall shortly open both: 1 Why it is ascribed to the Father: And, 2 Why
to the Father as sending the Lord Jesus, Unless the Father which has sent me,
draw him.

First then, Why the Father is said to Draw?

This Drawing as we have Disputed formerly, implies Two Things in it of
necessity: 1 (...) from whence the soul is drawn, and that is sin upon which
the soul was (...). 2 Something unto which the soul is drawn, and that is (...).
Now both the Expressions serve both these Intendments in a most pregnant manner.

Because the Fathers manifesting himself in his displeasure

The sin of Adam falling from his Creation in which the (...) of the Fathers
working is especially discovered, in that he is the original in the Deity,
first in Order, and Working from himself, and Creation is the Original of
things, there they have their beginnings: Hence in Scripture it is said to be
(...) directly against him, and indirectly against the Son and the Holy Ghost;
because that work wherein though they al wrought, yet the manner of the Fathers
dispensation did principally appear. 1 John 2. 1. Little Children sin not at
al, but if any man do sin, we have an Advocate with the Father. He says not,
We have an Advocate with an Advocate: Christ is not properly, and firstly, and
directly an Advocate to himself, but an Advocate is to plead with the party
offended, in behalf of him who stands guilty and has offended, and therefore
he is said to be an Advocate with the Father, because he was the offended party
properly and directly. Christ an Advocate to plead the Cause of his people, the
Spirit the Witness to Certify of the Success what the Advocate has done for
them, and what acceptance he has found with the Father in their behalf.

Hence the Fathers Displeasure in the fierceness of it comes as most cross, and
directly contrary unto sin, and so the sinner; because directly wronged, and
therefore has most reason, and is most ready to offer violence to the sin, for
the destruction of that, and the Confusion and Condemnation of the sinner
because of that: And hence therefore the resistance of sin comes to be
destroyed, and the soul of the sinner most affrighted for it, and wearied with
it, and so compelled to part: And therefore our Savior who was in our stead,
and became our surety, and bore our sorrows, the chastisement of our peace
being upon him, He says, Shall I not drink of (...) Cup which the Father will
give me? Joh. 18. 11. By Cup is meant those sufferings in our behalf (...) the
Father had appointed, and did also lay upon him; and so Consequently upon us in
him.

If the fierceness of the wrath of the Father as the Party directly offended
is most cross to the sin of (...) sinner, and most dreadsul to his soul as
guilty, (...) the Expression thereof even in that regard, is most fit, by a
kind of violence to remove sin from the soul, and to force the soul from it.

Again, The Father as he sends Christ, (...) sufficient pay, Its yet doubtful
whether the (...), being the Creditor, will accept of it, and rest (...) with
it, or no: Yea, says the text, The Father has sent him for this purpose to be
his salvation unto the ends of the earth, and therefore he will not refuse him:
briefly, therebe Three things (...) in this sending, which may draw the (...)
of the sinner toward Christ.

1 That God has appointed him, in his (...) purpose and Counsel, to accomplish
this work, (...). 49. The Lord has called me, verse. 1. And he (...) unto me,
Thou art my Servant, in thee will I (...) glorified, verse. 3. Thou shall be my
salvation to (...) ends of the earth, verse. 6. Joh. 6. 27. For him (...) the
Father sealed: A Comparison taken from Princes when they would send any with
certain Evidence of their Appointment and Approbation, they (...) him a
Commission, and signify their mind under (...) Hand and Seal: So the
Commission and (...) of the Father, is as it were the Evidence, and (...)
undeniable, that he was Designed to this (...). 2 That he has fitted and
furnished him with all (...) abilities and sufficiency to discharge the (...)
of Redemption committed to him, Psalm. 89. 19. He has laid salvation upon one
that is mighty (...) save: Yea, Isa. 61. 1. 2. The spirit of God was (...) him,
and he has anointed him, i. e. (...) him with Grace, that he might suit all the
(...) and desires of his people, yea, with the spirit above measure, Joh. 3.
34. 3 That he accepts of him, and his Service and Mediation, in the behalf of
al those whose (...) and places he sustains, Matt. 3. last. This is my (...),
in whom I am well pleased: Not with whom only, but in whom, with all those whose
place he sustains, and whose surety he was.
If God the Father who was offended, and that deeply with my sin, and therefore
is now come out against me, either to destroy my sin, or to ruinate and condemn
my soul, he has appointed the Lord Jesus his Son to deliver poor Creatures
from their sins and from his wrath, and he has fitted him for this so great a
work, and he will accept him only, and all that sue for acceptance in him. He
only appointed, fitted, and accepted for sinners, let us therefore look toward
him, and go to him. The Father that has sent him for this end, would drive me
out of my sins, and send me to him for succor and relief, that I may be sure
to speed. And I may be sure the Father who is so deeply offended, will never
refuse him, (...) me, if I come to him through his Christ.

So we have done with the Explication of the Point.

Instruction. We may hence by way of Collection Use. 1
infer several things, which are of much Consequence in our daily Course, and
yet al appertain to this place as to their proper residence where they have
their first rife, and therefore may most clearly and rightly be here discussed
and so discerned by those who will incline their ear, and apply their heart
unto wisdom.

Hence it follows by force of undeniable Consequence, Coll. 1.
that this work of Attraction (and so of preventing Grace) proceeds from God as
the only Cause thereof, and depends wholly upon his (...) pleasure, and that he
works in us without us: We being destitute of al Ability which might help
thereunto.

That which is done by a Holy kind of Violence against the natural inclination
of the heart, that must needs be done upon us, but not by us; we have no hand
in that work, and so it is here as has been proved. Let me ad Two or Three
Reasons more besides the Evidence of the Rule from whence it is immediately
deduced.

Here that Weapon comes first to hand which Reas. 1
some of the Ancients have so often used in this Cause, and its the Canon of
the Apostle, and that Staple Principle that cannot be gainsaid, Romans 9. 16. It
is not in him that wills, or in him that runs, but in God that shows
Mercy. Where al other helping Causes that may share in the Conversion and
bringing home of the sinner, are wholly denied and cast out, though they were
Means of special improvement, that if any thing might seem to further it, they
might have been of peculiar use, and of a speeding nature. It was not a sleepy,
careless, slighting of the attainment of any spiritual good, or a sloathful
attendance upon it, nor is it a kind of heartless, and spiritless Affection to
it that are here rejected, nay though his will was there, and the strength of
endeavor, yet both miss the mark; The Apostle is Plain and peremptory, Let him
set Heart, and Feet, and Hand, and Head on work, he shall never do no good on
it, it is not there. Its merely only in him that shows Mercy.

It was wont to be Answered by the Pelagians, that it is so said, That its not
in him that Runs, or Wills, without Mercy pitying of him, and Grace assisting
of him, he cannot do it without these, let him do what he can; yet he can do it
with these. The vanity of which Answer has been long since discovered, as that
it crosses and corrupts the very meaning of the Apostle. For then the
meaning upon the self same grounds would here be thus, As it is not in him that
Wills and Runs without God assisting, co-working; so you might turn the tables:
Its not in God that shows Mercy without him that Wills and Runs. For if the
words be not a plain and peremptory denial, but only comparatively to be taken,
Its not so much, or not in his willing and running without Mercy prevailing and
helping, yet they concur as Causes in this work; then may they as (...) be
taken the other way: Its not in God that shows Mercy only and wholly, but in
him that wills and runs in part, which is to destroy the text, and to cross the
intendment of the Spirit.

That Dispensation of God which gives ability and (...). 2
a Principle to the will for to work that act and dispensation must be before
the ability of the will and act of it, and so cannot be caused by it. As if God
put a soul into those dead dry bones in Ezekiel. 37. that they might live, this
putting in of the (...) whence comes life, is before, and so without the work
of the soul, or life also; and not at al caused by either. But this Preparation
and pulling away from sin, is to make way for a spiritual ability to be given
to the will for to work, and therefore it is before the will and work, and
either of them as any cause. So the Apostle John, 1 John 5. 20. He has given
us a mind to know him and his Christ. Not only drawn out this act of Knowledge,
but given a mind also to enable us hereunto. 2 Cor. 3. 5. We (...) no
sufficiency as of our selves to think a good thought, but all our sufficiency
is of God: Not only the thinking, but the (...) thereunto. Its he that gives a
(...) of flesh, and then causes us to walk in his ways: Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27.

This is to be Observed against a wretched Shift and cursed Cavil of the
Jesuits; when they would pretended to give way to the Grace of God; and yet in
truth take away what they give: And therefore they yield freely and fully, That
it is God who gives both the will and the deed. And Grace is required of
necessity unto both, and neither can be without it; nor will nor deed. But in
truth this is nothing but a color of words, when the sense which they follow
sounds quite contrary. For ask but their meaning, and when they have opened
themselves, al comes to thus much; That the Lord has a Concourse and a
co-working in the Will and Deed, and sends forth an influence into the act of
the Will, and of the work done: and leads forth and guides both unto their end.
And this is no more than he does with the act of any Creature; the first cause
concurring with the second: For in him it is that we live, and move, and have
our being. As it is with Two men that draw a Boat or a Ship together, each man
has a principle and power of his own whereby he draws, but both these meet,
and concur, and co-work together, in the drawing. So that all this that is said
is but indeed to darken and delude the Truth; yea, and to destroy the work of
Gods Grace, and deceive the Reader. For this gives no more to the work of Gods
Grace in Conversion, than it does to the Act of Providence upon, and with the
act of any Creature reasonable.

Whereas this must be observed carefully, and for ever maintained as the
everlasting Truth of God, That the Lord gives a power spiritual to the work,
which it had not before he Concurs with the act of that power when it is put
forth, he gives him a being in the (...) of Grace, before he leads out the act
of that being. He first lets in an influence of a powerful impression upon the
Faculty of the Will, before he Concurs with the Act (...) Deed. He gives a
heart of flesh, and then causes them to walk in his ways: As if one could put
a Principle of life and motion into another, and then draw forth the act of
that power to the performance of the work: As to draw a Boat, etc. This
comparison will (...) the truth of the work.

As it is with the Sons of the first Adam, in the Reas. 3
work of their Generation naturally, and the perverting and turning aside their
souls from the Lord: So it is with the Sons of the second Adam in their
spiritual Regeneration and Conversion. But in the (...) the work is wrought in
them without them; so it is said (...) Adam, He begat a Son in his own image,
Genesis 5. 3. That the Son was begotten in point of natural Constitution, and that
he was in Adams Image, his mind darkened, his will perverted, and the whole
frame and disposition of the whole Man turned aside from God; all which is
wrought in the Child without any act on the Child's part. So (...) is with every
one that is begotten unto God by a new Conversion. There is an impression of
Gods Spirit to turn them from (...) unto God, without any ability of their own,
further than it was given them by God, and acted by his Spirit. Jam. 1. 18. Of
(...) own will begat he us. Joh. 1. 13. Born not of the will of blood, nor of
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.

Hence then it follows in the second Place, That Coll. 2.
the Conversion of a sinner depends not upon, (...) is lastly resolved into the
Liberty of man's Will, which is the proper Opinion of the Arminians, and somewhat
more (...) than the (...) themselves will own. The sum of it, and the full sense
of it will appear in the Answer to this Question: Suppose that all outward
means have been used and improved by providence upon Two Persons indifferently,
in the same place enjoying the same helps, say Judas and Peter, who were both
trained up under the wing of Christ, and received the droppings of his daily
counsels alike, their minds both so far enlightened, and their Consciences
convinced of the things of God and Grace, that they see what the will of God
is, and what their way is to Happiness, by Believing in Christ.

Here grows the Question: Why does Peter receive Christ, and Judas reject him?
Why the Answer and last Resolution of Arminians is here; It was in the Liberty
of their own Wills, and Peter would close with Christ, Judas would refuse him.
But the Orthodox Divines Answer out of the Word, The Lord gives a heart of
flesh to Peter, and enables him: which he denies unto Judas, as he (...) may,
and Judas has justly deserved he should. The wretchedness and falseness of the
former Opinion appears as from the former ground, so also from these following
Arguments.

If the Will of it self has not the next Passive power Argu. 1.
to receive Grace and Christ, then it is not in its Liberty to choose or refuse:
But it has not the next Passive power, Romans 8. 7. It is not subject to the law
of God; nay, it cannot be subject to receive the Work, therefore not Choose the
Work much less.

If it be in the Liberty of the Will either to Choose Cor. 4. 7. Who makes thee
to differ? And What have thou that thou have not received? Why the Arminians
will say, It was my own Will that made me to differ, the Liberty of my own
Choice, because I used and improved my freedom well, which another did not.

That which exalts the Will of man above the power in genere (...); this in
genere causae efficientis proprie sic dictae. That is only to stir up power,
this alone puts forth the power by (...) it is wrought.

This Delusion is exceedingly derogatory to the

But the Saints when they come to acknowledge the Son of God; at the meeting of
all the Churches they do profess the contrary; It was not their prayers, their
tears, nor hearing, (...) resolutions, (...) performances, for all these their
guilt still remained, the power of their Corruptions not removed.

It was not any ability, or parts natural that could do it: for they see the
spawn of al sin in their hearts, and had certainly had the strength of al
distempers in their Lives, that they are not in the dungeon with Witches, upon
the chain with Malefactors, they cannot thank their good nature for it. Nay it
was not in all the means though spiritual and powerful, the Ministers they
showed the way, they set forth the glorious things of God and Grace, but it was
not that which did it, but it was only in God that showed mercy, merely, only,
wholly, out of the free mercy of the Lord. Coll. 3.


Hence, Our conversion depends not upon, nor issues not from the congruity of
al such means, or the (...) suitableness of al such Circumstances which may help
forward those forcible persuasions which the Lord does present to the Soul, and
whereby he would so call the soul of a sinner to himself, as that his call may
certainly find success. I conceive it meet to ad this Collection to the former,
partly because this is the proper place to which it ought to be referred, and
where it should be disputed, and from the former Doctrine receives its Doom,
and Confutation.

The Brain of the Jesuits is the Womb that bare it, and their Forgery gave it
its first being; a Brat of their Brain, a Conceit which they Forged and
Anvilled out of the Froth of their own imaginations: For when they saw that it
was a Conclusion absurd and unreasonable, yea, that which sounded harshly even
to Common Sense to affirm, (...) a man's Conversion was Lastly resolved into the
Liberty of a man's own Will; which advances man's free Will above Gods Free
Grace, and makes the Will of man a superior and more principal Cause of our
effectual Calling, than the work of Gods Spirit and Grace.

It was so loathsome to look upon, That they Resolved not to Own it in such
Apprehensions, but they devised to put another Vizard upon it, that so (...)
might appear other, when it was presented in other Apprehensions; and because
they cannot maintain what they say, they would say something which neither they,
nor any else can understand. For they set down their Opinion in these
Expressions.

When God (say they) who made al Creatures, and so the Will of man, by his
Wisdom and foreknowledge fully understood, what each Creature and so the Will
of man would do in every event, condition, and occasion that could betide it:
He also foresaw when the Will of man was set in such a Condition, so Disposed,
so Suited with several Circumstances, and Conveniences, when his Persuasions
would find the greatest Congruity and Agreeablness with his Disposition: And
then presents such Arguments that suit his Disposition, and so undoubtedly
prevails. So that these Three Particulars are attended in it.

1 The Lord works only by Moral Persuasions; that is the alone way that he
takes to draw, not offering any violence, for that they think is unnatural, and
unreasonable. 2 The Will is still left indifferent, and in its own Liberty to
Choose, or Refuse. 3 The Lord out of his wisdom and foreknowledge, sees how to
hit the heart in a right Vein, takes the sinner in a good mood, hits his humor,
watches as it were his advantages, observes what will meet and suit his
disposition, and then presses it, and so (...).
He that God at such a time, in such a manner, by such means presses, as carry
a congruous, a suitable, and answerable agreeableness to his disposition, he is
converted. He that has not such hints taken to hit his Disposition, he is not
Converted. So that Two men sitting at the same Sermon, the Spirit equally (...)
both, the Wills of both being equally apt and able to receive the work of the
Spirit, yet there is Congruity and suitableness in the one, and there the word
speeds; not so in another, and there the word takes no place, (...) prevails.
Ask them what this Congruity and Agreeableness is? They (...) they cannot tell.
And thus they mud the water and raise the dust, that they may go away in the
dark, that others may not see them, nor see where they go. And thus they labor
to shift off the pressure of Reason, as Hares when they are pursued they fall
to their Jumps and Doublings, but al in vain, for the (...) of this Conceit is
Confuted from the former Doctrine.

For if this Attraction be wrought by the impression

If the Lord does by a holy kind of Violence destroy before; Therefore the
latter also.

Nor do they, or can they by this pretense prevent

For they themselves Confess, as you heard in the Explication of the Cause,
That this persuasion of the Lord put forth in this Congruity and suitablness of
all the Circumstances; It leaves the Will still at his liberty and indifferency,
as the Masters and Maintainers of this Opinion do profess: whence I Reason thus,

If it be left in the power of the Will, either to Receive or Refuse this
Congruous persuasion, then is it in the power of the Will still, whether the
act of Conversion shall follow or not; then is the efficacy and success of the
work of the Means and the Spirit resolved lastly into a man's Will. For if it be
in his Will to succed, or not to succed the work of Conversion, then is it in
the power of it, To make, or not to make the Means efficacious, for therein
lies the efficacy of Grace.

But besides the former Principles, weigh we a little the following Arguments,
which further discover the folly and falsehood of this Delusion.

First, Experiment: Then, Argument.

First, The Experience of the Saints left upon Record in the Scriptures (which
give witness (...)) give in Evidence, and that undeniable that in truth the
Dispensation of the Lord is quite (...) to this Conceit: who is pleased herein
to magnify the freedom, and power, and riches of Grace, that (...) takes
sinners at the worst, and over-powers the perverseness of their hearts, and that
many times when they are come to the height, and that in the very heat of their
Rebellions, that they might indeed Confess it, and all the world see it: It is
not the suitableness of our Disposition which God needs to take advantage by,
but the Almighty and All-sufficient efficacy of his Grace is such, That he does
what he Will, when our wills most oppose, and in reason there is least
probability and possibility in the work of Causes to attain this effect. Thus
the Israelites, Ezekiel. 16. 3, 4. when the Lord called them, and took them to
himself, he professes their navel was not cut, nor salted with salt, nor
washed; but he saw them weltring in their blood, and that was a time of love
which the Lord took, and said to them, Live. Isa. 43. 24, 25. When they wearied
him with their wickedness, and made him to serve with their iniquities, then be
said, I, even I for mine own names sake will blot out thine iniquities. It was
the carriage of God to Abraham, and typed out in the Son of his Promise, when
his body was dead, her womb was barren, then he gives them a Son: He brings and
begins his Church out of the dust, and calls things that are not, as though
they were.

Paul is breathing out threatenings against Christ, fierce in the pursuit of his
poor members, and resolved to see the ruin of them, as he himself speaks of
himself, he was mad with malice, and made havoc with the Church, Acts, 26. 11.
Acts, 1. 1. Gal. 1. last. The Lord takes this time, when he was in the height,
and ruff of his outrage, to bring him to the embracing of the truth, when he
was come out in greatest outrage in opposition and persecution of it, Acts. 9.
And this was usual in the Course of Providence, and the Dispensation of the
Means of Grace, for himself gives the ground of Gods dealing, and his aim in
this. 1 Timothy 1. 16. To wit, That he might be an example and pattern to all
Posterity to support the hearts of the rebellious Gentiles, that they might not
sink under the weight of their unsufferable (...), but yet to seek the Lord.

So it was with these Converts, Acts, 2. Some mocked, some blasphemed, (...)
derided the Apostles, and that was the season, the Lord took to set upon their
hearts by the Ministry of the Apostles. And were the Scripture silent in this
case, how often have we found it in our own experience acknowledged by many,
those who came purposely to deride and scom the Ministry of the Word, sometimes
to entrap and ensnare the Minister, sometimes to see, and slight, and jear at
the Assemblies of the Saints: that was the time which the Lord took to seize
upon their souls, to Convince, Convert, and Save them through Mercy, what
Congruity or suitableness was there then for this work, unless you will make
Contrariety and the height of sinful rage, and opposition to be Congruity, this
is Gods manner to do wonderful things beyond the reach of Common Reason, when
it was hard to the people of the Captivity to believe it; God then says it was
not hard to work it: Zach. 8. 6. Thus says the Lord unto this people, If it be
marvelous in your eyes, should it be marvelous in my eyes?

God usually carries the chiefest of the Expressions of his Providence by way
of Contrariety, and cross Means in Common Apprehension, and the course of
things, that he might silence the pride of al flesh, and the forgery of al
(...), who are the professed enemies of his Grace: So Elias when he would make
way for the Glory of the Miracle and Manifestation of Gods power, he does nor
only lay the Sacrifice upon the Altar without Fire, but digs ditches deep, and
fills them with water, that the power of the Fire might appear more
remarkablely, 1 Kings, 18. 33, 34, 35. So here,

To this Experience, which cannot be (...), take these Reasons for further
clearing of the truth, and the crushing of this Erroneous Conceit.

If the Conversion or Attraction of a sinner be Argu. 1.
lastly resolved into the Congruity and suitableness of Moral Persuasions: then
may it lastly depend upon some natural Cause, or in truth upon some Common
Circumstance of some outward occasion, and Convenience with which the sinner
may meet in the use of Means. For in the meeting and Concurence of these, as
time, place, order, or outward helps, and the disposition of the party, in
some, or al of these this Congruity will consist. But this is to resolve our
spiritual and supernatural Call into a natural Cause against Rule and Reason.
For nothing can exceed the bounds of that ability which the Lord in the way of
his Providence has set in the Creature, natural Causes produce natural Effects
only: Joh. 1. 12. Which are born not of blood, nor of the will of man, nor of
the will of the flesh: There is nothing in Corruption, or natural Disposition,
or the excellency of any (...), that brings forth this spiritual birth. Nay the
Apostle professedly excludes al these as not able to bring about this work, and
therefore sets out the vanity and emptiness of them, when they are at the
highest; We Preach (says the Apostle) Wisdom to those that are perfect, which
this world, nor the Princes of this world were never able to reach unto, 1 Cor.
2. 6. 8. If any were suited with the choicest Means, or had liberty to enjoy
the choicest Opportunities, or the best Advantages, according to their hearts
Content, these were the men, and yet these could (...) (...) of this work:
(...), a (...) of outward Means which properly reach not the (...) work, prove
an (...) unto this effectual Calling. So the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1. 26. Not many
wise, not many rich, (...) many noble: (...) wisdom and choice abilities.
wealth and outward (...), honor and (...), they are in (...), and so (...), and
therefore Congruous to help forward a (...) Course, (because those that are not
subordinate, (...), are (...) (...), and the Argument follows (...)) (...)
reason if any, then these who had (...) and choice abilities to improve the
Means, (...) (...) the work, those who had wealth to purchase them, those who
had authority to (...) and them to serve their turn, they should be suited to
al (...) encouragements, to (...) on in a Christian Course, but we see this
does it not.

Some who have the greatest (...) and suitableness Heb. 6. 5, 6. They taste of
the heavenly gift, that is Faith; are made (...) of the holy Ghost, have tasted
of the good Word of God, and of the powers of the world to come: They have a
taste of Vocation, of Adoption, and (...), and (...); and that there were (...)
of Moral (...) to work these, I thus show, Where there is a Concurrence of al
Moral Causes which by the rule of Providence the Lord has appointed, all those
that he has fitted and proportioned both to the nature of the soul, and the
nature of the spiritual work needful for it; such whom he has so far breathed
upon and wrought withal, that there is a taste of all the saving work of God
left upon the soul, only the truth and reality of the work is (...), comes as
near to effectual Calling as may be, and not be Called; as near to the stamp of
true Sanctification as can be, and not be Sanctified: there is the Congruity of
al Moral Persuasions, and the meeting and Concourse of the strength of al
Arguments and Reasons that can be propounded, only there is yet a principle
internal wanting, which should indeed change the Will: For if the contrary to
al these be incongruous, and carry a kind of unsuitableness, either to the
necessities of the soul, and the work of God upon the soul for its saving good,
then the presence of these carry an undoubted congruity, and answerableness to
all the good of the soul and the work that should be done upon it. For certain
it is when all the Means that God has appointed are attended and used, also in
the order and manner he has appointed, neither more help, nor more Congruity
can be desired, nor yet attained; for if there be any other Means which God
has not appointed, those will prove hindrances not helps; or if they be used
in any other Order than that he has ordained, these are disorderly perverted
and abused, and made unserviceable to do their work, or attain their end. And
yet when the power of al these is improved to affect the Will, and stir and
provoke it, but not change it, it is never savingly brought home to God. So
Moses, touching the Condition of the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 4. 34. Compared with
Deuteronomy. 29 4. Did ever God assay to take a people to himself with signs and
wonders, and great temptations, and out of the heavens he made thee to hear his
voice, that he might instruct thee: What then was wanting? He suited them with all miraculous expressions of his Love and Mercy; but this was (...), To this
day he has not given thee a heart. And if he give you al Mercies beside, tried
you with all Corrections, pursued with miraculous Expressions of his power and
faithfulness, if yet he give (...) a new heart, all that ever he shall give will
never do you good. So the Prophet, when he was appointed and fitted in an
especial manner, having his tongue touched with a Coal from the Altar, when he
was furnished with gracious abilities from Christ to dispense the Word, yet al
was to make their ears heavy, and their hearts fat, and their eyes blind, that
they should not see, nor believe, nor be converted, Isa. 6. 7, 8. And therefore
the Apostle when he had given the doom upon those back-sliders, he ads, We are
persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany salvation, which
these did not: (...) 6. 9.

If al Means and Helps that can be used in way of may be enabled to put forth
any act that may be acceptable unto God, Romans 5. 6. When we were without
strength; and the Apostle does not say, We have some sufficiency to think a
good thought, if some Arguments were suggested to draw it out, but does plainly
and peremptorily affirm, That all our sufficiency is from God, and therefore
none firstly of our selves. 2. Cor. 3. 5.

How silly was it, and incongruous to common sense to provide the sweetest
sounds, and choicest music to delight a deaf man? To present the pleasingest
colors to affect and please him that is blind, to set the most sovereign
cordials and the most curious rarities and dainties before a dead man to
refresh him? Yet such is the Condition of every natural man touching the things
of Grace: He is deaf and hears not, blind and sees not, dead and relisheth not
any thing that appertains unto his peace, unless then you give him a new soul
whereby he may live, al outward services are utterly unsuitable to his
Condition: In a word this quaint devise of the Jesuit is so far from any sap,
or any real subtilty in it, that the Opinion quite contrary (in a true sense)
is most consonant to the truth.

The Means (then) appointed and used in Providence by the Lord, may be attended
in a double respect, either in regard of the end the Lord aims at, and the
effect he intends; and so it is true, the Means which the Lord has Ordained
carry Congruity and and suitableness for the attainment of his own end, and
accomplishment of his own work.

But Secondly, If we look at the corrupt Heart, and Nature, and Will of man,
which is now to be subdued, and his darling Corruptions now to be removed from
him, then it is most certain the Means which the Lord has Ordained and uses
for his Conversion carry not any Congruity, but a Contrariety to his corrupt
heart and Will.

That which must expel and (...) Corruption in the heart, that must not have
(...) but a (...) to it. But the Means which the Lord (...) to Call and draw
(...), are to destroy and expel the Corruption; therefore they must (...) not a
Congruity, but a Contrariety and crossness to them.

That Question which is attended with so many Coll 4.
tedious (...), is from the former Doctrine (...) and Concluded, and that
undeniably, and because (...) does (...) properly to this place, I shall (...)
Express it: Hence then it Follows,

The Power of Grace put forth in the Work of Conversion, is irresistible.

When I say, Irresistible: We mean not that the Corrupt Heart does not Oppose
and resist the Operation of the Spirit, and the (...) of the Ordinance: for
whilst that (...) is (...), it cannot but labor the preservation of it self,
and therefore cannot but oppose the power of Gods Spirit, which works the
destruction of it. But this is the meaning, It cannot so prevail as to (...)
Gods intent, or to prejudice the work of his Grace, as that it should not find
(...) in the (...) of the sinner, or hinder his (...) home to Christ: This
Collection in (...) (...), is (...) Demonstratively, and undeniablely from the
former Doctrine.

That Grace which takes away the power of Resistance stirred up by Satan, or
the Corrupt Heart of a Sinner, that cannot be resisted. But the Grace of God
put forth in Preparation, and drawing does by (...) (...) (...) of (...) take
away the power of resistance in the (...) Heart of a Sinner; and therefore it
cannot be resisted.

Hence it Follows again in the Fifth Place,

Wheresoever there is spiritual sufficiency of Coll. 5.
Grace; there is also spiritual efficacy put sorth (...) work of (...).

These Two go hand in hand in this (...) of God, and are either the same
really, or do (...) accompany one another. And I therefore mention this
Collection, not only (...) of the (...) of it, as that it needs to be unfoulded
and apprehended aright, especially considering (...) is the proper seal unto
which it must be referred, where his stock and (...) may be observed, and where
his (...) (...) be Disputed and (...).

But (...) I (...) it Convenient to take the more (...) (...) thereof, (...) of
the special Benefit and Use thereof: The right (...) of this makes ready way
for the clear (...) of the Delusions of the Jesuits which they have invented
and set up as blinds in the way that men might not see the (...) of the Lord,
and set forth and acknowledge the power and Glory of his (...). Nay, it has
found favor with some who otherwise follow the (...), and that truly, in their
(...) of the drawing of God, (...) according to their diverse Apprehensions,
they set down Explications of their own Thoughts in a diverie manner.

Their general Tenent is this, They make this (...) Distribution of the Work of
Gods Grace in Conversion,

Auxilium est vel, Sufficiens. Efficax.


The Dispensation of the Work of Grace in the way of Conversion, is either by
way of Sufficiency (...) (...): Either Sufficient, or Effectual and Efficient.

1 All men say they have sufficient help from God in the Dispensation of the
ways of his Providence and Ordinances, that they may be Converted were it not
their own fault; they (...) a power and a (...) by the supply of this
sufficient help from God to this end and for this work, and yet though they
may, yet they do not attain success. 2 But the Elect and such as the Lord has
set apart to himself, have the Efficacy of this spiritual help from the Lord,
as that they shall be, and in their times are actually Called and Converted unto
God. Against these Forgeries, I desire this Fifth Collection may be attended.
Where ever there is Sufficiency of exciting and preventing Grace, put forth by
the Lord, for the Drawing, and Converting of the Sinner; there is also the
Efficacy of that Grace which never fails to attain success.

First, We shall Open this Collection, That (...) full meaning may fairly and
plainly be apprehended.

Secondly, We shall show how it follows evidently from the former Doctrine, as
that the one cannot be granted, but the other must needs be yielded.

For the understanding of the Collection, attend Three Things.

That this Exciting or Preventing Grace of God,

Sufficiency of any Cause or Causes is to be attended, Cor. 12. 9. My Grace is
sufficient for thee. And thuse some Causes may be sufficient for the
accomplishment of one Effect, which are not for another. Those Common strokes
of the Spirit in Illumination, and Conviction, and Moral (...), in propounding
Arguments to the hearts, (...) pressing on mightily by Evidence of Reason, are
sufficient to make people beyond (...). Joh. 15. (...). If I had not come and
spoken to them, they had (...) no sin; but now they have no Cloak for their
(...) Ezekiel. 3. 11. Whether they (...) hear, or whether they will for bear, yet
this they shall know there (...) been a Prophet amongst them. Its sufficient to
Condemn them, if not to Convert them. But these (...) not sufficient to (...)
the work of Conversion, for there is more power required to that: There is not
only an enlightening of the understanding, but (...) opening of the heart;
(...). 3. 11. (...) Baptize (...) water, but there is one that comes (...), he
(...) (...) with the Holy Ghost and Fire.

There is Sufficiency upon Companison or Supposition, upon this Ground or
Supposal that we take in other Causes, in their (...) and (...) work with
others; and this is very improperly and abusively said to be Sufficient. This
is the (...) of the Popish Crew, There is Sufficient Help vouch safed on Gods
part unto (...), for Salvation and Conversion, if they would (...) of the
freedom of their own Wills use and improve them for the End that the Lord has
appointed them, and does now (...) them if they will give way, and welcome (...)
the light which the Lord has now (...), and not reject the (...) of God
against (...): which is in truth to say it is not sufficient to work their
Wills and Hearts to this, but it is sufficient to present, and persuade the
Heart if it will for they who make the Will of Man a partial Cause with God in
this work, (...) that (...) Will and Grace of God and his Spirit is not the
sole and alone Cause, and therefore not the Sufficient (...) to do it. As if
Two men be partial Causes in drawing a Ship, neither are sufficient to do it.

The like mistake is in that Expression and Comparison, in which the Fautors of
this Opinion do so much please themselves: Say they, The Eye has sufficient
power to see, but yet unless the Air be enlightened, and the Object presented
unto it, it will never see or perceive it, not put forth this power effectually
upon the Object. Answ. The mistake is merely in the manner of the Expression
misunderstood: For Seeing implies Two things in it. 1 To act upon an Object
when it is presented in a right distance, and through a fit mean. 2 To bring
this Object in such a manner to the Eye. That the Eye is sufficient to do the
first, and is also effectual that way; the Eye is not sufficient to the second,
and therefore no wonder it does not perform it. Thus it is in the spiritual
work; Deuteronomy. 29. 4. Though they had seen many signs and wonders, yet nothing was
sufficient to work upon them, and prevail with them effectually: And its added,
because that unto that day God had not given them an (...): He had given them
Wonders, provided Ordinances, crowned (...) with Privileges, and these might
happily (...) and Condemn, being sufficient for that: but not to Convert,
unless he had given them an heart. This is the ods our Savior gives of the
Sufficiency, and so the Efficacy of Gods Dispensarions, Matt. 13. 11. 13. To
them I speak in Parables, that-seeing they may see and not perceive; hearing
they may hear, and not understand: But to you is given to know the Mysteries of
the Kingdom of God. He not only gives unto his Disciples a word, but a mind to
know.

Efficacious, or Effectual Grace and Help is, when Lord, is now really
accomplished, actually performed, and put into Execution: When the Soul (...)
turned, and called according to his purpose, Romans (...). 28. So that the full
sense is, Where ever there is (...) absolute sufficiency of preventing and
(...) Grace, there is an actual Efficacy in the accomplishment of that work
upon the Soul. And this (...) from the former Doctrine by force of (...)
Argument several ways: Thus,

Where there is the Concurrence of all (...)

Where Gods preventing Grace is put forth, there

Where all the power of Resistance is (...) (...) might hinder the work of our
Conversion, there our Conversion must needs be effectual, but (...) (...)
drawing is, and so sufficiency of Gods exciting Grace, (for that and drawing
are alone) there all the (...) of resistance which might hinder is removed:
herefore where this sufficiency is, the work of our Calling must needs be
effectual.

Hence again it follows by undeniable Evidence, Coll. 6.
That al men have not sufficient help of preventing Grace whereby they may be
called effectually, and (...) Conversion wrought without fail, if they would
but improve the help as they may. This (...) immediately from the foregoing
grant, and (...) beyond al gainsaying.

For Sense and Experience puts it beyond al

Again, The Letter of the Text gives in Testimony the drawing of the Father,
they partake not of the sufficiency of exciting Grace: for herein the very
nature of it lies, and the words are pregnant, No man can come to me, he has
not power to come unless the Father draw him. But the Father draws not al, for
that is the scope of our Saviors direction and Caution whereby he would check
the murmuring of the Jews, quarrelling with his Doctrine, and despising his
Person; now lest any should be taken aside by their sinful example, our Savior
ads this as the Reason, and leaves it upon Record, No man can come to me, be his
place, his parts, his excellencies and abilities never so great and glorious,
therefore marvel not, it is not in their practice, it is beyond their power,
unless they are drawn, (...) yet they are not, nor are like to be.

Again, There is yet a special work of Gods Grace Joh. 6. 36. I said unto you,
that you also have seen me and believe not: But they might have (...) a Reason
to be rendered, and a (...) given, why that should be charged; our Savior gives
in His Argument which will admit no Answer to satisfy it, hardly a pretense to
avoid the (...) of it. verse. 37. All that my Father gives shall come unto me,
and him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out. Not to be given, then
is one Cause why men cannot come; and so have not sufficiency of help to enable
them to that work, and to partake of the comfort.

Lastly, the sufficiency of exciting Grace may be dly. There is also the
internal operation of the holy Ghost wherein only the sufficiency of saving
Calling is accomplished. Now many thousand thousands, there be that never
Communicated in any of these either the external, or (...): (...) in the
external; when the special privileges under the Law were paled in, and
appropriated to the Nation of the Jews, You alone have I known of all the
Nations of the world, Amos 3. 2. To them belong the Adoption, and the Glory and
the Covenant, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the
Promises, Romans 9. 4. He has not dealt so with other Nations, neither have the
Heathen the knowledge of his ways, Psalm. 147. 20. They who never heard of
(...), nor Grace, nor Sin, nor Conversion, nor Salvation, (...) have not
sufficiency of outward Means whereby (...) might be Converted, Acts, 17. 30.
The times (...) that ignorance, he over-looked: He regarded (...) the Gentiles;
but now he commands all men to (...) and repent; as if he should say, Before he
(...) not so much as Call the Gentiles to the (...) of the things of Grace. And
for the inward (...), how many thousands have not the Common (...) of the
Spirit which tend to Conviction, and (...) Persuasion, of whom that of the
Prophet is (...), To whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed? (...). 53. 1.
Multitudes there be, to whom the word is (...) of death. 2 Cor. 2. 16. In whom
the God of (...) world has blinded their eyes. 2 Cor. 4. 4. That (...) might
not see the Glory of God; who seeing see (...) yet perceive not, hearing they
hear and yet (...) not, their ears are made heavy and their (...) fat, that
they should not be converted. The whole Nation of the Jews now Curse the Lord
Jesus (...) their Synagogues, and therefore have no drawing (...) the Lord
Jesus. And so much for the First Use of Instruction.

The Second Use is for Consolation, to several sorts of men.

First, Here is ground of incomparable, and inconceivable Use 2
Comfort to support the hearts of (...) sinners, from sinking under desperate
(...), and that irrecoverably. When their Corruptions come in upon them like
the mighty Ocean, when innumerable evils compass them about, Psalm. 40. 12.
(...) their sins take hold upon them, that they are not (...) to look up, they
are more than the hairs of their (...), and their very hearts fail them: They
find the Opposition so strong, and themselves so weak, (...) work of
deliverance so impossible to their own Sense and Experience, that their Prayers
and Endeavors, and Hearts (...) them: Yet here is a Gale (...) Hope, and that
which will uphold the Heart, if (...) Lord will have in the soul, all
Opposition in (...) and Earth, shall never hold it.

As he must needs go whom the Devil drives, so (...) must (...) come whom God
will draw: Though (...) Means prevail not, thy Prayers speed not, thou (...) not
able by all thy Endeavors to bear up against (...) stream, yet God is able, and
its his work, here stay they heart, God can do it, and who knows but (...) may.

Briefly, the DISCOURAGEMENTS are Three.

First, The Assaults of Satan, he comes in amain, New England, but upon the Sea,
in the Land of our nativity, and he brings him to his Cradle, and (...) him how
he came a Child of wrath into the world: Withal, Satan lets in the guilt of al
these sins upon the soul: Says Satan, if one sin deserve everlasting
Condemnation as you know it does, what then is deserved by so many sins
Committed, continued in, repeated, against Means and Mercies, why Hell is too
little for such a Rebel, God must make a new Hell for such a wretch. And withal
Satan tells him the date of Mercy is past, your best days are done, you have
had Means, and Mercies, and Friends to Counsel you; very good, now Mercy is
gone and past, you shall hear no more of the Mercy of God, or of Jesus Christ.
Now Satan hurries the (...) when he has got him hither, (the multitude of his
sins, the guilt of his sins, and Mercy past) why now had you not better go out
of the world, than to live without Hope, and multiply your sins, and so your
plagues forever? Here he hurries the soul up and down, and gives him no leave
to think of Mercy. Oh! says the soul, Is there no hope in Jesus Christ, the
Means of Grace, and the Spirit of God? Why, says Satan, Do not you deceive
your self, you have had Means, and Mercies, and you are just in the place where
you were, therefore you had best put an end to your sins, and self, and life,
and all.

Now mark (...); In this Case you should have recourse to the former Doctrine,
Satan will not cannot be entreated that's true: Aye, but God is stronger than
Satan, and he can cast him out of thy Soul; It is not Arguments that can do it,
but God can do it: Say therefore, Though my Prayers, my Endeavors, my Heart, my
Hopes fails me, yet God (...) do it; though my Soul cannot leave my sin, (...)
my (...) will not, cannot leave my soul, yet God can force away my sin from my
soul, and command my soul to return from iniquity, God can do this, Romans 16.
20. The God of peace shall beat down Satan under your feet shortly; What ever
become of your Sense and Feeling listen not, attend not to his temptations, be
sure to Retire hither as to your Castle, God can do it, it is the Almighty work
of God, there stand, there live, and there die. Christ told his Disciples, He
saw Satan fall from Heaven like lightening, Luke, 10. 18. That is, Suddenly and
strangely. And Joh. 16. 11. Now shall the Prince (...) this world be judged.
God will judge Satan for all those Temptations and Delusions of his, do not you
own them, and God will Condemn him for them: Nay, as it is, Isa. 43. 6. I will
say to the North, Give up; to the South, Keep not back; bring my Sons from far,
and my Daughters from the ends of the earth: Though thou should be in the
mouth of Hell, or in the bottom of the Sea, yet God is able to call thee from
thence: He that says to the Sea, Give up thy dead; he can say to Hell, Give up
thy damned. Therefore bear up thy Heart and Hopes, and Expectation that God may
do that for thee, which thou art not able to conceive of.

But yet there is another ground of Discouragement: they scarce ever return
again. (...) lamentable what those that are acquainted with Cases of Conscience
this way do know: still (...) mates tempt, and these Companions over-bear
though they resolve, and promise, and vow, (...) pray, yet they are in again,
just in the place (...) they were; so that the soul says, I am not able (...)
resist these temptations, I am never able to get (...) of these snares,
therefore sin I shall, and sin I must and perish I must: temptations are
desperate here a man lies prostrate under them, not able to recover out of them.

Now Brethren, when you are in such a Case as this; you see your sins, you
confess them, pray against them, and yet are taken aside by them, your heart is
strongly engaged, and ensnared, you are not able to get from under these sins.

Here Is all the hope I can give you: It is in Gods hand yet to pluck off thy
soul, and to take away thy heart for all that. You know how Solomon the wisest,
and Sampson the strongest, they were Deluded and snared, and taken by their own
Corruptions and snares of the world Sampsons head upon Dalilahs lap, he would
sit and lie, though he died for it. Brethren, it is here only, God may do good
unto you: If I (...) tell you, It is in the power of Means and Mercies, and any
Congruity of Means, or Liberty of your own Wills, your souls might be deceived,
but would never be Comforted: But look up to the Lord, there is Hope in him,
there is Mercy with him. Joh. 16. last. Be of good Comfort (says our Savior
Christ) I have overcome the world. Yea, the Lord professes it, Ezekiel. (...).
32. They shall loath themselves in the sight of all their doings that have not
been good. Say then, God is able to make me loath my self and my snares, and all the sinful entanglments that my heart is so taken aside withal; this is that
only that will sustain thee and support thee: Joh. 16. 10. I have other sheep,
and they shall hear my voice, and them I must bring. I must bring the (...)
from his Cups, the Adulterer from the arms of his Queans, and the worldly man
from all the snares of the world; the Lord can do it, and will do it also for
those that belong to him; therefore to that God look, (...) that Christ look,
who has said it, and can do it, he can do it for thee as well as for any other.

A Third ground of Discouragement which the viz. The stiffness and stubbornness
of his own heart; he cannot blame the Devil for (...) of him, or the world for
snaring of him; he says, and knows his heart is as bad as Hell it self, he
has courted and desired temptations, his heart has been lingering and
hankering after them: and had not God been merciful to him, he had lived, and
lien, and perished for ever in his sins. Nay, though there were no (...) to
tempt, nor world to allure, yet I have a heart like a dunghill, that steams up
continually noysom abominations: Nay, that that is worst of al, If after all the
Mercies I have abused, and sins committed; I had a heart that could repent
there was some hope: but Oh! the stiffness and knottiness of this heart of
mine, I have had Conscience checking of me, and the Minister reproving of me,
and the Spirit of God striving with me, but Oh! I have a hard heart that cannot
repent; And this is the plague of al plagues, worse than the Devil and Hell it
self, How shall I help my self here? Moral Persuasions? Alas my heart spurns at
them all, and makes nothing of them al, I have had the Minister speaking to my
soul, and the flashes of Hell in my face, and yet alas! such is the desperate
frame of my heart, that I will have my sins or (...) die for it. What will al
Moral Persuasions, and Congruity of Means do here? Alas! the Heart scorns al:
As in the Case of a man, who fell into deep distress and horror of Conscience
(...) he had (...) the sin against the Holy Ghost, lying in that a twelve month
together, and the Lord let loose the (...) of his own Spirit upon him, that he
often thought to lay violent hands upon himself, but this was all that he had to
support himself in that sad time; my Salvation is not in mine own hand, it is
not in my Will, but in Gods Will, It is not in him that Wills, or in him that
Runs, but in God that shows mercy, Jam. 1. 18. Of his own Will he has begotten
us by the word of truth. He that made the Will, can only Convert the Will: Oh!
then bless God, that has taken our Salvation into his own hand, for if it were
in our hands, if it were left to our Wills, we should never have it. This is
that that may uphold the heart in the midst of all the heavy temptation, which
will (...) or last seize upon the hearts of men.

Again: Secondly, It is matter of Consolation to to me when I strive against
it? He that forced his Mercy upon me when I resisted it in the days of my
folly and wretchedness, when I resolved I would none of him; will he deny me
Mercy when he has given me a heart to beg and prize it? He that sought me, and
drew me, when I forsook him, will he not embrace and entertain a poor Creature
when I seek and sue for acceptance from him? Thus the Apostle disputes and
cleers himself with much boldness, and assurance of invincible success, and he
gains and gets the higher ground of his Fears and Discouragments, Romans 5. 6. 9.
If Christ died for us when we were of no strength, nay, when we were ungodly,
How much more being Justified by his Death shall we be saved from wrath through
him, for if when we were enemies, we were reconciled, how much more shall we be
saved by his life? If when we had no strength, he rescued us from the hand of
Hell, and Sin, and when Enemies reconciled us: when he has given us strength
and made us his Friends, will he not for ever relieve and succor us? yea, much
more says the Apostle, he gets upon the higher ground and triumphs over all the
enemies of our salvation, as knowing he should certainly be Assisted against
them al.

Thus Samuel shored up the dismayed and sinking hearts of the Rebellious
Israelites, when the Lord had thundered out his displeasure against them, by
reason they had wretchedly, and treacherously, and unfaithfully rejected the
Lord and his gracious Government, when they would not believe Samuels words, he
tells them, That God would thunder out his threatenings from heaven, 1 Samuel 12.
17, 18. etc. And when the people saw the lightning and heard the thunder, and
then saw the hamousness of their sins, and feared what heavy punishment they
might expect from so terrible a God. Then they that cared not for his words and
Counsels, crave his Prayers, Oh pray for us (say they) for we have sinned, and
to all our other sins have added this, in asking for a King. Samuel to prevent
the deadly symptom of desperate Discouragement, which would drive them from the
Lord, and so from their own Comfort; heads, You have indeed sinned, yet turn ye
not aside from following the Lord: And again he ads, Turn not aside unto vain
things that cannot help: And he gives this as a ground, For the Lord will not
forsake his People for his great Names sake, because it has pleased the Lord
to make you his people: He that out of Mercy made you his people when you were
not, he will not forsake you when he has called you to him: As the Elders of
Israel Reasoned when they were to War with Jehu in the defense of their Masters
Sons, 2 King. 10. 4. Behold two Kings could not stand before him, how shall we?
Let this be thy comfort and undoubted evidence of succor and deliverance: When
thy heart was Satan's home, and the power of darkness dwelt in it, when he had
levied al his Forces, he was strengthened and encouraged, by all the advantages
that might be; he had the hold of the heart, and entrenched himself in the
stubbornness, and invincible stiffness of my Will, and that I was resolved to
leave my life, but never to leave my lusts, nor renounce his temptations, which
I entertained as my delight, and sided with all alurements, and stood in open
(...) against the Holy One of Israel. If Satan in his full power could not keep
his hold, nor my heart, but the Lord cast him out; when he is Conquered, and
his Forces spoiled by the Lord Christ: Shall he not for ever keep him out? When
I was under the power of Satan, he then rescued me; being now rescued from his
rage, and beyond his power shall he not preserve me? He that destroyed the works
of Satan when he was in his full strength, entrenched, fortified in the
unconquerable stiffness of his Will, and took away his Armor: being Disarmed,
Dispossessed, and Conquered, shall he ever be able to recover and set up his
works again? By no means.

The Third and Last USE of this Doctrine, Use 3.
is of Exhortation. First, To the Converted: Then, To the Unconverted: Here is
something for both.

First the Converted are hereby to be provoked to Children Matr. 5. 45.
of your heavenly Father, be merciful as he is merciful. And if in any case, I
take it, Mercy is herein to be discerned, ought to be practiced and expressed.
As the Elect of God put on bowels of mercy, Col. 4. 11. If you be the Elect of
God show it in this, if ever you have received Mercy express it, if ever God
has showed favor to you, show the fruit thereof in showing compassion to
others: put too the best of your endeavors, even by a holy kind of violence to
pluck away poor sinners from their sins, unto the Lord. So David, Psalm. 51. 13.
I will teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall be Converted unto thee:
I will take no nay at their hands, they are stubborn, I was so; they resist, I
did so; they are unwilling to part with their sins, I was so; and yet the Lord
has done me good, and overcome al my evil with goodness, when I was in my
blood, when I lay weltring in the guilt and filth of my sins, when I said I
would have my sins and I would die, and was resolved to destroy my self, then
he said unto me, Live poor Creature, Live: You cannot get your heart away from
your Corruptions, the Lord will do it for you, nay he can do it for you without
you; If he will put forth the same power upon your soul as he has done upon my
soul you shall be drawn from your sins to Jesus Christ. In a word.

1 Do what you can your self. 2 Help them with supply from others.

First do what you can your self; let every man Heb. 3. 13. Exhort one another
daily, lest any be bardened through the deceitfulness of sin. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14.
Now we exhort you Brethren, warn them that are unruly, comfort the feeble
minded, support the weak, be patient toward all men: As who should say, Lay
about you to do all the good you can; he makes a Christian man to be as busy as
a Be, that he should go no whither, but should seek and find occasion of doing
good to one or other, you will meet with some that are unruly, warn them and
instruct them; and some that are weak, labor to strengthen them; some that are
feeble minded and discouraged Christians, labor to quicken and encourage them:
Let not those thoughts be found once in thy heart, Am I my Brothers keeper?
Yes, thou art, or else thou art his murderer; will thou defend his house from
a thief, his body from (...)? nay, would thou ease and raise his Ass from
falling, and return his Ox from straying? and will thou not do much more for
his Soul? Therefore take al opportunities that are offered, and seek what is no
offered, and improve what you have to the (...). Jude, 23. And others save with
fear, plucking them out of the fire. If thy neighbors Ox were in the pit, or
himself in the fire, thou would break (...) the door and not strain
Complements, much more when his soul is fallen into his distempers, as into a
deep ditch, his soul is (...) on fire from Hell, (...) away the Drunkard from
his Cups, and hale the Covetous man from the world, and those whom you see to
be (...) by any special Corruption, do (...) you can to rescue them from the
snare of the Devil; and double thy forces, lay battery against the heart, to it
again and take better hold; it may be he sees his evil, and acknowledges his
sin, and yet returns to it again, return thou to thy prayers, and tears, an
(...), if he forget thy Counsels, Counsel him again, admonish again, besiege
him, lie at him; when thou meetest him in the way, walk in the field, (...)
at the table, leave some remembrance upon (...) of those you converse withal,
say and do some thing that may help to draw their souls from their sins to
Christ. God has dealt so with thee, therefore deal thou so with others.

Succor them also by all other Means. (...) Isa. 2. 3. Come let us go up to
the house (...) the Lord, he will teach us of his ways. And as (...) good man
Cornelius, when Peter was to come (...) Preach the Gospel to him, Acts, 10. 24.
he Calls (...) his friends and kindred together that the Lord (...) work upon
them; and says he, We are all here ready to hear what the Lord has commanded
thee. This especially belongs to al such as have power and authority over
others, as Magistrates may compel the Subjects, the Master may compel his
Servants, and the Father his Children to use the Means (for they can go no
farther than a moral violence) and to be under those Ordinances which they in
their own Consciences are convinced of to be the Means of Conversion and
Salvation: And look as they did when our Savior Christ came to any place, they
brought the blind and the deaf, and dumb, and those that were possessed of
Devils, and laid them down before him, and entreated him to Cure them; Mar. 2.
4. So if thou have a stubborn Servant, or a Rebellious Child, all the Means thou
have used can do no good upon him, bring him before the Lord in the use of the
Ordinances, lay him down before him, and tell him what his Case is, what a
blind mind, and what a hard heart he has, and how he is possessed with a
Devil, of pride, and self-willedness, and resistance against God, and Grace;
and say, It is with thee alone, O Lord, to work upon him; Thus we should use all the Means we can to draw others to Jesus Christ.

Here is also a word of Exhortation to the Unconverted, Romans 1. 16. The Gospel
is the power of God unto Salvation: And if the Lord draw by his Spirit in his
Ordinances, repair thou to his Ordinances for ever. It is the Lord only that
makes his Call effectual, therefore come under (...) Call of his in his
Ordinances.

It is God only that does this work in us (...) Object.
us: It is not in our power to help our selves, therefore better sit still,
then rise and fall; why (...) we endeavor that we can never do?

I do not say thou can do the work, but do (...) Answ.
go to him that can do it. Thou say thou can (...) go; I confess thou
can not as a Christian, but (...) I exhort unto is, Do what thou can as a
man, improve those Faculties, and Parts, and Gifts that (...) yet left in thee;
and come under, and keep (...) the Call of God. God meets his People in the
(...) Exo. 29. 43.
of his worship, in the use of the Ordinances which he appoints, therefore go
thou thither to meet with him. Thou have an Ear to hear the word therefore thy
feet can carry thee to other places, let them carry thee to the house of God,
that mind and memory of thine can meditate upon other things, (...) it meditate
upon the word, and fasten upon the truth and the reasons thereof; I do not say
thou (...) pray so as to please God, but pray still, who know but God may help
thee; thou can confer (...) things of no profit, and remember idle things of
(...) worth; nay, such as leave a taint of Corruption (...) Pollution upon thy
soul; use that mind, and (...) thoughts, and that tongue of thine about the
(...) of God and Jesus Christ. Thou may do this, (...) should do this.

Attend further these Two Directions.

Present thy self before God in the use of (...) (...) heart here, and be sure
thy soul be rightly (...) of it. And mark what Balaam said, Lo, I (...) come
now, have I now any power at all to say (...) thing? Numb. 22. 38. So say thou,
Here Is a (...) mind, a dead heart, a damned soul, I live to (...) and hear
that, that thousands desired but never (...); but now I am here, Lord, have I
any (...) to receive any good from any of the Ordinances, (...), Lord, the work
is thine, do al for thy Servants, (...) receive all the Glory from me; you think
you (...) a large understanding to catch the reason of the (...), and a strong
memory and can recount what (...) hear, and you go for a right Godly man,
because (...) hear, and repeat, and profess, etc. Thou may (...) all this be
utterly destitute of any saving work (...) thy soul, thou have the outside but
thou can (...) come at the kernel, the sap, the sweet, the good of the
Ordinances; therefore say thus; I can hear (...) Word blessed be thy name, and
I am able to remember, and repeat, and to discourse of the things of God, but
Oh! the power of God to work upon my (...) that I want, here is a blind mind,
and a dead (...), a lame heart; Lord work upon it, and draw (...) to thy self
and that effectually: It was (...) speech, 2 Chronicles. Chap. 20. Verse. 12. when
(...) had Mustered up all the Forces of ISRAEL, Yet, says he, We have no
strength, nor do (...) know what to do, but our eyes are unto (...). So
should thou say, for thou may have (...) strength, and moral strength,
but spiritual (...) to hear profitably, and savingly, and to bring (...) fruit
unto God, this is not in any man's power of himself. Therefore say it, and
acknowledge it, Lord, though I do what I can, yet I have no strength, (...) do
I know what to do, but mine eyes are unto (...).

When you are got hither and keep here, be sure Mat. 9. 21. 22. Thou know
the pride, and peevishness, (...) uncleanness of thy Nature, the bloody-issues
of corruption in thy soul; that, nor word, nor Ordinances could help thee to
this day, thou have spent all, and done al thou can do in the use of Means,
and yet the issue is, the proud heart, the carnal heart, the unclean heart
remains still, taken aside by (...) (...) still; what will you do now, you are
in the crowd of Means and Helps, but say, Oh! the Hem of the Garment of Jesus.
That Virtue and Power may come from Jesus Christ (...) work upon this Soul
(...) mine: But how shall I know that? Answ. When you see the Ordinance so upon
your soul really as you see it in your understanding and judgment, when you
find it in the work of it upon your heart, as you apprehend it in the letter of
it. And (...) you shall (...) the work really done, and your heart bowed, and
loosened from those base Distempers, you never touch Jesus Christ until you
find it so: Therefore as the Widow, whose Child was dead, when Elisha sent his
Servant, she was not contented with that; but says, As the Lord lives, and
(...) thy soul (...), I will not leave thee: 2 Kings, 4. 30. The man came, and
the staff was laid, but (...) Child was dead, till the Prophet came, and the
power of God came along with him, and then (...) Child arose; Let me leave this
upon Record for ever amongst you. This effectual drawing and quickening of the
heart, is the alone work of God. It is not in him that Wills, nor in him that
Runs, (...) in God that shows Mercy. You know (many of you, hundreds for ought
I know) that you never knew what Christ and his Grace meant; and you know your
hearts close with your sins though you dare not give way to them: Now mark,
when you come and hear the mind of God, and the Ministers speak unto you, and
the Will of God is published: Oh! Go your ways home, and say, As the Lord
lives, I will not leave thee until the Lord has spoken to my soul, till I find
the effectual work of the Word and Spirit of God drawing my soul from my sins
to Jesus Christ. Therefore call for that same, showing Mercy which the Apostle
speaks of; Romans 9. 16. So then it is not of him that wills, nor of him that
runs, but of God that shows mercy. When you have run what you can, and willed
what you are able, then look up to the Lord to show you Mercy; the Minister
has spoken what he can, and I have heard what I can, but Lord show Mercy; and
never leave until you have found that the Lord has showed you Mercy, in this
work of drawing your Soul from Sin to Christ.

FINIS.
THE Application OF Redemption By the Effectual Work of the Word, and Spirt of
Christ, for the bringing home of lost Sinners to God. The Ninth and Tenth
Books. Beside many other seasonable, and Soul-searching Truths, there is also
largely showed, ^^The heart must be humble and contrite before the Lord will
dwell in it. ^^Stubborn, and bloody Sinners may be made brokenhearted. ^^There
must be true sight of sin, before the heart can be broken for it. ^^Application
of special sins by the Ministry, is a means to bring men to sight of, and
sorrow for them. ^^Meditation of sin, a special means to break the heart. ^^The
same word is profitable to some, not to others. ^^The Lord sometimes makes the
word prevail most, when its most opposed. ^^Sins unrepented of, makes way for
piercing Terrors. ^^The Truth terrible to a guilty conscience. ^^^Gross and
scandalous sinners, God usually exercises with heavy breakings of heart,
before they be brought to Christ. 11. Sorrow for sin rightly set on, pierces
the heart of the sinner thoroughly 12. They whose hearts are pierced by the
word, are carried with love and respect to the Ministers of it: And are busy
to enquire, and ready to submit to the mind of God. 13. Sinners in distress of
conscience, are ignorant what they should do. 14. A contrite sinner sees a
necessity of coming out of his sinful condition. 15. There is a secret hope
wherewith the Lord supports the hearts of contrite sinners. 16. They who are
truly pierced for their sins, do prize and covet deliverance from their sins.
17. True contrition is accompanied with confession of sin, when God calls
thereunto. 18. The Soul that is pierced for sin, is carried with a restless
dislike against it.


By that Faithful, and known Servant of Christ, Mr. THOMAS HOOKER, late Pastor
of the Church at Hartford in New England; sometimes Preacher of the Word at
Chelmsford in Essex, and Fellow of Emmanuel College in Cambridg.

Printed from the Authors Papers, written with his own Hand. And attested to be
such, in an Epistle, By Thomas Goodwin, And Philip Nigh.

London: Printed by Peter Cole, at the sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil,
near the Royal Exchange. 1657.

READER.
IT has been one of the Glories of the Protestant Religion, that it revived
the Doctrine of Saving Conversion, And of the new creature brought forth
thereby. Concerning which, and the necessity thereof, we find so much
indigitated by Christ and the Apostles (in their Epistles) in those times: But
in a more eminent manner, God has cast the honor hereof upon the Ministers and
Preachers of this Nation, who are renowned abroad for their more accurate
search into, and discoveries hereof.

First, For the Popish Religion, that much pretend to Piety and Devotion, and
does dress forth a Religion, to a great outward Gaudiness, and show of (...)
and will worship, which (we confess) is entermingled with many spiritual strains
of self-denial, Submission to Gods will, Love to God and Christ, especially in
the writings of those that are called Mistical (...). But that first great and
saving Work of Conversion; which is the foundation of al true piety, the great
and numerous volumns of their most devout writers are usually silent therein.
Yea they eminently appropriate the word Conversion and thing it self, unto
(...) man that renounceth a Secular life, and enters into Religious orders
(as they call them) and that Doctrine they have in their discourses of Grace and
free will about it, is of no higher elevation, than The (...), and (...) of late
and his followers.
what (as worthy Mr. Perkins long since) may be common to a Reprobate; though
we judge not al amongst them. God having continued in the midst of Popish
Darkness many to this day, and at this day with more Contention than ever, that
plead for the Prerogative of Gods Grace in man's Conversion.

And for the Arminian Doctrine, how low does that run in this great Article?
this we may without breach of Charity say of it; That if they or their
followers have no further or deeper work upon their hearts, than what their
Doctrine in that point calls for; they would fall short of Heaven: though those
other great truths they together therewith teach, God may and does savingly
bless unto true Conversion, he breaking through those Errors into some of their
hearts.

And how much our reformed Writers abroad, living in continual wranglings and
Disputes with the Adversaries of Grace, have omitted in a Practical and
Experimental way, to lay open and anatomize the inwards of this great work, for
the Comfort and settlement, of poor souls, many of themselves do greatly
bewayl: And to find them work, and divert them from this, it has been the
Devils great Policy (who is at the head of all those Controversies) as also
ever since Pelagius time, to this very day) to make that dry and barren plot of
Ground (namely the naked dispute of the freedom of man's will) to be the great
seat of this War (as the Pope did the Conquest of the Holy Land, in the darker
times, to find al Christian Princes work) and thither to draw all the forces and
intentions of men's minds jejunely and in a great part Phylosophically to debate
what power man's will (for-sooth) has in the Summity and Apex of Conversion to
resist or to accept the Grace of God: and so whether Moral persuasions only be
not Sufficient? or that Physical Pre-determinations be not also requisite to
Conversion? whilst in the mean time, al those intimate actings of a soul in
turning to God; The secret particular passages, both on Gods part, and on the
souls part (which are many and various) by which the soul is won over unto God
and Christ; those treaties the souls of men hold with God and Christ for
justifying and Sanctifying Grace, and for union with him: these have been
forgotten, or but overly and slightly touched upon, which if our reformed
Divines would have made it their work distinctly to have insisted on, out of
the scripture and their own experience: that Glory would have appeared therein,
which would have put a period unto al those janglings about Free Will.

And further to take a serious survey of the present times in this Nation; the
temper of Professors is such, that it cannot enough be Lamented: Ordinarily men
enter into and take up a profession of Religion and that with difference from
others, upon very cheap Rates. And do give and receive Honor of being such to
and from one another upon so slender grounds; that we with grief say, there
has been more of Profession in these changes, when less of Regeneration.

The Causes whereof are more than of one sort, or than which we are able to
enumerate. Yet for instance; Either because God has in the Course of his
providence involved the Cause of Religion, and the Vindication of the liberties
of the sincere Professors of it, (formerly so much oppressed) with so high an
hand, and out-streched Arm; so apparently, that therefore Carnal men have
fallen in, and mingled themselves (as that mixed multitude of Egyptians who came
forth of Egyptian bondage with the Israelites) and joined issu therewith, and
Learning a little to speak the (...) Language, and give Religion, and good men
good words; and being for the Common Cause, (as they call it) they have thereby
put themselves and been received into the Common Roll of men well affected in
Religion, as well as to the public.

Or else (which we cannot but judge and mention as another Cause hereof) it
has been professedly held forth (by men holy and spiritual) that all that
(...) not scandalous in their lives, having in (...) Knowledge, the Form of
Truth, by (...); adding thereunto some outward (...) Duties. Such Persons we
mean, as (...) were in our Pulpits, plainly (...), but Civil, Moral (...) (and
(...) really but such kind of Professors of (...), as Mutatis mutandis, are
found (...) Turks of Mahumotanism; who (...) the Principles of that (...), and
are devout in Duties to God, (...) thereby, through the mere (...) of Natural
Devotion, and Education, (...) Laws and Customs of that Religion; (...) also
through Moral Honesty, are not (...) in their Lives.) Such like (...) amongst
us, have been, and that (...) a New (...) of Religion, with (...) also from
others (the Ignorant (...) Profane) professedly received (...) the Communion
of Saints, as visible Saints. (...) Principle, and Practice, has (as it (...)
needs) weakened and embased the (...) purer stamp of the Doctrine of (...) (as
then held forth with such evidence of difference from these (...) Profession)
not only by encouraging such boldly to take on them to be (...) (as it were) by
Authority; but also by having checked, and flatted the spirits (...) themselves
that would teach it, seeing that this Real Application in Practice, and
Principle, to such Moral Christians as Saints, is a manifest Contradiction unto
al (...) can be Doctrinally said in the Pulpit to the contrary, concerning the
power (...) this great work in true Saints. And (...) the Profession of
Religion has been levelled, and diffused into that bulk and commonness, that
the true marks of saving Graces, are (as to the open discerning) much worn out,
and will be more and more, if this should obtain.

Or else (as great a Cause as any other) a special Profession of Religion being
(...) Mode, and under Countenance: Hence many have been easily moved to see
what might be in Religion, and so attend to what is said about it; and upon
listening thereto, their spirits have been awakened, and surprised with some
light, and then with that Light they have grown inquisitive into what this or
that Party of Religion holds; what the other, or what a fourth. And thinking
themselves at liberty (as the Principle of the times is) to choose (as men in a
Market) what that Light will lead them to; they accordingly fall in, either with
this, or that particular persuasion: and this is al of many men's Conversion.
And yet because such become zealously addicted to such, or such a (...) (some
of the Professors of each of which, others that differ, own as truly Godly)
therefore they are presently adopted, and owned as Saints, by the several
Followers of such Opinions: And each sort thinks much, that those who embrace
their Opinion, should not be accounted, and esteemed Religious (...) all
others, that do sincerely (...) the power of it. Thus men Tithe (...) and
Cummin, and leap over the great (...) (...) Regeneration, namely, (...) for
sin, the (...) sense of their Natural Condition, the Difficult work of Faith,
to (...) them, Union and Closing with Christ, Mortification of lusts, etc.
which works where they are found, and visibly held forth, none are to be
disowned for other Opinions consisting with the (...); yet so, as without
these, no Opinion, of what Elevation soever, can, or does constitute a man
Religious.

Now look, as when among the Jews, Religion had run into Factions, and Parties,
and the power of it thereby, was (...) lost; God then set down John (...)
amongst them, a sour and severe Preacher, and Urger of the Doctrine of (...),
and preparative Humiliation for sin (which he comparatively to what was brought
in by Christ, terms the Baptism of Water) though withal it is said, that in
the Close of his Doctrine, (...) pointed unto Christ; Saying unto the people,
that they should believe on him that should come after him; that is, on Jesus
Christ. Yet this he did but (...) at: for the full (...) of his Dispensation ran
in that other Channel. Of whose Ministry (...) is also said Luke 1. 16. 17.
That (...) of the Children of Israel should he turn to (...) Lord, their God.
And shall go before him (namely Christ) in the spirit and power of (...) to turn
the hearts of the Fathers to their Children, and the Disobedient to the (...)
of the just to make ready a people (...) for the Lord. The meaning whereof is,
he came to restore the Doctrine of (...) Conversion, and in that point (...)
bring and reduce the Children of the (...) back again unto the same (...) and
ways (necessary to Salvation) (...) which the Fathers, and all the (...)
Saints of the old Testament (...) been brought in unto God. And (...) by that
means to become of the same Religion (saving Conversion being the (...)
practick Foundation and Center (...) all Religion) that the Godly Jews (...)
old were of. So what know we, but (...) God (in some lesser, proportionate
(...), both in respect of persons and times) may have had this in the eye of
all wisely designing Providence to set out this great Authors works and
writings (amongst the labors of others also) upon this very Argument, to bring
back, and correct the Errors of the spirits of Professors of these times (and
perhaps by urging too far, and insisting too much upon that as Preparatory,
which includes indeed the beginnings of true Faith, (And a man may be held too
long under John Baptists water) To rectify those that have slipped into
Profession, and Leapt over all both true and deep Humiliation for sin, and
sense of their natural Condition; yea and many over Christ himself too,
professing to go to God without him. However, this we may say (without
diminution to any other or detraction from the Author himself, in respect of
his (...) raised knowledge of Christ and (...) free Grace) That if any of our
late Preachers and Divines came in the (...) and power of John Baptist this man
did.

This deeply humbled man, and as (...) raised, both in Faith and (...) with
Christ, the Author of (...) Treatises. He had been trained up (...) his Youth,
in the Experience and (...) of Gods Dispensations and (...) this way; and
versed in digging (...) the Mines and Veins of Holy (...), to find how they
agreed with his (...) (...). His Soul had (...) the intricate Meanders, and the
(...) (through temptations) (...) of this narrow passage and (...) into Life
(and few there be that (...) it.) And by deep reflections upon (...) step of
Gods Procedure with (...), has descried those false and (...) by-waies, which
at every step, (...) man (who errs in his heart, not (...) the knowledge of Gods
ways) is apt to (...) astray when they have but inferior (...) of the Spirit
on them, from (...) way of Life, which only those do (...) that are un-erringly
guided by the (...) Spirit (peculiar to the Elect) into (...) ways of Peace.

And whereas there has been published long since, many Parts and Pieces of
this Author, upon this Argument, Sermon-wise preached by him here in England
(which in the preaching of them did enlighten all those Parts) Yet having been
taken by an unskilful hand, which upon his recess into those remoter parts of
the World, was bold without his privity or consent to print and publish them
(one of the greatest injuries which can be done to any man) it-came to pass his
genuine meaning, and this in points of so high a Nature, and in some things
differing from the Common Opinion, was diverted in those printed Sermons from
the fair and clear draught of his own Notions and Intentions, because so
utterly deformed and misrepresented in multitudes of passages; And in the rest
but imperfectly and crudely set forth.

Here, in these Treatises, thou have his Heart from his own Hand, his own
Thoughts drawn by his own Pensil. This is all truly and purely his own, not as
preached only, but as written by himself in order to the Press; which may be a
great satisfaction to all that honored (...) loved him (as who that was good,
and knew him, did not?) especially (...) that received benefit by those (...)
imperfect Editions. And we cannot but look at it as a blessed Providence of
God, that the publishing of the same by others (in that manner that has been
mentioned) should have provoked him, and that by the excitation of the Church
(whereof he was the Pastor in New England) to go over again the same Materials
in the Course of his Ministry amongst them, in order to the perfecting of it by
his own hand for public Light, thereby to vindicate both himself and it from
that wrong which otherwise had remained for ever irrecompensible.

And hereby it came to pass (that so far as he has proceeded) this Subject
came to have a third Concoction in the Heart and Head of him that was one of
the most experienced Christians, and of acutest Abilities that have been living
in our Age. He Preached more briefly of this Subject first, whilst he was (...)
and Chatechist in Emanuel College in Cambridg. The Notes of which, were then so
esteemed, that many Copies thereof were by many that heard not the Sermons,
written out, and are yet extant by them. And then again, a Second time, many
years after, more largely (...) Great Chelmsford in Essex; the (...) of which,
was those Books of (...) that have gone under his Name. And Last of all; now in
New England, and (...) in, and to a settled Church of Saints, to which the
Promise is made of being The Seat and Pillar of Truth; and (...) which all
Ordinances set as the Load stone in the Steel, have the greater power and
energie: In which the Presence of Christ breaks forth, and all (...) Springs
are found therein.

And truly we need not wonder (...) God set his heart and thoughts a work (...)
much, and so repeatedly about this Subject. We see that the Holy Ghost
himself, the Author of this Work of Conversion, does sometimes, and that in an
(...) manner, go over the whole of that Work again and again in the hearts of
Christians, whom God means to make great in his Church: as in Peter, when (...)
art converted, etc. who was yet (...) already. And to the Disciples, Except ye
be converted, etc. And the (...) of the Holy Ghost upon them, at, and (...)
Pentecost, was as a New Conversion (...) them, making them to differ (...) much
from themselves, in what they were before, as wel-nigh they themselves (...)
before truly wrought on) did (...) differ from other men. The (...) of God
himself goes over this work (...) in all the parts of it: As to (...) anew, to
draw to Christ, to change and (...) the heart to higher strains of (...). And
when so, then his Second (...) excels the First, that it comes not into mind;
and his Third the Second, (...) it cease (as it were) to be remembered (as the
Prophet in other works of wonder speaks) for thereby he every (...)
Spirituallizeth the heart still more, (...) it from Hypocrisy, and makes it
(...) refined; causes the heart to come forth from each new Cast and moulding
with a deeper and fairer Impression (...) his Image and Glory. If then the Holy
Ghost (the Writer of his Law in the Heart) set that high value upon that Work
(...) his, that he vouchsafes to take (...) pains to write it over and over
again in the same Tablet; Let it be no Diminution to this great Author, but let
us bless God rather for the Providence, that the same Divine Hand and Spirit
should set him this Task, to take the Doctrine of (...) Work into a second,
yea, a third Review; and thereby make it as it were, the (...) the Work of his
Life.

Only thus it is, That the other Great Points, as Union with Christ,
Justification, Adoption, Sanctification, and Glory (which Subjects, as he was
able for, so his heart was most in them) he has left unfinished: And so
thereby (as is most likely) multitndes of precious, yea glorious thoughts,
which he might have reserved (as often falls out to Preachers and Writers) for
those higher Subjects, as the Close, and Center, and Crown of what forewent, as
preparative thereto, are now perished, and laid in the dust with him. None but
Christ was ever yet able to finish all that Work which was in his Heart to do.
Farewell.

Thomas Goodwin, Philip Nigh.

COLE. 1216.



The Application of Redemption, by the effectual work of the Word and Spirit of
Christ, for the bringing home of lost Sinners to God.
The Ninth Book.
ISAIAH, 57. 15. Thus says He that is the High, and the Lofty One that
inhabiteth Eternity, whose Name is Holy; I dwell in the High and the Holy
place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble Spirit.
THe Work of Preparation having Two Parts:

First, The Lords manner of Dispensation as he is pleased to deal with the
Soul, for the setting up the praise of his Rich and Glorious Grace: and
therefore with a holy kind of Violence he plucks the (...) from his sins unto
himself, and his Christ. This has been dispatched already in the former
Discourse.

The Second now follows: And that is the Frame and Disposition which is wrought
in the Hearts of such as the Lord has purposed to save, and to whom he has
dispensed himself in that gracious Work of his.

Contrition, Humiliation.
This Disposition consists especially in Two Things

That so I may follow the Phrase of Scripture, and retain the Lords own Words
in the Text, where the Lord says, that he dwells with him that is of an humble
and contrite Heart.

To omit al manner of Coherence, and other Circumstances, we will pass all the
other Specials in the Verse, and point at that Particular which will suit our
proceeding, and may afford ground to the following Discourse, that we may go no
further than we see the Pillar of Fire, the Lord in his Truth to go before us.
We shall fasten then upon the last words only, as those that fit our Intendment.

To make way for our selves in short, there is one word alone to be opened,
that so the Point may be better fitted for our Application; we must know what
it is to dwell, or how God is said (...) dwell in a contrite and humble heart?

I Answer, To Dwell implies Three Things.

First, That the Lord owns such as those in whom he has an especial interest,
and claims a special propriety, as though he left all the rest of mankind to
lie wast as a Common, that the World, and the Devil, and Sin may (...), and use
at their pleasure, reserving the Honor of his Justice, which by a strong hand
he will exact as a Tribute due to himself out of all things in Heaven and
Earth, and Hell and all; but persons whom he thus fits, he reserves for his own
special Improvement. As Princes and Persons of place and quality, do lease out,
and let some Forests and Commons to the Inhabitants bordering thereabout,
reserving some acknowledgment of Fealty and Royalty to themselves, but the
choice and best Palaces or Granges of greatest worth, and profit, they reserve
for their own peculiar to inhabit in. So here, the Lord leaseth out the World,
and the wicked in it to the Devil and his Angels, and Instruments, reserving a
Royalty and Prerogative to himself, as that he will have his Homage and
Acknowledgment of dependence upon himself; but his brokenhearted ones are his
own for his own Improvement, Deuteronomy. 32. 8, 9. When the most High divided to the
Nations their Inheritance. and separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of
his People according to the number of the Children of Israel, for the Lords
Portion is his People Israel, the Lot of his Inheritance: Ye are the Temple of
the Living God; 2 Cor. 6. 16. Yea, to them the Lord himself says, Ye are my
People, and they shall say, thou art my God, Zach. 13. last. Therefore he
professes, that though in the course of his Providence he goes on progress
over all the world, yet he takes up his dwelling and abode amongst his own
People. For,

Secondly, Where a man dwells, as he owns the house, Jer. 23. 24. His infinite
Being is every where, and one and the same every where in regard of himself;
because his being is most simple, and not subject to any shadow of change,
being all one with himself. Yet he is said to take up his abode in a special
manner, when he does put forth the peculiar expression of his Work; as in
Heaven he dwells, because he puts forth the constant expression of his Glory,
and that in the full brightness of it without any alteration and change. Here
in this Spiritual Temple, the Souls of his Saints, he puts forth the peculiar
expression of the constant assistance of his blessed Spirit. I will pray the
Father, and he shall send you another Comforter, who shall abide with you for
ever, John 14. 16. 1 John 2. 23. Ye have received an anointing which abides in
you.

Dwelling, if it be attributed to the chiefest Inhabitant live in the Spirit,
and to walk in the Spirit, Gal. 5. 25. And it is that which follows by Inference
upon this ground, John 15. 4. 5. If I abide in you, and you abide in me, you
shall bring forth much fruit; and therefore its added also in this place, that
the Lord dwells in the contrite and humble heart to receive the Spirit of the
contrite ones, they yield themselves to be acted by him, and they shall be
acted and quickened by him to Eternal Life.

So that the full meaning is, The contrite and humble heart is such to whom the
Lord vouchsafes acceptance, special presence and abode, and peculiar guidance;
he owns him, abides with him, and rules in him for ever.

True, it is said Christ dwells in our Hearts by Faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. and as many
as believe in him, they receive him, John 1. 12. That is done as by the next
and immediate hand, by which we say hold on Christ, and give entertainment to
him; but unless the heart be broken and humbled, we cannot receive Faith, that
we may receive Christ. And while the soul is thus breaking and humbling, Faith
also is coming in a right sense, rightly understood; whereof we shall speak
somewhat largely, if the Lord give us leave to come to that place.

The Words thus opened, the Point is the very letter of the Text, which looks
full upon every Hearer or Reader that will look upon the Text.

The Heart must be broken and humbled, before Doct.
the Lord will own it as His, take up his abode with it, and rule in it.

There must be Contrition and Humiliation before the Lord comes to take
possession; the House must be aired and fitted before it comes to be inhabited,
swept by brokenness and emptiness of Spirit, before the Lord will come to set
up his abode in it. This was typified in the passage of the Children of Israel
toward the promised Land; they must come into, and go through a vast and a
roaring Wilderness, where they must be bruised with many pressures, humbled
under many overbearing difficulties, they were to meet withal before they could
possess that good Land which abounded with all prosperity, flowed with Milk and
Honey. The Truth of this Type, the Prophet Hosea explains, and expresses at
large in the Lords dealing with his People in regard of their Spiritual
Condition, Hos. 2. 14, 15. I will lead (...) into the wilderness, and break her
heart with many bruising Miseries, and then I will speak kindly to her heart,
and will give her the Valley of Achor for a door of hope; the story you may
recall out of Jos. 7. 28. when Achan had offended in the execrable thing, and
the hearts of the Israelites were discomfited and failed, like water spilt upon
the ground, because they had caused the Lord to depart away from them, the Text
says, they having found out the offender by lot, they stoned him, and they
said thou have troubled Israel, we will trouble thee, and they called it the
Valley of Achor, and after that God supported their hearts with hope, and
encouraged them with success, both in prevailing over their Enemies, and in
possessing the Land. So it shall be Spiritually, the Valley of Consternation,
perplexity of Spirit, and brokenness of heart, is the very gale and entrance of
any sound hope, and assured expectation of good. This I take to be the true
meaning and intendment of the place, and part of the description of a good
Hearer, Luke 8. 15. Who with an honest and good heart receives the Word, and
keeps it, by strong hand, and brings forth fruit with patience; the fruit is
Obedience, Patience is part of Sanctification, and the holy disposition of
heart, that must be in the heart, that brings and bears such fruit, that which
makes the heart good is Faith in Vocation, which enables the soul to lay hold
upon Christ in the Word, and from him to receive that lively virtue of
Patience, and readiness to every holy word and work. And an honest heart is a
contrite and humble heart, so rightly prepared that Faith is infused, and the
soul thereby carried unto Christ, and quickened with patience to persevere in
good Duties. As we say of Grounds before we cast in Seed; there is two things
to be attended there, It must be a fit ground, and a fat ground; the ground is
fit when the weeds and green sword are plowed up, and the soil there, and made
mould: And this is done in (...) and Humiliation; then it must be a fat ground,
the soil must have heart, we say the ground is plowed well, and lies well, but
it is worn out, it is out of heart: Now Faith fats the soil, furnishes the soul
with ability to fasten upon Christ, and so to receive the Seed of the Word, and
the Graces of Sanctification, and thence it produces good (...) in Obedience:
Upon this condition Gods favor is promised, Psalm. 34. 18. The Lord is nigh to
them that be of a contrite spirit, and saves them that be of a broken heart.
Isay 61. 3. He gives the Garment of praise to those that have had the spirit of
heaviness; it will suit none, fit none, it is prepared for none but such, it is
their Livery only. Upon this condition it is obtained, Mat. 18. 3. Unless ye be
converted, and become as little Children, ye can in no wise enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. 2 Chronicles. 33. 12. It Is said of Mannasseh, he humbled himself
greatly, and made supplication, and the Lord was entreated of him; such persons
and services are highly accepted, Psalm. 51. 17. A broken and contrite heart O
God, thou will not despise, nay, he will undoubtedly accept of it.

The Reasons of the Point are taken, partly in regard of the heart, which
without these will neither be fitted nor enabled to act upon God in Christ for
any good; partly in regard of God, all his Ordinances and Dispensations will be
unprofitable, and unable to do that good which he intends, and we need.

To the first in regard of our Hearts; those Lets and Reas.
impediments which put a kind of incapability, yea, and impossibility upon the
soul, whereby the coming of

The (...) which stops the way and work of Faith is, a settled kind of
contentedness in our corrupt condition, man is so full of self-love that he is
loath to pass a sentence against his own soul, to become a judge and
selfcondemner, and consequently an executioner of all his hopes and comforts at
once, and so put his happiness and help out of his own hand. Besides, we are
Naturally afraid (out of the privy, yet direful guilt of our own Consciences)
to profess the wretchedness of our own miserable and damnable Condition, as to
put it upon a peremptory conclusion, and that beyond question, I am undone, I
am a damned man, in the Gall of bitterness, in the bonds of iniquity, lest they
should stir such horrors, which they are neither able to quiet, nor yet able to
bear. And therefore out of the presumption of their own hearts, they would
easily persuade and delude themselves, they have no cause to alter their
condition, and therefore they should not endeavor it. Hence the carnal heart is
said to bear up himself against all the assaults of the Word, Deuteronomy. 29. 19.
When all the Curses of the Law were denounced with never so much evidence, yet
the presumptuous sinner blesses himself, promises all good to himself, and
secretly feeds himself with vain hopes that he shall attain it, therefore he will
not stir to seek for a better estate, nor yet receive it if offered, Job, 22.
17. They say unto the Almighty, depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of
his ways: do Ministers press them, do others persuade them to a more serious
and narrow search, to get more grounded assurance of their estate in Grace,
they profess they bid them to their loss, they think they need not be better,
nor do they desire to be other. It is impossible upon these terms that ever the
soul should be carried by Faith unto God.

For to be contented and quieted with our condition, as that which best
pleases, and yet to seek out for another, are things contradictory. And yet
this Faith does, For he that is in Christ, is a new Creature, behold all things
are become new, 2 Cor. 5. 17. he must have new comforts, new desires, new
hopes, (...) (...) heart must be broken to pieces under the weight of the evil
of sin, and the Curses due to the old condition, before this will part; for that
the word here used with great elegancy and pregnancy implies, viz. by an
oppressing weight to be pashed to powder and dust. (...) the Psalmist uses it,
Psalm. 90. 3. Thou turnest man to powder, to the dust of death: when a (...)
composition is dissolved, and the body returned again into its first principle;
so the word here by way of resemblance, implies that the soul should find his
corruption his greatest oppression, so that the composition betwixt sin and his
soul should be dissolved and taken down, and the nature of man return to his
first principles, and primitive disposition, that he sees an absolute necessity
to change, and then he will seek and be willing to receive a change: The (...)
need no Physician, and therefore will not seek; but the sick that need, will be
content to receive; The issue is, If the soul be contented with its sinful
condition, and would not have a change, then it cannot be under the power of
Faith, or receive that which will bring a change; but before the soul be broken
under the pressure of sin, it would not have a change, therefore so long it
cannot be under the power of Faith.

Be it granted that the soul finds sin as a plague, and therefore would be
preserved from the evil of it: the second impediment which wholly keeps out
Faith is this, When the sinner expects supply and (...) from its own
sufficiency, either outward excellencies, abilities of Nature, or common
Graces, or the beauty of some performances which issue from any of these: For
this is Natural to all men ever since Innocence, That since the staff was put
into his own hand, and then needed not, nay should not deny their own strength,
(...) to this day this practice of old Adam remain still in all his posterity,
they will scramble for their own Comforts and try the utmost of their own
strength, to help themselves rather than be (...) to another to help them:
Hence in cases of Conscience and trouble, men are so ready to resolve, so apt
and free to promise and profess amendment, what they will do, and others shall
see it as well as (...) (...) it, and so alas it comes to nothing in (...)
(...), either they fall back unto their base courses, when horror and fear is
over, or else wasting (...) into a (...) formality, and so perish in their
Hypocrisy. This is an apparent bar to faith, which is the going out of the
soul to fetch all life and power from (...). Now wholly to be in our selves,
and to stay upon our own ability, and yet to go out of himself (...) (...), and
receive all from his sufficiency, are things which (...) stand together, I came
not to call the (...), (...). 9. 13. While they sought to establish (...) own
(...), they did not submit to the Righteousness of God.

Hence t (...) the second work of Humiliation is required, (...) God plucks
away all his props, and (...) him wholly of what he has or seems to have.
For pride (unto which Humiliation is opposite) is but the rankness of praise,
and praise is a fruit of a cause by counsel, that has power to do or not to do
this or that, as he sees (...) Humiliation is the utter nothingness of the
soul, that we have no power, it is not in our choice to dispose of our selves,
not yet to dispose of that which another gives, nor yet safe to repine at his
dispose: In a word, as in a Scion before it be ingrafted into another stock, it
must be cut osf srom the old, and pared, and then implanted. In Contrition we
are cut off; in Humiliation pared, and so sit to be implanted into Christ by
Faith.

In regard of God, without this disposition his Word Reas.
will not, nay cannot take any place in us, or prevail with prevail not, profit
not at all. As Christ told the Jews, John, 8. 37. 'My Word takes no place in
you, and Zach. 7. 11, 12. They hardened their hearts as an Adamant, etc.

A word of terror to dash the hopes, and sink the hearts Use, 1.
of all haughty and hard hearted sinners, God owns not such, will never
vouchsafe his gracious presence with them, or his Blessing upon them for good;
be where they will, dwell where they will, the Lord is not with them, nor will
dwell in them, by his comforting, quickening, saving presence: Hear and fear
then all you stouthearted, stubborn, and rebellious Creatures, whose
consciences can evidence that the day is yet to dawn, the hour yet to come,
that ever you found your sins a pressure to you, they have been your past-time
and delight in which you have pleased your selves, so far from being troubled
for your evils that it is your only trouble you may not commit them with
content, and without control, you are troubled with Admonitions, and Counsels,
and Commands, and Threatenings that cross you in your sins. You were never
brokenhearted here for your abominations, know assuredly that you will burn for
them one day; your proud hearts were never abased, and laid in the dust, the
Lord will ruinate both you and them. Never expect a good look from God, set
your heart at rest for that, you may draw the Eyes of others after you, make
many of your deluded followers and Favorites to look upon you, but the Lord
will not come near, nor once cast a loving look toward you, Psalm. 138. 6.
Though the Lord be high, he has respect to the lowly, but he knows the proud
afar off. Nay, the great God of Heaven and Earth is up in Arms against thee, he
is upon the March to work thy destruction, James, 4. 6. The Lord resists the
proud, but he gives Grace to the humble; all Grace is in his gift, and he doles
it only to the bruised and abased; but there is no thought nor expectation that
thou shall receive any Grace, nay, that Grace that thy rebellious and proud
heart has opposed and resisted, will work thy own ruin. Thou art the mark of
Gods direful indignation and vengeance, he plants all his Forces against thee;
If all the Wisdom in Heaven can contrive thy confusion, all the Power in Heaven
work it, all the Justice there determine it, it shall be done. God is nigh to
them that are of a contrite heart, he saves such as be of a broken spirit,
Psalm. 34. 18. true, and mark it, Of such, but such thou (...) not, such thou
deridest, scornest, whose hearts fail them under the weight of their
abominations, thou look at them as mopish, silly, despicable men, well, such
you shall see saved for ever, when such untamed, (...), proud wretches as thou
art shall be turned into Hell.

But we do see our (...), and have had many girds and Obj.
galls of Conscience for them.

True, It may be there has (...) some blows upon Ans.
thine heart, Conscience it has (...) thee, the (...) of the Word, it has
laid (...) (...), but it (...) not broken thy heart to this day; (...) that is
thus (...) (to go no further now than the very expression of the Text.)

If thy soul be beaten to (...) with this oppression of thy distempers (for so
this brokenness of heart was opened before) then as it is with the hardest
flints, when they are broken to dust, they are easily (...), and give way to
take the impression of the hand, or whatever is laid upon them: The stone which
out of its hardness before, opposed and started aside from the strongest (...)
(...) was laid; now its turned into dust the least and easiest touch leaves a
print and impression upon it; so it is expounded, as appears in this
opposition, 2 Chronicles: 30. 8. Be not stiff-necked, but yield your selves. Observe
then, is it so? when the power of the Word comes, the Scriptures are pregnant,
Arguments (...), (...) sweet, (...) sharp and (...), yet (...) heart shifts and
starts aside, and hits back the Authority of the truth, which thou can not
gainsay. The heart may be battered, but it was never broken, it may be over
powered and awed; but it was never humbled to this day. Its that of Prove. 3. 32.
The froward in heart is an abomination to the Lord, but the upright, he that
lies level, and bows to the Truth, are his delight. A froward man, that is, he
that turns off from the Authority of the Truth: Is this thy temper? thy heart
was never broken to dust to this day, but frampful and froward, know thou art
an abomination to the Lord. If thou should go to Heaven to dwell there, truly
God would go out of Heaven, he would not dwell with thee.

Pharaoh is the pattern of all proud Hearts, he hardened himself in his
wickedness against the Word of the Lord. But a broken and humble heart, either
lies right, or will come right, it will come to that bent of the (...) that is
revealed: Hard things makes that which is (...) soft to assimilate to them;
easy and yielding things assimilate to whatever they close: so Water in a
round Vessel (...) that form, in a three square Vessel, takes that. (...) (...).

(...), To teach us to delight in such, to desire Use,
the (...) of such as are (...) and humble men', to Zachary, 8. last, Ten men
shall lay hold on the skirt of a Jew, and they shall say, we will go with you,
for we have (...) God is with you. Much more here, for the Lord is not only
with humble hearts, but he dwells in them; we should therefore entertain such
Servants into our Families, such Inhabitants into Plantations, and such Members
into Congregations, for so you entertain God himself; Resolve as Ruth to Naomi,
Entreat me not to forsake thee, for where thou (...), I will live, thy people
shall be my people, thy God my God, where thou die I will die, and there will
I be buried, and nothing but death shall part thee and me. Nay go further, ye
blessed Spirits (say) death shall not part us, I will be brokenhearted with
you, and humble with you, and God shall dwell in us, and we shall dwell with him
in Heaven for ever. Oh now ye are right, keep here, and be happy here for ever.

Exhortation, To persuade us all, and to prevail with Use, 3.
us to take the right way to enjoy Gods presence, not only to seek for mercy,
but seek it in Gods Order, not only to covet Gods presence, but in Gods (...);
labor to be humble and brokenhearted Christians: then expect we may that the
Lord will manifest the presence of his Grace and Spirit with us, and in us, but
not else: Every man catches at Christ, and Mercy, and Comfort, but not in a
right Method, and therefore they lose him, and their labor also. This is Gods
order: First be humble and broken, and then he will revive your Spirits with
his presence, 2. Cor. 6. 19. Come out from among them, and touch no unclean
thing; then I will receive you, and be a Father to you. In a word, strive to
enter in at the straight Gate of Contrition and Humiliation, and then you will
hit the right way to Christ and eternal Life.

The Tenth Book.
ACTS, 2. 37. And when they heard this, they were pricked in their Hearts, and
said unto them, Men and Brethren, what shall we do?
THere be two Things especially observable in that disposition of Heart, which
the Lord requires and works in those he will draw to Christ, (...), and
Humiliation. The necessity of both these, we declared the last day, as that
they were not only to be looked at for complement and convenience, but such as
are of necessity required, that the heart may be fitted for the impression of
Faith, and by it for the entertainment of the Lord Christ; for if the sinner be
so settled in secure Contentment of his own condition as that he thinks he need
not change; or if he must, he is so confident of his own ability, that he can
change himself, and out of himself, and out of his own strength relieve
himself, he will never go out to another for succor and supply. Contrition
loosens a man from his sin, makes him see an absolute necessity to be another
man, or else he is a damned man. Humiliation loosens a man from himself, makes
him see an utter insufficiency in what he has or does, for to procure the
least spiritual relief unto his soul; now the Coast is clear, that Faith may
come to us, and we by that be enabled to come to Christ.

We are now to pursue these two according to the order propounded. And first of
the former, the Sum of which Work may thus be described:

Contrition is that Preparative Disposition of Heart, when by the sight of sin,
and the punishment due to the same, the soul is brought to sound sorrow for it,
and so brought to detest it, and to sequester it self from it.

The Description stands upon two Passages mainly.

I. The Causes which bring in this Contrition. 1. Sight of Sin. 2. Sorrow for
Sin.
II. The Effects which nextly discover this, and whereby it comes to be known.
1. Detestation of Sin. 2. Sequestration from sin.

And here I desire that still may be remembered which I mentioned and discovered
before, That all these are things rather wrought upon us by the impression and
motion of the Spirit, than performed by any inward principle, and habitual
power of Grace received, and this the manner of the expressions in the words of
the description plainly intimates; the soul brought to see his sins, brought to
forrow for them, brought to detest them, and sequester it self from them: For
the sinner would not look upon the loathsomness of his soul, and the filth of
his sinful distempers, but the Lord lays it before him, and holds his
apprehension to it, follows him with the remembrance of it, and forces his
thoughts to give attendance thereunto. Psalm. 51. 3. My sin is ever before me;
which way soever he turns his thoughts, his sins stared him in the face, and
were full in his view; they dwelt with him, and were daily in his presence,
that where ever he was, they were, he could not look off from them, look which
way he would.

2. The sinner would shake off the sorrow that now seizes upon him, and seems
to overbear him like a mighty stream, he labors to beat back the blow, and to
make an escape from under the stroke of the Truth that stabs and wounds his
heart, with the direful expression of Gods displeasure, and dreadfulness of the
evil that does attend him; but he can neither avoid it, nor remove it, neither
keep himself from the wound, nor cure it, Psalm. 40. Mine iniquities have taken
hold upon me, that I cannot look up: a similitude taken from the Prey that
flies from the Pursuer, though he would have fled from the terrors of the
Almighty, wrested and rescued himself from under the attachment, yet they
overtake him, and take such hold of him that he cannot escape: Psalm. 38. 2.
Thine Arrows stick fast in me, and thine hand presses me sore; he would have
plucked out the Arrows of Gods indignation, but his skill and strength failed
him, he could not be eased, they could not be removed from him: until at
length, the soul feeling the wrath of the Almighty, and seeing no way to avoid
an everlasting separation from the Lord, if yet his sins be entertained by him,
being thus pressed by the power of that undeniable Truth, which lays open the
loathsomness of his sin, and makes him feel the bitterness thereof, he is
carried with detestation against it, and driven to make a sequestration from
it. Of the fuller meaning of both these, when we shall come to the particular
scanning of them, in their proper place.

For the ground of my following discourse I have taken the words of the Text,
in which you have the grounds and hints of all the former Truths, not employed
only by way of collection, but expressly (...) down, and professedly aimed at as
evidently discovering the manner of Gods dealing herein.

The knowledge of their sins set down with the Causes r.
thereof, when they heard these things. Hearing] not that every hearing, or
bare hearing would serve the (...), for it is beyond question, that thousands
do, and many there did hear those savory Truths seasonably dispensed by Peter,
which were never either thoroughly convinced, nor had their hearts in any manner
affected therewith; the meaning therefore must needs be this, When by their
hearing they rightly discerned, and clearly conceived those things, i. e. the
nature of those sins, which Peter had discovered and charged so punctually upon
them; Let all the House of Israel know assuredly that God has made that Jesus
whom ye have crucified both Lord and Christ. When they so heard that they
yielded and assented fully to that which was (...) peremptorily (...) by the
Apostle, then they were pricked to the heart.

We have then here the fight and knowledge of their sin, together with the
Causes by which they came to attain it, and those were here intimated in the
words.

Their Conviction, in that they stood here indicted and Peter, and condemned in
their own Consciences that they were the guilty persons, guilty of no less than
the blood of the Lord Jesus the Son of God, and Savior of the World, who is now
advanced at Gods right hand as Lord and King, and shall come in flaming fire as
a Judge to condemn them for their bloody sins; who came in the flesh as a
Redeemer to save them from their sins: But they rejected him and their own
mercy and safety; and this says the Apostle admits no opposition, no
disputation at all, Let the House of Israel know assuredly, (...), It Is a Truth
that stands as Mount Zion, that cannot be stirred: it is beyond all cavelling,
questioning, doubting, (...) all probability or (...) to be other, a Truth not
subject to any slipping or uncertainty; so the word signifies.

The particular application that the Apostle here uses This Jesus whom ye have
crucified. He names not any other, blames not any other now, says not (...)
was a wretch that betrayed Christ, the Soldiers cruel and injurious that took
him and bound him; Pilate (...) fearful and unjust that condemned him, he will
not now speak to men absent; but you are they that crucified him, you that
cried, let his (...) (...) (...) us, you shall have blood enough, plagues
enough: this particular application sets hard, (...) deep, they heard these
their sins thus ripped up, and themselves arrested for them.

There is a serious (...) and attention here also Hearing, noting a continued
act; Hearing, bearing these sadly attending and pondering of them in their
thoughts, they came then to be pierced. Thus we have the sight of their sins
here laid open to us, together with the Causes thereof.

The second thing in this contrition, is sound and through

Their detestation and sequestration appears in the last Men and Brethren, what
shall we do? we will do any thing, suffer any thing, command what you will,
enjoin what you please, be it never so hard, we will endeavor it; never so
cross to our hearts or comforts, we will bear it; better be any thing than be
thus (...), let us be in any condition, that once we might be freed from this
sinful and accursed condition, in which we be.

We have taken liberty to lay out our Work with as much plainness and openness
of order as we may; because we shall have occasion to mind you of the
particulars in our future proceeding, and how the several (...) serve each
others turn, in their place and order.

Before we come to the Particulars, one Point (...) in the very entrance, which
will be very serviceable to make way for all the Truths following, and
therefore we shall take in that at this time, that it may be as an. Harbenger
to make room for all the rest. And it arises from a right consideration of the
parties to whom (...) here speaks, and with whom his word so prevailed, and
took place. (...) (...) 36. verse he tells them, that same (...) whom ye have
crucisied. They were therefore such as had rejected, blasphemed, (...) the Lord
of Glory; those who in a bloody manner (...) away the life of (...), who came
to take away their sins. Is it possible, is it credible, that ever mercy should
be extended unto such? that ever good should be wrought in such? Yes, Lo here,
When they heard this, they were pricked in their hearts. They whose hands were
imbrewed in the blood of Jesus, their hearts are now (...) with Godly sorrow,
and so made fit to receive Grace and Mercy.

Hence the Doctrine is,

Stubborn and bloody sinners; may be made brokenhearted Doct.
sinners: Bloody, hellish, abominable (...) may yet obtain broken hearts; worse
than these could hardly be conceived or imagined, and yet God makes work of
these knotty way ward Spirits; It was said of him that betrayed Christ, it had
been good for him that be had never been born. What shall we say of them that
murdered our Savior? they are in the highest rank of the most wicked men that
ever were born, yet even such as (...), who also opposed the Word and Gospel of
Grace, the Disciples and Apostles, the Preachers and Publishers of Grace, the
Author and God of Grace; yet such as these have now their hearts broken, and in
some measure prepared to be partakers thereof.

The Apostle speaks of the Gentiles, Romans 1. 29. That they were full of all
unrighteousness; there can hardly be added any thing to the largeness of the
expression: No sin worse for the kind, more for the number, greater for the
measure, for they had all unrighteousness, all the kinds of evil, and all
degrees in the largest extent they were full, and yet of such the Apostle
professes 1 Cor. 6. 9. when he had mentioned a heap of most loathsome and
hideous abominations; Know ye not that no unrighteous person shall enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven? Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor
Adulterers, nor Effeminate, self-Polluters, Extortioners, Covetous persons,
shall ever enter into the Kingdom of God: then verse 11. And such were some of
you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, in the
name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. Some such as these were
savingly brought home to God. Yea, when corruption becomes like an old cankered
sore of long continuance, and the sinner incorrigible under all the choycest
means that have been used, yet then the Lord works the Cure, Isay, 57. 18. I
was angry with him for his evil lustings, and he went on in the frowardness of
his own heart, there is no help if the Disease grow worse for the dressing, the
Prophet adds, I have seen his ways, I will heal him, and lead him, and restore
comforts to him, and to those that mourn with him; as if he should say, Ah poor
Creature, he cannot see himself nor me, yet I see him, and his way, he wounds
himself, but I will heal him; he deludes himself, but I will heal him; sink he
must in his own sorrow, but I will succor him, and supply to him, Isay, 48. 4.
I know thou art obstinate, and thy neck is an Iron sinew, and thy brow is
Brass; and yet Verse 17. I am the Lord thy Redeemer that teach thee to profit,
and leadest thee by the way thou should go. The Lord bows an Iron sinew, and
makes it bendable unto his will: The Lord makes snowy Saints of scarlet
sinners; scarlet we know is twice dyed in the Wool, and in the Web and Cloth,
and therefore it is beyond all the skill and art of man to alter it. Yet though
our Sins be such, bred in our Natures, committed in our Lives, and therefore
beyond our reach (...), and the power of all means and performances we can take
up to remove them, yet the Lord has undertaken it, and he will do it. Isa. 1.
18.

There is a Threefold Argument to settle this Truth.

Taken from the largeness of his Mercy, which is as Reas.
himself, Infinite; and therefore infinitely exceeds all Isa. 55. 7. Let the
wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and return unto
the Lord, for he will abundantly pardon, and to our God, for he will have
mercy. But the discouraged sinner might happily reply, It is Mercy that I have
abused, and his pardons he has tendered, yet I in the time of my folly have
trampled under my feet, and therefore with what face could I beg mercy, or upon
what ground could I think ever to receive it? He answers, For my thoughts are
not your thoughts, nor your ways my ways; for as the Heavens are higher than
the Earth, so are my thoughts than your thoughts: there is no proportion, no
comparison, the Earth is not of a valuable consideration to the Heavens, but
like a Center in the Circumference, it is as though it was not. So here, the
thoughts of Gods Mercy to pardon thee, is so far beyond the evil of thy ways,
and thoughts to condemn, that they are as though they were not: nay, though
thou could not believe it, or think it, yet the Lord could and would do it.
This is one of his names, He keeps mercy for thousands, Exodus 34. 7. he has it
in store for thousands, and FORGIVES Iniquity, Transgression, and Sin, that is,
all kinds and degrees of sin; and he must be thus, or else he were not God: For
did our sins exceed his mercies, our weakness his strength; were Satan more
malicious to tempt (...), and powerful to overcome (...), than he was gracious
to defend, and Almighty to deliver, then were he not God if any thing were
impossible to him, or had power above him; And hence the Lord delights to set
forth the praise of his Mercy, and therefore when sin is most vile, and
heinous, and hellish, then does he express his compassion in a most glorious
manner; it is the glory of the Physician when the Disease is most deadly, then
to do the Cure, Isa. 43. 24, 25. You have wearied (...) with your iniquities,
and made me to serve with your sins, behold I, even I am be that blotteth out
thy transgressions for my name sake; q. d. None but a God of endless Mercy
could do it, therefore behold it, acknowledge it, I will blot out your
iniquities, and remember your sins no more. This is the dispute of the Apostle,
Romans 5. last, having said that our Justification, Reconciliation, and Life
comes by Grace, he ads, why then serves the Law? he answers, That sin might
abound, that sin might be increased, and become more and more heinous, because
against an express Law, but where sin abounded, grace abounded much more; the
Lord gave (as it were) sin all advantages to do its utmost, and yet then Grace
would abound so much the more in conquering and reigning over sin: And
therefore it is certain, if all sins in the world (that against the Holy Ghost
excepted) should meet in one Soul as Waters in the Sea, the Mercy of the Lord
would abound much more, (...) those sins did abound.

The Merits of our Savior Christ are of an (...) satisfying Reas.
virtue, and exceed the venom of the guilt of all Rom, 5. 18. So Paul
constantly disputes, If by the offense of one sin entered unto (...), much more
by the death and obedience of our Savior Righteousness entered unto eternal
Life. And therefore it was that our Savior was pleased to receive our Nature
even from the vilest of sinners, that he might show himself a Savior from all
sins, Matthew. 1. Hence also his blood is called a fountain set open for Judah
and Israel, to wash in, for sin, and for uncleanness, Zach. 13. 1. i. e. For
all kind of sinners, and all sorts of sins. So that were thy heart a Sink, a
Sodom, a Hell of wickedness, if the water of this Fountain might pass through
and be applied, it would cleanse all. For our Savior (...) the infinite wrath of
his Father, which was due for our sins, more he needed not, nay should not. nay
could not have suffered, if he died for a thousand worlds of his Elect, if they
had come from the Loins of our first Parents. And I do believe there is virtue
enough there to pardon the sin against the Holy Ghost if it were applied, but
because it was committed against the work of the Spirit so directly, it is not
just he should, and there is no other that will; for the Spirit works from the
Father to the Son, and therefore last of all, so that they both have put forth
their works before, and if therefore his be wronged, he will not apply, and
there is none else that can; if the Work of the Father be wronged, Christ may
intercede; if he be blasphemed, the Spirit may apply; but if he be despighted,
there is none left that will or can.

Because the power of the (...) is such that he can Reas.
conquer and overcome all, which with his own Honor John, 4. 4. You have over
come the world, because greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the
world. That also which Paul propounds for the clensing of the most loathsome
puddles, 1 Cor. 6. 11. But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified in the Name of
Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God; for that Spirit is above all unclean
Spirits, and therefore when he will come and work upon the soul, and cleanse it
from all its corruptions, Sin, and the World, and the Devil, and all give way,
they cannot hinder his work.

So that if the Mercy of God be infinite, able to forgive all; the Merits of
Christ of infinite Virtue, able to satisfy for all; and the Spirit of infinite
power to conquer all, then the worst of sinners may become broken hearted
sinners, when the Lord will please to look upon them.

We have here matter of Admiration to see and stand Use,
amazed at the riches of Gods mercy and grace, which Mich. 7. 18. Who is a God
like unto thee, that par donest iniquity, and passest by the transgression of
the remnant of thine heritage, because mercy pleases him. He intends pardon to
such who have nothing that can purchase it, do nothing that can deserve it; nay
practice nothing which is in any manner pleasing, which might persuade him to
it; yea when he is displeased with all things but his own mercy, and indeed can
be pleased with nothing else, when they dishonor his Name, wrong his Justice,
reject his Commands, and grieve his Spirit, every thing provokes him, yet
because his mercy pleases him, therefore he does good against evil, therefore
he overcomes all their evil in goodness. Yea, When sinners out of their
impenitency, and malignant enmity of their Spirits, would destroy themselves
and his mercy also, and cast away his compassions; his mercy is pleased to
honor it self, and to save them, who is a God like this God? and what mercy
like this mercy? He is not like the Idols of the Heathens, even themselves being
witnesses, for the followers and favorites of Idol Gods, who (...) upon them in
time of prosperity, and devote themselves to their Worship, yet in the day of
distress, their Idols leave them in the lirch, and they are forced to look to
the Lord for relief. Jer. 2. 27. In the time of their trouble they will say,
Arise and save us. But the hope of Israel is not like them, when the Disease is
most deadly, he then cures, the condition of the sinner most desperate, he then
delivers, out of the jaws of Satan and botom of Hell, he then rescues.

Its the Prerogative he takes to himself. Thy destruction O Israel is of thy
self, but in me is thy help. Hos. 13. 9. It Is that praise which the Saints give
as the proper due of the Lord, Psalm. 103. Praise the Lord O my soul, who
forgiveth all thy sins, and heals all thy diseases; and Jonah leaves this
Cure upon Record after he was landed by the (...), Jonah 2. 6. Yet have thou
brought up my life from corruption O Lord my God; and verse 9. Salvation is of
the Lord.

Here is a ground of Encouragement to sustain the Use
hearts of such forlorn Creatures as are sunk down in desperate Matt. 27. 21.
the Son of God, they cried, away with him, away with him; not him, but
Barrabas; they choose a Murderer rather than a Savior: behold their butcherly
hands imbrued in the blood of Jesus, some goaring his side, others nailing his
feet, piercing his pure and holy hands; and that they might be bloody Creatures
indeed, they do not only shed his blood, but they keep his blood upon Record
for their Condemnation, say they, His Blood be upon us, and upon our Seed. That
v. 25.
which they have done, and desired for their own ruin, is it not just but they
should have it? do not thou wonder that the Earth did not open and swallow
them? that the Lord did not thunder from Heaven, and immediately destroy them?
or that he sent not Legions of Devils to drag those wretches souls out of their
Bodies to send them packing to the pit? And yet stay but a little, and see what
God has done, in the midst of all this hellish wickedness, look a little
further; they who took away the life of Christ, he is now taking away their
(...), and guilt from them; they crucified him, and he is now crucifying their
cursed corruptions; they pierced his tender body to put an end to his days, he
is now piercing their souls with Godly sorrow to put an end to their sins and
(...). Come hither therefore all you poor desolate undone Creatures, You whose
sins are written Jer. 17. 1.
with a pen of Iron, and graven with the point of a Diamond; they stand upon
record in every coast and corner; you stout-hearted rebellious sinners, the
Seats of the Place where you sit, the Stones in the Street where you walk, the
Walls of the Houses where you dwell, the Decks of the Ships where you have
sailed, and the Shoars where you have Landed, and the Wildernesses where you
have traveled, they can bear witness against you of the contempt of Gods
Truth, the neglect of his Ordinances, unprofitableness under all, you slight
all Counsels and Admonitions, you are amongst the number of them that are laden
with lusts, ever learning, 2 Timothy 3. 7.
but never coming to the knowledge of the Truth. So that the floods of iniquity
seem to compass and overwhelm, and might force you to sink down in irrevocable
discouragement. I confess your condition is extremely desolate and dangerous;
yet it is possible, it may be; there is a peep-hole of hope it may be otherwise;
and happy it is for you that there is yet a may be left, that God has not
sealed you up to condemnation, and turned the Tombstone upon you. Look up a
little, thou art yet alive, Oh therefore lay about thee while yet opportunity
and possibility lasts. Say, Lord, these sinful wretches that opposed thy
Grace, so long resisted thy Ordinances, thy Servants, yea, crucified the Lord
of Life, and yet their hearts are now wounded for their sins; Oh break my heart
also, humble my soul also.

Yea, but I cannot think it; truly I dare not, I cannot, I am ashamed to beg
mercy who have so long abused it. Why mark what the Apostle says, Ephesians. 3.
20. God is able to do exceeding abundantly above all thou can think or ask.
All this while the presumptuous secure sinner, he stands by and hears all this,
and he blesses himself in his lazy course, contents himself with this
possibility, and here takes up his stand, but neglects to do any thing that may
attain it.

Oh is it not pity to cast such Dainties before Dogs, and Pearls before Swine?
Did I say, it was possible? True, I said so indeed; but it is pity thou (...) in
the hearing of it, it is pity to speak such precious encouragements to such
poysonful and malignant spirits, that will pervert all to their own ruin. The
word is past, and cannot be recalled, but take these Preservatives or
Corrosives rather to eat out that impudent corruption.

Know, though it be possible, yet it is not possible to Matthew. 19. 36. With man
this is impossible.

Nay, know, That so long as thou continuest in that Heb. 3. 18. He has said
it, and sworn it, that they who rest in their carnal confidence, they shall
never enter into his rest: and God will not, nay, cannot deny himself, and his
Oath.

As it is possible God may, so it is possible he may not Romans 2. 4. Thou after
the hardness of thy heart which cannot repent, treasurest up to thy self wrath
against the day of wrath. It Is a shrewd suspicion if thou strivest long against
his Spirit, and slightest the season, he will cease to strive with thee and
take away the season, Luke, 19. 42. If thou had known at least in this thy
day the things belonging to thy peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes.

It will cost much labor and long time, before it be

This shows the (...) nature and the inconceivable Use
haynousness of the sin of despair, which rusheth the be, hightened with all
circumstances that may attend, as long as the soul can look out to the
infinitness of Gods Mercy and free Grace, the invaluable efficacy and virtue of
the Merits of the Lord Christ, his death and obedience, a man is within sight
of Land, when the Ship is split he may swim to shore. Look unto me all ye ends
of the Earth, and be ye saved, says the Lord, Isa. 45. 22. there is yet hope
in Israel touching this thing; for it is a true saying, and worthy of all
acceptance, That Christ came to save sinners, whereof I am chief, says Paul,
1 Timothy 1. 16. And as the Heaven is high above the Earth, so are the thoughts of
God above our thoughts, Isa. 55. But this sin of despair sinks a man's heart and
comforts as a stone flung into the midst of the Sea, carries a man beyond the
ken and compass of the boundless favor and compassions of the Lord. To go no
further than the Doctrine delivered, the malignity of this evil herein
discovers it self, as that which brings the greatest dishonor to God, and
irrecoverable danger to the soul.

It Is deeply injurious and dishonorable to the Almighty, great Work of
Redemption, there was wisdom beyond all the wisdom in the Work of the Creation;
power beyond and above all that power; God said, let there be a World, and it
was so: but saying will not serve the turn here, it must be the sending of his
own Son, the death and suffering of Jesus Christ, it must cost him his life
before lost man could be restored to life again; here was Mercy above all the
former Bounty and Goodness; that goodness then vouchsafed continued not with
man, nor he in it; but this is everlasting mercy, which does not only put us
into the possession of Grace and Glory, but keeps us there in despite of all
the power and policy of Devils, all the treachery and weakness of our own
hearts; despair casts the Crown of all his Power, and Wisdom, Truth, and
Faithfulness down unto the dust, and proclaims to all the world, in our
apprehension, our weakness is beyond his power, it cannot support us, our folly
too hard for his wisdom, it cannot lead and enlighten our minds, our misery and
sins surpasses the virtue of his mercy, it cannot help and relieve us.

This is the reason why the Lord cannot endure the least appearance of these
desperate pangs, as deeply injurious to the Honor of his Name, and that in the
greatest Excellency, Isa. 40. 27. Why say thou O Jacob, and speak thou O
Israel, my way is hid from the Lord, and my Judgment is passed over of my God?
Let no more such words be heard, the Lord cannot endure to hear you speak so,
or to have you think so; you cast the most vile unsufferable indignity upon the
Lord that may be. You drooping discouraged hearts, you think it is the
loathsomness of your own sins, the vileness and unworthiness of your own
persons that you look at in all those dreadful complaints you make. Is there
water enough in the Sea to cleanse this sink of hellish rebellions in this
wretched Nature? Can such loathsome abominations of so deep a dye, of so long
continuance, committed against so much Light, Grace, committed against knowledge
and Conscience, against patience and goodness, and that multiplied from day to
day, Can these be pardones? Mercy should be accessory to its own dishonor if it
should show mercy to such a wretch which has so abused it. Know assuredly, you
speak against the Lord all this while, while you would seem to speak against
your own wretched distempers; so the Psalmist Psalm. 78. 19. Yea (they not only
sinned more, and provoked God, as in the former verses, but) they spoke against
God, saying, Can God prepare a Table in the Wilderness? You blaspheme and speak
against his Power, which is not able to work it; against his Wisdom, which
cannot contrive it; against his Mercy, which is not willing, or not able to
succor you: It was the greatest sin that ever Cain committed, when he said his
sin was greater than could be forgiven, Genesis 4. Then thy heart is more sinful
than God can be merciful, Satan more able to damn thee than God is able to save
thee; then God is no God, and Christ is no Christ, and the Spirit no Comforter;
yea, this is to make the Devil, which is the worst of all Creatures, and Sin
which is no Creature, but weakness, and worse than the Devil himself, to be
above God, and the Lord Jesus, and the blessed Spirit of Grace; worse than
which blasphemy, Hell it self can hardly afford any. Hear therefore and fear,
and for ever abhor that such thoughts should once come into your minds, such
words proceed out of your mouths.

As it is dishonorable to God, so it is dangerous, yea, (...) may be otherwise,
this proud heart may be abased, this sturdy heart may he forced to stoop, this
unbeleeving heart though it has had, and abused, and slighted, and been
unprofitable under so many means, and after so many prayers, promises,
resolutions, continues still, yet it may be otherwise says Hope; this holds up
the head from sinking, the heart from failing: But despair takes away this, you
have tried, used the means, expected help, but you see it comes to nothing,
nay, there is no hope it will ever be, set your heart at rest, it will never
be. This stops all the These. 5. 8. Put on the Breast Plate of Faith and Love,
and for an Helmet the Hope of Salvation. Well-grounded evidence and assurance
of Gods Love in Christ, is as it were the head, and the highest top of a
Christians comfort, hope is the Helmet; for when our sense and feeling,
experiences and performances, yea our hearts fail, in regard of any present
sweet, or refreshing we have, yet hope says, it may be it will be better
hereafter, and this holds the aching head of a Christian: The Devil who ever
fights at the head, labors to shake our assurance and comfort, and if he can
dash a man's hopes by despair, he kills him dead in the head, there is no help
nor recovery to be looked for; know this, and be wary and wise for after times.

2. As it dams up the way, and stops the passage, that and contrive means, and
use what they have attained, improve what they take in hand, in hope the end
they have attended, may be brought about. Now where there is no hope (which
(...) casts off) there is no good to be expected, therefore no possibility to
attain our end, therefore no reason to attend our labor in that behalf. Why
should I se k (says the despairing man) when I have no hope to find? Why
should I spend my labor in praying, hearing, reading, improving any Ordinance,
when there is no possibility I should speed, that ever God should help, or
hear, or bless? as good sit still, as rise and fall. So Cain when he had laid
that desperate conclusion, My sin is greater than can be forgiven, he flies
into the Land of Nod, drowns himself in sensual delights, but forsakes the
Lord. The Hope of Good is the Lodestone of a man's labor, it carries on our
course with speed and resolution: So they in Jonah, 3. 9. Who can tell if God
will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not?
Therefore do these two things:

Let not Satan make conclusions from our weaknesses, Manassah, Paul; these
Converts in the Text were such, and yet such received the work of Grace and
Mercy also, therefore listen not to him who is the father of lies.

Look not to the power of means we do enjoy, the they will fail us and our
hearts also, there is no sufficiency for our succors, and therefore no sound
ground of Hope. But we should keep our eye constantly and continually upon the
sufficiency of Gods saving health, and incomprehensible power, Who is able to
do abundantly above all that we can ask or think, Ephesians. 3. 20.

Do you not see says the Enemy, the means do not work, your prayers do not
profit, the abilities you have, and the endeavors you take up, serve rather to
increase your sin than to help you, they nor you are able to subdue the least
sin, to gain the least assurance, not able to procure the least peace: True, be
it so, Yet God is able. Thus our Savior to his Disciples dismayed with the
difficulty of the work, Lord say they, who then can be saved? he answers, With
man it is impossible, but not with God, for with God all things are possible,
Matthew. 19. 26. It Is not possible says Satan, so many ways have been tried, so
many means used, and yet all is in vain; Ay but says Christ, though with man
and means it is impossible, yet with God it is possible. Psalm. 73. 26. My (...)
fails, and my heart fails, but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion
for ever. So much for that Point.

We are come now to enquire the Particulars expressed in the Description, and
here also presented to our view. And first touching the sight of sin, whereby
the sinner is made rightly apprehensive of his own corruption, and his
condition by reason thereof. The Point thence is this:

There must be a true sight of sin, before the heart can Doct.
be truly broken for it. A right apprehension goes before through Contrition;
The Judgment must be rightly enlightened to see the nature of our sins before
the heart can be pierced with that sense and sorrow that is meet. This is Gods
way which he takes, in whose hand it is only to do this work, Job, 36. 8. to
11. When sinners come to be bound in fetters, and holden in cords of
affliction, then he shows them their work, and their transgressions wherein
they have exceeded; and then bows their ear to Discipline, and commands them to
turn from iniquity. So repenting Ephraim prosesseth it was the course the Lord
took with him; After I was instructed I repented, Jer. 31. 19. That which the
eye sees not the heart rues not, that which is not apprehended by the
understanding, is not affected by the will; so in 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25. when (...)
word comes home in power and plainness, so that the thoughts of his heart come
to be discovered, he falls down, and says, God is in you of a Truth. The want
of this was the reason why the Woman of Samaria manifested such saucy
impudency, and peremptory boldness, in her conference with our Savior, though
she could not be ignorant that those abominable loose haunts of hers would call
to Heaven for revenge; but when our Savior laid his hand upon the sore, and let
the light shine in her face, and points at the vileness of her practice, Thou
have had five Husbands, but he whom thou now have, is not thy Husband; she then
becomes sensible of his sovereign wisdom, and her own wretchedness, John, 4.
18, 19, 20. So it was with Paul, when the Lord met him going to Damascus
persecuting the Saints; he saw not the sinfulness of his course, and therefore
was senceless of it. Saul, Saul (says Christ) why persecutest thou me? Then he
answers, Who art thou Lord? Jesus said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest, it is
hard for thee to kick against the pricks: when he understood the evil of his
way, then he stood trembling and astonished, saying, Lord, what will thou have
me to do? Acts, 9. 5, 6. Before the Corinthians were made conscious of their
own carelessness, neither pitying the soul of the incestuous Corinthian, nor yet
seeking to reform his sin, they gloried over him, and prided themselves in
their own conceited excellency; but when the Apostle had discovered their
miscarriage and failings, what sorrow and care did it work in them, and what
serious endeavor to reform the guilty party. The Doctrine is true, we shall
endeavor to make it plain, and therefore we shall open several particulars, the
right conceiving whereof will be as a key to unlock the Treasury of this Truth,
that each man may take what will serve his turn.

Enquire therefore we will

By what means, and after what manner God works this sight of Sin.

How far the sinner may be said to be active in it.

Wherein this true sight and apprehension properly consists, and so discovers
it self.

The Reason of this Truth, and the Lords Order in this proceeding.

And then we shall make Application of it.

By what means, or after what manner the Lord Quaere
works this sight of Sin.

To which I shall Answer in four Conclusions: Or

The Righteous Law of God, as it is the Rule of our Conclus.
Lives, so it is the Discoverer of our Sins, and swervings Romans 3. 20. By the
Law is the knowledge of sin; insomuch that Paul, a learned Pharisee, one that
profited in the Jews Religion more than his equals; he was yet at a loss in
discerning and judging of the turnings and distempers of his heart, before he
takes the light and lamp of the Law. So himself professes, Romans 7. 7. I had
not known that lust had been a sin, those first stirrings of the Body of death,
and secret lingrings and inclinations to that which is cross to the will of God,
though there be no consent given to them, no delight taken in them, but that
the Law said, thou shall not lust, the Sentence of the Law set down his
Judgment, and therefore the Apostle James compares it to a perfect and curious
Looking-glass, wherein each man may see the least blemishes or motes, if he
will present himself before it, James 1. 25. But whosoever looks into the perfect
Law of Liberty, and continues therein, will lay his mind, and heart, and life
level to the Law of God, and hold his heart and apprehensions to the righteous
Judgment, and Sentence thereof, it will plainly discover the smallest
imperfections, the least stirrings of the most hidden distempers that arise; so
Romans 2. 14. the Heathens with the twilight or Starlight of the remainders of
the Law written in their heart past Sentence against themselves, touching the
sinfulness of their course.

But this is not all, nor yet enough, to make us to attain Paul, Romans 7. 9. I
was alive without the Law once, but when the Commandment came, sin revived.
Without the Law, how could that be, since he was an Hebrew of the Hebrews, of
the Tribe of Benjamin, trained up at the feet of Gamaliel? a Doctor of the Law,
prosessed it, and practiced it, according to the most exact Sect of the
Pharisees, as he speaks? But the meaning is, that he was without the power of
it, and the spiritual life, and lively efficacy of the Law. It was a dead and a
killing Letter. Look what the sense of the words, or some evidence of Reason or
Arguments could hold out to a Natural Understanding; the bark, and shell, and
outside of such directions, he took and entertained. But the Spiritualness of
the Law, For the Law is Spiritual, says Paul, and that spiritual and lively
power of Conviction and Direction, it puts forth upon the souls of the Saints,
who are subject to it, and therefore indeed receive the work of it. This Paul
once in the time of his unregeneracy was destitute of, and then he was alive;
that is, in his own overweening, and self-deluded conceit, he concluded himself
to be a living Christian, to have the power and truth of Grace, and to live the
life of it. So that it is possible, nay it is ordinary, and nothing more usual,
than for men to be without the Law, when they have the Law; to be without the
Life of it, while they have the Letter of it; to be without the Law as a
Sovereign Rule to their Lives, while they take upon them the profession of it;
to be without the Spiritualness of the Law, and so to miss the end of it that
is closing with God, as our last end, and chief good, which is the sap, the
pith and substance of the Law, though they have the appearance of the practice
of it, (And if they miss the end of the Law at which it aims, and unto which it
tends, they must needs fall short of the Wisdom and Counsel, and Spiritual
efficacy of the Law, which should direct them) So in 2 Chronicles. 19. 3. Now for a
long time, Israel had been without the true God; that is, his true Worship that
would bring them to him; and that is the meaning of that Phrase, Ephesians. 2. 12.
Without God in the World; that is, without the true Worship of God: so that
they who want the true Worship of God, are without God. So they who have the
manner of the true Worship, and want both Spirit and Truth, in which God will
be worshipped, they have the Appearance, but want the Spirit and Truth of the
true manner they have. So of the rest. Thus it is with thousands in the Church,
which hear, and know, and have the Letter of the Law, and yet are indeed
without the Power and Spirit; and therefore they neither see the evil of their
sins by it, nor yet receive any spiritual Direction from it, nor indeed know
any such thing; and therefore though their carriages are somewhat reformed, yet
their inward corruptions are not observed, at least not reformed, or they made
sensible of them: As it is with a pur-blind man, he may see things of a greater
bulk, as a great Print, or the like; but the smallest Print, or the least
pricks, he perceives not: So it is with a pur-blind Christian who cannot see
afar off, 2 Pet. 1. 9. If there be some loathsome and gross sins discovered, he
can see them; but to see the stirrings of sin in his Nature, and the secret
inclinations of his soul to sin, and the base aims and ends that are up and
down in his heart in the performance of holy Duties, to see the smallest Print
of the Law discovering secret and spiritual wickedness in the Heart, that a man
that has no more than Nature cannot see. And therefore (for we come to the
Point) the Spirit of Bondage is required which may let in the light of the Law
into the mind, and set on the power of it mightily upon the consciences of
sinners, and so dazzle their Eyes, and daunt their hearts with the dreadfulness
of their sins, Romans 8. 15. You have not received the spirit of Bondage again to
fear: as who should say, it is a gift, and it must be received, or else we shall
not by all that we can do, attain the bondage and thraldom of that base
condition in which we are (whereof more afterward in Conviction.) The Law is a
Hammer, but it will not break the Flint unless the hand of the Spirit take it
and use it; a Hammer in the hand of a Child will not move the stones; so the
Law in the hand of a man or Minister, it is as a Rod to whip us unto Christ;
but unless the Spirit take it into his hand, we shall never feel the blow or
smart, and so be forced to go: Hence that Phrase, John, 16. 8, 9. I will send
the Spirit, and he shall convince, it is his Prerogative; he is appointed, by
him it is only performed.

The two former may agree to a false-hearted Hypocrite, and darkness out of the
mind, but the Saints of God have the two former and they have this further,
viz. such a through stroke of the spirit of bondage as takes away the rule of
darkness and removes the Soveraignity and Authority of it from the mind this I
take to be the meaning of that phrase, Acts. 26. 18. to turn them from darkness
to Light. When the Lord will work thoroughly, he will not only scatter the sogs
and disperse the grossest of the dimness and darkness of a man's mind, and leave
the soul under the power of it for all that. The hypocrite may be dazzled and
astonished by the light of the truth breaking upon him, but yet his
understanding is under the power of darkness, but the Saints of God are turned
from it, that is their understandings are delivered from under the power of
that darkness that was in them before. Conceive it thus, when the night comes
darkness overspreads the face of the Earth, and though there be Moonlight, or
some flash of Lightning sometimes, that may something take off the grossness
and blackness of darkness but yet it is dark still, the Moonlight or
Starre-light does not remove the rule of darkness: but when the Sun arises in
the East we say it is day break, and you shall see apparently when light comes
with a Command of the Sun, it scatters the darkness that was in the air, it
removes the rule of it, and it rules there it self; So it is with the spirit of
bondage, when he comes to an hypocrite he enlightens him with Starlight or
Moonlight as it were, so that the grossness of darkness and blindness is
scattered, that now a terrified hypocrit sees his sins, and is able to
Discourse of sin and of the Law of God and to Discover it to others, and yet it
is but Moonshine it makes not day, the root and rule of Darkness is there still,
which stops and hinders the intercourse of the dispensations of God unto the
soul. But now in a Godly man whose understanding is turned from darkness to
light, when the truth and light of it has by the spirit of bondage been (...)
on upon the mind and Conscience, you shall see day breaking as it were, he then
sees himself and his sin and he sees God and Christ, as the sun of
righteousness shining gloriously in his Eyes dazzling of him with such a light
as he never saw nor knew before, so in Acts. 9. the scales of ignorance and
blindness fell from the Eyes of his mind and he was turned from the power of
darkness, and that light which was let in to his understanding could never be
overcome^ again by all the darkness inthe world.

4 When the spirit of God has let in this light of the law in the
specification of it, as it belongs unto the Saints, and so has turned the
understanding from darkness, he leaves a set upon the understanding Godward,
that its ready, its that way-ward, to receive any truth that comes in the
impression of it; and this is the turn of the understanding to light, it was
before turned from God, and set hell-ward, sin-ward under the (...) of
darkness and acted thereby, wholly to bestow it self upon the creature in the
room of God; As when Adam sinned the whole man was turned from God to the
creature and sin, so now in Conversion, the whole man is turned from sin and the
creature to God again, and therefore the understanding from darkness to light.
And Hence it is that a poor ignorant creature that has come many years to the
Congregation, and has learned nothing he understands nothing, remembers
nothing, or if out, of the strength of memory he remember something yet he
knows no more the thing than a Parrat. But when God has once turned him, and
left this set upon his understanding, and the day is broken as it were and the
rule of darkness removed, and a new light set up there now he never comes but
he takes something, he can understand it, and remember it, there is no subject
but he will get something of it, because his understanding is heavenward. I
have known some by experience, that though they have been wise and witty
enough for outward things, yet so senceless and sottish in the things of God,
that they could sit and hear a Sermon of an hour long, of those very sins they
have been guilty, and yet it has been to them as though it had never been, yet
afterward they have professed it, that at such a time, the light of the word
broke in upon my soul, and after that I never heard the Minister preach but I
received something, and my heart did close with more than I could bear away, but
I could understand then, and remember also, ever after that time, This is
palpably true in cases of Conscience; I will issue this point thus 2 Pet. 2. 9.
who has called you out of darkness to his mervailous light, the soul now
begins to wonder and to be amazed, at the vileness of sin, at the frame of his
heart, at the patience of God that has suffered him so long, and he marvails
with himself where he has been, and what he has been doing all his days he
is in another world (as it were) and if ever you have had this work of the
spirit calling and turning of you from darkness to light it will (...) you a
wondering, you will see, sin and your self and grace and Christ and the
Ordinances and all after another fashion than ever you saw them before.

How far the sinner may be said to be active in this The second Partic. in
explication of the Point.
sight of sin.

The answer to this may be expressed in several particulars that that way of
God and the work of his spirit may more distinctly be discovered.

There is a weakness, impotencie and insufficiency in the understanding to
reach this right discovery of sin, for but to search into the entrales of sin,
and discern the spiritual composition of the accursed nature thereof, he can in
no wise attayn this by all the labor and light he has, 2. Pet. 1. 9. He that
lacks these things (that is these heavenly graces whereof the chief were
faith and heavenly knowledge mentioned before) he is blind and cannot see afarr
of, he may (like a purblind-man) give guess, or have a confused conceiving of
things, after a dym and dazzling fashion, if the things be near, as the man in
the gospel saw men walking like Trees, but there be secrets in sin, depths in
the disstempers of men's hearts, which are far removed from outward appearance
and ordinary apprehension, these he cannot perceive.

As it is in natural things and the several actions which issue from them, each
man is able to hear the sound of a man's words, to discern the sense and reason
of them, and will easily grant from the received principles of reason that they
come from a man, and evidence undeniably that there is a reasonable soul there,
which is and must needs be the cause thereof, because they are properties that
appertain to creatures of that kind alone, and argue a life of the highest
excellency, nor Trees nor beasts can do so, Its beyond their kind and the
bounds of their ability; But what this reasonable soul is in the constitution
and composition thereof, this is further removed from our sense, and so from our
apprehension, and it will exercise the most sharp and ablest understanding, and
that furnished with Learning and reading to apprehend or discover, so it is in
sin; when we hear the falsness of men's language, when they speak they care not
how, to cover their own shame or deny that which might bring danger to them,
when we see the cruelty and fiercness of their carriage in stealing or killing,
each man out of ordinary principles will condemn those, these be as it were the
words and hands of sin; Ah but the spiritual pride and sovereignty of will,
which lifts up it self above the law and will of God justles his holiness and
holy command to the wall, this is the inward soul of sin; thousands which
condemn the former have and harbor and maintayn these to their dying day; they
never saw the evil of them. How the sound of their actions strik outwardly they
hear and observe but how the wheels of their mind and will go inwardly and
swerve all the day long and all their lives long in the whole inward frame of the
whole man, they be as far to seek as though there were no such thing. The
Conscience checks and the worst of men see the loathsomness of the evil, if he
should stab and take away the Life of a man, but every Blasphemer stabs the
Lord and yet his Conscience does not so check him there, because he sees the
grossness of the one its near but the spiritualness of the other he does not
see, it is a far off.

To stick in the medium and fall short of the object is feebleness; That is the
proper intendment of the Apostle when he lays open the seebleness of the
wisdom of the most Eminent heathen Romans 1. 21. they knew God but did not
glorify him as God but became vayn in their discourse i. e. they fell short of
their end, of God whom they pretended to worship, they missed of him; that was
their vanity, and they worshipped the creature in the room of God. And hence
the Prophet expresses the practice of such as those who be wholly misguided in
their course by reason of their mistakes Isay. 5. 20. They call evil good and
good evil, they put darkness for light and bitter for sweet, and therefore it is
they are so easily cousened by Satan and do so easily cosen themselves; And
upon this ground it is, though they in Acts. 17. 23. worshipped an unknown God
and Paul would have taught them the true God whom they ignorantly worshipped,
they would follow their own fancies and worship Gods of their own making; but
the true God blessed for ever they might have heard of him and been instructed
concerning him, his being and Worship; they would not own nor entertain the
Apostles Counsel in that behalf, nay, verse 32. they mocked him when he spoke
to them of (...) things.

There is an incapability in our minds to receive this John 1. 5. The Light
shined in darkness and the darkness Comprehended it not. This is the Condition
of every man by Nature, So the Apostle, ye were darkness, Ephesians. 5. 8. Now one
opposite will oppose and resist another, but will not, nay cannot entertain
another, and hence the Apostle gives that to be the ground of that resistance
against the truth 2 Timothy 3. 8. They are men of corrupt minds, therefore they
resist the truth as Jannes and Jambres did. As it is in Nature when any sense
has lost his right temper and wholesome Constitution, it is not possible to put
forth its operation, with any right discerning or discovery of that which comes
to it, the taste is corrupt, the tongue tainted and overgrown with some Canker,
it cannot taste nor relish things aright, when the right constitution of the Eye
is altered by a blow or any putrefying Wen that Breeds there, (...) will
perceive nothing, nay it cannot; So here. When the Eye of the understanding
has lost his primitive (...), and becomes stained and polluted with putrefying
sensual delusions it comes to be Reprobate touching the Doctrine of faith, or
that which ought to be believed, not able to relish the truth in a right
manner; And this their practice gives evidence of beyond all doubt, the
revelation of the truth, which is in way of discovery of corruption, and that
which would touch them to the quick, they are not able nor willing in truth
without offense to hear. But the power of it to be pressed and persued they are
not able to bear, but there is present mutiny in their thoughts and
apprehensions, I say, not able to hear with quietness the truths which be of a
discovering Nature; when our Savior told them there must be more than an
outward formal Communicating with him, as the Fathers did eat Manna and are
dead, but they that would live by him must eat his flesh and drink his Blood,
they returned, this is a hard saying, who can bear it? John 6. 60. and John, 3.
20. He that does evil comes not (...) the light, lest his deeds should be
reproved; yea, this is the reason they (...) darkness rather than light,
because it suits best with the darkness of their minds; and as the very
manifestation is tedious to hear, so the power of it, if pressed and set on,
they are not able to bear; that is the scope of the Parable, Matthew. 21. 34. when
the Messengers were sent to require fruit, that is, Holiness, they beat some,
and stoned others, and others they abused, Acts 7. 51. when (...) brought the
Candle home to their Bedside, and would discover the roots of their corrupt
carriages to the Consciences of them all, Ye stiff-necked and hard-hearted, ye
have ever resisted the spirit of the Lord; their hearts burst with anger, they
cast him out and stoned him. And indeed hither the Apostle calls us to look as
to the Magazine of all mischief, the Armory and Ammunition House, whence all
the distempers and affections of the heart are furnished out to their sinful
practices, as so many enterprises they take in hand, Ephesians. 4. 18. they are
strangers to the life of God, it is because they walk in the vanity of their
minds. So again in Collos. 1. 21. They were alienated from God, and bent upon
evil practices; and he ads the root and reason of all, they were Enemies to God
in their minds, in their apprehensions, or the largest reach of the best reason
they had. and in this the Apostle makes the Fort-royal in which Satan places
and plants all the choycest of his Artillery, 2 Cor. 10. 4. there are in the
mind of a Natural man, strong holds of imaginations, which exalt themselves
against the knowledge of God.

The Lord Christ (...) the understanding to bear the prevailing impression of
his spiritual light, which searches the secrets of sin in the soul. The
Conclusion intimates a double work of the Spirit. 1. It destroies the
sovereignty of carnal Reason. 2. It leaves in the room of that an impression of
spiritual light; and in both these the understanding is merely passive, for so
it is added, it is forced to bear the one, it is fitted to receive the other.

It destroys the over swaying Authority of Carnal (...). 3. Has God said ye
shall not eat? Oh question it not, fear it not, Ye shall be as Gods; and so she
turning aside, and perverting the eye of reason to listen to the delusion
suggested, her light was dimmed, and she justly overborn with the force of the
falsehood presented, because she took off her mind from eyeing of the command,
and turned it to attend the strength of that delusion, and was so acted by it,
she conceived, though falsely, that it was good to get knowledge, when the
tasting that fruit was the only means to lose all the knowledge she had; and
from the abuse of her own mutability, her mind becomes perverted from light to
darkness, from the way of truth which God had found out, unto the by-path found
out of her own finding. Now the Lord Christ who comes to destroy and undo the
works of the Devil, he begins where Satan ended, he turns from darkness, he
takes down the Supremacy of that carnal Reason, by the which all the Sons of
Adam in their natural and corrupt condition are constantly both ruled and
carried in their whole course; and that is the Reason of the Apostles coupling
those two together, Ephesians. 2. 3. speaking of the Conversation of the ungodly, he
says, they did the wills of (...) flesh, and of their Discourses; their carnal
reasonings had ever one Oar in the Boat; and it is ever found true, there is no
man upon knowledge commits a sin, but ever he (...) some pretense of carnal
self-deceiving reason why he does so, and therefore it is called the strong
hold of Satan, and the Lord Christ, he first forces this Fort, demolisheth and
casts down the frame of it; so that though there be some remainders continue
still in the mind, while that remains in the body, and we in the world, yet
it is never made a place of retreat to a (...) Convert, wherein he can (...)
himself, and stand it out against any Truth; 2 Cor. 10. 4. he pulls down strong
holds, such as are highest and hardest to win; and that which is added, Casting
down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against God, (...).
Reasonings of the flesh; and nothing but the Power of God can do this, the
weapons of our warfare are mighty through God. For though Adam being in a
mutable condition, might slide away from the Government of God as well as
submit, yet after he had withdrawn himself from under the Covenant and Wisdom
of God in the Law given him, it was just with God to deliver him up to the
authority of his inventions, and there to stake him down, that nothing but the
Sovereignty of Christ who had satisfied for this his folly and carnal reasoning
should be able to restore him from the power of them. This makes me construe
the meaning of those words of Paul so, as that which best gives in evidence of
the dependence, (...). 4. 21, 22. If ye have heard, and been taught, as the
Truth is in Jesus, then put off the old man, etc. The Truth as it is in the
Bible only, or dispensed in any Ordinance, or as it was in the Covenant of the
First Adam, will never do it; but as it is in the hand of Jesus, the Head of
the Second Covenant when he comes to (...) a holy seed, and call home his Sons
to himself, he will then make the old man fall. And this the Lord Jesus forces
the Understanding to submit unto, and this is easily yielded on all hands; for
it is commonly confessed by Philosophers and Divines that there is a
constraining force in the undeniable evidence of Argument (...) on by the
Spirit, that the Judgment is necessitated to fall under, and yet hereby no
liberty is prejudiced, for that is in the will. Thus Paul's Commission runs
Acts, 26. 18. To open their Eyes, to turn them from darkness to light, from the
power of Satan to God. What is the opening of the eyes distinct from that which
follows? it may be (...) that common enlightening in the History, Matter, and
Truth of the Scripture wherein the understanding must in reason be informed,
and themselves also yield a full assenr, and so far be persuaded of the Truth
and Goodness of the Doctrine of the Gospel; for it is opposite to all the Rules
of Reason and Providence, that persons should step from profaneness in the depth
of it, unto the height of Christian Piety and Holiness, but there must be a
passing through the common Truths that are in the way and rode to come to that
end. First, a man must know there was a Christ, and who he was, and what he
did, and wherein that Redemption of his is recorded in the Scriptures, and of
what value and infallibility they be. Then we come to see our former follies
and delusions in which we were drowned, and so to be turned from darkness, that
we cast away the former forgeries of our carnal reasonings; where note, that
Paul turns them, not they themselves, that it is from darkness, they were
nothing but darkness, and darkness could not, nor would not turn from it self,
therefore from a more Sovereign light in Christ that darkness must be removed.
In all which the soul behaves it self merely passively, and is wrought upon,
and that by an overruling power.

The second Operation mentioned, follows without is hid from the light thereof.
So there is not the most secret corner or crevis of our corrupt hearts and
consciences, but the beauty and shine of the (...) of this light will discover
it; and this seems to me to be called the Spirit of the 'Mind, as that which
best (...) (...) the intendment of the Spirit in the place; for it is the mere
impression of the Spirit falling upon the (...) now turned from darkness, Ephesians.
4. 23. where the Apostle describing the two parts of Sanctification;
Mortification, verse 22. Put off the old man, in reason it should have followed
immediately, and put on the new man, he inserts this by the way, and be renewed
in the spirit of your mind, in the passive form; and then, put on the new man,
q d. This renewing is another work, and is to be referred to another place, and
it answers none so fitly and fully as this place; and the word also suits it
beyond imagination, (...), a comparison taken from Earth turned a new and
another way: So should the act of the understanding be turned afresh, and lie
constantly under the light and guidance of the Spirit; and here we are passive
merely. That which is merely the act and impression of the (...) to the
entertainment of the mind, is merely passive; but this is the mere act and
impression of the Spirit, as the beams of the Sun dispersing themselves into
the Air. Again, that which is wholly darkness, that cannot be active or causal
of any Spiritual light; but the mind naturally is mere darkness, Ephesians. 5. 8.

This light so received the understanding being overpowred and moved by the
power of this light does move again so that the action (...) not so much from
any habitual principle of grace, whereof a man has the free use and command at
his own pleasure, and so does act or not act by it as he will: for so
experience tells us it is not, The sinner at first would not see his sins
were it in his power and might he have his own mind, he would have the ghastly
visage of them gone out of his sight. Nay he uses all the ways and contrives
all the means he can, that he might put them out of his thoughts, that they
might not come into his consideration or remembrance, It Is against the heart
and hair, utterly against his will, that he cannot get off it; which argues
that he acts not so much here, as a cause by Counsel, out of his own choice and
habitual disposition whereof he has the command, but merely as he is acted;
and after when the spirit withdraws, he cannot so see them though he would, as
that phrase Gal. 4. 9. After ye have known God or rather are known of God. It Is
not so much from our own ability we have from within that we do it, but because
he looked upon us we look back again upon him. As a looking Glass reflects the
light not from any light it has of it is own, but because the light of the Sun
falls upon it, so that it is true to say, the light is reflected by it rather
than it reflects the light. For because the light (...) reflect (...) it comes
to be reflected. So Job Complained. Job. 13. 26. Thou make me to possess the
sins of my Youth. So David, Psalm. 77. 4. Thou keep mine eyes waking.

Wherein this true sight, and apprehension of sin properly The third Particular
in opening the Point.
discovers it self.

I Answer, A true sight of sin has two Conditions attending upon it; or it
appears in two things: We must see sin, 1. Clearly. 2. Convictingly, what it is
in it self, and what it is to us, not in the appearance and paint of it, but in
the power of it; not to fadam it in the notion and conceit only, but to see it
with Application.

We must see it clearly in its own Nature, its Native In many things we offend
all. But alas all this wind shakes no Corn, it costs more to see sin aright
than a few words of course; It Is one thing to say sin is thus and thus, another
thing to see it to be such; we must look wishly and steddily upon our
distempers, look sin in the face, and discern it to the full; the want whereof
is the cause of our mistaking our estates, and not redressing of our hearts and
ways, Gal. 6. 4. Let a man prove his own work. Before the Goldsmith can sever
and see the Dross asunder from the Gold, he must search the very bowels of
(...) (...), and try it by touch, by cast, by hammer, and by fire; and then he
will be able to speak by proof what it is; So here. We perceive sin in the
crowd and by hearsay, when we (...) some common (...) customary expressions
taken up by persons in their common converse, and so report what others speak,
and yet never knew the Truth, what either others or we say, but we do not
single out our corruptions and survey the loathsomness of them, as they come
naked in their own Natures; this we ought to do: There is great ods betwixt the
knowledge of a Traveller, that in his own person has taken a view of many
Coasts, past through many Countries, and has there taken up his abode some
time, and by Experience has been an Eyewitness of the extreme cold, and
scorching heats, has surveyed the glory and beauty of the one, the barrenness
and meanness of the other; he has been in the Wars, and seen the ruin and
desolation wrought there; and another that sits by his fire side, and happily
reads the story of these in a Book, or views the proportion of these in a Map,
the ods is great, and the difference of their knowledge more than a little: the
one saw the Country really, the other only in the story; the one has seen the
very place, the other only in the paint of the Map drawn. The like difference
is there in the right discerning of sin; the one has surveyed the compass of
his whole course, searched the (...) of his own heart, and examined the windings
and turnings of his own ways, he has seen what sin is, and what it has done,
how it has made havoc of his peace and comfort, ruinated and laid wast the
very Principles of Reason and Nature, and Morality, and made (...) a terror to
himself, when he has looked over the loathsome abominations that lie in his
bosom, that he is afraid to approach the presence of the Lord to bewail his
sins, and to crave pardon, lest he should be (...) (...) them, while he is but
confessing of them; afraid and ashamed (...) any man living should know but the
least part of that which he knows by himself, and could count it happy that
(...) was not, that the remembrance of those hideous evils of his might be no
more; Another happily hears the like preached or repeated, reads them writ or
recorded in some Authors, and is able to remember and (...) them. The ods is
marvelous great. The one sees the History of sin, the other the Nature of it;
the one knows the relation of sin as it is mapped (...), and recorded; the
other the poison, as by experience he has found and proved it. It Is one thing
to see a disease in the Book, or in a man's body, another thing to find and feel
it in a man's self. There is the report of it, here the malignity and venom of
it.

But how shall we see clearly the Nature of sin in his Quest.
naked hue?

This will be discovered, and may be conceived in the Answ.
Particulars following. Look we at it: First, As it respects God. Secondly, As
it concerns our selves. As it has reference to God, the vileness of the nature
of sin may thus appear.

It would dispossess God of that absolute Supremacy He is God over all blessed
for ever, Romans 9. 5. All from him and all for him, he is the absolute first
being, the absolute last end, and herein is the (...) (...) his Glory. Al those
attributes of (...), (...), Holiness, Power, Justice, Mercy, the shine and
Concurrency of all these meeting together is to set out the unconceivable
excellency of his Glorious name, which exceeds all praise, Thine is the
kingdom, the power and the glory, the right of all and so the rule of all and
the Glory of all belo (...) to him.

Now herein (...) the unconceavable hainousness of the hellish nature of sin,
it would justle the Almighty out of the Throne of his Glorious Sovereignty, and
indeed be above him. For the will of man being the (...) of all his
workmanship, all for his body, the body of the soul, the mind to attend upon
the will, the will to attend upon God, and to make choice of him, and his will,
that is next to him, and he only above that: and that should have been his
Throne and Temple or Chair of State; in which he would have Set his Sovereignty
for ever. He did in an Especial manner intend to meet with man, and to
communicate himself to man in his righteous Law, as the rule of his Holy and
righteous will, by which the will of Adam should have been ruled and guided to
him, and made happy in him; and all Creatures should have served God in man,
and been happy by or through him, serving of God being happy in him; But when
the will went from under the government of his rule, by sin, it would be above
God, and be happy without him, for the rule of the law in each command of it,
holds forth a threefold expression of (...) from the Lord, and therein the
Sovereignty of all the rest of his Attributes.

1. The Powerful Supremacy of his just will, as that he has right to dispose
of all and authority to command all at his pleasure; What if God will? Romans 9.
22 My Counsel shall stand and I will do all my pleasure, Isa. 46. 10. And as its
true of what shall be done upon us, so his will has Sovereignty of Command in
what should be done by us we are (...) say the will of the Lord be done; David's
warrant was to do all Gods wills Acts. 13. 22. and our Savior himself
professes, John. 6. 38. that he came not to do his own will but the will of
him that sent him, and therefore his wrath and jealousy and judgment will break
out in (...) that be disobeyed. 2. There is also a fullness of wisdom in the law
of God revealed to guide and direct us in the way we should walk, Psalm. 19. 7.
the law of God makes wise the simple, 2. Tim. 3. 15. it is able to make us wise
unto Salvation. 3 There Is a Sufficiency of God to content and satisfy us.
Blessed are they who walk in his ways, and blessed are they that keep his
Testimonies. Psalm. 119. 1. 2. Great prosperity have they that love the law, and
nothing shall offend them, ver. 16. and in truth there can be no greater reward
for doing well, than to be enabled to do well, he that has attained his last
end he cannot go further. he cannot be better;
Now by sin we justle the law out of its place, and the Lord out of his
Glorious Sovereignty, pluck the Crown from his head, and the Seepter out of his
hand, and we say and profess by our practice, there is not authority and power
there to govern, nor wisdom to guide, nor good to content me, but I will be
swayed by mine own will and led by mine own deluded reason and satisfied with my
own lusts. This is the guise of every graceless heart in the commission of sin;
so Pharaoh who is the Lord? I know not the Lord, nor will I let Israel go.
Exodus 5. 2. in the time of their prosperity see how the Jews turn their backs
and shake off the authority of the Lord, we are Lords (say (...)) we will come
no more at thee. Jer. 2. 31. and our tongues are our own who shall be Lords
(...) us? Psalm. 12. 4. So for the wisdom of the world, see how they set light
by it as not worth the looking after it Jer. 18. 12. we will walk after our own
devices and we will every one do the imagination of his own evil heart, yea they
set up their own traditions, their own Idols and delusions, and Lord it over
the law, making the command of God of none effect Math. 15. 8. 9. So for the
goodness of the word; Job. 22. 17. Mal. 3. 14. It is in vayn to serve God and
what profit is there that we have kept his ordinances, yea his Commandemnts are
ever grievous, Its a grievous thing to the loose person he cannot have his
pleasures but he must have his guilt and gall with them; Its grievous to the
worlding that he cannot lay hold on the world by unjust means, but Conscience
lays hold upon him as breaking the law. Thou that know and keep thy
pride and stubbornness and thy distempers, know assuredly thou do justle God
out of the Throne of his glorious Sovereignty and thou do profess, Not Gods
will but thine own (which is above his) shall rule thee, thy (...) reason and
the folly of thy mind, is above the wisdom of the Lord and that shall guide
thee; to please thine own stubborn crooked pervers spirit, is a greater good
than to please God and enjoy happiness, for this more Contents, thee; That when
thou considerest but thy Course, do thou not wonder that the great and
Terrible God does not pash such a poor insolent worm to powder, and send thee
packing to the pit every moment.

2 It smites at the Essence of the Almighty and the desire of the sinner, is
not only that God should not be supreme but that indeed he should not be at
all, and therefore it would destroy the being of Jehovah. Psalm. 81. 15. sinners
are called the haters of the Lord. John. 15. 24. they hated both me and my
Father. Now he that hates endeavors if it be possible the annihilation of the
thing hated, and its most certain were it in their power, they would pluck God
out of Heaven the light of his truth out of their Consciences, and the law out
of the Societies and Assemblies where they live, that they might have elbow
room to live as they list. Nay what ever they hate most and intend, and plott
more evil against in all the world, they hate God most of all, and intend more
evil against him than against all their (...) besides, because they hate all
for his sake, therefore wicked men are said to destroy the law Psalm. 126. 119.
the Adulterer loathes that law that condemns, uncleaness; the Earthworm would
destrow that law that forbids Covetousness, they are said to hate the light
John 3. 21. to hate the Saints and Servants of the Lord John 15. 18. the world
hates you, he that hates the Lanthorn for the lights sake, he hates the light
much more, he that hates the faithful because of the Image of God, and the
Grace that appears there, he hates the God of all, Grace and Holiness, most of
all, so God to Zenacharib, Isa. 37. 28. I know thy going out and thy Coming
in, and thy rage against me, Oh it would be their content, if there was no God
in the world to govern them, no law to curb them, no justice to punish, no
truth to trouble them, Learn therefore to see how far your rebellions reach, It
is not arguments you gainsay, not (...) Counsel of a Minister you reject, the
command of a (...) ye oppose, evidence of rule or reason ye (...); but be it
known to you, you fly in the very face of the Almighty, and it is not the
Gospel of Grace ye would have destroyed, but the spirit of Grace, the author of
Grace the Lord Jesus, the God of all Grace that ye hate,

It crosses the whole course of Providence, perverts the Romans 8. 22. The whole
Creature (or Creation) groans under vanity, either cannot do what it would or
else misseth of that good and end it intended, breeds nothing but vanity,
brings forth nothing but vexation, It crooks all things so as that none can
straiten them, makes so many wants that none can supply them, Eccles. 1. 15.
This makes crooked Servants in a family no (...) can rule them, (...)
inhabitants in towns, crooked members in Congregations, there is no ordering nor
joynting of them in that comely accord, and mutual subjection; know they said,
the adversary sin has done all this. Man was the mean betwixt God and the
Creature to convey all good with all the constancy of it, and therefore when
Man breaks, Heaven and Earth breaks all asunder, the Conduit being cracked and
displaced there can be no conveyance from the Fountain.

In regard of our selves, see we and consider nakedly

Its that which makes a separation between God and Isai. 59. 1. 2. Gods ear is
not heavy that it cannot hear nor his hand that it cannot help, but your
iniquities have separated betwixt God and you and your sins have hid his face
that he will not hear for he professes, Psalm. 5. 4. that he is a God that wills
not wickedness neither shall iniquity dwell with him. Into the new Jerusalem
shall no unclean thing enter, but without shall be dogs Rev. 21. 27. The Dogs to
their Kennel, and Hogs to their Sty and Mire: but if an impenitent wretch
should come into Heaven, the Lord would go out of Heaven; Iniquity shall not
dwell with sin. That then that deprives me of my greatest good for which I came
into the world, and for which I live and labor in the world, and without which
I had better never to have been born; nay that which deprives me of an
universal good, a good that has all good in it, that must needs be an evil,
but have all evil in it: but so does sin deprive me of God as the Object of my
will, and that wills all good, and therefore it must bring in Truth all evil
with it. Shame takes away my Honor, Poverty my Wealth, Persecution my Peace,
Prison my Liberty, Death my Life, yet a man may still be a happy man, lose his
Life, and live eternally: But sin takes away my God, and with him all good
goes; Prosperity without God will be my poison, Honor without him my bane; nay,
the word without God hardens me, my endeavor without him profits nothing at all
for my good. A Natural man has no God in any thing, and therefore has no good.

It brings an incapability in regard of my self to receive Why trangress ye the
Commandment of the Lord that ye cannot prosper do what ye can, 2 Chronicles. 24.
20. And He that being often reproved hardens his heart, shall be consumed
suddenly and there is no remedy, He that spils the Physic that should cure
him, the meat that should nourish him, there is no remedy but he must needs
dye, so that the Commission of sin makes not only a separation from God, but
obstinate resistance and continuance in it, maintains an infinite and
everlasting distance between God and the soul: So that so long as the sinful
resistance of thy soul continues; God cannot vouchsafe the Comforting and
guiding presence of his grace; because it is cross to the Covenant of Grace he
has made, which he will not deny, and his Oath which he will not alter. So
that should the Lord save thee and thy Corruption, carry thee and thy proud
unbelieving heart to heaven he must nullify the Gospel, (Heb. 5. 9. He Is the
Author of Salvation to them that (...) him) and forswear himself, (Heb. 3. 18.
He has sworn unbeleevers shall not enter into his rest) he must cease to be
just and holy, and so to be God. As Saul said to Jonathan concerning David, 1 Samuel 20. 30, 31. So long as the Son of Jesse lives, thou shall not be
established, nor thy Kingdom: So do thou plead against thy self, and with thy
own soul; So long as these rebellious distempers continue, Grace and Peace, and
the Kingdom of Christ can never be established in thy heart For this obstinate
resistance differs nothing from the plagues of the state of the damned, when
they come to the highest measure, but that it is not yet total and final, there
being some kind of abatement of the measure of it, and stoppage of the power of
it. Imagine thou saw the Lord Jesus coming in the clouds, and heardest the
last trump blow, Arise ye dead, and come to judgment. Imagine thou saw the
Judge of all the World sitting upon the Throne, thousands of Angels before him,
and ten thousands ministering unto him, the Sheep standing on his right hand,
and the Goats at the left: Suppose thou heardest that dreadful Sentence, and
final Doom pass from the Lord of Life (whose Word made Heaven and Earth, and
will shake both) Depart from me ye cursed; How would thy heart shake and sink,
and die within thee in the thought thereof, were thou really persuaded it was
thy portion? Know, that by thy daily continuance in sin, thou do to the
utmost of thy power execute that Sentence upon thy soul: It Is thy life, thy
labor, the desire of thy heart, and thy daily practice to depart away from the
God of all Grace and Peace, and turn the Tombstone of everlasting destruction
upon thine own soul.

It Is the Cause which brings all other evils of punishment Jer. 2. 19. Thine
own wickedness shall correct thee, and thy back slidings shall reprove thee,
know therefore that it is an evil, and bitter thing that (...) have forsaken
the Lord. Jer. 4. 18. Thy ways and doings have procured these things unto
thee, (...) it is bitter, and reaches unto the heart. Take miseries and
crosses without sin, they are like to be without a sting, the Serpent without
poison, ye may take them, and make Medicines of them. So Paul 1 Cor. 15. 55. he
plays with death it self, sports with the (...). Oh death, where is thy sting?
Oh Grave where is thy Victory? the sting of death is sin. All the harmful
annoyance in sorrows and punishments, further than either they come from sin,
or else tend to it, they are rather improvements of what we have than parting
with any thing we do enjoy, we rather lay out our conveniences than seem to
lose them, yea, they increase our. Crown, and do not diminish our Comfort.
Blessed (...) ye when men revile you, and persecute you, and speak all manner
of evil of you for my sake, for great is your reward in Heaven: Matthew. 5. 11.
There is a blessing in persecutions and reproaches when they be not mingled
with the deserts of our sins; yea, our momentary short affliction for a good
cause, and a good Conscience, works an excessive exceeding weight of Glory. If
then sin brings all evils, and makes all evils indeed to us, then is it worse
than all those evils.

It brings a Curse upon all our Comforts, blasts all our blessings, the best of
all our endeavors, the use of all the choycest of all Gods Ordinances: it is so
evil and vile, that it makes the use of all good things, and all the most
glorious, both Ordinances and Improvements evil to us. Hag. 2. 13. 14. When the
Question was made to the Priest; If one that is unclean by a dead Body touch
any of the holy things, shall it be unclean? And he answered, Yea. So is this
People, and so is this Nation before me, says the Lord; and so is every work
of their hands, and that which they offer is unclean: If any good thing a
wicked man had, or any action he did, might be good, or bring good to him, in
reason it was the Services and Sacrifices wherein he did approach unto God, and
perform Service to him, and yet the Sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination
to the Lord, Prove. 28. 9. and Tit. 1. 15. To the pure all things are pure; but
to the unbeleeving there is nothing pure, but their very Consciences are (...).
It is a desperate Malignity in the temper of the Stomach, that should turn our
Meat and diet into Diseases, the best Cordials and Preservatives into Poisons,
so that what in reason is (...) to nourish a man should kill him. Such is the
venom and malignity of sin, makes the use of the best things become evil, nay,
the greatest evil to us many times; Psalm. 10. 9. 7. Let his prayer be turned
into sin. That which is appointed by God to be the choycest (...) to prevent
sin, is turned into sin out of the corrupt distemper of these carnal hearts of
ours.

Hence then it follows; That sin is the greatest evil in the world, or indeed
that can be. For, That which separates the soul from God, that which brings all
evils of punishment, and makes all evils truly evil, and spoils all good things
to us, that must needs be the greatest evil, but this is the nature of sin, as
has already appeared.

But that which I will mainly press, is, Sin is only opposite to God, and cross
as much as can be to that infinite goodness and (...) which is in his blessed
Majesty; it is not the (...) (...) distresses that men undergo, that the Lord
distasts them for, or estrangeth himself from them, he is with Joseph in the
Prison, with the three Children in the (...), with Lazarus when he lies among
the Dogs, and gathers the (...) from the rich Man's Table, yea with Joh upon the
dung-hil, but he is not able to bear the presence of sin: yea, of this temper
are his dearest servants, the more of. God is in them, the more opposite they
are to sin where ever they find it. It was that he commended in the Church of
Ephesus, That she could not bear those that were wicked, Rev. 2. 3. As when the
Stomach is of a pure temper and (...) strength, the least surfeit or distemper
that befalls, it presently distasts and disburdens it self with speed. So David
noted to be a man after Gods own heart. He professes, 101. Psalm. 3. 7. I hate
the work of them that turn aside, he that works deceit shall not dwell in my
house, he that tells lies, shall not tarry in my sight. But when the heart
becomes like the Stomach, (...) weak it cannot help it self, nor be helped by
Physic, desperate diseases and dissolution of the whole follows, and in reason
must be expected. Hence see how God looks at the least connivance, or a faint
and seeble kind of opposition against sin, as that in which he is most highly
dishonored, and he follows it with most hideous plagues, as that indulgent
carriage of Ely toward the vile behavior of his Sons for their grosser evils,
1 Samuel 2. 23. Why do you such things, It Is not well my Sons that I hear such
things: It is not well, and is that all? why, had they either out of ignorance
not known their duty or out of some sudden surprisal of a temptation neglected
it, it had not been well, but for them so purposedly to proceed on in the
practice of such gross evils, and for him so faintly to reprove: The Lord looks
at it as a great sin thus feebly to oppose sin, and therefore verse 29. he
tells him, That he honored his Sons above God, and therefore he professes, Far
be it from me to maintain thy house and comfort, for he that honors me I will
honor, and he that despises me shall be lightly esteemed, verse 30. Hence it
is the Lord himself is called the holy one of Israel, 1. Hab. 12. Who is of
(...) eyes than to behold evil, and cannot look upon iniquity, no not in such
as profess themselves Saints, though most deer unto (...), no, nor in his Son
the Lord Jesus, not in his Saints, Amos, 8. 7. The Lord has sworn by himself,
I abhor the excellency of Jacob; what ever their excellencies, their
privileges are, if they do not abhor sin, God will abhor them, Jer. 22. 24.
Though Coniah was as the Signet of my right hand, thence would I pluck him.
Nay, he could not endure the appearance of it in the Lord Christ, for when but
the reflection of sin (as I may so say) fell upon our Savior, even the
imputation of our transgressions to him, though none iniquity was ever
committed by him, the Father withdrew his comforting presence from him, and let
loose his infinite displeasure against him, forcing him to cry out, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken (...)?

Yea, Sin is so evil, (that though it be in Nature, which is the good Creature
of God) that there is no good in it, nothing that God will own; but in the evil
of punishment it is otherwise, for the torments of the Devils, and punishments
of the damned in Hell, and all the plagues inflicted upon the wicked upon
Earth, issue from the righteous and revenging Justice of the Lord, and he does
own such execution as his proper work, Isa. 45. 7. Is there any evil in the
City, viz. of punishment, and the Lord has not (...) it? I make peace, I
create evil, I the Lord do all these things: It issues from the Justice of God
that he cannot but reward every one according to his own ways and works; those
are a man's own, the holy one of Israel has no hand in them; but he is the just
Executioner of the plagues that are inflicted and suffered for these; and hence
our blessed Savior becoming our Surety, and standing in our room, he endured
the pains of the Second death, even the fiercenes of the fury of an offended
God; and yet it was impossible he could commit the least sin, or be tainted
with the least corrupt distemper. And it is certain it is better to (...) all
(...) without any one sin, than to commit the least sin, and to be freed from
all plagues. Suppose that all miseries and sorrows that ever befell all the
wicked in Earth and Hell, should meet together in one soul, as all waters
gathered together in one Sea: Suppose thou heardest the Devils roaring, and
saw Hell gaping, and the flames of everlasting burnings (...) before thine
eyes; it is certain it were better for thee to be cast into those inconceivable
(...) than to commit the least sin against the Lord: Thou do not think so
now, but thou will find it so one day.

But if sin be thus vile in its own nature, why do not Quest.
men so discern it, so judge it?

That I may give a full Answer to this Question, I Ansiv.
shall first show the Causes of mistake: and secondly, the Cure. For the first,
There Is a five-fold Cause why though sin be so vile, and so great an evil, yet
naturally

First, The delusion of Satan dazles the eyes of our Jacob in the darkness of
(...) (...), takes Leah for Rachel, bad for good. So the Disciples took their
passion for zeal, Shall we call for fire from Heaven to destroy the (...),
because of their (...) dealing, as Elias did? Our Savior returns, You know not
what Spirit you are of, Luke, 9. 55. q. d. it is your rash anger that transports
you, not the Spirit of zeal that guides you; Judas pretends Providence and
compassionate care for the poor, when it was to promote his own profit, John
12. 6. Lukewarmness goes masked under the name of (...); licentious wantonness
in the abuse of the privileges of the Gospel, goes veiled with the Profession
of the Liberty of the Gospel, and while they profess, they must not be servants
to men, they serve their own distempered affections.

Men judge their sins according to the present sense and feeling of the flesh,
and the verdict of their sensual appetites pass thereupon, and sit down under
the sentence of their corrupt heaats, and they report of things according as
they relish them. It is (...) a sinful soul as with a sick body; the sick man
that is distempered in his (...) match, and his mouth out of taste, and his
pallat out of temper, he reports of his (...) and diet he takes as his pallat
relisheth it: So that in issue he tells you not what in truth it is, but how and
what he tastes; bitter things he calls sweet, because they are so to his Taste;
sweet things bitter, because they are so to his sense, though far otherwise in
themselves. So it is with a distempered heart, though otherwise gracious, if
yet it judges of them according to the relish of carnal Reason, or the present
apprehensions, their inordinate passions would put upon them; Jonah in a
feverish fit of a passionate distemper, he strikes he cares not whom, falls
out with God, his Providence, nay, his Counsel though most seasonably, sweetly
dispensed to him, Do thou well to be angry Jonah? Yea (says he) I do well to
be angry, and that unto death, Jonah, 4. 9. his passion like the pallat of his
sick soul, relisheth it so, to his own inordinate distemper, and so he judges
it. 1 Kings, 22. 8. 18. The heart of Ahab was inordinately transported with a
venomous hatred against Michaiah, and his message, though it was no other
counsel than the Lord had revealed, and he charged him to speak as in his Name;
yet it is no wise pleasing to his pallat, and so he speaks of it, Did not I
tell thee he would not speak good to me? So it was with Asah, when the Prophet
seasonably and sadly condemned his distrustful carriage, 2. Chron. 16. out of
an unbeleeving wrathful disposition he cannot relish it, but it carries the
taste of an insolent contempt and therefore he imprisons him, and very likely
all those that came to speak for him, and plead in his behalf, for so the words
follow, He put many of the (...) into prison, 10. verse. while he was in the
this distemper his spirit could savor nothing nor yet perceive the bitterness
of (...) heinous and high handed provocations of his against the truth of the
Lord and his Servants.

Though the mind be enlightened and the judgment also convinced of the
sinfulness of the course, and his Conscience is privy (...) and gives him many
a pluck yet he does not perceive the plague and venom in it, because he
judges it by the present profit he sees or pleasure he receives from it, and
so in truth sees the profit and the pleasure and contentment but sees not the
sin; As it is with the bitterest pills when they are sugared or covered over
with some pleasing Conserve, they are swallowed readily without the least
appearance of distaste or (...), and the reason is easy to conceave (...)
tasted nothing but the Sugar, though he took the pill down in it. So it is with
many base and wretched lusts, which are the very gal of bitterness, and carry
deadly poison with them, they are so Sugared, and covered over with applause
and credit in the world, pleasing contents or earthly conveniences, that the
mind is so taken up with the sweet and suitablness he eyes in them, that it
attends not the right judgment of the sin but lets it down without any
consideration; Satan plays here the cunning Apothecary and therefore orders
his Physic so, as he would have it retained or kept in the Stomach (like a
potion) not cast and vomited up again; Hence in all his enticements to evil
there is nothing but pleasing contents presented, that the sin may not be
perceived or scant thought upon, he shows the bait but hides the hook, In all
his discouragements whereby he would skare and keep off the heart from duty, he
casts in nothing but difficulties impossibilities hazards and (...), and (...)
expectation of unsufferable calamities, That the dreadfulness of the danger may
take off the heart from affecting or the mind from attending the duty, thus the
sinner sees not the good of the duty, but the ghastly visage of desperate
inconveniences, that seem to attend it. The extorting cozening Chapman, the
idling laboring man look only to the gain they get, not the wrong they do, The
Adulterer has the dilight in his eye that may suit and satisfy the flesh, not
the stain he leaves upon his soul and the guilt upon his Conscience, and the
wrath he treasures up until the day of reckoning. Thus (...) Thieves entice
their Companion to side with them in their course Prove. 1. 13. we shall find al
precious substance, we shall fill our (...) with (...), so the Harlot inveigles
the young man, and presents nothing before him, but promises of pleasing
content Prove. 7. 18. 22. 23. I have decked my bed with coverings of Tapestry
perfumed it with Mirrh Aloes and Cinnamon, come let us take our sil of love.
Thus she forces him with her fair words, and he follows (...) like an Ox to
the slaughter, and a Fool to the stocks, till a dart strike through his Liver
and he knows not that it is for his Life. So the enemy with the first Adam,
ye shall be as Gods Genesis 3. and (...) the second Adam Al these Kingdoms with all
the Glory of them will I give thee. Math. 4.

On the (...) he (...) off from holy services by showing nothing but the (...)
of the evil that attend them, that so the soul attends not the good of the duty
that follwes it. Thus he prevayled with Peter he laid before him the
fearfulness of the danger now eminent and such as in (...) might draw on death,
and his thoughts were so taken up with attendance to that, that he had no
leisure to consider the loathsomeness of his Lying, Cursing, Blasphemy and
unfaithfulness in denying his Master until at last Christ looked, and he
remembered and he went out and wept bitterly, 'Math. 26. Last. so they looked
upon the stature of the Giants, the height of their walled Cities, and their
Iron Chariots and therefore did not expel them, and so they became thorns in
their eyes and pricks in their sides, Bribes blind the eyes of the wise,
because the understanding looks not upon the Cause, but them, and the Cause in
them. So the pleasures of sin Bribes the heart and blind the eye.

A fourth ground of mistake is because men judge of the evil of their sins by
the patience and long suffering of God, which he extends toward them in the
midst of their deservings; that because they are not now troubled they think
they shall never be plagued, because that judgment is not presently executed it
will never be inflicted. Out of a secret kind of Atheism and desperate slighting
of the truth of God, in the vileness of their sins which it discovers, and the
judgments it denounces. This was their guise in Psalm. 50. 21. I held my tongue
and said nothing, and thou thoughtest wickedly that I was such a one as thy
self; but I will reprove thee and set thy sins in order before thee. Its so at
this day, men judge Gods connivance and forbearance a kind of allowance, and
because he forbears to reprove them, that therefore he will never come into
judgment against them; when men see the way of the wicked prosper, and them
exalted that rebelliously transgress, they conclude sin is not so dangerous as
Ministers would bear men in hand, nor God so severe against it or them. And
therefore they look at the threatenings of scripture as words of Course used as
in way of policy that God only would awe and scare men but does not purpose to
Condemn men. Why do ye not see (say they) that the most base on earth have
commonly the best portion and largest allowance of the most pleasing Contents?
do not their Breasts run full of Milk, and their Bones full of Marrow? do not
their Eyes stand out with fatness, and have they not more than their hearts
desire? Psalm 73. when such as walk with most exactness are fed with bread of
sorrow and water of affliction as their constant diet. We see no such danger in
sin, nor no such indignation the Lord bears against it. Upon this ground it was
that the profane, in Mal. 3. 15. make open protestation against the practice
of Godliness, We count the proud happy (say they) The strength of this
Temptation took Asaph aside, and almost turned him out of the way, Psalm. 73. 2.
when he saw the prosperity of the wicked, and the Lords bounty and forbearance,
he thought he had cleansed his heart, and washed his hands in vain. And it was
too hard for all the art he had to help himself. The wise man makes it a
conclusion, which is settled in the hearts of all the sons of men beyond all
doubt, Eccles. 8. 11. Because sentence is not speedily executed, therefore the
hearts of the sons of man are wholly set to do evil: because the Lord out of
his long-suffering abates them the present feeling of the plagues and
dreadfulness of their sins, therefore they determine it, there is no such
poison in them.

The Fifth and last cause of mistake, is want of that Laodicea had of her own
worth, Rev. 3. 17. Thou say thou art rich and increased in goods, and
want nothing: the reason he gives whence this erroneous apprehension came,
was her ignorance, She knew not that she was poor and miserable, and blind, and
naked; she wanted eyesalve to anoint (...) eyes that shemight see. The last
resolution of these (...) in a sinful carriage, our Savior refers hither, John,
15. 21. All these things they will do unto you, because they have not known him
that sent me. They wanted a spiritual understanding, and right conceiving of,
God, and that was the reason they rushed into the crowd of all evils in a
heedless and careless way without any consideration.

The Cure of these mistakes is by a double means.

Look upon thy sins as they will look upon thee at the day of death, and the
day of judgment, for there they Moses, Heb. 11. 25. That he chose rather to
suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin;
which were but for a season; q. d. Sin remains always with the wicked, but the
pleasure does not, that is but for a season, and that is but the time of Gods
forbearance, that he is pleased to abate the sinner of his dipleasure and
vengeance, at the utmost it is but for the term of this life; at the day of
death and judgment the pleasures of sin will be out of season. There is no
pleasure the Adulterer can take in his lusts then, the Drunkard in his cup, the
covetous worldling in in his wealth, they are out of date, the season is gone,
the applause of the proud, and the pomp of the great ones is out of season,
only the guilt and filth of sin remains, stares them in the face, and gnaws
their Conscience, and eats their flesh, as James speaks, as it were with fire,
cries day and night in the ears of the Lord of Hosts against them: It is said
of the Whore of Babylon at her fall, Rev. 18. 14. That the fruits that thy soul
lusted after are departed from thee, all things which are dainty and goodly are
departed from thee, and thou shall find them no more at all. Let thy sins now
appear as they will then appear, when all the pleasing, and dainty, and goodly
contentments that thou promisedst to thy self are departed, when all the paint,
and colors, and covers are removed, all the sweetness whereby they were sawced
are taken away, and thy distempers are stripped naked of them, and thou can
find them no more. The proud, malicious, (...), peevish, that have pleased
themselves in their sinful distempers, and continued in them, they will find
their sins indeed, and they will find them (...) down with them in the Grave,
where they will rot and rise with them to Judgment, and go with them to Hell:
but the thought and remembrance of their delights, the looking upon the
Harlots, and sight of their fellow drunkards, shall increase their torments,
and they shall curse themselves, and the day that ever they saw one another.
Upon this Consideration it was that (...) gave the awaking (...), 2. Pet. 3.
10. The time will come when the Heavens shall melt with fire, and the Earth,
and all the works thereof shall be burnt up. All the riot of the Epicure, the
rage of the Oppressor, the greedy pursuit of the Worldling, all the works on
Earth shall be consumed, no more matchings and quaffings with Drunkards, only
that that touched the Lord as an eternal God that shall continue, and that is
the Holiness of that Obedience that was sincere, that was performed to God; and
the guilt of the sin that was committed against him, all the carnal contents
that accompany a sinful course, they are but works of the Earth, they will be
consumed. But that which was against Heaven, and against God, that will never
be consumed, neither wildfire, nor Hel-fire will consume that; but it will
live there to work thine everlasting ruin. Labor therefore to make these
things present with thy heart, and real to thy own apprehension, be not deluded
by Gods long (...), the longer the blow is coming, the heavier it will be; the
greater (...), the greater vengeance; and thou that (...) had the Treasury of
Gods Bounty and Goodness (...) out unto thee, Thou treasurest up wrath against
the day of wrath, and revelation of Gods (...) Judgments.

Strive mightily to (...) a (...) sight of God himself, as he is pleased to
dispense himself in his Holiness and Goodness to the soul to be enjoyed as
(...) all-sufficient good, beyond all created Excellencies in the Creature. It
was the advice of our Savior, Rev. 3. 18. I counsel thee to buy of me Eye Salve
that thou may anoint thine Eyes, that so thou may see. For darkness is
not seen but only by the help of light, Crookedness by the Rule of
Straightness, He that knows not the Rule of true Latin will never be able to
know what is false, and and so it is in any Art, he that knows not the Rule of
building, planting, he will never discover an error in either. The like we may
say and conceive touching the discovery of sin, because it is a swerving from
the righteous and holy will of God in his government and communication of
himself to the Creature, it is a professed jusling with that, and his wisdom
and goodness therein. unless (...) Eyes be anointed with Eye Salve to see him
and the purity and spiritualness of his pleasure, as that which only should
rule us, and only can satisfy us. We shall never see (...) in its own
nakedness and Nature. And hence it is, when the wicked in the trouble and
terror of their Consciences feel the fierceness of the fury of the Almighty
(...) upon their Souls, they know now the smart of sin, and God also as a (...)
Judge, whose anger they can neither avoid nor bear: This is only a Consequent
and a fruit of sin, and comes after it. But to see a right the Sovereign (...)
of his Wisdom to guide them, and the all sufficiency of his Goodness far
exceeding all created excellencies, and their (...) as a going from both these,
if they be misguided in the one, they cannot but mistake the other. Job, 42. 4.
I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye sees thee,
therefore, I (...) my self, when (...) saw God clearly, he saw his (...): So
the Convert in 1 Cor. 14. 24. When he had the thoughts of his heart (...) ed
and made manifest, (...) (...) God is in you of a truth, because he neither saw
God (...) himself before, and when he sees the one, he sees (...), 1. John 3.
7. He that (...) sin, has neither seen him, nor known him, and these be the
terms of true conversion so set by the Apostle, turned from the power of Satan
unto God, Acts 26. 18. q. d. they fell short of the Sovereign Power and
Holiness of God before.

We have (...) with the First, What it is to see Sin The second Particular
wherein the true sight of sin consists.
(...): We are now to enquire of the Second, Wherein this true sight of Sin
(...), that is, we must see it also convictingly; what it is to us in the work
of it, as well as what it is in it self, in the Nature of it. This appears in a
double act, or in two Things:

1 We must apply sin particularly to our selves. 2 It must be settled with an
over-powring strength, upon a man's own soul.
We shall open both these in the order propounded.

He that sees his Sins convictingly, must (...) content himself with the (...)
and speculation of Sin, to speak freely of it, to (...) out the (...) of his
corruption, or to lay (...) the (...) thereof in a judicious and pregnant
(...). This a wicked man may learn, this a right godly man may sometimes do, and
yet do himself (...) (...) by it. Therefore it is required he must see it with
a particular application of it to himself and his ownestate (...) (...) (...)
same sentence upon those he (...) in his own (...), which he did upon any when
they (...) presented to his own (...) in the (...) without (...). There are two
things (...), we shall open both.

He must (...) (...) eye inward, follow his own (...) home (...) his own (...),
and cause his own judgment (...) (...) upon his own (...) and corruptions. This
is called in (...). (...) (...) into a man's (...) (...) 1 (...) (...) (...),
(...) If the people of Israel (...) (...) (...), and (...) (...) (...) (...)
them, and deliver them to the enemy, so that they (...) them (...), (...) if
they shall bethink themselves: the Original thus; if they shall bring it back
to their own heart. They had common apprehensions of sins as they saw them
committed by others, or as the word revealed them in the evil of their own
nature; but they did not look inward to the loathsome vileness of (...) evils
which lay in their own bosoms, until they came into Captivity. Thus the
Prodigal is said to come to himself, Luke 15. 17. he had lived without any
search and consideration of his own ways, lost himself in letting loose his
thoughts in the eager pursuit of his own lusts; now he began to take an account
of his own course, to see how the case stands with him, in regard of his own
corruption and condition in particular. The want of this the Prophet Jeremy
makes to be the principal (...) why men rush into the commission of sin, and
continue therein; without any (...), Jer. 8. 56. Why is this People of
Jerusalem slidden back with a perpetual backsliding? they hold fast deceit,
and refuse to return: they (...) themselves with some false imaginations, quiet
themselves by some self-deceiving mistakes, and so think they need not, and
therefore do not return; the reason is rendered in the next words; I hearkened
and heard, and no man repented; and why that? No man said, what have I done?
they bring not their own carriages to the scanning, each man will be ready to
be Eagle-eyed into other men's occasions; and can easily enquire, and question;
and determine, and say, others have done thus, and so, here such have fallen,
therein such and such have failed, but no man says, What have I done? and
therefore become fearless of what they have done, and careless of what they do:
but each man rusheth into his own wretched course as the horse into the battle;
because he carries not the light of the Truth into each (...) and (...) of his
conscience, to pry into the secret (...) of his own spirit, and judge aright of
that, else be his knowledge never so large, he will get little good by it. The
(...) that has his full charge, if it carry but level, give fire to it, it
hits and kills the live mark at which it is shot, but (...) hurts the shooter
unless it recoyl in the full power, then the man that discharges it hardly
escapes with life. It is so with the understanding that stands charged, that
is, fully informed with a clear discovery of the nature of sin, it is able to
dart in that light into the minds of others, that may dazzle their eyes, daunt
and wound their consciences with the dreadful apprehensions of the (...) of
their evils, and work their hearts through the blessing of the Lord to a godly
remorse for it: but unless their own thoughts recoyl back again upon their own
miscarriages, and the falseness of their own hearts, they will never be awed,
or humbled, or helped against their own sins thereby. Here is then the rule we
must arrest our own souls in (...). Achan was never troubled all the while he
heard there was an (...) thing in the Camp in general, but when the lot had
found him, and all Israel had charged the evil upon him, then his heart failed.
So we should not content our selves to know and confess that sin is an
execrable thing in general, which causes Gods gracious presence to be estranged
from (...), (...) leave not before we see the lot fall upon Achan; (...) thou
(...) attach thine own heart, take it in the very fact, and as men deal with
mutinous Traitors, drag thy wretched and rebellious heart before the Tribunal
of the Lord, and deal faithfully, and give in (...) against it; say, Lord,
there be many Traitors and Rebels abroad in the world which dishonor thy Name,
grieve thy (...), (...) thy Kingdom, (...) thy Law, lo (...) they be; (...)
(...) heart that has been stubborn and proud, it is my mind that is vain, my
affections loose; my life barren and unprofitable; here are those (...) (...),
unclean (...), (...) desires, no (...) (...) (...) (...), (...), (...) here
they be, Lord (...) they (...).

We must also pass sentence impartially without any (...). 1. 9. The Lord will
come in Flaming Fire rendering Vengeance to them that know him not, and obey not
the Gospel, they will all give in their verdict as one man with one mind, such
as be guilty of such disobedience, must certainly have this (...) Vengeance
from the hand of the Almighty, but infer, therefore this is (...) lot and
allowance from the Lord, because they have not, they do not obey the Gospel
(...) (...), their (...) do testify so much. Now the case is altered, when its
once come to their (...), Its another kind of ignorance and (...), and (...)
another (...) acted then (...) (...) they.

This (...) of our (...) (...) (...) self (...) hearts, the Philosopher in the
practice of men even by the twilight of the common Principles of reason
remaining in the decays of nature observed. For taking it for granted that no
man does will evil under the name of evil but as it comes under the appearance
of some good and that all men easily grant and freely confess that Drunkenness,
Injustice, Intemperance are evil, the question then grows how these men
judging these carriages to be evil, are daily taken aside with the Commission
of them. Ask the Drunkard whether (...) be unlawful, he consesseth it Loathsome
and yet commits it, Ask the Blasphemer whether (...) be a sin, He will profess
it detestable at one breath, and practice it at the next. Thieves themselves
count it unjust that any by cunning should deceive them, cry out of falsehood
and yet by force (...) (...) others; the ground is here. When the question is
put and propounded in the general, they will grant it.; when it comes to their
particular for such a man at this time upon this occasion in this company for
such an end, to be loose or tipple in this manner this is not unlawful. For in
these the Devil casts in (...) (...) (...) or (...), Credit, Friendship,
Familiarity (as the Lawyers alter the Case by circumstances) and by these he
would put another (...) upon (...) carriages and (...) make them (...) (...):
(...) (...) hearts they give in evidence of (...) (...) (...), (...) (...),
(...) (...), (...) our (...), and (...) would have the sentence (...) (...)
them, that in case they may be (...), and not utterly (...). So David saw sin
in the (...) (...) (...) (...) own (...): So (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) her (...) (...), when he himself (...) (...) of the (...)
(...) Genesis (...). 24. Therefore thou (...) (...) thy (...) with (...)
Application, that they are in thee as in others, and (...) (...) in thee (...)
thou (...) (...) (...) in (...).

(...) The (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) them apply (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) upon our Consciences: otherwise such a particular
apprehension may and will suddenly pass away, and the steams of our distempers
will easily alter and corrupt our understandings, and bring the cause quite
about. This particular application will be as a sudden flash of Lightning
sliding through our minds, which leaves all as dark as ever when once over,
therefore there must be a settling of this with an overpowring strength,
leaving it there enrolled that it may stand upon record in a man's Conscience.
The former arrests the sinner, this latter lays hold upon him, pinions him,
and imprisons him as it were, until he have answered what the truth has
against him, herein lies the life and power of a conviction and if it be of the
right stamp and carry indeed an overpowring virtu in it, it will appear in
three things.

It must be, 1. Undeniable, 2. Immovable, 3. Victorious and invincible.


Conviction must carry an undeniable evidence with (...), when he stood upon
the terms of his (...) at several times when God had terrified him by the
discovery of himself, he then yields the day, Job. 7. 20. I have sinned what
shall I do unto thee Oh thou preserver of men q. d. I have no reasons to
allege, no excuses to make, no arguments to plead, I (...) the action, I have
sinned. Thus the Lord took down the height of (...) of the Word, that as it is
said of Stephen, they could not (...) the Spirit by (...) he (...); (...)
(...), (...) though the (...) would gain say, yet (...) (...) and (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) 18. 15. Nay, but (...) (...) (...). So the Spirit follows the
soul, and (...), and removes these Cavils and Objections that the sinner makes,
and still shows and says, nay, but this is thy sin, and (...) will be thy
damnation; that the sinner is (...) to yield, and say, this is the Truth, I
cannot (...) it; it is my condition, I cannot deny it; this is my sin, and will
be my (...), I cannot but expect it.

It must be Immovable, of such (...), That as it (...) (...) understanding to
sit down under the evidence of the Truth as confessing of it; so it keeps it
under the sting and (...) of it. That as it is with the Bird in the Net, the
more she stirs to get out, the faster she is taken: So with the sinner, the
more he desires to fly from the (...), to (...) it, the more strongly the Truth
takes hold of him in the terror of it. So (...) (...) where he will, do what he
will, go whether he will, the Truth will go with him as a Jailer with the
Malefactor; for the Truth is so (...) when (...) brings in the discovery of our
sins at the first, that it (...) a man weary of each (...), each condition,
(...), and of his life, that (...) could wish not to be; that he may not be
under the terror of it. And therefore though he cannot (...) the Evidence of
it, yet he would (...) some (...) and shifts that may be to take off the (...)
of the dreadfulness of it, or make an escape from under the stroke and strength
of it: but all in vain; for the Conviction is immovable, no man can take it off
if God set it (...): All the Carnal Reasonings, corrupt Pleas, sinful Cavils,
whereby men would put by the blow, they do all vanish before this Light, (...)
(...) before the Sun. The more he opposes it, the more he is under guilt, and
so the strength of the convicting Truth; his sins way-lay him in every place;
he sees his sins dished out before him on the Table where he eats, lie down
with him in the Bed where he rests, when he dreams they terrify him, when he
awakes they are as so many Sergeants to arrest him, and summon him to Judgment
they are imprinted in the paths where he walks, and where ever he goes, he sees
his sins going before him, and he going to Hell with them.

Such an immovable discovery the Lord set upon the heart of Job when he let in
the light of himself, that he sits down in silence, and has not one word to
say, no way to wave it or to slip aside from under the evidence of it, Job. 40.
4, 5. Once have I spoken, but I will say no more; yea twice, but I will go no
further. While his friends were talking with him, their Arguments were so
feeble that he could find a way out, and could free himself from the stroke,
and deliver himself from the dint of the blow: but now the conviction besieged
him with such evidence that no carnal reason could relieve him, stops all
passages that there is not a muse or crevis for him to creep out, therefore he
sits down in silence, sees he cannot ease himself, nor wind away by any
pretenses and wiles he can devise: It is so with a corrupt heart beleaguered
with the light, so that if his carnal friends, or ignorant neighbors, his loose
companions would strive to take off his thoughts, alter his apprehensions, and
abate the edg of the blow, and (...) to put in bail for him; his state is not
so miserable and helpless, nor his sins so vile, quiet your heart, there is
mercy with God, and satisfaction in the merits of Christ. He replies, I have
often cozened my self with such devices, miserable comforters are ye all. I
have thought as you do, and said that which you speak in former times; but
alas, these shifts will not serve the turn. Christ came not to comfort sinners,
but to convert them also; to humble sinners as well as redeem them; he came to
save sinners but to destroy their sins first; I never found (...) (...). I must
not expect the other, nor you neither, This is to (...) the thoughts, to bring
them under (...) (...), under the Authority of the Truth that they may not once
hush or (...), 2 Cor. 10. 5. And this is that spirit of (...) the Apostle
speaks of, Romans 8. 15. It makes us (...) of our slavery, and binds a man hand
and foot as it were, fenceth his way with fears, besets his passage on every
side with expectation of evil, which he cannot tell how to bear, or how to
avoid; he sees he can procure no (...) nor (...) to himself, and fears he shall
never obtain none from the Lord, dares not commit sin as formerly, yet cannot
tell how to be freed from it. So that as Reuben sometimes in another case, so
the sinner in this, and I, whither shall I go? Genesis 37. 30. evils appear from
every quarter which way soever he looks; if to Heaven, there is Justice to
punish; if to Hell, there are Devils to torment; into himself, there is
Conscience to accuse; on Earth in his daily course, there is nothing but his
daily rebellions, and his confusion daily before his face, and the truth is the
more terrible because he has withstood (...) so long: That as it fares with
the prisoner that had the freedom of the prison while he carried himself
fairly, but because he has been taken in some false pranks, and plotting an
escape, he is now laid in the (...) and (...) with (...), now never like to
(...) (...) day, or look for any breathing. So here, my estate is more
miserable because I have opposed the means that might have procured my help,
the checks of Conscience, I have smothered or slighted; many warnings I have
had, but willingly forgot them; many sad reproofs that laid hold (...) me, but
I studied how to wrest away my thoughts; it is just with God to load me with
Curses, which would never look for comfort from God in a right way. (...) ever
there was a (...), I am he (...) (...) ever God (...) a Rebel, he will (...)
(...).

Lastly, This Conviction is victorious and invincible, It does not only stop
the mouth of carnal Reason, and the cavils thereof, but also displaceth it. It
not only stills the (...) and pretenses of the sinner, but makes the mind and
heart give attendance to the Truth, to be subject thereunto, and to take the
impression thereof. For otherwise the sinner thus tired and dauled by the daily
laying at of the Truth, may either happily lie still, though not cavil with it;
yet not give attendance to it. But in a stupid kind of fortish sencelesness,
wear out the blow, and so wast away to nothing, as many out of sorrow have
become like senceless blocks. Though their practice has not been evil, yet
they have had no heart to good; or else they fall to desperate profaneness or
professed opposition; when they cannot escape the prison, they will break the
prison, and lay violent hands upon the Keeper, Romans 1. 18. They hold down the
Truth in unrighteouness, they imprison the Truth while the Truth should
imprison them, therefore when the Lord will settle an over-powring Conviction,
he makes it victorious: Therefore he is said, Job, 36. 9, 10. When he shows
them their transgressions, he commands that they return from iniquity. (...)
(...) break out, and over bear and force the mind and heart to give attendance
and take the impression of it, as when the Conqueror and he that (...) got the
Victory, comes in place, all give attendance unto his (...). The want of the
maintaining this (...) power of a Conviction, I take to be the cause why many
even of Gods own are so (...) taken aside after althe helps they do enjoy, and
the resolutions they take up. I have often wondered when a man has be (...)
with much bitterness in days of humiliation such and such evils, begged for
grace and help, and resolved against them; they know and (...) it is in (...) to
cavil, or think to make an escape, (...) they reject such a (...), and (...)
they (...) (...) aside, and that strangely and (...) they fall (...) (...)
(...) with their old corruptions. They do not put this Conviction into
commission, they do not make it victorious, or maintain it so, or the Authority
thereof, so as to force attendance. When the (...) is good, and (...) Mill
tight, why goes it not? There is not so much Water kept as to drive it, because
they have let out the stream and strength another way; therefore there is not
so much power in a conviction as to force attendance, and to drive the heart to
obedience. Therefore as Paul said to Timothy, 1. Tim. 4. 15, 16. Meditate upon
these things, and continue in them, or be in these things. So you must be in a
Conviction, and continue under it if you would find it victorious, and then it
will be so first or last, and will eat out al opposition, though with much ado.
As it is with Aqua fortis if laid upon Iron, though it do not at once, and
suddenly, yet secretly and insensibly it will eat the Iron in pieces. So it is
with a Truth which God will make victorious, it will lie upon the Spirit of a
man, and eat there, and work there, and break out effectually, it may be many
years after, Job, 33. 16. this is called the sealing of (...) Instruction;
which is to add Authority and Sovereignty to it, as when the Edict was sealed
by the entreaty of Haman, there was no opposing, no gainsaying of it.

The Reasons of the Point (which was the fourth Particular attended in the
Explication) come now to be considered: And these are two:

The first is taken from (...) order which the Lord in the Reas. 1.
way of his providence and work of nature has placed betwixt the mind and the
(...), the understanding and will of man. these two faculties have a near kind
of correspondencie, the one to help forward the work of the other. Knowledge and
understanding is the inlet into the soul nothing comes to the heart nor (...)
work upon it but so far as knowledge makes way, etc ushers it in (as it were)
into the presence of the will and leaves an impression thereof upon it. (...)
use to say that which the eye sees not (...) heart rues not; that which the
understanding conceives not, the will is not, nay cannot be affected with, if
Good to embrace it, if evil to be (...) and troubled therewith. Its the method
(...) observed in Gods dispensation toward him, when his heart was brought to
a hatred against the evil of his ways, Psalm. 119. 107. By thy Commandments
have I got understanding therefore I hate every false way. Unless a right
understanding go before, a through hatred will not follow after. As it is in the
body unless the stomach receive and hold and convey also the purgation either
to the spleen or lower parts of the body be the receipt never so strong yet will
it never stir the humor, or trouble nature though the distemper were abundant
and dangerous. Because in an ordinary course of providence, there is no way
(...) come to the humor but by this means. Its so in the soul, be the truths
delivered attended with never so much terror and power, able to sink the heart
of a sinful Creature as not able to endure the dread of it, if yet the
understanding conceives not the nature of such truths, nor convey and settle
them sadly and Convictingly upon the heart, its not at all stirred in the least
measure therewith much less troubled with the danger discovered therein,
because they cannot reach the heart, therefore can never work upon it. As
through ignorance we commit sin because we see not the evil in it, so after
commission we sorrow not because we apprehend not the (...) and danger Acts. 3.
17. I know that through ignorance you did it, as did also your Fathers, 1. Cor.
2. 8. For had they known it they would never have crucified the Lord of life,
It fares with a fals-harted (...) as it did with the wife of Jeroboam, when she
came to enquire of her sick Child, all the while she had received no certain
evidence, whether it would (...) or live her heart was (...) and comforted in
her present hopes. But when Abijah the Prophet related the message of the Lord;
Come in thou wife of Jeroboam why fainest thou thy self to be another? behold I
am sent to thee with heavy (...). the Lord (...) bring evil upon the house of
Jeroboam and will cut off him that is left, get thee home to thy house, and
as soon as thy feet enter into thy house the Child shall die, this sunk her hopes,
so fares it with a fals-harted ignorant sinner he may be quieted with the
persent appresion, of his good condition when he has no evidence to the
contrary. But when the Lord sets up an overpouring conviction in the mind which
may give in (...) and infallible witness of its (...) and (...) estate (...)
thou fals-hearted hypocrite why (...) thou thy self to be another? and
befoolest thy self with vayn hopes behold here is heavy tidings sent unto thee
from the Lord of hosts. thou art yet in the gal of bitterness in the bond of
iniquity and if thou die so, thou (...) certainly (...) from the presence of
the Lord for ever. This fastening the truth upon the conscience comes home and
forces the heart to feel and to be affected therewith.

Ignorance frustrates wholly the end of all the means we use, and the
endeavors we take up for reformation Reas. 2.
of the evils of our hearts and lives. For.

1. First it misleads all our endeavors that they succeed not; it misleads our
whole course and our proceedings against our sins, and out of mistakes presents
our corruption as appearing sweet through our misguided apprehension, and
causes us to oppose our Savior Christ and his truth that would subdue them.
This Paul professed to be the ground of his (...) carriage, when he should have
persecuted the enemies of the Church he (...) the Church and that out of (...),
Phil. 3. 6, concerning zeal I persecuted the Church, so far from finding his
sin bitter to him (...) having his heart broken from it, as that (...) (...)
the practice of it with the greatest expression of zeal, as that which deserved
the best of his endeavor and wherein he might spend the best of his pains and
that you may see how ready we are in the dark to put up Snakes in our bosoms
instead of sweet (...). He nakedly and ingeniously confessed whither his (...)
led. I did verily think in my self I should do many things against the Name of
Jesus. Acts. 26. He that conceived it as a matter of duty to do such things,
his heart upon such grounds under such delusions would never be carried against
these, Ignorance will make a man swallow the worst (...) any change, 1 John 16.
2. the time will come that they who shall kill you, will think they do God good
service, that which keeps the soul insensible of the bitterness of sin, and
from feeling of the weight of sin, that will also keep it from being weary of
it, and willing to part with it It Is a popish practice and a principle of the
power of darkness. Ignorance is the Mother of devotion; when men cannot tell
how to lead themselves or see their own way you may lead them (...) way you
will, and if once Satan can keep a man from the sight of his sin he will keep him
sure under the command of sin, and drive him to do his drudgery and that with
delight and resolution, when the Phylistians had put out Sampsons eyes, they
led him whither they would and made him do what they would. Paul in his
ignorance strikes a Friend instead of an Enemy, and strikes he neither knows
nor (...) who. Acts. 9, who art thou Lrod?

2 As thus ignorance misleads a man's whole course that it succeds not, so it
perverts the power of all means that they profit not, misapplies all the means
he has, and so spoils them and his own peace and comfort also insomuch that
his corruptions grow more strong and incorporated into him and he more
unwilling to part with them, and that's the fruit of ignorance; the promises and
comforts of the Gospel which do not appertain to him, he catches greedily at
them, as a portion provided for (...) and goes away with that dream, and swells
unmeasurably (...) presumption and selfconfidence; Are not all the Congregation
holy? what needs this severing and differencing of men? what are (...) who
would be the only Saints? are not we al sinners, and Christ dyed for such and
for us as well as for them? the threatenings and curses which the Lord denounces
against the ungodly (...) cast them away with a fearless contempt, as such as
do in no wise touch them or concern (...) particulars, and therefore should not
trouble them; tush say they we have made a league with death and a covenant
with Hell, and when the destroying scourge passes over, it shall not come near
to them, Isay. 28. 15. yea they do commit evil, and yet say they are delivered
by the Lord, Jer. 7. Thus they grow (...) and hard hearted, the wholesome
counsels and directions of the word, which should be light unto their feet, and
a discovery of al their failings, they slight the exact attendance thereunto as
that which God will not exact at their hands, because in many things we sin al,
and so become careless or negligent as though they should not answer, and the
Lord would not exact what they cannot do. Its with an ignorant sinner in the
midst of all means as with a sick man remaining in an Apothecaries shop, full of
choycest (...) in the darkest night: though there be the choycest af all
receipts at hand, and he may take what he needs, yet because he cannot see what
he takes, and how to use them, he may kill himself or increase his distempers,
but never cure any disease: so here with an ignorant person, he enjoyes al
means, and yet abuses them, he may increase his corruptions, but not reform
them, his heart grows more hard, and his corruptions more strong, but he cannot
in reason expect any help.

Hence we learn by way of Instruction: An ignorant Use. 1.
(...) is a naughty heart, whether out of blindness they do not, or out of
profaneness they will not understand, and look into their estates. He that never
saw his sin aright, he never yet saw good day, nor the least appearance of any
saving work of Gods grace in his soul, yea he is so far from attaining such a
condition, that in truth he is not in the way to it. We will go no further than
the consideration of the former truth, and then let thy Conscience be judge in
the case propounded. Suppose then thou should hear a distressed creature
under the terror of his Conscience freely and ingeniously lay open his
condition unto thee. The day is yet to dawn and the hour yet to come, that ever
he was touched with any sense of sinful rebellions, never yet Godly sorrow came
into my soul, nor remorse into my Conscience for all my many (...) before God
and men, wounds of Conscience, burdens of spirit, and brokenness of heart for
our daily departures and provocations they are wonders and riddles. I have
heard of such dispositions, but am a stranger to the having of the least work
that way. I appeal to thy own Conscience, what would thou think of such a
party, who thus confesses, and is as he confesses? me thinks I hear thee
answering, and thy heart shaking before thou give it, What! senceless of his
sin! how fearful is his estate! Where there is no sense, there can be no
sorrow, no repentance, therefore no Christ, nor pardon, nor Salvation, for
unless ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Never broken, God will never
bind, so far from being good that he is not yet in the way to receive any good.
Woe unto him that has thus sinned, and thus continues. Oh poor ignorant
Creature thine own mouth has condemned thee, thou have past (...) against
thine own soul, thou never had a true sight of thy sins, therefore thou
could never have a true sense of them, or sorrow for them; thou never hadest
a sound apprehension, thou can not have a through contrition for them. It
came not near thy heart to break it, when it never touched it in Truth, nay, it
never was within thy ken to see it in aright manner: See yet thy misery further
in enlarged these several Degrees following:

There is no evil thou can prevent, no good thoucanst receive, no mercy thou
can expect: and when thou have looked sadly upon these, thou will have thy
load.

Liable thou art to all the hazards that Devils can devise or intend, men
endeavor, or thy self deserve. A blind man is subject to all kind of injurious
dealings from the feeblest persons, yea, from Children; plot they may, he
cannot perceive; do they may, he cannot avoid. It is so with an ignorant person
in his Spiritual condition, he is a prey to his sins, and a spoil in the hands
of Satan that catches him at his pleasure; and carries him headlong and
hood-winked to everlasting destruction, every snare entraps him, allurement
intangles him, temptation foils him; he can see nothing, prevent nothing, but
goes like an Ox to the slaughter, and a Fool to the stocks, and knows nothing:
Nay, were there no Devils to tempt thee, thou would run into all evils of
thine own accord. An ignorant heart like a blind man, stumbles at every block,
falls into every ditch, yea, rusheth with greediness to the practice of the most
hellish evils: It was the Jews case, out of ignorance they chose Barabbas a
Murderer, and rejected the Lord of Life; they were violent to take away his
blood, that came to take away their sins, and this out of ignorance; for so our
Savior in his prayer, Father forgive them, they know not what they do, Luke 23.
34. He that walks in darkness, knows not whither be goes, though he go to Hell;
1 John, 2. 11.

There is no good he can receive from any means remaining in this blindness.
Counsels do not take place; (...) cannot persuade, Judgments, Threatenings do no
awaken, Admonitions, Exhortation are of no force, they are beyond the reach of
all these, they cannot come at them, therefore cannot work upon them, But as in
some desperate diseases when they are come to the greatest extremity, as in a
Quinsie, when it has swelled beyond measure, that speaking and swallowing are
wholly hindered, each man that sees will easily conceive, and conclude, Alas, he
is but a dead man, he can take nothing, therefore it is not possible he can
continue. The Disease indeed is curable, but how should his Physic cure him,
or his Diet nourish him, if he can take neither, there is no good to be
expected, to be done, when he can take nothing that can do him good. So it is
in the soul, ignorance stops the passage of the power and work of al Gods
Ordinances: There is no corruption, but the means are mighty through God to
relieve, if they could be taken; were the heart proud, if the Word were
received and welcomed, it would humble it; if stubborn, it would meeken and
calm it; if unclean, it would purge it. But ignorance stops all the passages,
intercepts the work of the Word, the understanding conceives it not, and the
heart cannot profit by it, nor be bettered therewith.

There is no Mercy thou can expect: And this is able Isai. 27. 11. They are a
people that have no understanding, therefore he that made them, will not save
them, nay, he will show no mercy to them. It Is the determination, he has (...)
as a conclusion beyond control, Hos. 4. 14. The people that do not understand,
shall perish; It Is the last execution he will put forth, 2 These. 1. 8. He will
come in flaming fire; rendering vengeance to them that know him not. They are
the mark in the first place, against which the fiercest of his fury expresses
it self. They that will not now see their sins by the word, they shall be forced
to see them, and to look them over by the flames of (...) at the day of
Judgment.

Hence again it follows: To be hard to be convicted is Use, 2.
a dangerous sin, and a dreadful curse to the party that is tainted with such a
disposition of spirit. We will go no further than the Doctrine delivered, and
that will give in undeniable evidence to both parts of the collection:

1 To be hard to be convinced, is a dangerous sin;

He sins against his own soul; the happiness and Luke, 7. 30. The Publicans and
sinners justified God, and were baptized; but the Scribes and Pharisees
rejected the Counsel of God against themselves, i. e. against their own good
and happiness. Yea, so the Apostle to the gainsaying Corinthians, when he had
disputed long, and manifested the Truth in the clear evidence of it, Acts, 18.
14. and they gainsayed still, and blasphemed, he shook his raiment in sign of
distaste and indignation, and said, your blood be upon your own heads, I am
clean, he was innocent. And so one day thou will be forced to confess, and to
clear the innocence and faithfulness of Gods Servants, I was the cause of my
confusion, my own wayward gainsaying Spirit, else I might have been recovered;
they did their duty with much painfulness, but my perverse spirit would not
receive that counsel, which would have directed and comforted me, but now
condemns me. So Paul to the contradicting Jews, Acts, 13. 46. Because ye put
away the Word, and judge your self unworthy of eternal life: thou will then be
forced to yield it, I am unworthy that ever the Promises of the Gospel should
establish my heart who would not be convinced of the goodness of them, unworthy
that ever the Gospel should be the savor of life to me, who have cast it behind
my back as unsavory Salt.

He sins against the Ordinances, the Faithfulness, Truth, and free Grace of God
therein revealed and dispensed Hebrews, 2. 3. How shall we escape if we neglect
so great salvation?

It sins against Gods Spirit in a more than ordinary manner; he would seem in
his gainsaying frame to try to contest with the Almighty Spirit of Christ in
the utmost defyance, as refusing to yield in the least appearance, I call it
the highest strain of (...) to try Masteries with the Almighty, and that may be
thus observed.

When our Savior was to leave the world, and to go to Heaven to possess the
glory he had with the Father before all worlds, he comforts the hearts of his
Disciples touching his departure with the Consideration of the incomparable
benefit that would accrue therefrom, John, 16. 7. It is expedient for you that
I go away, so if I go not away, the comsorter will not come, but if I depart I
will send him, that is, the Spirit of the Lord Jesus would not dispense the
powerful work of his Grace in such an abundant measure, unless he ascended unto
the Throne of his Grace; for the largeness of the dispensation thereof, and
that in reason until that time, The Spirit was not yet given, because Christ
was not yet glorified, John, 7. 39. When he ascended up on high he then gave
gifts unto men even for the Rebellious, Ephesians. 4. 8. And herein appears the
powerful dispensation of his Grace, and operation of his Spirit, then when the
Comforter is come, he shall convince the world of sin, he shall set down the
Consciences of the Sons of men in the sight of their vileness and guilt: This
is as it were (...) Masterpiece of the work of the Spirit, when he is sent
from Heaven, from the Father and the Son with full Commission and Power, from
our Savior, advanced to the highest pitch of supreamest excellency of his
Kingly, Prophetical, and Priestly Offices, and that for this end in the first
place as the prime and hardest work to convince the world of sin: Now to
gainsay and contradict this Spirit in this Work, for which he has received
this Commission, is to contest for Masteries with the Almighty, Heb. 12. 25. If
they escaped not who refused Moses who spoke on Earth, how shall we escape if
we refuse him that speaks from Heaven? And this is the highest strayn of
rebellion, when a (...) will not give way nor yield in the least but (...) out
this authority of the spirit from having any entertainment, even in the
suburbs, (...) our apprehensions and understandings, while we continue in this
gainsaying frame; there wants nothing but light and malice to make it (...) sin
against the Holy Ghost. Here is the hainousness of the sin;

See the Curse of it that is dreadful.

Thou make way for Satan in the means which are appointed by God to oppose
him John 13. 27. The Devilentred into Judas with a sopp, so he enters with an
admonition and counsel while thou do oppose that truth which should help
thee against his power and subtilty, but yieldest thy self fully to be
possessed by both, Thou will not be guided by the counsel of God, therefore thou
shall be cousened by the delusions of the Devil.

Christ in his righteous dealings and according to thy just deservings delivers
thee up to the power of Satan, whenas thou wast willing to yield up thy self to
his possession, So Paul. 1. Tim. 3. 20. delivers Hymenoeus and Philetus unto
Satan, and in Church discipline obstinacy in the least evil, is answerable to
the greatest offense, because by that means the soul shakes off the authority
of the Lord Jesus, and so is to be cast out.

Because thou have gainsayed his dispensations, he will have no more dealing
with thee Math. 23. last. you shall see me no more. He will pass by and not speak
with thee, He will instruct (...), admonish others, but he will (...) thee no
more, reprove thee no more. He will not change a word with thee in the (...), '
My (...) shall not always (...), Genesis 6. 3. That spirit which thou have
resisted and opposed shall stir in thee and strive with thee no more, thou
would (...) see, thou shall not see therefore; thou would not have thy
conscience stirred it shall be seared therefore.

Thou art every day ripening for (...), and reserved in the chayns of darkness
til the judgment of the great (...) and therefore thy condition is like that of
the Devil himself, thou have only the liberty of thy chain, that is, liberty to
increase thy sins and thy plagues. when the Lord would prepare a people for
destruction he saves. (...) a. 6. 10. he seals them up under the curse of a
(...) mind and a hard heart. Hear ye indeed but understand not, and see ye
indeed but perceiv: not; (...) the heart of this people fat, and shut their
eyes lest they see with their eyes and understand with their heart and convert
and be healed.

(...) Instruction, why men of the greatest ability for Use, 3.
depth of brain and strength of understanding are most hardly brought to
brokennes of heart and to be wounded with Godly sorrow for their sins; the
ground is from the point in hand, because they are hardest brought to see their
sins; the power of carnal reason does so mightily prevayl in them being now in
their natural condition, the strength of their abilities becomes wholly
perverted to their own hurt, and the maintaining of their own distempers, their
subtilty deceives themselves and they abuse the sharpness of their wit to beat
back the authority of the (...) and to wind away from the evidence of argument
that is (...) to their view. They shut out the light of the truth from coming
into their hearts. and therefore its not (...) it should work upon them (...)
or effectually prevail with them for God. Hence that peremptory (...) of the
Apostle not many wise men after the flesh 1. (...). 1. 26. because the wisdom
of the (...) is enmity against God. Romans 8. 7. (...) it is as a weapon in the
hand and under the command of our fleshly hearts, It fortifies most strongly
against the evidence and essicacy of the truth, will not suffer a conviction to
fasten upon the Conscience, and therefore no Godly sorrow to affect the soul of
a sinner. As it is in war when the trenches and outworks are slight, and the
wall of the City low, and the Castle weak, its no matter of danger or (...) for
a wise Commander with compitent forces to surprise it, to carry the place, and
Conquer the people their defense was but feeble, but were their outworks
strong, their walls high, the Citadel and Castle impregnable, it will abide many
assaults and stand out long, even against the (...) power that shall (...) them,
and happily be forced to raise the (...) and (...) (...) place as not able to
prevail. It is so in our spiritual condition, when the Lord coms to lay siege
to the soul of a sinful creature who is now under the power of darkness, and
the sovereign command of his corruptions which rule as supreme Lords over him:
There is no Conversion without Conviction (as has been showed in (...) the
point) Its not possible the heart should be content to leave sin unless the
understanding clearly see the loathsomness of it, the outworks and walls of
the soul are our apprehensions and understanding, now where there is wiliness,
depth and subtilty of (...), large reaches of carnal reason, these the Apostle
calls strong holds. 2. Cor. 10. 4. and they will abide the battery and force of
the most plain evidences, strongest arguments that can be devised and alleged
with the best skill, and yet hold it out against all. where the opposition is
not so strong the entrance is more easy, and subjection is sooner yielded to
the evidence of the truth. This is the ground the prophet gives of that
invincible stiffness, pride, and contempt of Babylon, as being unteachable
under al dispensations, Thy wisdom and thy knowledge they have perverted thee,
or caused thee to rebel, Isa. 47. 10. It was the reason of that stubbornness
of which the Lord complains in the Scribes and (...) the great Rabbis of the
world. Luke. 7. 30. 31. the Publicans and sinners (...) God because of John
Baptists doctrine, and so yielded themselves and were overcome of the evidence
of the truth. but the Scribes and Pharisees rejected the counsel of God. They
put it by and would not suffer the counsel of God to take place or to prevail
with them. Paul never found worse entertainment and greater opposition than at
Corinth, and Athens, the (...) of sciences and Storehouse of learning and
learned men, the excellency of whose parts and the conceit of (...) and wisdom
did so transport them, and puff up their earthly minds, that they slighted the
simplicity that was in Christ and trampled upon the meaness of the Gospel,
Acts. 17. 18. Philosophers of the Epicure and Stoics they encountered Paul and
said what will this babbler say? and v. (...) some mocked; As though the (...)
of the meaner sort, though they had no heart to receive the Gospel yet they had
no skill to resist, or were able, and (...) durst not grapple with his
arguments. These only who had more learning, they gave the encounter, and
openly contemned both his purpose and doctrine, As it is with men who are but
weak and unskilful at the weapon, not able to (...) a blow or put by a thrust,
it is no hard matter to get within them, but those who are (...) of defense are
dextrous, and handy at their weapons, there is little hope to hit them or to
come within them. So here, men of meaner capacities and of shallow reach, they
yield more easily and are forced to let fall their weapons, but such who are
skilful are masters of defense, can devise devices, the subtilty of their own
reason is (...) by (...) suggestions, they will latch almost any blow, and put
by the plainest truth for the present push, that there is no hope to come in to
them. And this also is the ground why your painted Formalists, and subtle
hypocrites who are grown cunning in the craft of profession, (for so they make
it) they are so hardly brought on to believe. Publicans and sinners and Harlots
shall go before them. And for this cause it is our Lord so marvailously
distasts this condition, Rev. 3. 17. I would thou were either cold or hot,
Lukewarmnes is worse than prophanness, not that falls shows are worse than
grosser evils when heart and life, outside and inside are both ill, but intruth
because such are more difficult to be convinced of their evils, and therefore
not likely to be amended or brought out of them q. d. As though the Lord had
said if thou were openly naught, thou might be brought to see and
acknowledge thy naught iness; Here Paul issues the strength of that resistance
against the Lord and his Gospel 1. Coloss. 21. Enemies in your minds by wicked
works. but in the original, Enemies by reason of your discourses, set or attent
to evil works. It Is the first step to wisdom to become a fool, and that's hard
to him that is highly in love with his own wit.

Examination: we may hence gain certain evidence Use, 4.
whether ever the Lord (...) made any entrance upon this great work of
preparation and so any expression of his purpose (...) to call us to himself to
this day or no. happily the Lord Christ has been knocking often at thy door as
he passes by in the dispensation of his Ordinances in the ways of his
providence in which he has walked toward thee, has called in upon thy
Conscience, presented the guilt of thy sins and laid heavy things to thy
charge, and knocked hard at thy door, awake thou that sleep, so that thou
have heard a confused noise as it were that made thee a little to look about,
but has the Lord ever lifted up the latch as though he were resolved to come
in? has he laid hold upon and begun to grapple with that Graceless heart of
thine and held this (...) of discovery of sin to thy mind as to constrayn thee
to look wishly upon it indeed to see it clearly and convictingly according to
that which has formerly been spoken? Know and conclude thou may, thou art
in the right way, and the Lord begins to deal with thee as he does with those
that he intends good unto. But art thou a stranger to these dispensations of
the Lord and tradings with thy mind and heart? Thou may indeed have notice
and hear a rumor of Christ passing by and the excellency of his Grace, but of
any purpose of making his abode with thee, thou never could have the least
(...) thereof unto this day.

How then shall we know whether we fall short of this Quest.
true sight of sin or no?

We will take both Particulars mentioned, into Consideration, (...).
that so we may take a true scantling of our own estate, and track the
Footsteps and Impressions of the work of the Spirit upon our souls. I will
touch the first in a word, and entreat more largely upon the Second, to wit,
Touching the convicting sight of sin, because there lies the life and stress of
this Doctrine.

If then we see sin clearly, naked, and in it is own Nature, This sight will
keep the heart in cold blood from careless adventuring upon the commission of
sin. You must still remember my purpose is not to dispute of sanctifying
knowledge, or to give in evidence of that, for we are in this place to look at
that light that is let in in this preparative work, and this first Branch of
it, which how far it may go, or whether it can agree to an Hypocrite, I will
not now dispute, that only I will infer from it, is beyond exception; That in
cold blood, i. e. Take such a man out of the hurry of a Temptation, when he is
himself not drunk with some overbearing distemper, for then he knows not where
he is, or what he does, and therefore may adventure to do any thing, but when a
sinner is come to himself, and the sight of his sin as before disputed, it will
suffer him carelessly to adventure upon the Commission of that which appears
such in his own apprehension, even the greatest evil of all. The dreadfulness
then of this duty apprehended, will drive the soul to a stand, and stop the
sinner in his proceeding, that he dare as well eat his flesh, and take a Lion
by the claw, and a Bear by the tooth, as to have his hand in that which is the
heaviest plague of all in his own Judgment. There is no man living, but as he
has something which he prizeth as the chief good, in which his soul takes
content, so the loss of that, or that which is contrary to that, he looks at as
the most unsupportable evil that can betide him. That the Soldier should take
the lie or challenge, and have the contempt of cowardice put upon him, and sit
still, and not seek to revenge the wrong as he conceives it, he cannot bear it.
That the (...) young man should sell his possessions, and part with all to the
poor, it is such an unsufferable loss, he will rather part with Heaven, the
very hearing of it makes his heart heavy, and himself to go away sorrowful,
Mat. 19. 22. Yea, that which Nature has made dear to all, to see death before
a man, and danger such as will undoubtedly hazard the loss of life; how do we
fear the thought of it fly the sight, avoid the occasion of it? did thou see
thy sins and the hellish resistance of thy heart against God to be a greater
evil than al these? did thou really judge them such, believe them (as the men
of Niniveh did Jonahs threatening, Jonah, 3. 5.) to be such? It Is certain it
would amaze thy heart, that thou would be as loath to rush into evil, as thou
would be to run upon a Spears point, or cast thy self into the mouth of the
Lion to be torn in pieces. Take a rebellious sinner beset with the horror of
his Conscience, so that he sees Hell gaping for him, and the Devils ready to
seize upon that hellish heart of his, how loathes he then the least appearance
of those corruptions, the evil of which he sees in the punishment only? how
tender is he to avoid the occasion of them? When the evil of thy punishment is
now over and out of mind, did thou but know that resistance and rebellion of
thy heart against God, his Grace, his Spirit, his Truth aright, as greater than
all those evils, and is now present with thee, thou would be so far fearful
not heedlesly to adventure upon the practice of it. When Judas saw whether his
Covetousness had brought him, be flung away his thirty pieces, Matthew. 27. 3.
And it is certain, all the Scribes and Pharisees in the Synagogue, and all the
money in the Country of Judea, could not have prevailed with him had they been
then tendered to him; much more had he seen the (...) had been a greater evil
than the vengeance that did (...), Acts, 19. 16. 19. When the evil spirits
prevailed against the seven Sons of Sceva, fear fell on them (...), and many of
them had used curious Arts, brought their books together, and burnt them before
them all. When the hearts of these Converts were pricked, and they craved
Counsel what they should do, Peter amidst many other Counsels which he
suggested, ads this, verse 40. Save your selves from this crooked generation;
You that are in Parthia, Mesopotamia, Phrigia, Galatia, you (...) amongst many
professed Enemies to the Lord Christ and his Truth, therefore save your selves
from their Society, and verse 44. They came and abode together, and sold their
goods and parted them as every one had need.

(...) to this you disobedient Children and rebellious Servants, who have the
Commands of Parents and Masters, Counsels of Servants and Neighbors daily
suggested and pressed upon you; listen to this you heedless Professors, who
have the Word and Precepts of God daily published in your Ears, and proclaimed
in your hearing, and you go away informed, convinced, and the heart cannot
gainsay but it ought to stoop, your carriages should not be wayward, your words
sharpish, your behaviors uncomely: and yet you dare, you do (...), carelessly
adventure at the next time and (...) upon the same sins; you may talk what
others say by (...), (...) profess in words that sin is the greatest evil of
al, but in truth you never saw sin to this day, much (...) saw it to be the
greatest evil of al. A little evil, were is but the (...) of so much of thy
blood by stripes, or the loss of so much money, were thou punished in thy purse
for such wretchlessness, they would cause thee to set thy mind, and heart, and
hand to thy work, the loss of thy life, and soul, and Heaven, and God, and al
would prevail more with thee; but in truth thou never yet knew what the loss
of these meant, and therefore not what thy sin is that brings the loss of all.

Thus much for the sight of sin (...); come we now to enquire of the second,
AND HERE MAKE WE the former Doctrine, and that will be an Indictment against
four sorts of Persons, whose Practices give in undeniable proof, that they fall
short of this Dispensation of God aright, they never found this Work upon their
minds.

The first are such, Who are unwilling to come within the Rule and discovery of
the Truth, that will lay open a man's loathsome corruptions, which are yet
beloved, and lodge too near the heart. If he might have his will, he would not
meet with that Truth that would meet with his Courses, whereby he gives his
sensual Spirit exceeding great content; unwilling to hear that to be an evil,
which he is unwilling to reform; loath that such and such either dispositions or
carriages should be condemned as wicked, which he is loath to part withal; he
loves not to have this or that to be a Rule, or a Duty, and yet he fears it will
prove so, and therefore desires not to hear of it, lest he should be forced to
practice it; and therefore he is most at case when he is least within the
sight, and call, and command of such Truths which he knows do so narrowly and
deeply concern him: and therefore he deals in this case with the Dispensations
of the Word, as men use to do that are in debt and danger of Law and Creditors;
they fly the Country when they know the under Sheriff has any Writ out against
them, or else betake themselves to some Privilege places, where they may be
freed from the Arrest of the Officer. So these labor to be there where the
Truth in reason is not likely to exercise any jurisdiction, they willingly
desire to be without the reach of it, and therefore willing to live in such
places under such Ministries where their Consciences may not be troubled, their
hearts and ways searched, and they brought to yield subjection by an over
powering hand. And here sometimes it comes to this, and that by the confession
of their own mouths, when God has broke in upon their hearts, that they have
been afraid to be in the company of such men that they suspected would either
convince and call to such practices, or yet to come to the Congregations while
such Truths were in scanning and consideration: Or as a Formal Knight once
professed (in the Country from whence we came) he would not come to the
Assembly until the Minister had made an end of such a Text. Thus (...) Spirit
was carried toward Micaiah, when al his Trencher Chaplains, the false
Prophets, had dressed a Dish on purpose to fit his tooth and turn, had brought
in a Verdict that they knew would please his humor, and content his carnal
desire; Jehosaphat in simplicity of heart, that he might indeed in sincerity
seek after the mind and counsel of God, enquires, Is there here any Prophet of
the Lord that we might enquire of him? He answered, There is none but one
Micaiah, and I hate him, for he never prophesies good, but evil to me, 1
Kings, 22. 8. He did not suit his humor, nor please his pallat, therefore he
was not willing to hear that from him, that happily he should be unwilling to
do. So they in Isaiahs time, they would give the Prophet his Text, and tell him
what Points he should handle also; They said to the Seers, see not; and to the
Prophets, (...) not right things; prophecy smooth things: Isai. (...). 10. And
so dealt those (...)-hearted (...) with our Savior, when he pressed Spiritual
and searching Truths upon them, they were not able to digest them; this is a
hard saying, who can hear it, and from that time says the Text many of his
Visciples went back, and walked no more with him, John, 6. 66. and hence it is
persons of this temper are most pleased when their sins or duties are
discovered in some general discourses, because they then suppose they may creep
away in the crowd, and their particular either conditions or corruptions will
not be attached, and they and them brought to the trial; but when it comes to
meet with him in the narrow, and touch him in his particular, these persons
begin to storm, Acts, 7. 51. 52. they heard Stephen quietly rip up the
rebellious carriages os the Jews; but when he came home to their doors, and
held the Candle to their Eyes, and gave in special Evidence to convince them
also, they were not able to endure it: Yestiff-necked and hard-hearted as your
Fathers, so do ye; they were Slayers of the Prophets, and you the betrayers and
murderers of the just one; when they heard these things, they were cut to the
heart, and gnashed upon him with their Teeth, etc.

If yet the Truth will come in upon them, and the then they fall to gainsaying,
they strive mightily to stop the passage of the Truth, and to darken the
evidence of it, to take off the edg and force of that which they conceive will
fall most heavily upon them, and constrain them to alter their course, and lay
down those distempers they are very loath to leave, Acts, 18. 6. They opposed
themselves. They deal with the Truth as subtle Lawyers do with a good Cause,
when the strength of it is such that they are not able to withstand, they labor
to hide the Point of the Argument, and to hide that wherein the stress of the
Cause lies, and fall hotly upon some bye business, or else deal most in those
things which are most probable, but indeed do not touch the Point. So a Spirit
that is not willing to be convinced, he will endeavor to decline the strength of
an Argument, and look least to that where the stress and the weight of the Rule
or Duty lies that most concerns him, or his course, when he sees the stream and
force of Reason coming in upon him, he will hinder or interrupt the delivery of
it, and turn it another way, or raise some blinds, and cast in some cavils,
like the putting out of the light, or if not hinder the observation, yet take
off the attendance and consideration of it, he will get off from that as soon as
may be, he will not stay there where the strength of the conviction lies, but
foist in many Objections, start other Considerations, that so he may lose the
Argument, and himself lose the power of the Truth that might prevail with him.
Thus Elimas the Sorcerer, Acts, 13. 10. when Paul and Barnabas had preached,
and he labored to turn away the Deputy from the Faith. Paul thus speaks to him,
O full of all subtilty (he had a slight of hand to any wickedness) why do
thou crook the strait ways of the Lord. He cast in many cavils, put in many
suspicions and pretenses that he might not look at the simplicity of the Truth
delivered. The word there used in the Original, implies a sleight of hand as we
call it, when such wily spirits can turn themselves into al shapes, to (...) by
the evidence of the Truth; so many windings and turnings, so many wimblings of
devices, so many outs and doubtings, that may bemist the manifest discovery of
a Duty which ought to be done, or a sin that ought to be avoided, and so in
conclusion loses the Truth, and the benefit of it also, through Gods just
Judgment, and their own just deservings. So the Scribes dealt touching our
Savior when he had cured the Eyes of the blind man, John, 9. they would have
taken him off from the attendance to the work to have slighted the person of
our Savior, We know (say they) this man is a sinner, etc. as it is said of a
Fish called the Sepia, when the Fisherman comes to follow her, she casts forth
a kind of black humor with which she (...) the water; and puts him to a loss in
his proceedings; whereas an honest heart that is willing to be convinced, he
looks most at that where there is most light, and most strength, and is
desirous to attend that which gives in greatest Evidence to overcome the heart.
So Ely spoke to Samuel, 1 Samuel 3. 17. bide nothing from me. Job. 6. 24. teach
me and I will hold my tongue he will quietly hear al, and attend that most, which
may carry the cause to his Conscience.

If yet the evidence of the truth be such that he cannot there is a third
distemper which is as bad if not worse than the two former, A restlesness of
spirit to raise new brabbles and quarrels against the determination of the
truth, which formerly he could not resist. When he is caught and held in the
strength of Argument, is taken captive and prisoner, he would fain rescue
himself with a restless jangling; he sees more, and can say more though no man
else can see it, nor he make good what he pretends. He cannot answer yet will
not yield, cannot maintain his (...) yet will not forsake them. As Lawyers
they will bring the cause about again, and have a fresh hearing in this and that
Court; the reasons are the same, and were answered before yet he brings them
over again and just in the place where he was, his arguments are at an end. if
his spirit were so, but there is more in it (he says) and he cannot see
through it, and yet cannot tell how to prove his own argument or answer
another, these spirits are like quicksilver which yet no man has attained any
skill to fix, so the Rulers, Elders, and Scribes when they knew not how to dash
the Glory of the Gospel, and the powerful dispensation thereof mark how
restlesly the venom of their spirits transported them against reason, Acts. 4.
15. 16. 17. they communed amongst themselves saying what shall we do to these
men, for that indeed a notable (...) has been done by them is manifest to all
men, and we cannot deny it, but let us straightly charge them that they speak
no more in this name, when in reason they should have inferred we cannot deny
the Miracle and so not the truth, let us not deny the liberty to speak, so they
in John 9. 24. when it was apparent Christ had cured the man, wrought the
Miracle, and so gained honor in the heart of the man, therefore they had
fished up and down to weaken that, and it would not do; It appeared he was
blind, (to his parents) that Christ had cured him, so himself affirmed; then
they come to this, give God the praise we know this man is a sinner. But what
is that to the purpose or how know they that? he answered whether he be a
sinner or no I know not, one thing I know whereas I was blind he has opened my
eyes; and this was to the purpose, Then said they what did he to thee? how
opened he thine eyes, I have told you already etc. they are upon the same
hinges not stirred a hairs breadth Here are no reasons but only wrestlings of
stomach, we are Moses Disciples but this fellow we know not whence he is.

If it be so that al these devises against the truth serve in the fourth place
he sets himself against the truth he cares not for argument, but he will stand
against the truth, and then God in his just judgment leaves him, 2 These. 2. 18.
he gave them up to strong delusions that they might believe lies that they
might be damned, because they received not, but opposed the truth thus it was
with Balaam Numb. 24. 1 he went out not as formerly but resolved to Curse
Israel whether God would or no, and this is to hold down the truth in
unrighteousness, Romans 1. 18. I told you before that in Conviction, when the
heart is thoroughly Convicted, it lies still under the work of God, but here the
heart opposes the word of God. Exo. 10. 28. says Pharaoh to Moses get thee out
of my sight, the day thou see my face thou shall die, Moses says, I will see
thy face no more, but God sends to him and kills his first born and afterward
drownes himself; It Is certain that if the truth follows a man home to his
beloved sin, if he be a dog he will snarl against it, and resolve to keep his
sin. Jer. 44. 16. 17. as the proud men there said, as for the word of the Lord
thou have spoken to us, we will not hearken unto thee; and if a man goes thus
far he is very near to the sin against the Holy Ghost, and if ever God bring
him home to himself it is by some strange judgments.

Exhortation to provoke the desires and quicken the endeavors Use. 5.
of all that have heard or read the doctrine delivered and opened to lay out
their labor and that unto the utmost of all their abilities never to give the
Lord rest, nor rest unto their own souls, before they get this true sight of
sin, if ever they hope to see the work of Gods Grace in their hearts here in
this world, or to see the face of God in Glory, in that other world that is to
come. Brethren let not Satan deceive you, nor suffer your selves so far to be
deluded as to dream of another course or to devise a shorter cut to Grace and
Glory, for its certain if you do, you will fall short of your hopes and Comforts
and all. This is the way that God has appointed and he will bless, the order
which he has set in his infinite wisdom and which he will prosper. If you would
find his blessing walk in his way, if you expect success attend his order and
direction which he has left to bring us to his Christ, and so to life and
happiness. If you see not your sins you are in hazard never to see good day
while you live nor when you dye. Christ is said to stand at the door and knock,
and if any man will open unto him, he will come in and supp with him, Rev. 3. 20.
Saving Contrition is a shooting back the boults of our base lusts, a severing
and unlocking the heart from the Sovereignty of ones noysom Corruptions, that
stop the passage and hinder the coming of our Savior; this clear and
convicting sight of our sins, is as it were the lifting up of the latch, or
letting in of the Key, the powerful dispensation of the truth and operation of
his spirit whereby the knot and combination between sin and the soul is broken
and severed, and the way made that the authority of the truth may come at the
heart and work kindly upon it for good An error here in the entrance is hardly
ever recovered to miss here is mervailous dangerous, it spoils our whole
proceeding in the great work of our calling and everlasting comfort as the
naturallist and Physician observe an error in the first concoction is never
recovered in the second, for the Lord in his wisdom and the course of nature
has so ordained, that each part does that which is its proper and peculiar
work but does not rectify or redress that which was done amiss by another, and
so the goodness of the nourishment is never recovered or the body strengthened
or health so comfortably preserved herby as were to be desired. So it is in the
entrance of (...) great work of preparation for Christ and our effectual
bringing home unto him, never see sin aright, the soul cannot be affected with
it in a right manner, never truly see the need of a Savior, never seek after
him or come to him; this through sight of sin is as it were the setting open of
the window whereby the light and good of the truth, and the loath (...) of sin
is laid open unto the soul, and comes in a main upon the Conscience to prevayl
with it whereas shut this window and stop this passage, the soul is cooped up
in the dungeon of darkness and delusion, be the ordinances never so powerful
the means never so effectual there (...) no coming into the heart, no hope to
work upon it or to prevail with it for good; the evil of sin is not
acknowledged, and therefore not prevented, that which his reason cannot see, a
man cannot shun, the excellency and necessity of a Christ is not discerned and
therefore not endeavored after as were meet. It befalls the soul, smote with
this spiritual blindness as with the Assyrian Host when they came to surprise
Elisha, 2 Kings 18. 19. 20. He prayed, Lord smite this people with blindness,
and he did so and they saw nothing before they were in the midst of their
enemies so here, when the sinner is misguided by the dimness of his deluded
mind he goes on in an evil way, and knows not whither he goes, or where he is,
before he be in the botintoless pit. Oh be wise and wary therefore that we err
not here, least we rush into ruin and that past alrecovery. Expect then Gods
blessing upon our endeavor but in Gods order, and attend his work in his own
way. It is the aim of our Savior in sending and the office of the Holy Ghost
in coming into the world when he intends to work effectually the saving good of
his people, to entitle them to the pardon of their sins, and to establish their
hearts under the government of his spirit. John. 16. 7. 8. If I depart I will
send the Comforter, and when he is come he will reprove, he will convince, and
set down the world by (...) conviction of sin of righteousness, of judgment, of
righteousness, that the law is satisfied, justice answered, and that fully,
because he that was in prison is now released, and therefore the debt paid, and
he gone to heaven, to his Father. Of judgment the power of his Kingdom and
government erected and set up in the souls of his servants and children, in
that by death he overcame him that had the power of death that is the Devil,
and therefore he is judged and falls in his cause as having no right nor in
reason can challenge no rule in the hearts of those, for whom Christ has
satisfied divine justice, and therefore are free from that authority that sin
and Satan had of them thereby. But before we can share either in the
righteousness of Christ for our justification or the rule of his spirit in our
Sanctification, the Holy Ghost must and does convince us of sin, that we have
rejected and not entertained this Savior. If we do not convictingly see our
sin in settling upon the root of our Corrupt rebellions and casting away the
riches of Christ's mercy and the rule of his Grace, its not possible that those
spiritual benefits should ever be made ours. As ever therefore you desire to
see and find the mercies of Christ sealed up unto your Consciences, in
pardoning of sins and acceptance of your persons; As ever you would find the
Kingdom of Satan cast down in your hearts, and the government of his Grace and
spirit there set up; labor for this clear and convicting sight of sin, begin
you where the Holy spirit begins that you may find his presence with you, and
his effectual power and blessing to accompany your endeavors in that way.
Catch not disorderly at pardon, look not for peace of Conscience or hope to see
the government of Christ's Grace set up in your souls before you come to (...)
your sins by convicting evidence of the Holy Ghost. The holy spirit of Grace
will not cross his course to gratify our Corruption. That I may further set on
the exhortation, I shall endeavor to do these two things.

First, To propound some means to help in (...) work. Secondly, Some motives to
quicken you therein.
The means are these that follow.

First, Labor we to see that unconceivable excellency Means 1.
of holiness that is in the Lord, and search we into the (...) and the
righteous laws there recorded for the direction of our daily course, and that
will make us see the loathsomness of our own hearts and the vileness of (...).
As its said of darkness, it cannot be seen by it self but its light that
discovers it self and darkness; Its as true of sin, it is not by it self to be
discerned, for it is spiritual darkness; the light of Gods Holiness and wisdom
which by sin are wronged, and the law which is transgressed these are both
lights, God is light and in him is no darkness,, John. 1. 5. The law is a light
and the Commandment a lamp unto our feet, Prove. 6. 23. And by the sight of
both these we come to have a full discerning of sin which is opposite to them
both.

Our ignorance of God breeds the ignorance of our own hearts, and the hidden
ways of wickedness, and the cunning conveyances of corrupt distempers which
are there in Psalm. 14. 1. 2. The fool has said in his heart there is no God,
and then it follows they are become abominable he makes bones of no sins at
al; for herein lies the spiritualness or spiritual evil of sins and that hidden
poison and malignity of the corruption of our natures, that they justle
professedly against the Almighty so far as he is pleased to communicate himself
unto us in the ways of his Holiness and goodness. Thus the blasphemer is said
to pierce God by his oaths, Levit. 24. 11. and the wicked are said to walk
contrary to him, Levit. 26. to (...) him, to weary him, to load him, while then
we see not him whom we do oppose by our sins, no wonder that we neither see nor
are sensible of the sins, by which we do oppose him. Whereas could we grope
after the Almighty as the Apostle professes we may, because he is not far from
any of us, nay in him we live and move in every spiritual action of our minds
and hearts. So that did but a wicked man, or could he perceive that in every
thought of his mind, motion of his will, stirring of any affection, that he did
justle with the infinite Holiness and purity of the Lord, who meets with him in
every action and motion of his mind and will, It were able to sink the soul of a
sinful creature, and make him sit down confounded in the sight of the
loathsomness of his own (...) nature, as being wholly opposite to so infinite a
good in all he is or does; thus it was with Job when the Lord had schooled him
out of the whirlwind, and discovered the surpassing excellency of his Glory to
him, he puts him beyond al pleas of his own worth, Job. 40. 4. Behold I am vile
yea more expressly he gives this as the reason of the discovery of his own
wretchedness, I have heard of thee by the hearing of the Ear, but now mine eye
sees thee, wherefore I abhor my self in dust and ashes, Job, 42. 4. So it was
with the Corinth who was convinced by the preaching of the Word, he saw God
before he saw the secret vileness of his own heart presented to his view, 1
Cor. 14. 24. God is in you of a truth. Search we into the holy Law of God, and
examine our hearts and lives thereby, and see how far they stand guilty of the
breach thereof; but view the compass of the Law, and what is vertually
contained therein; for though the words are few, yet the things are many that
are comprehended in them: And especially look not at the Letter, but at the
Spiritual Sense and Mind of the Almighty in each thing there required, that the
whole heart must close with God and his Will, as the chiefest good; look at, and
lift up his Glory as his last end in every duty we do, and that we make a
breach in all those particulars in every sin we do commit: our heart is not with
him, nor make we choice of him, set not up his Name, but seek our own base ends
thereby, and serve our selves, and not him.

By this narrow search, and daily observation of our daily course, we shall be
able to see the frame of our hearts and carriages presented to our view, and so
discern to the full, the loathsomness of those noysom (...) that leprosie-like
overspreads our whole man: Thus James advises, James, 1. 25. that we should
look our selves into the Law of Liberty, that is a Cristal and clear Glass, and
will discover what is amiss even to a mote, the smallest sins and (...), and
that unto their full view. Paul a learned Pharisee, he saw more of sin, and more
of himself by the Law, than either (...) conceived, or suspected to (...) to
him, Romans 7. 7. 9. I had not known that lust had been sin, but that the Law
says, Thou shall not (...): nor did he think himself bad, or his condition so
miserable, but when the Law came, that is, the light and discovery of the Law.
he perceived his sin alive, but himself dead.

When the Lord in any Ordinance by the Truth, shall Means 2.
discover our sins, our Conscience shall come in as a witness to (...), or as a
Sergeant and Officer by Commission from the Almighty to arrest and condemn us
for any evil, we should attend both; to see Gods mind to the utmost therein,
and then it is certain we shall see. We must beware that neither out of carnal
fear, nor sensual security of our sinful hearts, we be willing to lay aside the
evidence of the truth as content not to hearken to the Verdict of it, (...)
desirous not to listen to the dictate of Conscience, but to shake off the
Consideration of either, lest we should sink down in discouragement. It Is
certain, Truth is terrible, and the Dictates of Conscience are dreadful when
they come with Commission from the Almighty; yet true it is, walking humbly
under Gods hand, we should be so far from fearing the discovery of our sins,
that we should be comforted in this, that they are discovered to us: and we
should compose our hearts in quietness with the right consideration of the
manner of Gods dealing in this kind, and commune with our selves on this
manner: It Is a fearful thing indeed to fall into the hands of the Almighty, who
is a consuming fire, but yet herein the faithfulness of the Lord is seen, he
deals so with me as he does with those that he intends good unto; he makes His
see their sins, and that (...), before they ever see his pardon of them, or
power against them: if he never convinces, he never (...). He sent his holy
Spirit into the World for this purpose, to perform the work; this is the way to
Grace and Christ, I bless his Name I am in the way. I will hearken to the
Evidence of the Truth that I may understand all that God intends, and listen to
the checks of Conscience that I may know to the full the Nature of my sin; When
we have a little inkling either by an Ordinance, or Conscience, take hold of
the least intimation, and leave it not until you come to the bottom, and
perceive the utmost vileness in such a course. It was so with David who took
hold of the reproof of the Prophet Nathan; and though he mentioned but one
thing wherein the grosness and greatness of the evil appeared, yet hence he
took occasion to overlook his whole course, to consider every circumstance, and
to ravel out all until he came to the bottom, he confesses all the falsness of
his heart which he used in the contrivement of that evil, and leaves not there
until he come to the Root of al, the wretchedness of his Nature, that Original
corruption in which he was born and bred, Psalm. 51. 5, 6. Behold Lord, I was
warmed in wickedness, and in sin did my mother conceive me, but thou love
Truth in the inward parts: but I would have colored over my vile carriage, and
by false pretenses I would have hidden the filthiness of my sins, by sending
for Uriah, and sending him to his own house to have lien with his wife, that so
he might have fathered the sin without suspicion. This was the guise and
disposition of Eli, 1 Samuel 3. 17. he enjoins Samuel not to (...) any thing from
him of all the things that the Lord had spoken; he would hear al, and know the
worst of al: So it ought to be with every man, that in earnest, desires to know
the evil of his sin. If the Word discover, Conscience accuse for any sin, take
the first notice and inkling, cease not to make full enquiry, and see what will
become of it, search unto the very bottom.

Labor to take all those cursed Cavils, the wily shifts Means 3.
and devices which carnal Reason casts in, to break the blow as it were, and to
defeat, and put by the Authority of the Truth: So that the edg and powerful
Operation of an Ordinance is wholly blunted and hindered, that it prevails not
with the heart, nor can the Judgment (...) set down by Evidence of Argument and
Reason, which comes to be darkened by such Cavils and devices. Here is then the
great skill, and ought to be the chief care of a Christian; not to consult with
flesh and blood; at least to clear the Coast of al such Carnal Reasonings, that
the Evidence of the Truth may be entertained without gainsaying, and attain his
proper powerful effect upon the mind and heart.

These Cavils and Shifts are commonly referred to Three Heads.

1 To lighten the evil of sin, that it is not so heinous and dangerous a matter
as Ministers seem to make it. 2 If it were so dangerous, yet the danger may
easily be prevented. 3 If it cannot be prevented, yet it may be suffered
without any such extreme hazard, as many fear, and others would bear the world
in hand.
To remove these out of the way, that so the Work of Conviction may go on with
more success, we shall shortly speak to all of them in the Order propounded.

It Is incident to al men naturally to have a slight apprehension of their sin;
partly they do not know it, partly they are loath to be troubled and disquieted
with it; and therefore out of their own ignorance and security they would
easily persuade themselves, it is not so heinous and dangerous, that so they may
not fear so much to commit, nor care so much to reform them when once they are
fallen, nor yet suffer themselves to be overborn with terror and
discouragement, though they continue in them. This lessening of the hainousness
and dangerousness of sin issues upon a fourfold Ground for the most part.

The commonness of sin, makes men not start at the Shift, 1.
commission of it; that which so many do, and so ordinarily, and happily such
who are for their parts and places of no mean esteem, they imagine and conclude
they may safely do. We are sinners say they, and good now, are not all so? If
it go ill with us, then God be merciful to many. We have our failings, we are
not alone, we have many fellows, who lives without them? If we were so gross as
such, you had just reason to condemn us, and we to condemn and loath our
selves, but being no other than the most are, I hope there is no great matter
in it.

I Answer in three things:

1 The more common thy sin, the more (...) it is, Answ. 1.
and the heavier thy Curse will be from the Lord. The more they be that oppose
the Lord and his Truth, the more need of thy help, and the greater had been thy
love to him and his cause now to stand by it, and the greater thy falsness and
unfaithfulness to forsake both, and to join sides with the wicked. See how
unkindly he takes the suspicion and appearance to be carried away in a common
defection, (...), 6. 66. When many went back and walked no more with Jesus, if
commonness might have given encouragement, the Disciples had warrant enough to
have carried them in the stream, yet see how il the Lord takes the least
inclination or suspicion that way, Will ye also go away? See how heavily the
anger of the Lord breaks out against such Apostats, Judge. 5. 3. Curse ye Meroz
(said the Angel of the Lord) yea, curse ye Meroz bitterly, because they went
not out to help the Lord against the mighty. When opposition grows sierce, and
the numbers grow to be many, and the power mighty of such as become Adversaries
to the (...), (...) who then becomes careless of the Lord and his Cause, the
Curse of God comes out against such in a peculiar manner, he aims at them by
name; Curse ye such who go not out to help the Lord against the mighty pride,
the mighty stubbornness, the mighty (...) and unprofitableness, and base
Earthly-mindedness (...) gets footing, and grows common in the places, and
amongst such with whom we (...).

2 As it shows thy curse to be heavy, so thy estate to Answ. 2.
be miserable, and thy soul as yet destitute of any saving work of Gods Grace.
Thou art in the road and broad way to destruction, and this is one evidence
it is the common track, Broad is the gate, wide is the way that leads to
destruction, and many there be that go in thereat, Matthew. 7. 13. It Is easy to
find, and as easy, yet certain thou shall perish in it. It Is made a
description of a Child of wrath and such who are dead in sins and trespasses,
Ephesians. 2. 2. Who walk according to the Course of this world according to the
prince of the Air, who rules in the hearts of the Children of disobedience.
Do thou walk in the common road according to the course of the world? thou
art in the kingdom of darkness, and art ruled by the Prince of darkness and
shall go to everlasting darkness. Dead Fishes Swim down the stream. Thou art a
dead man if thou go with the stream of the world.

Therefore the Apostle James gives it as an Evidence of true Religion and a man
truly Religions James. 1. 27. This is true Religion to keep a man's self
unspotted of this present Evil world. If a man say he be Religious and yet
Refrain not his tongue, the Religion of that man is vain, If a man will lie and
Rayl and Shift up and down because others do so, truly the Religion of that man
is vain, and so his hopes and comforts will be.

The Commonness of this sin does exceedingly aggravate Answ. 3.
it and make it out of measure sinful, even of a poisoning and spreading and
infectious Nature, it is not consined within a man's own compass and conscience,
it is not a sin in a man's self but there be many sins in this one, it becomes
the Cause of sin to many others. Many are provoked and encouraged to the
practice of the like Evils by thy practice, Examples are of a constrayning
Nature, Peter dissembles and many are snatched (...) by his example to do as he
did Gal. 2 Many are strengthened and confirmed in their wickedness because they
have thy example to warrant them, they will certainly perish. But their Blood
will be required at thy hand: thou wast the man that did lead them to an
ungodly Course and did harden them therein. And the Name of God and his truth
will be blasphemed amongst the Heathen for thy sake Romans 2. 24. How can they
but conclude that Religion allows such an ungodly Course which men dare So
Commonly to commit, and to Continue in without remorse or reformation.

The Second shift whereby our carnal hearts would Shift 2.
keep off the Evidence of Conviction, is this, As the commonness seems to (...)
our corruption, so the naturalness is made pretense to excuse it: Here the plea
is ready whereby men would challenge pity (...) connivance as their debt: It is
my disposition or constitution, I cannot mend it; it is my Nature, I cannot
alter it. Al flesh is frail, God knows whereof we be made, how feeble we be,
and he does not expect perfection at our hands, no man counts his coat the
worse because there (...) some moats in it, or casts away his Gold because
there is a flaw or mark in it: It Is my natural infirmity, and has not each man
his failings? would you have us be Saints?

Saints? Yea, either Saints or Devils. The Lord would have thee to be so. This
is the will of God, Answ.
even your sanctification, 1 These. 4. 3. the Law would have thee to be so, 1
Peter, 1. 15. Be ye holy in all manner of Conversation: thy Profession would
have thee to be (...), Let every one that calls upon the Name of the Lord depart
from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2. 19. And he that has this hope purges himself as he
is pure, 1 John, 3. 5. That generally, but to come a little nearer, and to show
the vanity of this Shift, I Answer,

First, This excuse that would cover one sin, discovers another; and thy Plea
does give in undeniable evidence that all the means of Grace that ever thou
have enjoyed, and God has vouchsafed, has never wrought upon thee, nor
prevailed with thee for good to this very day, nor have thou received benefit
or profit therefrom; but all the pains that has been taken with thee is like
water spilt upon the ground. For that is the manner of the Lords proceeding with
the soul of a sinner, when he intends savingly and effectually to work upon
him, he changes his Nature, gives him another heart, and as it was said of
Saul in a like case, 1 Samuel he makes him another man. It Is the Prophecy of the
power of the Gospel, The Leopard becomes as a Lamb, and the Lion as a Kid,
Isai. 11. 6. the savage, harsh, and (...) distempers, which like a fretting
Leprosy, possessed the nature of sinners, are taken away when the Lord comes
to take possession of them, or to prevail with them in the power of any
Ordinance. It Is the first step in the profession of the Gospel: He that will be
Christ's Disciple must deny himself, he must be able to say as the blind man
whom our Savior cured; I was blind, but now I see; I was dead, but now I am
alive: I was of a proud, peevish, wayward, waspish, contentious, froward,
quarrelsom disposition, could agree with no body, nor with my self neither, but
since the Lord has met with me, and wrought upon me by his Word and Spirit, I
am not I; I have another mind, and another heart, and another carriage and
Conversation than formerly. He that is in Christ, and Christ in him, he is a
new Creature, and has a new Nature, he strives most against that unto which he
is most addicted by his own disposition, he watches how to prevent that, he
fears all the day long lest he should be surprised with it, fortifies most in
the improvement of al means against that, confesses that with most sorrow and
bitterness, seeks with most care and diligence to obtain help from Heaven to
subdue that, and commonly gets the greatest ground against the same.

Have thou then the same corrupt Nature? Conclude thou may and write upon
it, thou never have prayed aright, heard aright, thou have never received a
Sacrament aright unto this day, thou have never profited by any means thou have
enjoyed, or duties thou have performed to this day.

Thy Disease and distempers are desperate, and likely Answ. 2.
never to be cured, and thou recovered out of them: when they come to be
natural as it were, and yield to no Remedy; Jer. 13. 23. Can the Black-more
change his skin, and the Leopard his spots? no more can they learn to do well
who are accustomed to do evil. There be some spots of filth which are cast upon
our coats and flesh, there is a sooty blackiness wherewith our garments and our
skins are sometimes sullied withal by something from without, which may be
cleansed and washed away with little labor in a short time; but (...) which grow
out of Nature, as Moles and Wens in the Body, there is little hope that ever
they should be altered as long as Nature it self continues. It is so with
distempers, when some sudden occasions or temptations from without, taints and
pollutes the soul, there is Hope in Israel that some Spiritual means, like
healing Medicines seasonably applied, may help and recover. But when men out of
a corrupt inclination are customarily carried in the continuance of some
distemper, it (...) like another Nature, he may lose his life and soul, but is
like never to lose his lust, that will go to his Grave, and so to Hell with him.
Job, 20. 11, 12. When wickedness is sweet in a man's mouth, when he hides it
under his tongue, when he spares it, and forsakes it not, his bones are full of
the sins of his youth; they have been bred and brought up with him, grown and
continued and increased daily with them; he would not leave them, they will not
leave him, they shall lie down in the dust with him, rise with him to Judgment,
and go to Hell with him in the end.

Thy person comes most to be abhorred and loathed by Answ. 3.
the Almighty, for which thou vainly conceivest thou may be pitied. We pity
a man that drinks poison because it is not his disposition to be so, but the
infection that befell him; but the Spider and the Toad we abhor the sight, and
not endure to touch them, because they are (...) a poysonful Nature. So it is
with the Spiritual plague of thy Soul; even the dearest of Gods Servants may be
surprised with a pang of pride, overborn with a sudden hurry of passion, and
frowardness, and the Lord pities, and pardons, and passes it by, and will not
lay it to their charge, because it was their Disease, not their disposition,
their temptation and surprizal; not their purpose, the Lord looks at it so. You
have heard of the Patience of Job, James 6. But when such noysom lusts become
Natural, and that we live in them, as in our Element, when we have, and keep,
and own an accursed poysonful Nature, it is that which the Lord detests; The
froward in spirit is an abomination to the Lord, Prove. 3. 32. In the old Law it
was observed, that when the Leprosy tainted the Skin, but did not spread, the
Leaper was pronounced clean; but if it did fret into the flesh, it was unclean;
to teach us, that though we had leprous distempers that tainted and defiled our
performances, yet if they did not fret into the flesh, our affections taken
aside with them, the Lord looks at us as clean in his Christ, because it was
not we that in our hearts purposed the evil, but sin that prevailed against our
purpose; but if we hugged them in our bosom, laid them nigh unto our hearts,
and took them as our Natures, we were loathsome in the sight of God.

The third Shift whereby a carnal heart comes to Shift. 3.
lighten the hainousness of his evil, and therefore looks not at it as so
loathsome as he should and it deserves. Because he can put off the blame from
himself (as he conceives) upon his Companions, who either by their (...) and
persuasions, have deluded him, and led him into sinful courses, beyond his
intendment and sometimes contrary to his desire: and therefore he concludes he
may justly free himself from blame, and lay the blame upon them wholly. It was
the fault of such and such, I am free. Had not they counseled it, I had never
committed the sin; had not they persuaded me, I had never purposed it, it was
not in my thoughts, but they allured, deluded, and drew me to it. Let them be
charged with the guilt, and bear the punishment, I hope I may be excused. This
manner of sinful shifting of our faults unto another is that which all of us
have (...) from our first Parents. It was their practice immediately after the
fall, and We their Posterity have made it a president to our Posterity unto this
day. when the Lord challenged Adam for his offense and breach of covenant, why
have thou done this? he puts it (...) to the woman, the woman to the Serpent.
Genesis 3. 12. 13. 14. The woman which thou gave me (Says Adam) she gave unto
me, and I did eat. the woman she takes the rebound and puts the ball behind
her, The Serpent beguiled me. but al in vain, this could not free any of them
from the punishmeut or excuse them from the fault.

To show the feeblness of this fond pretense, I shall answer Answ.
several things.

The Aggravation of the evil of this sin, in yielding to who are here in guilty
they do in this their practice prefer the folly of man before the wisdom of
God, their falsehood above his truth, serve their turn and base ends, maintain
their honor, and that in an ungodly way, rather than the honor of the eternal
God from whom they have received al they do possess to whom they owe
themselves, and should improve al they have and are to his praise and yet they
do not only set up base men but even the lusts of men before the honor of the
Almighty, and profess so much by their practice, its not the command of God but
the corrupt (...) of vile men shall carry us, not his promises though great and
precious, but their persuasions shall prevayl with us, (...) suffer the name and
honor of the Lord to lie in the dust, nay trample it under their feet that they
may promote their persons, and (...) credit of their proceedings though
wretchedly wicked. And what greater indignity can be offered to the great God
of heaven and earth, who will require it at your hands, when your companions will
not open their mouths to excuse you nor can defend you from his vengeance. the
(...) of this conspiracy against the Lord he himself acknowledges in Eli's
indulgence yielding out of the easiness of his spirit to his sons in their
profane carriage in that he did not proceed with that rigor and severity as
the (...) of their carriage did justly (...) for. The Lord does plainly and
peremptorily charge him with a double evil 1 Samuel 2. 29. 30. 31. that they
kicked at his Sacrifice that is, cast contempt upon his holy things, and
honored his Sons, and that in their lewdness above him, when out of a feeble
childishness he would suffer his sons to abuse Gods ordinances, and not
administer a sharp reproof or execute a just and severe censure suitable to the
nature of the fact upon them. he gave so far allowance to the contempt of Gods
ordinances and was more willing to please them than God therefore the Lord
denounces his direful displeasure against him, he repented him of all the good
he had intended, and would pursue him and all his Posterety to the utter
confusion of their faces, because thou have kicked against my (...), and have
honored thy sons above me, therefore the (...) shall come I will cut off thy arm
etc. For those that honor me shall be honored, and those that despise me shall be
despised. Thus the Lord dealt with (...) when he inconsiderately joined sides
with Ahab. 2. Cron. 18. 2. (...) thou love those that hate the Lord? therefore
is wrath upon thee from before the Lord. Sodering with the society of the
wicked is to (...) it against the God of all the world: the Lord cannot bear it
but his anger breaks out immediately against such.

By your yielding to the counsel of the ungodly you do Answ. 2.
(...) (...) in their wickedness, and appear as a (...) in the (...) with them,
strengthen their hands and encourage their hearts, steel their faces and make
them resolutely bold, and impenitently impudent in their ungodly (...). they
dare adventure to say and do what ever evil may serve their turns, and
maintain what they do without either fear or care, to hear or reform because
they have others to maintain them in what they do. As the scripture speaks of
Absolons rebellion 2 Samuel 15. 12. The conspiracy grew strong for the people
(...) (...) with Absolon, the company and increase of his numbers added
encouragment to his rebellious course. Whereas had the people forsaken him his
project and proceeding must needs have fallen to the ground, and he been forced
to have forsaken his rebellious course, and hence it was (...) policy and that
accursed counsel he gave to Absolon to enter into his Fathers Concubines, in
the view of the people, that he might settle the hearts of the people more sure
to him in that there was no hope of reconciliation and agreement betwixt him,
and his Father and so establish his own safety. Common Soldiers if their
numbers increase though they be but weak and unskilful yet give encouragement
to the trained band, and the Commanders themselves, yea their very appearance
in the field, though they strike not a stroke, helps much in the Fight. So the
Prophet in the former place charge this evil upon (...) in siding with Ahab
in his design, 2 Chronicles. 29. 2. Should thou help the ungodly? he that yields
to the Counsel of the ungodly, and joins hands with them in their way and work,
he helps the ungodly, and is guilty of their sin, and blood. Thou that art
resolved to soldier with the Society of the ungodly, and so suit them in their
way, to maintain what they say and do, let them say and do what they will, thou
helpest a false tongue to lie, a malicious heart to reproach and (...), an
unjust hand to oppress, for thou will defend what they do, let them do what
they will that is naught.

Thou that art thus deluded and taken aside with the Yet know thou must, that
thy condition is far worse, in some (...) more dangerous than theirs, and thy
plagues will prove more heavy; so (...) art thou from hoping for any (...) or
pity to thy self, because thou art (...), that thy sin and judgment will hereby
be increased. It Is the sad doom of our Savior, and worthy of most serious
consideration, Matthew. 23. 15. Woe be unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites;
for ye compass Sea and Land to make a Proselite; that is, to make one of their
Sect and humor, one of their hang-by's that must be pinned to their sleeves,
melt into their Opinions, and embrace their practice; when they have made him
their own, their sworn Vassal, al of a string, that they can stir him and turn
him as they will, mark the issue; They make him twice more the Child of the
Devil than themselves. That Perdition comes to be their Portion, and Hell for
their Inheritance, they are the heirs of it, and they have a double portion
there; their plagues twice more heavy, and therefore their sins must carry the
same proportion, twice more vile than those that were their Leaders into that
leudness. Brethren, what a dreadful thing is it for one to think of it, The
Scribes and Pharisees who were cruel oppressors, (...) exactors, who devoured
widows Houses, false Hypocrites, blind guides, painted Tombs, Serpents, and a
generation of Vipers, who cannot escape the damnation of Hell, and one would
think Hell it self had scarce any worse. Yet when they had miss-led some poor
Sneaks, and deluded some ignorant silly people by their importunities, and
painted appearances of Holiness, brought them to the bent of their bow,
captivated them wholly to their Opinions and Practices, what a dreadful thing
is it to think that these poor (...) Creatures should be twice more the
Children of Hell than such, who to common apprehensions might seem to be the
scum of Hell. Hear and fear, and let your hearts sink and shake within you, you
poor (...) Creatures, take a scantling of your condition by the former example.
Imagine you saw a proud Pharisee, a man of a (...) tongue full of turnings and
windings, he cannot live without lying, he is froward in spirit, and (...) not
to (...) the straight wales of the Lord, that he may please his own will, suit
his own humor, bend the Rule to his mind, not his heart to the Rule; one of an
uncontrollable Spirit that will contend with God and men if they (...) him in a
sinful course. Suppose thou saw this man receive his Sentence at the day of
Judgment, and sent down to the pit, For without shall be liars, etc. (...). 22.
15. They who pervert the straight (...) of the Lord are the Children of the
Devil, Acts 13. 10. And such as sow contentions amongst brethren, and are
contentious, and obey not the Truth, tribulation, and wrath, and anguish, shall
be upon the soul of every one such, Romans 2. 8. He has learned thee his Trade
of Lying, miss-led thee into the like perverse, contentious courses, How shall
thou escape the damnation of Hell? Oh thou will reply; Lord, it was his counsel
that cozened me, his (...) and insinuations that drew me to those evils, I had
never done them else: I hope therefore I may be pitied, though he be plagued; I
may be excused, though the Curte fall upon him, who was the cause and Author of
all: No, no, poor misguided creature, thou art utterly mistaken; He is the
Child of the Devil, and has received now his (...), thou hear him yelling
in the bottomless pit; he has his load more than he can bear; but thou art
twice more the child of Hell, this is able to sink thy heart with the very
thought of it. Thy slavery is far greater, thy obstinacy more, and therefore
thy recovery harder than his; he is a slave to his sins, thou art a slave to
the man and sin and all; he will hear reason if it be propounded, thou know
nothing, and therefore receivest nothing unless thou be allowed by thy Leader,
the less hope that ever thou should be convinced or reformed. The Lord is
forced (...) let in the flashes of the fiercest of his fury into the faces of
such misguided creatures, to bring them to the consideration of him and
themselves, and to deal punctually for their conviction, Psalm 50. 18. When thou
saw a Thief, thou consentedst, and thou wast partaker with Adulterers, q. d.
they persuaded (...), and thou did embrace their persuasion Thou sit and
speak against thy brother; he points out the time, the place, the company,
the crew, amongst whom they sat, These things thou have done, and I kept
silence, and thou thoughtest that I was altogether like thee; but I will
reprove thee, and set thy sins in order before thee. Oh consider this, ye that
forget God. You forget, you misguided sinners, that God was present, and saw
what you plotted, that God is Omniscient, and knows what you intended, that he
is the righteous Judge of all the World, and will bring the secret things of
darkness, to light, and make known the hid Counsels of the heart. Therefore let
me end with the Advice and Counsel of Moses; do not think to excuse your
selves, because deluded by your company, but leave counsel and company, share
not in their sins and Societies, if you will not share in their plagues. Numb.
14. 26. Depart I pray you, from the Tents of these wicked men, touch nothing of
theirs, their counsels and persuasions; and they (...) his Counsel good, and
(...) own experience gave proof, They fled and cried whenthe Earth opened, lest
the Earth swallow us up also. So be not you deceived also, lest you be damned
also: stay not amongst wicked company lest you perish among them. Shift 4.


A Fourth Shift which seems to lessen men's sins, and to take off the strength
of Conviction, and the danger of the evil, is the strength of such provocations
which (as they pretend) constrain them against the heart and hair to the
commission of evil, and therefore might excuse them in it. Why say men under
such assaults, their speeches were so harsh and uncomely, I had almost said
unchristian, and cross to rule, their carriage so cross and unreasonable,
beyond the compass of humanity, yea, cross to common sense, their provocations
so great, so many that they were unsufferable, they would have angered a Saint.
If there fell any thing uncomly (as it is impossible but in reason it should) the
fault is in him that gave the provocation; a man in that case may seem to be
freed from blame, such unreasonable passages would put an Angel beyond his
patience, flesh and blood cannot bear it.

True flesh and blood cannot bear it, therefore flesh Answ.
and blood cannot please God, therefore flesh and blood cannot inherit the
Kingdom of God; flesh and blood cannot save you, therefore should not rule you,
if you will hear the Rule of Christ, it is plain, 1 Pet. 3. 9. We must not render
evil for evil, railing for railing, and if any man desire to see good days,
and to seek peace; this is the way which God appoints and blesses: If you will
see the practice of our Savior Christ, it is also plain and precedential, He
gave his cheeks to the Buffeters, and (...) back to the Snuters, and as a Lamb
was dumb before the Shearer in all his sufferings; and he was more innocent
than you, suffered more wrong, had more reason and Authority also, if it had
been a Rule so to have righted himself: But he would not do so, 1 Pet. 2. 29.
When he was reviled, he reviled not again; nay, the Text says, he durst not do
so, and that when he dealt with the Devil, the Accuser of the Brethren, for so
many Interpreters understand the place, and I cannot see but it is safe and
suitable; safe for the sense, and suitable to the Context. Jude, 8. 9.
reproving that sin of reviling, verse 8. he confutes and condemns it thus, Yet
Michael the Archangel, when contending with the Devil, he (...) about the body
of Moses, durst not bring against him a railing accusation. This Michael who
appeared now as the Messenger of the Covenant, and in the form of a Servant,
and therefore contested with Satan, as in the days of his flesh when tempted.
If Christ durst not, how dares any man? If not to the Devil, how any to such as
are in Dignity?

But come we nearer to the Shift, and examine the vanity of it; and that will
appear in Two things:

1 It Is very Unreasonable. 2 Very Dishonorable, that others provocations should
prevail with us to break out unto any unseemly practice.
It is an unreasonable thing, Because another (...) me wrong, that therefore I
should wrong the Lord, my soul, my place; It Is not an evil in Truth, but an
honor, and will be a man's comfort, and bring a reward with it, to bear an
injury, harsh dealing, and hard measure; Blessed are ye when men persecute you,
and speak all manner of evil against you, they bring great reward. But to
revile, and deal harshly with others, because so dealt withal, is to be
injurious to God, to my profession, to the peace and comfort of my own
Conscience: Because a man cuts my finger, should I go and stab my heart? men
would look at it as a way of Frenzy: Because men set themselves against me,
should I set God against (...) also? This is the Apostles cure, 1 Pet. 3. 12.
The Eyes of the Lord are upon the Righteous, but the Face of the Lord is
against them that do evil. Nay, how cross to common sense is it, when thou
think the carriages of men are unreasonable, their provocations
unsufferable, yet thou will do the like, and so condemn thy self by thine own
doing.

It Is marvelous dishonorable to God: We do not (...) up and express the virtues
of him that has called us to his marvelous Light, and out of the world, that
we might shine as Lights in a crooked generation; what serves your strength for
but for a time of trial? you say flesh and blood cannot bear, why good now?
what serves your Grace for, but to do other and better than flesh and blood can
do? This kind of distemper overtook Moses and it cost him dear, and the Lord
would not once vouchsafe to hear an excuse or to abate him of the (...), Psalm.
106. 31. 32. It went ill with Moses for (...) sakes because they provoked his
spirit, so that he spoke unadvisedly with his lips. The fore Moses himself said
Deutr. 1. 37. the Lord was angry with me for your sakes, saying thou shall not
go into the Land, nay Deutr. 3. 26. the Lord would not hear him, saying, speak
no more to me of this (...). This is a great dishonor to God and grace, when we
are overcome of evil, whereas we ought to overcome evil with goodness. Romans 12.
21.

Whereby men labor to put by the stroke of the truth, Shift 5.
that either it shall not hit at least not wound, either not touch them, or not
trouble them, it is they FORGET their duty wholly and therefore did it not. The
throng of business pressed in upon them, and that something unexpectedly, did
distract them, that crowd of occasions coming in like a mighty sea did so take
up their thoughts and surprise and hurry them, they remember not what they
should do and therefore did not perform what they ought, it was the slip of a
man's memory, no such great matter, nor will be so sadly charged upon a man they
hope, It were hard if it should, It was but my forgetfulness. But? forget thy
duty man? what could Answ.
thou say more wherein thou may aggravate thy fault in a most heavy manner?
Is not this the express will of God, that a man should do with all his might
what his hand finds to do Eccles. 9. 10. That he should abide in the calling
unto which God has called him, 1 Cor. 7. 20. Is not this the great errand of a
man's life, the end why we came into the world to do Gods will? the only charge
that is laid upon us by the Almighty, we are not charged to be rich or
honorable, to gain the profits and pleasures of this world, there is not such a
(...) to be seen in the whole Bible; thou only liyest to discharge thy duty, if
thou forgettest that, thou forgettest why thou live, and the very excuse is a
far greater sin than that was which thou did seem to excuse, and thy
punishment will be answerable when out of thine own mouth thou will be
condemned. As it was said to him in the story, when the Prophet in his own
person would discover the Kings carelessness, to him he disguised himself as the
King passed by, and so passed by him and said; 1 Kings, 20. 39. Thy (...) went
out into the midst of the (...), and (...) a man brought a man to me, saying,
Keep this man, if by any means he be missing, then shall thy life be for his
life, and as thy servant was (...) here and there, he was gone; and the (...)
of Israel said, so shall thy judgment, thy self has decided it. Let me speak to
thee in a like manner. The Lord has given thee his holy commands in charge,
the Grace of God, the Gospel of Grace which has appeared and which brings
Salvation teaches men to deny ungodly and unworldly lusts, and to live Godly
and soberly in this present evil world, and to be Zealous of good works, 2
Titus, 13. 14. that we (...) mortisy the deeds of the flesh, that we might
live, Romans 8. 13. but if we walk after the flesh we shall die, these Evangelical
commands thou art bound to observe, if by any means they be awanting thou
loosest thy lise, if thou loosest them; forget these, and God will forget thee.
Now thou returnest thy excuse, that while thou were busy here and there, busy
in planting, and building, busy in plotting and contriving thine own carnal
contents, thy heart busy and eager in the pursuit of earthly occasions and
employments, thy thoughts busy in devising and acting means, in observing and
improving opportunities, thy hand busy in endeavoring to the utmost of thy
power and skill to accomplish these, either sinful, or at the best earthly
conveniences thou mindest these so much; the other was wholly out of thy mind;
out of thy own mouth shall thou be condemned, so shall thy judgment be thou
heedless sinful creature, thou have decided the matter, they that forget God
shall be turned to Hell. Psalm. 9. 17 They who mind earthly things their end is
damnation, Phil. 3. 21. God in mercy will not mind thee, he will not mind the
prayers thou make, he will not mind thy complaints, thy necessities thou
presentest before him.

Thus generally: For a particular answer I shall do Answ.
two things.

1. Show who those be that make this shift. 2. How this aggravates their sin.
Who those be that make this excuse, that each man

First, such who in the sense of their own feebleness and brickleness of memory
are not able to keep the wholesome truths, those heavenly treasures which many
times are commended to their care and observance, but those precious promises,
precious comforts and directions, they slip away out of their weak memories
like pure liquor out of a leaking vessel, which makes them sit down in silence,
and their hearts sink in discouragement loaded with the loathsomness and
greatness of the evil, that they cannot tell how to bear it, nor yet to bear up
their hearts under the weight of it, they conceive it so heinous, so dangerous
a sin; that which we cannot retain say they, how shall we have the use of it,
how shall we answer the loss of such glorious truths, and the very weight of the
evil shakes their very hopes many times. And you shall ever observe the favor
the Lord shows to such weak ones and the work of his grace in them, that though
through the scantness and narrowness of their memories, they are not able to
keep things in their order and to make report of them; yet so much as they have
present use for they will have that at hand. and such truths which they shall
have need of for after times they are never generally called to the practice of
them, but they are called to their minds, Gods spirit brings them to
remembrance their hearts by faith received them and hold them Mat. 13. 23. but
the narrowness of their memory was like a house that had but scant rooms, kept
them in a lumber together, but there they were, and therefore the (...) brings
them forth. John 14. 26. The comforter (...) bring all things to your
remembrance, These are not the persons we now speak unto, for they lighten a d
lessen their evil by this means, these find it heavy and load (...) heurts
with Godly sorrow for it.

2. There is therefore another sort, whose wound of (...) lies not in the
weakness of their memories, or scantness of (...) that they cannot retain the
truths commended to them, and come within their charge, but such who stuff
their minds and memories so full of earthly occasions, or attendance to some
distemper that either they keep out or crowd out the rememberance of their duty
and think because it was not in their minds, therefore they have plea
sufficient if it be not in their practice, and thus their disposition and
spirit is worse than their carriage and behavior, and this their excuse it
increases their sin, in three things, or ads a three fold aggravation to it.

They give in undeniable evidence that they do not only neglect the service but
that they have no love to it; not only their endeavors are wanting but their
hearts and faithfulness, are wanting also to the Lord and his work, love and
faithfulness will cause attendance and remembrance where ever it is. The man
whose heart is endeared to the woman he loves, he dreams of her in the night,
has her in his eye and apprehension when he awakes, museth on her as he sits
at table, walks with her when he travels and (...) with her in each place where
he comes. So it would be with thee, If thou (...) little and make that thy
excuse, its certain thou love little, if thou mindest not, thou (...) not the
Lord and his ways, Psalm. 119. 97. Oh (...) I do love thy law, it is my
meditation day and night so the Saints Isa. 26. 8. The (...) of our hearts are
toward thee, and the remembrance of thy name. And therefore the Psalmist again
(...), thy Commandments are ever with me. The heart of the lover keeps company
with the thing beloved. If thou mindest not to practice the duty its certain
thou may est conclude thou (...) yet had love to the Lord Jesus and his
service.

This forgetfulness not minding that which is thy shows thou never had a
high esteem, never yet sett'st a price upon the (...) (...) of the ways and will
of God, thou undervaluest thy duties and look at them as things of little
worth and therefore are out of sight, and out of mind, refuse things that are
of mean account with us, we lay them by, cast them into any blind corner, we
judge them not worth the remembrance and therefore we bestow not our memories
upon them but if there be a pearl of price some special and rare jewel, each
man cares (...) he lays it, and can easily find it and that in the dark. So it
is when thou look at the Commands the Lord gives and the duties he requires
as matters of no great consequence, and therefore bestowest not thy thoughts or
remembrance about them, see how the prophet argues from this ground Jer. 2. 32.
Can a maid forget her ornaments, or a bride her attire, yet my (...) have
forgotten me days (...) number; so where their esteem is their memories are
also. It Is certain it is a base (...) heart of the duties which are in daily
practice and the discharge of his place, which ought to be his daily wear. A
man should put on Christ, his holiness, meekness etc. and (...) themselves with
a quiet and modest and peacable spirit. yet these are not in his way nor his
thoughts, It Is certain thou carest not so much for Gods command as a frothy
headed maid does for a clout. Weigh then but in serious consideration, the
wretchedness of thy pretense; should thou hear a servant or a child excuse
their idleness or disobedience to Master or Father on this manner, I hope you
will excuse my neglect, and pardon (...) disobedience, because I do not love
your person, (...) or esteem your place or command, were not (...) (...)
aggravate the evil no way to excuse it. Such is the silliness of this shift of
thine, when thou would make thy forgetfulness to lessen thy fault. Because
thou do not love the Lord nor reverence his holy law, this increases the
evil exceedingly.

It argues a sensual sottish, Atheistcal disposition of heart tolive without
God and (...), in our course (...) to put off the apprehensions of Christians
and men these are joined together Ezekiel. 23. 35. Thou have forgotten me and cast
me behind thy back, to live an outlaw upon earth, when we attend not, mind not
a law by which we live. Thy duty is plain which is required, the sin evident
that is forbidden, thou neglectest the one and committest the other, and this
is the balsom that heals and helps al; I did not once think of it. It was
wholly out of thy mind, I did quite forget it; why then forget thou art a
Christian, nay a man, forget there is a God, that there is a Heaven to reward
(...) a Hell to Torment thee, forget thou have a soul to be saved or sins to be
pardoned, or avoided until thou feel the plagues of them, which thou (...)
never be able to forget nor yet to bear.

Another Shift which keeps off the edg and power of Shift, 6.
a Conviction, Is the deadly and destroying hazards they expect, and great
extremities which they fear will (...) befall, if they should not dispense with
some sins in such cases: Hence it is their Arguments come on armed with such
unanswerable Interrogations in their apprehensions; Why? what would you have us
do? You little know the desperate streights unto which we are driven, were you
but in our places, we are persuaded you would not only pity us in what we have
done, but would do the same things; Alas, would you have us beggar our selves?
undo our families? destroy our Liberties and Comforts? yea, hazard, nay lose
our lives? herein we hope the Lord will allow us some dispensation or
connivance: Thus they with one (...) consent, not only desired, but took it for
granted they should also obtain their desire, which to them appeared so
reasonable; Luke, 14. 18. (...) Guests began to excuse themselves; One has
hired a Farm, and he must go and see it; Another a yoke of Oxen, and he must
try them; and therefore I pray you have me excused; Another has married a
Wife, and he cannot come, and (...) desires he may be excused, q. d. We
conceive the case so equal and reasonable, we suppose we need not speak our
selves, you will plead our excuse, which indeed pleads for it self: should not a
man preserve his state, and therefore in a way of providence go visit his Farm?
should he not attend his Calling? if he be called to follow the Plow, why
should he not follow it?

For Answer, I shall shortly leave two or three Scriptures Answ.
with thee: Is it not one Command of the Gospel, That they that will (...)
godly in Christ, must suffer persecution, and through many Tribulations we must
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, 2 Timothy 3. 12. He that will save his (...)
shall lose it, Matthew. 16. 25. He that loves (...) or Mother more than me, is
not worthy of me, Matthew. 10. 37. If thou art so far from yielding obedience to
the Gospel, as to refuse the terms of it, can thou be excused? To fear man
more than God, to preser thine own ease more than his Honor, can thou be
excusable? To attend the Comforts of this world with the loss of the peace of
thy Conscience, to look after the preservation of thy life, and neglect the
Salvation of thy soul; nor God, nor man, nor Angels, nor Devils, nor (...) own
Conscience will excuse thee.

The Seventh Shift and forgery whereby our Carnal Shift 7.
Reason would (...) and defeat the power of the Truth, and lessen the
loathsomness of sin, is that which seems to them so reasonable, even to common
sense, as that it admits no denial; and it is taken from THE HOLINESS AND
SPIRITUALNESS OF THE LAW, unto which they are bound, and that overbearing
strength of the body of sin, and original corruption, (...) they are wholly
disenabled to the performance thereof; so that there is not only a difficulty,
but even an impossibility to corrupt Nature, and to men in their Natural
condition, to answer the exactness thereof; does not the Text say (...) such
cannot cease from sin, 2. Pet. 2. 14. That which is (...) of the flesh, and
comes from it, is flesh, John, 3. 8, 9. Are not the words plain, That the
Prince of the Air rules in the hearts of the children of disobedience, and that
he takes them captive at his will, 2 Timothy 2. last. Nay, if the holy Apostle who
had the Spirit of Grace, yet found his distempers bear up so hard, and make
head against him, that they soiled him, and put him to the worse, and forced
him to cry out as under captivity and thraldom, I see another Law in my members
carrying me captive; Oh wretched man, who shall deliver me, Romans 7. If he that
had received the power of Grace against his sin, was yet so overborn, what can
they be able to do that are yet in their natural condition (and have nothing
but sin) as all the Sons of Adam are since the Fall? That as (...) in a storm
are forced by the rage of winds and weather to go whither they will carry them,
not whither they should; men pity them for what they suffer, do not (...) them
for what they cannot do: So it is with the strength of distempers, which like a
mighty stream, carry us uncontroulably to the commission of evil, and it is
impossible for us to prevail against; alas, what can Nature do in such a case,
if God will not help? Is it equal that men be put upon impossibilities? or that
they should be punished for that which cannot be avoided? It Is not in man to
direct his own ways, to subdue his own sins: we are nothing else but a lump of
corruption, the Lord knows we do what we can, and we hope we shall not be
condemned for what we cannot do.

I Answer, The Lord knows, and thy Conscience Answ.
knows, and the world knows, thou speak a horrible fall ehood, or to use the
Phrase of Scripture, Thou lie, and speak not the Truth. More particularly
I answer Four things.

Thou do not what thou may and can do. (...) Romans 1. 21. When they knew
God, they (...) him not as God. The unprofitable Servant was not condemned so
much because he had no Talent, but that when he had received a Talent, he idled
away his time and Talent, hid it in a napkin, he traded not, gained not
consequently, Matthew. 25. 25. This is thy condition, thou art in his rank, thy
sin the same, and thy sentence will be the same; thou have (...) one, but many
Talents; has not the Lord given thee a mind to conceive, and a memory to
retain things? why can not thou lay out these for the Lord and his Truth, as
well as to lavish out both in the pursuit of the world, and thine own lusts, and
lying vanities? thou may read the Bible as well as other vain Books, seek the
communion of Saints, and thy legs would carry (...) to them, as well as to
riotous company. Nay, thou art not only faulty in not doing what thou can,
but even neglecting, (...) opposing the practice of those Duties unto which thy
judgment would carry thee, and (...) constrain thee, Romans 1. 18. thou hold
down the Truth in unrighteousness, when thy reason props it, thy Conscience
provokes and calls, this thou should, this thou ought to do, and yet thou
neglectest it. Yea, let thine own Experience give in evidence in this behalf;
thou laziest away thy time in the ways of thy Calling, and the work of the
Lord, reads not, (...) not, prayest not in private, recallest not the things
heard, (...) not in thy place with meekness, but crooked carriages, peevish and
froward speeches, rugged behaviors attend thee in thy daily course: Answer me
out of thine own heart; Would not so much money hire, such reward promised and
performed, persuade thee to do such duties, or reform such sins? Would not the
fear of some displeasure, at least the sharpness of some punishment, compel
thee to reform outwardly; to find thy heart, and tongue, and mind, and force
thee to pray, and read, and recall, make thee bite thy lip, and compose thy
carriage, not to speak a cross word, or vent a passionate speech? Thou wretch,
does twenty pound, or a whipping post give thee any Grace, thou had therefore
ability, which thou never did improve as thou might.

Secondly, Be thy weakness whatit will be, or inability, Thou art not yet
WILLING to be made ABLE, to receive the grace which the Lord in the Gospel has
prepared and now tenders, and would give thee, (...) thou but willing he should
Rev. 22. 17. Oh every one that will let him come to the waters, for the Gospel
does not require that a man should believe by his own power, nor yet condemn
him because he does not, but that he will not incline his Ear, and suffer the
power of the Truth to take place with him, and prevail with him for good.
Christ comes to his own, and he comes with Grace and Life, but they receive him
not, John, 1. 10, 11. yea, our Savior professed it to them, Ye will not come to
me that you might have life, John, (...). 40. And light is come into the world,
but men love darkness rather than light, John, 3. 19. men love their
distempers, hug and (...) their lusts, they are weary of the Word that would
reveal and remove their corruptions, Romans 8. 7. The wisdom of the flesh is
enmity against God, it is not subject to the Law, nor can be: It has not any
Spiritual good, it will not bear the power of the Truth, that would pluck away
our corruptions, and take place in us Do not plead so much therefore thou art
not able, but go to the bottom, thou would not be made able thou would
have thy proud heart, and not be made humble; thou would have thy loose
heart, and not be purged: when thou art in Hell, and art tormented with these,
and for these, know thou have thy will, and therefore why do thou complain?

Nay, it is thy disposition to withdraw thy self from those means, and not to
give attendance, and leave thy self under the stroke of the Word that would
take away thy unwillingness, John, 3. 20. He that does evil, hates the Light,
and comes not to the Light, he went away sorrowful, Matthew. 19. 22. And after
that time, many of his Disciples went away from him, and walked no more with
him, because his words were spiritual and piercing, which they could neither
hear nor bear.

Not attending for redress and help against the frowardness and perverseness of
thy heart, it is a just and righteous thing with God to stake thee down under
all thosedistempers, that thou may be deluded with them, hardened in them,
and damned for ever for them, and thou have no more than thou have righteously
deserved, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11. Because they did not entertain the Truth in the
love of it, therefore he gave them up to the activity of Error, that they might
believe lies; and it is the best Reason that ever yet appeared to my
apprehension, why the Woman who in Reason could not but know the Serpent could
not speak, yet would and did talk with it: But she had begun before not to love
the Truth, being set to till the Garden, and to keep it, Genesis 2. that is, to
keep the wild beasts out of it; she did not so, therefore God gave her up to be
deluded by the Serpent: the like may be said of Balaams conference with his
Ass; in reason he should have fled from his Ass, not have fallen in conference
with him; but when men delight not to have God in knowledge, no marvel that he
delivers them up to a reprobate sense, Romans 1.

What ever difficulty and impossibility attends thy

The Eight Cavil, whereby our carnal hearts would Shift 8.
shift off the Authority and evidence of the Truth, as that it shall not be able
to set down the Conscience by an overpowring Conviction, is, That the sins
themselves are SLIGHT, of small consequence, not worthy any such serious
consideration, much less any trouble of heart, that should drive a man to a
stand, and cause him to sit down in silence and sorrow, as under just
condemnation: Alas, they were but some sudden words, and they were gone and
past, and if there were no worse I wis, the world were at a good pass; or they
were but the present and inward (...) of the heart, and the flashy thoughts of
my mind, no body knew but my self, neither did nor could they hurt any body but
my self, and are not thoughts free? Or lastly, were it a failing in practice,
it was but in a petty thing, a very trifle not worth the while to spend time to
take notice of it; some windy words, flashy and sudden thoughts, petty
failings, and they are so far from troubling the heart, as that they touch it
not; so far from sitting down convinced of the evil of these, as might break
the heart, as that they see no weight, nor just cause at al to burden it, they
go away as Sampson with the Gates of Gaza, and felt them not.

We shall therefore take the Severals into special consideration, Answ.
and see what hainousness there is in these sins, when they are weighed in the
Balance of the Sanctuary: And we shall begin with Words, and examine what is
the weight of the evil that is in them; and that will appear in many Particulars.

Look at them in their own Nature absolutely, thy words have such weight that
they are able to sink thy soul into the bottomless pit, and to pass sentence of
life and death upon thee; for so our Savior, By thy words thou shall be
justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned, Matthew. 12. 37. This is one
part of the Indictment upon which the Judgment is executed at the great day by
our Savior, When he shall come with ten thousand thousands Ministering unto him;
to execute Judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly amongst
them, of all their ungodly deeds, and of all their hard speeches, which they
have spoken against him, Jude, 14. 15. Those harsh Expressions, the unkind
language, currish, rugged; and cutting Speeches, whereby they would daunt and
kill the hearts of the Saints; the secret scorns, and contempts, and reproaches,
whereby they have tossed the names of the Saints in their Meetings, Merriments,
and upon their Ale-benches; happily there is no man besides thy mates that
hears thee, no witness can accuse thee, no Judge that can pass Sentence: The
Lord Jesus he comes for this end, and thou art the man, and thy speeches are
the matter of thy Indictment; of these he will convince thee, and for these
execute Judgment upon thee at that great day, he will make thee sit down in
silence, he will stop that wicked mouth of thine, thou shall not have a word to
speak for thy self then: this is the Charge that the Lord puts in against such
wretched Hypocrites, who think to carry al things covertly and cunningly that
no man may lay hold of them; the Lord pulls them out by the pole, Psalm. 50. 19.
Thou give thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue frames deceit: It is his Trade,
his lips are the forge of fals-hood, his mouth is as it were the mint of lying
reproaches, of backbiting, he sits at it, keeps his shop, it is the sale and
ware that is vented upon al occasions, when his Companions, as his Chapmen,
come to buy: So the Text, Thou satest and spakest against thine own mothers
son, etc. these things thou have done, the Lord keeps these words upon Record,
and sets them in order at the day of Judgment, Oh consider this, you do not now
consider, the Lord does, and he will tear you in pieces, as you have torn the
names of his Servants by your taunts and reproaches; and in truth it is no
marvel, for thy language and customary speech gives a taste of the temper of thy
soul and spiritual condition, and is a sad evidence of thy corrupt and
graceless estate, James 1. 16. If any seem to be Religious, and bridleth not
his tongue, the Religion of that man is vain; his language loose and froathy,
his words peevish and frampful, froward and scornful, the Religion of that man
is not worth a rush, his prayers are vain, his hearing vain, his profession he
will never do good with it, never receive good or benefit from it: As we say of
Money, the sound of it shows whether it (...) pure or base, true or
counterfeit, it sounds like Brass or Copper, it is certainly counterfeit, it
has not the sound of silver, or as we say of Bells, the ring of them discovers
whether they (...) of base matter, or of right (...); so here, a man's speech is
the discoverer of a man's Spirit. If his heart be the Inditer of a good matter,
the tongue will be as the pen of a ready Writer, Psalm. 45. 1. Those words that
come from Grace in the speaker, will administer Grace to the hearers; empty
words do show an empty heart. Thou art one of those, and thy speech bewraies
thee, said they to Peter: A jeering and scoffing tongue is a note of an
Ismaelite; by that Ismael was discovered to be of the flesh, Gal. 4. In a word,
as a stinking breath argues a corrupt Stomach and (...) Lungs; so it is with
base and vain language, it argues a corrupt and rotten heart: As light
therefore as thou conceivest these vain and windy words of thine, thou will one
day find the load of them so heavy, that they will be like a Millstone to sink
thee down into irrecoverable (...), so that thy life and death lies in thy
words as little as thou make of them.

Look at them with respect to OTHERS, cast them into the Balance of Comparison
and Consideration, with the evil of others, and thereby the greatness of their
evil will more evidently appear: I answer therefore in the second place, The evil
of thy words is in some regard, I say, in some regard, worse than the evil of
thy heart; though that be the Storehouse and Treasury of noysom distempers,
and the Warehouse which furnishes a man's whole course, yet corrupt language
ads a deeper dye, and makes those evils of the heart more loathsome: As there is
more store of Commodities in the Warehouse, yet the false light of the Shop
makes them so much the worse, because it makes them not appear as they are;
words darkens much of the Truth that is in the heart, which would make against
sin, and covers and colers over that which is evil, that it might not appear to
be such, that the heart purposes and concludes certainly it will have it,
because it likes it: yet could a man but hear the privy Verdict which knowledge
and conscience gives, 1. He should see them consenting to the Truth: 2.
Condemning the will of sin. Reason tells the heart, this is the way and the will
of God, and you should not reject it; this is your Duty, and Gods Command, you
perish for it if you do oppose; here Truth appears as well as distempers. But
when the Cause comes to be (...) and pleaded outwardly by words, the tongue
hides the verdict of knowledge and conscience, suffers not their testimony, or
the Truth once to come to light. But the corruption that the heart would have,
it pleads for it under the color and pretense of that which is Lawful and
allowable; So much light and knowledge as would discover the sin that is
suppressed. The evil that was there suppressed, that is by color of cunning and
false words, varnished over, and pleaded for under pretense of that which is
good and Lawful. So that here is a double evil more in our words than in our
hearts.

1. A Silencing of the Truth, when the testimony of Judgment and Conseience
must not come to light.

2. Coloring of the loathsomness of sin that it might not appear like it self,
by the paint and varnish of lying words. Thus some translate that of James, and
though it be not the full meaning, yet I see not but it is part of the meaning;
The tongue is a world of evil, James, 3. 6. is an ornament of evil, when lying
language (...) fair colors and pretenses upon foul and unlawful practices. So
the paint of words hides the foul visage of sin. Thus you shall observe in the
Scribes and (...), Acts, 4. 16, 17. It Is manifest to all, and cannot be denied;
yet that it spread no further, let us straightly (...) them that they speak no
more in this name. If (...) Consciences might have: been heard to speak, they
would have testefied that the wonder is great, and argues the Finger of God,
and the worth of the men, and that it should be published, and God honored; but
their tongue turns it another way, this man is but an Impostor, his name must
not be had in regard, his person in respect, so it was with them they would
have forced the blind man to have spoken against our Savior John 9. 24. This
man is a sinner give Glory to God, and so endeavored to have him deny the truth
of the miracle, which in their own hearts they did undoubtedly acknowledge; so
it was with the false witnesses packed by Jezabel, let Conscience be examined
and suffered to give in evidence and you see the truth, Did Nabal blaspheme God
and the King? no, is he worthy to die? no, Is it not treachery for any to plot
and pretend this? It is so, says Conscience there is no truth at all but
treachery; but their false tongues hide the truth, and put an appearance of
truth upon that which is false.

Sometimes a man out of an ignorant custom or neglect holds forth more evil in
his words, than he either conceives or attends in his own apprehension, this is
usual amongst Children conversing with naughty and lewd company, they speak the
evil words they hear frequently with their mates when they know not what they
speak, or what the words imply that they speak. It may possibly be conceived
that many of those children who cried to Elisha come down thou bald pate, 2
Kings 2. 23. spoke what was commonly said amongst their Parents, not knowing
the evil of the words they spoke.

All the while the evil is Confined and concealed in the closet of the heart
it is not dangerous, nor yet infectious to any, but only to the soul of the
party that harbors it. But when the wickedness of the heart walks abroad in
our words, and communication it conveyes a taint and pollution with it; And
herein lies a greater evil: in our words than in our hearts in point of
infection, the heart is like a dunghill of noysom abominations, but our speech
and words let out the steem of it, which is able to annoy all that are in
presence or pass by with the stench of it.

Compare the evil of our words with our practice also, and it will appear that
in many particulars the scales will be cast this way, and the (...) of the evil
will ly here.

Our words are as it were the panders and provokers, more universally to al
kinds of evil than our practice can be; There be many sins that come not within
the compass of our practice as errors, false opinions, and those that do they
come not within our power or possibility for the while. But there is no error
so gross, no delusion so loathsome but our speech can vent and broach it. No
practice so (...) but by our words and communication we can present it together
with all the occasion to the heart to draw forth those sinful inclinations
there, to linger after and to seek for opportunity to commit it 1 Cor. 15. 33.
Evil words corrupt good manners and the Apostle specifies none but implies a
taint and pollution of al, the sting of the Serpent we know spreads over the
whole body, taints all the blood at an instant, so there is the poison of Asps
that is under the lips of the ungodly, So the Apostle James 3. 6. the tongue
amongst the members defiles the whole body, Conference and Communication affects
the whole man, (...) (...) up the heart to effect, the head to plot, (...) eye
to look, the hand to work etc. Speech drives the chollerick man into a passion
the melancholic man into discontent, the loose and vain person to be
transported with his lusts, and uncleanness. Therefore the same Apostle compares
it to a (...) verse. 5. Behold how great a matter a little fire kindles a spark
of fire sets a whole house a whole town on a flame, before one be aware.

As wordstaint more universally so they (...) of greater force and prevail more
powerfully draw more effectually to the commission of evil, the sin is
committed and the commission leaves a scandalous example behind it, and that as
it were passively and in silence presents itself to the memory of him that
attends it. but our words do not passively present a thing to the view of
another, but awaken him and work upon, and actively, and prevailingly call out
any inclination to an evil, and that with (...) and overbearing importunity.
Examples only offer the bait if the heart will nibble and take it but words and
persuasions take hold upon a man, and will have no nay before they obtain their
(...), so the Adulterous woman Prove. 7. 21. with much fair speech she caused
him to yield, with the flattering of her lips she forced him, so Judge. 16. 16.
Dalilah laid siege and made battery at the heart of Sampson, at last wearied
him out and wrought him to her own will and his ruin, an evil example is like
the presenting of an army before a place and summoning of it, but spech is like
a constant beleaguring of a City which will force it to surrender and therefore
I have ever judged it more dangerous to live with a person of an il language
than of an evil life, because a man's practice will be but seldom and occasional
and mainly an enticement to some one kind of evil, but speech pursues a man
with variety of enticements words are arrows, and he that shoots a whole quiver
will hardly miss but wound with some or other at the last.

The evil of the tongue is a kind of restless unweariable untameable
wickedness, the practice of sin (...) such that sometimes a man's years permit
not the pursuit ofit, or the time suits not, or the place fits not, or a man's
ability and strength makes unapt and wholly unable to take it up, so nature
desires (...) and rest, and the commission of sin is at an end, the Thief must
leave his trade of robbing, the Drunkard his company, the Adulterer his lusts,
when age and sickness comes in upon him and their able strength is now spent.
But the evil of the tongue begins with a man in his tender years, when the
child knows not the mystery of sin nor yet has ability to practice it, yet he
can prate and talk of it. this grows up with him to his riper years, and when
his strength and nature decays and a man grows toward his grave yet the evil
of his tongue grows lively and active; and when a wretch is able to do nothing
yet then is he able to read lectures of villainy, and wickedness which he has
learned in his life and practiced in the leudness of his carriage from his
youth. As it is with old Huntsmen when their legs fail that they cannot follow
the game, yet they will sit and hear the cry and lewr after the hounds, when
they can do little else. So here, This I take to be the meaning of that of
James which exercises the apprehensions of interpreters, and its mervailous
hard to find the sul mind of God therein, James. 3. 6. It sets on fire the whole
course of nature and it self is set on fire of Hell. i. e. by the hellish
delusions and temptations of Satan.

Two things I suppose are ospecially implied in the text.

1. The violence and untameableness of this evil cannot be stopped, it carries
al before it; not only propounds a temptation unto evil, but counsels, yea
commands; if not that, entreats; if that take not place, pursues al these,
perseveres to importune, til the importunity kindles in the heart like a mighty
flame which cannot be quenched. So when Demetrius had pressed his companions
with such prevailing arguments of profit (...), you know that by this trade we
have our liveing presently they were al upon a flame, and the voice prevayled
by the space of two hours, Great is Diana of the Ephesians. Acts. 19. 28. when
they heard those sayings so they were kindled and carried away with Herod's
speech, the voice of God, and not of man Acts. 12. 22.

2. This untameable evil of the tongue has not his dates and periods, his
spring and fall as it were, but sets on fire the whole course of nature, i. e.
grows up with us from our beginnings, and goes along with us in our daily
course until we ly down in our graves. When children can know nothing nor learn
to do nothing, yet they will easily take in naughty words and tattle them when
they know not what they talk. In a word this is the full meaning, so near as I
can guess, whereas the feebleness of our childhood unfits us for the knowing
and practicing of some evil, our (...) years frees us from some, as childish
sports and vanities, decrepit age utterly (...) us to most, the (...) evil of
our tongues, sends in a veyn and current of wickedness, through our whole
course, the folly and (...) of our childhood unfits us not for this, or our
riper years frees us not, but such count it as suitable to their condition, our
decrepit age hinders us not, but the vanity of the tongue casts a venom through
al, nor is a man wearied with such (...) as that he craves end or ease, but is
as fresh at night as he was in the morning, in his youth as he was in his
childhood, in his decaying age as he was in his riper years. This hellish fire
(...) few el and matter to nourish it in a man's whole course, therefore it is
said it is set on fire of Hell. Because our natures are easily tainted with this
poison and takes it in almost unawares, you cannot keep children from learning
the language especially that's naught which they hear, nor can you force them to
leave it or forget it, they grow up to ripenes and readiness in it without
either care or pains, Joseph swears, the Court oath, and the children speak
half Ashdod and half Hebrew.

That thou may see how far thou art deceived in know if there be any evil in
the world it is in-manner and measure in them James 3. 6. the tongue is a world
of evil, an University, an Universality of al wickedness in it, and its an
Ornament of al evil besides, (the word will carry both, and I would include
both) what ever evil is on earth amongst men, in Hell amongst Devils and the
damned, what ever, wickedness the manners of al Countries have invented the
Condition of al men have practiced, or the hearts and (...) of men contrived
the tongue shares in all these. It Is the chief secretary to al estates of sin
and sinners, the Interpreter of men's minds and Translator of these evils
betwixt man and man. In a word, what ever evil is in the heart or mind of a
man's self, the tongue has vented it, whatsoever has been done by others, seen
or observed, the tongue has related, reported it. It Is that which will cover all the foulness, excuse or lessen the loathsomness of the most vile evils, has
varnished and decked over the most detestable practices with some pretenses of
liberty or indifferency has been the Lawyer which has undertook to plead the
cases of the vilest ways of evil that ever were.

Having seen the vileness of sinful words; Now let us proceed to consider of
our THOUGHTS, the first stirrings of the distempers of our hearts that suddenly
and presently vanish away, men imagine there cannot be such evil in them, nor
are they to charge themselves so deeply for them as Ministers would bear them
in hand. No man say they can see or know the thoughts of our hearts, and
therefore they cannot be offensive or scandalous to any and therefore its not
possible they should be discouraged from doing any good they desire or intend,
or provoked to the practice of any evil that may be dangerous to themselves or
dishonorable to the Lord. besides they appear not so soon to our apprehensions
but they pass away in an instant, and are as though they had never been, and
what great evil is in the, and why should the soul be so deeply (...) with them
and the sinner be forced to feel so great sorrow for them? this is to make them
worse than they are, and our selves more miserable than we should be.

The evil of thy thoughts and stirrings of the distempers Answ.
of thy heart are hidden and spiritual, and they pass away before thou can
perceive them, much less judge of them aright, but did thou but see them as
they are, and upon thorough search could truly find out the bottom of that
baseness and filth that is there, they would appear exceeding loathsome and
heinous to thine own apprehension, as he said, the sin of the soul, is the soul
of sin. The sin of the body, is the body and carcass of corruption; that is, in
the sinful motions of the soul, of the mind and heart, there is the life,
poison, and power of corruption, putting forth it self in the utmost activity
of the venom and malignity of it. The Actions of the Body are tainted with the
pollution of sin by consent, as the distempers of the mind and heart appear in
them, and are acted by them; the body is as it were an accessory in the evil
and wickedness; the mind is the principal, that contrives all, uses only the
body as an Instrument to vent its own venom and wickedness by.

More especially see the hainousness of the evil of thy Thoughts and Heart, in
the Particulars following.

First, In regard of God. The sinful poison of thy thoughts, does estrange thee
from God, carry thee in professed opposition against him; so that the sinner
comes by this means to resist the Almighty, as it were to his very face.

Let me open both these in a few words.

Thy inordinate thoughts takes thee off from yielding attendance to the Lord,
that thou fallest off from him, and the guidance of his wisdom in the Rule,
before thou fallest into any sin: Here came in the first breach between God and
the soul, and by this the breach is continued and increased daily in our
departings from him. This I know (says the wise man) that God made man right,
but he sought out many inventions, or findings, Eccles. 7. last. He was made
for God, and should have eyed him directly, and kept himself under the
operative dispensation of his spiritual Government, in which he would not have
been awanting to him, but he would have carried him to his end, and kept him so
in happiness, that is, carried him to himself, and kept him with himself for
ever. But he found out findings; so the words. When he should have looked to
the will of God as the Compass only appointed to stere his course by, he should
have looked to the Law which the Lord had found out as the line and level of
his life, which would not have failed to have led him to his Duty, and
quickened him in it. He was not content with the Rule and way that God had
found out, but he finds out an Invention out of the vanity of his mutable mind,
looks to that, and is wholly led aside by that from the Lord. So that when he
should go from Rule to Rule, for the guidance of (...) daily course, he goes
from one vanity to another, from one vain thought to another, from one device
to another; as they said, let us devise Devices. As in a well ordered Army,
break the Rank in one place, and ye bring ruin and confusion upon the whole:
Here was the right order in which we were made, and we should have kept Rank
and File; the mind and judgment should only have attended God; the Will attend
our Judgment, the Affections wait on the Will, the Actions issue as the
execution of al. Here Satan routed Adam, brake this Rank upon the first (...),
takes off the Mind from attending the Covenant, Command, and Direction of the
Lord, The day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die, and listens to the
(...) and forgery of Satan, Ye shall not die at all; and so falls into the
commission of the sin, which brought condemnation upon him and his whole
posterity; and (...) the (...) came in thus between God and the soul, so it is
daily made greater by this means. As a man once having missed his way, the
further he (...), the further he goes from the right way. Such is the ravelling
of our own imaginations, we (...) our selves the longer we continue in them.
After we are overborn with the hurry of our thoughts, we are (...) a (...) with
our (...), (...) God, his Promises, out Directions and Comforts, cannot tell
where to find our hearts. This the Apostle gives as the fountain and first
cause of those overflowing evils, and fearful backslidings from God, Ephesians. 4.
17. The Gentiles (...) the vanity of their minds, and so become strangers from
the life of God. Thus David by the sinful devices of his own mind departs so
far from God, that he cannot find any evidence of his Love, or sense and
feeling of his favor; he plots the commission of the sin, then the covering of
it, therefore sends for Uriah, would have sent him to his house; when that took
not, but resolves the contrary, then he plots his drunkenness that he might
forget his resolution; when that succeeds not, he sends him back to the Army,
and delivered him up to the hand of the Enemy in the issue. So by inordinate
attendance to unruly thoughts, the sinner is taken aside so strangely from the
Lord, and so overwhelmed with the guilt and pollution of sin, that partly he
dare not, and many times is so bewildred and (...), that he knows not how to
recover himself, and come home to God.

The evil of our thoughts carries the soul in professed opposition against God;
for it is by the Spiritual Operations and Actions of our minds that we meet
with the Lord, and have a kind of intercourse with the Almighty, who is a
Spirit. For all outward things are for the body, the body for the soul, the soul
is nextly for God, and therefore meets as really with him in the Actions of
Understanding, as the Eye meets with the Light in Seeing; which no other
Creature can do, nor no action of a bodily Creature does. Our Senses in their
sinful and inordinate sweryings, when they become means and in-lets of evil
from their objects, they meet with the Creature firstly, and there make the
jar: It Is the beauty of the Object that (...) up to lust by the Eye, the
daintiness of the Diet that provokes to (...) by the taste, the harsh and unkind
language that provokes to wrath and impatience by the Ear: But the Mind and
Understanding touches the Lord directly, meets with his Rule, and with God
acting in the way of his Government there, and when it goes off from the Rule
as before, and attends its own vanity and folly, it justles with the Almighty,
stands in open defyance and resistance against him. This also appeared in Adams
sin our of the folly of his own deluded thoughts, he would have unthroned the
Almighty, and hoped by Satan's Counsels to set himself in the room of God: Ye
shall be as gods, knowing good and evil, Genesis 3. and he saw it to be good to
get knowledge, and so purchase a Deity to himself, and so put it to trial: thus
the wicked openly profess, They say to the Almighty, depart from us, we desire
not the knowledge of thy ways, Job, 21. when they desire not to have the wisdom
of God rule in their minds, but set up their own foolish imaginations, they say
then to God, depart from us; they shake off the Authority of the Truth, and
with that the Sovereignty of the Lord himself and his Government: Hence the
Apostle, Collos. 1. 21. They were Enemies, and where lay that enmity? in their
minds, in their (...), in their Discourse, in the exercise of the largest act
of their Understandings, wherein the use of the whole faculty appears, and this
enmity appears in the fruit of it, which will undoubtedly follow, namely, evil
works. Hence Romans 8. 7. the wisdom of the flesh is said to be enmity against
God; not an enemy to him that would sometimes cross and oppose him, but Enmity,
the whole being and working of it is carried in constant opposition against the
Law. And upon (...) ground it is when the Apostle Peter would show Simon Magus
the hainousness of his sin, he stays not in the outward expression, but calls
him directly to consider the thoughts of his heart, where that (...) language
was minted, and from whence it proceeded. When (...) (...) that by laying on of
the hands of the Apostles, the holy Ghost was (...), he perceived how he might
get a booty, and therefore he fell to bargain, tries the Market, what shall I
give? etc. The Apostle carried with a zealous indignation against so vile a
demand, which cast so much contempt and contumely upon the holy Spirit, and the
gift thereof, answers with a holy disdain, and denounces a Curse. Thy money
perish with thee, q. d. thou art in a perishing condition, and this money of
thine which thou conceivest will further thy proceedings, will perish also; yet
he ads a caution for his recovery: Oh pray, if it be possible, that the thought
of thy heart may be forgiven, Acts, 8. 22, 23. q. d. Thy sin is so heinous, so
execrable, so detestable, it is almost past al possibility of pardon, it is not
in the tongue which uttered the word, nor in the hand which offered the money,
nor yet so much in thine eye that saw the work done, for all these met not so
directly, so immediately with the Lord. The words were propounded to the
Apostles, the money should have been paid to them; but Oh, it was the hellish
villainy of his mind and apprehension which did so basely esteem of the gifts of
Gods Spirit, as if they might be valued or purchased with money. He did so
conceive, as if the holy Spirit of Grace should Lackey after his lusts, and be
at the beck and command of such a proud rebellious wretch, as that it should be
disposed and dispensed according to his will and humor. This was in his mind
and thought, and this made it so heinous an evil, that the Apostle put it to a
may be, if it be possible; so that the hellish evil of our imaginations, and
cursed contrivements of our thoughts, may put a man almost beyond possibility
of pardon: So in the sin against the holy Ghost, it is said, our Savior saw
their thoughts, Mat. 12. ver. 25. those gave in evidence of the direfulness and
inconceivable hainousness of those contumelious speeches against our Savior,
when they said, He casts out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils; It is
not said he heard their words, though blasphemous, but he saw their thoughts,
they issued out of their apprehensions, their thoughts being calm and quiet, it
was not some base pang or passion; but when they had no provocation, their own
thoughts carried them against the evidence of all Truth, merely out of the
venom of their own hearts. This was unpardonable blasphemy; and in truth there
is no Creature but a reasonable Creature that can close not with the Creature
only, but with God in his Rule, that can sin, nor is there any sin properly but
where the mind and heart is an Ingredient in it. So the ravished Maid, though
her body was abused, yet her person was not charged as guilty of sin, nor she
polluted therewith, because her judgment was not there assenting, nor her heart
yielding thereunto.

Look at thoughts in regard of all the other evils of our for it will appear
they are the causes of all other evils, and therefore it cannot but be
concluded there is more and worse evil in them than in all the rest. A man's
imaginations are the forge of villainy, where it is al framed, the Warehouse of
wickedness, the Magazine of al mischief and iniquity, whence the sinner is
furnished to the commission of al evil, in his ordinary course; the Sea of
abominations, which overflows into all the Senses, and they are polluted into
all the parts of the body, and they are defiled and carried aside with many
noysom corruptions, Matthew. 15. 19. Out of the heart comes murders, adulteries,
thefts; there is the nest where al these noysom vermin are bred, Matthew. 12.
34. Out of the abundance of the heart the tongue speaks, and the hand works: If
there be pride and snappishness in a man's speech, stubbornness in a course,
(...) in a man's Conversation, there is abundance of al these, and more than
these within. The Imagination of our mind is the great Wheel that carries al
with it; That loathsome and execrable wickedness, worse than which the Sun never
saw, the Earth never bore (that unpardonable siu excepted) the killing of the
Lord Jesus the Lord of Life, the seed of it was, a thought cast by (...) into
the heart of Judas, John, 13. 3. it was warmed with a covetous disposition, and
so brought forth that hideous treachery, the (...) of the Lord Jesus.

If (...) be evil in the tongue that (...) it, is it not worse in the heart
that indites it? Wickedness in our actions and speeches, are but the brats and
brood of our minds and hearts, there they were conceived and fashioned in all
the parts and proportions of wickedness as in (...) womb, a man's practice does
but like the Midwife, bring them into the world, into open view, it makes the
evil appear, but evil in the very hainousness was there before: Nay, the Mind
has not a hand in the plotting only of al these evils, but it puts forth a
special power in the execution of the works, which otherwise would be at a
stand. The mind does not only conceive, but it travels for deliverance, and
brings it forth into action; that is the meaning of the place which carries
both depth of difficulty and excellency in it, Isai. 5. 18. There is a
Generation which draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with
Cart-ropes. We will open two things here.

1. What these Cords and Cart-ropes are. 2. How they draw.
First, Cords are, Counsels, false pleas, forged and plausible pretenses, which
are ordered and contrived as though they were twisted together as a Cord,
strongly to persuade and prevail, and they are Cords of vanity, which the
vanity and misguided apprehension of carnal (...) has twisted. Cart-ropes have
the same sense, only with this aggravation, it implies more strength and
subtilty; the most sedulous contrivements, the most subtle and restless
underminings of colorable excuses that may take off all the strength of argument
that oppose the way, (...) inconvenience that might hinder the work, so that
they carry al before them; Thus God is said to (...) the Cords of the wicked,
Psalm. 129. 4. when they drew their Plow over the backs of the righteous.

To draw iniquity, is by the strength of cunning contrivements, the greatest
subtilty of the most fained pretenses that carnal Reason can coin; by these I
say prevailingly to persuade, and carry even without fear or opposition to the
practice of sin, that is to draw, etc. that look when the Load is at a stand,
and the Cart at a stall, they set more force to it, and draw it out notwi
hstanding al (...) and resistance to the contrary: So here. Thus the unjust
Steward, Luke, 16. 3, 4. he said within himself, I am resolved what to do: Thus
the Harlot when the young man seemed not willing to listen to her first
Allurements, but came on heavily, she put to her Cart-rope, and plucked him by
force, Prove. 7. 14. 21. See the contrivings of her carnal reasonings as the
twistings of so many Cords to make even a Cartrope, to hale him with a kind of
violence to this villainy: Arguments she (...) to persuade him, impediments she
removes that may hinder him: Her Arguments are subtle, and secretly contrived,
she pretends (which is not common amongst Harlots) her Profession, yea, serious
practice of Relsgion, she had Peace Offerings with her, that is, the remainders
of them, and so provision, and that in a plentiful manner for her support; and
that which was more, then she had offered her free will Offerings, that of
purpose she came to meet him, that God in providence had put the opportunity
into her hands, Lo, I have found thee, and that al conveniences and contents
are fitted at home: As touching any inconveniency that might be suspected or
feared, that coast is clear, the good man is not at home; and thus she (...)
him with false pretenses. So the Prophet declares the prevailing power of
carnal Reasonings, that they carry a man uncontroulably in his course that he
cannot be stopped, Isai. 50. last. Hence it is the wise man passes Sentence of
a man's estate by the common rode of his thoughts. As the mind is, the man is;
as the frame and constant stirring of the heart, so is his estate and
condition; Prove. 12. 2. A good man obtains favor of the Lord, but a man of
wicked devices will he condemn, because such a man is an ungodly man, who must
not look to find favor with him, or acceptance from him.

Again, Look we at the large extent of this spiritual wickedness of the mind,
which cannot be bounded; the unavoidableness of it, it cannot be prevented; and
in both we shall see, and be forced to confess the aggravation of this evil:
There is a compass wherein a man's words and actions may be confined, a man
cannot vent the venom of his words, or express his poisonous and wretched
practices amongst all men, not amongst many, many times; but there are no
limits nor bounds to be set to the thoughts of a man's mind, or the lusts and
desires of the heart. Were a man never so full of malice and hatred, he cannot
murder many; happily he dare not adventure upon one, but yet his mind can plot,
and his heart desire, and both privily assent and approve the the destruction
of many millions, yea, most of the world at one clap: as the Tyrant that wished
that al in Rome had but one neck, that he might cut it off at a blow. Herein is
the extent of the murder of the mind; this may be multiplied and acted every
hour of the day, and each minute of an hour. The Adulterous mate has not
liberty, and it may be not possibility to satisfy his lust by commission of it
with one whom his heart is (...) after, yet he can lust after her, and many
thousands more, and the thoughts of the mind can inwardly conceit the villainy,
(...) give assent to it; and this is the Adultery of the heart, this may be
acted and continued each moment of the day. So that there is an endless,
boundless kind of infinitness in this evil of the mind, it meets with an
infinite God, and so swerves in an infinite manner from him.

Again in an ordinary course, and look at the power of the Creature, it cannot
be stopped nor hindered, we may gag the tongue, manacle the hands, fetter the
feet, and so prevent their actions, yet in all places, at al times upon al
occasions in all companies, let all men do what they can, the thoughts will be
working, and the affections of the heart stirring after such evils as they be
addicted to.

As the evils of our whole course have their rise and cause from our thoughts,
so are they nourished also hereby: Our imaginations are the womb where
wickedness is conceived; So are they also the breasts and dugs where they are
maintained and nursed up, the sinews of the strength of our distempers lie in
the lustings of our mind and heart; when the soul sucks the sweet of a
distemper by daily meditation, lies at the dug as it were, draws out the
Spirits and Quintessence of any noysom lusts and temptations, by daily
attendance, bestowing his mind and thoughts thereupon; whence the soul comes to
be incorporated into a lust, and wholly under the strength and power of it, So
that though the evil is not outward and scandalous, yet it becomes more heinous
in the sight of God: as it is in distillations, the spirits of Wine, and some
drops of Chemical Oil, are of more force than a great part of the substance
taken in the grossness of its Nature, and do more cheer and quicken, and
comfort in a cordial manner: So it is in the soul, by the daily musing and
acting of our thoughts, upon the occasion of any corruption presented; our
Meditation is the distillation which draws out the Spirits of pride or passion,
or lusts, and becomes marvelously confirmed in these, and transported by these
to our spiritual prejudice, they grow strong in us, and we under the power of
them, thus Jonah while he sits down in a muddy distemper and attends the vanity
of his own thoughts, he rows drunk with his passion, so that he neither knows
God nor himself; not only doing that which is naught, but he will (...) that
which he does, I do well to be angry unto the death, says he. Hence it is the
Apostle suggests that Caution, Romans 13. last, Make no provision for the flesh;
the Meditation and musing of our minds, is the plentiful provision we make for
the welcoming and maintaining of any distemper: when we let our thoughts loose
to view the compass (...) any harsh carriage, and injurious dealing, we make
provision for anger and revenge, and the heart comes to be carried with
violence of wrath and rage; Thus and thus he dealt with me, so unkindly, so
injuriously, and that to my disparagement in the presence of such; and this
sets him al on a flame: when we pore upon our infirmities and weaknesses we
provide for discouragements, and we sit and sink down under them, and so
strengthen those corruptions, that otherwise have received their deaths wounds,
and would be weakened and wast away. As it is with old decayed Bodies which are
subject to fainting fits, and are ever and anon swooning away, the pouring in
of some Cordial Water will fetch them up again, and ad new strength and cheer.
The Flesh here, is original corruption; the old Man, which in the Saints is
dying away, and decaying daily, but our Meditation puts as it were Aqua vitae
into the old man's mouth, adds vigor afresh, and sometimes makes it with violence
to prevail.

Lastly, while the swarms of vain imaginations keep there is little
expectation that the power of any means should come in upon the soul or
prevayl with it for good, the crowd of imaginations stop the passage so that
there is no coming to speech with the soul, the hurries of (...) to transport
it and take up the whole strength of it, that it can neither attend nor stay
upon any thing besides, 2 Cor. 10. 4. therefore called the strong hold, where
Satan intrencheth, and fortifyeth himself against all the means of Grace (...)
may cast him out, for while the stream of the thoughts are turned another way,
the ear hears nothing, the understanding minds nothing, the heart embraces
nothing, there is no place or room there, and thence it is, as our Savior
speaks, the word cannot take place in them, John. 8. 37. therefore the prophets
advice to Jerusalem when he would have her cleansed and saved, he directs her to
dislodge her vain thoughts, wash thy heart O thou Jerusalem that may be
saved, how (...) shall vain thoughts lodge within thee Jer. 4. 14. those vain
thoughts are those carnal reasonings whereby the sinner would put bye the
authority of the truth, that so the sinner might neither see the loathsomness
of his sin; nor the danger of his estate, or the necessity to recover himself
out of it, and if these thoughts lodge in him there will be no entertainment for
the power of any ordinance or counsel that will take place with him, nor reproof
awe, nor exhortation persuade, he casts out and keeps off any thoughts of any
necessity to be washed, and so to be saved. If then by those vain thoughts thy
heart is estranged from God, and carried in (...), against him, If they be the
cause of al sins committed and continued in, if the hindrance of al means that
might procure our God, then is their evil exceeding (...) and therefore we
should so judge it and so be effected with it.

We come now to speak of a third (...) alleged to excuse sin and to show the
slight (...) the soul (...) of it, viz. suppose the failing was in practice,
yet because the matter or thing wherein the offense was committed was but SMALL,
men look at it as a petty business, a very trifle, not worthy (...) taking
notice of, and therefore account it as an (...) of folly and childish weakness
to be troubled with so (...) a thing, or to have the heart deeply affected with
it more than the matter deserves, and a man in reason should. It was but taking
of a penny or shilling too much, putting off a cracked Commodity without
suspicion by slight of hand; lazying out a man's time, ever seem to be doing and
yet do little; out-bid a man in a bargain by a wile, and he never the wiser;
these are but tricks of wit matters of no consequence, and what needs
Conscience be troubled for these? a man is (...) the worse for them why should
he judge the worse of himself or his condition? such (...) in a man's coat make
it never a whit the more unseemly, such poor petty things in a man's carriage,
makes it never a whit the more uncomfortable, As the eye of man happily
discerns not these things, the Law cannot reach them nor the magistrate punish
them, why should any man punish himself or (...) a torment and rack to his
Conscience for them? The things are little and petty.

The less the things are more heinous thy fault is, and Answ.
the greater thy guilt as it thus appears. The less LOVE thou show to the
Lord if thou will BREAK with him for a trifle, Sets the honor of his great
name, Obedience to his holy Law, contentment to his good spirit at so low a
rate, as that thou will dare to justle injuriously against al these for a very
shadow, which in thine own account is as much as just nothing, where there is
truth and strength of Love the hardest things seem light and things of the
greatest worth little; As Jacob served seven years for Rachel, and it seemed
short and time little because he loved her, Genesis 29. 20. Ask me what thou will
for dowry said Shecher, Hamors son and I will give it, only give me the maid
Genesis 34. 12.

Amongst men in ordinary converse which lies within the compass of humanity he
never prizeth a man's friendship or fayor who fayles him in common courtesies,
and deny their desires, or refuse to gratify them in things of no great worth.
I thought I might have commanded a greater matter at your hands than so; but
when I see you stick with me for such a trifle, there is little love when so
little a matter can hinder the work of it. A gracious heart will part with all
for Christ, and thou will part with Christ and his mercy rather than part with
a little prosit or pleasure, nay, with a beggarly lust that thy heart takes
delight in: The Apostle calls it, The labor of Love, 1 These. 1. 3. Love is
laborious, lays out it self to give content to that which is beloved. Ye are
my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you, John, 15. Thou do nothing for
the Lord, and thy love is very little, or else that which is, is nothing worth
in Gods account: Look at the practice of Judas so helluh and detestable as not
to be named nor remembered amongst men; and the loathsomness that lay in the
bottom was this, That he sold the Lord Jesus for thirty pieces of silver; a
goodly price, says the Prophet, Zach. 11. 12. Turn but the Tables, judge thy
practice by this pattern, thou sets the Gospel of Christ, and the Government of
the Spirit of Christ at a far lower rate, even the thirtieth part of the price
that he set, yea, sell him to satisfy a base lust or humor of thine own heart.
It was a just reproach whereby Absalon checked the falsness of Hushas, who
forsook David as he conceived in his distress, and followed his Enemy into the
Camp: Is this thy love to thy friend? to leave him thus in the lurch, and do
nothing for him in the day of distress. The reproof was sharp and just, so far
as reason could reach: but it falls far more justly, far more heavily upon thee;
Is this thy love to the Name of the Lord Jesus that thou should slight it?
to his Law, that thou should despise it, (...) it? is this thy love to his
Spirit, that thou should grieve it? and that for a trifle, for a twopence,
for a booty, for a bargain, which will make thee a beggar when thou have got al
thou can gain by it; and that when there is no allurement worth the looking
after that might entice thee, no danger or difficulty that might hinder thee in
thy duty and receiving a blessing and comfort therefrom.

The less the thing is, the less care and conscience thou expressest for the
good of thine own soul. When thou will run the hazard of (...) happiness for
the gaining of a little profit, so many pence in the shilling, so many
shillings in the pound; nay, but the giving satisfaction to a lazy, sinful,
sensual humor. Alas poor Creature, had thou no more for thy soul but pence
and shillings, a little laziness for thy life and happiness, and Salvation,
do thou value thy soul of no greater worth? Our Savior in the Gospel sets a
higher price upon it, Matthew. 16. 25. 26. What will it profit a man, if he
should win the whole world, and lose his own soul, (...) what shall he give in
exchange for his soul? q. d. A. man should be a loser by the gain, and a beggar
by the bargain if he had all. And yet deluded Creature thou will sell thy
comfort, the peace of thy conscience, the salvation of thy soul for a thing of
naught. The whole world is vanity, nothing, and less than nothing, and thou will
part with thy happiness for that which is far less than that which is less than
nothing. When Naaman came to the Prophet to be cured of the Leprosy of his
body, and so to save his Natural life, and he was directed and enjoined by the
Prophet to wash seven times in Jordan; he began to take it in distaste as a
course that was too mean and base for his comfort and Cure, Are not (says he)
the Waters of Pharpar and Damascus better than the Waters of Jordan? His
Servants seasonably and wisely check the carelessness of his own safety and
recovery; Had the Prophet commanded thee some great thing, would thou not
have done it? How much more when he says, wash and be clean? 2 Kings, 5. 12,
13. The greatest labor should have been undertaken to preserve thy life, what
carelessness is this to neglect the least that may procure thy safety? It Is so
here, our sick, sinful, leprous and polluted souls, lies now at hazard ready to
perish; had the Lord enjoined us to the heaviest task, things of greatest
danger and difficulty to be done and suffered for the safeguard of (...) souls,
would we not, should we not have done them? parted with a limb for our lives,
our lives for our souls? and shall we not be willing to part with the paring of
our nails, these poor, empty, lying vanities, for our everlasting happiness?
what Athiestical carelessness is this? that men should live as if they had no
souls to be saved, nor sins to be pardoned, not care to do the least thing that
might procure their everlasting good, and greatest welfare.

The less the things (...) in which thou give thy self liberty to transgress
without any touch or trouble, the greater the wickedness of thy heart. For such
a kind of course argues undeniably that thy soul is fully possessed with the
sourse of corruption, when it runs out at every chink, runs over upon every
occasion, and is (...) to the commission of evil. And a man is put beyond al
color of reason that may excuse, or any pretense that might lessen it before
God or men: It argues the Veins are full of blood when the body bleeds in
several parts without provocation; It Is certain the channel is full, and the
stream strong, when it fills each creek, and goes speedily and swiftly when
there is no gale stirring. So it is certain, it argues strength of distemper,
and sourse of sinful corruption in the soul, when the heart is carried to the
commission of evil upon each trifling occasion that is (...). The less the
thing is that might draw thee, the greater the corruption of thy heart, that
like a mighty stream transports thee to the practice; so that there is no
reason to be rendered, but only the wretchedness of thy own Spirit, why thou
fallest into such an evil. When the Lord charged the Israelites with the
consideration of his kindnesses, and their departings from him, Judge. 2. 2. he
thus presses them, Why have ye done this? So when this question shall be put to
thee, Why art thou lazy in thy place? careless of a command, so easy to be
done, so daily before thine eye that thou can not but attend it? Why do
thou outreach in thy dealings, cheat in thy sellings? Why there is nothing to
be alleged but the poisonous impostumes of corruption that break out of thy
heart, when there is no temptation without to provoke a man, no bait to entice
him, no fear of evil on the one side to force him to sin, to avoid danger;
there is no weight of worth in any profit or pleasure by thine own confession,
that might justly stir thee, or take thee aside to go against Justice, Command,
Conscience, thy own Comforts and (...): There is nothing but the power of thine
own lusts, the perverseness of thine own will, the strength and distemper of
thine own affections, that (...) and hurries thee to the Commission of such
sins. It was the evidence of the leudness of Isreal's whoredom that did
prostitute her self to al Lovers without gift, Ezekiel. 16. 30. How weak is thine
heart? The strength of her sinful inclinations was such, that she did not stay
til temptation came and surprised her, but she sought temptations before they
came, and did prostitute her self to every occasion with eagerness. This also
was the guise of them who transgressed for a morsel of bread. As it is in the
balance, when a dram or a grain will fetch up the scales, it (...) it fully
loaded with the weight that carries it strongly that way. When thine own mouth
confesses the things are of no consequence, nor worthy consideration, no sweet
of (...) that might delight, there is no price of any commodity that might
carry any weight with thy will and affections to cast them that way. It Is an
argument undeniable, and beyond gainsaying, thy heart is loaded with lufts and
corruptions, that so easily cast the balance that way, even the least dram,
the least inkling of any occasion that comes in that scale. The less the
occasion, the more and stronger thy corruption, and such as cannot be excused,
therefore it is usually most severely plagued by the Lord, because there is more
sinfulness in an action where there is less provocation, and more heart and
affection to it. As it was in the Offerings of those that cast into the Corban;
the Widow that cast in two mites, the Text says by our Saviors Verdict, she
cast in more than they all, Luke 21. 3. because there was more heart there,
more unfeigned bounty and liberality, though the money and gift was less: So it
is here; There are most noysom corruptions in thy heart, vented upon the least
occasion; the thing thou covetest it may be is but two mites, a penny or
twopence in the shilling more than is just, when men's necessities force them to
seek supply. But there is a sink of immoderate covetousness in thy heart, that
against command and conscience, knowledge and comfort, thou will transgress for
a trifle. The less the thing is, the easier the command of a Governor; the more
hellish thy carelessness and perverseness that will not attend it, when it is
before thy face, and may be performed without any trouble at all. And this is
the cause why the Lord most commonly does most severely punish such a practice,
because there was more heart, and so more poison in the sin, when there was
less occasion to commit it. So it was in Lots wise, Genesis 19. 26. She looked
back from behind him, and she became a Pillar of Salt. It was but a cast of her
countenance, a look of her eye, one would have thought it had been but a little
matter; the thing was little and easy, and therefore more easily it might have
been discharged, therefore the (...) desire was exceeding strong, and the
provocation exceeding great, and the (...) sharp and remarkable when the
Command is plain and express, the Duty so open before us that it cannot but be
discerned, easy and familiar to be (...). It Is a (...) current of corruption
and (...) impudency, to sin in the face of a command, and under the eye and
check of Conscience, therefore our savior leaves a star as it were, a
memorandum upon that part of the story Remember Lotts Wife, beware how you go
against an express charge in services which may easily be accomplished, Luke.
7. 32. (...) like you may see Numb. 15. 31. 32. in the man that gathered sticks
upon the Sabbath, look we at the thing it self, what can any man imagine of
less moment, and smaller consequence, to gather a few sticks, he was alone, he
entised no man to the like evil, and it should seem not in so open a place, for
they found him, but if you look into the foregoing verse its a special instance
of one that should sin presumptuously, there is most of the venom and poison of
a man's heart in such a practice.

We have now done with the first sort of those pretenses whereby our carnal
reason would beat back the evidence of the truth, and cast in some foggs and
mists some forged cavills, which might cloud and eclipse the the full discovery
of the authority of the truth, that so the filth of sin might never be
discerned, nor the heart consequently affected therewith as it should and here
Satan uses all the subtilty and policy that lies within the compass of his
power. For he knows full well if he dash the work of the truth in the very
entrance and beginning of it, he will then keep it from ever coming to
perfection. If the strong man can keep his door shut, he must needs keep all
his substance and his house safe also, and herein answerable lies the primitive
and chief work of the Holy Ghost he is sent of purpose to convince the world of
fin, to silence al flesh and to captivate every thought; and therefore we have
labored to chase away those (...), to (...) those clouds and fogges, which
darkened the shining of the truth of the Gospel; when the sinner cannot but see
the evil and danger of sin, which is now so evident it cannot be denied.

The second sort of cavils is here. He cannot but the second sort of Cavils
confess the danger, yet he vainly hopes he can prevent it and that further
quiets him and encourages him in his sinful course, the hope of escape; The
(...) of carnal reason in this kind are four: Either God will not regard it; or
if he do, (...) he will not require it, and call to an account; or if that, He
can satisfy for it; or if none of these, The Lord will not be rigorous but he
will abate it.

Al these pleas issue from the Atheism, of the heart of the sons of men, whereby
they neither know God nor themselves; we shall pursue them in, their places and
order, but briefly.

Such is the deluded folly of men's minds, that they and therefore Sottishly
conceive that the Lord is so attent to the great affairs of heaven and the
place of his holiness, and the Glory of his own name, that he looks not after
the things here below nor regards the carriages of the sons of men, that creep
up and down like so many poor Ants upon the face of the Earth. So that either
the Lord has covered himself in thick clouds, and retired himself to the (...)
of his Glory that he cannot see or else he attends matters of greater moment
and Consequence to order in his infinite wisdom, and therefore lays these aside
without any regard. And if once this forgery finds entertainment it sets open a
gap to any kind of profaneness, makes men careless and fearless what they do
because God regards not what is don, 2 Pet. 3. 1. 2. So those scorners which
walk after their own lusts, saying where is the promise of his coming, for
since the Fathers fell a sleep all things continue as they were from the
beginning of the creation, (...) ye not see how men provoke God and prosper?
and has it not been so in all ages, (...) wicked and ungodly continue in
sinful courses and yet succeed according to their own content. It was so in the
former ages, it went best with the worst men, it is so in this, and will be so
to the end. the Lord looks not after the mean occasions of men upon earth
finds himself employment in the affairs of Heaven; it matters not what the
desert of our sins be, we shall never feel what they do deserve; so those
rulers, Amos 7. they put away the evil day far from them, and then they cause
the seat of violence to come near, (...). 73. 10. 11. those blasphemers who set
their mouths against Heaven and their tongue walks through the midst of the
Earth, and they say how does God know this? and is there knowledge in the most
high? Upon this ground it is that they let loose themselves in the fearless
pursuit of (...) loathsome abominations, then said he unto me (the Angel of the
Lord of Hosts) the iniquity of the house of Israel and Judah is exceeding
great, the land is full of blood, and the city full of perverseness; For they say
the Lord has forsaken the earth the Lord sees not Ezekiel. 9. 9. For since here
we must learn to chase out and keep out such imaginations, by setting up the
light of the truth in our minds and listening wholly thereunto. So the psalmist
shows the cause, and applies the cure, Psalm. 94. 8. Understand ye brutish
among the people and ye fools when will ye be wise. He that plantd the ear shall
not he hear; he that formed the eye shall not he see? Yea the Lord professes to
take notice of these men's ways in an especial manner, and to make privy
search after them, Zeph. 1. 12. he will search Jerusalem with candles and visit
such as sit upon their lees and say who sees us, you shall find he knows both
good and evil and he will work both as a reward to such as deserve. This Job
felt by experience Job, 14 16. For now thou numbrest my steps, do thou not
watch our my sins, my transgression (...) sealed up in a bag. and thou shall
find it so, the Lord will follow thee step by step; and track and trace thee in
all thy wanderings and keeps an account of al thy sins sealed up as it were in
bags.

But if the Lord does see and observe al our evils yet he is patient and will
pass them by, and put up those many (...), being pitiful and compassionate to
poor creatures, knowing they be but dust.

True it is the Lord out of his long sufferance, will Answ.
bear long with the base dealings of the sons of men, yet out of the purity and
holiness of his nature he cannot but bring them to account and trial for all the
swervings of their lives, Psalm, 50. 18. Thus the secure sinner counted the
Lords patience a kind of connivence, and allowance of him in ungodly ways I
held my tongue and thou thoughtest wickedly that I was such a one as thy self,
that God could wink at wickedness, look aside at the slips and swervings of the
ungodly, and suffer them to go away with it; but al in vain, For I will reprove
thee, and set thy sins in order before thee, consider this ye that forget God:
so likewise in Eccles. 11. 9. rejoice O young man in thy youth and let thy heart
cheer thee in the ways of thy youth, and walk in the sight of thine eyes but
know thou that for all these (...) thou shall come to judgment, the Lord will
arrest thee for the wrong done to his holiness, and follow the suit against thy
soul for all thy injurious dealings, and he himself will come in against thee as
a swift witness; If thy Conscience condemn thee God himself is greater than thy
Conscience and he knows al things, and will bring to light the hidden things of
darkness and will make manifest the counsels of the heart. When al those
dunghill stains of Adulterous lusts, and malicious, envious and covetous
desires, shall be laid open to the view of the sun, al those swarms of foolish
and wicked imaginations, shall be then discovered, its better therefore that
thou should see them now, in the day of Grace: better thou should have them
now discovered to thy Conscience for thy humiliation, then at the day of
judgment for thy confusion.

But if the Lord will require all, then I hope I may use means to satisfy for all, when my day beginns to decline, and my Sun to set, and my glass is run,
when I am dropping down to the grave, and groaning upon my sick bed. I will then
betake my self to my prayers and tears and repentance for my sins, I will sorrow
for my sins, seek unto God for mercy, I will repent and reform the evil of my
ways, and the Lord will remove the Plague of them.

In thy declining days will thou do this? Oh deluded Answ.
creature, who knows but this day or before thou have read over this book the
Lord may take away thy soul, who knows whether thou shall have time to seek, or
a heart to seek, or God will accept of thee when thou seek.

Whether a time or no. Whether the date of Gods Luke. 19. 41. 42. If thou had
known at least in this thy day, the things that belong to thy peace but now
they are hidden from thine eyes, the things of their peace were before their
eyes, and yet were hid from their eyes Rev. 2. 21. 23. I gave her day to
repent, but she repented not, therefore I will cast her in to a bed and (...)
her children with death. she had no more days of repentance but of ruin,
she was cast into a bed of sorrow and had not time to pour out her prayers.

If thou have time, who knows that God will give thee a heart, to seek for
mercy or sue for Grace; It Is true God may help thee, but it is as true God may
harden thee, he may humble thee and he may (...) thee, and it is most likely he
will, thou which have refused to hear, he will refuse to help, Ezekiel. 24. 13. I
would have purged (...) and thou would not be purged thou shall never be
purged more, Jer. 51. 9. we would have cured Babylon but she would not be
cured, leave her then, leave them to the blindness of their (...) that would
not be enlightened, leave them to the hardness of their hearts that would not
be converted; He will not always strive who has stood so long and knocked so
often, thou shall see him no more quickening, awing, affecting of thee.

Or if thou have a heart to seek in thy manner, who knows whether God will
accept it or no? Thou would not regard his (...) and (...), and he will not
respect thy prayers and (...), Prove. 1. 28. Then shall they call but I will not
answer they shall seek me early but they shall not find me; Hebr. 12. 17. Esau
found no place of repentance though he sought it carefully with tears; nay he
may send thee as he did the Israelits to the Idols of thy heart, Jer. 2. 28.
But where are thy gods that thou have made? let them arise and save (...)

But Lastly if I cannot satisfy for my evils, yet out of his bounty and mercy
he may abate me of the Plagues the mercies of God are great, and his
compassions large, and thus the mercies of God who were provided to bring men
from their corruptions to (...), through the abuse of carnal hearts become
means to make them secure in their dregs, Deuter. 29. 19. when all the plagues
were threatened, yet they bless themselves and say, I shall have peace though I
walk in the imaginations of my evil heart. So they in Isaiah. made a Covenant
with death and Hell.

The sin against mercy is one of the greatest sins that ever Answ.
thou committest. Thou turnest the grace of God into (...), Jude 4. and such
are ordained of old unto condemnation; thou despisest mercy and abusest it,
thou shall therefore be condemned by mercy not saved by it. God must not be
just and so not God, if he save thee without satisfaction to his justice, The
Lord cannot wrong himself to relieve thee, dishonor himself to deliver thee,
Exodus 34. 7. He will by no means Celar the guilty, Its one of his names and
himself, and he cannot deny himself, and if his justice be not satisfied thy
plagues cannot be abated.

If a carnal man sees he cannot prevent the danger of The third sort of Cavsl.
sin, then he says I will bear it, if I be damned I will suffer it as I may if
it come to the (...). Let me have my sins though the Devil have my soul, let me
have the sweet of the pleasures of sin in this world though I never see the
face of God in Glory, this is a most forlorn and divellish resolution.

But do thou know what thou say? true thou Answ.
shall bear thy damnation, but thou art never able to bear it without breaking
under it, being helpless and hopeless forever. O woe to thee that ever thou
were born! O poor creature! If I should cease speaking and al of us join
together in weeping and lamenting thy condition it were the best course; It is
impossible thou should ever bear Gods wrath. Let these three things be
considered.

Judge the Lion by the Paw, judge the torments of Hell by some little beginnings
of it, and the dregs of Gods vengeance by some little sips of it, and judge how
unable thou art to bear the whole, by thy inability to bear a little of it in
this life, In terror of Conscience as the wise man says, A wounded spirit who
can bear? When God lays the flashes of hell fire upon thy soul thou can not
endure it. Whatsoever a man can inflict upon a poor wretch may be born, but
when the Almighty comes in battle array against a poor soul how can he undergo
it? Wittness the Saints that felt it, as also the wicked themselves who have
had some beginnings of hell in their (...); when the Lord has let in horror
into the soul of a poor sinner, how is he transported with an insupportable
burden, When it is day he wishes it were night, and when it is night, he
wishes it were day, all the friends in the world cannot comfort him, nay many
have sought to hang themselves, to do any thing rather than to suffer a little
of the vengeance of the Almighty, and one man is roaring and yelling, as if he
were now in Hell already and admits of no comfort; if the drops be so heavy,
what will the whole Sea of Gods. Vengeance be? If he cannot bear the one, how can
he bear the other?

Consider thine own strength, and compare it with all the strength of the
Creatures; and so if all the Creatures be not able to bear the wrath of the
Almighty, as Job says, Job, 6. 12. Is my strength the strength of stones, or
is my flesh as brass, that must bear thy wrath? as if he had said, it must be a
stone or brass that must bear thy wrath. Though thou were as strong as brass or
stones, thou could not bear it: when the mountains tremble at the wrath of
the Lord, shall a poor worm or bubble and shadow endure it?

Conceive thus much, If all the Diseases in the world did seize upon one man,
and if all the torments that all the Tyrants in the world could devise, were
cast upon him; and if all the Creatures in Heaven and Earth did conspire the
destruction of this man, and if all the Devils in Hell did labor to inflict
punishment upon him, you would think this man to be in a miserable case, and
yet all this is but a beam of Gods Indignation. If the beams of his wrath be so
hot, what is the full Sun of his Wrath, when it shall seize upon the soul of a
sinful creature in full measure?

Nay, If yet thou think to lift up thy self above all Then set before thine
eyes the sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ, he that creates the Heavens, and
upholds the whole frame thereof; when the wrath of God came upon him only as a
Surety, he cries out with his Eyes full of tears, and his heart full of sorrow,
and the Heavens full of lamentation, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
Matthew. 27. 46. Oh thou poor creature, if thou have the heart of a man, gird up
the loins of thy mind, and see what thou can do: Do thou think to bear that
which the Lord Jesus could not bear without so much sorrow? yet he did endure
it without any sin or weakness. He had three sips of the Cup, and every one of
them did sink his soul; and art thou, a poor sinful wretch, able to bear the
wrath of God for ever?

Yield unto the Evidence of the Truth thus (...), Means 4.
beyond all opposition and gainsaying, and sit down in silence under the
Authority of it, and let it settle upon thy soul; neither question it any more,
nor hear any thing against it, when it has been heard formerly so fully
scanned and determined upon such undeniable grounds. Shut the door against the
appearance of any sinful shifts, admit no conference with carnal reason any
further; Say, that coast is clear, that case is concluded; my corrupt heart
has had a full hearing.

All the Cavils and devices that ever the policy of Hell could coin, or the
falsness and deceitfulness of my own heart could (...) or frame, have been
alleged, followed, and pressed to the utmost, they have been answered and
confuted, and the definitive sentence is past against mine own soul, by the full
consent of my own apprehension; I yield the day, I confess the case, I hold up
my hand and plead guilty: These are my sins, they are so heinous, so dangerous,
I could never have conceived, I could never believe it before, but now I yield
and confess it freely; these are the abominations that I have committed, it is
Hell that I have deserved; I am an undone man, a poor forlorn damned creature;
this is my (...), I cannot prevent it, nor can I bear it, I do not now question
it: Awake with this in the morning, sit down with this at the Table, walk with
this all the day long, and let this Truth rest with thee, when thou betakest thy
self to rest, and it will overpower and affect thy heart: So Job when his heart
came off kindly in a godly remorse for his transgressions, he suffers the (...)
of his condition to lodge and stay with him, he lies under it, and looks at
nothing else, Job, 7. 20. What shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men, I
have sinned; q. d. I have no Arguments to allege, no excuses to make, I can
say nothing, nor do nothing in mine own defense; only I must say I have sinned,
thou art the preserver of men, and unless thou succor me, I must perish, I
cannot preserve my self: If the Corrosive be never so keen, the Salve never so
searching and operative, yea, though it were applied to the rawness of the
Sore, the very proper place for it is work, if ye stir it continually, now take
it off, then lay it on; it will never work effectually, (...) thoroughly, or
kindly heal the wound; but you must bind it on, let it stay upon the place by
the space of so many hours, then you shall find the proper and powerful
operation thereof. So it is with the Sovereign and convicting Truths of Christ,
when all Cavils have been answered, and all the pleas which a man's
self-deceiving heart has put in, have been removed; so that the Truth finds
passage to the Conscience, and is applied aright unto the soul; unless it
settle there by a silent subjection unto the strength of it, and admit no
further questioning nor debating when the cause is determined by undeniable
evidence, it never works kindly, nor prevails (...) effectually as otherwise it
would. It Is (...) policy and practice he daily attends; When Scriptures are so
pregnant, and Arguments come in with such strength that no carnal pretenses can
stand before them, though he retires for the present, and seems to leave the
cause; yet upon the next occasion, when any advantage is presented, he brings
about the business again, and follows the temptation afresh, and puts in some
pretense, while he questions the Truth he hinders the operation of it for the
while, while we are parlying and disputing what we should do, we omit so long
to do what we ought, and unfit our selves to do what we intend and are resolved
of formerly. Therefore when al cavils have been silenced, let not these
brablers appear again, nor suffer them to renew their suits and (...) any more,
but cast them out of consideration (as we do use to cast bills and barreters out
of the Court when the causes have been heard) settle the heart under the
sentence of the Truth, and let it sit down there; Hear nothing against the
determination of the Word, but out of the Word; and then it is certain that
determination will never alter before thy condition alter. Give thy soul for
gone really according to the righteous Judgment of the Truth, and stop al
passages that no carnal reason may come to the speech of thy soul, or pretend
any way of rescue, and you will presently perceive, it will break kindly under
the blow, or else look out for relief elsewhere. Go aside then and parley with
thy Spirit, and say, The Word upon serious search and examination has
determined it, my Conscience confesses it, and I now see the loathsomness of
my sin, and wretchedness of my self and condition, I go up and down the world
as a condemned creature whose doom is past, and look daily for the day and hour
of execution, that death consume my days, my body drop down to the dust, and
my sinful, proud, polluted soul be dragged down into Hell amongst the Devils; to
avoid it, is impossible; to bear it, is intolerable; woe to my soul that thus I
have sinned, and who shall, who can deliver from this sin, and this death? Talk
not, trouble not me with dispute what my sin and my condition is, but Oh, help
me out of it, if it may be. And it is certain, if thy soul abide here, it will
sink under unsupportable sorrow, and soak it self in it, for this will take away
the sight and sweetness of any thing that may refresh and support the wounded
soul, because he will see his sins in the bitterness and venom of them, where
ever he is, and what ever he does, and as that which poisons all the best of the
comforts of this life. He sees his sin in his prosperity, which is but the
fatting of him for the slaughter. He sees his sin in his honor, he is advanced
the higher that his downfall may be the more miserable. God fills his belly with
his hid Treasures of this world, that he may treasure up wrath against the day
of wrath. As it is with (...), if it pass through the fire only, it hardly
warms it; but if it lie under the blowing of the sire, it will melt it. When we
take away carnal shifts, and bring the soul to the sight of sin, we put it into
the fire, but that only warms it a little; but when it sits down under the
Sentence, it is then under the Furnace, and that will melt it. Thus our
iniquities are said to lay hold of a man, Psalm. 40. 12. When we are under the
Sentence which the Word passes upon our sin, we are then under the reach of
our sins, and they then lay hold of us, and that will cau e that we shall not be
able to lookup.

All those Truths that we shall hear publicly dispensed Means 5.
out of the word, or we shall privately read in it, which concerns our
corruption of which we stand guilty, or that condition into which we are
brought by reason of our sin; We must take them home to our selves, as the
special portion the Lord has appointed unto us in particular, and we must make
particular application of them in a peculiar manner unto our selves; for by
this means there is more light without, whereby our sins and estates are more
fully discovered, more Eye Salve and Spiritual sight conveyed to our minds,
whereby the eye of our understanding is more clearly enlightened to see our
sins, and our misery in them. He that joins many fires together, they will not
only warm him, but scorch him if he stand near them. So it is with the Word
which is a fire, the joint Testimony of so many Scriptures, or so many (...)
Admonitions taken and applied near, as those which attend our Particular, they
will not only warm and affect the heart a little slightly, but scorch a man's
Conscience with the terror, as well as clear a man's apprehension with the light;
that is one thing in the 1 Cor. 14. 24. The simple Idiot when he comes before
God in the Assembly, and the Word is published and seconded; the Text (...), he
is judged of all, and condemned of all, and so the thoughts of his heart are
made man fest, and (...) falls down, and says, these sins are mine, I have
committed them; all these plagues, and threatenings, and judgments are mine, I
have deserved the Lord should lay them upon me; all this guilt belongs to me,
how shall I answer it, or be able to undergo it? All these thus taken home by
Spiritual application, become as so many weights added to the burden, which
makes it unsupportable. Look as it is in Chyrurgery, it is not enough to have
the Salve, and apply it, yea, and bind it also; but it must be (...) renewed,
and so quickened, and then it will work (...), and marvelous forcibly. So it is
when by our own conviction, and the dispensation of the Ministry, the light of
our apprehension is made more clear by the instruction of the Word, the
strength of our own conviction established by the conviction of the Word, we
apply afresh, follow them, and fasten them afresh upon our souls, and that
makes them prevail more effectually than before, like a fresh gale, it makes us
go faster on the way we intended.

Make and keep the evil of sin really present in thine Means. 6.
apprehension; and that is the last way to see the vileness of it, and find the
venom of it in its greatest efficacy. It was the Observation of the Natural
Philosophers, and Experience and Reason gives in approbation of the course; the
nearer we bring an Object of evil to our view, the more it affects and stirs
the heart of him that beholds, when they would terrify a Malefactor, and wrest
out a confession of Truth, they (...) the gibbets and instruments of Death that
be prepared, set him upon the Rack, make him ascend the Ladder, that the
neerness of the evil now approaching may strike terror, and fasten fear and
dread upon his Soul; deal thou so with thine own heart for thy spiritual good.
See the evil of sin in the execution of it upon others, and set them before
thine eyes, and act it also upon thy self by a through consideration of thine
own course.

Set the evil of sin before thine Eyes in the execution of it upon others. This
was the advice the Lord gives to the rebellious and unbeleeving Jews (...) he
would have them sensible of the danger of their own (...), he sends them to see
the ruin that sin has (...), the havoc it has wrought in the places of
greatest renown, persons of greatest respect for their (...) and account before
God and men, Jer. 7. 12. Go now unto my place, which was in Shiloh, where I set
my Name at the first, and see what I have done to it, for the wickedness of my
people Israel. Though that was the place of my Worship, where in my Name and
Honor was great, and therefore might in reason be preserved; they the people of
my choice and (...) ones, and therefore might expect pity and commiseration,
yet were destroyed and laid wast without remedy, and recovery. So will I do to
this house which is called by my Name, in which you trust, and unto the place
which I gave unto you and your Fathers, as I have done unto Shiloh. So also
when he would make them see the loathsomness of their unnatural departing away
from him to other gods, he sends them to other Nations, that they may convince
and condemn them for their course, so contrary to reason, and the very carriage
of the Heathen, Jer. 2. 10. Pass over to the (...) of Kittim, and send unto
Kedar, etc. Not that they should make a Journey thither by their bodily
presence, but send their thoughts afar off, and in serious consideration
present those evils really to their own view, see what sin has done to others,
and be persuaded it will bring the like evil upon their own souls. Let me so
speak to thee, and do thou so practice. Go thou hard-hearted sinner to the red
Sea, and hear there Pharaoh belching out his blasphemy against the Lord, Who is
Jehovah? I know not Jehovah, nor will I let (...) go: See there the Wheels of
his Chariots taken off, and he and his Egyptians crying and flying, Let us fly
from the face of Israel, for the Lord fights for them. See them drowning and
dying, and their dead Carcasses cast upon the shore. This is the hideous and
direful destruction that hardness of heart has wrought. Go thou rebellious
sinner into the Wilderness into the Tents of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram: See
them rising up against the Lord and his Officers, and reproaching their persons
and proceedings, Ye take too much upon you ye sons of Levi, seeing all the
Congregation are holy, Numb. 16. 4. Stay but a while, and see them standing in
their Tent doors, they and theirs, and see presently the Earth opening and
swallowing up them, and all that appertained unto them; they went down alive to
the pit, (...) to Hell: And hear al Israel flying at the cry of them, lest the
Earth swallow us up also. See the others that offered Incense burning in the
(...); and see what rebellion against God his Officers and Ordinances works. Go
thou proud hearted wretch to Babylon, see Nebuchadnezzar walking and vaunting
himself upon the top of the Turret; (...) wildering amongst the Beasts of the
field; and from thence pass on to the Palace of Herod: See him set upon his
Throne venting his venom against the dear Servants of the Lord, and the people
crying, The voice of God, and not of man, Acts, 12. 22. he taking the Honor to
himself in his heart, and not giving it to God: Follow him thence into his
Chamber, and see him breathing out his heart upon the bed of sorrow, the Lice
eating out his (...). Go thou covetous Earthly-minded (...) to Jerusalem unto
Judas; hear him there plotting and bargaining with the Scribes and Pharisees,
(...) the Lord Jesus, the Lord of (...) for thirty pieces of Silver; see him
(...) and (...) (...) Money, and so betraying his Master: follow him thence
into the Highpriests Hall, see his pale face, his ghastly looks, and shaking
hands; hear him yelling out of the horror of his heart, I have sinned, Matthew.
27. 3, 4. See him flinging his money away; and follow him thence, and behold
him putting the (...) about his neck, sighing out, the blood of Jesus, the
innocent blood, the blood of Jesus; let me not be, rather than be thus
miserable and with that he (...) himself headlong, and his bowels gush out,
and his soul departs out of his body, and the Devils they lay hold upon it:
Send thy thoughts post to Hell after him; hear him there cursing the day that
ever he was born, the head that plotted it, the heart that desired it, the
Scribes and (...) that consented, and gave it, and the tongue that said; Hail
Master. Behold what desperate evils (...) will drive a man unto, and what
unfferable desolation it draws with it.

As thou see the execution of the evil upon others So act upon thy self by
present consideration; danger and death when they are at hand and in present
expectation they put men upon real expressions, when they see (...) must die,
and they must come to answer, sins will appear as they are, and they must suffer
what they do deserve, there is no shift then, their hearts and hopes shake and
sink; act therefore thine own death and thine own judgment, and bring in a real
account of thy Condition by daily and real consideration, dye daily, and drag
thy heart to the trial of Gods tribunal, see what thou can make of it now,
that thou may know what to expect then; Go apart, and keep Assizes or at
least Sessions with thy self I see my sins and my condition, let me see how I
can give an account for them and how I can answer to the Lord and his Law, or
how I can bear that which follows; First or last I must come to trial, let me
(...) up my self beforehand to it. Suppose (...), I heard the last (...) blow,
Arise ye dead and come to judgment, (...) I saw Christ coming in the clouds
with thousands, suppose I beheld the thrones set and the Lord Jesus summoning
al flesh; when the books shall be opened, and al hidden things brought to
light, when the wicked shall not be able to lift up their (...) but call to the
Mountains to cover them, they are not able to abide the trial, and therefore
cannot endure the terror of the lamb; thou can not but say those are thy sins
of which thou never yet repentedst, that thy curse and condemnation is such as
thou art not able to avoid, thou can not answer for the one, nor bear the
other; Therefore bring it up to this conclusion let me not rest in this
condition now that the word and my Conscience tells me I shall never find
comfort therein at that day.

Let me now draw toward a conclusion by setting on the exhortation with two or
three Motives.

And first consider the danger of the mistake herein, to Motive I.
miss here is to miscarry forever in the great work of our conversion, without
any possibility of recovery or redress; If God never let a man see his evil its
certain he never recovers him out of it. When he will prepare a people for
destruction and cut out a people on purpose for confusion, and make them ripe
for plagues he takes this course, Isa. 6. go thy ways and make the eyes of
this people dim and their ears heavy that in seeing they may see and not
perceive, hearing they may hear and not understand, least they should be
converted and I should heal (...), keep them there and they be safe enough from
ever receiving any saving good. So our Savior Math. 6. 21. 22. The light of
the Body is the eye if the light within thee be darkness how great is that
(...) the whole (...) is so; a wound here is never (...) there is no hope of any
good coming to a soul (...) up in (...) It Is made a character, a brand that
(...) (...) upon such as be reprobates Math. 13. 13. to you (...) (...) (...)
(...) the mysteries of the kingdom, but to (...) in (...) that seeing they
might see and not understand. If there be but one gate to come into the way
miss that and you miss the way so here, therefore when men are but one step
betewen them and destruction they are thus discovered Math. 24. 37. they eat,
they drank, they married and knew nothing until the flood (...) and destroyed
them al, As in a town where there is but one entrance or passage, block up
that, there (...) (...) coming in, no going out, and (...) no (...) of relief.
They go not out to seek any, none come in to bring any (...), so here when the
mind is blinded, there is no (...) of the coming in of any good or for (...)
(...) receive (...), the passage of Grace and of mercy is wholly blocked up,
therefore our Savior is said to come to (...) (...) one (...) ou by turning of
you from your (...), therefore you must see them before you turn from them, no
seeing, no turning, no blessing. Acts. 3. 26.

It is the easiest way of al other; It eases a man of He that walks in
darkness knows not whither he goes and therefore must needs go to ruin, he
lies open to al evil that comes, he discerns it not, he will do any evil be it
never so loathsome, he perceives no such evil, he takes sour for sweet, poison
for (...) and preservatiues, and swallows down any thing though death be in
it, John 16. 2. they shall think they do God good service when they (...) you;
and says Paul I was a persecuter blasphemous and injurious and through
ignorance I did all this 1. Tim. 1. 13. The kingdom of Satan is the kingdom of
darkness; while he keeps men in ignorance and hoodwinked he can carry them
whither he will; when the light of the Gospel is once (...) up his juridiction
falls to the ground, nor can he prevail as before; It was a good woman's speech
(...) desireing that her children might be instructed (...) catechized that
their reckoning might be less and their account more easy than hers, having
lived in ignorance, children under Parents, and Servants trained up under good
masters that show them the evils of their ways and keeps them and affrights
from them, they come on so easily to Christ, and are carried so gently that
they know not what terror means, timely conviction keeps them from the
pollutions of the world.

Lastly it is the safest and surest way. See our sins If the eye be (...) the
whole body is full of light Math. 6. 22. If we would judge our selves we shall not
be judged of the Lord 1. Cor 11. 31. Who would not now be convinced that he may
then be acquitted see his sins now for his humiliation, that he may never have
them then laid to his charge, Jer. 50. 20. In those days and at that time
says the Lord the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be
none, and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found, for I will pardon their
iniquities and will remember their sins no more. How should this encourage thee
to seek out for thy sins now, to search thy heart and to look into thy life,
when as indeed if thou do so see thy sins as to sorrow for them and by this
sight and sorrow thou be driven to a savior, thy sins may be sought for but
they shall be found no more.

When they heard this.

The description of contrition stood of two parts whereby the nature of the work
was especially discoverd.

Partly in the Causes of it, Sight of sin, Sorrow for sin.


Effects of it, (...) of sin. Sequestration from sin.


Concerning the sight of sin so far as it serves our turn in a true conviction
of it, in that they stood here as accused by Peter and condemned in their own
Consciences as guilty of no less than the blood of Jesus, we have already
spoken.

The second thing in the text to be considered is the means how this was
wrought. And these are two.

The first, is a particular Application of their special corruption, the
Apostle does not hover in the general and shoot at rovers, but comes close to
them, charge them expressly in a special manner, and lets fly in the very
faces of them, this Jesus whom ye have (...), he names not, he blames not any
other, he says not Judas was a wretch that betrayed him, the soldiers cruel
that took him, Pilate base and fearful and (...) that condemned him, no this is
the Jesus and you are the men that have committed this villainy, A person could
not be more innocent, a practice more bloody, you are men that stand guilty of
this horrible abomination of Crucifying the Lord of Glory. The Doctrine from
hence is this.

A plain and particular Application of special Doct.
sins by the Ministry of the word is a special means to bring the soul to a
sight of, and sorrow for them.

Plain Application and powerful conviction (...) together. Let the house of
Israel know that God has made him Lord and Christ whom ye have crucified; you
are the men I mean, this is your sin I mention. Thus our savior the great
Prophet of His Church, who spoke as never man spoke and best knew how to deal
with deceitful hearts, he lays his finger upon the sore, and mark how he
pincheth with particulars, as his ordinary manner of dispensation was to the
Churches; Rev. 3. 2. I know thy works, thou have a name to be alive but thou
art dead. I say thou art hypocritical, and I know what I say, and I tell thee
openly what I know, thou have a form of profession but thou have no heart nor
life nor power of religion in thy course; He that could not err in what he did
teach, he teaches what Ministers should do in their dispe^nsation; And there
was nothing more usual with our Savior, then to point out particular sins and
sinners; Woe be to you Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites. Math. 23. and therefore
he does not closly and covertly as it were give a kind of intimation, afar off
what he would, and leaves (...) to pick and search out his meaning; but tells
them their own in English as we say: plucks them out by the pole goes not
behind the door to tell men their faults, but gives in testimony against their
sin and that to their teeth; Luke. 16. 15. when the Pharisees in an impudent
manner, began to mock at him, he lets fly point blanck, You are they that
justefy your selves but the Lord knows your hearts; Yea it was the charge he
gives to al his prophets, when they were to deal with the Jews and to dispense
his counsels unto them, Hos. 2. 1. 2. Plead with your Mother plead, tell her
she is not my Wife. [Plead] is a Law term, call her by name, summon her into the
court of Conscience, follow the suit against her Lay the charge and plead the
Acton against her particular sins. Thus Stephen Acts. 7. 51. Ye stiff-necked
and hard hearted, ye have always resisted the holy Ghost, as your Fathers did
so do ye. So the Apostle frequently Acts, 4. 10. 11. be it known to you and to
all the people of Israel, that in the name of Jesus etc. whom ye have
crucified, This is the stone refused by you builders, you are the men, and this
is your evil.

The Reasons shall be touched in a word.

The place and duty of a Minister requires this, who Reason, 1.
has a special charge, and therefore should have a particular care to foresee,
and so to prevent the particular and special evils, which he perceives to
blemish the Christian course, and endanger the spiritual comforts of the people
under his guidance and of whose safety he must give an account; and this will
not be done unless a man single out the persons and set home their sins in
special. The steward is not only to know (...) several conditions of the
persons in the family but to provide a portion suitable for each, if ever the
safety of the whole be provided for; and the cordials for the weak, milk for the
little ones, and stronger meat for those who are of able strength; the Skill of
the Physician and the only way to cure a settled and inward distemper as the
dropsy or falling sickness, is not to give the patient an ordinary purge, a
common receipt; that every Quack-salver will do and do no good at al; But he must
have that wisdom to hit the humor, and to provide ingredients that will suit the
temper of the party and the (...) nature of the disease; So it is the part of a
skilful Minnister to hit the humor of the heart of a sinner, to make a receipt
on purpose to meet (...) the particular distemper such as will work upon, or
sluggishness pride hypocrisy, perverseness and as the medicine does upon the
spleen or choler, and so the Lord to the Prophet Ezekiel. 16. 2. Cause the house
of Israel to know their abominations; The Sedulous shepherd who indeed would
provide for the welfare of his sheep, its not enough that by common survey he
casts his eye upon them, but he must pen them, and handle them, search them and
(...) them, (...) to their several ayls, and such Maladies unto which they are
subject. So a faithful Minister must (...) with poor sinners, as with the Sheep
commended to (...) care and custody; he must find them in their particular
evils, and follow them with application of special helps.

The necessity of sinners requires this: For this manner Reas. 2.
of the delivery of the Truth, it awakens and stirs up the mind and heart of
the Hearer to a more serious attention to that which is spoken, and settles the
heart upon a more through consideration of himself and his ways; unto both
which the soul of a sinner rocked as it were asleep in the security of a sinful
course, is loath to come; not willing to hear any thing that would trouble him
in his sins, and very ready to lay aside the consideration of that he hears in
that behalf. Whereas particular application provokes to the practice of both,
calls a man by name as it were, that he must come to his Answer; he cannot avoid
it, it will not suffer him to make an escape before he give in his Answer: This
flings in the light so full into men's faces that it forces them to look about
them. General Truths generally do little good. That which is spoken to all, is
spoken to none at al. No man heeds more than needs he must to such things he
has little heart unto, or takes little delight in. An Indictment or Attachment
without a name, read, published, and proclaimed in the face of the World, no
man is either troubled at it, or reclaimed by it; but when the name is
recorded, and the man challenged, it makes him bethink himself how to get a
Surety, or pay the debt, or prevent the danger. So is it with a general
reproof, no man will own it, and therefore no man reforms by it, or is forced
to seek out. Thus Nicodemus never left cavilling before the Lord came home to
his own person, and touched him to the quick, John, 3. 10. Art thou a Master in
Israel, and know thou not these things? See and be ashamed; a Master not to
know that which a Scholar might and should. It Is not enough that we be
stirring in the house, and people be up, but we must knock at men's doors, bring
a Candle to their bed-sides, and pinch the sluggard, and then if he have any
life he will stir. While the Ministers of the Lord are preaching and publishing
the Mind and Counsel of God in the Assemblies, there is some stirring in Gods
house, but yet the secure person sits and sleeps on the stool as the sluggard
in his bed, unless some special Application pinch him (...) the quick: then he
begins to look up, and ask who is there? So it was with David, thou art the man
did prevail more with him than all the (...), 2 Samuel 12. As the noise of a piece
a far off makes the Fowl listen, but one scattered shot that falls upon the wing
or leg makes them cry and stir. All the common discourse came not near David,
but thou art the man; three words like three small shot awakened him with a
witness.

The Nature of the Word calls for this manner of dispensation Reas. 3.
as that which suits and serves best for the end and work of it. It makes it
hit sooner, and pierce more deeply and prevailingly into the heart: The speech
of the Minister and his words are like darts and arrows, the right and
particular applying them is the level carriage of them to the heart, and so
they hit unavoidably, and fasten strongly thereupon. General discourses are
like arrows shot a cock-height at al adventures without aim, and so without
success or special profit, or powerful work upon the hearer; men come and go
away not touched, not troubled, not affected with any thing. The word is
compared to a Sword, the Explication is like the drawing of it. So the Truth in
the naked Nature and virtue of it comes to be (...); but the flourishing of the
Sword will never do the deed. But he that handles it suitable to the end and
work of it, he must follow the blow if he purpose to force his Enemy either to
(...) or yield. So it is with the Truth: downright blows puts sometimes the
most cunning Fencer past his Sense; so (...) cunning Hypocrites beyond all
their Shifts. See how the Woman of Samaria, John, 4. 18, 19. Put off our Savior
with fond Cavils, saucy and contemptuous Speeches, until our Savior met with
her in particular, Go call (...) Husband, she answers, I have no Husband; our
Savior comes within her, Thou have had five Husbands, and he whom now thou have
is not thine Husband, in that thou say right, thou poor sinful Adulteress;
then she fell before our Savior. It is in a man's Spiritual as it is with a man's
outward estate. The Bond lies forfeited, and the careless Debtor or Bankerupt
he looks not out to pay. He hears the news of a Writ out for him, but sees none
to arrest, and therefore he grows fearless. But when the Sergeant arrests him,
and drags him to prison, you will not provide for your debt to pay, provide then
to go to prison, that makes him begin to send to friends, to gather up his
(...), sell his Commodities, crave Bail and Surety. So it is with careless
prodigal sinners which suffer their souls and salvations to lie forfeir, and
yet look not out, until some particular word meet and make an arrest upon the
soul, and the Minister by his Commission like the Sergeant seizes upon him,
you will not forsake your sins, you must therefore perish in your sins. He then
begins to bethink himself what to do.

We here see the reason why there is so little good done Use, 1.
by the Ministry of the Word upon the hearts of ungodly men: Many Hypocrites
lie skulking under the covers of deceit, and are not discovered; many proud
hearts not humbled, but go on in their sturdy distempers; many sleepers sit and
snort in their security, and go hoodwinked down to destruction, and see nothing
before they sink into the pit. We do not knock at men's doors, we do not bring
the light to their bed-sides, we do not pinch them indeed with sharp and
particular reproofs, and those set on to purpose; we do not put them (...)
their fence, we do not keep them under the arrest of some conviction, so that
they cannot make an escape; but each carnal reason rescues them from the hold
of some common Truths that happily are delivered. Oh we level not, we hit not,
we apply not the Word so home, so particularly as the occasions, conditions,
corruptions of men require; and therefore it prevails not with that power,
finds not that success which otherwise it might. Common Reproofs are like the
confused (...) in the Ship when the Mariners were rowing Jonah to the shore,
notwithstanding all which, Jonah lies and sleeps under-hatches: But when they
go down to him, and laid hold upon him, and awakened him with a witness, Arise
thou sluggard, and call upon thy God, lest we all perish, Jonah, 1. 5. He then
began to bethink himself where he was, and what he had done; and then remembered
that though he had feared and served the God of Heaven, yet by (...) rebellion
he had departed away from him. So here, all the while we take up men's minds,
and exercise their Ears and thoughts with some hovering Discourses, and common
words of course, We are all sinners, In many things we offend all, All flesh is
frail; but I hope better things of you, I hope there is none such amongst you.

Those daubing discourses and roving reproves, toothless, powerless
dispensations, like arrows shot a cock-height, they touch not, trouble not,
and in the issue profit no man at all. They come proud and stubborn and
perverse and careless, they sit so and return so, day (...) day and year aster
year. But you should shake up a sinner, go down under the hatches to Jonah set
upon the hearts of men in particular Awake thou (...). Thou a master of a
family and (...) not, (...) not those that are under thee? Thou a servant yet
stubborn and (...), and (...) not to those that are set over thee in the Lord:
(...) thou a Wife and do not reverence and obey with (...) him whom God has
made thy head and guide? Art thou a member of a Christian Congregation, and
have the name of Christ called upon thee, and art thou treacherous to the
Covenant of Christ, opposest the government and spirit of Christ, and despisest
the (...) of the Lord Jesus? Awake you (...) masters and rebellious servants,
perverse wives, treacherous and (...) embers; Know that your Religion is vain
and your selves also while these distempers rest in your bosom; call upon your
own hearts for (...) and repentance, and unto God for mercy that you perish
not. Thus when Peter was recovered out of his fall, and had the blood of Christ
running warm in his veins, and the power of the spirit of the Lord now setting
on the right hand of the Father filling his heart with love to his Savior and
zeal for his glory; see how sharply (...) applies the keenest (...) to cut the
Consciences of al to whom he speaks without fear or partiality, Acts. 4. 10.
11. Be it known to you, Oh ye rulers and all ye people of Israel, that by the
name of Jesus of Nazareth whom ye have crucified, you have slain the just and
inocent one and desired a murderer to be given to you etc. and see the success,
God added daily to the Church such as should be saved. It Is Cartwrights
expression, when our savior sent out the sons of thunder then Satan fell like
lightening from Heaven, the right levelling the ordinances of Christ will (...)
make battery in the kingdom of Satan; sharp reproofs make sound Christians.
It Is a course which God commends in scripture, and has not failed to bless.
Judges 2. 4. When the Angel pleaded the indictment so punctually so plainly
against the people, their hearts brake al in pieces under such blows, they
lift up their voices and wept, they left cavilling and replying, and fell to
weeping (...).

Here see the reason why the best preaching finds the Use, 2.
least and worst acceptance at the hands of rebellious sinners, that which
works, and troubles most, that they most distaste, that which gives the least
quiet to them, to that they give the least respect and liking. like children
they love raw fruit which will breed worms and sickness, rather then worme-seed
though that would prevent both. So men love raw and windy discourses to please
sinful humors, and corrupt hearts, rather than some bitter and particular
reproofs which would make them sound in the Faith. Ahab will nourish four
hundred false Prophets at his Table, feed them with Dainties, and make choice
provision for them, that they may feed his humor, and speak good things to him;
when he is not able to abide the sight, scarce to hear the name of 'Micaiah the
Prophet of the Lord, who would speak the Counsel of the Lord without fear and
partiality, 1 Kings, 22. So they in Isai. 30. 10. They say to the Seers, see
not; and to the Prophets, (...) not unto us right things; (...) smooth things:
such as might suit their sensual Appetites, and would down without chewing. And
it is strange to see when such men have told a grave tale, and vented a
heartless, toothless discourse, neither pith (...) power in it; I say; it is
strange to see what admiration and esteem such carnal hearts will set upon such
persons and expressions; great their parts, prudence, and discretion: Oh how
sweet and seasonable their discourse, how glad to hear, and how unweariable to
attend such: And all the while they may sit and sleep in their sinful condition,
and neither have their Consciences awakened, nor their corruption discovered.
Squeamish Stomachs had rather take (...) a whole week together than a bitter
Potion one day. This is the Disease which Paul complains of as incident to the
last Age of the World; and therefore advises his Scholar Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.
2, 3. To be instant in season, out of season, convince, rebuke, exhort, for the
time will come that men will not endure sound Doctrine; but according to their
proper lusts, having itching Ears, will heap to themselves Teachers: itching
Ears must be scratched, not boxed.

Information: It Is not only in the Liberty, but it is Use 3.
the Duty of a Minister, according as the Text suits, and the condition of the
Hearers answer, to aim at the sins of the persons and people to whom he speaks.
Particular application implies a special intendment of the parties, 1 Kings,
21. 20. When Ahab met Elijah, he salutes him on this manner, Have thou found
me, O mine Enemy? He answers him, I have found thee, q. d. It was my duty to do
so, and therefore I have endeavored it, and according to my desire and endeavor
I have accomplished it, I came on purpose. Ezekiel. 33. 8. If the Watchman do not
(...) the wicked from his way, that wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but
his blood will I require at his hand. The necessity of the people, the nature
of the work which he intends, and the charge of his place which lies upon him,
calls for this at the hands of a Minister. Will not common Sense conceive it
reasonable, that the Physician discover the Nature of the Disease that troubles
the Patient, and put in such Ingredients as may purge the particular Humor;
it is the choycest skill he can use, and the chiefest good he can do; and
therefore he should intend it and endeavor it in a special manner: Would you
not have the Commander in the Field search the particular disorder in the Camp,
and pursue the reformation of it in each special passage thereof. Herein the
Faithful Execution of his place appears.

This I speak the rather to crush that vain Cavil of captious Spirits; Why did
not the Minister mean me, intend me? if the Word meet with their corruptions,
and begin to ransack and search the festered sores of their guilty Consciences?

I Answer four things:

If (...) heart misgive thee that thou art (...), he did mean thee, he should
mean thee. If thy heart condemn thee, know that God is greater than thy
Conscience, and knows more than he can express, or thou perceive in thy self.

However it is, He had thee in his intendment in what

If happily thou be freed from the outward practice Romans 2. 1. When the Jew
would plead his Innocence from such evils of the Gentiles, because he is ready
to condemn and judge them in that behalf, says the Apostle, Thou therefore that
judge another, thou condemnest thy self, for thou thy self do the same
things; but it might have been replied, We do not, we are not whisperers,
back-biters, guilty of (...), malice, covetousness, etc. Interpreters answer,
that the Apostles meaning is, Though they committed not such evils, yet the
corruption of their Nature suited with them, and so shared in them, and
therefore justly liable to the like (...) of the Law more or less.

He meant what he said, and what his words meant, If there be any evil in them,
bear witness of the evil, John, 18. 23. and it is just a man should bear his
blame. Would thou fish more out of a man's meaning than thou can find in
his words? I fear thou meanest to be a Caviller. It Is a certain Argument of a
captious and contentious disposition, and commonly of a man that carries a
galled Conscience, that seeks ways and means to make a fault when he cannot
find one.

It Is a word (...) Exhortation, 1. To Ministers, 2. To Use 4.
People. To Ministers, what they should do: To the People, what they should
desire.

To the Ministers: They have a pattern here for their (...). If we will be
faithful to our Places, and the Work commended to our Care, faithful to the
souls of the People; if we would further the Work of the Lord, and the Word,
and see the fruit of our labors to the conviction and conversion of such as
belong unto Gods Council: This is Gods way in which we must walk if we purpose
to find Gods blessing, that others may reap the profit, and we the comfort of
our pains at the great Day of our Account; we must by particular Application
make men see their sins, if ever we hope they shall see the Salvation of the
Lord.

How to stere our course in this so tickle a Channel, Directions.
and so tender a Work, these following Directions will not be unseasonable.

First, We must learn to bottom our Application upon L
the blessed Word of the Lord rightly apprehended, and opened plainly by
undeniable Evidence. Then our Application will come with uncontrollable power to
the Conscience, when it comes guarded with Authority and (...) of the Truth;
and men cannot but give way to those Reproofs, when they cannot gainsay the
evidence of Gods mind and Counsel therein. That however carnal hearts will
secretly be weary of them, yet they will not dare openly to oppose them, because
they perceive that they must oppose the Counsel of God. plainly dispensed
therein, and in their own Conscience also. Therefore I have ever judged it most
seasonable, if I would pursue a sinful course breaking out, not by the by to
pull it into a discourse, but to take a Text on purpose, wherein it is plainly
condemned. That the people may hear God in his Word speaking before we speak;
this is to show our Commission before we do Execution, and this will stop men's
mouths. Never balk any thing that is in the Text, never wrest any thing out of
the Text that is not there, for that savors too much of a man's own spirit or
passion, or private ends, al which must be avoided as much as Hell. If any man
speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God, 1 Pet. 4. 11. not our fancies, or
passions, or conceits, but let Gods Oracles be heard only.

It Is lawful for a Minister so to cast the mould, and carry Matthew. 21. 41. 45.
Thus our Savior lays out the corrupt carriages of the Scribes and Pharisees,
and paints them out so lively that they felt him, and were forced to give in
evidence of their own condemnation against themselves; as in verse 41. They
say, he will miserably destroy those wicked men; and verse 45. When the chief
Priests heard this, they perceived that he spoke of them.

In case either some false Opinions are spreading, or Peter discovers the
faults and wretched behavior of the Jews to our savior in their own words.
Acts. 3. 14. you denied that holy and just one and desired a murderer to be
granted to you: Not him but Barabbas. 1. Cor. 15. 22. How say some among you,
that there is no resurrection? Nay its lawful to name special persons in an
evil, if there may thereby be special warning given to others from falling. So
Paul to Timothy 2. Tim. 1. 15. of whom is Phygellus and Hermogenes it is Calvin's
(...) upon the place, they were more famous, and therefore their Apostasy might
be a means to draw others, therefore he gives warning concerning them. If any
man say this is to shame men, I answer their sins should be made shameful, and
they should take shame for them, that they may sorrow for them and forsake them.

Let our Application go so well guarded and fensed Acts. 6. 10. It Is said they
were not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit by which he spoke. Math. 22.
34. our savior Christ put the Sadducees to silence.

Let it be done with pity and tender compassion to Tim. 2. 24. 25. the servant
of the Lord must be patient and gentle toward al in meekness instructing those
that oppose themselves. As a Surgeon may be most compassionate when he cutts
most deep even to fetch up the core, and therefore the Apostle adds both to
Titus, show all meekness to all men, and therefore to the Cretians and yet
rebukes them sharply. Titus. 1. 13. He that is truly meek, and pities the souls
of men most he will show least pity to their sins, all sharpness of rebuke and
yet al meekness of spirit do well accord.

The exhortation to the people is that as ever you desire second part of
exhortation
to see your sins and have your hearts brought to sorrow for them, you must
desire it and delight in it, that you may have the light brought home to your
souls in way of particular applycation to your own sins, there is no means so
effectual as this, therefore desire God that your ministers may take such
pains that they may speak to your Consciences.

Take three considerations here.

Weigh sadly that when the Minister speaks in way of Applycation so as to
discover thy sins, he does no more than he may, nay no more than he should in
point of Conscience, his life lies at stake if he should not deal plainly and
faithfully. and therefore know its unreasonable for thee to quarrel with the
Minister, or with that he speaks when he has the word for his warrant in what
he does.

Look at the good of the dispensation of an ordinace

When thou find thy heart (...), consider that an under quiet taking in
sharp reproof its a sound argument Zach. 13. 6. these are the wounds I received
in the house of my friends.

When they heard this.

We heard before that application and special discovery of our particular
corruptions, what force it had to break the heart. We have here yet a Second
means couched in the manner of the (...) expressed in the Text. The word is
read in the Participle, and carries a kind of (...) endeavor with it, a (...)
of mind about that which was heard. In hearing they heard it, and when the
Sermon was over, and they had received the message of the Lord delivered by the
Apostle, when they (happily) were departed, yet that word departed not out of
their Ears and hearts. They heard it over again, they mused upon it, it stuck
by them, their thoughts recoiled afresh upon the consideration thereof, it
pressed heavy upon their hearts; Conviction brings the sin, Application lays
it, Meditation settles it upon the heart, that it sinks under it as
unsupportable.

Hence then the Doctrine is,

Through Meditation of sins applied, is a special Doct.
means to break the heart of a sinner.

As men that are stoned and pressed to death, while the stones are few that are
cast, and the weight not great, may be they are troubled and wounded in some
measure but their bones are not broken nor yet their lives hazarded, but while
they still continue flinging and adding to the number and weight, their bones
break and their lives fayl under the overbearing pressure that is put upon
them. A serious thought and right apprehension and application of a sin,
touches and troubles the sinner; but daily meditation flings in one terror
after another, and follows the soul with fresh consideration of yet more sin,
and yet more evil, and that more hainious and yet more dangerous beyond al
pprehension and imagination; so that a sinner is stoned to death as it were and
breaks under the burden of it. Thus the repenting Church Lam. 3. 19. 20. In
remembering mine affliction, the wormwood and the gall my soul has them still
in remembrance and is humbled in me, in remembering I remembered, they were daily
musing and continually poring and that made them pierce in wardly; look as it
is in the body it is so in the soul; meat minced if never (...) and digested,
it never nourishes; A potion prepared and given if not retained and kept in
the stomach it never purges or works kindly for cure, So here in the soul,
Applycation carves out a fit potion of truth to the sinner, but Meditation is
that which digests it and makes good blood of it. Applycation compounds the
potion, a particular reproof which is keen in the working brings it home, but
meditation retaynes it, that so it may work kindly and put forth the (...)
powerful effect for the loosening of those loathsome lusts; which are like
noysom and corrupt humors, which threaten the death and ruin of the soul. This
is one thing which is undoubtedly employed in that place by the consent of al
interpreters that I know Psalm. 77. 10. While the prophet was taking up his
thoughts with attendance to his own distempers and sinful provocations, and the
Lords departure from him by reason of the same, he sits down almost overwhelmed
with the direful apprehension thereof, I said this is my death, but I will
remember the changes of the right hand of the most high, this poring upon his
own sins and (...) was his death, therefore he turns the tables and turns his
thoughts another way and that was the cure of those discomforts, even the
remembrance of the former, the former expressions of Gods favor and
faithfulness its also one part of the meaning of that text, Psalm. 40. 12. My
sins have taken such hold of me that I cannot look up, when we lay hold upon
them by serious meditation then they lay hold upon us, and when our minds
attend not but slip aside from the serious consideration of them then they slip
away from us.

For explication we shall.

1 Show what this meditation is. 2 Apply the general Doctrine to the particular
occasion, and see how this helps forward this work. Then, 3 We shall make use.
For the first. Meditation is a serious intention What Meditation is
of the mind whereby we come to search out the truth, and settle it
effectually upon the heart.

An intention of the mind; when one puts forth the (...). 1. 8. thou shall not
suffer the word to depart out of thy mind, but thou shall meditate therein
(...) and night, when either the word would depart away or our corruptions
would drive it away, meditation lays hold upon it and will not let it go, but
exercises the strength of the attention of his thoughts about it, makes a
buisiness of it as that about. which he might do his best, and yet falls short
of what he should do in it. So David when he would discover where the stream
and overflowing strength of his affections vented themselves, he points at this
practice as that which employes the mind to the full. Psalm 119. 197. Oh how I
love thy law, it is my meditation all the day, love is the great wheel of the
soul that sets al on going, and how (...) that appear? it is my meditation day
and night; the word in the original signifies to swim, a man spreads the
breadth of his understanding about that work, and lays out himself about the
service wherein there is both difficulty and worth.

Serious.] Meditation is not a flourishing of a man's wit, but has a set bout
at the search of the truth, beats his brain as we use to say, hammers out a
buisiness, as the Gouldsmith with his metal, he heats it and beats it turns
it on this side and then on that, fashions it on both that he might frame it to
his mind; meditation is hammering of a truth or (...) propounded, that he may
carry and conceive the frame and compass in his mind, (...) salute a truth as
we pass by occasionally but solemnly entertain it into our thoughts; Not look
upon a thing presented as a spectator or passenger that goes by: but lay other
things aside, and look at this as the work and employment for the present to
take up our minds. It Is one thing in our diet to take a snatch and away,
another thing to make a meal, and sit at it on purpose until we have seen al
set before us and we have taken our fill of al, so we must not cast an eye or
glimpse at the truth by some sudden or sleighty apprehension, a snatch and
away, but we must make a meal of musing. Therefore the Psalmist makes it the
main trade that a Godly man drives, professedly opposite to the carriage of the
wicked, whether in his outward or inward work, in his disposition or expression
of himself in his common practice; whereas they walk in the corrupt counsels of
their own hearts, stand in the (...) of sinners, not only devise what is
naught, but practice and persevere in what they have devised, and sit in the
seat of the scorners; A blessed man his rode in which he travels, his set trade
he meditates in the Law of God day and night: that is the counsel in which he
walks, the way in which he stands, the (...) in which he fits. Look at this
work as a branch of our Christian (...), not that which is left to our liberty,
but which is of necessity to be attended and that in good earnest (...) a
Christian duty, which God requires, not a little available to our spiritual
welfare.

The end is doubly expressed in the other part of the description.

1 The searching of the truth. 2. The effectual settling of it upon the heart.
The search of the truth: Meditation is a coming in with the truth or any cause
that comes to hand, that we may enquire the full state of it before our thoughts
part with it, so that we see more of it or more clearly (...) fully than
sormerly we did, this is one thing in that of the Prophet Hos. 6. 3. Then shall
ye know if you follow on to know, when we track the (...) of the truth, in all
the pass (...) until we have viewed the whole progress of it, from truth to
truth from point to point. This it is to (...) for wisdom, Prove. 2. 2 When men
have found a mine or a veyn of Silver, they do not content themselves, to take
that which is uppermost and next at hand within (...) which offers it self upon
the surface of the Earth, but they dig further as hoping to find more, because
they see somewhat. So meditation rests not in what presents it self to our
consideration, but digs deeper gathers in upon the truth, and gaynes more of it
then did easily appear at the first, and this it does.

1 When it recals things formerly past, sets them in present view before our
consideration and judgment Meditation sends a man's thoughts afar off, calls over
and revives the fresh apprehension of things done long before, marshals them al
in rank together, brings to mind such things which were happily quite out of
memory, and gone from a man, which might be of great use and special help to
(...) our condition according to the quality of it; may be Conscience starts
the consideration but of one sin, but meditation looks abroad, and brings to
hand many of the same, and of the like kind and that many days past and long
ago committed, This distemper now sticks upon a man and brings him under the
arrest of Conscience and the condemnation thereof. But says meditation let me
mind you of such and such sins at such and (...) times, in such and such
companies, committed and multiplied both more and worse than (...) that now
appear so (...) and so troublesome to you; meditation is as it were the register
and remembrancer, that looks over the records of our daily corruptions, and
keeps them upon file, and brings them into court and fresh consideration (...).
13. 26. Thou make me to possess the sins of my youth: This makes a man to
renew the sins of his youth, makes them fresh in out thoughts, as though new
done before our eyes. This Interpreters make the meaning of that place Job. 14.
17. My trangression is sealed up in a bag, and thou sewest up mine iniquity,
though God do thus, yet he does it by this means in the way of his Providence,
i. e. by recounting and recalling our corruptions to mind, by serious
meditation we sew them all up together, we look back to the lineage and pedigree
of our lusts, and track the abominations of our lives, step by step, until we
come to the very nest where they are hatched and bred, even of our original
corruption, and body of death, where they had their first breath and being,
links al our distempers together from our infancy to our youth, from youth to
riper age, from thence to our declining days. So David, from the vileness of
his present lusts is led to the wickedness in which he was warmed, Psalm. 51. 5.
This was typed out in the old Law by the chewing of the cud; Meditation calls
over again those things that were past long before, and not within a man's view
and consideration.

Meditation takes a special Survey of the compass of our present condition, and
the Nature of those corruptions that come to be considered: It Is the traversing
of a man's thoughts, the coasting of the mind and imagination into every crevis
and corner, pryes into every particular, takes a special view of the borders
and (...) of any corruption or condition that comes to be scanned, Psalm. 119.
59. I considered my ways, and (...) my feet unto thy testimonies; (...) turned
them upside down, looked through them as it were; a present apprehension peeps
in as it were through the crevis or keyhole, looks in at the window as a man
passes by; but Meditation lifts up the latch and goes into each room, (...)
into every (...) of the house, and surveyes the composition and making of it,
with all the blemishes in it. Look as the Searcher at the Seaport, or
Custom-house, or Ships, satisfies himself not to overlook carelessly in a (...)
view, but unlocks every Chest, romages every corner, takes a light to discover
the darkest passages. So is it with Meditation, it observes the woof and web of
wickedness, the full frame of it, the very utmost Selvage and out side of it,
takes into consideration all the secret conveyances, cunning contrivements, all
bordering circumstances that attend the thing, the consequences of it, the
nature of the causes that work it; the (...) occasions and provocations that
lead to it, together with the end and issue that in reason is like to come of
it, Dan. 12. 4. Many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall increase:
Meditation goes upon discovery, (...) at every coast, observes every creek,
maps out the daily course of a man's conversation and disposition.

The second End of Meditation is, It settles it effectually upon the heart.
It Is not the pashing of the water at a sudden push, but the standing and
soaking to the root, that loosens the weeds and thorns, that they may be
plucked up easily. (...) not the laying of Oil upon the benumbed part, but the
chafing of it in, that suppleth the Joints, and eases the pain. It is so in
the (...); Application lays the Oil of the Word that is searching and savory,
Meditation chaseth it in, that it may soften and humble the hard and (...)
heart: Application is like the Conduit or Channel that brings the stream of the
Truth upon the soul; (...) Meditation stops it as it were, and makes it soak
into the (...), that so our corruptions may be plucked up kindly by the Roots.

This settling upon the heart appears in a threefold work.

It affects the heart with the Truth attended, and leaves Pet. 2. 8. It Is said
of Lot, in seeing and hearing, he vexed his righteous soul. Many saw and heard
the hideous abominations, and were not touched nor affected therewith. No more
had he been, but that he vexed and troubled his own righteous soul, because he
was driven to a daily consideration of them which cut him to the quick. The
word is observable, it signifies to try by a touchstone, and to examine, and
then upon search to bring the soul upon the rack: therefore the same word is
used, Matthew. 14. 24. The Ship was tossed by the waves; the consideration of the
abominations of (...) place raised a tempest of trouble in Lots righteous soul.
This the wise man calls laying to the heart, Eccles. 7. 1, 2. It Is better to go
to the house of mourning than to the house of laughter; for this is the end of
all men, and the living will lay it to his heart. When the Spectacle of Misery
and Mortality is laid in the grave, yet savory Meditation lays it to a man's
heart, and makes it real there in the work of it. The Goldsmith observes that
it is not the laying of the fire, but the blowing of it that melts the Metal:
So with Meditation, it breaths upon any Truth that is applied, and that makes
it really sink and soak into the soul; and this is the reason why in an
ordinary and common course of Providence, and Gods dealing with sinners,
(leaving his own exceptions to his own good pleasure) that the most men in the
time and work of Conversion have that scorn cast upon them, that they grow
melancholy. And it is (...) thus far in the course of ordinary appearance; The
Lord usually never works upon the soul by the Ministry of the Word to make it
effectual, but he drives the sinner to sad thoughts of heart, and makes him
keep an audit in his own soul by serious meditation, and pondering of (...)
ways; otherwise the Word neither affects thoroughly, nor works kindly upon him.

It keeps the heart under the heat and authority of the Truth that it is taken
up withal, by constant attendance of his thoughts. Meditation keeps the (...)
under an arrest, so that it cannot make an escape from the Evidence and
Authority of the Truth, so that there is no way, but either to obey the Rule of
it, or else be condemned by it. But escape it cannot, Meditation meets (...)
stops all the evasions and sly pretenses the fals-hearted person (...)
counterfeit. If a man should deny his fault, and himself guilty, Meditation
will evidence it beyond all gainsaying, by many testimonies which Meditation
will easily call to mind; remember ye not in such and such a place: upon such an
occasion, you gave way to your wicked heart to do thus and thus; you know it,
and God knows it, and I have recorded it: If the (...) would lessen his fault,
Meditation aggravates it; or if he seem to slight it, and look at it as a
matter of no moment, yet Meditation will make it appear, there is greater evil
in it, and greater necessity to bestow his thoughts upon it than he is aware of.

Hence it is Meditation lays (...) unto the soul, and cuts off al carnal
pretenses that a wretched self-deceiving hypocrite would relieve himself by;
and still lies at the soul, this you did, at that time, in that place, after
that manner; so that the soul is held fast prisoner, and cannot make an escape;
but as David said, Psalm. 51. 3. My sins are ever before me: Consideration keeps
them within view, and will not suffer them to go out of sight and thoughts; and
therefore it is Paul ioyns those two together, 1 Timothy 3. 15. Meditate in these
things, and be in them.

It provokes a man (by a kind of over-bearing power) Phil. 4. 9. Think of these
things, and do them: thinking men are doing men. Psalm. 39. 3. While I was thus
musing, the fire brake out, and I spoke: the busy stirring of Meditation is
like the raising of a tempest in the heart, that carries out all the actions of
the man by an uncontrollable command. I considered my ways, and turned my feet
unto thy Statutes: right Consideration, brings in a right Reformation with it.

The Nature of the Duty is thus opened; let us apply it now to the particular,
and give in the Reasons of the Truth, why this Meditation brings in this
Contrition, and heartbreaking.

I might argue from the former Description, that which makes a through search
of our (...), and settles them effectually upon the soul, that is a fit means
to break our hearts with them; but thus meditation does, as it has been
formerly disputed, therefore it is a fit means to break the heart.

But I shall add a double Argument briefly; they both shall be taken from the
special effects of Meditation, which are marvelous pregnant to this purpose.
These come nearer to the Point in hand, and apply the general Doctrine to this
special occasion.

Meditation sharpens the sting and strength of corruption, Reas. 1.
that it pierces more prevailingly; It draws out the venom, the quintessence
of the evil of a corruption, and lets in that upon the heart and conscience of
a sinner, which stings and torments him in greatest extremity: makes him see
more in his distemper than ever he suspected, makes him feel it far worse than
ever he could have imagined it could have been. As it is in the Art of
Chemistry and Distillation, by their dexterity and skill in that course; they
draw out the very spirits of the Metal, or Herb, or Liquor, as the Spirits of
Wine, the Oil of Gold, etc. and five drops of that will work more strongly than
five (...), five spoonfuls of the Body of the Herb, or Water in the gross,
because there is nothing but Spirits as it were gathered together in a narrow
room, and therefore they are active in the highest degree. If it be Spirits of
Poison, it kills suddenly, it is present death, past recovery; if of Cordial or
Preservative, they comfort and refresh beyond imagination, (...) and strangely.
So here; Meditation is this Spiritual Chemistry, or the art of holy
Distillation, which draws out the Spirits of the poison and bitterness that is
in corruption, Spirituallizeth the plague and venom of the vengeance that
attends every transgression; and though it was never so small in the eye of the
world yet it stings the heart more than the greatest evil which is committed,
if not mused on, nor attended.

Thus David when by consideration he had viewed (...) his course, saw the
infinite loathsomness of it, that it sunk his heart; which for the while, when
he attended it not, did not stick upon him, nor trouble him. He looks now at
the root of sin whence it came, at the extent in the highest strain in
spiritual wickedness: Against thee, thee only have I sinned, Psalm. 51. 4. I
said in my have, in my sudden foolish apprehension, it was but against a man,
my Servant, my Subject, and Vassal, and therefore no such great matter nor
grievous evil, if I as a Prince did gratify my own desire; but now I see it
was against thee, thee only, the God of Justice, and Mercy, and Fidelity, and
Truth. That was the extent of it, how far it went. Again, Deliver me from blood
guiltiness, O. God: he now saw upon more serious consideration, it was not a
point of Policy, a slight of subtle and secret conveyance that would color over
the business, and free him from blame, because he intimated his mind to Joab to
act it. But now he saw it was not Joabs treachery, nor the Sword of the
Children of Ammon, 2 Samuel 11. but it was he that had taken away the life of
Uriah: The dead body of Uriah was dished out to him as his breakfast every
morning. Thus for the extent of it. Again, upon consideration he looks to the
(...) of it; Thou Lord love Truth in the inward parts: Now he (...) his
sending for, his (...), his welcoming of Vriah, his pretense of care to send
him to his own house, was nothing but apparent treachery against the Law of
God, and light of his Conscience, and knowledge which the Lord had set up in
him. The root that bred and fed these bitter fruits, was his (...) heart, and
body of sin, yet not so mortified, which he brought from his Cradle, which the
Lord loathes, as a God of Truth, who loves Truth, who may justly condemn him and
reject him for his departing from it, doubling and dissembling in a continual
falsifying to Vriah by all his fair speeches, and glozing pretenses, he (...) to
express his respect unto him.

Meditation does not only pinch the heart with the but by the daily attendance
upon the evil of iniquity now considered, it holds the heart upon the rack
under (...) and unsupportable pressures; 2 Pet. 2. 8. Lot daily seeing and
hearing of the loathsomness of their hideous and unnameable abominations, vexed
his righteous soul: Many saw and heard as much as Lot, and happily more, and
yet were never troubled thereby; no more would he have been, but that he
tormented his righteous soul by the daily consideration, of these abominations
practiced. The word (...) is marvelous pregnant: It signifies, 1. To prove and
examine by means of the rack, or by way of torment, to make inquisition
touching the Truth. So Lot kept his soul upon the rack of restless vexation, as
by the continual hearing, so by the constant consideration of the hellish
villainy of the Sodomites; and therefore the Evangelist uses it to signify the
boisterousness of a storm when the Sea is raged by the wind to the height of
violence and rage: Matthew. 14. 24. Meditation raises a storm or tempest of
distress in the soul. A sudden and present apprehension, a flashy thought of
the evil of sin, is like the flourish of a Sword afar off, which a man neither
seels nor (...) at the utmost; it is but like the glaunce and fall of a blow,
which it may be ripples the skin, whereas deep and through Meditation is as it
were doubling of the blow, that steady recoyling of a man's thoughts, is the
stabbing of the heart through, and through again, makes the sinner bleed
inwardly and abundantly. When the sinner would put by the stroke of the Truth,
and shake off the danger of the sin now discovered, and applied, and set on,
Meditation follows the blow home, and puts the soul beyond its sense, nay, it
is so, it must be so, it will be so: believe it, and expect it, for you shall
find it worse than others do express, or you can conceive; for this is the
voice and verdict which Meditation gives in. The Prophet Jeremy expresses the
nature of the departure of the people from the Lord, thus: It is an evil and a
bitter thing that thou have departed away from the living God, Jer. 2. 19. And
yet Job tells us, and experience and profession of the wicked proclaims it to all the world, That wickedness is sweet in the mouth of the ungodly, he hides it
under his tongue; though he spare it and for sake it not, Job, 20. 12, 13. but
keep it still within his mouth, as a pleasing morsel to his (...). If you ask
the reason why these bitter pills seem so sweet to a base heart? Amongst other
Reasons, this is one; It fares with a man's sins as sometimes (...) see it in the
Physic of the body; bitter pills if they be swallowed of a sudden, there is
little sense of the bitter and unpleasant taste of them, or at least it lasts
not long: but if they be chewed over and over, they will then appear as they
are, and a man will be compelled to confess the extreme bitterness that is
therein. So it is with wickedness to a carnal heart: Your pride, and
stubbornness, perverseness, and rebellion, and carelessness, and laziness, and
your noysom uncleanness, they are a pleasant morsel to your profane and (...)
hearts, you roll them under your tongues, and take delight in them; it is because
you swallow them down without any chewing, any serious consideration; you
swallow down your pride, and way (...), and disobedience; whereas did you but
chew these things, and weigh them in a right consideration, you would then feel
that which one day you shall find, there is bitterness in the end.

Meditation is that which increases the weight of the evil of sin, presses it
down upon the Conscience, and burdens the heart with it until it break under
it. It gleans up, and rakes together althe particulars, adds daily to the load,
and lays on until the Axletree split asunder, and the heart fails and dies
away under the apprehension of the dreadfulness of the evil. This some, and
those very judicious, make the meaning of that inference and dependence, Job,
14. 16, 17. Thou sealest up my transgression in a bag, and sewest up my
iniquity together, and surely the mountain falling comes to naught; i. e. Thou
heapest up the hideous remembrance of al my provocations, and surely neither
rocks, nor mountains, nor any power was able to bear, and not break under the
unsupportable weight thereof. As it is in War, when the numbers are few, and
the parties that give the onset, are weak and feeble, it is not hard then either
to resist their power, or avoid and escape their pursuits; but when many
thousands, it may be some hundreds of thousands join al forces together to give
the onset, they usually say they overbear the contrary party, and break their
ranks with their very numbers and crowd of the multitudes that overlay them
utterly. It Is so in this Spiritual contestation with the sinful distempers of
our hearts; it may be we spend some few and flashy thoughts about them, and
look over them after a heedless manner, when either the Truths of God are
dispensed to our conviction, or our sins discovered; they neither touch nor
trouble our hearts, we cast off such thoughts, or cast them away, or break
through them easily: But Meditation musters up new Armies of Arguments, levies
and calls in new forces of all special, particular, aggravating circumstances,
whereby the hainousness of the evil is so abundantly brought home with that
overbearing evidence to the heart, that it is forced to fall under it.

You say it was your infirmity, you were ignorant and knew it not, it was a
temptation that surprised you, you were not aware of it, the matter was not
great and therefore you hope there is a place for pardon and pity so that
neither others need to be offended, nor you troubled for it. Think it over
again, call meditation to counsel, when you have sent your thoughts afar of, and
viewed the compass of thy course with all the considerate circumstances that
attend thereupon be it but the casting aside of the command of a superior, in a
common and ordinary occasion of thy calling, see to what it will amount when
meditation has cast al into the balance. It will appear the thing was open and
easy, that whereof thou have been often forewarned often commanded to the
contrary, when there was no trouble to do it, no profit to neglect it, and
therefore there was no pretense or temptation from without to take thee aside
and therefore thou did it wittingly, willingly, ordinarily against knowledge
and conscience, against the promises thou have made to man, confessions thou
have made to God confessed and continued in this evil. The less the thing, the
worse thy heart, the greater thy offense that will trample a command under thy
feet, for a trifle, thy spirit never affected with this, nor have made
Conscience of it to this day. This argues a heart not that hates sin but hates
to be reformed Prove. 13. 13. Its a Hellish heedlesnes of a graceless heart, it
shakes the evidence of thy estate, and hope of any comfort, This is the
reckoning thou must make, hear and know it for thy good says meditation, for
so it is. He that reverenceth a command shall live. But he that despises a
command shall die for it. This is thy estate and thy misery this is that which
broke the heart of Peter exceedingly Mark 14. 72. though the Cock had crowed,
and Christ looked upon him yet he stood it out, but when he remembered the words
of our Savior and thought thereon, then he wept. When he bethought himself,
had cast all things together brought in the (...) of account, he went out and
wept bitterly, he laid all the heightning circumstances together that he who was
not only a Christian but entertained as a servant, called as an Appostle of
Christ who was forewarned of his backsliding, had promised, resolved so
strangly against it, that he should not only forsake his master closely, but
openly deny and renounce him, yea hellishly blaspheme and curse, and that (...)
often, and now especially in this time of trouble, in the day of our Saviors
distress, when the innocence of his cause, the honor of his person, yea his
life was at hazard; that such a servant and Apostle should so basely and
blasphemously forswear and renounce his master and Redeemer and that upon so
slight an occasion, as the voice of a Damsel, etc. he laid al these together
and laid them to his heart, he was not able to hold, he went out and wept
bitterly. Use.


Here is matter of Humiliation to every soul in the sight of God, who may sit
down in silence and return home the sentence of the desiled leaper, behold I am
unclean I am unclean, Levit. 13. 45. every man fayles in this, let every man
ingeniously own and acknowledge his sin and that's the best way to make us to be
humbled and abased for it, let every man lay his hand upon his heart, take it
to himself. Oh this laying aside the duty of meditation its my sin, so say ye
husbands and answer ye wives, its our sin also; speak ye parents to your
(...) this is our sin we have not practiced nor taught it, answer the children
and confess, no wonder we did not know it therefore never did it nor never
could endeavor after it. And its our shame, each man has a mind and can spend
it unweariably where he setts himself, set but the covetous man about the
world, the voluptuous man about his pleasure, each man about his comforts and
conveniences and we sit at it, nay no man will suffer his thoughts to be taken
off from these, they eat with them, drink with them, walk with them, talk with
them. What a loathsome thing is it, others muse how to commit sin and we not how
to redress it, they meditate how to contrive their own ruin, and shall not we
how to prevent it?

Shortly; there be two sorts of people whom this matter of complaint may
especially concern, and those are either such, 1. Who stand in professed
opposition to this practice; 2. Who continue in an open neglect thereof, and
conceive they may have a dispensation for their carelessness.

First those who were typed out by the unclean beasts who studiously endeavor
to contrive all ways and means how they may take off their minds from this
service; their care for themselves and their counsel also unto others, is to
shake off these dumpes as they call them; they look at this mopish kind of
Melancholy musing, as a practice deeply prejudicial to their peace and
comfort, conceive it as a piece of extreme folly, as though a man should not
find trouble enough in the world, but should devise means to torment and vex
his own soul; and therefore they avoid the meditation of the danger of (...)
sins, as their rack and engine of unsufferable vexation, and that upon a double
ground; partly, that they might not be crossed in their sensual (...), but that
they might have elbow room and go on with ease in their ungodly lusts, whereas
the consideration of the danger of our finful (...), damps and dashes men's
delights, deads men's endeavors, and hearts, knocks off their wheels that they
draw heavily, spoils all the sport as we say, and deprives them of the pleasures
they did expect. Therefore it is a rule of (...), Amos. 6. 3. 4. 5. they put
far away the evil day, and then (...) the seat of violence to draw near, etc.
q. (...). the thoughts of that would spoil the other. Partly, it arises from
hence, the privy guilt of their own Consciences makes their hearts misgive
them; The number of their abominations is so great, the nature so heinous, the
plagues so direful and dreadful which attend upon them as their due that they
are afraid to view, the ugly visage of their sins, or to take a right seantling
of the dreadful plagues they must expect, and therefore study to forget both,
that they may not be tired with either, as bankerupts are loath to view their
account books when they cannot pay their debts, they would not remember what
they are not able to satisfy.

To these men I would say two things. 1. By way of terror to awaken them. 2. By
way of advice to counsel them.

Let them know their folly. When they would avoid their misery they take the
only way to increase it. They keep in the fire, and make it flame more; dam the
stream and cause it to swel over the banks; while they defer (...) accounts
they increase the debt and the danger also. You will not see your sins, you shall
see them, you will not see them here by the light of the word for your
Humiliation, you shall see them by the flames of Hell fire, and there be forced
to read over al your wretchedness for your everlasting ruin; you would not have
your hearts break for them while there was hope to be cased, you shall burn in
the (...) pit when you will be beyond hope ever to be recovered. Thou would
forget them, and cast them behind thy back: know assuredly thy distempers will
meet thee like an armed (...), (...) will mind thee of them, These things thou
(...) done, and set them in order before thee and tear thee in pieces when
there will be none to deliver thee, Psalm. 50. 21. 22. Then thou will curse thy
self and thy (...), and wish, oh that I had hearkened, oh (...) (...) had (...).

Let this counsel be acceptable to such. sear to commit sin but never be afraid
to see it, and (...) the vileness of it to the full, and the worse they appear
to thy apprehension, the better and more (...) thy condition and estate is. A
(...) and (...) knowledge of a disease is the ready means to cure it. Do thou
remember them, God will forget them; (...) them be in thy (...) and the Lord will
cast them out of his, and (...) away his face from thy sins, when thou (...)
turn thy mind and thoughts to a through (...) and (...) of them Jerem. 31. 18.
19. 20. (...) have heard (...) bemoaning himself etc. I will surely have mercy
upon him says the (...).

Another sort though they give allowance and approbation yet (...) (...) many
(...) to plead, why either (as their case stands) they may be (...) or
dispensed with all in the neglect of it; 1 Here then comes into scanning and
consideration the hindrances the men plead which may excuse the omission of
the Duty. 2. The ways and helps how to remove them, which go hand in hand. We
(...) handle both together, namely the causes and the cure of this neglect.

The first and main hindrance whereby men are taken Hindrance, 1.
off from this so spiritual a service, is a conceit that goes current in the
world that its matter only of indifferency this daily meditation; and so left
by God himself and therefore we should not exact more than the Lord requires,
and so lay burdens upon men, when we would profess we call for obedience at
their hands; and therefore we should not impose a needless necessity upon men
but leave it to their Christian liberty, he that can receive it let him, (as
our Savior in another case) he that does not, cannot be blamed. You have the
cause, attend now the cure; you see the hindrance, consider the help, that
(...) remove this stone out of the way.

1. Know then, It was the profession of the Prophet (...).
David that he would take up this service Psalm. 119. 15. I will meditate in thy
precepts and have respect unto thy ways, verse. 23. Princes did sit and speak
against me but thy servant did meditate in thy statutes again (...) 48. I will
meditate in thy statutes. And he does not this as a special conveniencie nor
yet as a peculiar duty proper to him, but upon such grounds as belong to al,
and therefore will call for it of al; verse. 97. Oh how I lovethy Law, it is my
meditation all the day. Thou will not deny but thou art bound to love the Law of
God, and then certainly if that cause be there, this effect will of necessity
follow. Nay its the guise of all the Saints Psalm. 1. 1. 2 its as necessary as
not to sit in the seat, walk in the counsels, and stand in the way of sinners,
so necessary is it to meditate in the Law of God, and that to have thy set
meals, thy appointed times and turns for meditation.

2. The want of this is given as the cause why men are carried head long to the
Practice of loathsome evils. (...). 44. 19. No man considers in his heart.
Jer. 8. 6. I (...) and heard, but they spak not (...) No man says with himself
what have I done? the want of this hastens the righteous judgments of the Lord
Psalm. 28. 5. because they regard not the operation of his hands, therefore he
will destroy them and not build them up.

3. The use of this affects and fits the heart to the duties that are to be
discharged. It Is a preparative to many daily perfourmances in our Christian
course, it quickens the holy dispensations of the soul, charge it with
confessions and petitions feasonable and savory that they may be delivered with
feeling and affections when the heart is boiling of a good matter, Psalm. 45. 1.
So Psalm. 102. 1. I will pour out my meditation that is his prayer; meditation
was the mint or Anvil uponwhich our prayers should be made. And therefore
Divines refer it to the third Commandment as that which is an Harbenger to al
holy duties we do to God, stirring up the faculties of the whole man, to that
reverend attendance which becomes the majesty of the Almighty, Eccles. 5. 1.
and the advice of the wise man is to look to our feet, as in the public so in
private also.

As by way of preparation it fits for spiritual services so it confirms and
settles the good of them unto our souls when they are done then shall your
profiting appear, if you meditate upon these things 1 Timothy 3. 15. Sermons will
not profit though we hear and that attentively. Sacraments will not profit,
conference, reading will not profit, though we studiously for the present turn
and bestow our selves thereupon, unless we meditate afterward. As exercise
before meat to stir up the stomach to receive meat, So digestion after meat, if
we hope to have any strength, meditation is both, it stirs up the affection to
the duty, and then digests the good and sap of the service and turns it into
good blood. Tuum illud est quod Meditatio facit (...).

Secondly. Men complain they have no time, occasions Hind. 2.
so many, buisines crowds in so with such multitudes our minds, and heads, and
hearts, and thoughts are so taken up, one crowds out another, we have no time.

I Answer, 1. Have thou no time to repent, and to break Answ.
thy heart for sin? no time to fit and quicken thy Spirit to Service? no time
to profit by all the Spiritual means? Then have no time to be saved, to maintain
the comfort and peace of thy Conscience.

2. Must God only be loser, and his Worship go to the wall? must he only be
crowded out of our minds, and heads, and hearts? how unreasonable is this?

3. Redeem the time, Ephesians. 5. 16. Pluck some opportunity, and rescue it from
meat, and sleep, and company, and recreation, Psalm. 119. 148. I prevent the
morning watches that I might meditate in thy Statutes: he had as many
employments as thou, being a King, and yet he did attend this Duty; so may
thou, and so should thou.

4. I desire no more time to this Duty in the day, than each day thou
squandrest and spendest away unprofitably: and let any man observe his own
course, and record but his expense, and that needlessly of his time, he will say,
thus much I spent vainly here, and thus much there, and why might not that have
been spent in meditation for the helping forward of the Work of God in my soul?

The great Complaint is, The unsteadiness of their Hind. 3.
(...) thoughts, which (as they conceive) (...) from some kind of natural
(...), whereby they are wholly disenabled in their own apprehension, and common
experience, to keep their minds to any set employment and exercise in this so
serious a work of Meditation, they are so off and on upon every occasion, a
(...) and wandering frame of Imagination, that cannot dwell upon a thing; nay,
though they resolve it sadly, withdraw themselves from al other occasions into
their private Closets, and there retire and set themselves on purpose about
this business, as being convinced it is so needful, and being persuaded it
would be so profitable to them, yet immediately they are taken off, they are
gone from their task, when they had begun now to bestow their attention upon
the Duty; that look what a shaking palsy is to the head, there is no stilling
of it, while a man lives it will follow him; so this shattering and giddiness of
our minds, unsettles us when we would be most serious, and does accompany us in
every retired corner, and that upon every turn, as a disease and distemper of
our natural apprehension; and it seems there is an impossibility to reform this
feebleness, and therefore we hope we may be excused if we cannot perform this
service, which is so necessary, and which we also endeavor, but as al men may
see, we cannot accomplish.

I Answer, Answ.


1 Generally. 2 Particularly.
Be it, that this shaking Palsy, this Vertigo and giddiness of Spirit, be a
disease which has seized upon the faculty of the Understanding as an
haereditary Curse, which comes from the sin of Adam, and is communicated more
or less to al his Seed. Thou should labor to look at it as a sickness, and
therefore not to maintain a disease, but seek a Remedy how thou may be
recovered out of it. Thy understanding is full of blindness; and ignorance
naturally is one part of the image that was imprinted upon thee by the nature
of thy first Parents received; thou would not therefore plead for thy
ignorance, and sit down well satisfied with it, but be more studious to amend
it, and seek to Heaven, and be studious and painful in the use of al means that
thou may be healed and cured of it: So do here; take this giddiness of mind,
as a fruit of the forbidden tree, as a curse of that carelessness and
non-attendance which surprised our first Parents, whereby they slipped aside
from under the stream of Gods Providence and blessing, and so undid themselves
and al their Posterity; only see the evil of it, and seek to be freed and
delivered therefrom.

Several things I would suggest here by way of help.

See what is the breeding and the seeding root, the next and immediate cause of
this fickle and unsteady roving of thy mind, and redress that, and the Cure
will follow, and the cause will be most easily thus discovered, and so also
removed.

Observe whether those wandering thoughts that are (...) and roving in a
restless manner from one thing to another, like your fluttering Butterflies
which fall upon many Herbs, but (...) and draw out Honey from none: observe I
say, whether those unsteady thoughts pass upon the multitude and variety of
things, which have no cohaerence one with another, no dependence one upon
another, but here and there, and every where, as your vagrant beggars that have
no settled abode: or else observe, though a man's thoughts be full of variety
and uncertainty, straggling here and there, and compassing many coasts to and
again, yet for the issue, they border and Butt for the most part upon some one
subject, or aim at one thing mainly, though Spannel-like they coast up and
down, and cross al ways, and meet with multitudes in their course, yet their
game is that which at last they look at. So here.

If the (...) and (...) of thy imaginations be of the first kind, it issues
merely out of the frothiness and emptiness of thy understanding, and the wound
lies in the vanity of that faculty: As it is with a Boat or Barque that is put
to Sea, if neither fraught nor ballast, every wave tosseth it too and again,
the least breez of wind that blows, almost overturns it, because it is empty,
wants (...), and (...) must needs (...) (...). So here, when the Understanding
is not (...) (...) the blessed Truths of God, is (...) fraught (...) (...) with
the Wisdom, and (...), and Comfort of the Word, by which it should both receive
light and ability to stere our Christian Course according to the stability and
(...) of the Rule, it floats up and down with sroathy and foolish apprehensions.

The Cure then is here plain; If thy wanderings come from this cause, store thy
understanding with the Heavenly Truths of the Lord, let thy mind be furnished
and sraught with the rich and precious Promises, Commands, and Comforts of the
Word; let them be ballasted with these, and they will make thy thoughts steady
and settled in thy constant and daily employments: Thus the Apostle, (...). 4.
14. when he persuades, (...) they be no more children carried up and down with
every wind of Doctrine; and those are nothing but the devices and conceits of
men, the sleight of men's brains; he adds verse 15. Truth in Love: so the word,
attend thou the Truth, and have thy mind taken up with that, and possessed by
the power thereof: this will make a man steady and unmovable, that nothing may
take him aside. Therefore David makes that Cohaerence, as though the one would
undoubtedly bring in the other: I hate vain thoughts; how did he attain that?
Thy Law do I love, Psalm. 119. 113. It Is the Physicians direction for the state
of our bodies; the best way tofence the stomach against wind, and the head
against lightness, which comes by that, is to feed heartily, and make a full
meal of that which is cordial and nourishing, nothing better to expel wind, and
preserve against it. So it is in the state of thy soul, To preserve our minds
from windy and vain imaginations, is to have our understandings fully taken up
with the blessed Truths of God as our daily and appointed food.

If thy wandering thoughts be of the second kind; such It Is then certain, the
wound lies in the affection firstly. Some affection or other, either of love,
fear, sorrow, hatred, is inordinate and violent, and that transports a man's
apprehensions and thoughts, to (...) after it, and to send post from one coast
to another quarter, to lay out themselves in what ever special occasions shall
present themselves that (...) (...) satisfaction. As for instance, when the
covetous (...) (...) forced and constrained by Comcience to (...) (...) in a
serious Meditation about his own estate; (...) (...) sooner retired into his
Closer to attend that work, (...) forthwith his affections present some earthly
object, starts something which concerns the benefit of his outward estate, as
one while may be the hazard of a debt, that he is now like to lose, his debtors
estate growing low, and he behind hand, and that he persues as a (...) for the
while; when he has run himself out of breath there, and gone as far as (...)
can, anon (...) starts a fresh Hare, a bargain that (...) of late (...) him,
and he conceives there may be a booty in that, that he also follows with much
eagerness, lays out his (...) to the utmost, how he may contrive (...) (...)
it according to his desire: No sooner is he off from (...), but then sends post
have to his Lot, and Harvest, there he is casting (...) how to order al to
advantage. Here are now roving imaginations that range over hedge and ditch in
much variety, but still they aim at the same thing, border all together upon
earthly contentments, and how to compass them, they do center there still;
therefore it is an Argument undeniable, the unsteadiness of thy thoughts arose
from this distempered Affection. The like I may say of the unclean person,
whose affections are fastened upon his lusts, he sends his thoughts far and
wide how to prevent what he fears, how to bring about what he desires; one
while he looks at the (...) that some did unto him, that stood in his light,
and crossed him in his intended course and match, his mind wholly taken up with
the consideration of the greatness of the wrong that has been done him, busied
with diligent search and enquiry how to prevent their proceedings, how to repay
them in their own coin, and to deal harshly with them, because they dealt
subtly or unkindly with him. Another while he is suiting himself (...) al
convenience that either means or friends can make, purchasing such outward
comforts, and that with (...) pains, and dividing cares, because he knows such
outward (...) of wealth, and state, and lands, will be very advantageous to
accomplish his own ends. Here be variety of thoughts, which fetch a compass far
and wide about many particulars; yet they aim al at this, how to satisfy his
sensual desires, therefore the wound was there. The (...), because the Channel
is narrow, and the wind somewhat scant, he touches in many places, tacks about,
and fetches many points, but still because it is to attain the Haven; therefore
each man in reason concludes, that was the cause that invited him to all that
variety in his course. It Is so in the carriage of the soul; the cause why a man
fetches such a compass, and tacks about in his own contrivements; now this,
now that; one while one way, another while this or that presented and pursued
busily; yet in the issue we land al our thoughts, and look at the last how to
bring in content to such a lust: It Is certain the vanity of that lust
occasioned and drew the vanity of thy thoughts after it.

The Cause being thus conceived, the Cure is fair and The cure 1.
easy to comprehend; namely, Cure these inordinate and raging lusts, and
thence will follow a still and quiet composure of mind; purge the stomach if it
be foul, and that will ease the pain of wind in the Head, because that is caused
by the fumes that arise from thence. Take off the plummet, or lessen but the
weight of it, the minutes though they hurried never so fast before, yet will not
move at all, or at least very slowly and quietly. So here, take off the poyse
of the affections, purge away these noysom lusts which carry and command the
head, and send up dunghill steams which distemper the mind, and disturb it, and
those windy imaginations will cease, and those thoughts of the mind like the
minutes, either will not move, or move in order and manner as may help and not
hinder. Here the great skill and care ought to be to labor the clensing and
sanctification of such affections which are most tainted, and where the vein
and fourse of original corruption, either through custom, or constitution, or
company, has vented it self most usually, and so has taken up the soul, and
gained, and so exercised greater power over it. For as in bruised or weak
parts, all the humors run thither, so commonly this corruption is the link and
drain of the soul, all distempered thoughts, and other inferior lusts, empty
themselves, and become Servants unto this. If once the affections had gained
such a taste and relish of the sweetness that is in Christ, and his Truth, that
al these baggage and inferior things here below seemed sapless, and that the
heart were endeared to him and his Truth, and carried strongly (...) both this
would carry the thoughts vehemently, and keep them so strongly to both, that
they would be so far from wandering away from Christ, that they would not be
taken from bestowing the strength of their intentions about him, Psalm. 119 97.
Oh how I love thy Law, it is my Meditation (...) the day; verse 93. I will
never forget thy Precepts, for thereby thou have quickened me; ver. 23. Princes
sat and spoke against me, but thy servant did meditate in thy Statutes. In
reason he would have conceived it (...) (...) time for him to bethink himself
how to prevent their fury, and it would cost him sad thoughts of heart how to
provide for his (...) and safty; no truly, Thy servant did meditate in thy law.

Possess thy heart with an (...) consideration, and a who sees and pondereth
all thy paths, and therefore will take an account, and that strictly, of all the
outstrainings of thy thoughts when thou come to give attendance upon him, and
to draw near into his presence, in some peculiar and (...) Service: There is a
kind of heedless wantonness which like a Canker breeds in our Atheistical
dispositions, whereby we see not the Rule that should guide us, we lay aside
also the consideration of that power that does rule us, and will bring us to
judgment, and so missing the guide that should show us the path, and the power
that should awe us, and constrain us to keep the rode, a man's mind powrs out it
self to every vanity that next offers it self unto its view. Whereas were we
aware of his presence, and awed with it, it would cause us to eye him, and
attend him in his way and work, wherein he commands us to walk with him. As it
is with trewantly Scholars who are sporting and gaming out of their place, and
from any serious attendance upon their books, when nothing will still them, and
force them to their studies, as soon as ever there is but the least inkling of
the Master, or any eye they can cast upon his approach, they are all as still as
may be, repair (...) to their place, fall close, and set their minds to their
work; O Master, Master, our Master is yonder; there follows stilness and
attendance presently. Our trewantly and wanton minds are of this temper, we are
apt to straggle out of our places, or from giving attendance (...) those
special Services which the Lord calls for at our hands, and to lay out
themselves upon things that are not pertinent, and further than we are awed
with the apprehension of Gods sight and presence, who calls for the daily
attendance of our thoughts when we draw near unto him, does see and observe our
carelessness, and will proceed in Judgment, and (...) punishment upon us for it,
it is scant (...) to hold the bent of our thoughts awfully to the business we
have in hand. It was the Curse which attended Jonah when he departed away from
the (...) of the Lord, and from following his Command, he followed lying
vamues, Jonah, 2. 8. And it is (...) peculiar plague which is appointed in the
way of Providence, and the Lords righteous proceedings to. befall al who bestow
not their hearts upon him, Ephesians. 4. 21. They walk in (...) (...) of their minds;
and the reason is (...), they are strangers from the life of God. When our
thoughts start aside from under the Government of Gods Wisdom, the Rule of
Truth and stability, they wander up and down in the ways of error and vanity,
and find no end or measure, follow vanity, and become vain, nor can they attain
any stability before they return thither. As your vagabond beggars, and vagrant
persons in the Country from whence we came, there is no possibility to fasten
them to any employment, or settle them in any place before they come under the
eye of Authority, and power of the Magistrate. So fares it with our vagabond
and vagrant thoughts; further than they are under the eye of God, and awed with
his presence, it is not possible to stop them from the pursuit of vanity, or
confine them to settled consideration of that which (...) our duty and comfort.
The Rule is one, like it (...) accompanied with stability and rest; if once we
go astray from that, there is neither end nor quiet in error, but restlessness
and emptiness. The Sea, while it keeps the Channel, the course is known, and
the Mariners can tell how to advantage their (...); but if once it exceeds the
banks, no man can tell whither it will go, or where it will stay. Our imaginations
are like the vast Sea, while we eye the Rule, and are ordered by the Authority
of it, we know our compass; but once go off, and we know not whither we shall
go, or where we shall stay.

Be watchfully careful to observe the first wanderings and out-strayings of thy
thoughts, how they first go off from the attendance to the work in hand, and
look off from the matter, thou set thy self to meditate in (...)
immediately recall them back, bring them to their task again, and set them about
their intended (...). If (...) they fly out and follow fresh occasions that
(...) or a man's corruptions shall suggest take them at the first turn and often
again settle them upon the service, until at last by constant custom our mind
and thoughts will buckle handsomely to their business, after they be kept in by a
daily care; I have heard Hunts-men say when they have young dogs, raw and that
has not been entered nor accquainted with their sport, if a fresh (...) come in
view, or some other unexpected prey cross them in their way, they forsake the
old sent and follow that which is in their eye, but their manner is to (...) at
them off, and call them away from that, and then to bring them to the place
where they left their former pursuit, and there set them to find the sent
afresh, until at last being often checked and constantly trained up they will
take and attend the first game, so here, with our wandering minds which are not
trained up to this work of meditation, if they begin to fly off and follow a
new occasion, suffer not thy thoughts to range, but bring your mind back again,
and set it upon the former service, and then by thy constant care and Gods
blessing thy mind will fall in sweetly and go away with the work, or as men use
to do with some kind of wand that is warped and bent somewhat much one way, they
bend it a little, at the first and there hold it. Bend it and hold it, at last
it comes fully to the fashion they desire it. So here often bend and hold thy
mind bent to the work in hand, Heb. 2. 1. let us give earnest heed to the
things we have heard; our roving thoughts are like riven vessels, if the parts
be not glewed and the breaches brought together again by strong hand, they will
leak out, so here etc.

The fourth Hindrance which is here pretended is their Hindrance 4.
unskilfulness and unhandiness to this service, which many even Conscientious
Christians in the bitterness of their souls complain off, as that which wholly
(...) and discourageth them to the work. They say, that (...) of the truth, and
the dictates of their own Conscience does give in full evidence and undeniable,
that they should attend the duty, and in obedience to Gods Command they set
about the work, but at the very entrance they are at an utter loss, at a period
in their own thoughts, at a stand within themselves, and cannot stir a (...)
forward. They want materials one while upon which they should spend their
thoughts, another while they want skill, after what manner to exercise their
apprehensions about it that they might do good on it, In a word their weakness
they find to be so great and the service to be so strange and hard to them,
that they cannot but conceive it to be impossible to them, ever to attain the
skill, and to what purpose is it to endeavor it if they cannot attain it?

I answer what need any further argument than thine own Answ.
words, to constrain thee to the duty now discovered? the more unskilful thou
art, the more need thou have to learn; the greater the weight and worth of the
duty, the greater diligence in reason thou should use in (...) attendance
thereunto. There is neither weakness nor want of power, nor skill in God to do
thee good, what ever weakness, or want thou find in thy self, and if thou
need much, as he has much in his hand so he will give abundantly to satisfy thy
desire and to fit thee for the perfourmance; others have attained it, why
may not thou receive it? he has bestowed it upon others why may not thou
expect it? Wisdom gives subtilty to the simple, and sharpnes to the Idiot.
Prove. 1. 4. thy dullness and heaviness should increase thy diligence and and
endeavor and not discourage thee when the tool is dull men (...) to more
strength, Eccles. 10. 10. every thing must have a beginning, while we are
endeavoring, God is blessing, if we never set about a work we shall never
compass it, thou will not expect the child should know a trade before he learn
it, and art well content the child see seven years over his head, before thou
look to see him attain any perfection; And in the greatest works and where
we have leaft ability, why should we think to attayn any dexterity without long
endeavor; and this adds to our encouragement, its the season and time wherein
the Lord has promised much of his spirit and presence, and therefore we may
look for it, The weak shall be as David Zach. 12. 8. David we know was eminent
and marvailous (...) in this service, thou (...) weak and foolish and feeble,
be it so yet thou have a promise, thou may be as David; who made David so
skilful? why the same God lives still, who is alsufficient and therefore can,
who has promised and therefore will help thee also.

A word of caution. Hence loose company is a deadly Use 2.
enemy and hindrance to the conversion of a sinner. that which does exceedingly
prejudice the work of Meditation, and so of brokenness of heart, that hinders
the work of Conversion for that is the way thereunto. But there is no greater
hindrance to be found on Earth to holy Meditation than froathy Company and
Companions, while a man is in the crowd amongst such wretches there is no
possibility in reason that one should search his own heart and examine his own
way, take any account by serious consideration what his course has been or
what his condition is, there is little hope of any possibility that ever the
word should settle upon the soul or stay with the sinner in the evidence or
prevailing power of it, or that the mind or heart of a poor creature should
settle upon that, suck out the sap and virtue of it and continu under the
stroke and authority of it while he continues with such varlets, which like the
greedy fowl of the air, pick out the seed of the word out of the minds of such
with whom they do converse, and stop the passage as it were with their
prejudices they cast against man and message, that they may never attend it, or
if yet they talk with it as a passenger, yet never entertain it as an
in-dweller to continue with them. And therefore they act the part not of Gods
Ministers or such as would be helpers to the spiritual good of others, but the
part of Satan's factors, when God is pleased to parley with a sinner, and to
speak terror to his Conscience out of the word that they may be troubled and
tumbled and so find rest at the day of Christ. These Quack-salvers send the
distressed sinner to sports, pastimes and recreations, and merry Company, that
they take up their thoughts and take off their minds from attending to their
sins or the truth, that is, take off the Slave that should cure them, spil the
Physic that should heal their maladies; thus they ease their terrors for the
while that they may increase their torment forever; accursed comforters, or
rather they take up the Devils name and Office Apollyon destroyers of the souls
of men; therefore holy Peter gave that advise to these hearers; Save your
selves from this crooked generation, q. d. your safety and their society cannot
stand together, you must not continue with them, if you would have the power
and comfort of the word continue with you; and therefore experience evidenceth
God so disposes ever in the dispensation of the work of his Grace either the
sinner that is wounded will shake off his wicked company, or else the counsel of
the word and the work of Gods spirit. Hence that of the Apostle Ephesians. 5. 14.
Stand up from the dead and Christ shall give thee light. and 2 Cor. 6. 17. Come
out from among them and be ye separate, and then I will receive you, and walk
among you, God will not walk with you if you will walk with the world, there is
no coming into communion with Christ, unless we come out there. Christ tells
his disciples John. 15. 19. I have chosen you out of the world.

Exhortation. We here see the way that the Lord has Use 3.
chalked out before us the means which in mercy and in way of his providence he
has provided and appointed to break our hearts, to bring us to his son and so
to life. We are therefore to be exhorted to attend and follow the counsel of the
Lord that we may expect and so receive his blessing; even with Conscientious
diligence and studious endeavor to press on to the perfourmance of this
service. some hapily never knew it, looked not at it as a labor or task that
did (...) to them, let such now own it, and set about it with all (...) might,
others it may be have been convinced of the duty, and have been forward in the
practice of it in former times, and forced to it in the (...) of their
distrels, but now are fallen back and grown wearish in their way, those are to
be persuaded to proceed on with more cheerfulness and speed, he that never knew
the work let him now learn it. He that has set about it in former times let
him be for ever quickened and encouraged in it. Join al your counsels and
resolutions you that are children and servants in the same family, members in
the same assemblies, neighbors in the same place and plantation, and (...)
upon each other to this holy course; Lam. 3. 40. Let us search and try our
ways and turn again unto the Lord. say so one to another, you that are privy
to the wretchedness of your own hearts and lives, we complain and that justly
of a giddy slightness of spirit, we meet with many stroks of the word,
stirrings and recoylings of spirit, our hearts misgive us, many checks of
Conscience, and motives (we think) of the holy Ghost cast into our minds but
nothing stays with us, sticks upon us, they pass away insensibly, and leave no
impression, no power behind them we wash away al: we cannot but see and wonder
at the unreasonable hardness of our heart, and condemn our selves, who have had
so many blows from Gods hand and they break not, so many dreadful threatenings
we hear out of the word daily able to shak the heart of a Devil, we stir not,
we are not affected therewith; our corruptions are heinous for their nature,
many for their number, accompanied with direful plagues from the Lord, are
daily before our eyes, have driven many to untimely deaths and so to Hell. We
cannot but acknowledge all this and yet we be not touched with any saving remorse
for them we have had al helps, and the Lord has tried al conclusions upon us,
and yet al in vain. Who knows but we have been negligent this ordinance, and
therefore God has cursed al others, we have not used this means as well as
others, and therefore we have got benefit by none, who knows but the want of
this has hindered the success of al other that we have had and used in our
times and places, Oh then recover our former carelessness, send our thoughts a
far off and survey our former conversations, let us search and consider our own
ways who knows but the Lord may turn our hearts to him? Let us question our
own souls and say to our selves what have we done? that it may be beyond
question that God has humbled, pardoned and accepted of us. What is the reason
that one sinks under the sin that another never feels? It is with our sins as
with our burdens he that sees a weight and it may be lifts at it, but if he
never lay it upon his shoulder, or if it be laid, he never keeps it there but
casts it off immediately, he will never be touched or troubled with it, which
another dies under as not able to endure, so it is here our sins and iniquities
are a burden too heavy for any man to bear and not to break under them and they
who are forced to feel the Least of them are compelled to confess as much; as
the Devils and damned in Hell, the wicked in horror of Conscience my punishment
is greater than can be endured. Others whom God abates of the execution of his
displeasure for the present, these men look at them, and may lift at them a
little by some sudden flashy and flitting apprehension, as they hear or read
etc. But by Meditation to bind this burden upon their Consciences, that the
heart cannot get from under it, they are not able to abide the weight of them,
therefore will not abide the thought of them; they (...) off, and cast away the
burden, and so they never feel it, before the infinite Justice of the Lord
seizes upon their souls by everlasting discouragement. Better we set them in
order before our eye and trouble our hearts with them than that the Lord should
set them in order before us at the day of Judgment, and tear us in pieces when
there shall be none to deliver us.

To help in this so hard a buisiness, let me speak something.

1. By way of provocation to stir you up to this work. 2. By way of direction
to guide you in it.
To provoke your hearts thereunto take these considerations.

Let every man take it to himself as his own task, charge it upon his own soul,
as a service which by unavoydable necessity, lies upon him which he may not
neglect. This will awaken the soul to the work, say, it is my debt and I must pay
it. It Is my duty appertaining to me, and required at my hand, and I must
discharge it: as I will answer it at my peril at the day off accounts. Our lazy
hearts if they can find any dispensation or exception they will slip the collar
and put off the perfourmance, call therefore upon thy self as sometimes they
upon Ezra, Arise thou sluggish and sloathful soul, the matter belongs unto
thee, to me? you will say, that's a likely matter indeed, I am a silly maid, an
ignorant youth, or an aged and decrepit creature, my memory and (...) worn out,
I pray you have me excused, my place my ability suits not, my times and leisure
in the multitude of (...) many occasions permit not, such and such who have
abilities can, such who have leisure and opportunity may, such who have
dexterity and skill in such performances, should indeed both own the duty and
perform it but alas my place and abilites suit not, my time and leisure in the
multitude of so many occasions permit not, therefore it cannot belong to me,
yes to young ones and ignorant ones, it appertains to you, does it not
appertain to you to be Humbled, and to turn your feet to the testimonies of the
Almighty? does it not appertain to you to be blessed and to have your ways
made prosperous in which you walk? If you would come to Gods end you must
attend Gods way, If you would attain a blessing and success from God, you must
use the means appointed by him for good go your ways you poor creatures,
commune with your own hearts, and set down this for an everlasting conclusion,
Come, we can tell how to muse and plot about the pleasures of a sinful course,
how we may commit them: Oh it appertains to us to meditate of the danger of our
wicked ways, how we may resorm them, and avoid it; we can tell how to muse upon
the wayward perversneis of our own Spirits, that we may break the righteous
Laws of God; let us consider the evil of our ways that we may turn our feet
unto his Testimonies.

Consider how much you run in Arrearages, and how far you are cast behind hand
in this Spiritual Service; how unacquainted with it in former times, and how
(...) since you have known the way, and therefore so much more need you have to
double your diligence, and to recover your former carelessness with more
studious and conscientious endeavor to your utmost. He that has much work, and
little time, has reason to be exceeding laborious: he that has a long
journey, and sets out late, had need to make have: he that has many ancient
reckonings almost past remembrance, he must resolve to sit at it, and that it
cost him the setting on to make any through accounts, when thou art to call over
the folly of thy Childhood, the vanity of thy youth, the rebellion of thy
riper years, to search into the sinful distempers of thy heart, which thou have
long harbored, and thy miscarriages worn out of mind and remembrance, it will
cause thee to sit at it night and day, and to bring in those (...), and to read
them over, it is almost impossible for thy life, and therefore thou must labor
hard, Zach. 12. 10, 11, 12 When the Lord shall power out the spirit of Grace and
supplication upon the Jews, they shall look upon him whom they have pierced,
and they shall mourn apart, the Wives apart, and the Husbands apart, etc.

Consider what need thou have of this holy Ordinance, that will compel thee to
prize it, and to use it also; it is that which will yield some supply in most of
all thy Spiritual wants, lend a hand (...) support in most of thy feeblenesses,
which may befall, and would hinder thee in a Christian way, thy memory is weak;
thou do attend the holy Word of God, and many times close with the (...) and
precious comforts, but alas they are gone and slip away: Meditation will
strengthen thy feeble memory, and though these blessed Truths would depart, yet
it will stay them and retain them with thee. Jos. 1. 8. The words of this book
shall not depart away from thee; how (...) we prevent that? Thou shall meditate
therein day and night. Thy apprehensions are shallow, and thou narrow in thy
conceiving; Meditation will ripen and enlarge thy judgment, so that thou shall
exceed the most udicious and learned, Psalm. 119. 99. I have more understanding
than all my teachers; how came that about? For thy Testimonies are my
Meditation. Thou art simple and imprudent in thy way, not able to discover or
prevent the over reachings of such as be wily and cunning in their
contrivements; Meditation will sharpen thy apprehensions, and make thee able to
discern the secret conveyances and slights of the falshearted, and to prevent
the danger of them; Psalm. 119. 98. I became wiser than mine Enemies, because
thy Commandments were ever with me, and that was by Meditation: Thy Spirit is
sluggish and wearish, thou want life and metal in the discharge of thy
duty, prayest without sense, and confessest without sorrow, begs mercy, and
do not affect it; Meditation will quicken thee in Conference, make thee apt
and ready to all undertakings, store thee with matter, fraught thy
apprehensions and tongue, warm thy affections, and make thee go with readiness
to the work; Meditation adds as it were, wind to a man's Sails, and wings to a
man's endeavor, While I was musing, my heart burned, then spoke I with my
tongue, Psalm. 39. 2, 3. If then thy memory be weak, and thou need that that
would strengthen it; thy apprehension narrow and dull, thou need'st that that
would enlarge it; thy spirit dull and sluggish, and thou need that that may
add quickening virtue thereunto, a full stream that may turn the wheel; behold
Meditation is the Medicine, it has a Probatum est upon it, approved of all the
Saints, and the Cure left upon Record. Thy needs are great and manifold; so do
thou prize this means, and use it for thy good.

Consider the Sovereign Virtue of this Spiritual Service, and special Ordinance
of God, as that which sucks out the sap and sweet of al other Dispensations of
God, and means of Grace, wherein he discovers himself to us, so that though
they be good in themselves, yet the good of them is not received but by
meditation: As it is in the body naturally, be it that thy meat is choice that
is provided, the dressing neat and wholesome, the appetite strong and sharp, and
that a man feeds liberally and heartily of such dainties set before him, though
these provisions be never so savory and Cordial, and able to refresh and
strengthen, yet al labor is lost, and meat lost also, if his digestion be
naught, Nature is loaded and (...), but never nourished thereby. So it is in
the soul, be the means of Grace never so powerful and precious, sappy and
Spiritual, Opportunities great to enjoy them, liberties and desires ready to
attend them, to hear, and read, and confer, receive the Seals, etc. These are
excellent, and of special use in themselves, but unless by Meditation we digest
this food, the head and heart may be loaded, but little spiritual knowledge or
power with a spiritual blessing will be reaped therefrom. Josh. 1. 8. Thou shall
meditate therein day and night; then shall thou make thy way prosperous; then
shall thou have good success: would thou have the Word that is preached, and
the administration of the Seals savory and seasonable, admonitions prosperous,
when they are dispensed to thy soul? to what purpose else have we them, and
enjoy them? if not prospered, they are certainly accursed; that is the scope of
all Ordinances, the end and good of al Church Liberties and Privileges:
Would thou be sure when thou go to the Congregation, thou shall have good
success in hearing, thou shall be quickened, good success in receiving, thou
shall be strengthened in assurance of eternal life? When thou fallest to
Meditating, then, then I say, expect the Lord will make al prosperous and
successful to thy soul; and before that time the Lord does not promise thee
either blessing or success, nor can thou expect it, nor art thou like to
receive any. Our Profession in the Church, is like the Trade we drive in
Christianity, and Meditation it is that brings in all the profit and gain,
wherein the life and comfort of al Performances and Ordinances do consist. And
that wherein the upshot of al our desires are brought in. The reproof was sharp
and seasonable, met with thy corruption, and touched thy heart in a special
manner, and thou say, I pray God we may profit by it. The Examination and
Trial, was narrow and straight, came indeed to the quick, drove me to stagger
and stand; our Liberties and Privileges are precious we enjoy in New England,
I pray God we may profit by them; so say I, I pray God thou may. But if thy
heart be with thy prayer, I would only advise thee the way to obtain what thou
desire. That of Paul to Timothy, 1. Tim. 4. 15, 16. Meditate upon these
things, and be in them, and thou shall profit, and thy profiting will appear to
all. The wicked will be forced to see it, and wonder at it; the Saints will see
it, and rejoice in it; it will appear to thine own heart, and thou may be
comforted in it.

These be Motives to provoke thee, and compel thee to pay thy debt honestly:
Thou art marvelous behind hand; thine own ease should draw thee now to pursue
it; thou have most need, and necessity should force thee to attend it; the
blessing goes along with it, and that should (...) thee to be glad to continue
in it.

The Second Particular propounded, is how to direct Meditation is Directions
(...) (...).
that which has exercised the Pens of many, and the Thoughts of more; and the
desires of men are not herein yet satisfied, who find it most hard to practice,
and yet more than ordinarily difficult to know what they should practice: I
shall suddenly lay forth the compass of it so far as concerns the occasion in
hand.

The Meditation of our sins, so far as may be serviceable to set forward the
work of Contrition, has two Parts:

1. Following the enquiry of the Nature of corruption. The Rule to Authorize to
the Work. Manner how to proceed in the Work, Survey the particulars severally.
Sum them up jointly, see the value of them.

2. Fastening of it upon the Soul.
That we may follow the footsteps of a corruption, and tracka distemper to the
full, we must have our COMMISSION that must Authorize us, and carry us on in
our Course. And here the Direction is this:

We must go out to this Work of Meditation in the virtue Direct. 1
of an Ordinance, and so of Commission from God: We must attend a Word that
must guide us in it, and look to Christ and (...) Pro nise, and set our Grace
awork, that by the power of his might, and the help of his Grace, we may both
be enabled and preserved in the service; for such is the ticklishness of our
corrupt hearts, and the infecting and tainting Nature of sin, that it is hard to
meddle with it, but some pollution will cleave unto us by it. And it is that
which the Saints, and those most sincere, have found by experience, and in much
bitterness have complained of, that (...) they have set themselves about this
work by Meditation of their sin, their hearts have suddenly been carried aside
with it, and tainted with a kind of delight in it, when they intended to loath
and abhor themselves in the Consideration thereof. Thus by the abuse of this
Duty, we come to be molded and melted into the temper of sin by Meditation,
when we intended to be burdened with it. The error and mistake is here; We do
not bring the Authority of the Word, and Power of Christ, and help of his Grace
against sin, which would both discover and subdue it: But we bring the
Temptation, and occasion, and our corrupt hearts together, they soder and suit
one with another, like tinder to the spark, it increases the fire, not
quenches it, provokes a corruption, not kills it. This is to make a brabble
with a man's lust, when out of our own strength we enter into a contestation
with our distemper; we act under the Covenant of Works, by an irritating power
we add to the strength and dominion of sin. Whereas did we go against it in the
Covenant of Grace, we should destroy the dominion of it, Romans 6. 14. Sin shall
not have dominion over you, because you are not under the Law, but under Grace.
Thus if a man have Grace. But if it be in the way of seeking and receiving
Grace, then attend the Word, and in the Authority and Commission from thence
received, be carried on: Go against thy Corruption in the virtue and power of
the Word, not in any power of thine own: As Constables, though mean, yet they
use the Kings Name.

For the Manner of our Proceeding, to make a full Enquiry into the several
Passages of a sinful Distemper, the Directions are Three:

First, Lood at the Root and rise of a sinful practice, whence it springs,
inwardly, otherwise we shall never come to the core of a Corruption, or see
where the loathsomness of a lust lies. The sting of the Serpent is small, and
the skin pleasing, but the poison is spreading and deadly. Beware that there be
not a root of bitterness, Heb. 12. 15. Thus our Savior he leads his Disciples
to the right discovery of their carriage when they asked whether they might not
imitate the practice of Elias, to call (...) (...) down from Heaven upon the
heads of the Samaritans, because of their unkind dealing, Luke, 9. 54. Did one
look but at the outside of the expression, the pattern they propound, and the
pretense they made, there would no great matter of discovery appear; therefore
our Savior leads them inward, says he, You know not what spirits you are of.
The voice is the voice of Jacob; your pretense is fair, as Elias his zeal was
good; but you have not the spirit of Elias, not the love of God, but the love
of your selves, even the spirit of self-love and pride, etc. there is little
exception that can be taken from any thing that appears outwardly, their
Imposthumed matter lay within. The spirit of sin is in the spirit of a man's
practice; may be it is but a short and snappish speech, a wayward carriage in a
silent manner, and (...), thou go away, and say nothing. But from what
spirit came this? From thy heart in hideous disdain and contempt, with (...) of
hatred, as though it had been a fiend of Hell, look to thy spirit.

When thou have known the womb of wickedness, Look secondly to the (...) and
breeding of sin, how the frame and constitution of a corruption comes to be
fashioned inwardly, before it be brought forth into practice, James, 1. 15.
Lust when it has conceived, brings forth sin: Sometimes a man conceives and
travels of a monstrous Birth, of an abominable and hideous villainy, and yet no
man can so judge it before it appear in the full birth, and so the complete
constitution thereof. This conception of a lust appears in the concurrence and
combination of a corrupt heart, and carnal reason. 1. The affections pursue
eagerly the evil, and the will resolves peremptorily, this lust I must satisfy,
this (...) way I will walk in. 2. Carnal reasonings are like the formative
force, or like the Spirit in the seed; it casts about by all cunning
contrivements, subtle devices, to compass and bring it about, and to cover and
color it over with the fairest pretense they may: But when the parts and
proportions of a perverse carriage, the framing of our loathsome lusts come to
view, they then appear direful and dreadful. That David should send for Uriah,
entertain him kindly, tender him and his comfort, so as to send him to enjoy
his own comfort at his own house, that he should advance him to that respect,
and put that honor and trust upon him, as to put him into the Forefront of the
Battle, who can blame any thing? But to do all this to cover his Adultery, and
at last to suck the blood of the innocent that he may enjoy his lust, here is a
hellish brood, a monstrous birth: So it was with Absolons fair language, etc.
To this place appertain al those rebellious oppositions which make head against
al Rule and Reason; when the light of knowledge would gainsay, motions of the
Spirit persuade and forewarn, do it not; checks of Conscience control; yet
against knowledge and conscience, and the motions of the Spirit, they break
through, and pursue their lusts; the light of knowledge carnal reason darkens,
the motions of the Spirit they quench, the checks of conscience they (...). So
it is in the perverse carriage of rebellious Servants, etc.

Follow sin by the fruits of it, as by the bloody footsteps, and see what
havoc it makes in every place, where ever it comes: go to the prisons, and see
(...) many Malefactors in Irons, so many Witches in the Dungeon; these are the
fruits of (...); look aside, and there you shall see one drawn out of the pit
where he was drowned; cast your eye but hard by, and behold another lying
weltring in his blood, the knife in his Throat, and his hand at the knife, and
his own hands become his Executioner; thence go to the place of Execution, and
there you shall hear many prodigal and rebellious children and servants upon the
Ladder, leaving the last remembrance of their untimely death, which their
distempers have brought about. I was born in a good place where the Gospel was
preached with plainness and power, lived under Godly Masters, (...) Religious
Parents; a holy and tenderhearted Mother I had, many prayers she made tears
she wept for me, and those have met me often in the dark in my dissolute
courses, but I never had a heart to hear and receive. All you stubborn and
rebellious, hear and fear, and learn by my harms; hasten from thence into the
Wilderness, and see Corah, (...), and Abiram going down quick to Hell, and all the people flying and crying lest we perish also; Lo, this rebellion has
brought. Turn aside but to the red Sea, and behold all the Egyptians dead upon
the shore; and ask who (...) them and the story will tell you a (...) (...) was
the cause of that direful confusion: From clience send your thoughts to the
Cross where our Savior was (...), he who bears up Heaven and Earth with his
Power, and behold those bitter and brinish (...), (...) hideous cries, My God,
my God, why (...) thou (...) (...)? And make but a peep-hole into Hell, (...)
(...) your ear and listen to those (...) of the Devils and damned, cursing the
day that ever they were born, the (...) that ever they enjoyed, the mercies
that (...) (...) did (...), the worm there (...), and (...) (...) the (...)
there burning and (...) goes out, and (...) this (...) (...) done, and it will
do so to all that (...) it, (...) (...) (...) it. Say thou therefore, and why
not I amongst the Witches upon the place of Execution, with Malefactors? why
not I in Hell with the Devils? Since my sins are as theirs, my plagues might
have been, and in the issue will be as theirs, unless I repent.

Direful are those plagues that sin brings upon the sinner; but these are not
the worst, nay in truth, the least part of that evil that sin procures, and
pulls upon the souls of those who give themselves thereunto. Here is the venom
of the vengeance, and the dregs and malignity of that mischief that accompanies
it, in those spiritual desolations and ruins it leaves upon the soul, those
not to be conceived, much less uttered by the tongues of Men and Angels. Let us
look inward, and dig decper.

Commission of sin makes a man senceless and remorseless in it, puts a man
beyond the consideration and thought of amendment, either capability of good or
to look after it; it takes off endeavor, nay desire, and thought of recovery
out of our wretchedness: such were they of whom the Apostle speaks, 1 Timothy 4.
2. Having their consciences seared with a hot Iron; as it is with seared parts,
what ever gashes or stabs come, they have no sense or feeling of them; what
ever judgments are denounced, threatenings proclaimed in a man's ears, executed
before a man's eyes, the seared conscience is stupid and fearless, it feels
nothing, is affected with nothing. So it was said of the Heathen, Ephesians. 4. 19.
They were past feeling; God frowns from Heaven, the Word threatens, Devils
accuse, their own Judgments condemn the loathsomness of their practice, and men
bear witness, and cry shame of the sottishness of their course, their
distempers are such that they stink above ground, and yet they poor creatures
feel nothing, but bless themselves in their present condition; Romans 2. 5. They
have hearts that cannot repent, heaping up (...) against the day of wrath.

The daily and ordinary commission of any one sin, delivers up the sinner to
become a prey to the power of al corruptions even the most detestable; sin lays
wast the soul that it becomes a through-fair, and lies open to the most hellish
provocations or distempers that can be presented before it and nothing comes
amiss, that's the inference when the heathen had no delight to have God in their
knowledge, had notliking to such and such righteous and good ways of God, he
delivered them up to a reprobate sense, Romans 1. 28. they had no delight to be
ruled by the truth, and the wisdom and holiness thereof, no delight (...) know
or relish any good; God takes them at their word, and leaves them in the hands
of their sins, they should have minds that should never know the truth, hearts
that should never approve of it. See presently when the soul is thus laid wast
what a drove and inroad of hideous abominations come in, and take possession,
and make a prey and spoil of the poor wretched creature as they will, then ver.
29. 30. they are full of all Unrighteousness, Covetousness, Fornication, Envy,
proud Boasters, beady, high minded, (...) breakers, False, Unfaithful,
Disobedient, Unnatural, nothing is a miss what ever the heart of Beelzebub, or
the bottom of Hell can harbor, It Is the ground of the cohaerence of that place
also Ephesians. 4. 19. Who being past feeling, they have given up themselves to work
al uncleanness with greediness; the poor creature is at the (...) and beck of
any base abomination; no temptation presses in, but prevayles, no allurement
is presented but it surpriseth and takes aside, no corruption (...) but it
carries and acts him without gainsaying; the Devil and his distempers take him
alive and take him at their pleasures, lead him as they (...) and he knows not
where he is before he be in the bottomless pit; This is the quintessence of
vengeance an unseen evil; (...) in truth unconceavable, the terrors of death
and the torments (...) hell are nothing in comparison of this. When the
glorious and blessed God through the just desert of sin leaves the creature, at
the lust of Satan and his diftemper, Lo he is in your (...) do what you will
with him, I will have nothing to do with him more this is the sentence passed
upon the backslider Prove. 14. 14. the backslider in heart shall be (...) with
his own ways, he shall have his belly (...). Thus as the saints are sealed up
in the day of Redemption the wicked are (...) (...) up under the soverainty of
their sins (...) the day of destruction, thou (...) have thy pride and
stubbornness and (...), be thou for ever proud and for ever (...), and for ever
(...)-hearted, continu so and perish (...). There is no judgment like to this
and this is the (...) of sin, and that which the Lord reserves as the choycest
of al his plagues the last and worst 1 Prove. 26. 28. 31. Ye shall call, but I
will not hear; ye shall seek me, and shall not (...) me, one would think this
is heavy and harder measure could hardly be found, yes the Lord has worse
because ye despised my counsel and set at naught al my reproof, (...) they
shall eat the fruit of their own ways and be full of their own devices, they
who srame and devise devises to contrive Contentments to their own carnal and
corrupt (...) carry a forge of falsehood and (...) about them, to succeed in
these one would have thought is the (...) content such a person could take;
true it is so, and that is the greatest and most dreadful plague that could
befall them. When the Lord Christ takes away (...) of himself and his spirit
from the (...) and leaves him wholly to himself and the power of Satan, and his
own (...) (...) distempers, nothing of Gods wisdom (...) their own folly shall
mislead them, nothing of Gods (...) but the perverse rebellion of their own
hearts shall rule them and so destroy them. this is to be in hell before he come
there, and so be a Devil before he come among them.

They come to be helpless in regard of all means, that the Lord has provided,
or the mercies that the Lord has offered unto them, and does yet strive with
them in, Its sin that stops the intercourse between God and the soul, his
ordinances and our Consciences, takes and (...) the passage, that the power of
the means never work upon us, the sweetness of his mercies never affect us, the
virtue of his ordinances find no place, leave no impression upon the soul; This
is the fruit which the prophet lays forth of the rebellions and (...) of the
Jews, which made them ripe for everlasting ruin, Isa. 6. 9. 10. Make the
heart of this people (...), and their ears heavy, and by that time they are
sure enough for ever seeing the face of God, or receiving (...) by any means;
seeing they may see and not perceive, hearing they may hear and (...)
understand, least they be converted. They are far enough from conversion and so
from salvation, Its that also which is of necessity employed in the former
expression; they shall be filled with their own devises, so there is no
entrance, no acceptance of any direction from the will and word of God. As it is
in vessels that are brim full of liquor ready to run over, there is no room for
a spoonful of the most precious liquor to be put into them. So through the just
desert of their sin they are so fully possessed with the power of their
corruptions which have had commission to rule them, that as our savior said
John 8. 37. There is no place for the word. Their minds so full of pride of
their own carnal reason, that there^ is no room for instruction to direct or
inform them, their hearts so full of stifness and perveriness, that there is no
place for reproof that may prevail with them and reform them, the spirit so full
of falsness and ready to take hold upon (...), that there is no place for the
(...) of the truth to frame them to the (...) and singleness of carriage as
suits with Gods mind; so that all means of grace and ordinances take their
leave of the sinner, work no more upon that heart that has (...) long and so
often opposed the work thereof (...). 51. 9. We would have healed Babylon,
(...) she would not be healed, leave her then leave instructions, and leave
exhorting etc. so it is with the ordinances the Lord passes by and will not so
much as speak a word to a rebellious heart, the threatenings that troubled
before, now stir not; the instructions that convinced before now awe not at al;
the reproofs and exhortations that awakened and affected the heart, now slide
away like water upon a rock, and there is no print or the least appearance of
any impression left behind; the ruin of men's comforts, lives and liberties
which sin has brought are open, but oh the woeful desolation of souls could it
be seen of al, as it is felt of some whose heart God touches it would make sin
exceeding sinful and unsupportably evil, as they in the Prophet complained
bitterly, Why are our hearts hardened from thy fear? Isa. 63. 17.

Besides this bitter fruit which the sinner is forced to view we the extent of
that evil which sin does unto others; and that partly which is common to every
corruption of what ever kind or degree, it is of great or small, open or secret,
whether more loathsome and not (...) to the eyes of men, or that which is
esteemed less in the account of the world, that which is an ingredient into the
nature and constitution and making up of every corruption that it makes a
breach upon the righteous law of God i. e. not only shaks of the rule and
sovereignty of the law, but preferrs in truth the supremacy of our lusts,
before the authority of the Lord himself which ho has and ought to exercise
over our souls. For the sinner in the practice of any sin proclaims this unto
the world, its not the royalty of the righteous law of God but mine own
distemper shall rule me: not his will but mine own wayward corruption shall (...)
the balance; Its not the wisdom of the word but my folly, and the vanity of my
ignorant mind shall lead me in what I do; Its not the goodness of the Law of
Gods holiness but the pleasing corruptions of mine own carnal heart shall
content me; in a word, each man professes God shall not be his God but he sets
up his lust in his room and does homage thereunto; than which what greater
indignity can be done to the Almighty? Al men look at it as a most hellith
expression of the Jews, (...) him but Barabbas. Barabbas was a murderer vile
and base, yet a man, and therefore something of God in him, but more hideous is
the hateful blasphemy which the practice of every sinner proclaymes not God but
sin; he advances sin in his choice which is nothing but baseness it self,
above the infinite holiness of the only blessed God, so their profession was,
they said to the Almighty depart away from us we desire not the knowledge of
thy ways, thou say in thy heart as much, when in the secret resolution of
thy soul thou baddest humility depart the pride of thine own heart should carry
thee; to meekness depart, so to the God of Grace and holiness depart, the
knotty stoutness of thine own spirit was the Liege Lord thou yieldest homage
and obedience unto. Out of men's Atheism and ignorance this is not thought on,
and therefore men think their sins little, nor are they apprehensive of that
infinite wro^ng that they do to the holy and infinite Majesty of the blessed
God.

Besides this wrong that is common to al sins, there be some especially open
and scandalous that become out of measure sinful.

Committed against many mercies, against many means; against many mercies
wherewith God has (...) and allured them, that he might have overcome their
unkind hearts, with his tender compassions, had they but a spark of any good
nature or ingenuity within them. Thus they sin against more of God, and
therefore their sin becoms unmeasurably (...) against the bowels of a Father
that has yerned toward them: the blood of a Christ that has been shed for
them; the tears of a savior that have been wept over them, Oh that thou had
known in this thy day; the consolation and intimations of the spirit who has
striven and entreated, Oh do not do so and sin against God, and yet impudently,
presumptuously and pertinaciously thou would break through al these armies
of compassions, to commit that sin that will be thy ruin, how vile thy carriage
and how just thy plague. Thus Nathan pleads with David when he would lay open
the loathsomness of his evil before him, 2 Samuel 12. 7. 8. 9. Thus says the
Lord God of Israel I anointed thee King over Israel, and I delivered thee out
of the hand of Saul, and I gave thee thy masters house and thy masters wives
into thy bosom, and gave thee the house of Israel and the house of Judah, and
if that had been too little I would moreover have given thee such and such
things. Wherefore have thou despised the command of the Lord? The heart of the
holy man sunk down in sorrow, I have sinned. Yea these coals of fire if
gathered and heaped up I mean these compassions rightly considered and weighed,
and laid upon the heart they are able almost to melt the most flinty
disposition, Jud. 2. 1. 2. 3. So the Angel overbore the rebellious spirits of
the Israelites, I made you to go up out of Egypt and have brought you into the
land which I swear unto your Fathers, and I said I will never break my Covenant
with you, and ye shall make no league with the inhabitants of this land, you
shall throw down their altars, but ye have not obeyed my voice why have ye done
this? and it came to pass when he spoke these words unto all the Children of
Israel that the people lift up their voices and wept. This brake their hearts
al in pieces, though perverse and rebellious, they ceased answering and fell to
weeping, their tears and mourning were instead of words they would return in
their defense.

Against many means wherewith the Lord has striven with us to stop us in the
pursuit of sin, and to reclame us from our iniscarriages; God hems in a poor
creature on every side by public dispensations and private (...) by ordinary
and extraordinary helps, way-layes a sinner and hedgeth up his path (...)
thorns, and builds a wall about him that he might find the ways of ungodlyness
no more Hos 2. 8. He that adventures upon the commission of sin against such
means, and breaks through such armies of ordinances, there is a multiplication
of many sins in the commission of one, because it is against the multiplication
of many truths, or one truth in a manifold dispensation, he sins against so
many instructions, so many comforts, so many counsels he has heard.
Confessions he has made, and prayers he has put up for himself, and others
have made in his behalf; every one of these dispensations has an action
against the soul because it has been wronged by the sinner; John. 12. 48. He
that hears and rejects has one that judges, even that word that I have
spoken and he has heard will judge him: says our Savior Christ. Those reproofs
that thou haft heard and not submitted to, Instructions that thou have heard
and not embraced thou shall need no other judge, those will judge thee, and how
heavy will that judgment be then, John, 15. 22. If I had not come, they had had
no sin, but now they have no cloak for their sin.

Wrong to our brethren their honor, and lives, goods and good names, especially
when open and scandalous, we sin against the souls of our brethren, lay
stumbling blocks before them, and here one sin may become many millions of
offenses, as the numbers may be many that shall hear of it. Who knows how others
may be emboldned and encouraged in sin by our example? how others hindered, and
provoked to speak evil of the good ways, of Gods grace because of our
wretchedness? Woe be to the World because of offenses, Mat. 18. 7. Who knows
but the blood of many who perish by our means may be required at our hand? nay
that our sinful example may live when we are dead, 2 Samuel 12. 14. By this deed
thou have given great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, Romans 2.
24. the name of God is blasphemed amongst the heathen through you, and
therefore the Prophet David though God has pardoned his sin, and published it
by Nathan, he would not pardon himself, but left his repentance upon record as
well as his fall, Peter went out and wept bitterly that others might hear of his
sorrow and humiliation for his sin who had heard of his backsliding. Many will
ly and curse with Peter, but he that has his Grace will go out with Peter and
mourn bitterly. Many can easily fall into filthiness as David, but if he have
his spirit he will labor to have his heart and bones broken with David.

Add unto all the former the time wherein a man has continued in his sins and
the frequency of them, having often committed one and the same sin, stumbling
again at the same stone, and taken aside again by the same (...) and
temptations after they have been confessed; bewailed, resolved against Psalm.
78. 32. For all this they sined still etc. Psalm. 40. 12. they are more than the
hairs of my head, I am not able to look up, Thus we must survey severally the
particulars which may be able to present the vileness of sin to us, but that is
not al nor yet sufficient. but,

We must sum them up jointly by serious meditation, that so they may fal-upon
the heart in the full weight of them, and prevail more effectually and this also
helps forward the work of contrition in a special manner, He that parts every
stick in the bundle and takes them severally and singles them one from another
he may carry them easily and lightly, never be loaded or troubled with them,
but when he has gathered them from several places where they lay scattered,
and (...) them together, he will then find them a burden he is not able to lift,
much less able to stand under and bear; so here that is also another and
special work of Meditation, besides those mentioned formerly, it does not only
look over the several aberrations of man's practice, and gather up our
particular miscarriages scattered up and down in our daily course, but lays
and bundles them all together, and so they become a burden unsupportable: that
seems to be one part of the meaning of the place, Psalm. 38. 4. My sins are
passed over my head, and are become too heavy for me to bear. It Is a comparison
(say Interpreters, and those very judicious) taken from Waters; that look as
the Land-floods when the waters flow in from every Riveret and Gutter, and from
every Hill and Furrough; at last they meet all in the main Channel, and so
becomes an overbearing stream that swells above the Banks, and bears down all
before it; whereas each petty Gutter was such as any might wade through, and
step over; the might of the Flood none can withstand: So it is here with
Meditation, it does not only search the several aberrations and goings aside in
the several occasions of our life, which when they are singled one from another
seem very small; yet when our several distempers, and daily swervings become
like the drops of rain, not falling forty days and forty nights, but may be so
many months or years of continued provocations; the great depths of the
corruption of our Nature, are set open, and our sins like the Waters of the Sea
gathered together by sad musing, pass over our heads, and are past our strength
to bear them, and without special supporting mercy would sink us into
everlasting discouragement. As it is with a Bankrupt arrested, some petty debts
or small bills that are charged upon him, he might easily answer, and be able
without any great difficulty to discharge; but when al his Bills are brought in
from each Creditor, and his (...) summed up, the Summa totalis, amounts to so
much that it sinks his estate, and breaks his back utterly. So here, a slighty
apprehension of such and such slips, or some circumstances of our miscarriages,
look over them severally, they (...) but little in themselves; but laid
together, and taken in the full Sum unto which they amount, the guilt and filth
of them will appear inconceivable and unsupportable, that the sinner will never
be able to answer, or to bear.

It is the mind and intendment of the Spirit, the meaning, yea, the proper
meaning of that word, Mark, 14. last, when he had thought of his sins, says
our Translation; when he had cast all the particular and heightning
circumstances together, as the word properly signifies; when he had summed up
his several miscarriages by a serious Meditation, then his heart breaks
within him, though the Cock had crowed, and our Savior had looked upon him, and
he remembered at a sudden push of apprehension his evil, yet he stood it; but
when he had laid al together, cast up the Summa totalis of his fearful
departures from the Lord, by denying, falsefying, cursing, with all the
aggravating circumstances, that he that was not only a Christian, but
entertained as a Servant, yea called to be an Apostle, who was so seasonably,
and with such earnestness forewarned of his back sliding and false dealing, who
had promised and resolved with such courage against it, that he should not only
forsake his Master in a covert manner, but openly and shamefully renounce him,
yea (...) blaspheme and curse, and that often, and now especially in this (...)
(...) trouble, in the day of our Saviors distress, when the Innocence of his
cause, the Honor of his person, yea, his life lay at hazard, that such a
Servant and Apostle should so basely and (...) deny and forswear his Master and
Redeemer, and that at this time of need, upon so slight an occasion, as the
voice of a silly Damsel, or some ordinary man; he laid al these together, and
(...) them upon his heart, and he was not able to bear it, but went (...), and
wept bitterly.

The Art of Meditation, appeared especially in two things, as the special and
proper parts of it.

1. The following of (...) in a full search and (...) after it, and that has
been dispatched in all the severals of it, when we have viewed all the
particulars of sin, and brought in the whole and full Sum together.

The Second part of Meditation is in the fastening of The second part of
Meditation.
Meditation thus discovered upon the heart. All this while the sinner has been
gathering and bringing in the several circumstances, as it were so many single
sticks scattered here and there, and bundled all together as it were by a joint
consideration that they may be attended in their full weight; and lastly, the
sinner has lifted at them by meditation, and found them heavy, but it has not
as yet laid them and pressed them upon his soul, that he might feel them piercing
and pinching as a burden unsupportable.

The Second thing now to be attended as the last part of this Heavenly Art, and
holy Duty, is to fasten these sins upon our souls in the full weight thereof.

This is done in two things:

1 By grapling with the Heart. 2 By getting above, or getting the better of the
Heart.
In the first of these we act Meditation as far as our endeavor will go: In the
second the Lord arms it with power to do that it should, and we cannot by the
best of al our diligence and ability. In the former the soul is put in suit,
the sum of the several bills being charged upon it. In the latter we have
sentence past, and execution done upon the soul, that it is forced to seek out
for payment and satisfaction, and that is awarded from under the hand of the
Spirit in the High Court of Heaven.

To begin with the first of these, How Meditation grapples with the heart, I
shall in short set forth unto you, in three Directions or Rules.

The first comes within the Soul. The second lays hold upon it. The third
drags it to the Throne of Justice, and drives it to seek out for payment, and
satisfaction.
It Is the skill of meditation to come within the soul, and surprise it with the
pursuit of the evil of sin, which has now been laid open in so large and
apparent manner. It Is the cunning of Wrastlers before they fasten upon the
adversary whom they intend to foyl and bring under, they gather in upon them
with the greatest wiliness and dexterity they may, and then they lay hold with
such advantages that they are not able to escape their hands: It Is so in this
Spiritual Service, it is the chiefest dexterity in Meditation to gather in upon
the heart, i. e. the will and affections (where the sink of sin lies, and who
are wedded to their distempers) that it shall be forced to come under the
Evidence of the Truth, and the (...) of the evil of sin so discovered. It Is one
thing to sum up debts, and show them to the Bankerupt; another thing to serve a
Writ of them, to summon him to the Court that he may answer and give
satisfaction: it is one thing to relate a man's bills, as a Servant, an Accomptant
may; another thing to charge them upon him. So here, Meditation showed the
corruption, now summons and serves a Sub-paena upon the soul; before it played
the part of an Accomptant, brought in all Bills; now takes the place of a
Sergeant, lays them to the charge, and attacheth the sinner: Meditation you
must know, includes the highest strain of the strength of Reason, in the utmost
extent of it; it is not the whole (nay indeed it is the least part of the) work of
Meditation, to search and take a survey of the compass of corruption in all the
circumstances thereof apprehended to the full, but it puts home an apprehension
to the full, follows it, and (...) it upon the heart, and causes it to attend
for the while.

Herein lies the Excellency and Efficacy of Meditation, That it forces the
Truth and discovery of sin with that (...) Evidence upon the Heart, that it
cannot but own it as his debt, acknowledge what is his due, and the danger unto
which he is justly subject by reason thereof, and is now compelled to find and
confess it self to be under the sovereign authority of the truth, to be in the
guilt of sin which it has committed, and the punishment of sin that it has
deserved thereby, the case is now so clear it sees it cannot but own the guilt
and it cannot avoid the punishment. This is the reason rendered by the prophet
of the sottishness of the deluded Idolater, that he cannot see his own folly
and madness in worshipping an Image of wood, he stifles the strength of reason
and setts not (...) that overbearing evidence of truth which his own experience
would give in to his heart. Isa. 44. 16. He burns part thereof in the fire
with part thereof he rosteth flesh, yea he warmeth himself and says Aha I am
warm, with the residue thereof he makes a God even a graven Image he falls
down and worshippeth it. what is the ground that any living man should so far go
against common sense, he answers ver. 19. None considers in his heart, to
say I have burnt part, I have roasted and warmed my self, and shall I make a God
of the rest? The strength of reason in a right way would easily have forced
such a conclusion upon the heart; but the corruption of the heart stifled and
intercepted the power of reason and damped the evidence thereof, because it was
not followed and fastened by the power of Meditation; no man considers in his
heart, the want of consideration made the heart not find nor own the evidence
of that inference and truth. For we find this in our corrupt hearts naturally
when sin and guilt comes to be charged upon us, and the dreadfullness of both
are presented to our view, we willingly would hide our selves from the evidence
and power of the truth, as Adam from the presence of the Lord. If we cannot
deny it, yet excuse it, that the fault was in such and such, they are to be
blamed, they were the cause and they (...) me to the commission, I therefore am
to be excused. Or if not excuse it wholly yet mince and lessen it, if not
slight it, and cast it aside as that which neither needs nor deserves
consideration. As the bankerupt, the debts he is not willing to pay he is
willing not to think off, here now is the fruit and virtue, (...) power and
profit of Meditation, it dasheth and scatters al these delusions and deceits,
stops the passage as it were that none of al these carnal and false pretenses
can keep off the stroke of the truth, and the sting of sin from the heart. No
no replies Meditation: these and these are your corruptions you must own them,
the evidence of them are such and so plain ye cannot excuse them; the
aggravations so many so great you cannot lessen them, the plagues heavy and
unavoydable you cannot prevent them. Thus it is know it for your selves these
are your sins, these will be your ruin. And I summon thee here to answer it
before God in the sight of men and Angels at the great day. When the heart
cannot shuffle, nor shift, nor shake off the strength and cleerness of the
Truth, it is compelled to own its sin and misery, though happily not willing to
leave the one, nor knows not how to avoid the other.

True indeed then Meditation has attained its proper and powerful work, and is
effectually blessed of God when our hearts are so affected, with the evil of
our sins, as in our judgments rightly informed, we did conceive them, and in
our most serious (...) concluded them, and indeed we should shine to our utmost
to attain this, and never give the Lord rest, nor our own souls any rest, until
our hearts feel the bitterness of sin, as by meditation we have found it made
known in the word. This is beyond our power and reach, only its good to run
after it, and though we cannot go as far as we should, yet thus far we may go.

We may put the heart to silence for the while, stop the waywardness thereof.
This has its mervailous use, and leaves a great restraint upon the soul that
it dare not vent it felf in ungodly practices but with a kind of awe and fear.
It deals with our souls as the Angel with Sarah, when she laughed in herself as
conceiving it impossible she should have a son in her old age, though the Angel
had said it, Gen 18. 12. the Lord asked why did Sarah laugh, and she denied it
because she was afraid and said, I did not laugh; but the Lord followed her
and held her to it, and would not let her go away so, nay but thou did laugh.
So when the heart would fly off from the evil that is evidenced, and charged,
either, excusing or lessening the hainousness of the evil, or slighting the
danger of it. either it was not my fault or its not so great, or the punishment
is not so grieous and fearsul as men would bear us in hand. Hold the heart to
it, and do not suffer it to go away. Yes it was you that did it, you must own
it, you shall find it upon your score one day. you know and God knows and I know
it, the time when they were committed the manner how, and how aggravated with
many heightning circumstances: It is so, know it; and thy damnation sleeps
not, do not slight it, you will never be able to endure it. Yes but I can: God
will abate it, or I can bear it, nay you cannot; God cannot abate it if you live
in your sins, and you cannot bear it. Take the leave of your heart thus when
you go to bed; this is your condition, this will be your misery. The sum of this
first Rule returns to these three particulars.

1 Summon the heart to answer the charge. 2 Force the heart to own it. 3
Silence the heart for the while under it.

When thus Meditation has come into the heart, let it lay hold upon the heart:
That Is the Second thing in this fastening, when it has arrested the soul, the
undeniable Evidence of the Truth, then keep it under the arrest: as Officers do
such as they have attached, not suffered them to go out of the room, nor to be
out of their sight or presence. When thou have with strong hand as it were
forced thy heart by the power of the Truth raised by Meditation from every
Coast, as it were from all particular circumstances and occasions, that it
yield the Charge which it cannot gainsay, owns the guilt under which it lies,
and the punishment which it has deserved, sits down silent under the
Sovereignty of the Truth which it cannot control; keeps the heart under this
awful disposition for ever. Do not suffer thy mind to go off from the Duty of
Meditation, or thy will and affections from under the impressions which were
left upon it thereby. For if thou thus give way out of sloth, or wearish
negligence, thou art in hazard not only to lose thy labor, but to leave thy
soul much worse by the abuse of an Ordinance, than it was before thou did
enjoy the liberty and practice of it. As Iron or any Metal once melted, if it
cool, it grows more hard than before, and more unsit to be fashioned to any
use; It Is so with the heart awed and melted as it were, and made coming under
the power of Meditation; if once thou growest careless, and it grows cold, it
becomes more unteachable, hard, and unfit to receive any impression of the
Truth, with what ever power it be dispensed. Therefore by daily consideration
keep the power of the Truth, and discovery of thy sins within ken still, before
the eyes and sight of thy soul, that so thou may keep the same heat and
temper of Spirit, that awful, under, and silent subjection, to the Authority of
the Truth, the terror and dreadfulness of thine own sins; and here our greatest
watch is to be improved to follow this direction, because the policy of Satan,
the proneness of our own hearts, and professed opposition that the Spirits of
the sons of men have against this Dispensation on Gods part, and this
disposition on ours; we are loath to bear it, Satan and the wicked are loath to
suffer it in us, to have the rod daily shaked over us, the silth and guilt and
plagues due unto our sins continually presented and pressed upon our
consciences, it is exceeding tedious and irksom unto our natures: Flesh and
blood is very loath to bear it, Satan and the world are unwilling we should
continue in such a course, because they know it is the next way to make us weary
of our lives, and of our sins; therefore our corrupt hearts are willing to
shake off such considerations, and they are as restless to pluck our hearts
from under the power of such an Ordinance. It will be our comfort, let it be our
care to have daily meditation keep us company in our daily course, it will keep
the heart in an awful and under temper. Therefore the Apostle joins both
together, 1 Timothy 4. 15. Meditate on these things, and be in them, under the
power and prevailing virtue of them. As it is sure of al, so of this Truth also,
John, 8. 31, 32. Continue in the Truth, and it shall make you free. It Is not
enough for an old cankered sore to make it open, but we must keep it open; not
only lance it, but tent (...): to force a Truth by Meditation lanceth the sore,
attention to the same Truth in Meditation, is the tenting of the sore, and that
brings, though a slow, yet a persect Cure. Dog the heart with the daily
consideration of the discovery of sin formerly set on, it will tire a man out of
his distemper, force the soul either to leave his Meditation or his corruption.
It was that which caused the venom of Gods vengeance, and the poison of his own
abominations to enter into his bones. Psalm. 51. 4. My sin is ever before me.
And this is the peculiar work of Meditation to keep things in present view, and
fresh apprehension, it keeps sin ever before men's eyes. The sinner is forced to
walk and talk with it, to wake and sleep with it, to eat and drink his sins,
and curses due to him for the same, they are (...) out to him in every cutting,
and (...) before him in every (...) that is set at the Table; Psalm. 119. 98. It
was Meditation that drew out the marrow (...) quintessence of Counsel and
Wisdom out of the Command, so that David came to have more understanding than
the Ancient; Because thy Commandments are ever with me: Meditation drains and
draws out the dreadful venom of a man's distempers, and makes it ever with him,
where ever he goes, in every (...) he takes, the guilt of his sins is before
him to accuse, and Hell gaping to devour him; where ever he is, his sin and
guilt, his fears and terrors, his curses and confusion is with him to astonish
him to al eternity. To have a wound or sore is troublesome, but to be raking in
it daily, though it were never so small, were in truth intolerable. So it is
here, Meditation is the multiplication of al these stings and terrors.

When Meditation has thus taken hold of the heart, it then drags it to the
Throne of Justice, and then drives it to seek out for payment and satisfaction,
without which it cannot be eased nor delivered. This is the Markstone, within
which the bounds and limits of Meditation are to be confined that it may be
ordered and acted aright, according to the Method of the Almighty, and a right
Rule. When the soul is summoned to answer the Charge, and is under the Arrest,
and not able to escape, it finds now the severity of Gods Justice that exacts
all, even the utmost, the greatness of the debt, and it is own inability to
answer; yet pay he must, or else he must perish. It drives the soul to see a
need of a Christ and mercy, and that it ought to seek out thither for relief
and satisfaction: This is the aim of the Duty, and Gods end in fastening thus
the filth, and guilt, and desert of sin upon the soul, and it should be our end
also. And here a Threefold extreme unto which the soul is very subject in the
exercise of this Service, is especially to be avoided.

1 Desperate Discouragements. 2 Hellish Provocations. 3 False Conceivings of
the measure of Gods Work, or the manner of his proceedings, which we frame to
our selves in our own thoughts.
All which are aberrations from the right way and Rule, and prove marvelous
prejudicial in our proceeding. And the Enemy strives to put us upon all these
by all the malice and policy he can use. If he cannot keep us in security, and
hinder us from setting out in a Christian course, his next endeavor is to wrack
us upon rocks, and fholes, and sands, and so to hazard our passage. A word of
all.

First, We must beware of desperate discouragements in the consideration of our
evil ways: for first Satan uses all the crafts and wiles that he can, that we
may not see our sins, if we never know the danger, we will never avoid, can
never escape it. But if he see the sinner resolved to make a through search,
and to make work of it, he then labors to carry him as much to the contrary
extreme, that he shall see nothing but sin; before he bore him in hand, he
needed no pardon; now he persuades him there is no hope of pardon: Before his
estate was safe and good, and need not be altered, nor he trouble himself about
it; it is now so vile and desperate, there is no help, and cannot be recovered:
Before he soothed up the sinner, it was in his power to reform when he would;
now he persuades there is no possibility in Heaven or Earth to relieve. Do you
not see (says Satan) the greatness of the guilt of your former sins that is
daily before you, the power of present corruptions prevailing more and more? do
you not see that all the means you have, and endeavors you use, do you no good?
only you increase your sin the more, by the abuse of Duties and Ordinances; and
God has forsaken you, rejected your person, cast out your prayers, blesses
not his Ordinances to you for good: talk not you of Grace and Mercy, you have
deluded your self with those dreams too long; look not out for any such relief
which you know you have formerly neglected, and it is now too late to expect:
cease further troubling your self, sit down in your sorrows, and sink under the
weight of your sins, that is the reward you have deserved, and the portion that
is prepared for you of the Lord. This is Satan's Logic, who would have us to
abuse this blessed Ordinance, and to go beyond the bounds and Lawful limits of
Meditation set out by the Lord himself; who would have us to see and search our
sins, so as to see a need of Mercy, and to seek out after the unsearchable
riches of his Grace, (...) to keep us in our sins, but that we may be carried
out to him who will recover us out of them. Abraham considered not his own dead
Body, or Sarahs barrenness, Romans 4. 19. he considerd them so far as to put him
beyond hope in himself, that he might hope above hope; and it is the Lords
command, Isai 45. 22. Look unto me from all the ends of the Earth, and be ye
saved. Look upon your sins, miseries, dangers, depths of despair, but look up
to me out of all these.

The Second Extreme is, Hellish provocations, which we are to watch against in
this Work. When the sinner has set himself as he conceives (...) Gods way, and
about his work, and yet finds no success in what he does, our self-seeking
hearts are apt to (...) with the Lord, snarl at his (...), and so rise (...),
and fly in the face of the Almighty: (...) that wretched King said in (...)
Siege of Samaria, 2 Kings 6. 33. This evil is from the Lord, why should I wait
any longer? So the soul, I have done what I can, endeavored what I am able, he
does not bless what I do, I find no more strength, but my corruptions grow
strong, my heart worse, my hopes and comforts less, I do but increase my sin,
and hasten my (...) in what I do, why should I endeavor any more?

I Answer in three things briefly.

1. Do not set too high a price upon our own performances, and overween our
worth, and over value the services we do, for that is a root of bitterness, and
a cause of these Hellish risings; when we secretly conceit God does not
consider our care, and the weight of our work and endeavor; if he did, he would
otherwise reward us: As Taul says, Romans 9. 20. Nay but, O man, who art thou
that reply against God? 2. Beware, I say, beware of bringing the righteous
Command, and holy Law of God, which discovers our sins, and requires our
Duties, and our ability and feebleness together; as though the power and
principle of the Work must come from us, and we go out in that. For there will
follow bigh and hellish provocations, fierce and fell rebellions against the
Lord, when out of thine own heart thou do tug against thine own heart and
corruption: for instead of the first principle of working (which is not in us,
but in the Lord Jesus) we become the first principle of sinning; and then
direful and dreadful effects will follow, which I profess I am afraid to speak,
lest I should occasion some tender hearts through mistakes to question. 3.
Check and (...) all those risings with that of the Apostle, Romans 9 21, 22. What
if God will not? and deny any Spiritual power of thine own, and stand still, and
expect no principle of any performance in thy self, but that which is from God,
in and by his Word, and let him alone with thy heart: Say, I have nothing, it is
fit I should have nothing it is righteous that God should give me nothing. I do
not expect to do any Spiritual good of my self, nor yet expect that God should
give me Grace for what I do (because all that I do is sin) only I know it is
with him to do what he will; the will, the power, and thework is al from him;
therefore I will lie in his way, and be at the pool, it may be he will cast me
in: I know he can, and who knows but he may, if not, I have no reason to rise
up against him.
Men devise new Rules, and make new Gospels of their own, and set such a
measure to themselves in their own apprehensions, which unless they can
compass, they are resolved to take no content; nay, not to follow any other
direction than that they have coined in their own conceit; and thus they please
themselves in their own apprehensions, and resolve to dwell in the consideration
of their sins, until their hearts were brought so low, see themselves so vile,
the soul so through broken under the weight of their evil, and their own
unworthiness, else what have they to do with a Christ, or once to look toward
him.

How we come to grapple with the heart by Meditation, we heard before; and
because this Work is wearisom in it self, and tedious to our corrupt Nature, to
be ever raking in the Wound, set a man's heart upon the rack, and keep it in
restless disquiet, that the venom of a man's guilt and plagues should ever be
before his eyes, and the Summons to Judgment ever sounding in his Ears; the
soul is not able to bear the unsupportable weight thereof, and therefore it
cannot get to Christ to be cured and healed; it winds and turns every way that
yet it may be eased, therefore the sinner tries al conclusions that possible
may be, that he may drive away the dismal thoughts of his sinful condition, and
cast aside those stabbing considerations that makes his heart die within him.
Therefore he turns every stone, if he can drink it out, or game it out, or work
it out, or pray it out, or any ways, or by any means wear out the thoughts
that weary him of his life.

Thus he strives if he cannot get good by his Mediration, yet to get rid of it;
because he cannot be bettered by it, he would not be troubled with it. As the
Patient when he is not able to bear the extremity of the Corrosive, that would
eat out the proud flesh, takes it off and lays it aside, rather keep his sore
though it hazard his life than suffer the smart of it, and may be his
perverseness costs him his life. A serious consideration set on, and kept on
upon the soul, is like this extreme Corrosive, the rebellious hear is not able
to endure the continuance of it, and therefore at last it will make an escape
from under the sting and strength of it, if possibly it may; and usually it
does, unless the Lord put forth his powerful hand in some special help: and
therefore herein lies the last, and the hardest part of Meditation, to get
above the heart, and to get the better of it. And to this purpose, the
Directions are Three.

Labor to possess thy heart aright with a dreadful fear of thy sinful and
desperate condition: maintain it alive in thy self, that it may go along with
thee, that will keep thy Meditation alive also, and mightily prevailing. Where
a man's fears are, his thoughts will be, they carry a man's consideration
uncontroulably with them. Fear is a faithful Watchman, it sends post between
the head and heart, it calls up our consideration and thoughts, and carries them
along with them, as the occasion is presented; and it is beyond al a man's skill,
either to prevent the coming, or gainsay the power and overbearing force of
fears. If once Satan get the heart fearless, it becomes careless and
thoughtless, as I may so speak. Eliphas couples them together, Job, 15. 14.
Thou casrest off fear, and restrainest prayer; thou have taken off the activity
of fear: fear has fallen from his authority, and then it follows thou
restrainest prayer. Fear keeps Sentinel, gives the (...) daily to the soul of
the approaching plagues, as the deserts of our sins, calls up the best ability
of our minds, and strength of our thoughts to attend the (...), so that there
is no sleeping nor idling under such a watchman. What will be the Judgments
which your sins deserve, who can conceive? and how soon they may come, who can
tell? Come they will, that is certain; but when they will come, that is uncertain:
think, and ever be inusing how to prevent those evils, that ye are never able
to avoid, nor bear: Job compares fear to an Army of mighty force, that commands
where it comes; Job, 30. 15. Terrors are turned in upon me, they pursue me
(...) the wind; therefore by an overruling command they call for attendance of
the strength of the mind and man, and they cannot be put off, or laid aside, or
silenced, but press a man to his most serious consideration, to be exercised
with all diligence, how to foresee and prevent the evils expected, Psalm. 48. 6.
Fear is said to seize and lay hold upon the sinner, as travel upon a woman with
child. We know when the appointed time of Travel comes on, there is no
preventing or delaying of the work, as that the party can stay til the (...)
day, or week, or hour; nor yet can she put off her work to another, as she may
do her other occasions, as a friend may go this way for her, a servant may do
that which she desires; but when her throws come, no body can stay them, no
body must bear them but her self, and she will be forced to mind, and attend
them and her own help, whether she will or no. The fear and dreadful expectation
of Gods righteous Judgments deserved and threatened, let them seize upon the
sinner, and let him travel under the terror of the Almighty; If God should come
and call me to answer, how should I help my self? If the Lord do (as the times
are in his own hands) what should I judge or think of my condition? In a sinful
and miserable estate I am (I am sure) and how soon the pit may shut her mouth
upon me, that I may be past hope and help, I know not; high time therefore to
think how to be affected with this, and how to be freed from this damnable
condition. If the good man of the house did know the Thief would come, he would
certainly watch, he would listen attentively at every stirring, Matthew. 24. 43.
Fear says the evil will come, and makes a man ever be thinking how to prevent
it before it comes. As in a Siege, he that keeps the noise of the Drum, the
sound of the Trumpet, the clattering of Spears, the report of the Canon in his
ears and fears, he will be kept a waking, and be forced to attend upon his
watch, and stand (...) his Guard for his life. So do thou as the psalmist said,
Psalm. 9. last Put them in fear O Lord that they may know themselves to be but
men. they will know they are sinful and mortal and wretched (...) that must come
to death and judgment.

Awaken Conscience, call for the help of it, and put it into commission, and it
will put forth an overruling power, for the settling of our apprehensions in
their attentive employments; when sometimes they are routed and put by their
proper exercise, by the unruly and inordinate distempers of our hearts. For
reason and understanding are the underlings as it were of inferior and lower
rank, and can but as servants and attendants offer and propound to the will and
affections; what they (...) and conceive may be most convenient, and the
wretched way wardness of our hearts, will either snub or silence them, reject or
cast them away, you befool reason, damp and pervert the light of judgment, tell
reason she is a fool and is deceived and drive it to another search sometimes in
the Saints (...) and will are for the work. The one pleads for it the other
approves and desires it; and yet the violence and outrage of some overbearing
corruptions take off Meditation and hinder it against the heart and hayr
against our judgment and desire. Now conscience is to be called in who has
received a supreme authority, to oversee both, to right al such disorders and
to see that the mind have its free scope, for the exercise of Meditation in his
times and turns. And that this is so, Experience of all men in all ages will give
in evidence undeniable; the Godly, their Conscience is controuler in their whole
course by the beck and least iutimation of whose authority, the frame of their
spirits inwardly and their carriages outwardly are (...), so as they can do
nothing against the truth (2 Cor. 13. 8.) and dictate of their Conscience they
could do any thing against their credit and comfort and profit yea their very
lives (...) not against their Conscience. Witness again the wrastlings of the
spirits of the ungodly, when their (...) reason has contrived al ways and
shifts their hearts earnestly desired, also how to stifle and stop the mouth of
Conscience, to silence his dictates, that they might proceed in the practice of
their lawless course, without stop and trouble and disquiet and the sad
remembrance of that guilt and (...) which Conscience tyres them with, but al in
vain when Conscience is armed with authority and exercises that authority
which is given it, is in his place and does the (...) of (...) place but I say
you must put it into commission; God can and does when he will, but we should
also give way and help forward this work as we are able, according to that
direction for our spiritual good in this behalf, for it is with Conscience as
it is with men of worth in the country from whence we came, though they be as
holy and gracious and wise when they are out of the commission of the peace as
when they are in; yet then (when they are out of the commission) though they be
willing and desirous according to the (...) the Lord has given them to see and
so to reform al wrongs and disorders yet they want power. So it is with
Conscience, when through our careless and rebellious carriage, it is either
blinded or stifled, and so his place and exercise of his power is utterly
hindered; we must therefore (...) Conscience into his commission as much as in
us lies; i. e help forward the exercise of that sovereign authority with the
right whereof Conscience stands possessed according to the place the Lord has
set him in. Here are three directions.

Let nothing join with Conscience in the command it gives and power it
exercises but the holy and righteous Law of God. This is that which makes the
simplicity of the eye which our Savior mentions, Math. 6. 22. and that which
adds that overruling virtue and (...) thereunto, insomuch that the text tells
us; where the eye is single the whole body is full of light. That eye I suppose
is not bare reason or understanding enlightened, though that sense is savory
and included: but there is I conceive somewhat more, that eye is here meant
according to the light and direction whereof the whole body is acted and
ordered, that is a man's whole course and conversation is guided in a right way.
That is by virtue of Conscience especially which has an overpowring command
with it, to act and carry out all the dispositions of our hearts and actions of
our lives, suitable to the light and level of the law of God, according to
which it accuses or excuses; This single eye is a conscience sincere, when
nothing interrupts the work of Conscience, but the law acts it, and it acts the
man, thus the office Conscience exereiseth is from God and for God.

Keep Conscience trembling and tender, that it may be Eagle Eyed, and easily
sensible of the least evil and do thou accustom thy self to be sure to take
notice of the least intimation it gives. This gives as I may say encouragement
to Conscience and helps forward the work, and honors that authority which it
exercises, Thus David was at the beck of his Conscience even for the
appearance and bordering of evil, 1. Sam. 24. (...). his heart smot him because
he had cut off Saul's skirt.

Take undoubtedly the sentence of Conscience rightly guided to be Gods own
sentence. That which he will own and make good upon all the sons of men at the
great day of (...); It will pass current and prevayl then either for thy
Condemnation or for thy absolution, It should therefore prevail with thee for
thy direction in this world thou shall be judged by it then, it stands thee in
hand to be ordered by it now. Rev. 20. 12. The books were opened, and the dead
were judged out of those things written in their books according to their
works.

Thus there is some help and assistance lent to Medita^tion that it may awe and
keep under the heart, and these have their use and fruit also in their time and
measure but yet a corrupt heart left to it self will sooner or later shut out
Meditation and silence the serious exercise of his own thoughts against his sin
and himself to arraign himself every day to sit in judgment and pass the
sentence of Condemnation upon his own soul, he is not able to endure. He will
not part with his sin and yet he cannot take pleasure in his sin upon these
(...). He will shake off his fears and sear his Conscience, silence his (...)
that neither his thoughts nor terrors may trouble him any more, and so return
again to his old haunt and there perish.

Unless the Lord (in the last place) put to his Almighty So when the fears God
(...) sent in be scattered, the dictates of Conscience, as his officer, be laid
aside; the Lord himself will take the (...) to task and so restelesly pursue the
sinner with his own (...), that he will not respite him for the least refreshing
from the evil that presses in upon him; Job. 7. 14. How long will thou not
depart from me, nor let me, alone til (...) swallow down my spittle? Its not
the fire but the blowing of the coals that melts the metal to become fit
matter for a vessel to be made. It Is not the Law that breaks the heart of a
sinner, for he neither is nor can be subject to the LawRom. 8. 7. but its done
by the spirit of Humiliation, who has it in his own hand, and must blow up
this fire it will not melt else; strike with this hammer (...) certain he must
or else the heart will never break: Job, 13. 26 He makes a man possess the sins
of his youth. when he has not minded them, may be forgot them; he revies them
again and presents them, afresh to the view of the mind, keeps the eyes waking,
etc.

They were pricked to the heart.

From the means we are now to come to the work it self, which is attended here
with the subject or parties to whom it does appertayn and in whom it was
wrought and these are considered in a double respect: and so they will afford us
a double Instruction. This pricking it was not of al but some only who heard
the word upon whom it prevailed with saving success; some were pierced, some
went away not touched not stirred there with. As it fares with scattered shot
when the piece is discharged against the whole flock or flight of the fowl, some
are hit and slain with it, some sit still are not afrighted nor stirred with it.

Hence the doctrine is.

The same dispensation of the word which is Doct.
powerful and profitable to some is unprofitable unto others.

They be together at the same time, in the same seat with the same ability,
intention and devotion, and yet one is benefited by the means, the other
receives no good from it. Luke. 7. 29. 30. And all the people heard John
preaching, and the Publicans justified God being baptized of him, but the
Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves, So again,
Acts 18. 6. 8. Some (...), others opposed and (...), Christ himself is laid as
a stone of stumbling for the rising and falling of many 2 Cor. 2. 16. The word
(...) some is a (...) of life (...) life, unto others the savior of Death unto
Death.

Because God has several ends to attain in these. dispensations; Reas. 1.
the execution of his justice in a righteous manner, the punishment of the sins
of the wicked by the means he affords, to recover them out of their sins and
the conveyance of the work of his grace to those that belong to the election of
his grace, It Is a strange inference God makes and way that he takes in the
sending of his messengers, Math. 23. 34. behold I will send you Prophets and
Apostles, and some of them ye shall scourge, and some ye shall (...) and Crucify;
this was to gratify their corrupt wills and so dishonor his own ordinances, how
can this stand with his justice; yes herin is his justice exceedingly
magnifyed, that the (...) of all that (...) been shed might come upon them. Nay
which is yet most strange; God then sends the most glorious means of salvation
to a people, when in his righteous judgment the work of Conversion shall be
furthest off and they aggravate their condemnation. Isa. 6. 9. The Prophet had
his tongue touched with a coal from the Altar, mervailously gifted and fitted,
and himself unwearied, but mark what his commission was, go (says the Lord)
make the heart of this people fat, and their Ears heavy least they be
converted, and should beal them. This was the way to convert them, and yet by
this (...) they are hardened and set further off from conversion than they were
before; The choycest physic and purest air meeting with corrupt and decaying
bodies, kills immediately. So here. Our Savior resolves it. Math. 13. 11. Its
not in the power or parts or improvements of some above others but to you it is
given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to them it is not
given. The same fire we know will melt the metal which shall make vessels of
honor and dishonor. He makes the wicked without (...) he makes his Saints
serviceable to his own mind.

That herein he might show the (...) (...) (...) good Reas. 2.
will and pleasure. Romans 9. 18. He has mercy on whom (...) will, and whom he
will, (...) (...) Has not the Potter power over the clay, to make one vessel
to honor, another to dishonor? He shows that the issue and event of al comes
only from his own purpose and pleasure. So the Apostle resolves it, (...) 22.
What if God will? So the Evangelist also, John, 12. 37, 38, 39. Though Christ
(...) done many miracles, yet they believed not; Why did they not believe? He
adds, Therefore they could not believe, because Isaiah had said he has blinded
their eyes, and hardened their hearts, that they should not be converted.
Hither our Savior comes, and sits down in admiration, Matthew. 11. 25, 26. I
thank thee Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid these things
from the wise and prudent of the world, and have revealed them unto Babes, even
so O Father, because it seemed good in thy sight.

It should provoke in us all, the (...) fear in the (...) Use 1.
of the greatest means; our deadliest bane may come from the best Ordinances;
this is speeding Physic, it will work either one way or other, either kill or
cure. Now is the Ax laid to the root of the tree, (...) 3. 10. When Christ
came, then was their destruction coming on with most have, 2 Cor. (...) When
the (...) had discovered the excellency of his Gospel, in the plainness and
power of it, he leaves with that Supposition, If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to
(...) (...) perish. When Moses was coming, (...) (...) (...) (...) Where he
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) excellent means of Grace; (...) 11. (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)

(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) Use 2.
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) of these, as
though they had inhaerent, prevailing power in themselves. Bless not thy self
barely by having of these; say, I may have these Ordinances, and yet have death
as well as life: yea, I may hear of Christ, may seek after him, and enjoy his
presence here in the means, and yet never have any saving good by any of these,
Luke, 2. 34. He is as well for the fall of many, as for their rising.

Exhortation to stir us up to use all means; and when Use 3.
thou see the benefit received by some, seek thou also for a blessing upon
them; as Esau said, bless me, me also. So say thou, such (...) proud heart has
found the Word humbling of him, such a discouraged heart has felt the Word
comforting of him; Lord, let the Word humble me also, pierce me also, comfort
me also. The Husbandman sows, and waits for the first and latter rain, and as
David said, mine eyes fail for thy Salvation, saying, when (...) thou comfort
me? when will thou enlighten me, quicken me? when will thou break my heart?
when will thou make me spiritual, and painful, and thriving in (...) Christian
Course.

Lastly, Return praise and thanksgiving to the Lord Use 4.
for what thou (...) receive, and find in the powerful dispensations of the
Word. God has marvelously separated his mercy unto thee, in giving not
Physic, but health in it; not Bread, but the staff of nourishment with it; not
the Word, but the life and profit of it. Be thou marvelous thankful and careful
not to come and hear as (...) but set thy heart to the Word, bring a (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) to the hearing of it. Do not power out thy words
in prayer, but power out thy (...) etc.

Again Secondly, Look who these are, who are now Secondly.
wounded and pierced with the preaching of Peter, and we shall find them some of
the (...) of the (...) and (...) of (...) wretches, who were not only guilty of
the death of (...) but such who now set themselves in an inhumane manner
against the Apostles of Christ; and carried themselves with (...) and contempt
against their persons and proceedings, the publishing (...) (...) of the great
things of God in the (...) strain of opposition; for (...) ye look back into
the 12, and 13. verses, you shall there see the miracle of tongues wrought a
twofold effect in the hearers; some were amazed, verse 12. some mocked, verse
13. and to these Peter addresseth his speech, his spirit being stirred in a
holy indignation against so hellish distempers, against the gracious and
miraculous expression of the Spirit of the Lord; to them he says, ver. 14, 15.
(...) it known unto you, that these men are not drunk (...) ye suppose, etc. to
these (...) and deriders he now speaks, and they are now Pricked. Some (...)
wounded, and these were the worst, and such as did oppose.

Hence the Doctrine to be observed, (...)

The Lord many times makes the Word pierce Doct.
and prevail most powerfully in the hearts of sinners for their everlasting
good, when they oppose the power thereof, and their own good therein.

In a word. The Lord often makes the Word work then effectually, when the
scornful heart is (...) against the work, and (...) at a distance from it. This
is the Lords profession, (...) 43. 21. Even the people that he formed for
himself, and such (...) should show forth his praise, those whom (...) would
make most (...) to himself, (...) so did; yet see in the following words how he
found these, and when he formed these for his own (...) (...) 24, 25. Thou
(...) (...) (...) no (...) Cane (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) Sacrifices:
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) of his Ordinances, and cast his commands behind
their back, yea, thou have made me serve with thy sins, and thou have wearied
me with thine iniquities; instead of serving God, they made his Ordinances, and
the Privileges he provided, and so his Love, and Mercy, and himself therein,
to serve their (...) and sensual Hearts; they put God to it, his Patience and
long-suffering, that he could no longer endure their lewdness. Yet then he ads,
he would do most good to (...) when they had no care of their own good; and
then enlarge his compassions to them when they multiplied (...) provocations
against him. I, even I for mine own sake, will blot out thine iniquities, and
remember thy sins no more. This was Gods dealing with Ephraim, and the season
of that his saving health he extended toward him, when he rushed on in the
ways of (...), according to the ways of his own heart, Isai 57. 17, 18. For
the iniquity of his covetousness, of his evil lustings, I was (...) with him, I
(...) him, I hid my self and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the way of
his own heart; here is the highest strain of rebellious sturdiness of Spirit.
When God is angry he smites the soul, and hides away himself; yet to be froward
in the midst of al these heavy expressions of his displeasure that might
reform him, yea, to go on after in the (...) of wickedness. If ever a people
seemed to be past cure, prepared for ruin and confusion, past all hope either
of enjoying or profiting by the means; this might seem to be the time, these
the men; but Gods ways and thoughts are not as ours: for mark the next words;
I have seen his ways, and I will lead him, and heal (...), and (...) comfort
to him, and those that mourn with him. Then God will see him, when he cannot
see himself; then God will heal his frowardness who cannot help himself; then
God will guide him when he cannot guide himself; then he will make him mourn,
and others mourn, with him, and mourn for him, and he will comfort them both.
And our Savior for this very end, has ascended up on high to receive gifts for
men, even for the rebellious, that the Lord may dwell among them also. Psalm.
68. 18. Ephesians. 4. 8.

This may suffice for the Proof of the Point: See the (...) of it laid open in
(...) Particulars.

He presses in upon men by the prevailing work of his Grace in his Ordinances,
before they look after him or their own welfare, prevents their imaginations
and desires. When (...) snorting in their sins, sit down securely, well apay'd
with their careless and corrupt condition: the things of Grace, and Christ, and
Mercy, are not so much as in their thoughts or dream; the Lord beyond their
expectation, lets in the discovery of himself, and (...) manifestation of the
work of his Spirit, before they be aware of it. Jos. 24. 2. compared with Acts,
7. 2. Thus it was in the calling of Abraham, when the Lord brought him to
himself, and made him the Father of the Faithful, when Terah and he were
drowned in Idolatry, without God, without Christ, and without Hope, never heard
of any such thing as life in a Savior by Faith, never hearkened after it, but
worshipping the Idols of the Heathen. The God of Glory, says Stephen, appeared
to our Father Abraham, when he (...) in Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in
Charran; when he dwelt in the midst of Idolaters, and never had the least
thought or apprehension of the Covenant of Grace; the Lord then appeared to
him, and bad him come out from thy country and kindred, and from thy fathers
(...), and so from their Idolatrous Practices. God finds men before they seek
him, he makes known himself before they enquire after him; Isai. (...). 1. I am
(...) of them that asked not after me, I am found of them that sought me not; I
said, behold me, behold me, to a Nation that was (...) called by my Name. How
often have we heard it, and known it in our own Country; the Lord has sent a
Minister to see the Country, and visit his friends, and it has been the day
wherein he has been pleased to visit the heart of many a careless ignorant
Creature, who came idling as to a May Game, or Morrisdauncing, and dropped into
the Assembly, and the Word has laid hold on him before he has been aware of
it; how often has the loose Prodigal come to riot it at the Fair and Market,
and has been drawn in to hear beyond his purpose, cross to his desire, and
wished himself out of the place, and yet has heard that before he departed,
which has been a word of life and peace unto his soul, for which he saw cause
to bless God to all Eternity, Matthew he is sitting at the receipt of Custom,
minds how to take money, Peter and James are casting a Net into the Sea, to see
how to make provision for themselves; Christ calls them to himself, and so to an
Interest in Grace and Glory, when they had not so much as a thought that way;
It Is that of the Apostle, Romans 9. 30. The Gentiles who sought not after
righteousness, they have attained unto righteousness, and yet the Jews who
pretended great pains and search that way, they fell short of it.

As the Lord presses in upon men before they be aware, So many times he takes
the worst of men, whose hearts and lives are at the greatest distance from the
holiness of his word and ways: Thus our Savior posesseth that the Publicans
and Harlots, such as were in the rank of the most notorious wretches, Go before
the Scribes and Pharisees into the Kingdom of Heaven. Luke, 3. 9, 10. Luke, 7.
29. Which carried a form and appearance of Godliness in the view of the World.
And you shall observe the Lord to gather the most glorious Churches in the
places, and amongst the people where there have been the puddles and sinks of
all wickedness. (...), Corinth, Creet, notorious and (...) in all (...) for
hideous and hellish abominations, and yet there the Lord (...) Churches of the
greatest beauty, Saints of most glorious excellency of Grace, such as were
destitute of no Grace, and yet the place destitute of no villainy, 2. Cor. 6. 7.
When he had reckoned up a catalogue of most accursed Villainies, yet professed
God brought precious Gold out of dirt and (...), Know ye not that no (...),
Idolaters, Effoeminate, abusers of themselves with mankind, nor Thieves, nor
Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God; and such were (...) of you.
Ver. 10. 11. But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified by
the Name of Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.

The Lord Jesus prevails with these that are the most reffuse persons, even
when they are in the ruff and height of all their wretchedness; when they are
in the extremest outrage and running riot in the ways of wickedness, beyond
the bounds of modesty and moderation. Our Savior Christ stops not Paul in his
proceeding, when his injurious and blasphemous carriage was in the bud and
beginning, while his Spirit was stirring with the pangs (...) pride and (...),
that he stood as a Spectator, and (...), and kept the Garments of those that
stoned Stephen. Acts, 22. 20. not yet attaining that impudency and violence to
lay hands on the Saints, and to fly upon the prey. But when he became more mad
in malice and cruelty, and became a principal in such outrages, a leader in
bloody persecutions. Acts, 26. 11. that he goes armed with Authority, breathing
out threatenings and slaughter. Acts, 9. 1. resolves to attach and imprison all
sorts (...) (...) Sexes, men and women that prosess the Name of Jesus. When he
is running full carreer in such (...) and cruelty, the Lord then meets him,
unhorseth him, takes his weapons out of his hand, (...) his Commission, and
causes him to bear his Name, who had before blasphemed it, to care sor all the
Churches who before destroyed them, he makes him fall at his foot, and follow
his (...) and colors, Lord, what will thou have me to do? The (...) beyond his
place, commission and allowance, he scourges and cruelly handles Paul and
Barnabas, and when he prides and pleases himself in his cruelty and (...)
behavior toward the poor servants of the Lord he then takes him to task Acts.
16. 30. pulls him down upon his knees and forces him to seek for mercy and
direction from those to whom he showed no mercy nor humanity before, he
trembling fell down saying Sirs what must I do to be saved? The Lord stops not
Manassehs outrage when he enters first upon his kingdom (as he easily could
have done) but suffers him to fill up the measure of his iniquity, so that the
bottom of Hell could not afford abominations more or worse than were practiced
by him, he filled Jerusalem with blood, shut up the doors of the sanctuary,
gave himself to witchcraft and conjuring. The Lord now grapples with him by
the power of his grace, and after his mighty provocations, persevering also in
those desperate courses; the Lord humbles him mightily under his almighty hand
and brings him to the obedience of his will, 2 Cron. 33. Chap.

The Reasons of the point are four.

The greatness of his power is hereby discovered, and Reas. 1.
that he has laid salvation upon one that is mighty, that when all the power of
darkness has proceeded to his highest pitch, when the subtilties of Hell and all the venom of the corrupt heart of man furthered by all advantages, that the
world and counsel and company of ungodly have brought in all forces, to manage
and maintain a wicked and ungodly course herein appears that power of the
Almighty whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself; in that he batters
down all the strong holds of the hearts of the sons of men and every high
thought that lifts up it self against the obedience of his truth, dasheth all
those temptations and delusions whereby the Enemy has advanced his Kingdom in
the hearts of his captives and vassalls, so that Satan and al his
fortifications shall down like lightning before the dispensation of the truth:
this is indeed the power of God unto salvation Romans 1. 16. this is the
outstretched arm of the Almighty revealed in this so wonderful a work Isa.
53. 1. thus the Apostle 2. Cor. 10. 4. the weapons of our warfare are mighty
through God, to cast down strong holds. It was that which (...) observed wisely
and as truly concluded, Exodus 18. 11. Now I know that the Lord is greater than
al Gods for in the thing wherein he dealt proudly he was above them. It is most
true in this case, herein it appears that the Lord is greater than al gods, the
god Pride and Stubbornness, the god Self-love, and Self-confidence, the god
Covetousness and Uncleanness; greater than all the Devils in Hell, than all the
Temptations in the World, and all the distempers in the hearts of sinners,
because in the thing wherein they dealt proudly, he was above them. As he said
I know not the Lord I will not let Israel go. So when they deal proudly, I know
not the command of a Christ to obey it, I know not the reproof of a Christ to
reform by it, I know not, acknowledge not the threatenings and terrors of the
truth which are denounced, know that God can if he will, and its certain he will
if he ever take pleasure in thee to bring thee out of bondage he will be above
thee in all these, when you shall see the sturdy stoop, the stubborn yield, and
he that was firce and proud as Beelzebub himself to fall at the foot of Christ,
tremble at every truth, melt under the least admonition and counsel, herein you
may know the greatness of God indeed, when Peter's chayn fell, the iron Gate
(...) way, he concluded it was a message of God. And therefore Moses looks to
this in God when he desires the removal of the great provocations of the (...);
Numb. 14. 17. I pray thee let the power of my Lord be great according as thou
have said. When the walls of (...) (...) (...) to the ground: (...) the sounding
of Rams horns it argued the breath of the Almighty went out with them. So to
see the mighty fortes of carnal Reas. 2.
reason which men have reared against the force of the truth, and when they
have entrenched themselves in the desperate resolutions of the self-willy,
waywardness of their own hearts yet to become easy, yielding, and under, so
that a child may lead them, the greatness of Gods power appears in this.

The riches of mercy is hereby especially magnified which (...) all the baseness
(...) our hearts, the miscariages of our lives, beyond al our unkindnesses when
they are beyond measure, herein the Lord seems to give way to the wickedness of
the sons of men, to swel (...) the common bounds, that his mercy may appear to
be beyond al bounds, and boundless and bottomless that is the virtue of the
salve when the wound is deadly to heal it, the excellency of the physic when
the disease is past hope, and help, then to recover it. Romans 5. last. When the
Apostle had disputed concerning the freeness of grace he asks this question why
was the Law added? he answers, that sin might appear and be aggravated, because
the Law was given, and the end of that, and the use that God made of it, that
where sin abounded grace abounded much more, when sin has done what it can by all advantages, mercy will do more than sin, that as sin had reigned unto death
so grace might reign unto life through Jesus Christ our Lord, God suffered
pride and rebellion to reign in Paul, for this end that his mercy and patience
toward him might be exemplary 1 Timothy 1. 16. hence it is that the times wherein
(...) gets ground and prevails they are called the times of mercy wherein that
gets (...) Ezekiel. 16. 5. 8. When the Church was weltering in her blood and had
neither (...) in herself nor succor (...) without, Reas. 3.
then was the time of love, not a time when it was deserved but a season
wherein it should be magnifyed, otherwise in reason the Lord might have taken
many other times more suitable to his love. Nay the more vile and miserable they
were, Herein is the sovereign virtue of his love and mercy to make them
acceptable and beloved.

Look we at the condition of the parties from whence also another reason of the
dispensation of the Lord may be discovered, hereby the Lord stains the pride of
al flesh, and confounds all the carnal confidence that men seem to place in the
creature; for should either the wisdom of the wise, the pomp of the rich, the
parts and pains and studyes and dexterity of the prudent and learned, the
honor and magnificence of the mighty, and the Monarchs of the world should have
found the Profit of the means or received the prevailing power of the holy
spirit in his ordinances for their saying good. Men would have eyed and
honored those excellencies, and doated upon them, hung al their hopes and
confidence upon the presence and work of these; so that the conclusion out of
carnal reason would have issued here, none but such should have had any good,
none of al these that had these out ward (...) should have wanted it, and so
some would have been discouraged, that could not attain these, others would
presume and be secure that did possess them, and the Lord have been deprived of
that honor both of confidence and dependence that was due from al. That the
Lord might lay al these excellencies in the dust and forever wean the hearts
(...) men from setting their hopes thereupon, he takes the weakest and the
worst and those also when they are at the greatest Under of al baseness and
wretchedness, they shall outstrip al those in whom there is this seeming worth,
of all the surpassing eminency that the Earth can afford. Thus the Apostle
disputes, 1 Cor. 1. 26. you see (...) (...), not many wise, not many mighty,
not many noble, these are the three excellencies in the world. The (...)
abilities of wit and learning, the nobility of birth, the privilege of our
place and state. The Lord (...) (...) whole course of carnal excellency, he
chooses the (...) to confound the wise, the weak to confound the mighty, base
things, that are not, to bring to naught things and things that are, nothing,
of any probability or possibility in an ordinary way, that might have attained
any good, being wholly set, against it nothing of ingenuity or moderation or
common (...), but when they grow desperately wicked yet then the Lord does good
that no flesh may glory in his presence; that it is not in your wealth or parts
or endeavors or outward pomp, behold these poor base creatures, base in their
condition and yet more base in their carriage, scant worse in the bottom of
Hell, yet these are called. Oh how will it confound the wise to see the foolish
of the world brought to the knowledge of Christ when they never knew the things
belonging to their peace, how will it confound the Civilian and subtle hypocrite
who had painted over his profession with appearance of Godliness to see a
profane wretch whose leudness time was when he loathed, as though his person
were not fit to be looked on, yet now pulled out of his sink and dunghill, made
a glorious saint in heaven when he shall be cast out amongst dogs. So the
Prophet. Ezekiel. 16. last.

Look we at the Work it self, There is also a depth of Reas. 4.
infinite wisdom in this Dispensation to bring that about in many hearts, and
that by this means, and that with most success the Lord suffers many to go to a
great excess of sin, before he lays hold upon them, or seems to take them to
task, that the grossness of the evils might make way for their more easy
conviction; and so for the entry of the Word upon their souls, and their
subjection to the power and evidence thereof. Men or Hypocrites of a smooth
refined carriage, when they carry a conformity in their course to the ways of
Godliness, and have strength of carnal reason to make the best of an
unblameable life, it is hard for any to come within them, either to pass a
Sentence of their present condition, because love hopes the best, when it can
bring no evidence of the contrary evil, much less to persuade their estate is
unsafe and not sincere; but when the Lord lets loose Satan, or some loathsome
lusts upon them, that they become scandalous and notoriously (...), and their
(...) appears in their foreheads, then they yield to go out of the Camp, and
confess they are unclean. As the Physician when he would cure the cold Palsy,
he is content to cast his Patient into a burning Fever, because he can tell how
to come the better to the Cure. So here, our Savior wishes, Rev. 3. 17. I
would thou were either hot or cold, because then he could tell how to deal with
her; if either truly good, he would encourage; if openly naught, he would then
convince her, he knew how to apply the means, and she would be content to
receive it; bu when she conceives her selfrich, she will receive nothing; wise,
she will hear nothing. So I have known some in experience, that would take it in
indignation that any should question their Grace, until the Lord left them to
some foul falls, gross cozenage, scandalous drunkenness, etc. that has made
them go deeper, etc.

The (...) operation of the Word, the breaking, Use. 1.
and so converting the heart of a sinner depends not upon any preparation a man
can work in himself, or any thing he can do in his corrupt estate for the
attaining of life and Salvation. For had the Lord expected the good use of a
man's free will in the employment and exercise of the works of civility and
outward moral behavior, had he looked for the husbanding of the stock of those
moral abilities which are left in corrupt nature, or (...) by the (...) of
providence in the restrainning strokes of common grace, or had the Lord stayed
until these (...) had either valued the worth of the Apostles and their
administrations, and painfully improved the advantages, of the means of grace
and (...) now brought home to their doors, or brought a teachableness of spirit
to the ordinances. If either the preparation and saving conversion of the souls
of men had depended upon any such emprovement of themselves, it is certain they
had not now been made brokenhearted sinners, or savingly brought unto the
Lord, and for ought any man can. tell had never attained it. But when cross to
the course of humanity they mocked and scorned both (...) persons and message
of the Apostles contrary to truth, they cast reproaches and contumelious
contempt upon them, (...) men are full of new wine, nay when they were carried
with professed opposition, malignant enmity against their persons and
dispensations, yet now the Lord presses in upon them, by the prevailing power
of his spirit and word and does good to them, when they set themselves by all
the policy and rage they could to oppose the work of the Lord and their own
everlasting welfare; clear it is therefore that this spiritual dispensation of
breaking or calling of them home depends not upon any preparation which was
done, nor any performances al which for the present were professedly opposite
to their own welfare; but merely upon the power and good pleasure of the Lord,
and the work of his spirit which he puts forth when it seems best unto himself
its not in him that wills or runs says the Apostle, he puts both together and
denies success unto both, that so he may take off all the cavils that could be
made or indeed pretended. For had it been said the means were powerful and in a
plentiful manner bestowed but men would not do what they might and ought, may
be there was a slight (...), some powerless wishing but there wanted the
strength of endeavor behold he excludes both It Is not him that wills only, nay
let him run for it, put to the best of his abilities, that will not do the deed.
It Is not there but in the good pleasure of him that shows mercy Romans 9. 17.
And hence it is that the very spirit of bondage, terror and astonishment, and
sensible troubles of heart, which many times wicked men that fall finally short
of saying grace, yet attain in some measure or degree even that is beyond the
reach of a man's own power, We have not received the spirit of bondage to fear
Romans 8. 15. even that is a gift and must be received and is dispensed freely,
all that a natural man can do cannot call for his old terrors and troubles which
out of his sensuality he has devised ways to wear out, unless the Lord will
set them on by his hand. And hence the Apostle makes the exception so general
to Timothy, 2. Tim. 1. 9. Who has saved us and called us with a holy calling
not according to our works but according to his own purpose and grace, so the
resolution is into the free grace of God and the sovereignty of his purpose,
issues not from any work of ours, hangs not upon that hinge, and hence it is
the Lord denies the communication of means to some whom he foresees would use
and husband them to beter advantages and bestows them upon such who neither
prize nor profit by all they have, nay are open contemners and opposers of the
truth. Woe be to thee Chorazin woe beto thee Bethsaida for if the great works
that have beendone in thee had been done in Tire and Sidon they would long
before this day have repented in sackcloath and ashes Math. 11. 21. yea he
professes Ezekiel. 4. 6. If he had sent Ezekiel to a strange people and of hard
language such as had never heard of the things of God and grace they would have
hearkened to him when the Jews rejected his counsel and the commands of God
dispensed by his means, Hence it is the Lord to show the sovereign freedom of
his pleasure, that he may do with his own what he will, and yet do wrong to
none, he denies pardon and acceptance to those who seek it with some
importunity and earnestness Prove. 1. 28. they shall seek me early and shall not
find me and yet bestows mercy and (...) known himself unto some who never
sought him. Isai. 65. 1. That we may (...) from hence for ever to fear and
avoid that haeretical doctrine of the Arminians so deeply dangerous to the
salvation of men's souls and so exceedingly derogatory to the glory of Gods free
grace in Christ, who maintayn that if we do what we can, and improve the
natural abilities we have, and the means we do enjoy God will not deny to give
us the grace supernatural we want. An opinion so gross that the Popish school
will not abide by it, and the most ingenuous of the Jesuits themselves do
professedly oppose and condemn. For besides that it destroys the comfort of a
sinner and dasheth the hopes of all the sons of men, for if none should be saved
but those that do what they can, its certain never any man either in nature or
grace did what he (...) either emproveing his natural abilities as he might
according to special opportunites and liberties put into his hand, nor (...)
faithful ever tohusband their grace according to what they received and was
expected, and might also be justly challenged at their hands; If therefore
their hopes had their support here, their hearts and hopes and comforts and
happiness and al would fayl them, and they must needs have their lives and
their everlasting condition ever in doubt and suspense, and in issue sink down
in everlasting discouragment, but I say besides this it destroys the whole
frame of grace in the carriage of it.

First it undermines the very foundation of the dispensation of grace which
proceeds as we have heard from the purpose and Good pleasure of the Almighty
thither our Savior looks as at the fountain from whence al spiritual favors
proceed: Math 11. 26.. I thank thee Father etc. Even the Father because it
pleases thee 2 Timothy 1. 9. called not according to our works and free will, but
according to his purpose and free mercy Romans 11. 19. Whom he will he hardens,
and whom he will he shows mercy to soften and converts; he does not expect how
we improve the freedom of our wills and perform our works, but he gives both will
and deed whereas this opinion resolves the issue of my conversion and so of
salvation into my own purpose, and as he said makes Gods free grace lackey
after man's free will. For it is in a man's power and pleasure to do what God has
put into his own power according to his own will, if I will do but what I can, if
I will, and improve abilities and advantages afforded, but as I may according to
this conceit, God will never deny me the Grace I want, the mercy and Salvation I
do endeavor after. So that the last resolution in this way is left upon a man's
own free will, if he will not do what he may, he misseth his good, if he do what
he can, he shall not fail to receive it.

It cuts the very (...) of the Covenant of (...), and the freedom thereof. For
upon this ground and grant, it is not in Gods hand to dispose of his own mercy,
but it is in my hand, and left in my choice; If I will improve liberties and
advantages, I may have the Grace I want; if I will reject both, then it is my
folly and negligence, I must bear the blame, and endure the misery, and thank
my self, when it was in mine own power, to provide for mine own comfort. This
course issues and returns into the Covenant of Works: these Paul sets in such a
direct opposition, as that they cannot stand the one with the other, Romans 11.
6. If of Grace, it is no more of Works, for then Grace was no more grace; if of
Works, then not of Grace, for then Works were no more Works; what then Israel
has not obtained, q. d. It was not the bulk and body of the people, nor in the
power, ability, or performance of any person; but the Election has obtained:
Not because Israelites, not because they had such Privileges, not because they
used such Ordinances, and took up the performance of Duties required; but
because elected, therefore called, therefore justified. The contrary course
which issues the obtaining of Grace into the improvement of abilities and
advantages, returns as I said into a (...) of Works, for the Condition in the
ultimate resolution still remains in my power, the staff is left in my hand.
It Is al one upon point to have (...) enough in my hand to pay, and to have it
in my power to command, if at my pleasure in another hand; and so I dispose of
Gods mercy, and my own good in the issues. Whereas in the Covenant of Grace,
all is firstly, freely, wholly, and only in the hand of the Lord to dispose, to
whom he will, what, when, and after what manner he will. In this Covenant he does
not require the condition only; but the Lord Christ as the Second Adam, he
performs the Condition also; not only requires new hearts, but puts new spirits
into us; not only commands us to believe, but enables us; and as he himself
speaks, Gives us to believe, Matthew. 13. 11.

This crosses the end of the Covenant, and the scope of the whole course, and
administration of the means of life and Salvation; which is to set forth the
glory of the Riches of Gods Grace in the Eyes of all, and to the Consciences
and acknowledgments of all hearts, a return of al (...) to him, and a total
dependence upon him for ever. Therefore the Lord chose the base and despicable
things that are not, to confound things that are, 1 Cor. 1. last. that no flesh
should glory in his sight, and that he that glories, might glory in the Lord.
By what Law is boasting excluded? by the Law of Works? Nay, but by the Law of
Faith. Romans 3. 27. For if Abraham had been justified by Works he had whereof to
glory. Romans 4. 2. And therefore as in the Material, it is so in the Spiritual
Temple, the laying of the first and lowest stone, and adding of the last, all
the people cried, Grace, Grace; and hence the whole chain is as it were of Gods
own making and tying, Whom he predestined, them he called; and whom he
called, them he justified; and whom he justified, them he glorified, Romans 8.
30. and the end and issue of all, is set down by the holy Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 15.
when all the Churches shall meet at the great day of Appearance in the unity of
the Faith, it is to the acknowledgment of the Son of God. By whom were you
called, humbled, justified, adopted, sanctified? By the Son of God, receive all
from him, return all to him. But this Opinion plucks the Crown from Christ's
Head, the Glory from his Work, the Praise from his Grace, and gives it to the
will of man, and the improvement of those abilities and opportunities the Lord
has put into his hand; because by this means he makes himself to differ. For
set Paul and Judas in the same rank, let them enjoy the same means, share in
the same liberties, advantages, opportunities, one as the other: Paul by the
good use of his free will, he plays the good Husband, he does what he can, and
he obtains what he wants, and receives Grace; Judas plays the Prodigal and
Unthrift, does not what he should and might, and therefore he wants Grace: so
that they were both equal in the privileges and opportunities they received
from God, they differ not there; that Paul has that Grace which Judas wants,
he may thank his own pains and improvement, and glory in himself and them. Nay,
Paul is not bound to be thankful to God for any thing more than Judas; for he
had no more from God by this Opinion than Judas, what he had and received more,
it was by his own improvements, which to conceit, is a most hellish delusion.

Lastly, If by the improvements of Abilities and Advantages then this must
follow, Either because such improvement deserves Grace; or do immediately and
nextly dispose the soul to receive Grace; or that such improvements have a
promise made to them from God. But none of al these can be granted.

They cannot deserve Grace, because when we have Luke 17. 10. The plowing, and
so the praying of the wicked is sin, his most beautiful performances are from
the flesh, and so sinful, and deserve the just wrath of God, and therefore no
Grace nor Glory, John 3. 8.

They do not, nor can dispose the soul, as that it may be thereby a fit subject
to receive Grace: Those actions which leave the soul under the power of sin,
and acted by sin, and a man in a Natural condition, those still leave the soul
indisposed to Grace; for the Natural man perceives not the things of Grace, nor
can he receive them, 1 Cor. 2. 14. they found him in the world, and they leave
him in the world, and the world cannot receive the holy Ghost, John 14. 17.
Natural and corrupt actions, cannot prepare immediately for Supernatural Grace.

There is no promise of giving saving Grace to such, and none could ever be
showed. That which sometimes the Arminians pretend, but press it with no great
confidence, is in Matthew. 25. 29. in the Parable of the Talents; To every man
that has, shall be given; and to him that has not, shall be taken away, even
that he has: Hence, He that has, and uses his Natural abilities well, shall be
given Supernatural. Answ. That gloss corrupts (...) Text, and does not suit
with the Scope and Circumstances of the Parable, as has been made good by many
Arguments, by such as have diligently searched into the sense of the place. The
unprofitable Servant that used not his Talents well, he is to receive that
Sentence, (...) must be cast into utter darkness; which were it understood
according to the former Opinion, it would infer an apparent falsehood. He that
did not improve his Talent, was forth with to be cast into utter darkness; but
many that do not use their natural abilities, and the special advantages well,
have been formerly, and will without question be brought home to Christ and
happiness, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Know ye not, that no Adulterer, Covetous Reviler,
Extortioner, shall inherit the Kingdom of Heaven; but such were some of you, but
ye are washed, but ye are cleansed. 1 Pet. 4. 2. It is sufficient that in time
past we have had our Conversation among the Gentiles, when we walked in
lasciviousness, (...), excess of Riot, Revellings, and abominable (...). These
did not use their Natural abilities well, and yet were not cast out into utter
darkness; therefore the using of the Natural abilities, is not the having, or
the using of the Talent there meant. (...) I suppose the meaning of the Phrase
is, by him that has, is meant the man that is truly gracious; the Talent is
the Gospel; by having, is the receiving and (...) of it in a good and honest
heart, and the sanctified use of it in a saving manner. For the Evangelists
Expressions seem undeniable to evidence this meaning, Matthew. 13. 11, 12. When
our Savior Christ had told his Disciples it was given to them (q. d. it is the
peculiar special work of the Spirit of Grace in your hearts) to know the
mysteries of the Kingdom, but to them it is not given; he ads the reason and
proof in the next verse; for to him that has, he that in sincerity entertains
the Gospel shall have a further communication of the Truth, and sweetness of the
Gospel to his soul; but whosoever has not, whosoever entertains not the Gospel
in truth and uprightness, from him shall be taken away the Gospel, which by a
seeming profession of fals-hearted, lazy entertainment he would seem to have,
but never had in sincerity; the like connection is found, Mark 4. 24, 25. Take
heed what you hear, and unto you that hear, i. e. that do take heed what you
hear, more shall be given; for to him that has, shall be given; but (...) that
has not, i. e. that does not take heed what he hears, and so receives not the
Word in sincerity, from him shall be taken even that he has.

But if the saving work of the Word, does not depend Object.
upon my endeavor, why should I endeavor any further, any longer, or attend the
use of the means, or practice answerable thereunto?

Thou thy self, and al thy services being in a natural Answ. 1.
estate, are as a menstruous cloth, both in themselves, and in the sight of
Gods pure eyes, unanswerable to Gods mind, and the Rule of the Law, and
therefore cannot save you; yet thy sinful neglects, impudent and scornful
contempt of the way and means of Grace, will undoubtedly damn thee: This is
condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men love darkness more
than light, John, 3. 17. The Scribes and Pharisees despised the Counsel of God
against themselves, Luke, 7. 30.

The Law and Command was given to Adam in innocence, and to thee in him, to
Husband all advantages, and to lay out thy self in all thy sufficiencies to
advance Gods Name, and to do his will; to love him, and serve him with all thy
mind, and with all thy might; (...), 22. 37. How ever thou be changed, yet
the Law is not changed; however thy ability is not the same, by reason of (...)
wound thou have taken by original corruption, yet thy Duty is the same to this
day. Gods will is done in Heaven, and should be done in Earth. The Debtor that
borrows the money, and stands bound to the Creditor to answer the Debt, though
his state alter, and he be impoverished, and made unable to pay, yet his Bond
for payment continues in full force against him, and he will be constrained to
make it good.

Though all that thou can do, can neither prepare yet the means through
Divine Institution are mighty; God by them can work effectually, and if it seem
good to 'his good pleasure, he will; wait upon him only for that good thou
want, from whom only it can be received. As the Leapers in the time of the
Famine resolved to try what might be done by others for their safety, who could
do nothing for themselves. That is Gods way and means; try what God will do, in
whose pleasure it is to give, or deny. I might ad what Divines speak, and
seasonable (...) to the Point in hand. While thou art endeavoring as thou
can, it lessens thy sin, and prevents further plagues, unto which thou will
be subject, through Gods just Judgment, and thine own just deserving. Abab's
(...) humiliation, prevented the (...) plague, though it did not free him from
the eternal, 1 Kings, 21. 29. See thou (...) Ahab humbles himself, I will not
bring the evil in his days.

A Patient that has a Wolf in her Breast, and an (...) Gout, knows neither can
be recovered, yet both may be eased by use of Physic, and moderate Diet; and
therefore he intends both. Cast away the evil of your works, but keep your
works still; keep some Rules if thou can not keep all: better save one side
of thy (...) good, than both naught. If thou can not avoid al sin, avoid as
much as thou can.

Is it then beyond the power, and any possibility of Object.
man to attain Grace?

Yes. It Is not in man to direct his own way, Jer. 10. Answ.
23. It Is beyond the power of a dead man to restore himself to life. And our
Savior is express and peremptory in giving Sentence in this case and his
determination is conclusive, Matthew. 19. 26. when he said, it is as easy for a
Chamel to go through the eye of a needle, as for a rich man to be saved: The
Disciples ask Who then can be saved? He returns this definitive Answer, With
man it is impossible, but with God all things are possible. Look we at the
power and performances of man, there is no sufficiency (...) possibility: for
of our selves we are not able to think a good thought, 2 Cor. 3. 5. But if we
look at the Almighty Power of God, there is nothing hard to him, who has
Hardness at Command.

But is any man tied to impossibilities, and can any Object.
be punished because he (...) not (...) that which is impossible to him?

Impossibilities are of two sorts, 1. Some are absolute Answ.
that exceed the compass of our being, or all that ability we ever received. 2.
Impossibilities by supposition, which though the things be possible, yea; easy
in their Nature, and with reference to their first order, and institution; yet
by reason of some inconveniences, hindrances, weaknesses which fall in beside,
and cross to the course and constitution of things as they were at first; that
which formerly might easily have been compassed, there is in ordinary course no
possibility to attain unto it. And to such (...), a man may be justly tied, and
failing in his performances, may justly be punished by the Law of Nature,
Nations, right Reason, and the righteous Rule of God. The (...) has borrowed
so much money, which he may improve, and is bound to repay at such a day
appointed; if he through his prodigality and riot, shall vainly mis-spend, not
only the Sum he borrowed, but his stock, a fair estate unto which he was born,
so that it is now impossible to him, thus impoverished to satisfy. May not the
Creditor according to all the Rules of Right and Reason require his Money, and
in the default of payment, punish or imprison? No Nation ever questioned it. It
was not only possible for Adam, but easy to love God above all; if he through
his fall, has brought impossibility of payment upon himself, the Lord may in
Justice require it, and punish him for it. And certain it is, God justly may
and does deny Reprobates Grace; not only because they do not what they may, but
also because they do that which through the corruption of their own hearts they
cannot avoid: As namely because of the enmity of the wisdom of the flesh, they
are not, nor cannot be subject to the Law, and (...) Will of God, Romans 8. 7.

That for which God condemns the wicked, for that he denies them Grace and
Glory: For Condemnation implies both, and cannot admit either. But they are
condemned, not only because they do not so much, but because they did such and
such Duties to false ends: I say, 58. 3, 4, 5, 6.
not because they did not fast and pray, but because they did both to a wrong
end, to serve themselves and lusts, and not to serve God: and yet they could
not aim at Gods Glory as their last end. If for the not doing of such Duties
they should and might do, they only want (...), then if they had done such and
such according to their power (as they could) and improvement of their
abilities, then they had received Grace undoubtedly, which has been fully
confuted by the former Arguments. To issue this Point, that we may fence our
selves against so dangerous a conceit, let us take in, and store our hearts
with some saving Truths, as a Sovereign Antidote against such fals-hoods: and
herein I shall not only speak mine own Judgment, but the Judgment of all my
fellow Brethren, as I have just cause, and good ground to believe, that so you
may receive them (...) Truths under the Testimony of many Witnesses.

Ballast therefore thy heart with the Conclusions following:

All men are by Nature, dead in sins and trespasses.

A dead man can not prepare himself for life, much

The Lord in the Work of Conversion, does not only

In this work of God, the Sinner at first is merely

That men may (...) this from God, every man is

When any man has improved his abilities to attend for it is not in him that
(...) andruns, but in God that shows mercy, Romans 9. 16.

COMFORT. Here is ground of incomparable Use, 2.
Encouragement, and in truth, of inconceivable Refreshing to hold up the heads
and hearts of the most wretched sinners in the most forlorn condition, able to
shore and prop up the soul with some possibility of good, that it sink not
down, and be swallowed up with desperate discouragement. I am almost afraid to
cast such Mat. 7.
Pearls before Swine: And when I do but think or suspect and turn this Grace of
God into wantonness; if it do Jude, 4.
not depend upon my doing, I will do nothing, let God do al. I am forced almost
to bite in my words, and my heart almost misgives me, as loath to cast away such
compassions of the Lord upon such hellish Varlets, who out of the venom of
their Spirits would turn these choice Preservatives into Poison. Yet because it
is like a piece of board left after the wrack when the Ship is broken as the
last means of relief; as a cord of compassion let fall amongst a company of
poor perishing Creatures, ready to be overwhelmed with the floods of iniquity,
and who knows but some may catch it at the last cast, before they go hence, and
be seen no more. Let me therefore bequeath this Encouragement to you as my last
Will, even the words of a dying man, before you and I appear before the
dreadful presence of the Lord. Know then, you are yet in the Land of the
Living, and bless God you are so; and know, because it is the will and pleasure
of God to do good to some of the worst of men as he sees (...), therefore there
is yet hope while there is life; some little peep-hole of hope, like a pins
head, a possibility there is you may receive good. You see here how he prevails
with the spirits of (...) most perverse, they have their hearts (...), though
it be (...) the hair (...) heart and all, (...) when they (...) and wounded the
godly (...) (...) (...) poor Disciples. (...) your hearts echo then from every
corner of the Assembly, Pierce me, me (...); Pardon me, me also; Humble me, me
also; (...) thy abundant goodness and good pleasure. If the (...) be (...) so
dangerous, and in appearance (...); (...) the disease be (...) so deadly, and
in the apprehensions of al, past help, If the Physician and (...) be known to
have cured and helped in such cases, and that he yet lives; the patient will yet
support himself with such inferences, why may not my sore be cured, my disease
healed, so the Lord lives who has done as much for forlorn sinners and why not
for me, poor wretched creature, say so, thou say (...).

This is the scope of Gods counsel and his very purpose why he leaves such
patterns of the freeness of his compassions, that yet forlorn creatures might
look to him, from the depth of their most desperate misery. Let not the Lord
fayl of his intendment, nor you of your comfort 1 Timothy 1. 16. I was a Blasphemer
a Persecuter and injurious howbeit for this cause I obtained mercy that in me
(...) Christ Jesus might show forth all longsuffering for a pattern to them who
should hereafter believe on him to life everlasting. That they might hope still
for Good as he received it. and know they may be made partakers of it upon the
same terms that he was, set the pattern of this compassion (...) your eyes, and
see yet a possibility of relief. We shall sever a little the particulars that
each man may suit his own condition with that most (...) him, here is that
which answers to every necessity and complaint.

One complains his wants are so many, he cannot (...) how ever they should be
supplied, another complains his spirit so perverse, he knows not how it can be
subdued, a third his rebellions so open, so gross against the Almighty and all the means of life, its (...) that ever the Lord should pass by such hellish
provocations I (...) al your complaints are just and weighty, your condition
very dangerous. And let me tell you did your relief and help depend upon your
preparations and (...) or (...), its certain your hearts and (...) and hopes
would utterly fail and give up the Ghost. Here is the anchor of your hopes that
where in your help lies is here, and leave not this anchorhold the Lord can do
good and will, against al indispositions and oppositions of spirit, and
carriages to the contrary, as he sees fit. And therefore thou may lift up
thy head and say then it may be to me yea to thee never so weak, to the
perverse and rebellious. Attend what the Lord says take his word and take it
with thee.

Thou see and confessest thy person baser than the earth Object.
that bears thee, thy mind full of blindness, stupidity, sottish mind of mine.

True thou have been taught by men, and man Answ.
and means have happily done their best, and truly they are nothing, and thou
art nothing, and all that they and thou can do is nothing, yea but they shall
all John, 6.
be taught of God, says the text. Christ now 45.
in heaven did more by the Ministry of Peter, than in his bodily presence he
did, nay (go further than that) then his bodily presence could do, though he
spoke as never man spak. No matter how dull thou art if God will teach thee, how
weak if God will strengthen thee. Be thy wants what they will be or can be, the
all-sufficient God wants neither wisdom nor power nor mercy to do what thou
can need, and he will, for thy good. And his power pitcheth his tent, and
takes pleasure to show it self in weakness. Thou art foolish, God chooses the
foolish things of the world to confound the wise. 1. Cor. 1. 26. 27. Thou art
not any thing thou should be, God delights to call things that are not as
though they were, and therefore may call and choos thee also. They are not only
dry but dead bones which the Lord makes to live Ezekiel. 37. 2. can these dead
bones live? they are not only miscarrying but barren wombs which the Lord
makes to bear, and be fruitful. Not only when things are under hope but when
there is nothing in present appearance or expectation then God can do it. Romans
4. 24. when it is not only beyond thy power and ability God can support thee,
and strengthen thee, teach and quicken thee when it is beyond not thy
apprehension, but thy very thought and hope; he has done so, (...) do so, he
lives still, and can do so to thee also.

True my weaknesses are many but that's not al, nor Obj. 2.
yet the worst, the way wardness and perverseness of mine own heart ads the
greatest weight unto my misery and wretchedness not only destitute of any
spiritual good, but not willing to be made better, my brow as brass and my neck
like an iron and sinew, as the Lord complaynes, Isa. 48. 4. My heart harder
than the nether millstone Job. 41. 28. If life and Salvation were laid before me
and that I might have heaven and grace for taking or entertainment of it, yet I
would neither have word, nor Christ nor heaven it self unless I might have my
will in heaven, such is the invincible stiffness and desperate perverseness of my
spirit; unless I may have what I will when it comes upon the narrow, God must
not have his glory, nor service nor subjection nor alleagiance nor duty in the
least (...) discharged. I must burn, for I can neither break nor yield: nor
mercies persuade me, nor judgments awe me, I can receive no good, nay I can see
no reason why God should do any good to me that would not have it.

Here is the dead lift, and the wonder of al wonders, Answ.
the overpowring of the sovereignty of a stubborn selfwilly heart, (...) the
throne where Satan dwells; which (...) the doctrine of free will to be a
doctrine of Devils and that which drives the soul to everlasting
discouragement, pretend what such deceivers can to the contrary.

But the former doctrine affords support, and that which will bear up thy heart
even in this particular also thy Salvation depends not upon thine own will, for
then neither thou nor any flesh should be saved. But God shows mercy to whom
he will show mercy, Romans 9. 19. As nothing can deserve his mercy so nothing can
resist his good pleasure, when he will show it, he will make thee find it and
others see it. James, 1. 18. of his own good will begot he us by the word of
truth; It Is not according to the will of Satan, for then no man should be saved,
its not according to the will of man fallen, for then no man could be saved. But
he dispenses the work of his grace according to his own will And his counsel
shall stand, and he will do what he will. Isai. 46. 11. let the will of men and
Devils oppose it to the utmost of their power. Quiet thou thy heart, I cannot
do any thing that might purchase, not yet in truth would I have grace if God
would give it, only it is with God to do good to this miserable soul of mine as
he will, who does what he will in heaven and in earth, his will be done and
blessed be his holy name for ever and ever: and there stay thy self. It was the
expression of a man in heavy perplexity of Conscience finding the crosness of
his will to snarl at the Lords dispensation, his heart sunk within him, with
unsupportable horror, that he had (...) the sin against the Holy Ghost; and
with many prayers and tears he sought to heaven to bring his heart to an under
subjection to the good pleasure of the Lord, but the Lord left him to his own
perverseness, nothing he could do, could prevail with his own spirit. and
proffessed against that cursed cavil of the Arminians, that reproach of the
doctrine of Gods free grace which leads to despayr and discouragement, openly
acknowledging that if his own salvation depended upon his own will, he should
perish irrecoverably: but that only held his heart in some hope that his
happiness was in Gods hand, and that it merely depended upon the will of the
Lord, to give him a heart to fear and serve him or else his heart would fayl.
And it was a savory speech of a gracious woman that had a great deal of Do with
her own heart, when she could not find her heart to come off so willingly to
give way as she ought to what her judgment allowed, she besought the Lord to
give her such a disposition of heart whether she would or no.

Thou yet replyest, that which ads to the hainousness Obj. 3.
of my evil is this, these loathsome distempers have not been harbored in mine
own breast only, confined in mine own bosom, which yet had been too much, but
they have broken out into the most sierce and professed rebellion and that in
the highest degree. I have been a professed opposer of the gospel and the power
thereof, an open Rabshekah, a Ringleader and Encourager, to such that would
revile and reproach the righteous and good ways of Gods grace, a jearing
Ishmaelite, of such as with (...) of Conscience had care to walk therein, and
have resolved and attempted also even with an impudent face and a brazen
forehead to outbrave the authority of the truth, and made it matter of scorn to
drop and give in to the most dreadful threatenings, that could be denounced out
of the word, I have trampled all the entreaties of the Lord and tender offers of
mercy under feet, that when I have called over my course, and viewed my
carriage in cold blood I have wondered that the Lord has not made me a
spectacle of his displeasure, before I departed out of the place, that the very
earth did not open and swallow me quick as Corah (...) and Abiram. So that God
cannot be God unless he do avenge himself and pluck the praise of his justice
(...) the heart blood of such a wretch, nay he should be accessory to the
dishonor of his own name if he should show mercy to such who openly, impudently
in a hellish haughtiness of heart have trampled his mercy under their feet.

True flesh and blood could not do it, nay the heart (...) (...).
man cannot think it how this should be, did we measure Gods compassions
according to our narrowscantling, but Gods thoughts are not ours nor his ways
ours, so far as the heavens are above the earth, so great is his mercy unto
them that fear him. Isai. 55. Psalm. 103. 11. infinitely above and beyond our
own desires and thoughts, our imaginations and expectations; They are I confess
amazing expressions of miraculous compassions of the Lord, yet such they are as
he is pleased to manifest to sinful dust and ashes. He can tell how to have the
honor of his justice and to save thy soul, thou sinful rebel. Nay he can tell
how best to provide most for his own glory, when he pardons most sins: I
beseech thee pardon my sins for they are many Psalm. 25. 11. He lets the power
of darkness proceed to its full strength, that the power of his exceeding mercy
might show it self in delivering from the nethermost hell. He gives sin
advantage that it might do its worst, and reign unto death, that so his grace
might reign over sin and death unto eternal life. According to the sovereignty
of his will whereby he subdues al things to himself Ephesians. 3. last and here thou
may yet feel firm bottom to bear up thy fainting heart from sinking down
into everlasting discouragement.

Thus you see the compass of this encouragement which issues from Gods free
grace. But least some proud flesh should arise by this healing preservative if
it should heal too fast to keep thee under this encouragement and yet to keep
thee from presumption take these Cautions.

It Is possible God may do thee good, notwithstanding Caut. 1.
all indispositions and oppositions. But know (...) for certain he never will
do it but in his own way. If he save thee he will humble thee, if he pardon that
guilty soul and Conscience of thine, he will pierce both to the quick; there is
not a possibility he should save thy soul (...) thy sin also, set it down for
an undeniable conclusion I cannot have my stubborn and rebellious heart and
have any hope that ever I shall have either Grace or Mercy. If thou will sin
that mercy may abound (as the Apostle brings in the sons of Belial, speaking,
Romans 6. 1.) thou may have thy sin, but upon these terms thou shall never
have mercy. Either expect that God should take away thy sin, or else never
expect he should prevent thy ruin.

When the Lord lets in some light to discover the (...) fear, fear, lest thou
should make an escape from under the hand of the Lord, and fall back again
to the old base course; it is a dreadful suspicion of Gods direful displeasure,
lest either the Lord will cease to do thee any further good; or give thee up to
those hellish departures, that thou should make thy self everlastingly
incapable of mercy.

1. It Is a sore suspicion that the Lord purposes to leave striving, and to
meddle with thee no more, when the Lord suffers thee to wind away from under
the power of the means which formerly thou were subject to. It Is Gods usual
manner to make such unexcusable, and never make them good, that they might go
self-condemned, and so go to Hell. It Is that of the Prophet (...) which he
makes a Symptom of the outcast condition of the Jews that they were dross,
Jer. (...). 30. Reprobate Silver shall men call them, because the Lord has
rejected them: How proves he that? Verse 29. The Bellows are burnt, the Lead is
consumed in the fire, the Founder melts in vain, for the wicked are not
plucked away. To this purpose is that of our Savior, when he had long striven
with the rebellious Jews, clocked to them as a Hen to her Chickens, and would
have gathered them under the wing of his saving Providence, by the preaching of
the Gospel and ye nothing would prevayl, they would drive Christ out of their
sight, and he smites them with a plague answerable, Math 23. 2 last. ver. ye
shall see me no more, until ye shall say blessed is he that comes in the name of
the Lord. And this his word has taken hold upon them unto (...) day, the poor
forlorn Jews have not had a sight of Christ this sixteen hundred years,
scriptures they have, prophecyes, promises, yea they have the Gospel while they
(...) the Gospel, for so the Apostle Gal. 3. The Gospel was preached to
Abriaham saying in thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed, they
see all this but the vayl is over their eyes, they see no Christ in promises,
ordinances and therefore no salvation, leaving secret things to God. So it
befalls many falshearted Apostates when God has had them in the fire and they
come out too hastily from horror and humiliations, before half melted, Its a
great adventure they never come to Christ, but wanse away in a powerless kind
of formality and content (...) with the enjoyment of some outward privileges
and ordinances and names of profession, they have the scriptures and ordinances
but never see a Christ, in any of them, nor will the Lord look upon them, nor
once speak to them, when he passes by, but let them live and perish as
heartless, Christless men. Thus our savior dealt with his people in former
times when he had sent the spies into the Land of Canaan, Heb. 3. 18. Numb. 14.
23. and they returned convinced by their own experience of the goodness of the
land as flowing with milk and honey, and out of a slothful cowardice because
there were iron Charrets and walled cities, and mighty Giants, they withdrew
the duty and Gods charge, and disheartened also the people, the text says the
Lord swear in his wrath they should not enter into his rest. When God swears,
it shows his purpose is unchangable and his execution will not be altered.
Canaan is a type of the Kingdom of grace and so of Glory when the Lord let in
some evidence of the excellency thereof and the heart cannot but acknowledge it,
(...) leaves off rather than it will take the pains to grapple with those
Giant-like corruptions, that iron and (...) hardness of heart, why should
not thou fear least God should swear thou shall never enter into his rest, thou
should never find the power of the death of Jesus in killing the body of
death, so that thou should cease from thine own works, and from the sinful
distempers of thy corrupt heart.

Fear again, lest the Lord give thee up to thy old distempers, Secondly.
that thou should make thy self everlastingly incapable of any good, and sin
that unpardonable sin against the holy Ghost. When thou go against those
Convictions of thy Conscience, those tastes of approbation which sometimes thy
heart took in the good Word and ways of God; for by this backsliding thou art
in the ready way to run upon that rock. This was that which helped Paul the
possibility of mercy, 1 Timothy 1. 14. But I obtained mercy, because I did it
ignorantly, it was his zeal that he persecuted the Church, i. e. his blind
zeal; but should he have done so against the Dictates of his Conscience, and
the evidence of Truth in his own heart, he could hardly have seen a way for
mercy. So the Apostle to the Hebrews, 6. 8. The Earth that often drinks in
the rain, and yet brings forth thorns and (...) is nigh, is nigh unto cursing,
whose end is to be burned. The rain is the Word, heard, understood, embraced,
acknowledged, and yet have their malicious venomous conspiracies against the
Gospel of God, and Saints of Christ, and that in (...) like thorns under the
leaves, like briars under pretense of moderation and humility, can scratch
bitterly, it is a heavy suspicion their end will be burning. Take heed thou
content not thy self in thy rebellious condition; for upon this supposition
that thou will have this, thou put thy self out of any possibility of good,
go against Gods Order, Course, and Covenant, and the whole Work of
Redemption, Christ comes to bless his by turning them away from their sins,
Acts, 3. last; and therefore when the Lord comes to hale thee out of thy sins,
take heed thou do not go from under Gods strivings, lest he strive with thee
no more.

EXHORTATION. We have hence special motives Use 3.
to quicken the desires, and provoke the endeavors of the most carnal minded
men in the world, to attend with all the care and diligence they may upon the
means of Grace.

But you will tell us, It is not in our Preparations, Object.
Performances, and Improvements, that our Spiritual good depends, there is
nothing we can do can procure it, it depends wholly upon the good pleasure of
the Lord; Why then should we trouble our selves to endeavor any thing?

I Answer, The Inference is the quite contrary way: Answ.
All is in God and his good pleasure, attend therefore upon him in his own
means, that thou may receive al from him. If a man should reason thus: I can
do nothing for my self, therefore I will take a course that no man shall do any
thing for me; it were not a weakness, but a kind of madness; but rather in
common sense a man would be provoked to press his own heart thus; I can do
nothing of my self, therefore I must attend upon God in those means which he
uses to do for all those he uses to do good unto. So the Disciples to our
Savior when he would arm them against his departure, Will ye also go away?
John, 6. 68. They answer, Lord, whither should we go? thou only have the words
of eternal life. Christ only can humble and convert, Christ only has peace and
pardon, therefore only go to him. We are so wise for our bodies, where one is
most like to speed, every man is most willing to go, especially considering as
nothing can purchase his favor, (...) nothing can (...) the expression of his
good pleasure when he will, go therefore what ever thy condition is. When thou
art at the weakest, here is supply: As he said, Why Genesis 42. 1, 2.
stand you gazing, fainting, and famishing? get ye into Egypt for Corn, that we
may live, and not die: though thou live in the height of the perverseness of
thy heart, in the outrage of thy rebellion, though thou carriest a scornful
contemptuous spirit with thee, yet go; who knows when is Gods time, what he may
do? bring your own souls, your rebellious Servants, and disobedient Children,
fall down at the foot of Christ in his Ordinances, and say, Here are a company
of Hellish, Traitrous hearts, which bring proud, stubborn, scornful, rebellious
distempers, like so many bloody weapons, even to wound thy good Majesty withal;
Oh pluck these weapons out of our hands, these treasons out of our hearts, that
would pluck us to thee, and so to destruction. As we cannot deserve any thing,
so our wretchedness cannot hinder thy Work.

And because thou know not the season of mercy, Tim. 2. 25. Proving if at
any time God will give thee Repentance.

Attend upon him in all Ordinances; because it is in Sow thy Seed in the
morning, and in the evening, because thou know not which may prosper, this
or that, Eccles. 11. 6. Thou know not whether Prayer, or Meditation, or
Reading will prosper, and which of these, or any other Ordinance God will bless
for the saving good of thy soul.

When thou find the Lord stirring, moving, enabling, and working in thee,
move thou, and work thou also: As the Mariner when he finds the gale coming
any way, he tacks about (...) way to take the advantage. God was tampering with
the heart of Agrippa, it was at a ha, now a ha, Thou have almost persuaded me
to become a Christian, says he to Paul, Acts, 26. 28. Ah what a pity was it he
should fall back again.

It Is matter os wonderment able to swallow up the: Use 4.
heart of a sinner with the everlasting admiration of this (...), unmatchable
kindness of the Lord. Micah, 7. 18. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardonest
iniquity, and passest by the transgression of the remnant of his Heritage: He
retains not his anger for ever, because he (...) in mercy; he will turn
again, he will have compassion upon us; he will subdue our iniquities, and thou will cast all their sins into the depths of the Sea. You that have tasted how
good the Lord is, and found this Truth made good in your own hearts by your own
experience; as Paul was wont to recount his course, I was a persecuter,
blasphemous and, 1 Timothy 1 15, 16.
injurious, but I obtained mercy. I doubt not but many of you may say, if ever
there was a Fiend in Hell, or a Rebel upon Earth, I was one; an opposer of the
Gospel, a despiser of the means of Grace, a hater of the holy ways of the
Lord, and his servants that walk therein: yet then God did me good, when I
desired and (...) my own hurt. Get ye homeye blessed Saints, and in the secret
of your Closets call Heaven and Earth together, and leave these compassions upon
Record. Say, the time was this carnal mind of mine plotted my wretched (...),
and mine own ruin, but then the Lord prevented both; I opposed (...)
entreaties, and he yet pursued me, and would take no (...); he called after me,
wept over me, Turn ye, turn Ezekiel. 33. 11.
ye, why will you die? I provoked him, he pitied me; I resisted him, he
embraced me; I said I would have none of him nor his Grace, he said he would
have no denial; I resolved to walk on in the frowardness of mine own (...), and
to perish in the despite of al means, and he would and did show me mercy in
the despite of the pride and rebellion of this heart, or else I had never seen
this day, nor never had hope to see his face in glory. Be astonished and
confounded at this, O ye Devils, and come down ye blessed Angels from Heaven,
and magnify this mercy. Leave this in your last will and testament to your
little ones, O ye Fathers; leave this as a pattern of compassions to all
ensuing Ages, that they may love this God, and fear this God, etc.

They were pierced in their hearts.

The persons have been considered in those respects which were material and
suitable to the aim of the Text: We are now come to enquire of the Work it
self, that is termed here piercing. 2. The place or subject in which this was,
it was in their hearts. Pierced] The word in the Original is a compound, and
implies more than bare pricking; nor have we any English word fit to express
it. A shivering and pulling all asunder; Cyprian transpunctio.
for it is so to prick as to pierce and enter, dig on every side, to pierce not
overly, but quite through the soul, as some of the Ancients render it. It Is
found only in this place in the new Testament, though the Seventy, Interpreters
used it often in the Old, in the (...) of several words in several places,
according to the intendment thereof. But that is remarkable, that the Hebrew
Root which they sometimes expressed by the word in this place, it signifies such
a kind of piercing as when the body of a traveling woman is wounded with the
sorrow of Childbirth, when the Child is severed from the Womb, and brought
into the world. And it usually implies as here, a work of sound sorrow laid
upon the soul, whereby sin and the soul come to be parted each from other. And
this resemblance and similitude between this Spiritual Sorrow and piercing;
stands in three Particulars.

1. Piercing and digging, is ever grievous and tedious to the part that feels
it. 2. There is a loosning and parting of those things which were united and
closed before, there is dissolutio continui, as the Physician speaks; the parts
that were firm and continued, become now to be parted and severed more or less
one from another. 3. By this severing and sundring the parts, there is a way
and a passage made, that corruption, or any other humor which was in the part
may be drawn out. So in sound sorrow, there be three things answerably.
The soul comes to be wounded and pained extremely

Hence the cursed union betwixt sin and the soul

Hence there is way made for the letting out of those Hos. 2. 8. when they had
sought their Lovers, and could not find them, followed them, and could not
overtake them, they begin to take up other thoughts, I will go to my first
Husband, for it was better with me then, than now.

Heart.] It properly signifies that chief part in a man's Body, wherein the
Fountain of the Vital Spirits lies; that which lives first (as they say) and
dies last; that is the Natural signification. But here it is Spiritually
understood, and it is put for the Will and Affections, which have their proper
place of abode there, and express their special Operations in a principal
manner, according as Objects are presented, and occasion offered: And thus it is
taken in this place (not to trouble you with other variety of apprehensions)
thus you shall find it frequently in the Scripture; The heart shall fear, Deuteronomy.
28. 67. Joy of heart, Isa. 65. 14. Sorrow of heart, Levit. 26. 16. etc. And out
of the heart comes murders and adulteries, Matthew. 15. 19. All which carry
undeniably the work of the Will and Affections, according as they put forth
several Operations as they meet with several Objects. So that this was not a
slight and overly ripling of the skin, but a piercing to the quick, reached
unto the very heart-root, that which cut asunder the Sovereignty of the choice
of the Will, and made that stand back, and go off from those loathsome
corruptions, which were as near as the soul to the soul; and they were all
pricked as one man in the one and the same manner in the heart; they were al
wounded, as though there had been but one heart in them all. Hence we shall
propound diverse Points, and pursue that which is the main.

Sins unrepented of, and continued in, make Doct.
way for piercing and perplexing terrors.

I say, unrepented, and continued in, make way for terror. They do not always
immediately let in Gall and Wormwood into the Soul, presently after the acting
of them; plagues are then in preparation, and only those over-bearing and
dreadful Judgments which the Lord is devising against the ungodly, are then in
the birth, and the Lord will not bring them forth until they be come to their
full growth, as the fittest time for the execution of his vengeance. It fares
with sinners, as it does sometimes, and for the most part with Malefactors; they
make an escape from the hand of Justice, and they please themselves in the
practice of their wickedness, and contenting their own lusts, until their
destruction surprise them so, as they cannot avoid it, nor bear it. Had you but
seen these scorners and despisers of our Savior formerly, when they run riot in
their outrage and opposition, carried all before them, as if they had the
world at will, Away with him, away with him; not Christ, but Barrabbas. You
would have conceived, nay, if thou had asked themselves, they would have
concluded, they had been beyond all gunshot, terrors and perplexities could
not have touched, much less seized upon them. Yet see them here, and see how
their condition is altered; they who scorned the Apostles, now come trembling
to them; they who cared not what they did before, now are at their wits ends
which way to turn themselves; and it is certain, the fire was then making, which
now scorched; the sins were then committed, which now sunk their hearts with
unsupportable horrors. There be pleasures of sin, but they are but Psalm. 97. 11.
for seasons, Heb. 11. 25. and those are but the Seed times of Sorrows and
Judgments. Joy is sown for the Righteous, and sometimes in deep sorrows; the
longer it is growing and ripening, the larger is the Harvest of Comforts. So
troubles and horrors, hellish and heartbreaking amazements, are sown for the
wicked, and that in their greatest delights; and the longer these are in
growing and ripening, their Harvest of Horrors of Conscience will be out of
measure dreadful. As the Prophet to those who carried al before them in their
sinful contrivement, Jer. 5. last, The Prophets prophecy falsely, the Priests
bear Rule by their means, and the People love to have it so; all well met: But
what will you do in the end thereof? They might have answered, We do what we
list: Yes, for the while; but what will be the end? So Job, 20. 12, 13, 14.
Though wickedness be sweet in his mouth, and though he hide it under his
tongue, though he spare it and forsake it not, yet his meat is turned in his
bowels it is the gal of aspes within him. Revel. 18. 7. how much she has
glorified her self and lived deliciously so much torment and sorrow give her.
James, 1. 12. When lust has conceived it brings forth death; when lust is
conceiving then terror is hatching.

The reason is in a word. The heart comes to be more Reas.
estranged from God the God of peace and comfort, and therefore terror and
astonishment is now in the mint and preparation for them. The heart grows more
hard as it grows more secure in the continuance of evil, so more unfit and
incapable either of mercy offered, or of the benefit and saving good of any
means that are provided by the Lord. And therefore the (...) is more dreadful
when it comes (...) to be discovered, and the plagues more unsufferable when
they come indeed to be executed upon them or threatened against them A rankling
sore is hardly cured, and with much heart smart when it is. Surfeit of long
continuance is recovered with much difficulty 1 Samuel 12. 19. that which they
would not acknowledge and reform before is now most dreadful, pray for us to the
Lord that we dye not for we have added to al our sins this evil of as king a
King. Genesis 42. 21. The (...) of Joseph when their cruel dealing came but into
their remembrance how did it cut their hearts? we are verily guilty concerning
our Brother, his blood is required at our hands.

Learn we therefore not to judge the condition of a sinner, Use.
or the content of a sinful course, according to the present delights which
they seem to take or the pleasing sweetness they pretend they sind, in the
ways of wickedness. With which they are so far deceived and their carnal and
deluded hearts are so far taken aside and ravished as it were, that they think
it, nay conclude it, there is neither heaven nor happiness to be compared
thereunto and such a sudden glitter dazles the eyes many times times of the
Lords dear ones, when they look upon the painted appearance of things, as at
the present push they come presented and beautified with the trappings of
pleasure and profit and ease, and honorable hearts contents Psalm. 73. 2. This
made Asaphs foot almost slip and turn aside from the righteous and good ways
of Gods grace, while he was deceived with the present pomp of the proceedings
of the wicked men. Yea he professed that not only he stumbled but many were
wholly taken aside with this delusion, Psalm. 73. 10. Many come hither i. e. side
with the society of the wicked because full cups of water are administered to
them and a confluence of outward and present comsorts are cast in upon them.
The cure he himself found when he went into the Sanctuary and also prescribes
it unto others; namely when he beheld the end of those men, verse. 17. and those
their ways what will be the end of cozening and reproching, lying and
dissembling, that is the way to judge aright of sinful proceedings, and the
certain way not to be deceived by them. Look not upon the rich man as he fares
deliciously every day, but look at him as he is frying and scorching in flames
and herein crying Oh Father Abraham, let Lazarus dip Luke, 16 19. 24.
but the tip of his finger to cool my scorching tongue, when he obtaynes not a
drop of water, whereas poor Lazarus is at a feast in Abraham's bosom. Look not
at Judas as plotting with the scribes and pharisees and prospering in his
purpose, as pleasing himself in his project and pocketting his thirty pieces.
This is but for a season but stay a while, and turn aside a little, and see how
he is forced to vomit out his morsel, and in hellish horror to roar out his
wretchedness, I have sinned in betraying Matthew. 27. 3.
innocent blood. and follow yet further and see his end, he ends his days and
his comforts together, his covetousness continued in so long before, prepared a
halter for his ruin. Look not upon Corab Dathan and Abiram, when they ruffle it
out in the pride of their hearts, and out-brave Moses, and the authority of his
place, ye take too much upon you, ye sons of (...) Number. 16. 31. 32. 33.
but see the Earth open and swallow him and his company of rebels and all the
people flying and crying least we perish also.

It is one (and not the least) part of the power of the redemption of our
Savior that he gave himself for us, that he might deliver us from this present
evil world. Gal. 1. 4. not because world only, or evil alone, but from the
presentness of it, to deliver and free our hearts and apprehensions, from the
two much attending and false conceiveings of those present appearances of these
false lying vanities; we cannot judge amiss if we look at the end of Godly men,
and a Godly life, not at the present inconveniences that are light and
momentary which do attend them. Psalm. 37. 37. Consider the upright and mark,
the end of that man is peace. Perplexed he may be but his end is, he will be
pardoned, full of doubts and distractions but his end is to be settled and
quieted for ever, you have heard of the patience of Job, and of the end that
the Lord made with him, judge that well, and you will not miss to judge aright,
James. 5. 11. see what end sin and a sinful course make and then you will not
pass sentence amiss.

It will be our greatest comfort and should be our greatest Use 2.
care to rise presently from our falls and recover our souls without delay, from
such failings with which we are many times overtaken. our first care should be
not to sin, our next care, not to continue in it if we be surprised therewith.
A green wound is easily and successefully cured in an ordinary course, when
your old rankled sores hardly admit of any recovery. When the member is
sprayned or out of joint, to delay or neglect to set it, and that with most
speed, its likely never to grow strong, (...) almost impossible it should be
made straight, deal so with thy heart in the work of seasonable and sound
repentance, for there is the like danger. better we judge our sin, than that we
should be judged yea condemned for them, better we begin with speed to see our
evils, and lie in the way to seek for mercy, than that our careless security
should make way and preparation to hasten piercing and overbearing plagues. It
were to be wished we should never be taken aside or plucked away with false
fears, to speak hastly and by unbeliof basely to deny the Lord Jesus, and his
righteousness, but if we have failed and that shamefully as Peter, go out
immediately, and weep with him bitterly for our base departures. Math. 26. last
the Lord bears not a fearless continuance in any distemper, if David bed it
securely in base lusts, the Lord will break his bones for it. David therefore
takes himself here, no sooner sees God withdrawing, but he seeks him with
instancy and importunity, Psalm. 30. 7. 8. 9. 10.

It Is a word of TERROR and astonishment to such who Use 3.
adventure to continue in their sinful distempers, because they never found so
much as a touch of any (...) in their souls for any of those distempers, they
have continued in. know such must assuredly, that sin is of the same poysonful
nature as ever, and the word as true, and God as just as ever; and therefore
their sins they have continued in have all this while made way for overbearing
perplexities, which they will certainly bring upon your souls; the less you have
felt therefore the more you may expect, and without doubt you shall find and
receive. There is wrath to come; tribulation and wrath and anguish will be and
must be upon the 1 These. 1. last. Romans 2. 9.
soul of every man that sins; if you had none as yet, there is the more behind;
when those noysom abominations that have so long nestled in thy bosom, and
there lies as it were in ambush, will march in upon thee like armed men, and
sink your (...) in everlasting discouragements; cozen not therefore your selves
with the present content you seem to find in your corruptions that you can
trample upon Christ his ordinances and Servants, go away with it, without any
trouble or control. See these poor creatures and consider their condition what
it was and now is, they stuck not to profess open rebellion against our Savior,
Away with him, crucify him, and they carried al before them, with a high hand
and so continued, from the Passover to Pentecost many weeks together, the
poison of their sins that pleased their spirits so much in the practice of them
now beginns to work trembling and astonishing confusion unto their souls the
pleasure of sin is but for a season, and when that is gone look for the like
gall and wormwood. As it is in the body while the impostume and gross humors
are gathering, the party finds no matter of grief, until at last when it comes
to a full growth and breaks suddenly, and proves present death that cannot be
prevented, and then all the filth and impostumate matter issues out of the ears
and mouth and each man can see it, when no man can help it. It is so with a
canckered Conscience and a corrupt heart who has hugged and harbored his
distempers with pleasure and content and so continued. Until the Lord break
open the (...) and then those hideous abominations let in the dreadful terrors
of the Almighty, which overwhelm the soul of a sinner with unsupportable
horrors; the Apostle thus concludes it (...). Gal. 6. 7. 8. be not deceived,
God is not mocked, as ye sow, so you must reap, if you sow to the flesh, of the
flesh you shall reap corruption it may be your ruin is growing but not ripe, the
harvest of horror is not yet come, but be not deceived God is not mocked you
shall reap and your crop will be confusion and perdition, the Lord himself has
so revealed it.

Deuter. 32. 35. in due time their foot shall slide. Stay but the time, yea he
determines it fully as that which he will not fayl to accomplish, Deutr. 29. 20.
21. (...) men bless themselves, and bear up their heads bravely against all the
peal of plagues that were rung in their ears, the Lord resolves upon it, his
anger shall smoke against that man to cut him off from the land of the living
etc.

Pierced.

As their sins made way for this terror, so the word set it on. hence,

The truth is terrible to a guilty Conscience Doct.
when it prevailingly takes place there.

It Is a hammer that breaks, a fire that scorcheth, an axe sharp and keen that
cutts and wounds the soul of a wicked, unrepentant sinner. Acts. 7. 54. When
they heard these things they were cut to the heart.

Because it is a witness to accuse, a judge to condemn, Reas.
an executioner to torment such poor creatures, as I might make al these good
in particulars, it is said Rev. 11. 10. That when the two witnesses were slain,
the inhabitants of the earth, solaced themselves and sent gifts one to another,
because those that tormented them that dwelt upon the earth were taken away.

Matter of trial, those who are careful hearers may Use.
without fayl discover their condition, by the word that is dispensed. Art thou
sick of the saving dispensations of the holy and righteous will and law of God,
thou sits and shakest under it as that which passes the doom and sentence upon
thee, which thou art not able to endure nor avoid, do not cozen thy self with
any vain conceivings of thy estate, or please and delude thy heart with the
mistaken apprehensions and approbations of other men, it is certain thy heart is
naught and condition also. If thou best sick of the truth, (...) not side with
it, nor receive approbation from it, when it comes in the strength and terror
of it. As we say of men that are sick at Sea, the cause is not in the tempest
but in the stomach, because there be corrupt and noysom humors there, it is
those that raise stir and trouble in the stomach and not the (...), when the
stomach is purged and clear, the passenger can sleep in the most tempestuous
Heb. 9. 14.
Seas, So it is where the heart is truly emptied and the Consoience purged from
dead works, the sharpest truths would find most welcome and entertainment.

But does not the truth carry terror with it and that (...).
even the best tremble at it?

It Is true they do so but with a double difference.

The word though it ever speaks against the corruptions Ans. 1.
of those that are sincere hearted, yet it ever (...) sentence on their (...)
both for the acceptance of their persons and the happiness of that condition
they are in through grace, and if it appear other to them, it is because their
judgments are darkened through temptations, misguided through some (...) (...)
Micah. 7 Are not my words good to them that walk uprightly. Isai. 3. 10. Say to
the (...) (...) shall go well with them. The Lord and his word says no (...)
(...) man ought to say any other, there is no condemnation to them that are in
Christ. Romans 8. 1. but it is otherwise with the wicked. The word not (...)
condemns their sins but their persons also. Because they are one with their
sins and incorporate into them, and carried with the power of them. Isai. 3.
12. Say to the wicked, woe unto them, for the reward of their evil works (...)
(...) (...) to them.

The Saints of God ever find (...) in the (...) and most keen threatenings, and
their hearts tremble at them because the (...) of God is there, (...) submit to
them and close with God in them, they take them as (...) to cure the (...) in
them, not (...) kill them, and therefore take (...) in them, and they will still
say; the word of the Lord is Good, and hence are desirous to hear al, to know
the worst, and the whole mind of God so Ely. 1 Samuel 3. 17. hide nothing from me,
that which wounds most deep and works most kindly he welcomes it with a glad
heart, because he knows his welfare is there. Whereas a falls (...) flies from
the terror of the truth, Math. 19. 22. He went a way sorrowful, they say to the
seers see not, and to the prophets, prophecy not right things but smooth
things. Isai. 30. 10. He is loath to hear what his heart does not like, and
willing to put by the power and darken the evidence of the truth, that appears
dreadful to him by reason of his sins.

Cme we now to the main Observation, wherein the pith of this spiritual truth
consists and that's in two things.

1. Gross and scandalous sinners God usually exercises with heavy breakings of
heart before he bring them effectually to himself. 2. Sorrow for sin when it is
rightly set on, pierces the heart of the sinner through, that is rightly
affected therewith.
To the First.

Gross and scandalous sinners God usually exercises Doct.
with heavy breakings of heart before he bring them effectually to himself.

These desperate wretches who had embrewed their hands in the blood of the Lord
Jesus, and now in an impudent manner set themselves, to out-brave the servants
of Christ, and his Word and Ordinances also: the Lord he handles them roughly,
suitable to their rebellious carriages toward him; they had pierced the Body
of our Savior, and exercised his soul with unsupportable sorrows; he pierced
their hearts, they openly and impudently professed their cruel and accursed
rage, not him, but (...); Cruc. fie him, crucify him. He forces them to
proclaim the loathsomness of this their way, in the view of the world: they
before the multitude, scorned the Apostles; he forces them now in the face of
the people, to reverence and ackn^owledg them as the dear Servants of God. The
Lord knows how to deal with men, answerable to their sinful dealings with him,
and the (...) of their hearts, and does thus with scandalous ones, and not only
those whose lewdness and wickedness lies open to the view of the world, but
with such also who are many times more retired, and carry it more cunningly and
closely from the eyes of men, if yet their evils be gross, in which they live
and lie; as such which oppose the light of Reason, the Dictates of Conscience,
the remainder of those common Principles which are left in the corrupt Nature
of men; as murder, theft, forgeries, adulteries, though molewarplike they carry
it never so secretly, dig deep to hide their counsel, and contrivement from God
and man, yet commonly God breaks open their Conscience, breaks in with dreadful
terror upon such, plucks those sweet morsels out of their maws, and constrains
them to vomit out those bosom abominations by open confession after one manner
or other, to some one or many. I say, it is Gods usual manner so to deal, with
such, which implies he may deal so with others, but usually so with these.

Not that he may not, nay sometimes deals not so with others, whom by the
strokes of his restraining Grace, he has preserved and kept untainted from
such loathsome abominations, and refined by a civil and comely fashion and
carriage.

If either he purpose to use them as choice Instruments in his (...), and
improve them in some special Service to set (...) and promote his own praise,
as men use to season their Timber more than ordinary, if they intend to use it
in some more than ordinary Service; and when they mind to raise the building
marvelous high, they commonly, according to a course of prudence, lay the
Foundation exceeding low.

Or if the Lord intends to manifest himself to the soul of a sinner with some
ravishing sweetness, with enlarged and amazed communications of the assurance
of his Love, Joys unspeakable and glorious: It Is ordinary with the Lord to
abase the heart exceedingly under the dreadful apprehensions of it is own
vileness, that it may be the more fitted to receive such special comforts, not
to surfeit with them by security and pride: Great Revelalations have great
Humiliations go before them; the Eb is very low before the Tide come with
greatest strength and height; otherwise the soul would never be able to bear
such over-bearing expressions of Gods Love, and communications of himself, but
would certainly abuse them. If the Keel of the Boat were little and narrow, a
large Sail would over-turn it, not convey it to the Haven. Great Assurances and
glorious Joys, are too great a Sail for a heart that is not widened with
enlarged contritions James. 5. 11.
and humiliations. God would make Job a pattern of Patience, to all
posterities, therefore he exercises Job. 1. 12.
him with all extremities in all kind of sharp and piercing sorrows, and heavy
desertions. Job. 2. 4


The Lord shakes the heart of Isaiah in the sense of his own unworthiness, Woe
is me (says he) I am undone, I am a man of polluted lips; before he would
reveal Isa. 6. 5.
unto him those hid Prophesies concerning the Dispensation of his displeasure
amongst the Nations, and those mysterious depths of the glad tidings of the
Gospel, which were kept secret from the beginning of the world. 2 Cor. 12.
Paul is buffeted with fierce assaults by the splinter in the flesh, that he
might not be too much lifted up by Revelations, that he might know he was not
yet in the third Heavens, but in the midst of a burry of distempers, and a
Hell of Devils. These are but some exempt cases, and that in some persons for
some special ends. But with gross and scandalous persons it is Gods usual way so
to deal, not that he is tied, or has tied himself to this manner of dealing
upon necessity, but that he has expressed it to be his good pleasure so to
dispense himself to such notorious rebels, as that way which best suits the
Counsel of his own will, and the attaining his own end, his glory, and their
best good; and if ever he make an exemption for causes best known to his own
blessed Majesty in bringing such unto himself that he deals tenderly with them
at the first, it will hardly ever be found, but they taste most (...) (...)
afterward, when happily they least (...) them, and yet are made better able to
bear them. When the Delivery has been speedy, the after-throws have been many
and hazardful many times: If such men get somewhat an easy bargain at first,
there be hard penny-worths, heavy after-claps they meet withal beyond their
expectation, and it commonly never fails. The Rule is general the Prophet
delivers touching Gods Dispensation, and I know not but it may hold here, Psalm.
18. 27. With the froward thou will deal frowardly, the place is hard for the
apprehension of it in the fair and full sense of it. The words that go before
will give in some light; With the bountiful thou will show thy self bountiful;
with the perfect thou will be perfect; with the pure, thou will show thy self
pure; and with (...) perverse or froward, thou (...) show thy self froward;
thou will make thy self deal frowardly. To speak to the pinch of the Point but
in two words. I conceive (...) to be the meaning (...) the place, and the mind
of God in it. He that walks with God in the exercise of the Rule in a (...)
manner, God (...) meet with him in it, and give him the (...) and comfort that
follows and flows from it: he that conscienciously keeps the Rule, shall be more
fitted for to keep it, and to share in the blessing and (...) of it: he that
deals bountifully in virtue of the Rule, he shall be more apt to that Duty, and
shall find bountiful dealings from the hands of others, God and men: he that is
upright, thorough, and simple in Spirit and practice, he shall be more exact
every way, and find peace and praise as the fruit of that: he that is pure,
that is, not only contents himself to be simple and sincere hearted in his whole
course, but is daily purging himself, and clensing his own heart, (...)
severing himself from such taints and remainders of distempers that appear, and
(...) to clear up the Rule in the beauty and excellency thereof to himself,
that he may see more of it, submit more freely and fully to it; the Lord will
make himself pure to him. So the word. God will let in pure instructions, that
no darkness or dimness may stumble him, or cause him to mistake; pure evidence
of pardon, and acceptance, no guilt may unsettle him; pure comforts and peace
that no doubts or fears may discourage him; pure holiness and power of (...),
that no strength of corruption may blur the Image of God in him, or darken the
Evidence of the Work of Grace received. But (...) a man will be froward, crook
the Rule, go cross to the Command, and will walk in the vanity of his own (...),
and stubbornness of his own Spirit, oppose the power of the Truth, not willing
to look upon, or abide to hear of the purity of it. God will show himself
froward toward such a one, he will (...) you, and cross you in your whole
course, and in all your comforts; you crook and wind away from the Rule to
content your sins, God by his Righteous Law, by virtue of the provoking power
thereof, will deliver you up to the power of your sins, and to all the terros, and
plagues, and expressions of his (...), that attend thereupon: and in the days
of thy distress, when nothing will help thee but the holy Word of God, God will
then deal with you, and follow you with the (...) of your own (...), thou
would not see the holiness and purity of Gods Precepts, thou (...) have a
mind not able to attend, or receive, or remember any thing that may be for thy
direction, support, or comfort, but only live upon thine own guilt, and the
terrors that attend thereupon, and the perverseness of thine own heart will be
thine own plague: In your froward pangs you flinch and fling, care not what you
say or do; God can be as (...) as you, nor hear prayers, nor regard your
complaints, nor pity your necessities, but pursue you with his plagues, let fly
on every hand the fierceness of his displeasure; God can and will hamper thee if
thou had a heart as sierce as a (...) of Hell, make thee weary of thy part,
be as perverse as thou will or can be. And therefore the word in the place is
marvelous pregnant, it signifies to contend with another, as one that wrastles
will do, wreath and (...), and turn his body every way, that he may meet with
his adversary with whom he is to grapple. So the Lord will meet with thee at
every turn; the greater thy opposition has been against him, the greater
expression of his displeasure shall thou be sure to (...), and that in the most
dreadful manner. The sins of Manasseh were high handed, and hellish
abominations, mighty provocations, out of measure sinful. 2 Chronicles. 33. 11.
Therefore God abased him mightily, fettered, and (...), and humbled him
mightily, and made him cry mightily before he could (...) audience and
acceptance with him: the cruel and harsh carriage of the Jailer, Acts, 16.
exceeded his Commission, and so the bounds of common Humanity, to deal worse
with the distressed than either their Fact deserved, or the Law permitted, or
Authority allowed him in that behalf, a (...) transported with deadly
indignation against the ways of God and his People, and as it appears by the
circumstances of the story, a man that pleased (...) in such unreasonable
practices; the Lord therefore handles him answerably to the harshness of his
spirit, makes the Earth quake and the Prison totter, the bolts break, and the
door fly open, and at last his heart begins to shake and die within him,
notwithstanding the fierceness of his Spirit. So Paul, Acts, 9. he comes
trembling to crave the Counsel of those whose presence formerly he loathed.

There is a Threefold Ground; from whence the Reasons of this Point may be
fetched; which will Evidence, That this manner of proceeding best suits with
the insinite Wisdom of God, look we at God, at others, at the sinner himself,
with whom the Lord is now trading.

The Holiness of Gods Nature, and exactness of his Reas. 1.
Truth, not only commends, but even seems with some kind of comely necessity,
to call for such a manner of Dispensation. The Lord styles himself, the holy
One of Israel, a God of purer eyes than can endure to behold iniquity, not able
to pass by sin in the least appearance of it; and therefore leaves so strict a
charge, beware lest there be an evil thought in thy heart, and abstain from all
appearance of evil, 1 These. 5. When the Lord is to convince the sinner of sin,
to express his mind and displeasure against him, because of those his evils, so
scandalous and detestable to all that have but the least spark of saving
knowledge and Grace; yea loathsome to the very light of Conscience in corrupt
Nature. Should the Lord casily and overly (...) them by, with some small (...)
of some little dislike, it could not but impeach his Purity, and make himself
accessory to the dishonor of his own Holiness. When Eli proceeded not with that
zeal against (...) evil of his Sons, as the (...) thereof might justly have
provoke (...) him unto, but after a slight manner manifested a heart-less
dislike of it; the Lord (...), 1 Samuel 2. 39. That he honored his sons before
him, rather respected their carnal content, that they might not be so (...)
ashamed, and justly (...) as they did deserve than the honor of his name and
the excellency of his ordinances and worship, that they might be preserved in
that purity and attended with that awfulness and holiness of heart as was meet.
Now that which God abhors and punishes so severely in another, its not
possible that the least appearance of any so great an evil should be justly
charged upon the holy one of Israel, for he should deny himself to be God if he
should deny the exactness of his own infinite holiness, and he should not be
just, should he not manifest the glory of his holiness, according to the
excellency and (...) thereof. True it is that out (...) mere grace and mercy
the Lord Christ brings the soul of a sinner from his sin, but the same mercy
that would save the sinner, cannot but destroy the sin and express its
detestation (...) it, otherwise may (...) say, and the rebellious sinner think,
that either the word requires more than it needs and the Saints do more than
they ought, or else the Lord is not holy as men imagine, when the (...) (...) so
great detestation against so gross and scandalous evil which the Lord looks at
with so little dislike.

In regard of others, the sharpness of this dispensation of Reas. 2.
the Lord against such scandalous and notorious offenders, seems to be very
necessary, Least the hearts of the wicked should be encouraged and their hands
strengthened to adventure to commit, and careless (...) reform the greatest
evils when they shall observe some of their crew and company, who were as bad or
worle than themselves, yet (...) acceptance and forgiveness at the hands (...)
the Lord upon such easy terms and with so little trouble, It Is that of (...)
wise man Eccles. 8. 11. When (...) (...) a Malefactor is but delayed, it is in
the (...) (...) (...) sons of men to take encouragement to (...) evil, If the
delay of the punishment which is not long, do so encourage them when that is
but little and slight, how will that imbolden in a fearless kind of impudency to
proceed to any outrage, when they can promise themselves pardon upon the same
terms which others have found before them, in the like case and condition with
themselves? Therefore the Lord in his infinite wisdom, does so temper the
sweetness of his mercy, and the severity of his wrath, in the recovery of a
lost and forlorn wretch; riches of mercy to the soul to save that, rigor of
severity against the loathsomness of sin to destroy that; so that none should
be discouraged to seek for pardon of the greatest wickedness, and yet none
encouraged to continue the shortest time in the least sin, since Gods
displeasure is so dreadful against al. It was the course that the Lord
prescribes to his Vicegerents here on Earth in their proceedings against sin,
that it should be such, that all Israel may hear and fear, and do no more so,
Deuteronomy. 17. 13. he will not be wanting to do that against sin which he would have
to be done by others, he will hamper al such Rebels, that the rest of the
company shall have little cause to bless themselves in any of their sinful ways.

In regard of the sinner himself, it is safest for him that Reas. 3.
he may be thoroughly recovered from his corruption for the present, and
preserved against it for the time to come. Recovered for the present, he needs
heavy blows, or else he is like never to have any good by them. As with Trees
that are rooted deep, and of long time and continuance, ordinary winds have
settled them, it must be a Herricano that must pluck and tear them up from their
roots. So when the sinner is rooted in (...) wretched distempers: the wood that
is knotty, there must be sharper wedges, and the heaviest beetle, and the
hardest blows to break it: So it is with the hard, and stupid, and knotty heart
of a scandalous sinner. As with the stomach filled with stiff and noysom
humors, easy Physic, and gentle Receipts may happily stir the humors, but it
must be strong Ingredients, and a great quantity that must remove it. So with a
corrupt heart.

This is a means also to preserve him from it afterward; if once he have
thoroughly smarted for his sin, he will fear to meddle with it; (...) he have
felt the danger of the Surfeit, he will taste the Sweet-meat no (...).

TRIAL. We have here Ground of Discovery Use.
how to pass a safe Sentence touching the Spiritual Estate of some persons,
namely, The easy and sudden conversion of such who have been grossly wicked, or
scandalously vile: By grossly wicked, I mean such who have been taken aside
with some loathsome abominations, though they carry it never so covertly, as
your clofe (...), fornications, thefts, murders, continued forgeries of
fals-hood and injustice: By scandalously vile, I mean such who have continued
in an open tract of profossed opposition against the power of Godliness: I say,
the easy and sudden conversion of such, gives just ground of suspicion why
they may question the truth of the Work, and others justly suspect it, (...)
their judgments be settled by sad proof, long experience, and that upon serious
observation. It Is not Gods ordinary way, and therefore men should take more
than ordinary trial before they trust, or in truth thou trust (...) self. The
proceeding of God in his Word and Providence, are according to the Rules of
Wisdom, and the right order of causes and means, by which he has appointed to
bring about his own will, and the Work of his Grace in the hearts of his. To
save men per saltum is not Gods usual way, that works of greatest weight and
difficulty, should be done in so little time, and with so little labor and
trouble, in other cases thou would think it (...); why should thou judge
the contrary reasonable in this, which is hardest, and the weightiest work of
all other, unless thou have more than ordinary warrant for it? When men grow
rich of a sudden, and to a great Estate, and those who observe their course,
see neither ways nor means in reason how to raise it, each man concludes, it is
not his own Estate, but other men's Stock that he braves it withal, for he is
worse than nothing, or else he never truly came by it, so that a State sometime
questions such. So here, when a man grows up to a great Estate of Grace, and no
man can tell how; (...) so many quarters or years, he was as base a wretch as
the Earth bore, not fit to sit with the Dogs of a man's flock, his carriage so
reffuse and vile, as that he was not fit for the Society of moral men, that no
man could tell how to believe his words, or to trust his dealing; and is he now
of a sudden come to the top of Religion? a sweet, godly, gracious man, fit to
be made a Member of a Congregation; how came he to such a large measure of
Grace and Godliness? Surely not as other men use to do, and therefore it is a
great suspicion he came not truly by his Grace, nor is he truly that he seems
to be; great sins cost other men great sorrows; grievous scandals cost great
grief of heart, great heart-breakings, humiliations and satisfactions: great
Grace and power against sin, great pains, and the highest strain of exactness
in speeches and practices; they that knew and see the Conversations of such,
never saw nor knew any such matter; it is certain he, and all the Christians in
the world, may justly question his uprightness, (...) yet he be not worse than
nothing, if there were a true inventory taken of his Estate in Grace; out of
the depth of profaneness to come to the height of holiness at unawares it is a
work of delusion, not of true conversion to God. Trees that are planted in Gods
Orchard, they take root downward, and then bring forth fruit upward: Upstart
Christians are like Jonah his Guord, grow (...) and (...) presently, flourish
and fade, and al in a day. Untimely births are never true, nor yet of
continuance; when an old sore is healed too hastily, it never proves sound,
it is (...) over, (...) cured, festers inwardly, proves more grievous and
dangerous than at the first: The skilful Chyrurgeon will tell you it must be
searched, lanced, tented, before it attain its full and perfect Cure. So it is
with that cankered corrupt (...) of thine, who have lived and continued in
those loathsome abominations which thou have hugged in thy bosom, it must be
lanced by the cutting knife of the Law, and the dreadful curse thereof,
searched by the soul-saving preaching of the Gospel, and daily tented with
constant contritions and breakings of heart, otherwise know assuredly, that
those hellish lusts of thine will imposthume within thy soul, and in issue break
out more loathsomly, and thy latter end will be worse than thy beginning. To
find little or no hardness in that which in thy reason thou conceivest and
concludest to be the hardest work of all, how can thou but suspect thou art
cozened and mistaken? Make it thine own case in another thing, and be thine own
Judge; (...) thou enjoined to drain a Quagmire, or a dirty rotten Swamp, to fit
it for the Plough, and should any man seem to persuade it would cost but litte
time or labor, might easily be dispatched, thou would scarsly with patience
hear such an expression, as that which is expressly contrary to common sense,
why should men speak of impossibilities, or think that men should conceive that
reasonable that is against Reason; not only Trees felled, stubbed, removed, but
the ground gained which is not arable, and all this in a short space with ease?
Look now into thy condition with this resemblance, and be thine own Judge; thou
have a dunghill heart, a soul like a dirty swamp, those hellish abominations
which have taken up thy mind, and will, and affections, in which thou have
continued, and unto which thou have been accustomed, so that thy heart is like
a standing puddle of profaneness, which have weakened and wasted the very
faculties of thy soul; so that thy heart is not fallow ground, as the Prophet
speaks Plow up the fallow ground, Jer. 4. it is not (...) ground, even abilities
so wasted and disordered with thy wretched and unreasonable lusts, and do
thou think that these abilities can be (...) easily, and thy Spirit made good
soil, even a good and honest heart, without extraordinary power on Gods part,
and more than ordinary labor on thine. When the covetous young man that was
glewed to the world, and had his heart riveted in restless and immoderate
desires after these Earthly things; so that all the directions which our Savior
gave, and the great offers he made of Heaven and Salvation, could not take off
his affections, but he went away sorrowful; says our Savior, How hard is it
for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; it is easier for a Cable
rope to enter in at the eye of a Needle, than for a rich man to enter into the
Kingdom of Grace here, and Glory hereafter. Matthew. (...). 22, 23, 24. He spoke
of one, it is true of all by the like proportion; how hard is it for a rich man,
it is as true to say, how hard is it for a riotous, unclean, malicious,
voluptuous, self-conceited, rebellious wretch; he that has scandalously
continued in these, accustomed himself to these, how hard is it for such says
the Text. And do thou find it easy? a Holy Day task, and a trifling labor,
that which may suddenly be done without such trouble; either Christ is
deceived, or thou art mistaken; either the Word fails, or thy apprehension
fails: Whether the Scriptures or thy Conceit is to be believed, let thine heart
judge, unless thou will be an Atheist. The Word in reason never wrought that
work, nor will it give in Evidence and approbation thereof. The Prophet Isai.
46. last, describing a rebellious sinner, he thus speaks of him; Hearken ye
stout-hearted, who are far from righteousness. A man that has gone many years,
and that with much speed and labor one way, which is down-hil, to return to the
same place when the way is more difficult, with a little time, and less labor,
there is little probability, if possibility in reason. So here, thou have
hurried headlong in the ways of wickedness, have had full wind and tide, Satan's
temptation, thine own corruption, to carry thee with mighty violence many years
together in thy (...) course, do thou think suddenly and easily to (...)
back? No believe it, thou must take many a weary step, send out many a heavy
sigh, tug at it with continual prayers and tears, and the utmost improvement of
al thine (...), nay it will cost thee hot water, the setting on before thou
see that day.

I read of a double expression, 1. Of the Devils going out. 2. Of his casting
out, (...). 12. 43, When the unclean spirit goes out, etc. which is done by
(...) outward and serious reformation, and some sudden resolution wrought out
of terror, to forsake such and such courses; this smoaks Satan out of his
house, etc.

COMFORT. This is ground of great support, (...), 2.
and in Truth of strong consolation, to shore up the hearts of forlorn and
scandalous Creatures, when they lie under the most direful strokes of Gods
heaviest displeasure. When the loath somness of their lives, and hellish
abominations of their hearts are presented to their view, their Consciences now
accuse, and the Lord from Heaven by his infinite indignation encamps against
them with Armies of terrors, so that to their sight and sense there is nothing
appearing but present ruin and confusion: Yet out of the strong, comes sweet;
greatest safety Judges. 14. 14.
issues out of the heaviest searchings and breakings of heart. Here is now
ground of strong support to bear thy (...) above all these devouring horrors,
which like so many waves would overwhelm thy soul. The more miserable thou
find thy condition, (...) more comfortable it is. It seems a riddle, carries
the appearance of contrariety and impossibility, and yet upon proof and trial,
will prove an infallible Truth. The heavier the blows be, which come from Gods
hand for those gross evils of thine, there is more probability of (...) serious
intendment of good unto thy soul: The greater thy strokes are at present, the
greater thy hopes are of some spiritual relief and refreshing in future times.
And there is no greater plague upon earth, hardly such another in hell, (...) a
wretch should prosper in his wickedness and go suddenly down to the bottomless
pit before he see where he is. It was the carriage of a great Commander in his
time, yet mervailous sharp in the execution of military discipline, when a
Soldier had deserved death by martial law, if he seemed to smile upon him it
was a messenger of death, and therefore his old Soldiers that saw (...) manner
of his proceeding, when ever he appeared to laugh they looked then for a doom,
insomuch that an ancient follower of his coming before him for some
miscarriage, his General carrying himself in a silent manner; he breaks forth
in this manner. Good my Lord do not smile on me, for he then knew the (...)
execution would be the next he should hear of. It is here most certain and so
judge of it. If thy carriage and thy Conscience likewise give in testimony of
the loathsomness and vileness of thy corrupt conversation, that thy behavior
is detestable to any who have any spiritual discerning, yea to moral persons;
if the Lord seem to smile upon thee, not so much as check thee in thy
scandalous way, know that the sentence of destruction is the next that is like
to ensue, Math 23. 34. 35. I will send you Prophets and Apostles and some ye
shall kill and stone etc. that the blood of all the Prophets may come upon you,
fulfill the measure of your fins and so receive the fullness of the measure of
plagues. (...) can ye escape the damnation of bell. ver. 32. 33. I These. 2.
15. The Jews both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, and have
persecuted us, they please not God and are contrary to al men, to fill up their
fins always, for the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost When (...) have
elbow room in their wretched ways, and are not crossed in their hellish
corruptions, the wrath is come upon them to the utmost. This is the dregs of
God vengeance, the utmost of Gods indignation, thou can hardly be worse if
not in hell. Whereas great heart-breakings for sin give in more than a little
hope, and probability of good intended, see this in the several degrees of it,
and al follow from the doctrine delivered.

It shows, poor forlorn wretch that thou art in the way of mercy. God deals so
with thee as he usually does with those with whom he will deal welin the issue,
he has (...) left thee to thy self and sins, and ceased striving with thee to
stop thee and recall thee from thy sinful course, as commonly he does when he
delivers up a soul to the power of his corruption, with whom he intends no more
to meddle, Isai. 1. 5. So he proceeds with the perverse and obstinate Jews,
why should ye be smitten any more, ye fall away more and more; As the Father
with the prodigal, my counsels cannot move thee, my blessings allure thee, al
my corrections I have laid upon thee do not reclame thee, take thy course
therefore, and so casts him out of his family, and takes no (...) care of him.
But he whom he corrects most sharply for his faults, it is yet a pregnant
evidence for the while that he purposes to keep him. This is the day of Gods
visitation, may be the last time of asking yet it is the time of (...) and
grace and the date of mercy. God is yet wrestling with thee as loath to leave
thee to the malice of Satan, and the power of thy distempers, as he does with
them that he purposes to do good unto Isai. 6. 9. when God would (...) (...)
people for (...), and devote and set them apart to destruction this is the way
he takes Go make the hearts of this people fat, fatness implys (...) brawny
kind of stupidity, and sencelesness of spirit. Then such persons are ripe and
ready for destruction; when God plucks up the stake and gives a forlorn wretch
the round rope, let him have his will; Ephraim is joined to-Idols, let him
alone, Hos. 4. 17. He that is unjust let him be unjust still; he that is filthy
let him be silthy still. Yea this is that which casts a (...) beyond the compass
of the compassions of the Almighty, when the Lord (...) he will not meddle nor
make, he will have nothing to do with such vile creatures, Hos. 4. 14. I will not
punish your daughters when they commit whordome, nor your spouses when they
(...) adultery, therefore the people that does not understand shall fall. But
when God will take pains and trouble himself with such a Rebel, has thee upon
the anvil, and bestows so much fire and so much melting, yet (...) is hope that
he may make thee a vessel of grace, and for the Lords use.

There is some expectation that the work may prove more speedy and successful,
as it is in the body, in old festred sores, he that ripples the skin, and lays
easy salves, he will be long in doing a little, and yet fail at last, when he
has done al, he that lanceth to the bottom, in reason is like to bring out the
core, and to hasten the cure, both with speed and success; the stronger the
physic stirs and works upon the humor, the sooner the patient recovers, and
health returns with some stability and continuance. It is so in the soul, those
old cankered lusts which have been of long continuance in a corrupt heart, some
slight terrors or sudden flashes of Gods displeasure, which may a little
trouble the Conscience and ripple the skin as it were, they pass away presently
and leave the root of the distemper untouched, at the least not removed, so
that the corruptions grow more fierce and violent, and so break out in a more
loathsome manner than ever formerly. Whereas those direful and overbearing
horrors, in a way of rational providence are of a more prevayling nature, to
astonish the heart, shake the Conscience of the wicked, and ransack the very
core of those hideous corruptions, which have been long harbored and lodged
within. Thus the Lord dealt with the revolting and Apostatizing Israelites.
Hos. 2. 6. 7. He bedged their ways with Thorns and built a wall before them,
and they shall seek their lovers and shall not find them, and then shall she say I
will (...) to my first husband etc. Had the hedge been so (...) and easy and the
wall so low that they might have broken through the one or leaped over the
other, she would have made a hard shift but she would have followed and sound
her lovers; but the hedge was made of thorns (...) and unsufferable sorrows, and
necessities unavoydable, not to be endured, not to be removed, and those
wearied her out of al pretended delights she had formerly taken. This is the
method that God (...) Hos. 5. 12. 14. Hos. 6. 1. First I will be a Moath, 2 if
that will not do I will be a Lion, 3 If that will not do I will leave them and go
to my place, withdraw his comforting and protecting presence; and then we hear
(...). Come let (...) return unto the Lord for he has torn and be will heal us;
this did it.

This (...) way for our spiritual comfort in a special blessing if he be
pleased to follow the (...) with his blessing. For its a special means to bring
in clearer evidence and (...) assurance both of the soundness of the work and
the certainty of a man's good estate, all the days (...) his life, if the Lord
be pleased to second these heavy breakings of heart with his blessing. For it
is the nature of (...), when they are set in opposition to make each other
appear more (...). For a conscientious (...) to be made of a (...) (...), (...)
(...) is so (...) a (...) especially when the dreadful expressions of Gods
displeasure have been so amazing in the eyes of all that have been the
spectators and in a peculiar manner astonishing to the soul of the profane
creature that has selt the arrows of the Almighty sticking fast in him, (...)
he cannot be but restless before he get relief and help, so he cannot but know
it when he has gained it, the change is great and open, Gods dispensation so
glorious. This man is able to say, at such a time in such a place, by such a
man, out of such a (...), the Lord was pleased to speak home to my heart to
make known himself, my self and sin to my self, which caused my soul tody
within me, in the sense of my vileness and misery, and from that time forward,
followed me daily with fears and horrors, the venom of vengeance drinking up my
spirits until in such and such a manner and by such means he was pleased to
work my heart to his own terms, made me glad to seek him importunately yea
restlesly, and more glad to find him sealing up the truth of his free love by
his own spirit in the word of truth; This man can tell how he came by his grace,
and can tell what to say and show for heaven, and happily unless it be through
his own careless neglect may carry the assurance with him to his grave. Whereas
such as the Lord does sweetly but secretly draw unto himself, in an insensible
and undiscernable manner, restrains them from common evils, traynes them up
under Godly Parents, religious government, good company and spiritual means of
Instruction, and so implants by little and little into the Lord Jesus, without
their privity or apprehension however their estate is good, and their condition
safe in its self, yet they gain littl evidence or maintain little assurance
thereof in their own hearts, but upon every turn are questioning and
quarrelling, doubting and staggering, touching their condition, whereas they
that come to their grace by many and great troubles retain it commonly with
great evidence, Thus Paul when the Lord Christ had made a glorious conquest
over his proud rebellious and malicious heart, against the holy ways of his
truth and (...). He could tell and did upon al occasions when the field was
fought, how the Lord Christ got the day over his hellish distempered heart.
Thus he relates Gods dealing. Acts. 26. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. Acts. 22. 1. to
the 14. And so issues having obtained help of God I continue until this day
thus it was, so it is; thus it was wrought, so maintain d.

And though it be true I confess that no man should or will break his arm, that
he may have it the stronger for the setting, or know how it is set; or
therefore be careless to become scandalously vile, that God may be gloriously
merciful: yet through the riches of mercy which makes our losses gains. The
certainty of the assurance we find, does countervail and exceed the terrors and
horror we felt. Give me the man who can say, I was blind but now I see; I know
I was in prison but am now delivered; its not delusion but a vision and real
accomplishment of the work by the Allmighty hand of God.

Lastly its honorable for a poor scandalous wretch to be under such heavy
breakings of heart, and therefore it should be comfortable to him. I rather
mention this to stop the mouths of the reffuse rabble of the world, and to show
the desperate mistakes unto which carnal reason carries us, out of the pride of
our own spirits; we know that sin is (...) and shame loathsome, even to nature
especially corrupt and proud, to be forced to acknowledge the one, to take the
other. It appears very direful to the apprehension of all the sons of Adam. And
therefore when the Lord is pleased to hold a scandalous wretch upon the wrack
and to make him roar out his wretchedness, vomit out his sin and take the shame
he has deserved. His companions that have conversed with him, and his friends
that have honored him, they are driven to their dumps in discouragment and
coffeehouse, and cry out the man is undone, and curse the day that ever the
Minister came into the country, and blames his folly and silliness that he
would attend to what he said and be troubled with any thing he heard, to bring
an everlasting blemish upon himself. No: I say there is no such matter. This is
the greatest honor that yet ever befell him in this world, and will be a means of
blessing to him in another. It is a shame to commit sin but not to have the
heart breaking under the apprehension of it. Nay it is an expression of Gods
favor and as it may prove, a sign of Gods special love, if it be rightly
emproved. God thus far honors a poor wretch that he will speak to him as he
passes by. Should a Prince that was provoked by the conspiracies and
rebellions of many Traitors, as he passed by, should he vouchsafe to send unto,
and call upon some one to reclaim him from his crew, and company and courses,
and that upon very equal terms he might find acceptance and pardon and peace:
when he will not so much as look after others, or change a word with them, would
not this be accounted matter of marvelous respect from the King, and honor to
the man? So here. As David, begs favor from the Lord. (...). 119. 132. be
merciful to me, and lookupon me as thou usest to do upon them that desire to
fear thy name, he takes it to be the highest pitch of his happiness to be so
dealt withal. If God deal with thee as with these, as he dealt with the
Jaylour, as he dealt with Paul whom he made a choice vessel for himself, art
thou not highly honored? why should God knock at thy door and call in upon thy
Conscience etc.

ADVISE unto Ministers, whose place and calling Use 4.
it is, under the Lord, to deal with such persons undersuch diseases. Hence we
may see a right way in holy prudence how to proceed with them, in the times of
temptations and their saddest distresses of spirit. See what God does, and that
we may do. As Gods deals so we may deal as the safest way and most likely to
find (...).

When therefore we have fortifyed the heart with hope, in regard of the
sufficiency of God free grace, and possibility of relief from him: As that he
is able to do Ephesians. 3. 20.
excessive exceeding abundantly above all we can ask or think, As in desperate
cures men use cordials to fortify against faintings of heart, that they may
better bear the hardness of the cure: this being supposed then the rule is. The
sharpest receipts are most seasonable in a right manner of proceeding and that
in three things.

1 Be not slight in the searching. 2 Be not too hasty to heal; 3 Be not too
suddeenly confident of the cure.
Not slight in the search for that is most dangerous, and an error here can
hardly ever be recovered, go therefore to the quick, see the bottom, if ever
you hope to make work of it, or to lend help indeed. He that cleaves knotty
logs must have the sharpest wedges and hardest blows. Here pity is
unseasonable and greatest cruelty. When out of (...) we are afraid to put men
to pain, we increase their pains and hasten their destruction, Jer. 6. 14. they
have healed also the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly. The Apostle
teaches another way. Titus. 1. 13. reprove them sharply that they may be sound
in the faith. Sharp reproves make sound Christians. He shows greatest love
and mercy which follows the Lord in love and mercy. Yea it is a course that
procures most ease to the party, the corrosive that eats away the proud flesh
brings soonest ease because that proud flesh and humors bring all the pain. So
these dreadful overbearing threatenings abate the pride of the heart, and a man's
perverseness and so brings ease, for the waywardness of our own wills work our
own woe, and here, not to trouble men's sins and Consciences is indeed to
trouble their peace and comfort in issue. Thus Samuel. 1 Samuel 12. 20. He
lesseneth nothing of their sin, only sends them forth to mercy for relief.
Ye have indeed done all this wickedness yet do not forsake the Lord.

Be not too hasty to heal the wound. More have than lavers before in reason
they can be cleansed. So old distempers which have taken strong possession, and
are of long continuance, happily if the cure be too hasty, it will hazard our
comforts: The Israelites left War too suddenly with the Canaanites, they
tribured them, and not destroyed them; and they proved goads in their Judges,
2. 3.
sides, which they could not get rid of all their days.

Be not suddenly confident of the Cure. Let men be Solomon said of Adonijah, 1
King. 1. 52. Let him show himself a worthy man. This creating of Professors,
making men Christians by our applause and approbation, because they have
attained the under strokes of horror, skill and ability to holy Services, proves
the bane of their souls, the blemish of their Profession, and a breach of their
Peace; either they have turned wretches again, or else have been overtaken with
their carelessness, so that they have been foiled by gross falls, and hardly
ever recovered their peace and comfort though they have taken off the scandal.
Therefore as John Baptist told them, if indeed you purpose to (...) from the
wrath to come, bring forth fruits worthy of amendment, Matthew. 3. 8. such as will
carry weight, and fetch up the scales as it were, and undoubtedly evidence the
work of Grace.

Matter of Caution and Direction unto such whom Use 4.
God has exercised with such heavy breakings of heart for their scandalous
courses; beware ye be not weary, and labor to make an escape from under the
Dispensation of the Lord, but give welcome thereunto; help forward the work, do
not resist it, make way for the Dispensation of the Lord, do not oppose it, and
therefore possess thy heart with a necessity of subjection thereunto. Why
should thou think to have an exception? be rather fearful thou should not
find the Truth of the work of these terrors, than that thou should be
fearful to endure these; if he will land thee in Christ, he will toss thee in
this manner. As a Patient having a (...) wound, he enquires what the (...) did
to others, and how the Salve did work upon others in his case, and if he find
the Salve and working be the same, he hopes that he also shall be cured. So here.

EXHORTATION. Improve the utmost of our endeavor Use 5.
to keep our selves, and all ours from scandalous sins. Restraining Grace is
but common Grace, yet is it a great favor of the Lord that he will curb and
restrain a man; by this means the work of Conversion is more easy, and such
persons freed from dreadful terrors that seize upon others, Mark, 12. 34. Thou
ant not far from the Kingdom of God. (...)'s bring our Children as near to
Heaven as we can, it is in our power to restrain them, and reform them, and
that we ought to do: As it was the speech of a godly woman, she (...) that al
means might be used to restrain her Children, that if it were possible their
reckoning might not be so heavy as mine, (...).

A Profane course cannot hinder the unresistible Object.
work of Gods Grace.

It Is true, But though God may save thy soul, yet he Answ.
may scorch thy soul in the flames of Hell fire, and make thee weary of thy
part, and of thy lusts and all. Are there no terrors dreadful, but those of the
torments of the damned in Hell? Yes, you will find it, you may pay deer for all
your pleasures in sin, for all your fleshly lusts, before your hearts be brought
off from them: therefore you that are Parents, join your helping hands to this
great and good Work, beat down the stubbornness, do what you can to restrain
the looseness and profaneness of the spirits of your children, though it is not
in your power to bring them in, yet bring them as near to the Kingdom of God as
you can, etc.

They were pricked in their hearts.

The last Doctrine which is considered touching the Work it self.

Sorrow for sin (...) set on, pierces the Doct.
heart of the sinner through, that is truly

They were pricked, not in their eyes to weep for their sins, so Esau could;
not in their tongues only to confess their sin, so Judas did, I have sinned in
betraying innocent blood; nor in their hands alone to reform it outwardly, so
those Apostats did, 2 Pet. 2. 20. They escaped the pollutions of the world
through the acknowledgment of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: but it reached
their hearts, their souls bled inwardly: their souls were most guilty, and had
the greatest hand in the commission of those bloody and execrable cruelties;
the fountain of their sorrow, did rise as high as the beginning of their sin;
soul sins, and soul sorrows.

Nor was the stroke slight, not the ripling of the skin, a lighter touch, a
sudden pang, a sigh and away; nay, not only lanced and gashed, the rotten
imposthumes of the corruptions of their hearts in a great measure, but
ransacked the very root of the corruption, pierced the heart quite through;
through and through again as it were, let out the core of the most inward, and
most retired corruptions, that were lodged in their bosom and bottom of their
hearts. And this work proceeded not from any power of their own, nor from the
liberty and freedom of their wills, as that which they made choice of, and out
of their own ability did readily put forth, but it was set on by the hand of
the Almighty, in the entrance whereof they were Patients, went against the
heart and hair, and wholly beyond their purposes and expectations: So the words
are in the passive form; they were pricked, they did not prick themselves. Nay
certainly could they have told how to prevent it, how to remove it, or to
procure any ease and relief unto themselves, they would never have cried out as
men in a maze, and astonishing straights of Spirit, What shall we do? Thus God
proceeds when he purposes to make a through work. When God was purposed to set
upon the revolting people of the Jews, and to bring them savingly home to
himself, Hos. 13. 4. so (...) carry it, according to the foregoing and
following words, I am the Lord thy God from the Land of Egypt, and there is no
Savior besides me, ver. 4. and blames also the frowardness and folly of their
Spirits, not yielding so readily, and taking the advantage of Gods dealing for
their good, ver. 13. The sorrows of a traveling woman shall come upon him, he
is an unwise son, for he should not stay long in the place of the breaking
forth of Children, q. d. The Lord in mercy offers himself to the Israelites
under their terrors as a Midwife, that would make way for them out of their
sins and sorrows: Now in this (...) of his toward the people to be converted,
he professes, that he will meet with them (...) a Bear bereaved of her whelps,
he will rend the caul of their hearts, ver. 8. the words are, the closure and
shutting up of their hearts; sinners are shut up under the power of their
distempers, as the Apostle says, all men by Nature are shut up under unbelief,
Romans 11. 32. especially there be some closets and secret corners and
conveyances of soul, wherein the most sweet and delightful abominations are
hugged and harbored: the Lord leaves not a poor wretch, if indeed he intend his
good, before he breaks open those great depths, rests not before he come home
to the root, and let out the heartblood of thy lusts, and then their death will
undoubtedly follow.

And hence it is this sorrow is compared to such as enter into the very inwards
of Nature, and sinks the soul with unsupportable pressures: when that great
conversion and return of the Jews to the entertainment of the Gospel shall be
brought about by the Lord. The Prophet sets forth the greatness of that sorrow
of theirs, under a double similitude. First, Zach. 12. 10. They shall mourn for
him, as the mother mourns for her only son, and for her first born: the
mourning of a tender hearted mother for her son, her first born, and for her
only son, he adds al degrees of grief: if she had possessed many, she might
more easily have wanted one, or at least parted with it; or had it been any but
her first born which had the first of her strength, and the first of her love,
yet she might have born it with more quietness: but when al these meet
together, her life and comfort is wrapped up in the life of the Child, the
mourning becomes unmeasurable, fills the heart as it were. Secondly, It shall be
like the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the Valley of Megiddon, when al Israel
lamented the death of their good Josiah, the light of their eyes, the breath of
their Nostrils, the comfort of their souls, 2 Chronicles. 35. 25. Therefore the
original words which lay open this work, are of marvelous weight, and discover
the overpowring virtue thereof, Isai. 57. 18. The Lord dwells with him that is
of a contrite spirit. Isai. 61. 6. The Lord binds up the broken heart. The
first whereof signifies to pun to powder, and to bring to small dust; it is so
used, Psalm. 90. 3. Thou bring man to the dust of death, again thou say,
return ye children of men. That as the hardest stone when it is broken al to
small mammocks, and powder as it were, it is easy and yielding under the touch
of the hand, what ever ruggedness and resistance was in it before. So it is
with the soul that is punned to powder, so that there is not any unbroken, or
any whole part to be found there, no sodering in any secret manner with any
retired distemper; but the weight of godly sorrow has shattered all asunder,
distress of Conscience has brought it to dust, parted all the privy closures
with any particular of any distemper, all that knotty stiffness and perverseness
of spirit in siding with any corruption is now taken off. The soul comes easily
to give way to the Authority of the Truth, that would take any sinful lust
away. To the like purpose is that of Job, Job, 23. 16. when the Armies of Gods
indignation had encamped against him, and the terrors of the Lord had drunk up
his spirit; says he, God makes my heart soft, or has melted my soul; the word
signifies a severing and separation of one thing from another, and is opposite
to settling and fastening, making firm, stiff, and hard, as that of Pharaoh,
Exodus 9. last, Pharaoh hardened his heart, his soul fastened by an invincible
resolution to the sinful purpose of his malicious detaining and oppression of
the Jews. When the fierceness of Gods dupleasure brought home by the breathings
of the Spirit of God upon the soul, it makes it melt like Wax before the fire,
makes it easy to give way to the impression of the pleasure of the Lord, that
his Spirit may take away any of those lusts that have been of (...) league with
the heart. Hence lastly it is, that in the Phrase of Scripture, the sinner is
said to be in (...), Zach. 12. 10.
or the soul to be imbittered by God, when he is brought and held under the
sense of the loathsomness of his ins, and himself by reason thereof; so that all the sweet that his liquorish heart takes in any pleasing lust, is wholly taken
away. The Physician observes, and reason teaches, that sweet things only
nourish, but bitter things cleanse, the Nature of the stomach abhors the
presence of them, expels them, takes no pleasure therein, receives no
nourishment therefrom. So with the sinner in his condition, when the Lord (...)
out the bitterness of sin upon him, he can find no food relish, no delight in
his former distempers, which he followed with that violence, and fed so eagerly
upon, even unto surfeiting in former times, they will not down with him now.
It Is a dreadful thing now to him, to take the least taste of them by any serious
consideration or remembrance, when formerly he could have made a meal of them
by daily meditation, When Job. 20. 12. 13. 14.
wickedness was sweet in his mouth, and he hid it under his tongue, but now
it is turned to the gall of Asps, and he is not able to endure the poison and
bitterness of it, but it makes him heart-sick, in the sight and sense of it.

For the opening of the Point, it will be needful to enquire after Five
Particulars.

1. The Manner how this sound sorrow seizes upon, or is brought in upon the
soul. 2. How God sets it on, and makes the soul truly affected with it. 3. How
far the sinner is, or may be said to be active in it. 4. What is the behavior
of the heart under this stroke, being truly affected. 5. The Reason, and then
the Use.
To the Former of these:

The Manner how this Sorrow is brought in The first particular opening the
point.
upon the soul.

It is Threefold in Gods ordinary Dispensation, (reserving exceptions, as he
sees fit in his own infinite Wisdom.)

It is either Successively, and by degrees. Suddenly, and at once. Unsensibly
to the heart of the sinner who receives it.


Successively, when the Lord would leave the track that the goings of our God
Psalm. 68.
and King may be seen in the Sanctuary, and in the souls 24.
of his Servants, and it may be attended in these several Degrees.

First, The Lord lets in some unexpected flashes of spiritual Truth,
discovering the evil of sin in the general, and the dangerous conditions of
such as stand guilty thereof, and continue therein, which were never
considered, nor before that time conceived of, by him that has been an
ignorant and careless hearer of the Word: who came to the means either by
constraint, or custom, or complement in a way of course for company sake, never
set price upon the means, nor attended to the Truth and goodness thereof, and
therefore the Ordinances were as the Waters that pass by, left neither power
nor profit upon the soul. But now there is some evidence of Truth which God so
directs and darts in, that it flashes like lightning into his face, leaves a
kind of amazement upon his mind, and like a sudden blow gasters the (...) of
the sinner, so that he begins to stagger, and is driven to give some attendance
to that of which he never took notice before, not knowing well (...) to make of
himself, nor yet of that which he heard, only he is forced to observe something
he never formerly regarded. Hence therefore (...) a confused kind of tumult and
lumber of thoughts within himself, he begins to be in a muse what such things
mean, whither they tend, is at a loss with himself, and knows not which way to
take; I never heard so much as now, if all be true that I have heard, and the
Minister has preached; there is more in sin than ever I imagined, and my
condition more miserable than ever I did conceive. This maskering of spirit
drives him to make enquiry, the things seem strange, he begins to search (...)
they be true or no. So they to Paul, disputing concerning false Worship, and
their Idolatrous practices, Acts, 17. 19, 20. Thou bring strange things to
our ears, we would know therefore what these things mean. So it was with Paul
at his first bringing home to God, Acts, 22. 6. There shone a great light from
Heaven about him, and he heard a voice, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?
The thing was strange, but what it was he could not tell, and therefore he makes
yet further enquiry, Who art thou Lord? As the poor woman having heard the
Minister preach out of that Text, Isai. 27. 11. They are a People of no
understanding, therefore he that made them, will not (...) them: he that
created them, will not show mercy to them. It came so directly cross to her own
conceivings, that she repaired to one of her neighbors, to know whether those
words were in the Scripture yea or no, and what those Scriptures were: for
says she, If he that made us will not save us, Lord be merciful to us, who will?
who can? So these sudden dazlings and dartings in of the Truth, forces men to
fall on questioning; enquire they do, come they will, resolve to hear more of
those strange Novelties; and the greater search they make, the greater certain
Truth they perceive, the Law peremptory, the Word plain, threatenings certain,
and the Lord just, his sin most heinous, and his condemnation certain and
approaching, so that he cannot tell how to avoid it, or how to bear it.

Hence fear surprizeth him forthwith, pursues him (...) a (...) expectation and
(...) of what (...) befall him; I know what I have deserved, and I hear what the
Word has threatened against such, and I know God is true, and cannot deny his
Word nor himself, and he is just, and cannot but execute in his time what has
gone out, of his mouth, has not all Ages manifested this? the Experience of al
men proved it undeniable? Did ever any provoke the Lord and prosper? Job, 9. 4.
and can I in reason expect it should be other and better with me, than it was
with any that was ever before me? Can I be so sottish to think that God should
send another Christ, devise other Scriptures, make a new Causey way, or a back
door to bring such a wretched rebel as I am to Heaven, contrary to his own Word
and Will? God has said, Woe to the wicked, it shall go ill with Isai. 3.
him; who can say the contrary, and who can expect but he will accomplish what
he has said? the Word excepts 11.
no man; what folly is it then that I should except my self? 2 Thessalonians. 2. 12.
That all they might be damned that have pleasure in unrighteousness; If I take
the same pleasure, I must look for the same plagues, Luke, 13. 5. Except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish: If I be in that condition, I must expect
the same condemnation, and be likewise accursed and confounded, and cast out
from the presence of the Lord. It Is certain it will be so, and it is uncertain
how soon it may be: What if God do? Who knows but God will? What if God should
pluck me out of the Land of the Living? I may truly, justly suspect it may be
so, and fear it will? When I lie down, I shall never rise more; when I go forth,
I shall never return more; when I depart from the house, I should take my leave
and never see Sabbath more, nor the Assembly of the Saints more: why may not my
meat be my poison? my table my ruin? my bed my grave? all Creatures instruments
of death to me, who have been an enemy to God: So that their hearts begin to
fail them for fear, (...). 21. 26. Thus the (...) under the (...) of his (...)
(...) Acts. 19. 27. Adam at the coming of the Lord into the garden feared and
fled. Genesis 3. 10. this is the fruit of the spirit of bondage. Romans 8. 15. and
the distressed sinner becomes as Pashur a terror to himself, Jer. 20. 3. 4. the
slying of a (...), the (...) of a leaf, the shadow of darkness and approach of
the night like the shadow of death; he knows not but the devils Luke 12.
may have received a commission this night shall they (...) away thy soul (...)
thee, and drag it down to hell.

While the sinner is (...) fearing the evil that is deserved, behold the feet
of the officer now approaching to see present excution (...), and therefore the
Lord in the third place puts a commission into the hand of Conscience, really
to attach and arrest the soul of a sinner, to fasten all those curses upon the
soul, and to force it to feel the vennome of those punishments, which were
formerly threatened and feared. That as it was said to Belshazzar when he was
quassing in his cups, and bowls of the Sanctuary, and the hand writing came out
against him: the appearance of it affrighted him with the expectation of some
direful evil; but the present execution of it ushered in ruin upon him and his
Kingdom. Dan. 5. 28. 30. So the Prophet, to thee be it spoken, thou art weighed
in the balance and found too light, thy Kingdom is departed from thee. So
Conscience as Gods officer comes to see (...) execution done, and therefore
comes authorized as a sergeant to arrest, as a witness to accuse, as a judge to
condemn; tells the soul thou art weighed in the scales of the Sanctuary, and
(...) too light, thy doom is past, thy destiny is determined thy sentence set
down, and thy salvation is departed from thee, that which thou did fear is
now befallen thee, and thou must feel it to thy woe, Psalm. 140. 11. wickedness
hunts the wicked man, but it overtakes them also If Conscience condemns God is
greater than our Conscience and he condemns much more. His iniquities lay hold
upon him that he is not able to look up. Psalm. 40. 14. thou have feared the
punishment of sin before man, and have not (...) to commit sin before God, and
thus thou have sealed up thy condemnation casting away the goodness of the
Lord. If thou do evil, sin lies at the door. Genesis 4.

Hence flows in the fearful expression of the displeasure of the Almighty, the
dreadful wrath of the Eternal, like the mighty waves of the Sea, overwhelm and
sink the soul of the sinner in desperate discouragement.

There be 2 things in sin, 1 The (...) of it. 2 the punishment that comes from
it, the stayn in it and the sting and tartness of it, cross to me, and cross to
God; cross to my honor and shames me, cross to my quiet and peace and troubles
me, cross to my safety and destroys me; And this second, the sinner is firstly
most sensible of; the plague of sin first stings and stabs the heart. Because
nature seeks its own preservation, and self love carries al men readily and
easily to provide for their own safety; And here sorrow begins usually when the
Lord by the Ministry of Conscience awakened, encamps about the sinner with all
the curses of his righteous law broken; besigeth him with the armies of his
indignation and his fierce wrath follows him at every turn. So that now (...)
ever he is, which way so ever he turns himself his sins and plagues compass him
about, on every side; If he look to heaven, he sees a just God there ready to
destroy him, before him are his sins ready to accuse him, within him nothing
but guilt to condemn him, below him hell opening her mouth prepared to receive
him, and the Devils at (...) to torment his wretched (...) as soon as it (...)
depart out of his body. And (...) behold (...) pale (...), those weak hands,
and feeble knees that the poor creature becomes not worth the ground he goes on
a (...) (...) himself and weary of his life; The Lord dishes out (...) sins and
plagues to him on the table where he (...), writes them upon the tester of the
bed (...) he lies his pressures and miseries become unsupportable and
unsufferable: and were it not that God sustaines with one hand as he beats him
with the other; A wounded Prove. 18. 14.
Conscience no man can bear; Hence it is in such horror men betake themselves
to the pit, to the knife, to the halter, rather choose not to be, then to be so
miserable; In these perplexities the sinner as a man under his burden would
shift shoulder, try al conclusions, turn every stone, wind every way, if any
way he could get ease or relief. And if the counsel of carnal friends can
lessen the trouble, company allay it, false reasonings of his own vain mind
abate it, time and continuance wear out the terror, his confessions and
reformations put in bayl upon his Conscience, and quiet it, or some false
mistakes of pardon, and mercy heal the wound, (he walks in a wily way how to
serve sin and yet God too, how to keep in with the truth upon some fair terms
and yet attend his own ends) the man is where he was, returns to his old
sinful distempers, and the latter Math. 12. 45.
end proves worse than the beginning, he dies in the birth. Thus millions of
men perish, go within the view of Canaan, and never possess it, cast away in
the very haven, within the sight of land, and never arrive.

But he whom God loves he will not leave here; and though the Lord will force him
to look further, to see and feel something more, and worse than ever yet he
found, before he have done with him; therefore he makes the wound deeper, rests
not before he be at the root of the heart quite through, comes to the very
quick and sees the bottom; Hence the Lord leads the soul from the terror and
sting of sin, to view the stayn and filth of it, which was more deer to the
soul than its own (...), and yet worse to the soul than all the misery and
vexation that could befall it. Open here a little; There is something in the will
above the natural or physical being of it, look at its being merely as it
arises from the power of those natural principles, whereof its made; there is
something above these and so better then these, unto which theseare subject and
subordinate; namely those divine principles of grace which were at the first
imprinted upon it, and by which those natural abilities should be carried
beyond their physical being to close with God and so attayn an eternal, and in
that (...) a supernatural happiness, I say in that sense supernatural though it
was Naturae debitum, because Adam should not, nay could not please God, put
forth such a divine act out of the faculties of understanding and will for, then
the (...) in Hell now might please him, for their natural faculties still remain
but it was as they were acted and carried by the image of God, wisdom, holiness
and righteousness that were bestowed upon them. So that these principles of
grace in the will, were above the will, and better than the natural being of it.

Since the fall of Adam original corruption is come into the place and room of
that original righteousness, and by a Sovereignty of power takes possession of
the heart and will so (and so the whole man) rules it, carries it, captivates it,
in subjection and subordination to it self So that to a son of Adam now in the
state of sin, corruption exercises a sovereign power and command over the will,
and is better to the sinner than his natural being, corrupt self is of more
power, and more near and intimate to the soul then natural self; Hence the
soldier will rather loose his life than take the lie, he will fight for it, and
dye for it, his honor is nearer to his heart than his being; thus the Ambitious
among the heathen; the desire of vain glory amongst the Jesuits that they may
be-canonized for Saints, makes them put their necks into the halter; And a
corrupt heart will loose Christ, and ordinances and safety and life and al
rather than not satisfy his own humer. So Saul, kill me that it may not be said
the uncircumcised Slew me after he 1 Samuel 31. 4.
had been dead he would never have felt the disgrace, but his ambitious humor
was more dear than his blood.

When the blow reaches hither then ye are come to the root of the heart, and
the heart is pierced quite through when the heart and the power of corruption
are parted. Therefore when the Lord intends to make through work with a poor
wretch whom he has upon the rack, in his horror and perplexities there he
holds him; he shall not go or get from hence before he go further and forces
the sinner to further consideration; If it be so why am I thus, thou look
upon hell and the torments thereof as loathsome and fearsul, what are thy sins
then that deserve these, thou viewest thy plagues which are diresul and
unsufferable, what are thy sins then that procure these, Says the Lord. Psalm.
107. 17. Foolish men are plagued because of their transgressions. Psalm. 38. 8.
there is no quietness in my bones by reason of my sin, Jer. 4. 18. thy sins and
iniquities have brought these, therefore thy wickedness is bitter, because it
reaches unto the heart Hither the Lord brings and here keeps the soul; my sins
are before me. Psalm. 51. 3. he leaves the thoughts of his punishment and turns
his eye to the power of his distemper, and the distance that they work between
God and his soul. Here Satan bestirs him that he may darken the way of the
distressed sinner and deceive him by some wily fetch; And therefore he devises
how he may shift shoulder, and change his habitation, and not be thrust wholly
out, And therefore he is well content to gratify the sinner here, that he should
look upon some sin that is attended with shame, and loathsome to the light of
nature to the dictates of the common principles of natural conscience, and
there he will suffer him to lay on load and to follow it with great fierceness
and indignation that so when the heart is come to a calm, and the storm is over
he may take aside with some lesser evils that he may but color them over with
the pretense of religion thus many men have changed their special corruptions,
not truly parted with them, and for the while have fallen short of this through
sorrow. The Devil does with sin as great men with their houses, they have their
winter houses and their summer houses, and they remain there where they have
most convenience and suitableness; so when a man's speicial sin of his
constitution has fallen, and the parties have conceived the day is theirs,
their hearts have been truly broken; when the Devil only alters his
habitation, they grow to be disobedient servants and sharp wives and that under
pretense of Religion; the servant must go pray when he should go to work, his
Master is a carnal man: the wise froward and perverse, her husband wants the
power of Religion, why should she look at him? and this upon mine own knowledge,
has discovered the (...) and has been a means to many to begin again, and to
make through work, therefore the Lord follows the soul afresh, that it must
feel sin as sin and therefore every sin and else none truly. Cursed is every
one that continues not in all things written in the law. Gal. 3. 10. there must
not be great breaches, but no breaches, not gross sins but no sin, that God will
bear or we should keep; know thou not says Saul to Jonathan that as long as
the son of Jsha remains alive, thou will never be established. 1 Samuel 20. 31.
So Conscience to the soul that as long as the league and life of any of these
distempers concontinu, do thou not know, thou will never, thou can never
be established in the kingdom of grace; Nay the sinner beginns now to reason
with himself why was I born, why came I into the world? wherein consists my
good or what is my hapiness? is it not to please God, to be one with him, and
happy in so being; should I carry this proud stubborn, rebellious heart to
heaven with me, heaven would be a hell to me, and I a devil in it. Now however
this work be thus punctually in the several parts of it discovered, and however
it is even in special distances many times thus also enstamped upon that soul.
Yet the Lord does bind himself to leave such plain tracks and footsteps of
proceedings with a poor (...) at al times, and therefore we must not limit the
holy one of Israel to be at our allowance and liking, or confine him to the
compass of our conceits and desires. Therefore it pleases the Lord to dispense
himself in a diverse manner in dealing with diverse sinners, and those we shall ad
in a word.

Sometimes then in the second place, the Lord suddenly sets on the blow, and
leaves mighty and prevailing impressions at the very present, speedily and
unexpectedly goes through stich with the work, pierces the soul through at one
thrust. Sometimes at one sermon, may be in the handling of one point, nay some
one sentence, or some special truth, the Lord is pleased to arm it and
discharge it, with mighty power and uncontrollable evidence, that it
astonisheth and shivereth the heart of the sinner al in pieces; As it is in the
(...) of a piece it may be one scattred shot or splinter hitts and kills when all the rest miss; so with the splinter of a truth when directed aright, God lets
in so much of the amazing beauty of his own holiness and purity, the
dreadfulness of his displeasure, and the infinite crossness in himself to the
least corruption, and consequently that abhorred (...) in the nature of sin
even the smallest, that look as it is with terrible thunder and lightning, it
melts al before it, and that most where there is opposition against it even the
league that is between the heart and the lust, soakes into the very root of the
soul; and hence under such a sudden thunderclap, such mauling blows now and
then, the sinner dies and faints away under it in the very place where he sits,
sometimes roars out as one that has received his deaths wound in his bosom,
and that he has heard his doom, and was delivered up into the hands of the
Devil ready to drop into the dungeon, and to be carried post to the bottomless
pit; and such soul sinking and confounding terrors, which takes off a serious
and judicious consideration of the (...) assaulting, they vanish away for the
most part and come to little or nothing when the tartness of the horrot is once
allayed; But sometimes lastly the sinner takes in the truth kindly and contains
himself, has his load as much as his heart can bear, for the while as much as
(...) and soul can hold together, goes away, droops and buckles under his
burden, steps into a solitary place and hangs the wing as a foul that is shot;
the saving truth thus set on lies gnawing and eating at the heart blood of a
sinner, (as aquafortis does in iron) leaves it not until it eat asunder the
league betwixt the lust and the heart. Thus this lively truth in the soul like
strong physic in the bowels walks up and down the world with a man, is working
night and day, he cannot avoid the evidence and light of it, he cannot lessen
nor hinder the operation of it. Now he questions with this or that Christian,
then resolves to speak to such a Minister and to reveal his whole condition and
to crave his counsel; he is often going and turns back again, almost at the
door and yet goes away again, sometimes enters into speech and his heart
misgives him, he pretends another (...) and departs again; All this while the
soul bleeds inwardly, the truth is stirring, and the physic working, til at
last it over-bids the darling distemper, then the coast is clear, the heart
grows to more liberty and his speech more free; Thus Paul expresses Gods
manner of proceeding with the Corinthian Convert, 1 Cor. 14. 29. when the word
is dispensed in plainness there comes in one unlearned and unbeleeving, he is
convinced of al and judged of al, i. e. the evidence of the word convinces him
and judges him and his (...) and it follows the secrets of his heart are made
manifest, those retired and privy haunts of sin in the soul are discovered, so
he will fall down and say God is in you of a truth, He saw more of God, and his
Majesty and purity, more of his own sin and the filthy puddle of his own
distempers; it was the Wisdom of God to discover those hid things of darkness,
and brought the loathsomness of them to light; it was the Holiness (...) God
that shows the heinous and hellish Poison thereof; it was the power of God that
did conquer the prevailing Dominion of these distempers unto which the heart
was subject. And this was the Lords dealing with Paul, he assaults the main
hold and strength of his rebellion, and drives him at the first dash as it were
to look where the loathsomness of his evil lay. Saul, Saul why persecutest thou
me? I am Jesus: thou persecutest that Jesus that came to redeem thee, opposest
that Grace that would sanctify and bring thee to Glory, tramplest upon that
blood that would free thee from the guilt and curse which thou have brought
upon thy self; thus lastly it was with Job in that new Conversion (as I may
say) that the Lord wrought in him, Job, 42. 4, 5. I have often heard of thee by
the hearing of the ear, but now mine eyes see thee, I abhor my self in dust and
ashes; when God lets in a sight of himself, and a sight of (...), from thence
the soul begins not to abhor his plagues and punishments which the other feels
or fears, he abhors not Hell and the torments thereof, but abhors himself, the
pollutions, and impurity of his own soul, which are worse than all the
everlasting burnings of the bottomless pit; and hence is that Phrase, Ezekiel. 36.
32. They shall loath themselves, not their miseries, though they were more than
they could bear; not their Judgments, though heavier than they could endure,
but they loath their own souls, the hellish exorbitations, swervings and
departings of heart from God, that they had held any connivence or
correspondence with their lusts.

Lastly, Gods manner of (...), is sweet and secret, and works insensibly (...)
spirits of such who do receive it, when and (...) (...) (...) to (...) infinite
Wisdom, whose (...) (...) (...) (...) (...). Romans 11. 33.

He can and does sometimes, (...) the soul in the (...), as it is commonly
conceived he did John Baptist, Luke. 1. 44.

Many times he begins to tamper and trade with the spirits of his, when they
are young and tender, and their years few, drops in some grain of the immortal
Seed of the Word, which takes root by the powerful operation of the Spirit, and
grows up with them as they grow in years, 2 Chronicles. 34. 3. While Josiah was yet
young, (...) eight years old he began to seek after the God of his Fathers, and
declined not to the right hand, or to the left; So the Lord seemed to deal with
Joseph, and to reveal himself to him, and to Samuel very young, at about
fourteen years.

Sometimes God keeps his by the strokes of his common Graces, restraining from
scandalous evils, and constraining by means appointed and blessed to that end,
the holy (...), the counsels and examples of Godly Parents, the society of such
who are (...), the power of the Ordinances under which they are bred and
brought up, toling and tilling of their (...) and affections by many moral
persuasions, to the love and liking of the excellency of a holy course, which
he knows how to present, and by which to (...) out the exercise of all those
moral abilities they are endued withal, and at the last insensibly, and yet
truly (...) them off from the root of old Adam, and implants into the (...)
Vine Christ Jesus; Ladia and Zachaeus are Presidents of Gods proceeding in this
case; whence it is that many a godly man and true Convert, never knew the time
of his Conversion, only he knows he was blind, and God has brought him to see
the wonders of his way and Truth.

Only a Threefold Caution is (...) to be attended.

Though the manner of Gods dealing be diverse, and (...) the Nature and
substance of the work is really and truly wrought in all that are effectually
called out of the world, themselves, and sins to the Lord Jesus; as shall after
appear when we come to give in the Evidences of the Point in hand; only now it
shall suffice to propound these two places, (...). 3. 1. Behold I will send my
Messenger, and he shall prepare the way (...) me, and the Lord whom ye (...)
shall suddenly come into his Temple; and this preparation his Harbenger John
Baptist discovers, Luke, 3. 5. Every mountain shall be brought low, and the
valleys filled, crooked things made straight, and rough things plain, and then
all (...) shall see the salvation of the Lord. And the evidence (...) this
appears in the question they made, What shall we do? etc. It Is Gods way of
entertainment which himself prescribes, Rev. 3. 2. Behold I stand at thee door
and knock; if any man will open the door, I and my Father will come in to him,
and sup with him. Unless the door be opened, there is no expectation of Christ's
coming, and supping: now all men are shut up under unbelief, and so the power
of their sins; the opening of the heart, is the loosening of the soul from the
league of these lusts, which is done by Contrition; true, a man may pick the
lock, or break the lock, open the door and lift up the latch gently, or else
unhinge it with violence, and noise, that all the house, and all the town may
hear, but it is opened both ways.

Though a man truly called, happily cannot tell the time of his Conversion, yet
every one should, and if gracious, he can give such proper and special
evidence, such never failing and infallible fruits of this work, that they may
undoubtedly discover to others, and ascertain to his own soul, that the stroke
is struck indeed, that he has been called out of the world, and from darkness
to his marvelous light, that the Lord has broken his heart kindly, or else he
cannot (...) (...) he will ever bind him up with his saving and healing
compassions.

It Is a safe way to view over these primitive and first impressions of the Lord
upon the soul, and a principle of Grace received to renew and act over daily
these first Editions, and Spiritual Dispositions imprinted upon the heart: they
were first (...) upon us but after Grace received, they may and should be (...)
by us, we should act them over again: This is the Advice and Direction which
our Savior so seasonably and so sadly leaves upon record upon the Conscience of
his Disciples: When Peter was (...) of his fall and denial of his Master, Math.
18. 3.
he also leaves this Receipt with him, (...) his recovery after the wound
taken, When thou art converted, strengthen thy Brethren, Luke, 22, 32. Peter
was converted (...) before, and called effectually unto Christ, and by faith
made one with him; and this faith he did not, nay could not lose, for Christ
prayed his faith should not fail: but in our falls, there is a weakening and
blemishing of this work of Conversion, and an aversion in some measure left
upon the soul, therefore we should labor a new Conversion, i. e. renew and act
over the work of Conversion, be broken hearted, humbled, drawn to Christ
afresh; and as necessary as the renewal of the act of faith, is the repairing
and renewing of these acts also, for there is no going to Christ, if we go not
out of sin and self. Hence again our Savior, when he would take off, and reform
that ambitious humor which had vented it self among the Disciples, when each
man strove to be highest, one at the right hand, another at the left, the rest
they disdained this (...) pang; our Savior applies this Receipt to (...) this
corruption, (...). 18. 2. 3. Jesus called a little Child, and set him: in the
midst of them, and said unto them, Verily I say unto you, unless ye be
converted, and become as little Children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven: The Disciples were called, and so converted, truly, savingly humbled,
and yet they must renew and act over again these first impressions of the
powerful operations of the Spirit of God, be broken hearted, loosened from thy
lusts as at the sirst, be abased and brought to nothing in thine own sense and
apprehension as at the first, be drawn to Christ as at the first; and there is
more reason and greater necessity of this, than men are readily aware of. For,

A wound here is never recovered in any following work upon the soul, unless we
go back, and begin again; miss here, and we miss all, spoil all our proceedings
in progress of the Work of Grace: He that enters not at the right gate, the
faster he goes, the further out of his way: Never loosened and divorced from
the league with some darling lust, thou can not be Espoused to Christ,
therefore not called, therefore not justified, (...) sanctified, nor glorified;
thy reformations are false, thy peace counterfeit, and al thy comforts thou
conceit'st thou have, they are mere forgeries and delusions; thou art fast in
the Devils clutches as long as thou have thy sins, he has thee at command. The
Metal that is not melted, there is no making, polishing, perfecting any Vessel
for any use with it.

Clear this, clear all, i. e. we make way for the Evidences

The looking over, and skilful discerning of these first impressions left upon
us, may, nay in truth will stand by us, and relieve us in the darkest days of
our greatest distresses; and we may find some foot-hold here, when all the rest
seem to be gone from us, to our own sense and apprehension. It Is Gods usual way
many times to put his Servant to it, as he tried Abraham, to make them
sacrifice their Isaacs, even to burn the (...) and pledges he has given them
for the (...) of the Covenant, and established their hearts therein. For Isaac
was all the pledge that the Lord had given, That in his Seed, all the Nations of
the Earth should be blesfed: now he commands him to cast his Evidence into the
fire, brings him to his beginnings, Genesis 22. 1, 2. So the Lord does often with
his: Enlargements fail, the heart is dead, their Graces bedridden, their peace
disturbed, their assurance gone; so that they find nothing, feel nothing in
their own sense and apprehension, all is in the ashes; God begins with them
upon the bare board, as we say, they sit down with a heart yielding and
melting, a heart burdened with sin, though it cannot disburden it self, a heart
loosened from his lusts, willing that God should remove them, though he cannot
subdue them.

The Second thing to be opened is, The Second thing to be opened.


How God sets on this Sorrow, and makes the soul to feel sin its greatest evil,
when Naturally it finds greatest content in it.

OR,

How it is possible that the soul (...) wholly possessed with sin, can be made
to feel the weight of sin as to be severed from it, where there is no room for
a habit in the subject, there can be no work of a habit; for habits of Grace
and sin work so far as they be in their subject, and have (...) from the
subjects in which they be: Corruption must be in the heart, before it carry and
command the heart; Grace must be in the soul, before it can act and quicken the
soul to its work. Now how the soul should come to feel, and be loosened from
it is corruption, when there is nothing in it but corruption, when God comes to
work upon it, how does God bring this about?

If by Sorrow a man be (...) from sin, then it must have this (...) before it
be loosened, because it is an effect of it. If so, then it must have a gracious
frame, and be possessed with the presence of Grace, when it is wholly possessed
with sin, which cannot be.

I Answer: In these Secrets and depths of Gods Spiritual Answ.
Dispensations with the souls of men, we must learn to be wise to sobriety, and
adore the ways of God which are too wonderful for us; and if any paths of his
Providence in an ordinary course are beyond our ken, and past finding out, I
suppose his complyings with the consciences and hearts of men in their
Conversion, are some of the chief. It Is of our Natural Birth David speaks,
Psalm. 139. I am fearfully and wonderfully made, much more may it be said of our
new birth: The wise man, Eccles. 11. 5. says, (...) thou know not the way
of the Spirit, (...) (...) (...) (...) do grow in the womb of her that is with
Child, so thou know not the (...) of God, nor of his Spirit, how he fashions
the frame of the mind and heart of him he will bring home to himself; curious we
should not be, careless we must not be. I shall leave therefore some such (...)
Expressions, so far as my light goes, and occasion the judicious to consider
further, for the further clearing of Gods Work.

That which I shall say here for the Answer and Explication of the Second thing,
I shall east into (...) conclusions, (...) I conceive that is (...) easiest and
openest way to help the weak.

In a right sense it (...) be truly said, that sin is truly Conclus.
cross and opposite to the Nature of the soul, and the greatest evil that does
or can (...): I say, opposite this day, whereby it is restlesly carried in the
search, and for the procurement of that good for which it was made, though it
(...) the right (...) of what it is, and falls short in the (...) of it. The
soul was made for (...) end, and good, and therefore for a better than it self,
therefore for God, therefore to enjoy union with him, and communion with those
blessed excellencies of his, so far as they are communicable, and it were
capable; this impression remains still upon the soul, though the work thereof
is wholly prejudiced, and it self disappointed wholly of that good which would
satisfy the desires thereof, and it misseth. (...) being possessed with sin,
the Judgment is blinded and deluded that it mistakes utterly, and perceives not
this good, and so pursues other things in the room of it, yet restless and
unsatisfied in what it-hath, and attains, but it has not that for which it was
made; thus Paul speaks of the Romans, Romans 2. 14. Being without the Law, they
show the work of the Law written in their hearts, their Conscience excusing or
accusing; this ever appears in the heart corrupt, I was for a (...); the
ambitious man he seeks his (...), (...) man the World, (...) gots the booty,
and yet is not (...) in that which he gets; I (...) (...) (...), and (...)
which should (...), and yet (...) does not satisfy. And (...) they know no
(...) (...) these, and are not satisfied with these, therefore they (...) (...)
carried after more of these vain (...), (...) Honor, more Wealth, more (...);
the (...) blinded (...) the (...) (...) and (...) with them, (...) (...) (...)
by what light, (...) is carried to no other by the power and principles it
has. This is the reason the Apostle Peter gives, why carnal hearts (...) see
spiritual (...), 2 Pet. 1. 9. Because they are blind; and cannot see (...)
(...). (...) (...) (...) things are far (...), and blind men (...) (...) reach
(...), (...) they (...) the light, help, and (...) (...) the (...), and the
(...) (...) (...).

Hence the reason follows.

That which crosses the end and good of the soul for which it was made; that
is so far contrary to the nature of the soul and the greatest evil that can
befall it.

But sin as such, and such, and that only crosses the end and greatest good
of the soul.

If sin in the venom and pollution of it were discovered, Conclus.
and brought home effectually to the nature of the soul, it might be made
sensible thereof and deeply affected and burdened therewith; this follows
undeniably from the former. That which carries the crossness of the greatest
evil to the nature of the soul were it but so seen did it but so act upon the
soul, it would affect it with the greatest grief and burden; for sorrow in all
the proportions of it issues from these two grounds. A crossness of an evil
truly apprehended by the judgment: and the venom acting really upon us; where
these are in a greater or lesser measure; there sorrow is greater or less; upon
this ground the Apostle evidenceth the grief and burden of the creature Romans 8.
22. For we know that the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together
until now, and that because it was made subject to vanity, and this is their
vanity because their end is crossed, and so their good is hindered: for whereas
it is their desire to serve such as may serve God, when they serve the humors,
and corruptions of carnal men, they become vain and miss their end, and so
their good, and this is, as it were a grief to them. Were the venom of sin but
discovered and acted upon the nature of the soul it could not but groan under
the evil and vanity thereof as that which wholly deprives it of its end and good.

While the soul stands fully under the power of corruptions Conclus.
possessed with it and acted by it, it is not possible it should apprebend the
evil of sin, nor the nature of the soul taste the venom thereof. Sin carries no
crossness of opposition of evil to it self, and therefore (...) disquiet to it
self, (...) so no separation from it self. But sin wholly possessing and wholly
acting the soul it makes the mind and heart apprehend, not according to the
nature of the soul and impression left upon it when created but according to
the distemper by which it is possessed, and carried. So did they to Samuel, 1 Samuel 8. 19. they said, nay but we will have a King Jer. 18. 12. So they to
Jeremiah; we will walk every one in the imagination of his own heart. Give the
sick man the most pleasant potion though the Physician profess it, and give
reasons, and others by experience find it so, he no sooner tastes it but he puts
it away, as that which is exceeding bitter, because his taste is corrupted, and
tongue furred with the foulness of his stomach he rellisheth the drink not
according to what they say and what it is, or what the natural constitution of
the palate would persuade, but what his distemper which now possesses and
disordreth his taste, tell him. So it was with Judas, though he was told before,
that it were better he had never been born, that would not do the deed, his
covetous heart found another relish, nay when he flung away his money out of
vexation, yet he rellished hismurther still, and therefore hanged himself. And
this is the reason why they who sin against the holy Ghost even against the
evidence of reason, the corruption of their heart rellisheth other than reason
tells.

Hence the Lord Christ by the irresistible power of his Conclus.
spirit does countermand the authority of sin; makes it appear that its
commission is come to an end, the date of it is expired. Namely sin after Adam
withdrawing himself received a commission from divine justice, that (...) the
soul would not be ruled by him and his law. It should be possessed and acted by
corruption; the date of the commission lasts until the Lord Jesus the second
Adam who (...) for the sinner comes by covenant to take the soul to himself;
and then he appearing in this behalf, sin is forced back, and not to exercise
her power, and then the evil of sin is brought home to the soul and set on with
the full venom of it, and the nature of the soul is made sensible of it, I say
made sensible and deeply affected therewith; This me thinks is the binding of
the strong man, Math. 12. 29. Whereby the Devils armor that is his commission
by virtue of which (...) holds the soul is taken away from him stopp the sluice
and stream that drives the mil, and then you turn the wheel another way, which
otherwise while under the sourse of the stream cannot be stirred. Thus God
commands the soul to return from iniquity Job. 36. 10. And if he do but stop
the commission for a sudden turn, then there may follow a taste which such as
sin against the holy Ghost may have of whom the Apostle speaks Hebr. 6. 4, 5, 6.

The Lord Jesus by the virtu of his death puts an end Conclus.
to the commission that divine justice gave, and disanuls the right and power
that sin challenged and by which it acted the soul of a sinner, whereby it kept
the soul under its command that no means could work upon it or be made
effectual to it. 1. Pet. 3. 18. Christ dyed for us that he might bring us to
God. For when Adam (and so we in him) wilfully departed from God and would not
be guided by his rightous law and just will; divine justice gave a commission to
sin to take vengeance of the soul, and keep it under, that no good may come to
it or it receive any; now Christ by his death having satisfied justice, the
commission is cancelled, there is nothing on Gods part which hinders; And there
is nothing on our parts can hinder, the authority of sin is disannulled, his
claym made void; that soul is mine says Christ, hands off (...), hands off
sin; the claym answered, authority disannulled, power stopped, now there is way
for light to come to the mind; and for the nature of sin as discovered to be
set on upon the soul, and it made to seel the venom thereof, as upon those
terms it may, utsupra. So our Savior (...). 1. 18. I was dead but am alive,
and I have the keys of hell and death. i. e. has supreme authority to shoot
back al boults to open al doors. As the first Adam by natural generation (...)
power and commission from divine justice to turn the souls of his children from
God to sin, so the second Adam having satisfied and answered divine justice,
has power to turn the soul from satan and sin to God; satan and sin are at his
devotion, the soul at his command

The third particular to be opened.

How far the soul is or may be truly said to be active in this work of
Contrition, or this

The Answer may be conceived in the following particulars.

There is no power in man to remove that resistance that is in his heart
against God and the work of his grace; that which out of its own corrupt
principles does wholly for resistance cannot take away resistance; it implies a
palpable contradiction, as that which is professedly cross to common sense; but
the corrupt heart of a natural man while he is in the state of nature, and
corruption, does and cannot but wholly resist, the work of Gods spirit and
grace and all the saveing operations of all the means thereof. The flesh lusts
against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and these two are
contrary Gal. 5. 17. And what is born of the flesh is flesh John, 3. 7. that is
the temper and inward constitution of a soul in its natural condition, its
wholly born of the flesh, and therefore nothing but flesh, and therefore can do
nothing but resist the spirit; yea it cannot but oppose what ever would take
that resistance away; for it is a received rule of reason and confessed of al
hands, every thing desires the preservation of it self, and its being,
otherwise the being and the causes that made up the being should be cross to
the thing, if it should endeavor its own destruction, nay a thing should be
opposite to it self; Hence it is that the corruption of the heart will put forth
all the skill and strength it has or by the contrivements of carnal reason, can
compass to fortify and preserve it self against the spiritual and saving
dispensation of the work of Gods spirit in his own ordinances, because wicked
men look at the power thereof as that which works the ruin of their lusts;
therefore they labor to avoid the light if they can, if not that, to oppose it,
and overbear it by their delusions, if not that, to destroy it; they will not
hear the truth, or gainsay, what they hear, or abhor and loath what they cannot
many times gainsay, nay endeavor to destroy what they so hate and are
tormented withal, The wisdom of the flesh cannot be subject to the law. Romans 8.
7. the heart rises up in arms, and indignation against the soul-saving and
uncontrollable evidences of the truth, they will not be ruled by the holiness of
it, and they cannot endure the terror and Majesty of it. (...) sometimes the
Philystians dealt with the Ark when it came into the field, they thus spoke one
to another there was never such a thing heard of as this, these are the Gods
that destroyed the Egiptians in the red. Sea, quit your selves like men, Oh ye
Philystins, that ye be not servants to the Hebrews, They say of the word as
sometimes of our Savior. Math. 21. this is the Heyr come let us kill him, and
the inheritance shall be ours, they cannot have their lusts so long as the power
of the word would, overtop and cross them, therefore Herodias prefers John
Baptists head before half the Kingdom, that she might be quiet in her sins.

Before the soul can act against the evil of sin or for venom of sin lies, and
that which stops the passage of the power of the ordinance and the work of
Grace, It Is necessary that the Lord should not only concur with the (...) of
the will of a sinner to lead or draw forth the act thereof which he has ability
to express, but he must let in an influence of the (...) power and virtue into
the faculty of the will, whereby it may be enabled to put forth an act unto
which it formerly it had no power of it self; It Is a subtle pang of
Pelagianism and the Arminians some of their successors have licked up that
loathsome heresy of theirs at this day: and (...) this delusion and cunning
pretense of theirs they would color over those rotten and poysonful conceits;
and hence it is they labor to bear men in hand, that they labor to set forth
and exalt the honor of Gods free grace, they profess that without the
preventing grace of God, man's free will and all that ability he has left in
nature since the fall is able to do no spiritual good. The words are fair but
the intent is false and (...), and indeed they do privily and cunningly
undermine the work of Gods grace while they pretend indeed to advance it. For
the meaning is this. God must enlighten men's minds and reveal the things of
life and happiness to men's wills, excite, stir up and call forth their hearts to
the embracing of that which is good, and concur with him in their endeavors to
the performance of the work or else they can do nothing, so that upon this
grant, Gods free grace in the work of conversion, calls forth and concurs with
that act which man's free will has sufficiency to put forth, which is to make
man share with God in his work, and to part stakes with him.

But the truth is this, The Lord must let in an influence of some special
motion and operation and leave some impression of spiritual power upon the will
to enable it to act, not only to concur with the act thereof. God gives a man
ability whereby he may will, does not (...) with him by assistance and
providence when he wills as one in whom we live and move.

Of the first of these it is true which many of the Ancients speak, God works
without us, many things in us, i. e. unto which we being in no causal ability
at al, God gives us ability to do that which is pleasing and spiritual, to the
obtaining whereof, we had no causal ability of our own; when the Lord Christ
raised Lazarus now dead and smelling in the Grave, he did not concur with the
action and motion of his Soul in rising out of the Grave, but without any
causal concurrence or help of Lazarus, he put a soul into his body, whereby he
was enabled to stir and move. So it is with a soul dead in sins and trespasses,
when the mind and will have no ability for any spiritual act, not able to take
off that deadness and indisposition that is there, the Lord without the will,
without any causal concurrence of it, lets in ability into it for the work, and
concurs with it in the work. So Paul expresses this manner of Gods Work, 2
Cor. 4. 6. He causes light to shine out of darkness, he gives light and being
out of darkness, without the help of light, and then concurs with the light in
the shining of it, God lets in an Influence to the will, not only lends a
concurrence to the work.

The Influence of this spiritual Power whereby the Lord takes away this sinful
resistance, is not by any gracious habit of sanctification, but by an
irresistible motion of the work of his spirit upon the soul: By a gracious
habit of Sanctification, I mean those spiritual Graces of Wisdom, Holiness,
Righteousness, in which Adam at first was created, and according unto which, all the Elect and called are renewed according to the Image of him that created
them, Ephesians. 4. 24. Col. 3. 10. these gracious habits are so many Spiritual and
Supernatural Principles as it were left in the soul, whereby it is in a state
of Life and Grace, and liberty and free will to any good; and therefore as
those that are Agents by Counsel, they are (...) of their own work, can act or
not act, can act more or less according to their own choice: And I follow the
Apprehension of those Authors who conceive that the removal of this resistance
is not by any gracious habit of Sanctification, but by the irresistible motion
of the work of the Spirit; and therefore they call it Actual Grace, the other
Habitual: A work of the Spirit assisting, the other a work of the Spirit
inhabiting, or dwelling in the heart; the one a Principle of Grace in us which
we have from communion with Christ; the other the work of the Spirit upon us,
to bring us from our sins to union with the Lord Jesus; and that upon these
grounds:

All Habits (as it is in the Nature of all qualities) The Natural man does not
receive the things of the Spirit of God, nay he cannot do it, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The
World cannot receive the Comforter, John, 14. 21.

Where there is a capability to receive, there is some kind of consent and
agreement, but so as yet it cannot be here in a heart fastened to its lusts;
where there is a total opposition, there is no fit disposition to receive, but
while the soul is under the power of this resistance, there is a total
opposition, and therefore there can be no consension.

Again Secondly, All gracious Habits of Sanctification Adam, 1 Cor. 15. 49. As
we have born the Image of the first Adam, so shall we also bear the Image of
the second Adam, and so also part of our Spiritual communion with Christ, of
whose fullness we receive Grace for Grace, John, 1. 16. and are transformed from
one degree of glorious Grace to another, 2 Cor. 3. last.

All Communion presupposes Union; no sap in John, 15. 4. Unless ye abide in
me, ye can have nothing, do nothing: Ephesians. 4. 15, 16. Grows up in him in all
things, who is our Head, by whom the Body aptly compacted together, according
to the effectual working, etc. First In-being then working.

No Union but by an Act, for no qualities close

Those gracious Habits, when and wheresoever they to issue this Point, Look as
it is in the will of every Son of Adam, when he comes to be averted, and turned
(...) God to sin in the course of Natural Generation; so it is in a right
proportion in the (...) of every man begotten of the Second Adam, when he comes
to be turned from sin to God in Spiritual Conversion. Look at the will of a
Child in the course of Natural Generation, as it is created by God, and comes
holy and undefiled out of his hand; as the question, How comes the will of the
Child to be turned from God to sin? it cannot be by any actual sin of its own,
it has committed none; it cannot be by any corrupt quality first put into it,
before it was turned from God, and by which, that turning aside is wrought, for
then it should be under the power of sin, while yet it is under the power of
God. But by virtue of Adams sin, and the Curse that attends the breach of the
Covenant, and by means of the next Parent in the work of Generation; the Body
made wonderfully, and the Soul created holy by God, he as an unskilful workman,
by the virtue of the Curse, acting the work of Generation under the power of
the Curse, and power of a perverted will, turns the set of the Soul from God,
joins body and soul in a wrong and exorbitant manner; hence they (...) to be in
a disorderly frame, the wheels run wrong, under the power of original
corruption, and struck wrong by actual transgression; so that there is the
strength of the Curse, the push of Divine Justice, and the perverting stroke of
the next Parent turns the soul from God to sin, whence it comes to be wholly
possessed and acted by corruption.

So it is by proportion in a contrary manner in the work of Conversion, when
the Lord Jesus comes to bring the sinner home, he does not put sanctifying
Grace into the heart, to bring the heart from the power and rebellion of fin,
for then it should be under the power of Grace and sin together; but by the
mighty impression and motion of his Spirit takes off the resistance, and turns
the soul from sin to himself in Christ, in whom accepting of it as adopted in
his Son, he leaves the impression of his Image, and al gracious abilities
whereby the heart may be carried toward him, and act for him in all things.

In the removal of this resistance, for the conquering and overpowering this
opposition, that a carnal heart naturally carries against God and his Grace,
the will of the sinner it self is a mere Patient, and the soul is only a
sufferer and acts not, but is acted upon; for the heart and will of a sinner
being possessed and overpowered with corruption, that which is the subject of
his corrupt quality, and acted by it, has no power to expel it, that which is
wholly carried by resistance, cannot will to remove that resistance out of it,
but in truth resists all that resists or opposes that; only the Lord by the
mighty impression of the powerful operation of Spirit over-bears that
opposition in the soul, and forces the soul to feel the stab and venom of sin,
though it use all means and ways it can to avoid the stroke of it, but al in
vain, for the Arrows of the Almighty stick fast in him: And all this is done,
and may be without any prejudice to any Liberty that the Lord has put into the
will, for the will may be forced to suffer even against it is will, without any
wrong to the liberty thereof, as the damned do in Hell at this day, and shall
through all eternity, and shall never be able to get from under the terrors of
the Almighty.

For the meaning of that received expression, the Will cannot be compelled, is
this, In all the acts the Will puts forth, she is a cause by counsel, and acts
from the inward power and ability that is implanted in her; to be compelled, is
to act by constraining force from without: now for the will to act from her own
power inwardly, and yet to be acted by a contrary power from without, are
Contradictions. The will then (in a word) cannot be constrained to do, but it
may be constrained to suffer without any the least prejudice to liberty; and so
it is here in this work I now mention, a mere sufferer.

Thus Job, 36, 10. The Lord said to command men from iniquity; he not only
directs, but by a sovereign power carries the soul from iniquity: thus
lamenting Ephraim entreats, Jer. 31. 18. Turn me and I shall be turned, thou
art the Lord my God: And Paul was sent, Acts, 20. 18. To turn men from darkness
to light; and so the whole frame of Scripture runs: they are said to be wounded,
burdened, (...), when they should avoid the blow, and remove the burden, were
in their choice, but they are pressed under the hand of the Lord, which they
are not able to escape, though not able to undergo it: Hence it is that though
by reason of the presence of the body of death that yet remains, there will be
some stirrings of distemper, which will raise up some mutinies and conspiracies
against the work and preventing Grace of God, yet there will never be power nor
possibility, so far to resist as to hinder the work of Conversion, and
effectual bringing of the soul to God: As in an Army wholly defeated, and
routed, and scattered, their Commanders slain, and strong Holds taken, and
their Country possessed; though some roving Troops may happily pilfer and
forage up and down here and there in secret, when they are not observed; yet
they are never able to make head, or come into the Field. So here.

Lastly, When this resistance is removed, and the the soul comes yet further to
yield consent that there should be an everlasting divorce made between it and
her former lusts and lovers, and is in earnest content they should for ever be
estranged from her, and she from them. And in this consent which the soul
yields for this separation, which is the great knot, it moves only as under the
power, and in the virtue of the motion of the Spirit. So that Divines thus
speak, This consent is not of our selves, though not without our selves. There
is no power in the soul, by which as a principle and beginning of the work it is
carried to the work, but acts as prevented by the impression of the power and
motion of the Spirit, in virtue whereof it is acted and enabled to this consent;
so that the act of Gods exciting and working Grace, does not concur with the
power that is in the will, to put forth this consent, but as a principle leaves
an impression of power upon the will, by the virtue whereof it is moved, and so
moves in and to this consent. As the will of a child of Adam, in generation it
turns from God to sin, not by any first power of its own, but by the perverting
work of the next Parent, who under the virtue of the Curse and Gods Divine
Justice, turned it from the Lord, and the Authority of the Law, and put it
under the Authority of fin: So the will of him that comes to be begotten of the
Second Adam, does turn from sin unto God, not by any power or principle it has
of its own, but by the impression of the operation of his Spirit by which it is
turned, and in virtue of that it turns. Take an instance: Suppose the first
Grace offered, or the voice of Gods Call tendered unto the will that now has
the resistance taken off; the Question now grows, How the will comes to give
her consent to this Act or first Grace; this consent must come either from the
will only; or partly from the will, and partly from Grace; or from Grace only.
To say from the will only, is Heretical, and perfect Pelagianism in the highest
degree, which exalts Nature above Grace, nay, to make it perfect without it. If
from Grace and the will both, as diverse principles, then there is a concurrence
of our will by a power of its own with the power of Grace at the same instant
to this work of consent, then there is an ability in the will to begin its
work, and to meet and concur with Grace, without Grace so far in a Spiritual
Act: As for instance, The Father and the child both draw a Boat; the Father
puts more strength to the work, the Son also from a principle of its own puts
forth some strength, and both these concur and meet in the motion; the
beginning is several from each as several causes, though both meet in the act:
So that Grace concurs with the power of the will to this motion, does not give
power and principle whereby it moves: And this also is Heretical and
Pelagianism; for thus far, and in that beginning, the will closes with Grace
without the power of Grace, which is cross to the Apostle, and to all the
former conclusions. Whereas it is in this consent, The first call of Grace
prevents, and wholly moves the will, and the will in the (...) of that motion,
moves to the call, and consents: As it in the Echo, the Voice stirs the Air,
the Air in virtue of that stir, returns the Voice again.

Among some searching Disputes, I meet with such an expression, which I shall
propound and explicate, because it makes way for the understanding of the thing
in hand; The Will does consent or will, but does not make it self to consent,
but is made so by another. Their meaning is this:

1. The Will does put forth the Act of Consent, and so far it is the cause of
it. 2. But it was not the cause of that power by which it was enabled to
consent, but that it received, and by that it was enabled to it. So that this
seems to be the order in which God proceeds.
God takes away that resistance by the irresistible operation vult moveri.

God leaves a powerful impression upon the will, acts and consent, so that this
consent is not from our selves, though not without our selves.

And thus we are put beyond any principle of our own, or to be the beginners of
our own work, by any thing we have in our selves, which cuts the sinews of the
Covenant of Works; and hither many times God will bring us to our beginnings, to
the bare board, even to leave our souls with him, that he may carry us from sin
to himself, and act us upon himself, and keep us with himself for ever. Thus
David, Psalm. 119. 29. Take from me the way of lying, (...) could not take it
away himself: Hos. 14. 2. Take away all iniquity; they leave themselves in Gods
hand, that the Lord would cause them to turn from iniquity.

So that in this Condition, it is true to say a man has not a principle of
concurrence with God, as by sanctified habits we have; but the Spirit puts in
us a power whereby we are carried to God.

The Fourth Particular for opening of the Point.

The behavior of the heart under this stroke;

When this Sorrow is rightly set on, and the soul rightly affected therewith,
the sinner has the loath somness of corruption ever in his sight, keeps it
ever within his ken: he could not be brought before to take to heart, the
hainousness of (...) evil; Ministers pressed him with it in public, others
minded him of it in private, forewarned him of the direful venom and (...) that
lay in those distempers of his, that one day he was like to feel to the hazard
of his everlasting happiness, it would be bitterness in the latter end. but he
turned the deaf ear to al, would not so much as take it into consideration, not
once look back into the danger of his rebellions, nor listen to any thing that
may force the same upon his soul; but now the case is altered; he that could
not be brought to see sin before, now he will see nothing but sin, cannot be
brought to look off from it, he feels now the plague of those provocations of
his, and finds by woeful proof and experience the truth of all that formerly has
been told him, and has time enough now to recount the savory counsels, those
seasonable reproofs, directions and entreaties which would have kept him from
the commssion of those evils, the hainousness whereof he is not able to
conceive; the bitterness and poison whereof he is not able to bear, now he is
constrained to feel the sting thereof. He has now leisure to survey the folly
and perverseness of his spirit in former times and to sit down in silence and
shame; now he can seal to that as an eternal truth of God which before he east
behind his back as slight and vain; Oh I now see the Ministers were faithful
watchmen which foresaw the danger, and foretold me how dreadful the evils
would be which did attend my distempers, If I would not leave my sin, mercy and
blessing would leave me, and my heart feels it so. The Christians were loving
and compassionate which labored by earnest and affectionate entreaties to with
draw me from the ways of wickedness, which with drew me from God, and by woeful
experience I sind it so. Though it were a sharp, yet it was a sure and safe
word that I have often heard, but would never receive, It were better to cut
off my hand and to pluck out mine eye and to enter lame and maimed into the
Kingdom of Heaven, lame and maimed in comforts and credit, and carnal and
sensual delights, than to have (...) these and go to hell, where the worm never
dies and the fire never goes out, and now my Conscience confesses it is so,
Lord where was my mind that could not see this? how hard and senseless my heart
that could not be affected with this? the sinner thus wounded, his hand is ever
upon the sore, his eye upon his distemper, as the extreme danger that hangs
over his head, and the deadliest enemy that is in pursuit of his soul; he
sleeps and wakes and eats, and drinks with this, as his daily diet, and a
standing dish; carries it up and down as his daily companion, Psalm. 51. 3. My
sin is ever before me; listen to him when he sighs out his prayers in secret,
ye shall observe his complaints run upon this, confer with him, enquire of his
condition, his speech ever returns to this point, and al his questions lead
still to the discovery of the loathsomness of his rebellions. As it is with a
commander or General of the field when he sees the enemy come on furiously, his
numbers many, his power great, his soldiers skilful and courageous so that he
sees al ly at stake, the shock is like to be sudden and fierce, either conquer
al or loose al; A prudent commander seeing where the stress of the battle and
the strength of the enemy lies, and the safety or ruin of the whole consists; he
leaves the thoughts of comforts, conveniences, wife and family, the profits
and privileges which he has formerly enjoyed and prized; bends al his
thoughts, exercises the utmost of al his (...) now to defeat the enemy how to
encounter him, how to overcome him, and this takes up the whole mind and the
whole man, its vayn to attend other things when the neglect of the enemies
approach is the loss and overthrow of al. So it is with a broken hearted
Christian when the numberless company of those hellish abominations of heart
and life, lay siedg against and threaten his everlasting ruin, either he must
destroy them or they will undoubtedly destroy his comforts; he leaves the
consideration of other things and looks to the main chance. If my sin live I
dye for it either I must be separated from them or they from me; and therefore
bends al his forces, bestows al his thoughts how the hainousness of this may be
forever discovered, and the heart forever freed from the power and authority
thereof. The Apostle Paul has his sin ever in his eye, he keeps it in fresh
remembrance and consideration never has occasion to mention any thing of
himself but still he strikes upon that string, to me the least of all Saints and
then the chiefest of all sinners, I was a persecuter 1 Timothy 1. 15.
and blasphemer, the main evil was there, and his eye and thoughts were most
upon that. So the lamenting church Lam 5. 16. woe to us because we have sinned,
the plague famine and sword though they were beyond measure grievous, yet the
plague sore of their sins was heaviest upon their hearts and most in their
thoughts, so it is with a contrite sinner, his complaints and thoughts return
hither as to their center, publish the comforts, promises and privileges of
the Gospel, the sinner acknowledges the promises are precious, the comforts
are sweet the privileges great, and happy they that ever they were born that
have a title thereunto; But alas what have I to do with these, my heart is yet
hard, and my sins yet unsubdued. Those keep good things from me; Lay open all the threatenings of the word, the plagues the Lord has prepared, the curses,
judgments and punishments that are recorded in the scripture and ever were
inflicted by the justice of the Lord, the contrite sinner looks presently
beyond these plagues to his sins, which is the cause of al these and worse than
al these, and that gives the sting and evil unto al these evils what shall I do
Psalm. 51
I have sinned, deliver me from blood guiltiness O God, not from the sword,
though that was threatened, but from his sin.

The sinner that has his heart thus truly affected and pierced through with
his sins, is marvelous tender, easily to be convinced, of a yielding
disposition, i. e. freely and readily enlarged in the open acknowledgment of an
evil that is discovered and he stands guilty of; As it is with the body when it
is pierced or pricked with a stiletto. He bleeds inwardly it may be but so as
the blood has no vent, nor the party relief; hence the life is in hazard, but
when its thrust quite through, though the wound be greater and wider yet the
danger is less, because the party bleeds kindly and naturally, the wound is
more (...) to be cleansed and healed, there is no fear of festering and
rankling inwardly, but the Surgeon may readily come at it for the cure. So
it is when the soul is wounded aright with Godly sorrow for its sin, it bleeds
kindly and naturally, ready to see the evil, the core, the root of that
corruption from whence it comes, and willing and open hearted that the saving
word of the truth, either of instruction, reproof, comfort or exhortation may
be applied for cure and recovery. A broken hearted sinner falls immediately
before the power of the word, takes the sin presently home to himself, when
ever or what ever is presented with evidence to him, without cavilling or
gainsaying, shifting or winding away from under the authority thereof. That
resistance and gainsaying opposition is now removed, which formerly took
possession: and the irresistible power of the spirit has flung down those
strong holds of Satan and sin, has conquered and captivated the high thoughts
of the mind and sturdy rebellions of the heart unto the obedience of the Lord
Jesus, and therefore there is an entrance and easy passage made for the truth
to take place and the heart to take the impression thereof with some pleasing
content; parts of the body which are wounded, broken and sore, and very
sensible of the least stir or touch of any thing that comes nigh them, they
feel presently and are affected with some trouble, Oh say we, its my broken
Arm, my sore Hand, the least touch it goes to my heart; It Is so with broken
spirits they are presently sensible of the least touch of any truth, the least
intimation or discovery of any sin that comes by the by, if from a work that
falls occasionally, it feels it forthwith, yields it, and owns it, without any
more ado. That's the deceit of my heart which I never saw before, that's my
distemper unto which I have been addicted: the law is holy and good, but my
heart naught, and sold under sin Romans 7. this was the temper of good (...) at
the reading of the law which the Lord observes and so much (...) 2 Chronicles. 34.
27. because thy heart was tender, and melted when thou heardest the words of
this law, he took the impression of the truth at the first, without the least
appearance of any opposition, in any particular or rising of spirit against
them, though the severity and sharpness of the threatenings were marvailous
cross not only to a corrupt heart but to the outward comforts, and eminent
privileges of his place, pomp and prosperity of his Crown, and Kingdom; the
heart is melted and broken is conquered by the truth, and therefore can do 1
Cor. 13.
nothing against it. But can do any thing against its own lusts, and the
pleasing corruption of his own nature; this is part of that preparation which
the Baptist, the Harbenger of our Savior made, to make this plain, for his
coming into the hearts of his as into his temple. Luk 3. The rough things shall
be made plain, and crooked things straight, the rugged and sturdy gainsayings
of a rebellious heart, are taken away and it is made easy and readily yielding
to the evidence of any part of Gods will, it finds a plain passage into the
soul, no rub in the way, no rising against the righteous and good will of God.
If any thing be doubtful he is easy to be informed; amiss, to be reproved and
amended thereby. Those crooked aims and by ends also whereby falshearted
hypocrites serve their turn of the Lord Jesus, seek for grace and mercy either
to quiet the horror of their (...), promote their own credit, or under a
profession against sin to get more liberty to commit sin, to sin without
suspicion or distraction; these rugged distempers must be levelled, and the
spirit of a man made pliable, simple and sincere, and then all flesh shall see
the salvation of the Lord. And unless this de done set thy heart at rest, thou
can never see Gods Salvation; True indeed I confess the truth many times may
be secret and such as at the present exceeds the reach and apprehension of
weaker judgments. And here will be, and in some (...) may, a long inquisition
and painful and tedious search for the right discovery where the narrow way
lies. But there is great ods betwixt an inquisition and serious enquiry that we
may see the truth. And a quarrelling against the evidence thereof that we may
not see it. Inquisition is one thing, contention against the truth is another;
that all the Saints should endeavor, this none but the ungodly will practice,
for it is given as a never failing note of a graceless person who is appointed
to destruction, to them who are contentious and obey not the truth, but obey
unrighteousness. Romans 2. 8. for where the one is not the other will be;
contentious persons join sides with their sinful distempers against the truth,
and authority of the righteous law of God; openly to maintain a professed
opposition against the truth is so loathsome to common sense and (...) even to
the remainders of light left in the (...) of a natural man, that hardly any man
is come to the height of wickedness that he dare openly own a course so
hellish, and absurdly unreasonable, and therefore your cunning hypocrite he
colors over his treachery under another pretense; and therefore his conspiracy
comes under the name of enquiry, but in the issue if the will of God suit not
with his will, and his (...) commands cross the corruptions of his heart, which
he is resolved to maintayn, he casts al away in (...) and (...). So they to the
prophet (...), Jer. 42. 3. they said to the prophet (...), let our
supplycations be accepted before thee, and (...) thou (...) the Lord thy God
that be may show us the way (...) we may walk and the (...) (...) we may do;
and (...) 5. The (...) be a true and faithful witness (...) us, if we do (...)
even according to al things for which the Lord (...) God shall end (...) to us,
whether it be good (...) evil we will obey. But when he had consulted with the
Lord and returned his mind that they should not go down to Egypt, which no way
suited their privy resolutions which they had taken up within themselves. They
oppose him to his very face and give him the lie, Jer. 43. 2. Thou speak
falsely the Lord thy God has not sent thee to say go not into Egypt to sojourn
there: when he did not speak that which they would have him. Thus your false
hearted hypocrites deal with the truth of God, as the Jews dealt with Paul who
banded themselves together and bound themselves under a curse, that they would
neither eat nor drink until they had killed Paul. and they carried it thus,
they came to the Priests Acts, 23. 14. 15. we have bound our selves etc. Now go
ye with the counsel, signify to the chief Captain that he bring him down unto
you to morrow as though you would enquire something more fully; and we, ere-ever
he come near will be ready to kill him. So treacherous hypocrites deal with the
truth, their enquiries are indeed conspiracies against the wisdom and counsel
of the Lord, they say they would enquire more perfectly, and see more and more
fully what the mind of God is; But if things please not their pallat, suit not
their conceit, answer not their corrupt desire, and carnal ends they are
resolved what to do, only ask God leave to do what they list and therefore they
make no bones to cross the truth when it crosses their expectation, when that
which is answered they cannot remove it, that which is alleged they cannot
gainsay, yet hold their own apprehensions and so cast the commands of God
behind their back, and refuse utterly to follow them. Whenas a brokenhearted
sinner who has this resistance taken away, he in earnest is content to part
with his corruption, and therefore readily gives way to what ever truth is
revealed in the evidence thereof. Both these dispositions the Apostle
expresses as contrary one to another answerable to the contrary conditions of
nature and Grace, Romans 6. 17. But God be thanked that ye were the Servants of
sin, that is an evidence of their Natural condition, But ye have obeyed from
the heart that form of Doctrine unto which ye were delivered; that is, they
were ready and easy to take the impression of every Truth that was published
and dispensed to them. Certain it is, he that is not willing to be convinced,
and to give way to the Authority of the Truth made known, and to submit
thereunto, is led with his own lusts, and is a Servant of sin to this very day.

He that has his (...) pierced through, and is truly affected with his sins,
he loathes himself and his soul for it, sees that shame is his due, and that
which his sin has, deserved, and therefore is willing to take that which is
his due and desert, desirous to shame and dishonor that which has been the
greatest shame and blot to his person and profession, and the greatest dishonor
to God; this is made the guise and behavior of all those whom God does kindly
and really break off from their sins, and bring them to himself, Ezekiel. 36. 31.
Then shall ye remember your evil ways and doings that were not good, and shall
loath your selves in your own sight for your iniquities, and for your
abominations: Ezekiel. 6. 9. And they that escape of you, shall remember me,
because, I am broken with your whorish heart, which has departed from me, and
with your eyes which go a whoring, and they shall loath themselves for the
evils they bave committed in all their abominations: Ezekiel. 16. last, Then shall
thou remember, be ashamed and confounded, and never open thy mouth more. The
soul in this condition, sees and feels now the (...), and the greatness of the
evil of sin, that rebellion and opposition by which it has been carried
against God, and the separation it has made from him; and therefore it loathes
that most, wherein most of this evil is harbored, and by which it has been
practiced, and that is his soul which has been the sink of these sinful
distempers, the root from whence all these bitter fruits arise and grows, the
fountain, or dunghill rather, whence all those (...) steams of loathsome
abominations have been sent, in speeches, practices, and behavior, in our daily
course; the filth of sin is most loathsome, and there is most of that in the
heart, therefore he loathes that most of all. It Is true, there be some sins so
detestable to the light of Nature, and the common principles left in a corrupt
Conscience, that they are not fit to be named, Murders, Adulteries, (...), and
Sodomy, brutish Drunkenness, and excessive Riots, which abase a man below the
very bruit Creatures, and make the Earth spue out such Inhabitants, as fitter
for the company of Devils, than the communion of men, It Is a shame to speak of
those things which were done of them in secret, Ephesians. 5. 12. And therefore
Reprobates do, and Hypocrites can, and all, even the worst of men, may when
they come to themselves in cold blood, and take things in a right
consideration, loath these practices because shameful and scandalous, fling
filth in their faces, disparagement upon their persons, and cast them out of
the society and communion of reasonable men, and make them abhorred of
humanity, even a terror to themselves; but alas when this is over, they look
not to the nest of these noysom abominations which lodges in their bosoms,
where they have their being and breeding in their hearts, the Cage of these
unclean Birds, the Den of these brutish Lusts; but if they can wipe the mouth
with the Harlot, and wash their hands as Pilate did, and keep themselves from
the contempt of men, and the stroke of Authority; they can maintain a privy
communion between these lusts and their souls, and suck out the sweet of these
by speculation, and never be troubled nor affected therewith. Judas flings away
his money, he fingers that no more, looks at his treasonable practices as
detestable to the very Scribes, but he still keeps his murder in his heart. But
when a sinner is indeed pierced quite through the heart, and feels inwardly the
(...) and evil of sin, he loathes that most, and his heart most of all, that is
most guilty and tainted with it. In the soul, there is (...) it were the soul
of sin, the (...) and poison of it, and he opposes that most, that has
opposed the Lord, (...) Spirit, and the Word and Work of his Grace, the (...)
of this mind, the preversness of this will, the distempers of these corrupt and
carnal affections; he is at (...) with his own heart, that ever it has held
any kind of connivence and correspondence with any corruption, ever been acted
by it, carried with it, that ever it has combined and conspired with sin and
Satan in (...) against the righteous and holy One of Israel, the great God of
Heaven and Earth; and here he finds work enough, even matter of abasement al
his days, he (...) down in shame, and is covered with confusion as with a
cloak, and never lifts up his head more, because he (...) that about him, that
will daily mind him of his own baseness. (...) It Is now his daily task to oppose
that which opposed the Lord, resist that which has resisted the work of Grace,
conspire against the Treacheries and plottings of his own heart, where all the
conspiracies against God and his holy Law have been hatched. Job was vile
before, but he saw not the vileness of his heart.

He fears all sin, and all provocations to sin, because he has felt the evil
of all, and knows the danger of all; any inclination from within, any
temptation from without, any appearance in the least measure that might provoke
thereunto. Therefore these two are put in way of opposition; Blessed is the man
that fears always, but he that hardens his heart, shall fall into mischief,
Prove. 28. 14. q. d. A hard heart feels (...), knows not the evil of (...), and
therefore (...) like the horso into the battle to his ruin; but if the heart
be truly wounded and contrite, truly affected with sin, as having experience of
the danger of it, it will come no more there; he that has been scorched with
those flames will come no more into that fire: As men who have wounded parts,
broken an Arm or a Leg, how careful are they where they sit, where they go,
they will come near nothing that may hurt, cannot endure any thing near, lest it
should so much as touch or trouble. So the Apostle advises, Heb. 12. 13. '
Make straight steps to your feet, lest that which is lame be turned out of the
way: Lame men observe every step they take, every stone upon which they tread,
see and view the place where they set their feet, search and set al right, come
there no more: So here, a broken Spirit (...) every thought, weighs every word,
takes notice of the least (...) of his heart, the first appearance of any
occasion or temptation: Thus they fear al sin above al other evil, nay, the
least sin above the greatest plague, because he has felt them by proof and
experience to be such; fears rather he shall not be sound, than not quiet: He
that fears one sin, and yet is careless to fall into another, he never seared
nor sorrowed aright; sorrow for sin will not make a man commit sin by sorrowing:
if he fear, or take notice it is a sin, it is enough: And hence it makes
watchful to (...) (...) prevent the evil. So Joseph, Genesis 39. 10, 11. He would
not lie by her, nor be with her, avoided her company that would withdraw his
communion from the Lord. It makes a man speedy to avoid the (...), he (...) the
place, left his garment rather than his (...) he that would not fall into the
pit, will not come near the bank: As after a (...), the party cannot endure the
sight, the (...) of it, and are careful to (...) (...) the appearance (...) the
(...) of such evils, (...). 19. 11. I (...) (...) thy (...) in my heart, that I
(...) (...) sin against thee.

He is (...) to attend all (...), but accounts most of those (...) work (...)
(...) and (...) (...) the (...) (...) (...) of corruption (...) (...) (...)
heart, and (...) (...) (...) the (...) from it. Though the Truths which are
delivered, carry dread with them to the Conscience, rack the heart of the
sinner in restless horror and perplexity; are like the bitterest Pills, and the
sharpest Corrosives, cross to the sinful security, and that Natural quiet the
soul does covet, yea, to his Credit and outward Comforts and conveniences in
which he pleased himself, yet he is content his hand should be cut off, and his
eye plucked out; that is, that the (...) Truth of God, and powerful and plain
Dispensation thereof should pluck away those darling distempers, be they as
profitable as a hand, as dear as an eye, rather than they should once pluck his
heart from the Lord; quarrels with the loathsome abominations of his Nature
which now are discovered, but gladly welcoms those soul-saving Truths that
would slay and subdue those sins, and not quarrel with them: The Word of the
Lord is a good Word, though a convicting, terrifying, yea, a condemning Word to
his own apprehension; he that is sensible of his burden as unsupportable and
passing strength, he is best pleased with that ease: A wise Patient, when by
his trial he has found it, and the consent of learned Physicians and
Chyrurgeons have concluded that his Gangrened part must be cut off and
cauterized, cannot be healed; though his Nature shrink at it, yet Reason and
his own preservation makes him desire and choose the sharpest Instrument,
because by that his life and safety is best procured. The sinner that finds the
burden of his sin the heaviest of al other, and a disease most deadly to his
soul, the sharpest Truths he accounts the safest, and therefore takes most
content therein, there shall no course that can be prescribed, be it never so
tedious to flesh and blood, no means that shall be appointed to him, be they
attended with never so much danger and difficulty, but he readily addresseth
himself to the use thereof, and easily submits himself to the Counsel, and
Authority, and Command of God therein; willing that God should do any thing
with him, that he might do good to his soul, and remove that which he feels to
be the greatest evil of it. As Ely to Samuel 1. Sam. 3. 17. Hide nothing from
me, though the heaviest and hardest of the message that he was to report; A
broken hearted sinner will (...) capitulate with the Almighty, stick with God
unless he may have his own (...), or look for some abatement from the Lord, if
the corruption be more than ordinary strong, and the means which are to be used
be mervailously cross, not only to a man's corruption, but to ones outward
comforts, yea to nature it self; yea the heart under this disposition yields
quietly that the Lord should take his. own course, any course with it, if he
will but take away his corruption with which he is plagued most of al, and of
which he desires most of al to be freed and delivered, if it were the good
pleasure of the Almighty: Zach. 14. 6. These are the wounds wherewith I was
wounded in the house of my friends. In case of resolution of it, come to the
highest sum and to the hazard of a man's whole estate even to his open beggary,
if God appoints it, he will bear it, if that be a means to remove his distemper,
he will not baulk it, he can part with his estate, if he may part with his
covetous disposition by that means. If the heart be loosened from the world its
not hard to leave the things of the world. But if the stroke be but overly that
has taken off, and abated only the edge of inordinate desire after these
things, but there lies a root of bitterness and base covetousness within,
though a man may take the receipt in some degrees of it to restore to some
shillings and crowns and pounds, but when it comes to hundreds, the heart is
not loosened from al, and therefore leaves God and his ordinance rather than
his own lusts. So the covetous young man when it came so that he must sell al
and give to the poor, He went away sorrowful, Math. 19. 20. etc. He would
rather go away from Christ than suffer him to take away his covetous
disposition.

Again: In Confession there is also a stress which a proud and perverse heart
is wholly unable to undergo, unless the Spirit be deeply affected with
unfeigned sorrow, and so fitted for to apply and bear so keen a Corrosive to
eat away his corruption; especially if it be the confession of some secret, and
some shameful distemper, as in case al other means be improved, the Lord
refuses to give pardon, or power, or peace, he then calls for attendance upon
this Ordinance: And the contrite sinner when he understands Gods mind herein,
he freely, fully powrs out his acknowledgment into the bosom of such, whose
help he craves in that case; and as his heart is loosened from his corruption,
so his confession issues Naturally from him, improving of it as a means
appointed by the Almighty that he may ashame his sinful course, and himself for
it, and be for ever separated from both; therefore confessing and forsaking are
joined together, Prove. 18. 13. and 1 John 7. he that indeed confesses; God is
faithful to forgive, this is to judge our selves, 1 Cor. 11. Whereas the sinner
that is yet riveted in the wretched distempers of his own soul, the Lord when
he has him upon the rack of Conscience, may happily wrest a consession from
him; but it is by a constraining hand, and against the hair wholly, he would be
eased of his plagues, not of his sin: So God Josh. 7.
sound out Achan, pursued Judas, and laid hold on Math. 27.
both, and pulled the acknowledgment by force out of their mouths, which they
did to ease them of their sorrows, not as a means to help against their sin.
Lastly, it easily falls under the evidence of an Admonition administered so far
as it reaches the evil of his sin, though happily unseasonably or disorderly
administered, neither out of that love it should, nor in that prudent manner it
ought to be: If yet he perceives that it helps him to remove his corruption, he
is glad of it, and takes advantage thereby to get the heart more convinced, and
estranged from its distemper. When Joab so rudely reproved the unseasonable and
excessive sorrow of David for the death of Absalon, 2 Samuel 19. 6, 7.
expressions not beseeming a Subject (...) to a Prince, when Shimei cast (...)
and (...) reproaches upon him, 2 Samuel 16. 7. 10. Come out thou bloody man, thou
man of Belial, the Lord has returned all the blood of Saul upon thee; he
retired into his own bosom, takes notice of the guilt of his own sin in the
death of Uriah he puts up all these provocations because he perceived' Gods
displeasure in them, let him alone, God has commanded him to curse, (...) he
will do good unto me. Though the Physic was il mingled, and given in a worse
manner, yet he takes both, and hoping to receive help against his corruption by
both; whereas the painted Hypocrite who never had his heart touched with any
true remorse for his many rebellions; observe how perversely (...) he will be
under a stinging reproof, quarrel with the man, the manner of the delivery of
it, etc.

A brokenhearted sinner feels his covetousness worse than beggary, and
therefore restores al readily; his sin worse than shame, and therefore freely
confesses it; than scorn or contempt, and therefore bears the sharpest
reproofs after the most unsavory and disorderly manner dispensed: he is weary
of his distemper, and therefore willing to bear the sharpest means that shall
be tried upon him by (...) to remove it,; use any, even the most difficult and
tedious that may subdue those distempers in his (...).

He is restlesly importunate in seeking relief from God against his sin, and
not satisfied in having any thing but deliverance from sin by Jesus Christ. He
is RESTLESS and SEEKING: So that should the Lord reprieve him srom his
presentplagues, abate him of the (...) he has found, and those pressures and
(...) (...) has felt, should the Lord (...) him of all his horrors, (...) him,
and take present (...) from the troubles and occasions of his Conscience; his
sorrows would seize upon him afresh, and his fears pursue him without
intermission; and the reason is, because the same cause continues, and
therefore there must be the same effect, as long as his sin continues
unsubdued, he will continue to sigh out his sorrows, and his prayers; for they
were not the crosses of the world, poverty in his Estate, disparagements which
were cast upon his person, pressures and persecutions from the rage of
unreasonable men, nor yet the torments of Hell prepared or suffered, that did
sink the soul of a contrite sinner: No, it was the crossness of his corrupt
heart to the holiness of the Almighty, his opposition against him, and
separation from him, that was the burden unsufferable and unsupportable; and as
long as this remains unsubdued, there is no end of his sorrows, nor end of his
prayers in suing to the Almighty for succor and relief. So David, Psalm. 38. 3.
There is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger, nor is there any
rest in my bones, because of my sin, for mine iniquities are gone over mine
head, as a heavy burden, they are too heavy for me, and he goes mourning all the
day long. Remove therefore al miseries, troubles, (...), punishments, let the
man free. As long as the bitterness of sin rightly set on by the hand of God
remains, he will (...) no rest in himself, and it is certain he will give God no
rest, Lam. 3. 49. Mine eye trickleth down, and cease not, without any
intermission till the Lord look down and behold from Heaven: For it is an
everlasting Truth; Sorrow for sin, if right, ever drives a man from sin to God,
never from God to sin; that which is appointed in way of Providence, to take
off the resistance of the corrupt heart against God, and our crossness to him,
that in reason cannot make way for any resistance, or crossness against him, to
convince the soul. He that truly sorrows for his departure from God, as
contrite sinners do, he is driven nearer to God, but never departs away from
him, by his sorrow; And therefore he that by reason of the horror of his heart
is hurried and carried to the commission of sin in his ordinary course, he
never truly found the burden of sin, for common sense will teach men that has
any consideration about him; he that is truly sensible of his burden, and in
earnest willing to be freed from it will not purposely and willingly ad to his
burden. He that is (...) God should take away his distemper he will not go away
from God, that so he may keep his distemper; he went away sorrowful says the
text, therefore his sorrow was worldly, causing death, he went away to his own
ruin; Achitophel to the rope, Judas to the gallows, Cain to the Land of Nod,
the knife, the pit, being hideous sins, comes from a sorrow that chooses sin
before misery, not from a sorrow that burdens with sin more than misery; and
therefore he never puts an end to his cries before he sees an end of his sins,
As a man oppressed and crushed under his burden and has no power to help
himself, and none by to succor him, hark how he cries help, help, and never
cease to cry help till he dies.

Again he is not satisfied in having any thing but deliverance from sin by
Christ; If nothing but a Christ can ease and deliver him, nothing but he can
satisfy him, it is certain if any thing cured thee besides a Savior, something
wounded thee and troubled thee besides sin, thou have been in horror of heart,
anguish and perplexity of spirit in the very flames of hell, and under the
fiercness of the fury of the Almighty, and now the terror is (...) and trouble
is over, quieted and eased, healed and comforted; but how come thou by quiet
and comfort, how healed how recovered? did time and continuance were it away?
thy pleasures and delights remove it? did thy prayers, perfourmances put in
bale upon thy Conscience, and thou stoppest the mouth of it with this, thou
have seen, confessed, resolved? or doft thou lick thy self whole by thy
reformations? thou have not been put beyond thy shifts by the Almighty, thou
have made a shift to pray it out, weep it out, fast it out, when those fayl,
shifted it off by thy promises and vows and resolutions, and so (...) sa west
an absolute need of a Christ, nor what it was to be brought to him, but have
made a shift to scramble it out; It Is certain as the Lord lives, and thy soul
lives, thou never knew what sorrow for sin meant, or conversion meant or
Christ, or Salvation meant to this very day: It was that which Paul speaks of
himself, 3. Phil. 8. 9. That I may win Christ and be found in him etc. his
brokenness of heart and sorrow for sin did in a restless way drive him thither,
he could not be satisfied without Christ.

The Reasons of the Point.

Because this sorrow is only true, God accounts it, Reas. 1.
and the Saints and Sinners shall so find it. Al other sorrows, what ever
pretenses or appearances are put upon them, they are in truth but counterfeit
and false, and men will fail in their hopes and fall short of their ends, and
expectations that trust thereunto they are not of the right make, nor have they
the right stamp of the spirit of contrition upon them, sorrow for the shame
that befalls the punishment that pincheth and lies heavy, wrath and vengeance
that scorcheth the Conscience, though this is good in his place as it makes way
for another, yet if it go no further men fall short of this work, and in the end
of their comforts also. This is in the way but he that sits down here will never
come to his end, untimely travels (...) untimely births; this we must do but
this is not al, and if we find no more, our sorrow is no true sorrow. Truth
ever carries conformity to the nature of the thing; the palate that rasts a
thing truly it (...) it as it is, bitter things as bitter, he sees a thing
truly that sees it as it is. But he that shall taste (...) things sweet, he that
shall call black blew, we say it, and sense (...) it, he is deceived. So here, he
that finds the burden of the punishment and feels his plagues heavier than his
sins, he does not feel things as they are, nor passes a righteous judgment
upon them according to their (...), for it has appeared and has been proved
that the least sin weighs down the heaviest plague. The heart tastes evils as
the stomach tastes meat, if thy sin be less than thy miseries, thy mouth is out
of taste; It was that which he charged upon Job. Job. 36. 21. thou have chosen
sin rather than affliction.

Because without this sorrow the heart can never be Reas. 2.
separated from his darling corruption, the league betwixt the soul and sin
cannot be broken and dissolved. Happily there may arise some brabbles and
slighty quarrels, betwixt the heart of a sinner and his distempers, but that
there should be a real divorce without this sorrow rightly set on, it is
impossible, for its open to every man's experience that which is sweet and
pleasant to the soul, that wherein it finds content, it will never cast away;
love and delight are affections of union, where things appear pleasant there is
no cause of parting; sorrow and (...) are affections of separation; unless the
Lord therefore take off these pleasing contents and imbitter the baseness and
filth of his lusts unto the soul and force him to feel them as such to be the
bane of the soul he will (...) part company; therefore it is these go together,
when wickedness (...) sweet, he (...) it, spares Job. 20.
it and forsakes it not; things that are sweet the stomach 12. 13.
holds them, they must be bitter and then it vomits them happily a sinner may
wrangle for a turn and fall out with his distempers because they do him some
unkindnesses, (...) his commodity or ease etc. but they will fall in hand pat if
there be no further ground of (...) and forget al those unkindnesses, Luke 23.
34. the wicked will rather loose his life than his railing distemper; The Dog
returns to his (...), because he loved not 2 Pet. 2.
the pain of his (...), he casts out the vomit, yet because (...).
he loved the (...), he returns to his vomit again; yea (...) is not restrained
by his terror from his sin, but is acted by the power of it, while he was under
the terror of it. So that there is nothing in the world that will sever betwixt
the heart and its lust. Prove. 27. 22. Bray a fool in a mortar yet will not his
folly depart from him.

By this the great bar and hinderance of the coming Reas. 3.
of our Savior is removed, even the hellish resistance whereby the soul was
carried against him. For it is a peremptory Truth, Gal. 4. 17. The flesh lusts
against the Spirit; and the conclusion is express, Joh. 3. 9. That which is
born of the flesh, is flesh: but every Son of Adam being wholly born of the
flesh, does wholly resist the Spirit. They who are wholly flesh, do wholly
resist; they who do wholly resist, cannot receive; for receiving, and wholly
resisting, cannot stand together: therefore this resistance of a fleshly heart
must be removed, and that is done by this (...). That Sorrow whereby the bar
and hindrance which stops the coming of our Savior is removed, that sorrow is
of necessity required; but by this sorrow that hindrance is removed.

In regard of our selves; Either the heart must thus Reas. 4.
be pierced, or else a man without this in his Natural condition, is capable
and disposed to receive Faith and Christ; either necessary thus to be disposed,
or Nature without this, is fit to entertain him; but that is professedly
contrary to the Truth, 2 Cor. 2. 14. The natural man cannot receive the things
of the Spirit of God, Romans 8. 7. The carnal mind is not subject to the Law,
neither can it be; It Is not possible there should be two Suns in the Firmament,
two Kings in one Throne, two Gods in one heart, to be in Heaven and Hell at
once, to serve God and Mammon. So that as God must give Grace before we have
it, so he must give us power to receive it, or else we are not capable of it. A
Subject cannot be capable of contrary habits at the same time, John. 5. 45. How
can ye believe who seek honor from man?

Hence therefore its plain, that the substance and Use.
truth of this preparative work, it must be and is enstamped upon all that
belong to God, though it is in a diverse manner wrought in the most. If this
sorrow be only true and of the right stamp, If by this, sin is severed from
the soul, the hinderance of our Saviors coming removed, and the soul made
capable of faith and Christ, then this of necessity is required of al, and it is
certainly wrought in all whom the Lord brings effectually home unto himself.

Here is matter of complaint we may justly take up against Use.
this secure age in which we live, and it shows, how little, very little
saving sorrow there is in the world, and therefore how little saving grace; If
no preparation, no Implantation, certainly, never fitted for a Christ, never
made partakers of him; never hewed or squared to the building, and therefore
never put as spiritual stones into the building. Had we but Jeremiahs fountain
of tears we might mourn day and night, that there is no true mourning; and if
the Lord should send an (...) to see and mark such as mourn in secret, how few
should he find; the former doctrine is a bil of indictment and falls very heavy
upon five sorts of people.

Your heedless and fearless professors, who notwithstanding to the trial? let
us a little parley about the buisiness and because we will deal plainly, your own
practices and your own consciences shall bring in evidence and those I hope are
beyond exception, you careless servants in the family; you careless hearers in
the Assemblies, and you careless professors in the plantations, you are here
indicted that the practice of this heartbreaking sorrow for sin is a stranger
to you, and you a stranger to it in your daily course, we shall then agree upon
the grounds on which we shall proceed.

You will not, you cannot deny, but you have wholesome and savory counsel daily
suggested, the commands of God are line after line, precept after precept here
a little and there a little, and your duties daily laid before you in public,
in private, your failings bewailed, grace and help begged from the Lord for
you; the truth, your judgments do not gainsay and your hearts cannot but
approve, as lawful and suitable to your places and according to Gods mind, yet
no sooner out of the assembly where you hear, out of the presence of your
master who commads, from your knees where you have prayed and confessed, but
the commands are laid by, that is not attended, this not discharged, that is
neglected, you return again to the old distempers; and you say you did not
remember it, you have (...) it, you did not think of it. What need we more
evidence? (...) own words shall be thine own (...), and appeal to thine own
Conscience, let that be (...) own judge; did thou ever hear any man that (...)
under the load that was two heavy for him, wearied with the burden that is
beyond his strength, as not able to bear, nor to ease himself, say he did not
remember the burden that (...) him. he did not think of the weight of the load
that clogges and tires him; would you not (...) such expressions as cross to
common sense, or would you not conclude either the man had no burden or else
his words had no truth?

Ah but thou say; If they had been gross evils it had been something, but
they are petty things and therefore need no great care; what need we any more
evidence, thine own words will be thine own wittness, therefore thou carest
only for great sins, fear only gross and scandalous evils, then thy care
and fear is naught, and thy course so, and thy Conscience so, and thy condition
also, he that feels al sin as such, he fears al sin, yea the least sin more
than the greatest evil, if thou fear only loathsome and scandalous practices,
thy fear is false and thy heart falls thy sorrow was never found nor yet thy
condition; that I must confess when I (...) men's infinite heedlesness, if they
did know what God were, or what sin was, what Conscience, what a command, what
the reckoning to come were, did not most men live without God in the world they
could not live so.

The second sort who are hence shut out from having any share in this Godly
sorrow, or the through impression of the work of the spirit is the treacherous
formalist. Formalist I term him because he carries the face of religion, the
garb and guise of Godliness in outward appearance and would be counted a
friend to the truth, so far as he may serve his own turn of it, and he is
content to be at league with the Gospel, provided he may make his own terms,
and attain his own ends; namely that he may have allowance in some lusts and
yet (...) honored 1 Samuel
also among the people, with the title of an honest 15. 30.
Godly and good man. But when his carnal ends are not answered, and the word
requires more than he has, and commands more than he would do, and would pluck
away his beloved lust that he is loath to part withal; he then begins to set up
secret conspiracies in his heart against the evidence of the doctrine, and
therefore I call him a treacherous hypocrite, because he may happily bite the
lip and go away for the while, and says little but he bears a privy grudg
against the strictness of such truths that are beyond his pitch and strain, and
when time comes he will be revenged of them, in the mean time his heart is
inwardly tired with them and goes off from them, this the (...) calls the
counsel Psalm. 1. 1.
of the wicked, when wicked hearts call a counsel and sit in counsel against the
commands of God: and Job prays earnestly that God would keep him, and free him
from it. Job 21. 16. Let the counsel of the wicked be far from me, namely a
reserved resolution to have his distemper, rather than to have and welcome that
word that would remove it. Whereas we have heard a brokenhearted sinner is
willing to attend al means, but those especially that would help him most and
free him from his corruptions: this treacherous wretch notwithstanding his
pretended love to the word, yet when it comes to, he is willing to be rid of
the word, not rid of his corruption, so far from being weary of his sin, that
he is weary of the Minister, or Christian brother that would remove it, of the
word that would subdue it. This was the temper of those formalists that
followed our savior for the loaves, that is the Gospel for (...). 6. 16.
their own ends, when our savior pressed a spiritual and convicting truth upon
them which might carry them beyond their own falls aims or else would condemn
them utterly as such as had no life of Grace in them, unless (...) eat the
flesh and drink the blood of the son of man, ye have no life in you, John. 6.
53. nor were it possible they should attain the life of Glory, they answer,
This is a hard saying, who can bear it? it pinched them to the quick, and
searched the very core of their corruption, and they were resolved to bear
their sin, but could not bear the saying of our Savior; the presence of their
sins was pleasant, they could welcome them, but the power of the Truth was hard,
they could not endure that; nay, they speak as though it were a matter
impossible, who has power to submit to it? truly none but a heart truly
pierced with Godly sorrow: and therefore it is added, verse 66. From that time,
many of his Disciples went back, and walked no more with him, because they
would walk in their own ways, and wicked practices, therefore they chose
rather to forsake the company and Ministry of a Savior, than to forsake their
own distempers. Thus it has been often seen in the Country whence we came,
many a formal wretch has been at great cost and charges, laid out himself and
estate to bring a faithful preacher to a place; and when the soul-saving
dispensation of the Word has either discovered his falsness, and laid open the
cursed haunts of a carnal heart, shook his hopes, and beat all the holds he had
of the goodness of his estate, and batterred them before his eyes: He that had
the greatest hand to bring the means and Ministry unto the place, ifhe cannot
cunningly undermine the man, he would rather leave the place, than live under
the Ministry that would take away his lusts: This was the wound of the young
man, because he wanted this brokenness of heart, not being rightly burdened
with his corruption, nor loosened from it, Matthew. 19. he went away from that
Counsel of our Savior that would have plucked away his Earthly, covetous humor
which did take place in him, He went away sorrowful: all the while our Saviors
conditions suited his crooked ends, and carnal reason, he gave way and welcome
to what he was advised, All these (...) I done from my youth up, this is so as
I would have it; but when our Savior went further, Go sell all, that was beyond
his pace and expectation; and he went away, he could not bear the Counsel, and
therefore would not hear it. Thus it befalls many a man that the Lord has
brought hither, confined him to the narrow compass of the Covenant of the
Gospel: All the while he lived at large as it were, and (...) constantly or
occasionally attended upon the preaching of the Word, and carried an approved
kind of conformity thereunto, in the Judgment and Opinion of such as only
attended the general strain of his profession, and so walked aloof off in way
of Christian (...) and loving entertainment of the Truth, al went well: but when
he comes to be foulded in the fellowship of the Faith, and that men follow him
home to his doors, and watch him in his retired carriage, and have occasion to
grapple with his spirit in the specials which concern his particular (...), as
when he had failed and offended, and therefore follows him with Physic
answerable and appointed for the purpose, a seasonable admonition: poor sinful
Creature, he is not able to (...) the Discipline and Government of Christ, to
(...) under it, he begins secretly to (...) (...) undermine the strictness of
those (...) that formerly he did como into these Parts for, that he might seek
them, find and enjoy them as (...) often professed. It Is said of Herodias, when
John Baptist would give no (...) to her lust, but professed openly against it,
so that she must be forced to reform it, or to have Gall and Wormwood with it,
either not have it, or not have any (...); the Text says, Mark, 6. 19. she
waylaid him, and left not the plotting of her purposes until she procured his
ruin, she watched him a turn, and was revenged of him. So it is with a carnal
heart, he is so far from being troubled for sin, that he is troubled he cannot
commit it; so far from being plagued with the corruption (as Solomon speaks, he
that sees the plague 1 Kings. 8. 38.
of his own heart, the plague of pride, the plague of a perverse, sluggish,
heedless heart) that he is plagued and tormented with those Spiritual Truths,
and power of those Ordinances, that will not suffer those lusts to lodge in his
bosom, nor suffer him to lie and live in them with any quiet or content. Thus
when sin should be grievous as the Psalmist speaks, the ways and Commands of
Psalm. 10. 5.
God are ever grievous to such, it is a grief to him to be counseled, checked,
crossed in a sinful course: was (...) any man truly sensible of a burden that
would not be (...)? any man oppressed with a load, that would not be content to
have it removed, and taken away from him? Of this temper were those the Lord
delivered up to a reprobate sense, Romans 1. who did not delight to have God in
their knowledge, they bear a secret spleen against such saving Truths as would
search the core of those noysom corruptions of their hearts. It Is certain such
never knew what Godly sorrow for sin meant: since we have heard that such are
willing to attend all means, but take most content in those that work most
powerfully for the removal of their special distempers.

A third sort who fall short of this saving Work, is, your self-conceited
Pharisee, who has such an overweening apprehension of his own worth and
excellency, that (...) is not able to take shame for (...) sin, and therefore
cannot endure to be convinced of it, what he will not do, he will not know, loath
to confess his course shameful and vile, because then he concludes there is no
color of common sense to continue in it, but he must be forced to reform it,
unless he would openly proclaim to all the world, that he is resolved to go
against Knowledge and Conscience, which is too loathsome and gross, even to
ordinary profaneness; therefore he pretends nothing but the search of the
Truth, (...) further information of the mind of the Lord, and if that once
could appear, how glad would he be to receive it, and more glad to follow it,
because this plea is beyond exception, (...), carries an appearance of
conscientious and judicious watchfulness in a man's course, which cannot (...) a
Cavil, but is secretly resolved of the Conclusion, the reasons shall never be
plain to him that would press and persuade to the practice of that which does
not please his (...) heart, which he purposes to satisfy; let men say what
they can, if he may have approbation and allowance from others to follow his
own heart, it will be more credit for him, and he shall find more ease; if not,
he determines to do what he list without leave and allowance, holds out this in
his ordinary and daily profession; it is the way of Truth he desires to find,
the Rule he would see, the mind of God he endeavors to know and follow; that he
pretends, but intends indeed to walk in his own way, and follow his own mind;
and therefore if things answer not his intents, suit not his expectation, but
Arguments seem strong that persuade to the contrary, and the evidences of
Reason look and lead another way: he then keep afoot his old course, confesses
he is yet in the dark, those reasons do not carry him, those arguments do not
convince him, he desires further light, and shall be willing to submit and
follow, i. e. if men would be willing to submit to his conceit, and follow his
humor; thus he holds his sin, and holds his enquiry, keeps off al conviction
that he may keep his corruption, and his course in it. As we know it in the
Country from whence we came, some wily headed persons get possession of a
living, keep the Owner in suit and restless wrangling many years together,
against the evidence of their own Conscience and Reason, because so long they
can keep the Living, and reap the Commodity of it. So while men keep an
enquiry, and dispute what they should do, all that while they do what they
list, but only waiting for better light, Numb. 23. 34. when Balaam had gone
against the express Counsel and Command of God, to listen to Balack to gratify
his malicious desires, the Angel of the Lord met him, and withstood him in the
perverseness of his way, he crooked his way, and perverted his path against Gods
express charge, observe how pliably he comes in to the Angels reproof, I knew
it not that thou stoodest in the way, now therefore if it displease thee, I
will get me back: he knew it displeased God, and though he said so, yet he kept
his disposition and resolution to curse Israel, and so to displease God still,
and therefore he contrives all ways to compass his (...), and therefore here
he builds seven Altars, and there he builds seven Altars, that he might ask
leave of the Almighty, and when that would not do it, he went without leave,
Numb. 24. 1. This is one part of that of the Prophet to lay hold of deceit; and
so of sin, whereas a brokenhearted sinner as we have heard, because the holds
of sin are cast down, and the crossness and resistrance of the (...) removed,
and his soul loosened from his sin, he is easily willing to be convinced,
sensible of the least inkling and intimation of any evil that is or shall be
discovered, and sits down under the Evidence of it (...) but when Reasons are
so pregnant that he cannot gainsay, and Answers so undeniable that they cannot
be shaken, yet to stand off from the Truth, with a pretense of waiting for a
further discovery, argues a person strengthened in the stiffness of his Spirit,
which holds out Truth at the staves end, and was never yet subdued to the
Sovereignty and Authority thereof; he keeps the blow off, and therefore breaks
not under it, shuts the Truth out of their Souls, and therefore it stirs not,
works not at all upon the soul; such are afar off from God.

The fourth sort is your complaning Hypocrite, whose it is beyond our power to
help our selves, and free our selves from our corruptions; thus he keeps his
complaints and keeps his sins, he mourns over his distempers, and maintains
them while he does so; thus they bath their sins, as he said, but do not drown
them with those heartbreaking Sorrows, which in truth are poison to them: thus
it was with Ahab when he had received that dreadful Message from the mouth of
the Lord, That he would require the Blood of Naboth at his hand, and cut off
his house, he rent his clothes, and put on Sackcloth, and fasted, etc. 1 Kings,
21. 27. the Lord himself observes how he acts this work of (...), and that in a
comely manner, Stage Player like, and abates him for the present execution of
the plague; the Lord loves his own Work and Ordinances; that as it is with a
Parent that affects a Child, the very Picture of it pleases him; so it is with
God, he likes his Ordinances, and the acting and using of them: but this did
not cure, but increase his corruption, for he that was an Enemy to Elijah,
verse 20, he professed after, 1 Kings, 22. 8. He hated Micaiah, his sorrow was
too overly and slighty, he rent his clothes when he should have rent his heart.
Thus it was with those Hypocrites, Isai. 5. 8. 2. 3. We have fasted, say they,
and thou regardest not; we have humbled our souls, and thou respectest it not;
the Lord Answers, You fast for strife and debate, and to seek your own
pleasure; they made way for the maintaining and practicing their sins, not for
the removal of them from their hearts; and it is admirably strange how this
delusion will cozen a man, and how far it will carry him, it will make him
Sermon-Proof, and help him him to (...) his heart against the most sharp and
searching Words. As he, how came he to desire and delight in the most powerful
preaching, and yet never knew what it was to need a (...), or to be relieved by
him? Answ. I conceive such threatenings are intended against them that will not
repent and sorrow for their sins, but that will I. Nay, it has been found by
experience from the confessions of many, that they would weep over their sins,
and then fall to commit them; men make their lamentation over their distempers,
and then return to the Commission of them: As old friends weep at their
parting, not because they would be quit one of another, but it is a grievance
they should part, and they hope to meet again shortly.

The fifth (...), (...) the discouraged Hypocrite, whom Saul, 1 Samuel 28. 15.
God has forsaken me, and answers me, neither by Urim, nor by (...): thus also
that wicked King, 2 Kings, 6. last, This comes of the Lord, why should I pray
to him, or waitupon him any longer? and thus it was with them, Ezekiel. 33. 10.
Men pine away in their sins, lie under the weight, and never look out for help:
This is not (...) or brokenness of heart, for that makes a man restlessly
importunate in seeking the Lord; its not therefore sorrow for sin, but a kind
of sullen waywardness of Spirit, a dogged kind of self-willy disposition,
because the pressures grow heavy and unsufferable, and the Lord withdraws
himself from our desires, (...) it is beyond our power and ability to relieve
our selves, God denies to hear, and will not help, and we cannot help our
selves, nor command help els-where; in sullen way wardness the heart casts off
any further attendance upon the Lord.

Whereas Godly Sorrow rightly set on, and that for sin, and departure from God,
will not suffer the soul to depart further; that which takes away the resistance
of our corrupt hearts, that will not suffer them yet further to depart, these
desperate discouragements are Valleys and Ditches that must be filled up before
the Lord Christ come into the soul, Luke, 3. 5.

TERROR. It shows the direful condition of all Use 2.
hard-hearted (...), who are not only in the Chains Prove. 5. 22.
of darkness, and held with the Cords of their own iniquities (as the Scripture
speaks) but shut up in the Dungeon of everlasting destruction, and locked in
within the Iron Gate of a hard (...) stupid heart without the least
preparation, or expectation of good from the Almighty.

This Hardness is double; there are two sorts, at least two (...) of it.

1. Such as sleep in a careless and secure Course, never yet saw, at least were
not sensible of the plague of Sin, or the sting and punishment that is
attending thereupon. 2. Such as have been in the fire, scorched with the fury
of the Almighty, which has drunk up their spirits, but when God has abated
them of the expression of his Displeasure, and allayed the flame, they grow
cold and careless; as the Iron that has been heated with a long and strong
Fire, grows more hard when it grows once cold, than ever it was before: They
have been gashed, and (...) in pieces with the terrors of Conscience; but (...)
worn out their Terrors, and Fears, they are more seared and senceless than
ever.
Such who are drowned in senceless security, have their hearts glutted and
surfeted with pleasures, and (...) of the flesh and contents of this present
world. To sit moping in a corner, sink under the burden of their sins and smoke
out their days in a melanchollick pressure and pensiveness of spirit, they
account it a matter of scorn, a silly kind of sottish behavior unbeseeming
persons of a generous spirit; they wonder what men ayl, and conclude its more
in men's conceit, than that there is any just cause for such a carriage; for
they bless God they never knew what it meant, and they hope they never shall;
And hence they fearlesly adventure upon the practice and commission of known
evils; and it never stuck in their stomach, nor are they troubled with it, but
are delighted in it; that which is a plague to the broken hearted Saints, they
are plagued with their pride and froward perverseness of spirit, but its a
pastime, a may game, it is their (...) and matter of merriment in their meeting;
my (...) rebuked me sharply says the Servant, my Mother chid me says the
child, but I think I (...) them, they would have their way and will, and would
have it done after their manner, And I did it with a witness, so il-favoredly,
that I know it vexed all the veyns of their hearts, that's the way to weary them,
and there they solace themselves, ah it is roast meat to them; and thus it is a
pastime to a fool Prove. 10. 23.
to do wickedly: but know thou art a hard-hearted fool, a graceless wretch in
the wise man's account; do not our plantations groan under such sons of Belial?
such senceless (...) do they not swarm in our streets? are not our families
pestered with such? Esau-like when he sold his (...); eat and drank, and rose
up and went his way, not affected with what he had lost, not ashamed of what he
had done, but (...) of al; or like the man in the Gospel possessed with the
Devil, sometime Math. 17. 15.
he cast him into the fire and sometime into the water, so these rush headily
into sin, and impudently continue in such (...) courses; they commit sin, and
continue in sin, hasten Gods wrath, and their own ruin, and go away senceless
of al so that it is now seasonable to take Jeremiahs complaint I (...) and heard
and no man said what have I done (...) Jer. 8. 6. He might and did hear of
hideous vile evils without any diligent harkening, see and meet loathsome
distempers without any searching; but when he followed men home wondering, in
what quiet do these men live? what comfort do these men find? how do they bear
up their hearts under such hellish carriages? I will go see how they lie down in
their beds, and whether they dare sleep or no under such trangression and such
guilt, and when he came he hearkened, surely I shall now hear them mourn
bitterly, afflict their hearts with unfeigned grief, there is no such thing, no
man said what have I done? not a word of that, it was the least part of their
care, the furthest off their thoughts. And this is the temper, the condition
and disposition of scores, hundreds of you that hear this word at this instant.
Is not the day yet to dawn, the hour yet to come that ever you shed a tear,
sent up a sigh to heaven, in the sense of thy evils, or set thy self in secret
to bewail thy distempers before the Lord? God knows and your hearts know, the
Chambers where you lodge, and the Beds, where you lie, can bring in witness
against you, you are strangers to this blessed brokenness of heart, yea enemies
to it; you were pricked, no not so much as in your eyes nor in your tongues,
God and his word and al means that have been tried could never wrest a tear
from thine eye, not a confession out of thy mouth, thou will commit thy follies
and die in the defense or excuse of them: but to have thy heart affected in
serious manner with the filth of thy sinful distempers, it is to thee a riddle
to this day. Nay there be thousands in the bottomless pit of hell that never
had the like means as thou, never committed the like sins, and yet never had
such a senceless sottish heart under such rebellions, as thy self. Woe be to you
that laugh Luke, 6. 25
now, you shall mourn: those flinty spirits of yours will not break now, they
shall certainly burn, you draw a light harrow now, you find no burden of your
pride and stubbornness, rebellions, idleness, and noysom lusts, they are no
burdens, ye can go boult upright with them and Sampson like carry the very
gates of hell upon your backs and never buckle under them, well the time will com
you will call to the mountains to fall upon you, and the hills to cover you, from
the infinite weight of Gods everlasting displeasure. Taste a little the sting of
this sin, and see the compass of this accursed condition of thine and go no
further than the point in hand.

Thou art far without the walk of the Almighty, there is no dealing and
intercourse between thee and the thy fleece is dry when there is dew upon all the earth this is that which the Apostle discovers to be the cause of that
heavy curse of the heathen, Ephesians. 4. 18. strangers from the life of God by
reason of the hardness of their hearts. Oh thou have a (...) heart, and leadest
a strange life, even as opposite to God as darkness to light, hell to heaven,
differs only but in degree from that (...) which appears most eminently
amongst the Devils and damned, even to be an adversary to God and his grace,
to stand it out in defiance with the divine goodness of God, his power and
faithfulness, Pharaoh he (...) it, but thou do it, (...) it out with the
Almighty and impudently dare the great God, who is Jehovah? I know not
Jehovah, neither will I let my heart go to yield subjection and service to him;
I know no authority of a command that shall rule me, nor admonition that shall
awe or reform me. Thus thou art a stranger to the wisdom of God, the folly of
thine own self-deceiveing mind and heart, leads thee and deludes thee, thou art
a stranger to the grace and holiness of the Lord; the perverseness and rebellion
of thine own wretched heart takes place only with thee, yea a stranger to
mercy, and to the compassions and consolations of the Lord Jesus, and his
blessed spirit, who choosest thine own ruin, love thine own death, following
lying vanities and forsakest the mercies purchased and tendered to thee.

Upon these terms in which thou now stand God has appointed no good for
thee while thou continuest in this temper: as he said, write this man
childless, so write upon it, write thy soul graceless, that shall never prosper,
Isa. 61. 1. 2. The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because the Lord has
anointed me to preach good (...) to the meek to bind up the broken hearted,
liberty to the captives, opening of the prison to those that are bound, to
appoint to them that mourn in Zion; beauty for ashes, the garment of gladness
for the spirit of heaviness: thou hear the glad tidings of mercy, pardon and
peace, grace of life, that passes understanding, joy unspeakable, rich and
plentiful redemption from al sins and miseryes, which God has laid up in his
everlasting decree, and laid out in the great work of redemption by the Lord
Jesus, but thou may set thy heart at rest, as long as thou see that hard
heart of thine thou shall never see good day; joy, and comfort, and liberty,
they are not thy allowance, they are childrens bread, its prepared, intended,
and appointed of purpose for others, thou have no share and portion in all these
precious things of life; hands off thou hard (...) wretch; There is good (...)
from (...), (...) poor shall be enriched, the mourners comforted, but no good
to thee; no, look the second (...), there is other provision the Lord makes for
stiffnecked Creatures, he proclaims a year of Jubilee, a day of acceptance from
God to the distressed; but there is a day of Vengeance of our God, to those
that are of a contrary disposition; there is Vengeance, and it is from God, he
will be revenged upon thee for all the contempt of his Truth, grief done to his
Spirit, resistance of his Grace, he will rain fire and brimstone, storm and
tempest upon thee, this shall be the portion of thy cup, for the conclusion is
peremptory, Job, 9. 4. Who ever (...) his heart against the Lord, and
prospered? Can there any example be alleged that will evidence it? any reason
given or conceived that might prove it possible? Search the Stories of so many
Generations, and enquire since the day that God created (...) upon Earth, if
there were ever such a thing heard. When there were Giants upon earth, the whole
earth was filled with violence; all the world (...) themselves in open rebellion
against God; God opens the windows of Heaven, and the fountains of the great
(...), and sends in a Deluge of his displeasure and wrath, and destroies those
hard-hearted Rebels from off the face of the Earth; me thinks I hear those
flinty stiffnecked wretches, (...) and crying, drowning and dying, and roaring
out their wretchedness, those loose Libertines, eating and drinking, marrying,
and giving in Mat. 24. 38.
marriage, and knew nothing, i. e. and would know nothing; their Cups in their
hands, and Queans in their Arms, and despair in their mouths: Oh we shut our
Ears, and hardened our hearts against the striving of Gods Spirit, the call of
Gods Messengers, the warning and entreaties of Gods patience: We would not
receive Counsel and terms of Peace and Mercy, and therefore we now perish
without Mercy, cursing one another, and breathing out their last; Cursed be the
day that ever I knew thee, by thy carnal deceits I was strengthened; Cursed be
thou and thy company, by thy example I was deluded and hardened: Thus they are
accursed, and go cursing down to the depth of the Sea, and so to the depth of
the bottomless Pit.

It is beyond the Scope of our Saviors coming into the world, and the
Commission he has received for the great Work of Redemption to communicate
Grace and Life to thee in the condition in which now thou art; Luke, 19. 10,
The Son of man is come to (...) and save that which is lost; not such as was
miserable, for so all was, but such as were sensible of that undone condition
in which they lay. Yea, his expression is peremptory, I came not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance, Marth. 9. 13. Those who conceited
themselves whole, in a safe and secure estate, he had no Commission to call or
comfort such; they (...) be broken before he bind them, weary and laden before
he ease them, wounded before he will pour in the Oil of Mercy to heal and
relieve them: Hence it was that when our Savior had prepared his Feast, killed
his Fatlings, and drawn forth his refined Wines, and sent and invited his
guests, all pleaded their excuses, and refused to come, not being hunger-bit,
and sensibly affected with their own miserable estate, and the need they had of
supply from those rich Provisions of a Savior, their-careless and secure hearts
could relish other sensual care, and swinish contentments which they had at
home; when men set no price, see no need of those Dainties and Rarities of the
riches of Grace and Salvation, purchased by Christ, and offered in the Gospel,
he peremptorily concludes, Such shall never taste of them, Luke, 14. 24.

The second sort of hard-hearted sinners, or of a further and higer degree in
this hardness, are such as have been exercised under the displeasure of the
Almighty, (...) had many stabs by the Truth, and threatenings of the Word, and
have had many bruises and blows from the Dispensations of God in his
Ordinances, deeply affected, and almost (...) (...) with the danger of their
own Estates, and the dreadfulness of those everlasting burnings which now they
felt in their souls, and were not able to bear; but at last they have SHOOK OFF
THEIR TERROR, (...) away the vexation, and trouble that lay upon their spirits;
and now they grow more fierce and hard-hearted than ever before, and dare
outface and out-brare the severest threatenings, the most dreadful Judgments
that can be denounced, and which they find and confess themselves liable unto;
having their conscience seared with a hot Iron, 1 Timothy 4. 2, and themselves
becoming fearlessly impudent to adventure upon sin, without the least touch of
any remorse or trouble for it. The time was they confess they sat with
trembling hearts under the Dispensation of the Word, and so silly and feeble
spirited they were, that their hearts failed with fear, and (...) away in the
apprehension of the hainousness of their sin, and the unsufferable plagues that
were due thereunto. But now that dale is (...), those days are past, they have
got more wit and skill than to be scared with such Bug-bears, they can tell how
to fence themselves against such fears and disquiets, they can sit and hear,
and attend all that can be said, let them speak while they will, and wear their
(...) to the stumps, they can hear all, and slight all; nay, rather than fail,
deride and make a mock of what they have heard, but to be troubled at what they
hear, they are (...) such Babies, they are not so much as stirred with any
thing: Oh woe to thee that ever thou saw thy heart at this pass, the greater
will thy trouble be one day: The Devils believe and tremble, and do not
James, 2. 19.
thou stir? Art thou in Hell here on Earth before thou come thither? and do
thou come short of the Devils themselves in sensibleness of heart, and can
thou content thy self, yea bless thy self in this condition? Hear what God has
determined against thee, and will certainly bring upon thee, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. He
that shall (...) the words of this Curse, and shall bless himself in his heart,
saying, I shall have peace though I walk in the Imagination of my heart, (...)
drunkenness to thirst, the wrath of the Lord will smoke against that man, to
cut him off from the Land of the Living, etc.

But before I part with thee, suffer me to spread the dreadfulness of thy
condition before thy face, and leave it upon Record in thy Conscience, that
thou may say thou (...) forewarned. Know therefore thy case is almost
desperate, and beyond Cure, thy doom draws on and hastens, which thou can
(...) escape, thy plagues are beyond the utmost of all extremity, which thou
can not conceive, much less endure.

First, Thy Case to common Reason (leaving secret things to God) seems past
cure; it is a great suspicion the day of Grace is over, the date of mercy past,
the period of Gods Patience come to an end; all means have been used, and
conclusions tried with thee, the invincible stiffness of thy Spirit has won
the day, thou have tried Masteries with all means, Law and Gospel, Promises,
(...) and (...), the unconquerable hardness of thy heart has out-bid all
Dispensations, thou art Cannon proof, Law proof, Gospel proof, Threatening
proof; there is no other means of good in Heaven or Earth, and thou art worse
by them; all which are provided to better others, and have so done: without
means thou have no reason to think that God will work, and thou have had the try
al of al, and thou art beyond (...) in thy stifness, and therefore beyond all
helps in an ordinary way, Prove. 29. 1. He that being often reproved, (...) his
heart, shall be destroyed, and that without remedy: he that casts away the
salve that should cure him, spils the Physic that should recover him, casts
away the meat that should nourish him, how should he be either cured or
supported? There are no Commands that awe, no Promises persuade, no Terrors
awaken, then there is no Remedy: He must be deluded that opposes the Wisdom
that only can guide him, he must be cursed that resists the mercy that only can
save him, he must be damned that (...) upon the blood of Jesus, that only would
redeem him, there is no other Remedy, no other Name but the Name of Jesus
whereby men must be saved, Acts, 4. 12. Nay, not only means fail him, but God
himself seems to forsake, Genesis 6. 3. My Spirit shall not always strive with
man: He has striven by his Terrors, by his Mercies, striven and laid hold upon
thee by heartbreaking (...); Turn ye, why will ye die? turn ye, and cause
others to return, and so iniquity shall not be your ruin, Ezekiel. 33. 11. Oh that
there were such a heart in them to fear me always, that it might be well with
them, Deuteronomy. 5. 29. but thou have wound away from Gods hand, and forsaken him,
and he has forsaken thee; there is Word and Promises, but no God in them,
Terrors and (...), but no God in them; Thou art without God, and art thou not
Ephesians. 2. 12.
then without hope? When the throws of a traveling Woman leave her, her life
leaves her. So here.

It Is said of a company of Despisers of Christ, That they (...) him again unto
themselves, Heb. 6. 6. When they resist one Christ, and resist that Salvation
that has been offered, either they must have another Christ, or he anew
crucified if ever they be saved. So there must be a new Christ, and new
Scriptures, before such miserable wretches can be relieved, the Blood of Jesus,
the Spirit and Promises of Jesus; Grace and Salvation has been tendered to
these stubborn-hearted, and they have opposed and cast all away; either there
must be another Christ, or he must die again: All the Commands and Comforts in
the Word, all the Rules and Directions, (...) and Counsels, have been used and
tried without any profit and prevailing power, therefore there must be another
Covenant, (...), and Scriptures, if thou be saved; that is incredible,
therefore the other impossible; (...) can ye escape that neglect so great
Salvation? Heb. 2. 2. I appeal to your selves, You will go from the Law to the
Gospel, from justice to mercy, but whither will you go when you have departed
away from mercy, and mercy is departed away from you.

Thy judgment hastens, thou can not not escape it nor prevent it, and truly
it is coming more speedily and suddenly then thou art awar of. Thou bring
upon thy self swift destruction, and though thou sleep yet thy damnation
sleeps not. Hebr. 6. 8. the earth that often receives rain from heaven, and yet
brings forth thorns is near unto cursing, look every day that God should curse
al thy comforts, thy outgoings, and thy in-comings, Prove. 28. 14. He that
bardens his heart falls into mischief, falls into it, and is overwhelmed with it
al of a sudden; he may fall into any tempration, he opposes that counsel that
should preserve him, falls into sins, he casts away that grace, and resists
that spirit that should strengthen him; nay being past feeling, such a one will
run to commit al wickedness with greediness, Ephesians. 4. 19. Hell and Divills and
(...) are let loose upon such, the light of nature, evidence of reason,
dictates of of Conscence, authority of the law, terrors of judgments,
entreaties of mercies, the hard heart has cast away al these, and therefore
rusheth into what evil comes next, against Conscience, command, reason, sense,
nature; men put of the principles, not of humanity, but of sense, and become
more base than the beasts themselves, do that which beasts will not do, and
morality is ashamed to speak; As the ship when the anchors are broke, and cable
cut and a mighty tempest arises, she is wholly left to the rage of wind and
weather. When men harden their hearts God swears they shall never enter into his
rest. Hebr. 3. last.

Ground of COMFORT to support the sincking spirits Use, 3.
of broken hearted sinners when they seem to faint under the fierce displeasure
of the Almighty, and to be (...) with the unsupportable weight of the
wickedness of their own souls which they are neither able to avoid, nor (...)
to undergo.

Here hence is matter of sound refreshing both to the parties that are the
patients, and bear (...) bitterness and burden of their sorrow; to their
friends, who as spectators do mourn with them, and are affected with a fellow
feeling of the evil of that which they find experimentally; let me speak a word
severally to them both.

Know therefore to thy comfort thou distressed soul, this sorrow and anguish
which now oppresses thee, its not unto death, nay its the only way and means
to deliver from death, from the death of sin, and that security in which thou
lyeft, without either sense of thy misery, or the least appearance and
possibility of deliverance, from the death everlasting of thy soul unto which
thou wast hastening amain: As it is with a dead body when with rubbing chafing,
and pouring in of hot waters there is some kind of warmth coming and
overspreading the parts, there is good hope the soul is again returning, the
man reviving again; Its so in this spiritual quickening of a soul dead in sin,
stone dead, stiff and insensible of the distempers that lodge within him, and
take possession of the whole frame of the inward man, as stif coldness takes
possession of a dead body; when the Lord begins to affect the sinner und makes
thoroughly sensible with Godly sorrow, by rubbing and chafing in of sharp
reproofs and passionate exhortations, there is a kind of spiritual warmth
coming into the soul, and certain evidence like a harbenger or immediate
forerunner of life, and (...) which will undoubtedly take up their (...) in the
soul, he that goes in the valley of tears he (...) on comfortably because he
goes in the right way to Zion, they shall go weeping and mourning with their
faces toward Zion, (...). 50. 4. this is the guise and the way of such who are
travailing toward the holy land, Immanuels Land, the land of Promise, they may
be content to bear the hardness of the way when they are sure to attain the end
of their journey, the salvation of their souls, that will pay the charges and
recompense the labor and quit cost in the issue; it is the travelers conclusion
that carries them through the harshest way they meet withal he has never an il
day that has a good night, and when he finds the marks of the way that are
given him, the directions that are suggested to discover his approach to his
own home, that makes him (...) all the rest, as happily they may be to this
purpose, (...) you are passed so many days journey you shall come (...) last to
a most tedious and heavy way, and deep waters such as you must be forced to
swim, can feel and find no bottom, yet if you keep the right causey there is no
danger at al; It Is a sad way, but sat, and then know you may, you are nearer
home, (...) danger is past, and the worst is over, ye are within sight of your
own house; when the traveller who has taken these directions, and retaynes his
marks in his mind, when he finds that by experience which has formerly been
spoken, the way mervailous heavy, tedious, he sticks fast in the mire and clay,
anon the waters are so deep that he feels no bottom, he remembers and concludes
now I know where I am, I am sure I am in the right way and certainly near home;
this makes him devour all the difficulties wet and weary, he feels he fears
nothing, he thinks of nothing, but his wife will welcome him, his children
rejoice in him, his friends refresh and accompany him, there he shall take up
his lodging and refresh his weary nature; so here, in thy spiritual travel when
the weight (...) thy sins which of al other is the heaviest, the loss of a God,
and his favor and presence which are depths and floods of distress which come
even to the soul, there thou find no bottom they are unsufferable
unsupportable, then lift up thy head, know this is the right way to Christ, and
thou near home, even within the ken of the Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24.
Promise of eternal life; Thou will come immediately to Jesus the Mediator of
the new Covenant, thy head and husband, who will wipe awayal tears from thine
eyes, who will embrace and welcome thee in the arms of his mercy thee into the
bosom and bowels of his love, and rejoice over thee with everlasting joy, come
thou mourning weary and weatherbeaten sinner, I have wept for thee and died for
thee, and prayed for thee, and looked many a long look for that distressed
soul, Oh be humbled, be estranged and divorced from thy lusts, when will it once
be, Oh welcome, though come weary and tired, no sooner there arrived but the
spirit of comfort shall pour peace into thy Conscience which passes al
understanding, and joy unspeakable and glorious, all the first born of God they
will come about thee and be glad to enjoy thy fellowship, and the innumerable
company of Angels will sing Hallelujahs in heaven, peace on earth and good will
toward men; God and Christ, Heaven and Earth, Men and Angels rejoice in thee
and thy condition, and why may est not thou be refreshed in it? There is no
other way whereby God can according to covenant convey spiritual good to thee,
no other way whereby thou eanst receive it. Be therefore forever comforted in
thy condition, God must cut if he cure thee of a stony heart, God must wound
that secure and careless soul of thine if ever he heal it, so himself
professes it is the method he takes in relieving the misery and distressed and
sinful condition of a son of Adam, Isa. 19. 22. The Lord shall smite Egypt and
shall heal it, and they shall return to the Lord, and be will be entrated of them,
and he will heal them.

Oh but my terrors have been many formerly but never Object.
as now passing strength; my burdens were (...) before, but never such as now
beyond al extremity, above all the ability I have, beyond al possibility I can
conceive, to endure and not to die under them in everlasting discouragement
never to look for any good.

Therefore thy comfort never so near as now; As in Answ.
childbirth, so in this new birth, the stronger and sharper the throws, the
more speedy and successeful the deliverance. As it is in the cure of an old
festered sore, all the while it breaks and runs there is some ease, but there is
yet no cure while the core remains, when that is pressed out though it be with
much pain and extremity, yet then the healing comes on with most speed. When
thy sorrows have seized upon thee and thou have breathed out thy sighs and
complaints to God, there has happly been some ease, Oh but there was a core of
some bosom lust or corruption that lay within, and yet not loosened and
dislodged, and there is no perfect cure or healing will befall so long as that
remains, and there must be much pressing, much struggling by word and paryer,
before that will part, and when thy heart parts from that, know undoubtedly,
health and Salvation and comfort is near.

Comfort? Alas what do ye speak to me of comfort? Object.
who am unfit and unworthy, nor have any right Psalm. 97. 11.
unto it, Light is sown for the righteous and joy for them that are upright in
heart, yea but they have it hardly for whom it was prepared even planted and
sown of purpose, it is their harvest let them reap it and receive it. But what
have I to do with it, to put my sickle into another corn, who am a sinful
unrighteous wretched creature?

Not only the righteous who by the power of grace can Answ.
subdue sin, but even the mourners in Sion who by the spirit are burdened with
their sins, these I say have allowance and that from God to share in this
comfort. Blessed are they that mourn they shall be comforted Math. 5. 3. thou
Say thou art not, thou find none for the present; be it so, that is not
in the promise but it is sure enough thou shall be, that is sufficient: God will
make thee stay for it, and beg for it, and prize it before it come, that thou
may be thankful for it when it comes; it shall be in Gods time and in due
time, and if thou would have it before, know thou art not sit to receive, nor
God willing to bestow, thou have it not in hand, but its (...) in hope; it will
be and will not fail, and the reversion of it, is sufficient to support thee to
live in hope; nay it is a portion provided on purpose and came for this very
end; Isa. 61. 3. to appoint unto them that mourn in Sion beauty for ashes the
Oil of gladness for the spirit of heaviness, yea God himself will come for this
end to bring consolation uto thy soul. Object.


That's a likely matter indeed when the vileness of my corrption makes me
loathsome to my self, and weary of mine own soul, how justly may God loath me
and estrange himself who is so great and holy a God.

That which thou conceivest a cause why God should Answ.
withdraw his presence, it is that why he delights in thee; thy sins are
loathsome that's true, but to loath thy sin, and thy self for them, its that
which makes way and room for the Lords both Love to thee and presence with
thee, Isa. 57. 17. Thus says the high and lofty one that inhabits eternity I
dwell with him also that is of an humble and contrite spirit, to revive the
heart of contrite ones.

The greatness of God and holiness of God takes most content in a broken heart
burdened with sin and loosened from it. And herein the doubts of a distressed
soul may be answered, and discouragments also cured and removed, will so great a
God vouch ase to call upon so base a creature, so holy a God, so sinful, so
filthy and polluted a sinner? yea behold; God reveals him (...) in the height
of al his greatness and holiness and professes he has but two habitations
where he takes (...), i. e. the highest heavens and a broken heart, that sees
his own weakness and therefore the greatness and power of God is most (...), it
ackonwledeth its own vileness (...) (...) (...) own filthyness, and there the
holiness of a God is most honored, feared and advanced, therefore the (...) for
God to dwell in where his honor may most of al be advanced; and he comes with
his cost, and for this intent and purpose, that he may revive and quicken,
therefore he will not, therefore he cannot miss of his end, and the attaining of
that he intends nor thou of thy comfort.

It Is matter of comfort to such (...) are frinds and welwishers to those
burdened and distressed creatures; Mourn for them you should, but yet be
comforted with them you ought. For if you desire their good in truth and in
earnest, its certain they are now, and never were before in the road of mercy,
in ready way, yea the only way to attain favor and everlasting compassions
Luck. 19. 44.
from the hand of the Lord. It Is now the day of Gods visitation, the Lord
seemed to pass by as a stranger before, as though he cared neither for them,
nor the welfare and comfort of their souls, but suffered them to live and dye in
their sins not so much as looking after them: behold now is the day of their
visitation, wherein the Lord comes to visit the sinner, and to enquire
touching the eternal prosperity of the soul, to loosen him from the power of
his lusts, and to free him from the prevailing power of those corruptions, that
would certainly ruinate his happiness, Yea now the spirit seems to travel upon
the soul until the Lord Jesus be formed in him, when as formerly he bore the
image of sin and Satan, so the Father of the Prodigal when his heart had been
pinched under the pressures and miseries of his baseness brought upon him, and
constrained him to take thoughts of forsaking his former course, see what Luck.
15. 24.
solace it was to his Father. For this my son was dead but is alive again, he
was secure, he is now affected with the sight and sense of his sin, he was
hard-hearted and perverse in his way, now he is pliable and yiedling to any
impression. I speak it the rather because carnal persons conceive that this
broken heartedness is a kind of curse, and that which makes men unsuitable to
their Places, and unserviceable wholly for any employment; the profane
Husband, the unjust Master, the loose Companion, curse the day that ever the
Minister came amongst them; the wife was vain and froathy to suit (...) folly;
but now the former (...) is turned into mourning, she grows mopish and
melancholy, there is no content in her: The Apprentice that was as the Glove
to the Hand, fitted his turn at all times, at al assaies, would lie for his
humor, cozen for his profit, but now forsooth is grown so tender and
conscientious, he dare do nothing, there is no service in him; his companion
that would ruffle it out in mirth and jollity, is become so pensive under the
pressure of his Conscience, that there is no society in him; they look at them
as lost and undone persons, the Preacher has spoiled them, they are fit for
nothing. And so also some poor ignorant people whose ways were civil and
moral, and never acquainted with Gods manner of dealing in such cases; when
they see their friends, and children, and kindred, sinking under the sense of
their sin, and Gods displeasure, their hearts taken up wholly with attendance
to their own Spiritual necessities, and taken off from all other occasions;
they look at it as a kind of madness and distraction, and they fear they will
not come to themselves again, when in Truth they never came to themselves
before now, nor in truth considered where they were, or what they did: whereas
this broken-heartedness does not impair any man's abilities, but turns them the
right way, and improves them for the Lords advantage; it makes men unhandy to
sin, but fit for the Service of the Almighty; only it is a spiritual sickness,
and you must in reason wait til the extremity be over, before the party can be
free for any work but this, because he finds this most needful: He that takes
Physic retires into his Chamber, but it is not to hinder his employment, but
further it for future time; the Child when he sees the Grapes a pressing, he
falls a crying; and fondly conceives his Father spoils them, to bring (...) out
of them: The unexperienced stander by imagines that the pieces of Gold that are
put into the refining pot, and that into the fire, will utterly be spoiled,
until he sees a Vessel of Gold framed out of them, glorious for show and
Service, he then changes his mind. So here; when thou (...) the Lord putting
men into the furnace of his fierce wrath, scorching their Consciences, know,
the Lord has them now in the (...), and intends to make them Vessels of Grace
and Mercy, who before were Vessels of Dishonor, fit for nothing but to serve
sin and Satan, help thou (...) the work, and (...) in it; and as Paul in a like
case wished, That not only they, but all; thy friends, and Acts. 26. 29.
children, and kindred, (...) not almost, but altogether such as they are,
brokenhearted sinners.

DIRECTION. How to carry ourselves toward Use.
distressed sinners in this condition, who are thus pierced unto the heart,
whose perplexities of spirit are such they cannot express, and their pressures
beyond strength, more than they are able to undergo. We should yern toward
them in mercy, and put on the bowels of tenderness and compassions toward them
in lending what possible relief may be to the utmost of our abilities; not only
Religion will enjoin this, and reason persuade, but even Nature and Humanity
might compel and constrain us hereunto. It was that which the Law enjoined,
Deuteronomy. 22. 4. Thou shall not see thy Brothers Ox or his Ass fall down by the
way, and hide thy self from him; but thou shall surely, Surely help him, q. d.
Let all alone, use no pleas, make no excuses, this must and ought to be done;
Does God take care of Oxen? No, it is for our sakes it was spoken; Shall the Ox
be burdened, and not the heart under pressures be relieved? Shall the Ass fallen
be raised again, and the Conscience bowed and crushed under the weight of
everlasting vengeance, not be comforted? There Life natural is only endangered,
here Eternal Salvation is hazarded; therefore their greater need calls for the
greater Prove. 18. 14.
pity. As Job complained, Job, 19. 21. Have pity upon me, O my friends, have
pity upon me, for the hand of God has touched me. The spirit of a man will
(...) his infirmity, but a wounded spirit, who can bear? Lend a hand therefore
at such a dead lift, and help him to bear that, that no creature of himself is
able to undergo; have such in your minds daily, carry them in your prayers,
keep them daily in your hearts; when a party is in a fainting fit, dying away,
how readily does Humanity lead men to lend present help; one man holds, another
rubs and chafes, a third applies warm clothes, each man strives to come first,
and to do most; I pray you take of my Water, take of my Bottle, etc. that is but
a sudden (...) over the heart that will suddenly pass away; but this is a wound
that has pierced through the soul, bleeding and sinking with Hellish horrors,
breathing out his sighs, Oh when, Oh when will it once be? He that has not put
off Humanity, and the very Nature of a man, he cannot but put on tenderness and
commiseration toward such; and therefore what shall we think of those, who
instead of tenderness and pity, which they should express toward such, their
hearts rise in bitterness, and indignation against them; yonder be your
brokenhearted persons, etc. It Is no great matter, you may see what they have
got by Sermon gadding, what may we think of such? We may say, and think as Job
speaks, he that is in misery, should be comforted by his Brethren, but men have
forsaken the fear of the Lord, Job, 6. 14. It Is an Evidence of an Egyptian when
an Israelite is going out of Egypt, he stinks in his Nostrils; nay, a sad
argument of a soul devoted to destruction, Deuteronomy. 25. 17, 18, 19.

EXHORTATION. As to proceed the right way, Use 5.
so never to rest until (...) come to the right pitch of this saving sorrow,
otherwise we shall lose our labor, all the pains, and (...), and trouble we
take, will prove indeed unprofitable, we shall lose our labor, and our souls and
all; we should not content our selves therefore with a slighty touch to have
the skin happily a little rippled, or the heart stabbed now and then with an
overly stroke, but stay not until we come to the bottom; to be pierced through
and through again, until we see our (...) bleeding out their heart blood, and
the core of our corruptions coming out; true it may be, it will cost hot water,
time and toil, before that day come: be it so, but it will quit cost when ever
it comes; the longer the seed time, the larger the Harvest; They (...) sow in
Tears, Psalm. 126. 5.
shall reap in joy, let us not lose all for a little: The Patient will tell you,
why should I be cut for the stone in the Reins, if the stone never be taken
away, and I cured? Has then the punishments which have been threatened, the
strokes and terrors of Conscience which thou have felt, the dreadful
displeasure of the Almighty, which has been denounced and seized upon thy
soul, have they happily wrested tears (...) of thine eyes, bitter confessions
out of thy mouth, and forced thee to pensiveness in thy carriage, and
perplexity in thy Spirit? etc. All this is good so far; but it will do thee no
good, if thou go no further. Say with thy self, what sorrow have I more than
Judas had? what do I do more than Cain Math. 27. 3. 4.
did? what difference betwixt my complaints, and Esau's tears? Do I out of
horror of heart, vomit out Genesis 4.
my sins by confession? So did Judas. Do I make Restitution? Heb. 12. 17.
So did Judas. Do I wander up and down racked in a restless condition? So did
Cain like a Vagabond upon the face of the Earth. Do I sue to God for a
blessing? So did Esau, and that with tears, and that with importunity. Take not
up thy stand here, but say, Oh Lord, that I may have something more than
Hypocrites, do something more than Reprobates can do; have I suffered all these
terrors, wept al these tears in vain? If so be it be in vain; Oh let me not
have sorrow 2 Cor. (...) 10. 7.
only, but that true sorrow that may cause repentance never to be repented of:
Go then beyond al horrors and fears, and stay not before thou find and
feel thy sin worse than al thy plagues, or else thou never feltest them
aright; Look not to punishments that are cross to thy comfort and (...), but
look to the stubbornness and resistance of (...) heart, which (...) cross to
God and his Holiness, and holy. Laws; (...) that be heaviest of all other
evils, which indeed is the greatest evil of all. This too much have (...) the
new (...) makes many (...) Christians, still born, not begotten again to a
(...) hope, 1 (...); They heal themselves before God heal them, make (...)
before sound (...); not that they can apply too soon, if they apply truly; but
they think they do apply (...) they neither do (...) (...) Keep thy heart in
foak by godly Sorrow until thou (...) thy corruptions like noysom weeds come up
kindly by the roots; (...) (...) feel sin as sin in the bitterness thereof,
that thou fear al sin in the least appearance thereof: that whatever shall be
conceived, or be discovered to be such, the (...), notice, inclination,
disposition, or suspicion thereof, thy heart may (...) to come (...) any
provocation leading that way, and may readily listen to what ever may (...)
help or direction to avoid it or subdue it. Bear thy burden till the Lord ease
thee, be in prison, and let the Iron (...) into thy soul, until the Lord (...)
and deliver thee, and bring thee out of the house of Bondage; then shall thy
mouth be filled with laughter, and thy heart with joy, and that joy shall no
man take away from thee; travel the appointed months of mourning, and then thou
shall be delivered with success, and attain the (...) that will stand by (...).

How may we get help against the stubbornness of but hearts, against that
resistance and (...) that we find in our selves to this contrition of (...)?

The Directions are Three.

Do not tug with this resistance in thine own power, Direct. 1.
or any ability that is in thee; do not in thine own strength contest with that
rebellion, for it is certain this will make it excessive rebellious; when thou
seem to (...) violence to thy self, thou will be more (...), nay thou will
grow to a kind of felness and (...) of opposition against the Work of Gods
Grace; Sin becomes out of measure sinful by the Commandment, Romans 7. 13. and
instead of quarrelling with thy sins, thou will quarrel with the Almighty; and
if I do what I can, why should not God help me? Mark, now you are quarrelling
with God; and because you cannot do what you should, you will do nothing: this
is ordinary and usual, you will find a Hellish fierceness of Spirit upon this
turn.

You will say, What shall I do? Quest.


Come and bring thy soul into Gods Presence, lay thy Answ.
self down in his sight, and tell the Lord that thou art a Traitor, and which
is worse, thou can not but be so, that is thy misery; make known all the base
abominations of thy heart and life before the Lord, and all that (...) and
opposition that thou find in thy soul to Christ and his Grace, beseech him
to take away the treachery and falsness of thy heart, beseech him that he would
do that for thee that thou can not do for thy self; tell him that thou
would choose not to be, rather than to be thus treacherous; tell him that he
has said, he will take away the heart of stone, Ezekiel. 36. 26. and that it is
not in thy power to put it away, and therefore leave thy soul there, beseeching
him to make known himself as a God hearing prayers, pardoning sins, and
subduing iniquities; plead the Covenant of Grace, and the Promises of it, that
al is freely, and firstly, and wholly from himself, that he must make us his
People, he must make us humble and brokenhearted; Look to Jesus Christ, and
beseech him that (...) the Keys of Hell and Death, that he would unlock those
brazen gates and doors of thy heart, Rev. 1. 18.

Do not fear the terror of the Truth, so (...) to step aside from under it, and
withdraw thy self from the (...) of it, but think of the goodness of it; as a
man, though he fear the bitterness of the Pill, yet knowing it is a means of his
health, he is willing to take it: So here. When God moves, move thou; when he
stirs, stir thou; many a man neglects (...) stirrings of the Spirit of God, and
never has the like again, and then on his death bed cries for his old terrors.
Oh therefore when the Truth meets you and stirs you, keep (...) heart under it,
and follow the blow in secret, and bless God that has opened thine eye, and
(...) thine heart in any measure, and let thy heart lie still under the stroke
of the Truth: the want of this is the reason why many a soul is so long under
the workings of Contrition, and never grows to any settlement, because (...)
keep not their hearts under the power of the Truth, which would thoroughly break
the heart for sin, 2 Kings, 13. 19. The Prophet bids the King smite, and he
smote thrice and ceased, whereupon the man of God was wroth, saying, thou
should have smitten five or six times; then bad'st thou smitten the Syrians
till thou had consumed them. So when God has been grapling with thy heart,
and would have plucked thee out of the paw of the Lion; thou have prayed once,
or twice, or thrice, it may be; and then after a while, thy care, and
diligence, and endeavors are over; thou should have prayed six times, thou
should give God no rest, nor thy own soul any rest, thou should never
cease striking until thou have destroyed those corruptions of thine.

Possess thy soul with the ticklishness and danger of that condition thou art
in. In regard of the secrecy and difficulty of the work, how easily may I be
deceived, and how dangerous is it if I be; a failing here can never be repaired
afterward; if never broken for sin, then never broken from sin, then never
united to Christ, and then thou shall never see the face of God in Glory: think
how many have miscarried in this place: as when a Mariner sees the Mast of a
Ship, he fathoms the Water, and tacks (...), and looks about him, lest (...)
(...), we split upon the rocks also. So do thou look to thy self here,
thousands have sunk and split themselves here, and thou art in danger; and
know, that if thou do (...) here, thou art (...) for ever.

They said to Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, men and brethren, what shall
we do?

Here we have the carriage of these Converts, as a fruit of that piercing and
brokenness of Spirit, which was wrought in them by the power of the (...), the
inward disposition of the heart discovers it self by the outward expression of
their speeches and (...) here laid forth before us, as (...) special effect
which followed presently, and (...) therefrom. The breaking of the clouds by
(...) and (...), beings a storm with it usually; the (...) in their speeches;
argued thunder and lightning in their spirits: look how the temper and
constitution of the body goes, so the pulse beats in his proportions
answerable; the Spirits few, and heart faint, and actions feeble, it moves
marvelous weakly; if the (...) be marvelous quick and speedy, the Physician will
tell you there is a Fever stirring, and it may be hazardful, that has now
seized upon the Nature of the party: Look as our hearts and consciences are
affected within, so will be the (...) of our words and actions without (...)
their (...) was deep, and their (...) are bitter, which here they make. In it
observe Two things.

1. The parties to whom they tender their complaint, Peter and the Apostles. 2.
The (...) it self.
The part (...) are described and set forth two ways, 1. In regard of the
office unto which they were now called. Peter and the Apostles. 2. In regard of
that esteem and respect they (...) them, they lovingly and tenderly here greet
them, men and brethren, a style and compellation that holds forth endeared
affection with it, so far are these men altered from what they were, from what
they said, from what they did, ere while they scorned them, now honored them,
not long since they reproached them, are not these men full of new wine? and now
behold they reverence and fear before them, they rejected their counsel before
and are now forced to crave it, yea right glad to hear and receive it. In a
word, they repair to them as messengers of Christ, they (...) them as
brethren, the world you see is well amended.

Look at the complaint as it looks to the parties and there we have two points
we shall speak briefly to them both.

They whose hearts are pierced by the Ministry Doct.
of the word, they are carried with love and respect to the Ministers of it.

Men and Brethren, they be words of honor and love, and they spoke them
seriously and affectionately, they mocked them before, and they now embrace
them, they cared not what terms of reproach they cast upon their persons, they
know not now what titles of love and tenderness to put upon them, they now fall
at their feet as clients, who flouted them before as enemies, so it was with
the jaylour Acts, 16. 30. 31. 34. how kindly does he use Paul and Silas whom
(...) he handled so currishly, beyond the bounds of reason and humanity, he
entertains them in the best room of his house who before thought the worst
place in the prison too good for them. He baths their wounded parts which he
had whipped and stocked before, fears and trembles before them as his
counselors, whom he handled most harshly (...) as Prisoners; he feasts them as
his guests whom he had struck as Malefactors; the wind was in another door, the
man is of another mind yea is another man than he was. God had no sooner opened
the heart of Lydia to attend the word but her affections were exceedingly
enlarged, toward the dispensers thereof. Acts 16. 15. so that the cords of her
loving invitation led Paul and held him captive, he professed she compelled
them i. e. by her loving and affectionate expressions, prevailed with them for
a stay. And while Paul had the Galathians under the Pangs of the new birth and
Christ was now forming in them, they professed they would have plucked out
their eyes and have given them to the Apostle, Gal. 4. 15.

Naaman has no sooner his leprosy healed, and his heart humbled and cut off
from his corruption, but he professed himself and what he had is at the
devotion of the Prophet, and that not out of complement but in truth, 2 Kings
5. 15. Take a blessing from thy servant.

Reasons are two.

They see and know more than formerly they did, Reas. 1.
when happily the crooked counsels of others deceived them, and their own
carnal reason couzened and deluded their own souls that they mis-judged the men
and their doctrine also. As that they did not speak the truth, or else had some
crooked and self-seeking ends in what they spak; As either to gratify other
men's humors whom they would please or else to set up their own persons and
praise and esteem in the apprehensions of others as singular men and more than
of an ordinary frame; and therefore would wind men up to such a high pitch of
holiness, and force them to such a singular care to fly the very appearance of
al evil, when its more than needs and more than God requires, and more than any
man can do but now they find by proof and are forced out of their own sense and
feeling to acknowledge the truth of what they have spoken, and what they have
heard, and themselves also, to be the faithful ambassadors of the Lord Jesus,
and therefore (...) to be believed and attended in their dispensations and
honored of al. So Paul 2 Cor. 4. 3 We hope we are made manifest unto your
consciences Thus the Woman of Samaria when our Savior came home to the quick
and met with the secrets of her heart, she then fell from her taunting and
slighting of our Savior to admiring of him, Come says she behold the man that
told me all that ever I did, is not be the Christ. John, 4. 29. Look as
Nabuchadnezzar said, Dan. 4. last, now I know the God of Daniel is the true
God, and now I praise the living God, so when they have been in the fire, and
God has had them upon the anvil, now I know what sin is, now I know what the
danger is, now I know what necessity there is to part with sin; when the
Patient has found the relation and direction of the Physician has proved real
it makes him prize and honor his skill and counsel, for ever; and for ever to
have his custom, (...) the Pythonist was compelled from the power of Paul's
administration to confess, these are Acts, 16 17.
the Servants of the living God which show unto us the way of Salvation, so
here.

(...) they see more and can therefore judge better of the Reas. 2.
worth of persons and things; so their conscience now has more scope, and the
light of reason has more liberty, and allowance to express that they know, and
nothing now can withstand and hinder; for while men are held captive under the
power of their lusts and corruptions of their hearts, in which they live, and
which for the while they are resolved to follow; though (...) reason happily do
yield it, and their own hearts and Consciences cannot but inwardly confess it,
the persons are holy, the (...) are (...) which they condemn and dangers
dreadful which they (...); yet to profess so much openly to others, and to the
world were to judge themselves while they would acquit others, and condemn their
own courses, while they (...) praise and honor the carriages and persons of
others, (...) therefore darken the evidence of the word by (...) (...) and
reproaches, (...) the wittness of (...) and stop its mouth that it cannot speak
out. Thus (...) 1. 18. they hold down the truth in unrighteousness When the
truth that is by their judgments assented unto, and by their hearts yielded,
and therefore should break out and give in testimony to the good ways of God:
their corrupt and unrighteous and (...) hearts hold it prisoner, will not suffer
it either to appear unto others or prevail with themselves; As it (...) with
the Scribes and Pharisees when the wonder was wrought by Peter, say they Acts,
4. 16. that indeed a not (...) miracle has been done by them is manifest to
all (...) dwell in Jerusalem, and we cannot deny (...) (q. d. they would have
done it if they could) but that it spread no further, let us charge them
straightly that they speak no more in this name. But here when the conscience of
a poor sinner is convinced, and the heart wounded, and that resistance and
gainsaying distemper is taken off and crushed, now (...) is in commission and
has (...) scope and the coast is now clear that reason may be heard, now the
broken hearted sinner will speak plainly, these are the guides that God has
setup, their direction I will attend, these are the dear and (...) servants of
the Lord whom I must honor, and with them I would (...) trust my soul, not with
the blind guides, and (...) teachers, who daub with untempered mortar and are
not trusty to God, nor their own souls, and therefore cannot be (...). Oh send
for such though (...) (...) life time they could not endure the (...), abide
the presence, nor allow them a good word (...) their persons and proceedings
and professions, (yea that they will confess) but it was directly against their
own judgment and knowledge and Conscience, mine own heart often gave my tongue
the lie, when I did so speak and so (...) their conversation, otherwise, I must
have condemned (...) own course and Conscience also, but the Lord is with them,
and the (...) is with them, and a (...) will undoubtedly follow them. Ask why
these poor pierced sinners did not go to the Scribes, they would tell the truth.
Oh it was (...) that deceived us, led (...) drew us to the commission of this
hellish wickedness; we cannot call them teachers but (...), they could never
help themselves, therefore not help us.

INSTRUCTION, Sound contrition and brokenness Use.
of heart brings a strange and a sudden alteration into the world, varies the
price and value of things and persons beyond imagination, turns the market
upside down; makes the things appear as they be, and the persons to be honored
and respected as they are in truth, that look what the truth determines, reason
approves, and Conscience witnesses, that account is current in the hearts and
(...) of those, whose hearts have been pierced with godly sorrow for their
sins. Because (...) not by outward appearance as it is the guise of men (...)
corrupt minds, but upon experience, that which they have found and felt in
their own hearts, what they have seen and judged in their own spirits, they
cannot but see so and judge so of others. Those who were mocked as men full of
new wine, are now the precious servants of the Lord, flouted to their (...) not
long since, now they attend them, honor and reverence them, yea fall at their
very (...). It was before men and drunkards, now men and brethren, the world
you see is well amended but strangely altered. It was said of John Baptist the
forerunner of our Savior, and the scope of (...) doctrine was mainly to
prepare the way for the Lord, it is said of him that Elias is come and has
reformed al, (...) a new face (...) frame in the profession of the Gospel,
Math. 17. 11. Turned the disobedient to the wisdom of the just men, the hearts
of children to the fathers, that though they were so degenerate that Abraham
would not own them had he been alive, yet when the Ministry of John had
hammered and melted them for the work of our Savior, they became to be wholly
altered, their judgments altered and their carriage also. For in truth the
reason why men see not the loathsomness of other men's sins, or else have not
courage to pass a righteous sentence upon them, It is because they were never
convinced to see the Plague sore of their own corruptions, never had their
hearts affected with the evil of them in their own experience but their own
Conscience was misled out of authority, and stifled that it durst not outwardly
condemn that which inwardly they could not but approve. They therefore who
either do not see their own evil, or dare not proceed in open judgment to
condemn, they will either not see or not pass a (...) judgment upon others, so
Paul intimates to Agrippa, Acts, 26. 8. 9. let it not seem strange Oh King for
I my self did think I should do many things against the name of Jesus, which I
also did. q. d. whiles thou so (...) thou will see as I (...), and do as I did,
but after God had entered into (...) with him and spoken dreadfully to his soul
see, (...) is another man and of another mind; he destroyed the Churches, now
takes care of them; he that hated the name and Gospel of Jesus counts al things
dung and dross for the excellent knowledge of Jesus, the world Phil. 3. 8.
is well amended but its mervailously altered, and therefore we have found this
man a Pestilent fellow Acts, 17. 16. he has subdued the state of the world.
Use, 2.


TERROR, this shows the dreadful and miserable condition of al those who after
all the light that has been let into their minds, conviction into their (...),
horror into their hearts touching the evils that have been committed and come
now to be discovered unto them, they loath the light that has laid open their
evils, distaste those persons and preachers and Christians most, that have dealt
most plainly to descover the loathsomness of their distempers, it shows the
(...) corruption of the mind and heart that grows worst under the best means,
and cleaves most to its sins under all the choycest means that would pluck their
sins from their heart, and their heart from them, they are either fools or mad
men that (...) endure the presence of the Physician without whose help they
could not be cured. This is made an evidence (...) the estrangment of Gods
heart from a people, and an immediate forerunner of their ruin. Isa. 9. 13.
14. 17. For this people turns not unto him that smote them, neither do they
seek the Lord, therefore the Lord will cut off from Israel head and tail, branch
and ush, one day therefore the Lord shall have no pify on their young men nor
mercy on their fatherless, for every one is an Hipocrite. It takes away al pity
in God, al hopes in themselves of any good. After Pharaoh had many qualmes and
recoylings of spirit by Moses dealing with him, and the miracles which he had
wrought for his repentance, and at last sides it with the hellish stiffness of
his own stubborn heart, so that he cannot endure the speech or presence of
Moses any more, Exodus 10. 28. get thee from me, see my face no more, for the
day thou see my face thou shall die, God sends ' Moses no more, but sends his
plagues to destroy his first born he will not see the face of Moses he shall feel
the fierceness of the wrath of the Lord.

He that is truly pierced by the Ministry of Doct.
the word, he is buisy to enquire and ready to submit to the Ministers of God
making known his mind therein.

They who never had thought of their own condition never craved nor cared for
the counsel and direction of any in the things of God, as seeing no need of
either, but now the case is otherwise every man's heart is now full of fears and
his mind sul of doubts, and he is stored with questions; they al with one
mouth, and one mind, as one man that had but one heart, they said one spoke it,
but al consented q. d. that is al our cases, that is al our de (...) men and
brethren, we can find no rest in our hearts nor resolution in our judgments,
we could not but come and seek and we shall be more glad to receive counsel and
guidance from you, So that broken heartedness does two things which are the two
Parts of the Doctrine.

1. It makes men buisy to enquire. 2. Ready to receive direction from Faithful
Ministers.
A true fight and sense of a man's finful condition The first part of the
doctrine.
sets men upon the search, awakens men out of that senceless security in which
they were buried, makes them look about them, puts them upon the serious
consideration of their own spiritual condition, not long before they scant
thought whether they had louls to be saved, or sins to be pardoned, or mercy
and grace to be looked after, they never put it to the question what they could
say or show for heaven, but now they begin to think with themselves what they
are; this is set forth to be the guise and behavior of converting sinners when
God begins to tamper with the hearts, for the alteration of their states. Jer.
50. 4. In those days and at that time, when God has stirred their hearts to
recover themselves out of the Babilonish Captivity, (Deliver thy self O Sion,
(...) who dwell with (...) Daughter of Babylon) See how they bestir
themselves, Going and weeping shall they go and (...) the Lord their God: weep
still, and go still, sorrow still, and seek still; they who stirred not a foot
before, nor looked after the Lord, nor their own happiness and comfort. So it
was with Ephraim, when the Lord began to work his heart to a right apprehension
of himself, Jer. 31. 18. while he was in his Natural Condition, he was like an
untamed Bullock, unacoustomed to the Yoke; but when the Lord had taken him to
task, then he begins to (...) with himself, and betake himself to new thoughts,
verse 19. When I was turned, I repented; when I was instructed, I smote upon my
thigh: Thus John Baptists Hearers, when once the Word wrought kindly upon them,
it made them al busy and inquisitive, even as one man, Luke, 3. 10. to 15. The
People they came and asked, the Publicans they enquired, the rude Soldiers they
also began to demand, Master, what shall we do? This disposition of spirit set
men a going who sat still before as in a dream. The covetous Publicans whose
thoughts were after their gain, how to compass their Commodities from every
Quarter: the rude and unruly Soldiers, who cared for nothing, nor thought of
nothing, but how to satisfy their own lusts, and sult their own corrupt
desires, al was fish that came to net; and the sottish multitude who merely
followed the sight of their eyes, after a brutish manner minded that which
concerned the out ward man, What shall we eat? what shall we drink? what shall we
put on? In likely hood had never a thought of God, nor of themselves, whether
there were a Heaven to be expected, or a Hell to be avoided, but followed their
present pleasures; see now how serious and inquisitive they be, they now
conclude something must be done, and they would willingly know what course they
ought to take: when God sets upon men's souls, then they set upon their Service.

The Reasons are Two:

Because they now feel the evil they never feared before, Reas. 1.
now they see the danger and misery hanging over their heads, able to overwhelm
them, and sink their hearts, which they never suspected formerly. And therefore
now, not only Reason (...) them, but their own safety, Nature and (...)-love
will force them to bestir themselves to the utmost of their strength, and
improve al their abilities to the utmost of their power, to prevent such
over-bearing evils, and provide for (...) own relief and welfare; and so the
more to use al diligence here, because they are unknown, and yet spiritual,
which concern their eternal estate, and therefore cause most fear, and threaten
most hazard, and therefore constrains them to seek (...) and near for succor
and relief. So it was with the Prodigal when he came to (...), before Luk, 15.
17. 18.
he had not the right (...) of his Reason, nor conceived of things as they
were, but as frantic men fall, into fire and water, and fear nothing, (...)
(...) (...) (...) nothing; but now being come to the (...) of his
understanding, he considers, How many Servants are in my Fathers Family, that
have bread enough, and I (...) with hunger? Luke, 15. 17. then he (...)
himself, I will arise and go to my Father, and say, etc. So it is with many
prodigal, (...), deluded Creatures; they spend time and strength, and lay out
themselves; (...) nothing, and therefore fear no after-claps, until the time of
Famine, and day of (...) and horror come in upon them; they never saw, need of
reading, hearing, prayer, seeking and enquiry: but now when they find
themselves besieged with sins and plagues, and daily expect the execution to be
done, Heaven frowning, Hell gaping, their Consciences (...), and themselves
dropping down to the Grave, and their souls to Hell, they think it high time,
and more than time to bestir themselves, to do what they can, and to cry for
help and direction in so desperate distresses and danger; I will arise, and go
confer; I will arise, and go enquire; I will arise, and go pray; The whole need
not the Physician, Math. 9. 12.
therefore they do not send, nor yet are they willing to receive, nor care to
enquire, or take any Physic; but when the Difease grows fierce, and life is in
danger, then post out Messengers, (...) far and near for a Physician, search
every bush, enquire of every man what might be good, what have you (...)? what
would you advise? So here. Thus God dealt with his People when he would awaken
them, Hos. 5. last, In their affliction they will seek me early; then Hos. 6.
1. Come let us return to the Lord, he has wounded, and he will heal. The full
soul loathes the Honey Comb, but never Prove.
looks out for provision; but the (...) soul, that is now starving, runs if he
can, if he cannot run, he will go; if he (...) go, he will creep; enquires where
he may have food, uses all means to get, he will buy, or beg, or borrow. So
here, etc.

They begin now to see the folly of their own conceits, Reas. 2.
and that confidence which in former times they had; how easily they could
procure their own comfort, and how certainly without fail they could provide
for the (...) of their own souls, and everlasting happiness; they said it; and
thought what they said, that there needs not so much (...) to get to Heaven; at
the time of (...), and before their departure draw on; it is but bewading (...)
sins, and seeking to God for mercy; Oh but when it comes too, they (...)
another (...) matter of it than ever formerly they did (...), they (...) at an
utter loss with themselves, they know not what (...) to take, which (...) to
turn; they know not, poor Creatures, how to come at a Christ; nay how to (...)
him, how to attain (...) pardon or peace: And therefore now (though (...) late
it may be) they see they know not what to do, or how to turn their hand to any
spiritual work, which in pride of heart, said and concluded, they could (...)
any thing: They are made of nothing but doubts and questions; If thou (...) est
the gift of God, thou would ask of him, and he would give thee Water of
Life. John, 4. 10. Thou know not that thou art poor, and wretched, and
(...), and (...), Rev. 3. 17. Those that are ignorant of the way, will (...)
(...) any man, ask of any child: So a soul under (...) (...) and ignorances,
will enquire of any Christian, ask of any Minister that may direct him in the
way he should take.

This Doctrine is a Bill of Indictment against a world Use.
of ungodly men, who live in the Church, who may here read their doom, and the
dreadfulness of their own condition discovered beyond all denial; namely, to be
such who as yet were never troubled, never so much as touched with a through
sight and sense, of their own baseness, and cursed corruptions of their Natures
and lives; they are so far from being broken by the Truth, and batterred al to
powder by the power of an Ordinance, that indeed the day is yet to come that
they (...) any (...) blow, from the (...) Word of the Lord (...) on upon their
Consciences, by the hand and good Spirit of the Almighty, and that is evidenced
out of the (...) had they received the like impression with these Converts,
they would have been (...) upon the like practice with them, had their spirits
been broken as theirs, they would have been as (...) to seek out for succor and
relief as (...) do; but alas this duty appears not scant in the lives of men,
therefore this (...) is far enough (...) their hearts: If thou had been sick
as they, thou would have enquired of the Physician as they; but where is the
man almost that has put the Quare to his own Conscience, propounded the
Question seriously to others, out of the sense of his own want, for to make
narrow search of his own estate, 'Men and Brethren, what shall I do? He never
saw need to do any thing, nor had heart to do any thing; men therefore had
never desire nor endeavor to seek direction; when he has been loath that men
should put him to pains, and press him to diligence, and doing in this behalf.
They make it a matter superfluous, and needless trouble thus to be taken up;
what needs all this ado? (say they) and therefore they are willing to sit down
with ease, but do nothing: they are settled upon their dregs, and endure not
stirring, it is a kind of Hell, and like the appearance of Death, to be pressed
to diligent inquiry, to make their Calling sure, 2 Pet. 1. 11. The state of the
World is somewhat like that which the Angels express upon the proof they had,
when they went to survey the frame of things, Zach. (...) 11. We have walked to
and fro through the Earth, and behold all the Earth sits still, and in at rest.
Walk we from one Plantation to another, from one Society to another; nay, which
is yet a further misery, from one Assembly to another, all the Earth sits
still, and is at rest; there is no stirring, no trading in Christianity; men
cheapen not, enquire not after the purchase of the precious things of the
Gospel, what shall I do to be quit of my self? what shall I do to be severed
from my sins which have pestered me so long? prejudiced my peace so much, and
if it continue, will be my ruin? As though Christ were taking the Charter of the
Gospel from the present Generation, and were removing the Marks, there is no
stirring, Trade is dead, men come dead, and sit so, and return so unto their
Habitations, there is deep silence, (...) shall not hear a word. What spiritual
good they get, what they need, or what they desire; men are willing to do
nothing, and therefore they will not enquire what they should do; certain it is,
the Word never wrought kindly upon thee, nor prevailed with that carnal and
hard heart of thine to this day in any saving (...) for thy spiritual good:
thou never knew what it was to be loft, (...) thou never had a stir of
heart to enquire the way to Sion, it is made an Argument of a man in the bonds
of (...), in the depth of his (...) distemper, (...). 3. 11. They have no
(...), (...) do they seek after God; and it is made an evidence of Satan's Rule,
Luke, 11. 21. When (...) strong (...) keeps the Palace, all his goods are at
peace; but when a stronger comes and (...) him, he takes from him all his Armor
wherein be trusts, and divides (...)
the spoil. The House and Palace, is the Heart and Spirit of a sinner; his
(...) and Furniture, are 1 Pet. 2. 11.
all those noysom lusts by which he (...) (...), and exercises (...) power in
the sinner; and as the Apostle says, fights against the soul; as despair is
the Headpiece; unrighteous, and careless, and unconscionable walking, is the
(...); carnal Reason the Sword; Unbelief the Shield; and an indisposition of
heart to yield to the terms (...) the (...), is that whereby the sinner is
prepared to walk in the way of (...), his feet shod, sit for every evil work.
While Satan is (...) furnished with the Armor of Darkness, all his goods are at
peace, he does without any trouble, act the soul, and wrong the Comfort and
happiness of the soul, and so the Honor of the Lord; (...) (...) his goods,
it is all he desires, endeavors, takes as the gain of his Labor and Diligence in
his Temptations: Does Satan act thee by his Temptations, and so increase both
thy guilt and ruin thereby? (...) are (...) his goods in peace? (...) (...),
thy woe, thy (...), is Satan's wealth and substance, he has what he (...), and
does what he will, and thou art not troubled with any thing, nor wilt trouble
him by seeking out for relief and deliverance, inquire (...) what thou may
do to be rescued and (...); know, Satan has his Armor on, and he seeks thy
heart as his Palace, under his Sovereign Power and Command to this day; nor is
there any preparation, nor the (...) inkling or intimation of (...) of that
wretched (...) of thine: thou (...) in this secure condition as one that
meddles not, have nothing to do with the things of Grace and Life. As it was
said, Judges 17. 7. of the men of (...), who dwelt careless, quiet, and secure,
far from the Zidonians, and had no business with man: It Is a Picture of this
(...) temper, and secure condition of thine, thou (...) far from the state and
grace of Glory; thou have no business with Christians, with Ordinances,
Officers; thou have nothing to say, or to demand touching eternal Life; thou
know nothing, yet inquire not what thou should do; have nothing, yet
(...) not for help and succor; thou have no business that appertains to Heaven
with any man living, thy business lies not with the Word, and the Lord and his
Word have as little to do with thee; that shows thy heart is not there, nor thy
portion there. As each man's affection and expression of himself is where his
employment lies, as (...) as a Be, they carry their businesses in their very
Countenance, their words sound that way, their behavior, look that way, every
man has something (...) say in that which pleases, that which pincheth him,
and questions go up and down, what shall we eat? and what shall we drink? and
wherewith shall we be clothed? And yet we may hearken and hear (as Jeremiah
speaks) and no man (...), what have I done, what shall I do to be (...)? Jer.
8. 6: Look into the Families where men live, observe the occasions with which
men meddle, and employ themselves, (...) of the persons with whom they
converse, you (...) scarce hear a question; every man is (...) after the things
that may suit his own (...) heart, and yet seek not after the things that
concern their peace: Look at men in their necessities, or take them in their
employments, (...) is no end of men's (...): In sickness we fill men's ears, weary
men's hearts with enquiries what means (...) be attended, what course taken up:
let it be matter of Commodity that may accrue, men are as full of their
questions, as the Sunshine is full of motes; what? and when? and after what
manner may occasions best be (...), to compass a man's content? This seems good,
but how may that be avoided? That is more profitable, but how may this or that
inconvenience be prevented? And yet as though men had no souls, or had nothing
to do with Grace, and Life, and Salvation, they have nothing to say for Heaven,
nay, nor about Heaven. Our hearts work not this way, which argues the Word
never wrought kindly, either for the discovery of thy sin, or the breaking of
thy heart for it. If men were wounded they would fill your ears with their
sighs, and your hearts with their complaints. So here, they would not give God
rest, nor you rest, if their hearts were restless in their distresses; thou
keep mine eyes waking, I cannot sleep, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 77. 4. God
will keep your Eyes waking if ever he work kindly.

Why? But is it not possible, yea ordinary, even for Object.
Reprobates themselves in the time of their troubles and terrors, when fears
and doubts assail them, to be earnest in their seeking, importunate in their
complaints, and endless in their questions, with every Christian with whom they
meet, and every Minister that they know?

Yes, It is common even for Hypocrites so to do, Answ.
therefore thou have not attained the highest degree of the Profession of an
Hypocrite, do not reach the carriage of a Reprobate; they are far from
Heaven, and thou art far off from them; thou art in the lowest Rank of
Hypocrites, thou have not yet had a look toward Sion, or a thought of eternal
happiness: thou art not come into the Market, not so much as cheapened the
things of Grace: Though therefore the presence of such a carriage does not
certainly evidence a good Estate, yet the absence of it, does undoubtedly
demonstrate that thou art in the worst estate of men. It is, as we use to call
it, a Negative Note, though the Affirmation of such a thing, does not discover
the Truth of Grace, yet the denial evidenceth the want of Grace; constantly to
reject and refuse, is the note of a wicked man, and yet to attend the (...) of
Grace, does not discover a Godly man: For as it is in Nature, there are many
things in man which go to the being of man, which yet do not distinguish him;
as to have a Sensitive Nature, etc. without which he cannot be a man, yet to
have sense does not difference man from other Sensitive Creatures. And hence it
comes, the denying of sense destroys the being of a man, yet the presence of
sense does not difference a man from a Beast. So it is here, a disposition
busily to enquire after the means of Grace and Mercy, does enter the being of a
brokenhearted Christian, yet it does not difference a Christian truly
brokenhearted from one Legally terrified; look at it in their general
carriage, and enquiry after the Ordinances, and things of God.

But is there no difference between the search and busy Quest.
enquiry which a heart truly broken, makes from that, which an Hypocrite under
Legal Terrors, does sometimes express.

I Answer: If we look at the Specialty and Spiritualness Answ.
of their Carriage, there is a Threefold Difference:

In the Ground whence they arise; that enquiry which it issues from the filth
and poison of his sin, which puts the thoughts of a sinner beyond his compass,
as not able to conceive, and the heart beyond his hopes, as not able to
undergo; Psalm. 38. 4.
My sins are a burden too heavy for me; they are innumerable, I am not (...) to
lookup: Therefore the thoughts Psalm. 4. 40. 12.
and heart set the whole man awork; the Tongue to complain of, and enquire a way
of release, the endeavor to pursue it. That of the Legallist issues out of
Nature, which feels her hazard, or therefore seeks for her preservation, and
calls for help; thus they howled upon their beds, but did not cry to God, Hos.
7. 14. As the Lion in the grin roars for relief.

In the End, the terrifyed hypocrite he is frequent in his complaints, buisy in
his enquiries, sometimes to gain ease and that is most usual, sometimes also to
ingratiate themselves in the hearts of the faithful and to gain their esteem
that they should look at him and account of him as a broken hearted Saint, as
one that (...) been exercised with the indignation of the Almighty, Esau would
have his blessing, Judas his guilt removed. A brokenhearted sinner (...) not
his ease or honor but God, going Jer. 50. 4.
and weeping they shall go and seek the Lord their God, not themselves; he seeks
Gods face to engratiate himself with him, and to get his favor.

In the efficacy and virtue, because his business lies against sin as long as
sin and he lives. The Legallist when his terrors. and fears are removed, or
eased, he has done what he would and he desires to do no more, and therefore
enenquires no further what he should do.

Here Is matter of DIRECTION, we hence see the Use 2.
ready way, and never failing means to set an edge upon our desires and put
life into our endeavors, to make us sedulous and busy in seeking after the Lord
and the things of his grace. 'Maintain a right sight of the (...) of thy sin,
the (...) thereof which will delude thee before thou (...) aware, and may be,
endanger thy peace and Comfort before thou do discern it. Maintain a right
sense and feeling of the evil of thy sin, this broken-heartedness as at the
first, thou will then enquire as at the first, pray and seek as at the first.
As it is with the Patient when the disease is over, health and ease coms on
(...), he then begins to lay aside physic, to neglect his diet prescribed,
never seeks to the (...) nor sends for further counsel, Oh but if his old fits
befall him, he is then as careful to use his old Physic, send presently to the
Physician for fresh counsel, and advice. So it will be with the soul of a
sinner, when once the wound is healed, and God (...) allayed the venom of the
vengeance which sin brought with it, and the heart grows up in some evidence
of the work, and assurance of Gods love, so that the worst is past and the
(...) is over. men begin to lay aside their diet, and that careful (...) they
ought to use, the daily renewed repentance they should take up, until the Lord
lets loose their lusts afresh, their old fits and force of their (...)
distempers seem again to overbear them, which hazard their truth and peace they
begin to find their hearts, and prayers, and begin again to be awakened to the
work. The Corinthians were careless either of the sin or misery (...) (...)
persons, or their own duty and careful endeavor to reform until the Apostle
(...) sharply to them, and affects their hearts with godly sorrow, this set
them al awork, what care? in what fear? what zeal did it provoke them to
express? both in their carriage toward him, and in their daily course before
God? 2. Cor. 19. 11. Paul's new (...) with his corruptions and the body of (...)
makes him renew his complaints, Romans 7. 24. Oh wretched man that I am who shall
deliver me from this body of death, when God left a splinter in the (...), and
sent a messenger of Satan to buffet him, this made him to bestir himself to
purpose, 2 Cor. 12. I besought the Lord thrice, that is many times, and with
much importunity, he (...) post have to heaven (...) supply (...) In the City
besiedged, the way to make them (...), and (...) (...) their attendance, is to
give the alarm upon every occasion; He that is in a (...) ague, though upon
his better day, he feels no fit, yet he is (...), and watchful o himself where
he goes and what he does, (...) he expects his fit, and he knows he may hasten
it and hazard his life? It is so with a Christian, we are in the leaguer
continually, though not assaulted, our (...) like (...) lie in our bones though
we have a better day now and then, expect the (...) and give the Allarum and
look for our (...) before it come, that will make us busy and watchful to
prevent it that it, may never come In their affliction they will seek me early
Hos. 5. last. God is forced sometimes to withdraw, and go away, that he may
force his Saints to seek after him.

They are ready to submit to the Ministers of God, The Second (...) of the
Doctrine.
making known his mind, the very words which they express argues such a
disposition of spirit, they come as Patients to the Physician to know his
advice that they may take it. As clyents to the Lawyer, to understand his
counsel that they may follow it. So it was with Paul when God set upon his
heart, intimates his mistake to him that it was hard for him to kick against
the pricks; he trembling and astonished, Lord what will thou have me to do?
Acts, 9. 6. not his own will but Gods he attends now, not what he would have
done, but what God would have done, Psalm 45. 5. When Gods arrows are sharp and
stick fast in the hearts of his enemies, the people fall under him.

Because the pride of their carnal reason is now conquered, Reas. 1.
the Lord has dashed, and confounded the overweening conceit which once they
had of their own worth and the excellency of their own abilities; they now see
that all the wit in the world does not keep commonwealth in their brain, that
their apprehensions are not Oracles, but that they are and have been miserably
mistaken and see now by experience the vanity of their imaginations, and that
they have been deluded by the darkness of their own (...) hearts, when they
professed themselves wise they became fools, Romans 1

And therefore they are ready to lay down their own conceits, and to follow
Gods counsels, they begin to (...) and suspect their own blindness, and
therefore yield easily to the directions of others. A man that is bewildred,
and has lost himself, he is content that a child should show him the way, that
he conceives has but any acquaintance with the coast. So it was prophesied of
Converts in the time of the Gospel Isa. 11. 6. That a Child should lead them,
even the meanest that brought arguments should prevail with them, especially
the ministers of the Gospel of whose wisdom and faithfulness, and acquaintance
with the way and will of God they have had (...) experience.

That stubbornness and rebellious resistance of their Reas. 2.
wills out of the sovereignty whereof, they durst set themselves against God
and heaven, is now tamed and subdued. So that they dare not gainsay but become
pliable to the holy and acceptable will of God, and ready to take the impression
of his good pleasure, when it appears and is presented before them; The hardest
peble when it is broken and (...) to powder, it will take any impression that is
put upon it, So Job joins these two Job. 23. 15. 16. Job is afraid of Gods
presence, for God has melted or made my heart soft and the Almighty has
troubled me, and hence when God had schooled him out of the whirlwind and tamed
the stiffness and perverseness of his spirit, see how he yields himself to Gods
hand, to do any thing with him, even works like wax, Behold I am vile, once
have I spoken but I will say no inore, twice but I will proceed no further.

Because they have found the truth of the word, and Reas. 3.
the terror and authority thereof made good upon their souls, and that they
cannot now but acknowledge and admire, and therefore dare not but readily submit
thereunto as knowing, they cannot resist but with their own ruin, and there
own safety consists in subjection thereunto, which they could never formerly be
persuaded of, before he found it by woeful experience, how terrible God has
been out of his Sanctuary, Psalm. 110. 3. thy people shall be willing in the day
of thy power, so the woman of (...) when the truth of our Saviors speech
pierced her heart, like a two edged sword, she then falls to admire him when
before she had (...) both his speech and practice,

(...) here see the reason of that (...) Use.
and way-ward unteachableness that sometimes appears in the hearts of Gods
(...), they are awk to know, wearish to give (...) to the evidence of Gods
counsel, they want broken heartedness, and therefore want this measure of
teachableness; as it is with an unruly Colt it costs him many a blow first,
before he be brought to be at command; so it is with the unruly heart of man,
which must have many sad strokes and blows before it be thoroughly subdued to
the obedience of Gods will. Men never knew what sin meant almost. Isa. 66. 3. I
will look says the Lord, i. e. with a gracious look of mercy upon this man that
trembles at my word; that trembles at a counsel least he should despise it, at
commands, promises, least he should not receive them. The Lord is terrible out
of his holy places. When the terror of the truth of God is fallen upon the
soul, then what ever exhortations, directions come from the word he dares not
resist or gainsay, but submit and fall under the will of God made known there;
then a man will fear to go from under a command as to go to hell it self.

EXAMINATION we may hence know whether ever Use. 2.
the word has wrought kindly, and left this impression of broken heartedness,
this is a never failing evidence, As thy subjection is to the word, so thy
contrition is. If the word has pierced thee, the word will awe thee. 1 These. 1.
6. Our Gospel came not in word but in power; and ye became followers of us and
of the Lord. Did the word overpower thy heart? then thou art a follower of the
faithful Ministers of God who left those impressions upon thy soul; the word is
mighty through God and brings every thought into the obedience of Christ, hence
2 Cor. 8. 5. they gave up themselves to the Lord and then to us by the will of
God, so far as they set forth the Government of Christ.

This false heavy upon two sorts;

Those that are open rebels, sons of Belial, that acknowledge

Conspirators and traitors that pretend and profess subjection and yet maintain
rebellion in their hearts, they yield fainedly, but when it comes to reallity
to stoop to the authority of the truth, they will not, these are traitors to the
truth; (...) the Swissers will be enemies when they cannot serve their own
turns, and friends when they do; (...) the Papists in England they are content
to take the benefit of the Law, but when it comes to take the oath of
Allegiance they will by no means do it because they are sworn Vassels to the
Pope, or Pensioners to the King of Spain, though they equivocate to serve their
own turns: so these when they come to take the oath of Allegiance to set up
Christ as supreme in their hearts and minds, to submit to the power of the
truth, then they take up arms against Christ and his word, and will not submit.
This is the evidence of a servant of sin, Romans 6. 17. when men receive the
power of the Gospel they are not servants of sin else they are, Psalm. 45. 5. a
man that will not fall before the truth, the arrows of Christ never stuck fast in
his heart.

What shall we do?

We have done with the parties, to whom the complaint was made, men and
brethren etc. The complaint it self is full of bitterness: some things are
employed in it, some things expressed. That which is employed in this complaint
may be attended in four particulars.

Their ignorance and inability how to help themselves.

An absolute necessity to come (...) of this condition, which now they find
themselves in.

A secret hope to receive advice and relief from the Apostles.

The price and excellency they now put upon the (...) from their sins; for this
is the end of their request, that which is supposed and employed as the end of
their complaint namely to bedelivered from that which was the plague sore of
their souls, and did so extremely pierce and pinch them. That which the jalour
in the like case did openly mention, and these also did intend, Sirs what shall
I do to be saved? Acts. 16. 30. namely from those sins which now overwhelm his
soul. Doct.


Sinners in distress of Conscience are ignorant and unable to help themselves.

The manner of the speech proclaims so much to each man's experience, at the
very first inckling and hearing of it. They speak as men at their wits end what
shall we do? we know not what to do, it is beyond our skill and above our reach;
either to bear or avoid, to make an escape from his sins and the plagues due
thereunto. As Ruben said when he went down into the pit, and found not his
Brother Joseph there, (being sold before) he returned to his brethren, the
child is not and I whither shall I go? Genesis 37. 30. So it is with the soul in
distress of Conscience, seeing it self forsaken of God. Because he has
forsaken him by his backslidings and departures, God is gone, my God is not, to
this poor soul, and I (...) shall I go? whither shall I look? if to heaven there
justice will reject and condemn me, if to hell there the Devils are ready to
torment; should I take the wings of the morning and fly to the utmost parts of
the earth, there the wrath of the Almighty shall pursue, and if I look into my
own soul, there is a Conscience to accuse (...) a hell of horror to confound me
for ever. We know (...) (...) way to take (...) we are (...) of our (...) (...)
(...) (...) makes it more (...) (...) know (...) how to get either relief or
release. We are at a loss (...) our (...) we are at a loss in our thoughts how
we may find succor and deliverance, you (...) are the seers of Israel, show us
the way of help. Paul acknowledges as much at his first Conversion, Acts, 9.
6. when the Lord had met him, and discovered the evil and (...) of his way, he
then conceived he did not well, and yet could not conceive what to do, Lord,
what will thou have me to do? I do not know, and therefore I cannot tell how to
do thy will, nor yet how to procure mine own peace: When the Israelites were
driven to perplexities by the expression of Gods (...) against their (...)
carriage in choosing themselves a King, and (...) cried out, (...) (...) us, for
we have sinned, 1 Samuel 12. (...) they durst not go to the Throne of Grace
themselves, but forced out of guilt and horror, they were ready to go the wrong
way, and therefore Samuel by seasonable prevention stops their passage, Ye have
sinned, yet turn not aside from following the Lord, q. d. the distressed sinner
as a Traveller in amazement, when they have once missed their way, the further
they go, the further they go aside.

Reasons are Two.

The (...) of Grace and Life, unto which men are Reas.
to turn at the times of their Conversion, they are hidden and secret; and men
in their Natural Condition, when the Lord is pleased first to stop their
passage, and build a wall before them, they are wholly unacquainted with the
narrow path that (...) to Christ and life, by reason of that inbred blindness
of their minds, and the daily (...) of their lives, and that from their (...)
For (...) is (...) part of the description of the Grace; (...) to enter in at
the straight gate for straight (...) the (...) and (...) is the way that leads
unto Life, and (...) (...) (...) (...) find it. Matthew. 7. 13. It Is but one
(...) and a narrow one; (...) be thousands of thousands of (...) paths and
(...) (...) miss it, and there is but one way to hit (...) and (...) hard (...)
find it self, and to (...) that is (...) in (...) impossible. Therefore men are
said to be strangers from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in
them, Ephesians. 4. 18. As men that never went a strange way, they cannot tell whether
they go right or wrong, they know not where they are; and as Travelers speak
when they are in remote places, I am out of my knowledge, I was never in these
Coasts before: So it is with all men Naturally, they are but strangers when
they fall unexpectedly upon the Coasts of Conversion and Contrition, they are at
a loss, and wholly unacquainted with the Coast of such a Condition, know not
where they are, or what to make of it or themselves, Romans (...). 17. The
Apostle speaking of men's conceivings of the ways and works of Christ, yet in
their Natural blindness, Destruction and Calamity are in their ways, the way
of peace they have not known; they think they are in the road to Heaven, when
they are posting down to Hell; yea, even such who have lived long under the
means, and have heard much of the Lord Jesus; nay, it may be have preached much
of him, and that with no small approbation; yet when they are come to these
straights, and brought to these amazing horrors of Spirit, they plainly show,
nay, are sorced nakedly to profess they never had any sound discerning either
of the work of Grace, or the way to Christ, but are very Children, Novices,
No-bodies in these Spiritual Mysteries. So it was with these in this place, in
such a multitude now brought home to the faith, no question but many of them
had enjoyed many means, and been long trained up in the Truth of the
Scriptures, and the Doctrine of Moses, and the Prophets, yea, Paul professes
of himself before his Conversion, That he profited in the Jews Religion above
many of his equals, and that he was exceeding zealous in his way: yet when the
Lord met him in his way, and speaks to him from Heaven, he knew not what way to
take; but Ananias is sent on purpose to teach him, Acts, 9. The ground is here
when the Spirit comes to convince, to reveal sin to the soul, and a man's self
to himself, things now begin to be real, and seem other than ever formerly they
did; sin is another thing, Grace, and Godliness, Faith, and Christ, and
Salvation, are other things than formerly they did appear unto the soul. So
that the sinner is as it were in another world, wonders where he has been, and
what he has done, stands amazed at his own folly and madness, that he should
so wonderfully mistake, that he should ever take contentment in those sinful
carriages, which are the only cause of his ruin and confusion, sees he is gone
so far out of the way, that how to get in again he is wholly ignorant. It Is
true, men speak much of sin, and can talk much of Christ, and may have heard
and read much of faith, yet know nothing but empty words, not know the thing
when they should use it: He that spells by rote, may be will not spel a Letter of
the Book when he is put to read. So your formal Professors, Carnal Hearers, may
be out of Custom and constant attendance upon the means, can make a shift to
speak out their Lecture, and speak somewhat freely of Faith, and Christ, and
Conversion, and yet come to distress, and feel the stroke of the Truth and
terror in their hearts, if they be put to read to the use, and improvement of
any thing heard; they know not the thing, nor their own hearts, nor yet the
Nature of their distempers. So it was with (...), our Savior was constrained to
point with that fescue, and put his finger upon the Word, and tell him, that
which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit; yet he is in a mist, understands not
what Christ meant, nor what his own condition was, How can these things be?
John, 3. 9.

As through their inbred blindness, and unacquaintance Reas. 2.
with the Ways and Works of Christ, they cannot discern the means of relief;
So by reason of their distraction under the pressures of their present
extremity, they are wearish to attend, and unwilling to listen and conceive
aright, any means that might procure their succor and comfort. As we see in
present fears and affrights, or extreme or sudden sorrows, we are not our
selves, and so become indisposed and (...) to conceive of that which is offered
plainly to consideration, and which otherwise we were able to judge aright of,
and improve it to our present, advantage, Heb. 12. 5. A person fainting under
afflictions and troubles, is wholly unable to (...) any means to support him.
So here, when men's thoughts are hurried with apprehension of evil, which in the
most dreadful manner are presented to their view, and their hearts possessed
with the feeling of them, they have no leisure to lay out their thoughts and
minds to provide for means of help themselves, nor yet to receive them when
they are offered by others, Exodus 6. 9. The bitterness of the oppression was so
great that they listened to the voice of their misery, but would not hearken to
Moses his Counsel.

INSTRUCTION. (...) men in distress of Use.
spirit, when and while the Lord is pleased to exercise them under his Almighty
hand in this Work of Contrition, they are soon misled by the delusions of the
subtle, and carried aside by the corrupt (...), and cunning devices of such as
be false Teachers. They who are feeble, are soon foiled, even by the assaults
of such as have either policy to undermine, or power in any measure to (...).
They who are dim (...), much more if blind, are easily and presently misguided
and led out of the way, and he not able to prevent it, nor yet in any way of
probability like to get in, and recover himself.

Now this is the under and weak condition of brokenhearted sinners they are out
of their ken and compass, the ways of God in that so sad and spiritual a Work
and Trade with the soul, they do not know, and therefore are unfit to seek, and
so in reason unable to find it out; and therefore it is easy for them to be led
into Samaria instead of Dothan, and the Devil by his Factors to lead them into
false ways, for which they are commonly hardly recovered; if they grow false
at this (...) of their life, he may there be lodged to his dying day; for this
is like the fall in a man's Cradle, may be, never get fully recovered again: And
upon this ground it is that false Teachers when they make a trade to wind into
men's affections, and win them to the entertainment of their erroneous conceits:
If they would spread their erroneous Opinions which go under pretense of Free
Grace, and painted with the appearance of holiness and exactness, they hearken
out where any be in (...) of spirit, in trouble and distress of Conscience,
they fall in with them immediately, and work them to their own minds and wills;
(...) they are tender hearted, and fearful to refuse whatever comes under (...)
color of Free Grace, they are now at a stagger and unsettlement, ignorant how
to help themselves, and therefore likely and ready to receive what help can be
lent; they know not what way to take, and therefore may be led any way upon the
sudden, and at a present push. These are the Devils Brokers that beguile
unstable souls, 2 Pet. 2. 14. And Paul was afraid that the new Converts might
be cozened by the wily carriages of the false Apostles which would work upon
their simplicity, 2 Cor. 11 3. I (...) (...) by any means, as the (...)
beguiled Eve (...) (...) (...), so their minds should be corrupted from (...)
simplicity of the Truth in Christ: We see in the (...) of Fowls, when one has
received a shot, either to the breaking of the Leg, or the laming of the wing,
and so lags behind their fellows, not able well to find the way, or not to fly
far, the Fox perceives a Prey, which he pursues. And it is (...) in the
Country whence we came, Kites and Buzzards observe when the Lambs fall, and
those they prey upon with the (...) opportunity, if not prevented. It is so
here, These false Teaches are like these ravenous Birds of Prey, and subtle
Foxes: If they perceive any who are of a wounded spirit, that the Arrows of the
Almighty stick fast in them, and that they are forced to hang the wing, and go
(...) and discouraged, at a loss in their own thoughts; they presently make a
prey of such, they know not how to relieve (...), and therefore are (...) to
listen to any that will considently pretend ways and means of relief.

Here is matter of ADVICE to all mourners in Use 2.
Zion; those that the Lord now has upon the Anvil, and is melting and framing
to his own mind to make them Vessels of Mercy; they must be marvelous wary,
(...) carefully circumspect that they be persons of approved faithfulness and
sincerity, to whose Counsel they do commit themselves, and betrust their
condition; and when they (...) so (...), then they must keep (...) prepared
heart, what Advice they are not able by reason to (...) say, they have then I
say (then, when such a one of tried uprightness and faithfulness is (...))
great reason to yield unto. They know not how to advise themselves, therefore
fall before the Advice of others; they know not how to do themselves good, and
therefore should be content to receive good from others. As it is in Nature, it
is so in Grace; Women in Childbirth, when they come to travel, they will not
take every one that offers her self to do them Service, but hearken after such
who are experienced Midwives, (...) they attend their Counsel, and take their
(...), when they are not able to succor themselves in such necessities. So it
is in this Spiritual new Birth, and Travel of the Soul; let him (...) a man of
Trust and Experience, able to (...) the Soul in the day of misery; (...) leave
your (...) to the Counsel of (...) when you are at a loss, and not able to
counsel your (...); and it is a special print and impression of the work of Gods
(...), that be commonly carries the hearts of the perplexed, and their own
spirits carry (...) to such who have been most exercised under such (...), and
(...) of (...) sincerity; as these came not to the Scribes and Pharisees, who
happily had been leaders and abettors to them in their sinful miscarriages,
their hearts (...) them they were as (...) as they, and for ought that they
knew, as ignorant of a better way as themselves, and therefore they were unable
to give advice, and they not willing to repair thither to ask it. And it is
commonly so with such, if men be left to themselves, and not overruled with
Carnal Friends, or else some subtle wretches that come in sheeps clothing,
press in upon them, beyond either their thoughts or desires: then happily they
may surprise them, and prevail too much; and if once they gain an interest, and
ingratiate themselves, they are hardly brought off; because that which first
takes place in case of distress, leaves the deepest impressions upon the
spirit: But when men repair to the wise-hearted in their extremities; take in
this Truth, and keep it ever with you, I am ignorant, and know not at this time
in this necessity to direct my self: therefore as I shall seek God in such
means of Counsel, so I will yield and deliver up my self unto that direction,
which in reason according to God, is suggested, and I have no reason, but only
fears and suspicions of my carnal heart to oppose. So God sends Cornelius to
Peter, Acts 10. 6. blind men, and such as are in darkness, and can see no light
nor way neither, they should suffer themselves to be (...) by the hand by such
who can lend them light and help also.

A sinner pierced truly with sorrow for sin, Doct.
sees an absolute necessity to come out of the sinful condition in which he is.

Therefore they do so (...) complain in the Text, Men and Brethren, what shall
we do? Let Us do any thing, suffer any thing, be any thing; let us not be, nor
remain in this Condition whatsoever it cost us, whatever become of us. They put
in no provision, no caution upon which they would receive Counsel, or which
they would desire might be allowed or granted; but we will do any thing that we
may not do the Devils drudgery, or the dung-hil service of sin; be any where,
(...) any thing, rather than under the guilt and power of those loathsome
abominations which have lorded it over us. Therefore I call it an absolute
necessity of being quit of, and coming out of this wretched estate.

And this Absolute Necessity, may be conceived in Three things:

There is no terms of tolleration of sin, which can be proposed; there be no
Articles of Agreement which can be offered, no way of Composition that can come
into consideration: As suppose I may have with secrecy, with quiet, with
credit; nay, suppose my Conscience would not trouble me; yea, the Lord abate me
of his Anger for the while; nay, I may suck out the sweetness of it without any
suspicion, without any vexation or distraction to my self for the while. No,
this will not do the deed, nor (...) the turn, if I have al these, and have my
sin, and be a slave to that. No, their complaint is of the (...) of (...), not
of the want of these, Mark, 9. 49. If thine eye offend thee, pluck it out; if
thy foot offend thee, cut (...) off: it is better to go (...) (...) Heaven, than
having both eyes and feet to go to Hell. So the (...) would be content to be
maimed in credit, quiet, comfort.

(...) no reservation of any sin of any kind, not touch an unclean thing, 2
Cor. 6. 17. He does not say, no gross unclean thing, but nothing, no not to
touch it. So (...) Savior to the young man; There is one thing wanting, Go and
sell all that thou have. Mark, 10. 21.

Admits no case of exception, what ever difficulty or Deuteronomy 33. 9. nay not
only to leave them but to do execution upon them, for so the case may be, and
it is supposed by interpreters when it is said the Levites knew not their
brethren, that has reference to that story Exodus 32. where the Levites were
enjoined to slay each man his brother. So Peter's advice here following the
text, save your selves from this Crooked generation. Yea were (...) the loss of
man's life, (...) also comes within this necessity; there is no necessity to
hinder to part with this life, there is a necessity; he should part with his
sin Dan. 3. 17. 18. we care not to answer thee in this thing O King, our God
can deliver us but (...) he will not, we will fall down and worship thy golden
Image.

The Reasons are three.

The sinners thus affected they feel experimentally the Reas.
(...) of Gods justice, which (...) proceeds (...) the sinner, for whatever
(...) it meets withal, and what ever the sinner be. That (...) men (...) in
the (...) of a sinful course, they (...) and promise to (...) freedom, and
escape from the (...) of Gods (...), or at least such a mitigacion (...) (...)
as may allay, the extremity of the fear of the evil they did expect; or take
off the pleasure or pursuit of sin in which they did delight, yet now under the
stroke or (...) they (...) by proof they were misguided in their thoughts, and
(...) in (...) hopes; For that such is the (...) of Gods righteous (...), that
he does and will undoubtedly (...) and find out al, and is absolutely resolved
to execute punishment upon al, and therefore there is an absolute necessity
they should renounce and abandon al, even the most beloved and least suspected
distempers, which formerly like Atheists they foolishly thought God did not
attend, or at least would not trouble himself withal, but wink at them or pass
them by, which now they find far otherwise, Gods justice is peremptory in
punishing, and therefore they must be as peremptory in abandoning their lusts,
they cannot avoid the justice of the Lord, and therefore they must avoid their
sins, whatever deluded hope they had formerly of Gods connivence, but now they
see themselves deceived be the corruption never so secret he will search it, who
professes Zeph. 2. 11. that he will search Jerusalem with candles, and punish
them that are settled upon their lees, who say in their hearts, the Lord will not
do good neither will he do evil; the lees ly at the bottom such as no eye sees
when the Vessel is set on broach, they carry the matter so covertly as if it
were beyond either apprehension or suspicion, but God will search it. It was
spoken of the times of Josiah when reformation was general, and with great
applause and approbation of al hands; religion seemed to be enterained: yet men
settle upon their lees, had their retireing corners for their corrupt lusts,
while they carried al before them, and seemed to be most exact. Isa. 29. 10.
16. there was a generation that dug deep to hide their counsels from the
Lord, but their turning of things up side down shall be esteemed as potters
clay, q. d. even those privy conveyances are as the clay in the hand of the
Potter, God sees them and will act and order as he sees fit, thus Achan saw and
took and (...) and carried Josh. 7.
and hid it secretly in his rent, but God found him and his falsness and
forgeries, and forced him to acknowledge so much. As the secretest so the
smallest transgressions divine justice stabs the heart of a sinner withal. Not
only Achan who committed, but Israel who did but neglect their watch and care,
to keep him from or recover him (...) of it, they also smart Jos. 7. 1. an evil
which the best of them neither saw nor considered, therefore the Lord was
constrained to mind (...) of it, in the day of (...), what means this, Israel
has sinned verse. 11. as who should say the hand is in a wrong box thou missest
that which is of the most weight, Moses his hasty expression in siniting the
rock, Genesis 19. 26.
or Lots wife looking back a man would have thought not to be evils of (...)
(...) a nature, and so heavily to be punished. It fares with the contrite and
brokenhearted sinner, as it did with the woman sick of the bloody issue, who
strove to touch our Savior that she might be healed, our Savior openly
discovers her evil, carriage, who was it that touched me? when she saw that she
could not be kept secret, she came trembling and acknowledged what she had
done. So when the soul under the horror of Gods revenging hand, (...) that
indeed he cannot be kept secret, but now God sees his evils and will pursue
them, he falls down flat before the Lord, and concludes the absolute necessity
of it that God should punish every evil, and therefore it is absolutely necessary
he should part with it, this the wise man intimates, Ecles. 11. last. rejoice O
young man in thy youth and let thy heart cheer thee in the ways of thy youth
but know thou for all these things thou shall come to judgment, q. d. diddst
thou indeed know that? thou would not, thou durst not, go on in the sins of
youth.

Now the sinner (I say now) in this state and under Reas. 2.
this stroke, (...) an inability in himself, nay utter (...) (...) (...) the
weight of the (...) sin, which is (...) (...) (...) (...) soul by the Almighty
and therefore is now put (...) (...) and (...) conditions and (...) that his
(...) (...) (...) him before withal (...) (...) (...) (...). But (...)
definitively, no more ado, no further talk; I see I cannot bear the sting of
the least sin, and therefore I must not keep it. Heretofore he could make a
shift to shake off the fear of the threatenings of the word, which were
denounced to stop the mouth of his Conscience, which whispered bitter things in
his bosom, and to wear away the (...) that stuck in his heart; and therefore
fondly conceited he could make a (...) to bear the weight that should befall,
that he might possess and enjoy the pleasures and content his (...) courses did
promise to his carnal heart. But he finds it otherwise; his heart say les him
under pressure of one sin, Psalm. 130, 3. If thou should mark what is done
amiss Lord who should (...) it. An ignorant soul settled in his secure condition
out of self deluding pride of his own spirit, would (...) that he could abide
the misery and so the danger that might accrue to him by his distemper, and so
is fearless to maintain it. But now he finds he is not able to abide that
which his sin does bring let him put the best of al his abilities together to
emprovement (...). 14. can thy heart endure etc. the time was they thought
their hearts could endure, the frollick Epicure, and flinty hearted sinner, he
wonders at he feebleness of the distressed and brokenhearted, that they should
be such children, persons of such feeble and milksop dispositions to sink at a
Sermon and be troubled at the words of a Preacher, tush his Conscience is
cannon proof, he can hear and bear al and yet pleal (...) and bless himself in
the pursuit of his lusts, as before times. Oh, thou (...) do so, while men deal
with thee, thou may avoid their blow or make an escape out of their hands;
but when God shall deal with thee in that day when thou fallest into the, hands
of the living God. Hebr. 10. who lives to torment the to eternity what wilt
thoudo? The shadow and appearance of the handwriting shook Belshazzars heart
when he was quaffing in his cups, in the ruff of his riot, what would the
stroke of that hand have done? and this hand now the (...) finds, and finds
himself absolutely unable to (...) the evil of (...) sin, and therefore
concludes it absolutely (...) to be (...) of it whatever it cost him. He knows
now by proof, this evil to be such as that no other can equal it: the evil such
as no contrary good in this world can countervail it. And therefore he sees
reason and chooses never to have any good in this world, rather than to have
his sin, to part withal, rather than not part with this, or be plagued with it.
Rather undergo al evils, and suffer the utmost extremity, (...) suffer his sin
to remain with him; Math 16. 26. What will it profit a man to gain the whole
world and to Ioose his soul, or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul.

The broken in heart he sees now by proof also, the Reas. 3.
cursed combination that is amongst corruptions, a league (...) lusts, if any
corruption rule in the heart, it makes a man a slave to what ever distemper
presents it self unto the soul, In a word. He that will keep (...) sin, he keeps
himself under the power of al corruptions, he keeps off the power of all the
means of grace and good for working upon or prevailing with the soul for its
(...) wolfare.

The keeping of one sin keeps possession for Satan, and his right unto the
soul, and under the Allegiance of all the accursed lusts that either can come
from without or arise from within: one (...) the Sovereignty but he is a slave
to al, as special occasion may be offered, he will serve any (...) that he may
suit the beloved distemper of his heart (...). Tim. 2. last. the (...) rakes
them captive according to his will. and therefore its (...) of the thorny (...),
in that the nick of (...) they fell away (...), 8. 15. Whither sell it: Nathely
it gave (...) to whatover either error in opinion or (...) in practice (...)
(...) (...) (...), or satisfied the (...) desire of the soul. He that misseth
the right way, be is for any by way that comes next in view; a City that is
under the command of the chief Captain, they must be subject to the out rage of
any or al of his (...), or underlings, that will but execute his will and attend
his tyrannous commands, so it is in the soul, if one lust rule it, its a salve
unto what ever distemper may be serviceable and seem to give content to that,
they went as they were led 1 Cor. 12. 1. 2.

The heart pierced with this through sorrow perceives also by woeful experience,
that the keeping of one corruption keeps off the power of any ordinance that it
cannot work kindly or (...) effectually for any spiritual good; it way (...)
the work of an ordinance; The heady and (...) (...) would have a King, and they
would hear no counsel nor yet take the savorest argument into Consideration,
that did concern their peace and prosperous proceeding in their way 1 Samuel 8.
18. the (...) Idolaters run madding after their Idols, they cast off all the
advice of the Prophet with scorn and contempt Jer. 44. 16. As for the word
which thou have spoken to us in the name of the Lord we will not hearken to
thee, Nay when they are set upon is, they profess plainly, there is no hope,
but we will walk every one after the vanity of his own imaginations Jer. 18. 12.
so that the sinner now (...) and resolves, either he must part withal, or else
for ever be deprived of al good, and be a slave to al sin.

TRIAL, We may hence gain undoubted evidence, Use.
whether ever our hearts were soundly soaked in this Godly sorrow for sin (...)
or no. Contrition if it be of the right stamp it has a constraining power with
it to force the heart against corruption; It silenceth al shifts, puts by and
puts off al false pleas, scatters al sluggish pretenses, that are made in
behalf of our distempers, (...) a word, it casts the balance against al carnal
reasons, that are (...) and stirring, and usually cast in by Satan, and our
sensual disposition to keep us, in our former estate, and to procure some, if
not toleration, yet mitigation in our (...) against our (...); It lays and
leaves a pressing (...) upon the soul that overbears, what ever may come on the
contrary part, to plead for any connivence for any sin in any kind, As we say
in the Proverb, there is no reasoning against sense, a man has no patience to
hear words, (...) or appearances which are against a man's feeling and
experience; If any stander by should persuade a man the potion is pleasant when
a man (...) it (...), and his stomach (...) it; or that the fire is cold when
he finds it (...) and burn; he can hardly give him the hearing, but disdains
him an answer; say what you will, I regard not what you say, shall not I trust
mine eyes, or so far befool my self as to go against mine own feeling? I pass
not that you speak in that behalf. So it is with a broken hearted sinner what
ever Satan shall suggest, his carnal friends and companions counsel, his
deceitful heart pretend, or plead what need he be so strict in his way, so
(...) against his sin, so resolute to abandon al his former courses, and his
ancient (...) with whom he has had so much content, there is no such need now
to set upon the work, herafter will be time enough, or no such danger in
maintaining a dalliance with such and such distempers, which are no great
matter, nor is there any great harm in them, the burdened sinner has not
patience to hear, but disdaines to enter parley about such things as he has
past sentence upon, long before this day, tell not me, talk not to me of such
things: there is no speaking against mine own experience, I have felt and found
the contrary, my heart knows otherwise and that by woeful (...), therefore I
pass not what you speak. God will allow none, I can bear none, no not the sting
of the least sin, when God will let it in, nor you neither when once the Lord
will pursue you with the least expression of his displeasure, I cannot have any
sin seem it never so small, but I must (...) under the power of al, nor ever
have any possibility of any good. As Ruth to Naomi when she advised her to stay
or return when she came with her, she puts an end to al such persuasions, Ruth,
1. 16.
entreat me not, for I will not leave thee, so (...) is with a soul sensible and
soundly affected with the evil of his sin, he is beyond (...) (...) and carnal
reasonings, he will hear nothing, the soul is overpowred with a sovereign kind
of absolute necessity, he has found by proof, which puts to silence what ever
can be said to the contrary q. d. cease reasoning about that for which no
reason can be (...), (...) not that which has no ground of persuasion, it
(...) admit a case of exception, therefore I will not once take it into
consideration nothing can be spoken of weight or worth, and therefore (...) to
speak further. Its not necessary I should not be poor, (...), despised, It Is
absolutely necessary I should not be sinful. I have no (...) from God, I should
not leave and loose my life, my liberty, but I have a (...) charge without al
exception; I should leave my sin. Art thou come to that with the three
Children, (...). (...). 17. 18. Our God can deliver, but if he will not, be it
(...) unto thee (...) will not fall down and wroship etc. Its necessary we
should maintain the truth of Gods worship, its not necessary (...) should
maintain our lives. Resolvest thou with them Hos. 14. 3. Ashur (...) (...) save
us, (...) will we go down to (...), nor say any more to the work of (...) hands
ye are our Gods I will no more be proud or perverse, no more loose or vayn,
(...) (...) liften to the pleasing dalliance of mine own heart, that Dale (...)
mown, that is determined long since, by long and woeful experience, its beyond
consideration, keep thy spirit ever in that temper, and thou will keep (...)
undoubted evidence of the sound work of contrition with thee.

Hence therefore this Doctrine (...) a Bill of (...) against (...) (...) of
(...) (...) (...), (...) (...) short of this (...) (...) of God; (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) Christ and Heaven, fall away totally and finally from the
Truth in the end.

The first sort are your NEUTERS, who study to compose al their course with
prudence and convenience, but conceive it not so safe to put a necessity upon
each Service in this kind, but only serve their own turn; and that is the
compass they stere by, and walk by. As your Neutral Towns, they pay to both the
Armies, but sight for neither, only keep their own safety and peace. So is it
with those Neuters in Religion, they would capitulate with Christ and the Rule,
and enter into Articles of Agreement with the Gospel; therefore they take up,
profess and practice Godliness, but with Cautions and Provisions, that they may
walk at (...) in their own deluded hearts; but to put it to the (...) of this
absolute necessity, and that they may dispense as they (...) fit, that they will
decline, they count it, and conceive it matter of comeliness and convenience,
nay prudence and Christian Wisdom, nay necessary if occasions suit to attend
the narrow (...) of Gods Command: if occasions suit, provided that no (...)
(...), and desperate inconveniences, and hazards appear to the contrary, they
plead a dispensation to relieve themselves by, to be necessitated and tied to
inconveniences, they conceive it unreasonable: Thus the Chapman, (...) (...)
wisling and ready to (...) his day, and (...) (...) payment, and perform his
(...) according to promise, if means and moneys come in comfortably, and his
(...) may be seived, as well as his Creditor paid, then it is necessary: But if
(...) (...) upon (...), and he cannot pay, but with much (...) to his Estate,
either to part with that which is profitable, or upon low rates, and for loss;
then he (...) he may be dispensed (...), and it is not necessary (...) that case
to pay. If a man (...) (...) in the world, then it (...) (...); (...) (...)
(...) is at (...) (...) in (...) Estate, (...) (...) (...) (...).

The wife that is froward, she (...), had she a head and husband so wise, and
able, and gracious, there were reason and necessity she should carry her self
in a (...), and sweet, and humble manner: but one that (...) (...) fit for his
place, nor answers her comfort, nor his carriage so prudent as she could
desire; if then she carry her self pettishly and perversely, in such a case, a
tolleration may be given. So these persons put no necessity of parting with
their sins, but of preventing their inconveniences. It Is certain, thou never
foundest the evil of sin, that can take and leave thy sin with these
exceptions; thou never seek Christ for himself, but only as he may serve
thee; not take his, but make thy own (...). But if ever God do thee good, he
will make thee know that God (...) lays a necessity upon a gracious man (nor
intruth upon any man) to sin, but (...) necessity, and that absolute, he
should not sin. And therefore al those pleas, alas my occasions many, my
necessities great, pinching extremities prevailed with me; but as soon as
convenienoies suit, then I will, etc. Therefore thou (...) be just and true in
promises and performances, only when thou have no necessities, when thy
conveniences serve not for conscience sake: No, thou will find thou had
better go maimed and halt, with thy (...) Mark. 9. 43. 47.
eye plucked out, and thy right hand cut off, than to keep thy sins, and go to
Hell with them. When thy conveniencie suits, thou will serve God; and when Gods
conveniencie serves, he will save thee.

There is another sort of Formal Professors, that pretend great kindness, and
large affection to the Lord, and the Gospel, and therefore profess they will go
far to accommodate the Lord Jesus, and give him full and free entertainment,
Only there is a reservation they make to themselves of that which shall not be
much prejudicial to the presence of his Majesty, if God will abate them (...)
(...), that is all they look for. As men that take in Mates, they let all, but
reserve only a room to themselves, and they (...) they go very far to pleasure
them: So these men will keep some one lust, and they must be spared in that.
Rachel reserves her Fathers Idols; Ananias and Saphira, they give half, and
keep half, Acts, 5. 2. It Is certain thou never knew the evil of sin, if thou
never (...) an absolute necessity to part with all. Thou say, The Lord be
merciful to me only in this; No, thou will never have mercy if thou keep this.
Thou say, Is it not a little one, and my soul shall live? It Is certain, thy
soul cannot live, if thou can not leave this.

INSTRUCTION. We here see the Reason of Use, 2.
all that uneven and unsteady walking of many men: Sometimes they are zealous,
and sometimes cold and careless, men are off and on, sometimes so (...) that they
cannot abide the appearance of any sin; sometimes bold to adventure upon that
which they know to be evil. This is certain, either thou never had the work
of Contrition, or thou keep it not alive in thy soul: 1 Cor. 5. 1, 2. You
are puffed up, and do not mourn? If they had mourned for the evil, they would
have been zealous to reform.

DIRECTION, how we may keep a readiness of Use. 3.
heart to (...) every corruption and occasion leading thereunto, that a man may
have a steady, even spirit; keep thy heart affected daily with the evil of thy
sins, and that will over-bear al corruptions and inclinations to any sin at any
time: As the Naturallists say of the Nightingale, she sets her Breast against
(...) Thorn, that when she begins to nod, the Thorn may awaken her; he that
lies hard, will not sleep long.

Two Rules here.

Keep the Judgment settled, Conscience convinced, and Heart (...) of this Truth,
that the evil of sin is so great, that no evil is equal, no good can
countervail it; and then this will certainly follow, thou will rather choose to
have nothing in this world, (...) than to have thy sin; and part with all
profits, and commodities, and comforts, (...) not to part with thy sin; suffer
any evil rather than sin; lose any good, rather than keep thy sin. Keep this in
the thoughts of our hearts for ever; there is no evil like to my sin; Matthew.
16. 26. What shall a man profit to win the world, and lose his soul?

Do not give a hearing to any consideration of any Cavil that is cast in to the
Contrary. Say it is past consideration, do not therefore entertain the motion:
As in the Chancery or Courts of Justice, when a Cause has been tried, and
proved by Witnesses, and Sentence past upon it; if a wrangler shall then put in
a motion, the Judge will not hear him, but casts out (...) motion. Deal thou so
with thine own (...) reason and (...); when thou have seen and found the
greatness of the evil of sin by thine own trial and experience, if now carnal
reason should put in and say, This is to be considered, and that is to be
considered; cast out al these Cavils, give no audience to any motion made for
any tolleration for sin, And this is the way to keep the Channel (...), and the
passage current, that your souls may be carried cheerfully in the stream of
Gods Truth; and that will make a man ever like himself; keep this Truth (...)
in your (...), there is an absolute necessity of it, I must not sin. It Is
inconceivable what this Truth in the lively work of it will do.

There is a secret Hope wherewith the Lord Doct.
supports the hearts of such as be soundly Contrite.

Though the case be dangerous, and their condition miserable, they do not cast
away all as though it were utterly impossible; they do not say, Men and (...),
there can nothing be done; we see nothing our selves, and we (...) you discern
nothing, and we conclude there (...) (...) (...) will (...) can do any good.
Nay, their words seem to issue from another principle and foundation, what shall
we do? q. d. there may be ways we see (...), (...) of (...) which (...)
through our folly and ignorance of this condition, and unacquaintedness with
the dealings of the Almighty, and his special and mysterious Dispensations with
the sons of men, do not conceive, nor can they come so easily and readily
within our reach and apprehension; yet we suppose, you that are the Seers of
Israel, and the Spiritual Physicians to the souls of (...), sinful Creatures:
you that are of Gods Counsel, and acquainted with his secrets, we should yet
think it, there is yet something to be done; Oh that we may know it, and that
direction that may do us good. So that there is a secret kind of unknown
expectation in their hearts, as presuming there is some course to be taken for
their cute and comfort. It is true, sometimes there be strong assaults of (...)
(...) in by (...), strong Suggestions of impossibilities, which of a sudden
seem to (...) over the soul; when after long strife and (...) held against our
corruptions, we are frequently and desperately foiled with the violence of our
own distempers, and our own (...), the sinner out of height (...) too much
(...) of Spirit, is ready to (...) away all. I shall one day perish: All men
are Liars. The soul tired with extremity, and by constant consideration, as it
perceives; so it supposes its condition forlorn, upon a sudden push; may lay
aside all, willing to look no further; the Lord by this means in his infinite
wisdom, out of the deceit of our carnal Reason, and by a present pang and
outrage of (...), does crush and confound all the pride and (...) of (...)
Reason, which by no other way happily could so easily be quelled; when our own
carnal (...) conclude according to our misguided (...), there is no way of
escape, or means to shift. Where is now your wit that thought to (...), your
power that thought you were able to (...) up your (...)?

But this is but a present push, like the rage of a (...) by (...) (...) fall
of rain, a hurry of Spirit, a (...) as it were: But when the soul comes to it
self, as the man that swouned away, it lifts up it self, and looks out, It may
be, and it is possible.

Let me therefore,

1. Show you in a (...) or two, the Nature of this Hope, and (...) it differs
from that which (...) wrought in the (...) (...); it is wholly of another kind
in the Nature, and the work of it. 2. The Reason why God leaves this Hope.
First, Touching the Nature of this Hope, I term it, a secret kind of unknown
expectation; by which the heart is carried on to look for relief and help,
which out of the sense of its own burden, and preservation of it (...) it
willingly would have, but knows not where to find it, nor yet obtain it, (...)
it did appear.

It may be discovered in two things:

In the rise and ground of it; the Lord leaves upon the Understanding of a
(...) sinner, a real apprehension of his own (...) in such (...), and about
such conditions, and yet (...) of the experience and knowledge of others, and
(...) of Providence in such difficulties beyond his reach; both which lead the
(...) and apprehension of a man to look out, and provokes the heart in this
(...) condition, to put forth (...) endeavor, because all the (...) of
possibilities, are not stopped up, and (...) of relief wholly taken away. For
be it he know none; yet this also he (...), there may be some way, and others
may and do (...) conceive more (...) of succor than his shallow conceiving is
able to know, or has (...) to (...) therefore look out he will, and expect what
further may be made to appear in the way of Providence, and from Direction and
skill of others. And hence it is they come here upon the (...), (...) and
Brethren, What shall we do? We (...) (...) are (...) a (...) in our own
thoughts, we are strangers to our own hearts and distempers, and distresses,
unto which through our just deservings we have brought our selves: yet you that
have more experience, and better acquaintance with the Dispensations of the
Almighty in such dealings with miserable Creatures, though we know not what may
help (...) selves, yet we know that we have need to seek for succor, and we
know not but we may speed; therefore we are resolved to put it to the trial,
put it to the venture, see what will become of it. Upon this ground the
Ninivites resolve to betake themselves to seek out for their own preservation
from the destruction (...) and now drawing on, Jonah, 3. 9 Who can tell if God
will turn, and show mercy, that was perish not? (...) can (...) it is beyond all the skill we have to contrive, and the power we have to accomplish any thing for
our own (...); but yet we cannot tell but God may turn from his (...) wrath, and
leave a blessing behind him (...) of a curse; as men who fall into strange and
desperate sicknesses, the danger they see, but cannot see how to cure
themselves; yet the apprehension of their own ignorance, and consideration of
the experience and wisdom of others, is thus far a help, as to provoke them to
seek out, not altogether without expectation of supply from them; for though
they easily conceive they understand not what is good for their own sicknesses,
yet they cannot conclude but others do or may understand more than themselves.
So here, Men and Brethren, we knew not our sins before, nor now how to be quit
of them. You that from God, know how to discover them, we cannot but think, but
you may show us a way of escape and deliverance, and therefore we cannot but
enquire; though the sinner cannot say it will, yet he does not know it will not
be; therefore I term it an unknown expectation, it secretly swaies and carries
the heart.

Hence this Hope is confused and uncertain, it does not, nor can bottom the
heart in any grounded assurance, and settle it upon any certainty, for the
attainment of that which now it needs; But keeps this on foot in the
consideration of the sinner, that there be unknown passages of possibilities
for his spiritual relief, and therefore this sends the heart out after search
and enquiry. And those possibilities provoke the sinner to put to, with what
diligence and endeavor may be to see what he can make of them, whether they will
hit or miss, what will become of him and his comforts, that he may know what to
make of himself and his condition, which as yet he knows not, Joel, 2. 13. Who
knows if God will return? Who knows whether these sins may be pardoned, grace
and mercy shall be extended to this miserable soul of mine? Who knows what will
befall? I will yet try what shall befall, I will see the issue: Such a kind of
possible uncertaintie caused the Leapers to make proof what would be the event;
they may slay us, and 2 Kings 7. 4.
yet they may save us. So Benhadads Servants, Ahab may proceed in his
indignation against us, and yet he 1 Kings 20. 31, 32.
may also pardon, therefore we will try. So the soul here. Whereas the Hope that
issues from Faith, and is found in the hearts of Believers as the fruit
thereof, it has a sure and clear ground, to sustain and settle it, upon which
a man's hopes may hang, and a special and infallible assurance it brings that
will never fail; that is as certain which is thus in hope, as that which we have
in hand; that which is in expectation, as that which we have in present
possession; so called, the Anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast, Heb. 6.
19. This Hope never makes ashamed, Romans 5. 5. A man never misseth of his
expectation, as the ground of our Hope is most sure, and the success is most
certain, and the ground is the love and faithfulness of God in the undoubted
performance of the Promises he makes, Romans 5. 4. Because the love of God it
(...) (...) in our hearts by the (...) Ghost.

(...) this unknown expectation arises from the apprehension of some (...)
presented, which because they are unknown what they may be, therefore the
restless contrite sinner puts forth his endeavor to prove what will be the
issue.

The reasons are (...) summed up in so many words.

Because this hope is a privy support whereby the heart is under-propped from
sinking utterly under those unsuportable evils, which it feels now in part, and
fears still daily to come in upon them, and yet not only beyond his strength
but beyond his thoughts: and therefore as the Lord smites with the one hand, he
sustaynes and upholds him by the other. Its the reason which the Lord
alleges why he will not always contend least the spirit should fayl before
him, and the souls that he has made Isa. 57. 16. As the wise Physician when
the disease is violent and the portion strong, he (...) the heart with some
cordial, least while he should purge the humor he should destroy nature, the
Lord is as a wife merciful Physician, he would melt us by Godly sorrow but not
consume us, he would have us loose our sins but not our hopes.

This hope is an inlet into the soul whereby the Lord makes way for the work of
the means; hereby the contrite sinner is ready to attend, and give
entertainment to the ordinances, while he has any hope of any good to be
communicated unto himself, because the patient knows not but the receipt may do
him good, he is content to take it and try what it will do; whereas desperate
discouragement stops all the passages, that the power of an ordinance cannot
come to take place. Upon this ground it was Naamans Servants persuaded their
Master, 2, Kings 5. 15. to give way to the means prescribed by the Prophet for
his cure. If he should prescribe some great matter thou would surely do it, how
much more when he says, wash and be clean, if washing be a (...) of clensing,
the very possibility of clensing should easily make him give way to prove what
washing might do. When men bore holes, they drive pinns mervailous readily with
much ease, hope sets open the heart to any ordinance, that it may easily find
attendance and acceptance as the Criple to Peter Acts, 3. 3. he gave car
expecting something etc. expectation draws attention, he looked upon them as
desirous to receive good; look what the spring is to the watch, the poyse or
weight to the minute no stirring without it. so is hope to our endeavors, the
Plough man plowes in hope, sows and reaps in hope, 1, (...). 9. 10. hope is the
great wheel which carries the life of our endeavor; the runners would not run
in the race, the mariner sail in the Sea, were there not possibility for the
one to attayn the goal, the other the haven, and the wise man when he would set
al on going, he (...) hope on work, keeps that in their eyes as that which
would keep them constant in their course. Eccles. 11. 6. Sow thy seed in the
morning, and in the evening let thy hand rest, and what is the prevailing
reason to provoak to such unweariable diligence? its hope of good, thou know
not whether this or that will prosper, (...) whether both alike; do both, if
either of both may do that for us that is useful and may answer our need and
expectation.

INSTRUCTION, We here see the reason why Satan Use.
draws out all his forces, uses the depth of his delusions on the one side,
sets all the policy and power of Hell a work on the other side, and tryes all
conclusions to the utmost of his skill, if by any means he might hamstring a
man's hopes, put the distressed sinner beyond all possibility and expectation of
Good, and then he has him close prisoner, past recovery, not once looks our
for deliveance, he is his own; the (...) off the hinges, nor opens, nor shuts
to give way to them that pass in or out, but rather is a trouble and stops
their way. Its so here, (...) Satan can but unhinge the heart of the hope and
expectation of relief and help, he makes the contrite soul wholly incapable of
al comfort or support, there is no (...) between heaven and him, but is an
outlawed wretch an outcast, beyond the compass of Gods compassion and
kindness, and sits down confounded in his own accursed condition and (...)
further. It is a stratagem usual and common amongst commanders, in the taking
of towns and walled cities, when provisions (as they understand) are low and
short within, they block up al passages; there is none can come out, none can
go in (as the scriptures speak in that kind) none go out to (...) or procure
provision, none come in to bring any, and then they certainly conclude the
(...) is theirs, they must either yield or famish in such a time, the like is
the policy of the enemy and its a direful (...), and undoubtedly procures the
speedy destruction of the soul that cuts off a man's hopes, and blocks up the
soul from the possible expectation of any good: it deads the (...), deads the
ordinance, deads a man's diligence, no going out by endeavor to procure any
spiritual release, no coming in by the power of any (...) to work any good in
the soul, and hence it is that the enemy darts in such temptations and by his
wiles and subtilties casts a man into such a condition at least to his
persuasion, that its utterly beyond al consultation and consideration either of
our souls, or others, and therefore there is no further seeking out but sinking
irrecoverably in a man's distress; And therefore (...) hastens the soul in a
(...) (...) of (...), to pass such determinations upon a man's estate, that
makes him past appearance of recovery or (...), and so (...) the reach of
reason or relief. As either a man's (...) (...) past and his (...) determined in
heaven: He was before (...) worlds (...), the (...) is (...) and the (...)
never to be reversed, or else the date of mercy is (...), and the day of grace
is past here on Earth; God has set a period to his patience, and long
sufferance and those are expired; he will not always strive with man, and its
not fit. nor reasonable he should: Jesabel had her time to repant, allowed by
the Lord, and she repented not, and then God cast her into a bed of (...) and
slew her and her children, Jerusalem had a day of peace, Oh that thou (...) the
things that belong to thy peace in this thy day, but now they are hid from
thine eyes; after the day was over, the darkness grew (...) gross that she did
not, nor could not see things before her eyes and this is thy condition just
says Satan. So many motions of the spirit, so many checks of Conscience, so
many (...) and strokes under the ordinances, and yet out stood al, and so the
time of mercy also, now it is too late. Or else surpriseth the thoughts of the
distressed with the hideous apprehensions and remembrance of some hellish
distemper of spirit unto which the sinner is privy; that its other and worse
than ever he yet conceived, (...) al circumstances considered, it amounts to no
less than the sin against the holy Ghost, for if we sin wilfully after we have
received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more (...) for sin, Hebr.
10. 26. and this is your case says Satan beyond al question, when after many
motions of the spirit and persuasions cast in, many secret entreaties, many
misgivings of heart, do not do so, do not do it, and yet you have despised the
very spirit of Grace, you have been enlightened, and had many pleasant
rellishes of joy and peace under the good word of God, and yet fallen back
again, and so fallen away, therefore its impossible you should be restored or
renewed by repentance. Then should you pursue that which is impossible to be
attained, this dams up al passages, he cannot endure to hear of any, or attain
the use of any means when its impossible to receive any benefit by all that can
be used.

Thus Satan deals with the discouraged sinner, as the thief with the weary
traveller who is unacquainted with the way and lost in which he is, he leads
him out of the road far into the forest without the ken and call of any
passenger, or expectation of any means of relief and then he has oppertunity
to spoil him of his substance, and of his life also. So Satan deals with
distressed, unacquainted with his own estate, under this trouble and stroke of
contrition, carries him aside with such misconceivings of his own condition,
that he leads him into by paths beyond the ken and compass of reason, and any
(...) consideration, so that he will neither seek nor receive any helps: Be wise
therefore, and watchful both for the discovery and perceiving these policies and
delusions of the enemy which draw on irrecoverable destruction with them; be
sure therefore you keep the rule of Gods revealed will and direction for your own
ways, while you keep under the guidance of the word, you are under Gods wing;
therefore in a word or two, to wipe away this false and wily pretense of the
enemy.

When the enemy would have thee to pry into the ark, would carry thee to heaven
to (...) the rolls and records of Gods eternal counsel, thou must not repel
(...) temptations and repress such pride and presumptuous attempts of thine own
vain mind, with that charge of the Almighty, tell him and thy own soul, That
secret things belong to God, but things revealed unto thee, Deuteronomy. 29. 29 Its
Gods advice, to search and try our own hearts and turn unto the Lord. Lam. 3.
and not to search his decrees. Look what is done in (...) own heart, which thou
may do and should by warrant from the word and direction thereof. But to
look into the decrees of heaven, what has been determined there, is beyond thy
line and last also. Its sinful curiosity and presumption which God does condemn
and thou must conscienciously avoid, know Satan leads thee out of the way, and
therefore be fearful to listen to him.

Touching the date of grace and day of mercy, its true which the Lord has
taught that God will not a ways strive, (...) its as true and evident also,
that while the Lord is pleased to (...), means, to work with them and to awaken
the heart by them, by convictions of conscience and (...), of a man's condition
and his corruption, and drives the sinner to sad thoughts and searchings of
heart, it is certain where these thoughts and stirrings are there God is
striving by his spirit, in his ordinance. And its Satan's policy and purpose by
such Luke 11. 22.
vain cavils to withdraw the from under the power of the means, to take (...)
th ne attendance thereupon, and so endevor to (...) thereby, when the strong
man cannot be at peace in his house, (...) certain that is the time when
stronger than he, is now breaking in upon him.

For the counterfeit appearance, and the ugly (...) of the sin against the holy
Ghost, which Satan would put upon thy (...), that by that means he might dead
thy heart, and damp and (...) thine endeavors, and prejudice the work of grace
and repentance that now the Lord calls thee unto, and thou also begins to look
after, I answer (Not now to be long here) the sear of the sin, and complaint
against (...), that the heart is burdened with the apprehension and thoughts of
it, and sighs secretly to be (...) from it, its argument enough that thou art
free from this evil, but God would make thee feel what sin can do, i. e. put
thee beyond help: and thine own emptiness, who can do nothing for thy self
when it comes to a dead lift. In a word, if thou would out-shoot the Devil,
and out-work his temptations to promote thine own welfare and peace; Be ever
watchful and conscionably resolute, to oppose that evil most unto which he
tempts thee; be most sedu'ous in the improvement of means in the use whereof he
would most discourage thee, and the most of the delusions will come to nothing.
Resist the Devil and he will flee from thee James, 4. 7. Use 2.


Hence we may observe how easy it is with the Lord to confound a poor creature,
to make his own hands his executioner, his own reason his (...), nay his very
conceit, and imagination of his mind to hasten his confusion, and that
irrecoverably unto himself, If he shall but stop a little crevis of hope and
lead aside a man's deluded reason into the appearance of impossibilities, as
into a by path, the soul will sink immediately, and be the greatest enemy in
Earth or Hell, to its own everlasting happiness he will seek no good if wanting,
will receive none, if offered and pressed, nay expect none, what ever can be
presented or laid forth, either in the works of providence, or in the infinite
power of the Almighty God, and one Conceit will do this if God see it on, as
well, nay more than all the Devils in hell could do, if they should set all the
power of darkness on work. So it was with (...), Dan. 4. 30. God dashed al his
power and pomp with one deluded and misguided thought, a conceit of a beast
made him unfit for crown or Kingdom or Counsel or Communication of men, So
that he that would have al for his honor and majesty, he neither knew what
honor or majesty was, nor could receive any, nor yet his kingdom would give
either to him.

EXHORTATION. To provoke our souls by Use 3.
al good means to nourish this hope in our hearts for ever Its said of hope
that it comes from faith and is the Anchor of the soul Heb. 6. But its true of
this also in its measure for where there is some hope of getting good it will
enable a man to endeavor. Look what the spring is to the weights of the clock
(...) is no stirring of the one without the other as it is in nature, so grace
in Physic, all the vitals must be especially (...) because a wound in the
vitalls is deadly, it is so in a man's spiritual course, if a man would have his
endeavor kept, then keep his hope alive, and say, though I do not know it shall
be, yet I do not know but it may be, (...) I will hope and wait. Two rules here.

Maintain in thine own heart an apprehension of thine own ignorance for thine
own relief: Men are apt to measure Gods dealings by their own apprehensions;
thou say thou can not see it, yet maintain this in thine heart, I will wait
upon God; for there is more than I can see: Isai. 42. 16. I will lead the blind
by a way that they do not know, and I will not forsake them, says the Lord.
God has unknown passages of Providence for thy good.

Maintain in thy heart a real, constant persuasion of the Al-sufficiency that
is in God for thy supply above all that which thou can conceive, and that will
hold up thy heart, for the (...) of Hope is a possible good, Matthew. 9. 33.
There was never such a thing seen in Israel; therefore though thy heart tell
thee, there was never sinner as I am, yet God is able to do that which never
was done in Israel, therefore expect still what may be: again, though thou can
not conceive it, yet know there is a sufficiency in God able to do it, Job, 5.
8, 9. I would seek unto God, and unto God would I commit my cause, which does
great things, and unsearchable, and marvelous things without number. This may
support thy heart, and carry thee on with some Hope in a waiting way.

They who are truly pierced for their sins, do Doct.
in an especial manner, prize and covet deliverance from them.

For this is the scope of their complaint, and the end and aim of their
request, that they might be freed from that which they found so bitter, and
indeed unsupportable to their souls; and it is of (...) implied in their speech;
that which in the like case was openly expressed by the Jailer, Acts, 16. 30.
He came trembling and astonished, saying, what must I do to be saved? not what
shall I do to be eased of my destraction, cured of my fears, freed from my
shame; but what shall I do to be saved from my sin? he was plagued most with the
remembrance of that, prizeth most freedom from it: the venom of his
transgression is that which lies heaviest upon his heart; and thence it is, to
be safe-guarded from that is of highest esteem in his account. Saved from the
guilt of sin, as that which sets the Almighty at a distance from him, and
raises the controversy between God and the soul, and forces him to withdraw
his favor, and loving kindness, which is better than life, which David felt by
woeful experience, and therefore sues with such importunity, Psalm. 51. 14.
Deliver me from blood guiltiness O God, thou God of my Salvation, and my tongue
shall sing aloud of thy righteousness. After the Commission of these evils by
David, the Lord threatened the sending of the Sword that might hazard the
safety of his person, and the prosperity of such as should succeed him. So
Nathan, 2 Samuel 12. 10. The Sword shall never depart from thine House: he
threatens to raise up cruel and subtle conspirators out of his own bosom and
bowels; as Absalon, out of his own Counsel and Kingdom, as Achitophel, and
Jeroboam, whose plottings and conspiracies should shake the Pillars of the
Kingdom, and the peace of his Government; all which were marvelous bitter
potions, and heavy expressions of Gods displeasure, but the sting of all those
troubles, the venom of all that vengeance issued from his sin, that is the evil
in all evils, and therefore he overlooks all the rest, and seeks most earnestly
to be rescued from this; Deliver me from blood-guiltiness: it is not the cruelty
of the Sword that will destroy, nor the conspiracy of Enemies that desire to
undermine my Crown, and Kingdom, and Safety, which I so much fear, nonso much
labor to be freed from; but deliver me from bloodguiltiness, O God of my
Salvation, q. d. that is the deliverance I look for, and long for; and here in
the Salvation of a God will appear, and show it (...), and wherein the soul of
thy servant shall most rejoice.

Saved also they would be from the (...) of corruption, which carries the soul
from God, and keeps the (...) estranged from him: and hence it is the (...)
Church makes (...) the matter of their most bitter complaint, Isai. 63. 17. Why
have thou hardened our hearts from thy fear, and caused us to err from thy
ways? When they withdraw their hearts from God, he (...) his gracious presence
and (...) from them: when they would not deliver up themselves to the Authority
of his Truth, and holy Will, to be ruled thereby, he delivered them up to the
power of their own perverse Spirits, they that would not be guided in his (...)
by his holy Spirit, they should be hardened from his fear by the perverseness of
their own Spirits: this is the most dreadful plague of al plagues, the
deliverance from which they so highly prize, and seek it with such importunity,
Look down from Heaven, thy holy Habitation, where is the sounding of thy
bowels? are they restrained? Oh why have thou hardened our hearts from thy fear?

The price the contrite sinner puts upon this deliverance from his sin,
discovers it self in four Particulars.

In the lack of this, the soul is not, cannot be quieted, though it does enjoy
all other things the World can afford, and his heart could desire: The want of
this takes off the sweetness of all the comforts; contentments, the sap and
(...) of al privileges, and the consluence of all Earthly Excellencies that
can be enjoyed in this Pilgrimage, when the soul is under the pressures of Gods
displeasure, and the tyranny of his own distempers, which carries him from God,
and keeps him under the dreadful indignation of the Almighty, present him then
with the beauty of all the choycest blessings that ever any man had on Earth,
yea, what ever others hoped for, but in vain. Put them into his hand, conceive
him possessed of the fullness of al worldly perfections, Crowns, Kingdoms,
Honors, and preferments, the broken heart (...) al under (...) with neglect,
what is that co me, says the soul? had I all the Wealth to enrich me, al Honors
to advance me, Pleasures and Delights to content me, and my sins still to damn
me? miserable man that ever I was born in the (...) of al these falsely
conceived comforts. This sour Sauce spoils all the Sweet-meat, this dram of
poison makes deadly all the delights and pleasures that (...) can be attained or
expected. As (...) when he was recalled from his Banishment, and had the
liberty and use of his House, and all the conveniences and helps that were at
his Command, but was charged not to see the Kings face: upon a two years trial
he found a straightness of all his Comforts in these enlargements; (...) he
thus expresses his resolution to (...), 2 Samuel 14. 32. What avails me to be at
Jerusalem, and in my House, to come from Geshur, if I may not see the Kings
face? let me see his face, and let him (...) me. It is so with the
brokenhearted sinner; What avails it me to be compassed about with all conven
ences my heart can desire, and be compassed about with my corruptions? to see
all Earthly happiness heaped up together, but never to see the face of God in
another world? the belly filled, and back clothed, and house stored, and the
soul damned, and east out from Gods presence, in whose Presence, there is
fullness of joy, and pleasures for ever more? These are but dead things, sapless
shadows, and are to a man of a contrite Spirit, as though they were not, nay
the (...) he has, (...) more trouble he has, because there is more sin, and
more guilt, more curse and condemnation; he sees in all, and expects by all
from God, and so remains restless in all.

He is content with this, though he want all the rest, because he prizeth this
more than all. Skin for Skin, and all that a man has, will he give for his life;
etc life and al for the Salvation of his soul. For sin now he (...) it, now he
has found it to be more bitter than death; and Eccles. 7. 26.
therefore to be saved from it, he judges, and that truly, to be better than
life it self: willing not only these things should not be, but that himself
should not be, that he might not be sinful: Let the Lord take all away, yea
life and all, only take away my sin, and it suffices; he counts it the best
day that ever yet dawned, the best news that ever came to his distressed
Conscience, if he can gain any assurance, get any evidence, but one good look
from Heaven, a smile of Gods face and (...), that the sins he has seen, he
shall never see them more; the corruptions that have (...) and plagued him in
his daily Conversation, indisposed him to do the Duties God required, and
unfitted him for the (...) Christ has purchased, God has tendered to him in
his holy Word: That pride that (...), those passions, that perverseness, and
self-willy waywardness of heart that has been the plague sore of his soul,
have interrupted the comfort of his heart, peace of his Conscience, communion
with his God. The very possibility and expectation that the Lord may save him
from the guilt and power of those prevailing distempers, supports his Spirit.
But if he can but live to see the day that the thing is done, he desires to
live no longer: Lord, let thy Servant (...) (...), since mine eyes have seen
thy (...) 2. 29, 30. Since thou have (...) (...) (...) lusts, mighty stifness
(...) (...) (...) al Convictions, though (...) (...); gainsay al Arguments,
though never so (...); slight al Directions though never (...) evident, mighty
self-considence, and hellish haughtiness of Spirit, whereby I could swel above
man and means, and God himself: Let thy Servant depart in peace; This Peace,
let it never be interrupted; this saving power of thy spirit never weakened,
never enfeebled more. Let me lose my life with the (...), let me die that they
may never live more. And therefore the distressed Christian sees not the
meanest Christian in the (...) miserable condition, but he prefers him above all the (...) on Earth, and wishes himself in his place. Oh if my soul were in his
souls stead, saved from his corruption, therefore he is in a safe and a blessed
condition. Salvation, if it be of the right stamp, to deliver from sin, not to
ease from plagues and sorrows, such a kind of saving carries ever satisfaction
with it, has a (...) fullness which answers unto al poor and imprisoned, yet
saved though; persecuted, reproached, yet saved though; despised and killed,
and yet saved; delivered from his (...), there is no evil of the first or
second death that shall hurt him, (...) have any power over him: And therefore
the contrite sinner contents himself in this, as Jacob in a like case, I have
enough, Joseph is yet alive; I have enough, my soul shall yet be saved. In a
wrack, he that saves his life, is abundantly satisfied. When so many thousands
suffer (...), split al their Professions, Hopes, and Comforts upon the Rocks
and Sands of Pride and Self-love; Oh what a mercy, satisfying mercy, that thou
who were in as much danger as they, stands alive upon the shore, when they are
dying, and drowning, and (...), under the power of their sins.

The (...) sinner (...) (...) (...) price, he is resolved in good (...) readily
to endeavor any thing to compass that he makes so much (...) of, (...). (...)
and Brethren, what shall we do? Command what ye will, we shall do it; give what
(...) (...) please, we (...) follow them; prescribe (...) means you see (...)
(...) shall improve them; (...) it is you shall (...) (...) enjoin, be it never
so cross to our own carnal (...), never (...) (...) and haza (...), we (...)
not haggle and (...) (...) you, but we shall endeavor (...), and (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...). What (...) we do? whatever (...) (...) (...) (...) (...), we
(...) do what we (...); and (...) (...) (...) to do what we cannot out of our
weakness perform, or out of our ignorance so readily conceive how (...)
accomplish: So they Isai. 30. 22. The Converts there, it is said, They (...)
(...) the (...) of Silver, and ornament of Gold, and cast them away as a (...)
cloth, and say, get thee hence. The price and worth of their Image might have
enticed them; if not to have kept them, yet converted them to their own use;
but they casheir them wholly, without the least consideration of any Commodity
that they might have contrived for their own content therefrom. So Zacheus,
(...) 19. 8. When once he began to be sensibly affected with his corrupt and
covetous course, and the danger thereof, and the evil therein, see how
comfortably restitution (which is so difficult a work) comes off a hand,
without any grudging, because that was the means appointed by God to quit his
heart and hands of the guilt of that sin. Behold Lord, half that I have, I give
to the poor; and if I have wronged any man by forged Cavillation, I restore him
fourfold. So lastly, the holy Apostle Paul, when the Lord Jesus had discovered
his sin, and abased his heart in the right apprehension of it; so that he is
come to Gods bent, What will thou have me to do? Behold I will send thee far
hence to the Gentiles, Acts, 26. 17, 19. He did not consent with flesh and
blood, nor so much as pretend either doubt or (...), but immediately addressed
himself to follow the direction. That which a man prizeth indeed, he will bid
fair for, nor will he scotch for a little cost, but is resolved to have it what
ever it (...), and therefore (...) not for the cost at all. So it is here, a
(...) sinner comes easily and resolutely to Gods terms, to do any thing.

He that (...) this price upon Salvation, and (...) from sin, his heart is upon
it, and his prayer is improved for the most part for this particular his
thoughts about it (...). Listen to him in (...) secret devotions, his
confessions about this, his Petitions spent upon this, he harps upon this (...)
still. But for things of the world they are out of his mind, his thoughts (...)
(...) (...) them, as though he (...) nothing, or cared for nothing, or (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...), Oh deliver me (...) (...) (...). Ask him what he
would have or desire, if he might obtain and have what he would; he answers, Oh
that I might be saved; as Abraham for Ishmael, (...). 17. 18. (...) that
Ishmael might live before thee; (...) he for his own soul, Oh that my soul may
live before thee: or as blind (...) said, Oh that my Eyes might be opened, and
that my heart might be opened and freed from my corruptions, Oh that Jesus
Christ would do this for me, who cannot do it for my (...).

Because (...) distressed soul finds the presence of all (...) Reas. 1.
there things do no whit prejudice a man's everlasting happiness; either the good
or comfort of his soul, either the having or (...) of his Spiritual (...); the
presence of (...) (...) (...) (...) which may (...), do not (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) of any (...) person, a (...) is never a whit the worse,
and the Lord loves him never a whit the less, because his pressures and sorrows
(...) upon him; but that is the season of Gods saving health, (...) is most
near when there is most need, and our (...) makes way for the enlargement of
his love and mercy to us. Joseph (...) (...) prison, land God is with him, with
his in the fire, (...) it (...) not, and the Waters that they drown (...); God
(...) (...) the (...), Isa. 43. 2. God (...) (...) (...) more (...) and (...)
(...) (...) himself to (...) (...), than (...) (...) (...) (...) the greatest
(...), (...). 3. 25. (...) the (...) is seven times (...), and the three
children (...) into it, then the Son of God (...) visibly with them in the
(...) thereof. (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...), and (...) all manner of
(...), then God does al manner of good, for great (...) your reward in Heaven.
So that what the Apostle enjoins, the sinner now finds true by proof, that we
have reason to count it all joy when we fall into many temptations, James, 1,
2, 3, 4. For in all those wants which out (...) befall, become (...) and entire,
and want nothing spiritually, and (...) the contrite is content to bear these,
when he finds they do not hinder the happiness of the soul.

He now finds, that the presence of his sins only poisons Reas. 2.
all the Comforts he has with a curse, and (...) off the Hope and Expectation
of any blessing from the hand of the Lord, in all the Dispensations, in the
ways of Providence, or Ordinances, toward him, nothing can prosper; Why
transgress ye the Commandment of the Lord, for ye cannot prosper? Sin stops
the passage; and puts him beyond al possibility of (...) or good (...) to be
extended toward him; sor the Lords determination is past, and it is peremptory;
there is no peace to the wicked, says my God, Isai. 57. 21. he has said it,
the word is past out of his mouth, and no (...) can (...) it. You know what a
(...) (...) (...) to the Messenger (the thing was so reasonable) What! peace,
so long as the (...) of thy mother (...) remain, Jos. 7. 12. It Is that which
the Lord professes, so peremptory; I (...) be with you no more, except you
destroy the (...) thing from (...) (...) God (...) his blessing and (...), in all the (...) of (...) (...); for (...) is the meaning he would not be with
(...) in (...) Warring, in (...) going forth, and coming in; he will not be with
them in (...), in receiving, praying, improving (...) (...); (...) shall not
work, Prayer (...), (...) (...), (...) (...) place; a man (...) have them, but
no (...) in (...), no Spirit with (...) no Blessing upon them, no good from
them at al. That which poisons all the (...) (...) (...), and (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...), nay in truth
the evil of al evils with it.

He now finds the removal of (...) would set open the floodgate of the infinite
favor and goodness of the Lord, (...) (...) in amain upon the (...). Jer. 5.
24. your (...) withold good things from you, God does not withold them or
keep them from us (...) only through the desert of our sins, his arm is not
(...) that he cannot help, nor his (...) heavy (...) he cannot hear, (...)
(...) (...) power that he cannot, nor mercy that he will not help? Its his
desire, Oh that there were such a heart in them that they might fear me and
keep my commandments that it may go well with them and theirs for ever (...).
5. 29. Nay he has taken a sollemn oath, As I live says the Lord I desire not
the (...) of a sinner but that he (...) repent and live (...). 18. 32. so that
he wants not mercy but we want (...), unworthy of the mercy he tenders, and
incapable; Yea unwilling to receive the grace he offers, Oh (...) man that will,
let him come, and (...) of the (...) of life freely Rev. 22. 17. If you (...)
(...) it, God will give (...), and no man wants it, (...) (...) (...), its he
that will have it, and its his corruption that keeps him that he (...) not, nay
is not subject, nay would not be made able to receive this mercy. Come out of
them my people, (...) (...) (...) and touch not the (...) (...); and he offers
himself readily, I (...) be (...) God I (...) (...) (...) (...), and walk with
them, he will constantly (...) (...) comfort them by (...) (...), (...) Cor. 6.
18. 19. He will walk up and down and see their (...) (...) (...) for them
answerable to al their needs and (...). (...) which brings (...) and the (...)
(...), (...) we should prize as a good. (...) above al (...) things we should
prize it.

INSTRUCTION, We here seethe (...) why the most Use 1.
men in the world (...) (...) (...), (...) not after (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) of the Physician; never looked for (...),
because they were never sensible of their thraldom, etc.

REPROOF, A bil of indictment to accuse and Use. 2.
(...) thousands giving in evidence that they never (...) the work of God upon
their souls. Two sorts especially.

The secure sinner who is so far from seeking and coveting deliverance that he
will not take it when its offered, but is content to be in the prison of his
natural condition and to lie in the boults and (...) of his sins still. Of this
temper were those Jews in captivity that had so long lived in Babylon they were
content to remain there when liberry was proclaimed and the way opened, deliver
thy self O Zion thou that dwell with the daughter of Eabilon Zach. 2. 7. yet
they stayed behind in Captivity still, so it is with many a sluggish (...), he
is content to perish rather then do any thing to deliver himself, he blesses
himself in his misery and so is a devoted slave to the Devil, as Exo. 21. 6. If
when the servant had his liberty to go out free, he said plainly I love my
Master I will not go out free, then his ear was to be bored with an awl, and he
was to be his servant for ever, the boaring of his ear did signify his yielding
obedience to the Command of another. So when Christ comes to set a man at
liberty, offers mercy and grace and pardon, if a man then say, I love my master
Pride, perverseness and Idleness, let me have and live in my sins if God say
Amen, thou art a bond servant of (...) for ever, thou (...) a miserable (...)
creature for ever.

The sluggish professor or hypocrite that has had some lazy prayers and feeble
endeavors, but when it comes to the point he will do nothing, he will give you
the hearing of counsels and admonitions, you would think the man were in a very
good temper, you may wind him about your finger; but in cases of Trial you shall
find him just where he was, he will do nothing, nay will do contrary to what he
professed to submit unto; he is not thorough and real in his desire and
endeavors for deliverance from sin, etc.

We are now come to these Things that are plainly expressed (...) the Words:
And here we shall content our selves with Two Collections, which are most plain,
and suit best to our present purpose in hand.

They who are truly pierced with Godly sorrow Doct.
for their sins are willing openly to confess them, when they are called
thereunto. Or. True contrition is accompanied with confession when God calls
thereunto.

So do these converts here in the place, they come here of their own accord,
they do not stay til they be arrested and summoned to the court; but they
readily arrest, indite, arraign and accuse themselves before Peter and the rest
of the Apostles. Men and brethren you have discovered many sins and the
dreadful condition of the sinners who (...) guilty thereof, lo we are the men,
thus and thus we have done. By us the Lord Jesus was opposed and pursued, by us
he was (...), rayled upon and blaspherned, by us it was that he was (...), and
we are they that have embrewed our hands in his most precious blood: we are
they that (...) it and (...) (...), (...) him, (...) with him, not him, (...)
(...). Nay they roundly, readily, told al, this in secret we plotted against
(...) life and liberty, thus we consented unto those that should attempt the
treason and (...) (...) (...) (...) them in their (...) and (...) (...)
proceeding, we (...) they that gloryed and rejoiced in the unrighteous (...) of
the innocent son of God, we applauded (...) selves in that we so prospered in
our unjust practices, Oh so would we have it. Men (...) (...) (...) plainly
here (...) it, we openly and nakedly acknowledge it, they are our (...) which
you have discovered, and we are the sinners against whom you have truly
proclaimed the judgments of God our sins intolerable, and our condition
miserable, (...) are the men, we are those accursed, cruel (...) whereof you
speak and what shall (...) do? Observe the like expression in the like estate
and condition, when al sorts of people came to the Baptists ministry, and the
Lord was pleased to direct him to pierce their hearts by the preaching of the
truth; they lay open their sins and sores before him and crave fuccor and
relief, as it appears by (...) he gives, he applies several directions
according to the several diseases Luke 3. 12. 13. Then came the Publicans, anon
the Soldiers saying (...) shall W E do? and he answers suitably: they made
known their maladies and he applies the (...). As it is in an inward cankerd
sore, if it be lanced thoroughly and to the quick, it then bleeds kindly and
freely: so with the soul, If the heart feel the sin really, the tongue will
freely express it, when the season shall require the point is clear, we will see
(...) we can make it plain.

There be three particulars in the doctrine which desire (...).

1. When a sinner is called into (...). 2. When confession is serious and
hearty. 3. How contrition (...) in such a confession
To the first of these.

Before I can come to lay forth the (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) I must
premise two things.

That sins are of three sorts, as they come to our

First some (...) public and noterious done in the sight of the sun, open unto
the view of al, that are in the place to see it, (...) come to the hearing of
it. such are practices which are impudent when men are fearless and (...) in
their way, They declare their sin as Sodom Isa. 3. 9. al may see, and they pass
not much what they do, so in the case of Eli's sons. 1 Samuel 2. 17. 23.

Secondly, Some are private between party and party to which none are privy but
themselves, either the offense don to another. As Joseph's mistress when they
were alone inticeth him. Genesis 39. 7. The Adulterous woman meets with the young
man, allures, yea tempts him impudently by her loose speech and behavior. Or
(...) they are Sociates together in the same evil, as of Simeon and Levy;
brethren in iniquity, Genesis 49. 5.

Thirdly Some sins are secret (...) no eyes sees, no man living apprehends, but
a man's heart and conscience, he commits the evil alone, and he alone knows it
and God only who knows the secret of al (...).

By open confession, I understand, the discovery and

(...) public sins, (...) (...) (...) here; what ever two branches (...) I will
touch both.

If the public scandals and evil which have broke out in our practice to the
offense of others, and stumbling of the weak, the grief of the good, the
encouragement of the wicked, who may be provoked in the like carriages or
confirmed in them by reason of our example; then its requisite and necessary,
men should take open shame by sollemn acknowledgment. Its the rule which
Christ. has left unto the Church, who sin openly rebuk openly 1 Timothy 5. 20.
and if a rebuk according to the rule of God ought to be dispensed, it ought to
be received. And that is a main end (...) on both hands ought to be looked at,
both in giving and receiving public censure, that the delinquent be ashamed,
and brought to acknowledge his sin and judge himself for it. So Joshua to Achan
Jos. 7. 19. tell me what have thou done? 1 These. 4. 14. If any man obey (...)
the Gospel, note such a man, set a brand upon him by a sad censure that he may
be ashamed and so see his evil and come to acknowledgment of it. And hence men
should lay shame upon him and he answerably ought to take it. And when men are
out of the Church that the power thereof cannot reach them, the connivence and
(...) of humane laws, will not see execution done upon them; Its commonly the
way of providence, that the Lord does force men to do that out of horror of
conscience which they will not do out of Conscience to Gods holy command.
Sometimes the Lord arrests men upon their sick beds and constrains them to
bear the shame of that, which they would not be brought to see in the days of
their folly. Then send for such and such who have been deeply wronged by me,
for such who have been corrupted by my example, The evil counsel that I have
given, the loathsome carriages and unsavory language, and speeches that I have
expressed, those subtle insinuations, and baits that I have laid to entice and
entangle them, I desire now that God would pardon and they forgive: yea such
who have been ringleaders to their wicked and lewd courses they were not able
to abide their persons and practice, either take him away, or remove me hence
says the sick party thus they brought their (...) and (...) them openly in the
view of all, when once God brought their hearts to a through sight and sorrow
for their sin Acts. 19. 19. Sometimes upon the place of execution God
constrains me (...) vomit out their wretchedness, to leave shame upon
themselves, and to (...) their (...) for a reproach and (...) behind them, and
to confess now to be condemned, when they would not confess in humility to seek
and receive (...) to be pardoned. Oh beware by my example that you never rebel
against Parents, reject the counsel and (...) of Governors, that was my sin,
has been my bane, and made me rush on headily to mine own ruin and confusion,
Nay,

Secondly If the commission of them were private and yet they be made public
by (...) way in a course of providence, still God calls for confession
answerable, as the season shall require and opportunity (...), As suppose a man's
secret fact come to open view, either by others care, or by the weakness of any
according to my defect, in all these cases open acknowledgment is requisite, as
for instance in the severals, The house is broke, the goods stolen, conveyed and
hid, at length the owner sees, chalengeth, pursues him in the open court of
Justice and yet righteously; and that which was cunningly carried before comes
now openly to be censured again: suppose that there is an offense given to a
brother in Church Covenant and while the (...) is in (...) and depending
between them (...), the party offended against the rule of our savior,
carelessly and (...) relates this to several persons, some without, some within
the Church and they also report it heedlesly to others, so that it grows
common and the report public though they of Matthew. 18. 15. 16. 17.
the Church (for the rule of our Savior binds them properly because they have
power to reform or prevent evil, and does not in many cases reach others out
of that relation) though they I say, did sinfully and disorderly make it
public, yet this is ground sufficient for a gracious heart, and that according
to Gods Command, to (...) the open shame of the evil, as seeing Gods hand so
pursuing of him, for purposes best known to his Majesty; for the reality and
venom of the scandal, issues properly from his sin, though the report came
occasionally and disorderly from others.

Since then the Scandal goes so far, and the hurt like to be so common by means
of his sin, it is requisite the salve should be as large as the sore, that the
report of the confession for the recovery of the evil, may go as far as the
infection has done by the report of the evil committed. Nay, if through my
just desert, it be made public, when private Counsels take not place, nor
admonitions awe, nor reasons prevail, when no private means that the Lord Jesus
has appointed, (...) have been improved, do good, but that they are
constrained to appeal to the public; this shows the strength of the distemper,
and the danger of it; and therefore the sinner needs more deeply to be affected
with it, and with greater shame and sorrow to bewail it: As when the Offender
will not hear one, nor yet two or three, that the stiffness and obstinacy grows
so high that the Brethren are constrained to call in the help of the whole
Congregation, and our Savior is constrained to raise the whole Army, the Body of
the Church, to make head against an evil, it argues the corruption grows
malignant and deadly, and the condition dangerous and desperate, and therefore
the Confession must be suitable, must (...) in soak, and be of more than usual
efficacy, or else it will in reason be no way satisfactory.

Touching private sins, In case of wrong and injury that is done betwixt man
and man; miscarriages are expressed between party and party in the daily
occasions of their lives, in which they are to deal one with another. The
Apostles Rule is plain and pregnant, without doubt and dispute, James, 5. 16.
Confess your sins one to another, and pray one for another. In our common
converse, miscarriages commonly break out and appear, either harsh, unkind,
discourteous or injurious carriages; men should not slight such evils, and sit
down carelessly for the healing or removing of them; but be as careful to apply
the Cure as men are heedless to avoid the sin; get a heart conscientious and
ready to (...) those evils, and that constantly, as we are ready to commit and
practice them, else our prayers and our comforts will be prejudiced, which by
this advice may be quickened and enlarged each for others (...); for while we
commit offenses, and not (...) we set our hearts and (...) at a distance one
from another, and therefore we cannot pray so affectionately and (...) as
otherwise we would, did (...) see the hearts of our (...) so easily coming in
to the Authority of the Truth, and so affectionately carried against the sinful
(...) of their own souls. This (...) the ground of that so (...) a warning,
which our Savior suggests, Matthew. 5. 23, 24. When thou (...) to offer thy
Sacrifice, and remembrest that thy Brother has (...) against thee, i, e. has
any just exception against any sinful miscarriage, go first and be reconciled,
and then come and offer.

Touching secret sins, there is the (...) difficulty, how to discern when a
party is called of God to make confession thereof.

For Answer, there be Three Rules which may serve for our right information
therein.

If the Lord shall (as he has promised in his holy Word) seal up the
acceptance of our persons, and the pardon of our sins, as it seems good to his
Will, when we shall make confession thereof unto himself; we then need not,
(...) in truth we should not make confession of our secret sins to man. First,
(...) it is God may, yea many times, nay most usually does evidence the (...)
of our sins unto our souls, when we humbly and unfeignedly bewail them unto
himself. So the Apostle John concludes it as beyond question, 1 (...), 1-2 last
verse, If we confess our sins, God is faithful, and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all iniquity; nay, we shall not only have
forgiveness granted in Heaven, but evidenced to our hearts on Earth, Prove. 28.
13. He that confesses and forsakes, shall find mercy. If a man's confession be
of the right make, not counterfeit, but current, he shall not only have mercy
(...) for him in the Deck, but he shall have the use of it, find the sweet of
it, he shall find mercy pardoning, pitying, pacifying, comforting, and saving
mercy. As when we have sought the thing that we have in our house, we say we
have found it, when we have it in our hand, and for our use. Yea, God is
marvelous ready to meet the sinner half way in his mercy and compassions, when
he perceives that with a serious purpose of heart he sets himself (...) this
work, Psalm. 32. 5. I said (says the Prophet) I will confess my sin, and thou
forgavest (...) iniquity. The unfeigned purpose of Spirit this way, God takes
in good part, and is so marvelously pleased therewith, that he gives him
pardon, and forgives his sins, before he can mention by his words what he
purposed in his mind, 1 Kings, 8. 38. (...) prayer shall be made by any man
that shall know the plague of his heart, he will hear in Heaven, and forgive,
etc.

And in this Case, we need not, nay we should not make confession of our secret
sins; for we have no Command to carry us unto this, no Example to warrant such
a practice, nor yet have we the Institution of any Ordinance, which may
challenge our attendance to it. And this you must carefully heed, and maintain
against that cunning forgery of the Popish consession, which they have imposed
upon al their followers and drudges. Their (...) and Opinion is this:

That every man is bound once, at the least before the Sacrament, to confess in
particular all and every one of his mortal sins, whereof he stands guilty, into
the Ear of the Priests; the memory whereof by due and diligent premeditation,
may be had, even such as are hidden, and are against the two last Commands of
the Decalogue, together with the Circumstances which may alter the kind of the
sin; If not (say they) let him be accursed.

This Canonical Institution, is the erecting of an Engine of Cruelty, to rack
men's Consciences, and pick men's Purses to satisfy their own greedy covetous
desires; and to set up their Lawless Sovereignty in the hearts of such, who
have captivated themselves to their Directions and Counsels: for thus they have
a noose upon men's Consciences, and hold men between hopes and fears, leaving
them between Heaven and Hell, as they suit their minds. If they please their
Humors, then they pardon them, and pull them out of Hell: If they satisfy not
their expectations in giving so much for good use, or paying so much yearly to
further the Catholic Cause, then their sins are such, to Hell they must go,
they cannot be acquitted: This made their Drudges even weary of their lives, as
never seeing an end of their misery, nor knowing what would become of their
souls: And it is that which is called by John in the (...), The torment of a
Scorpion when he stings a man, Rev. 9 6. That men shall seek death, and (...)
not find it; and shall desire to die, and death shall fly from them. And holy and
judicious Brightman expounds it of this sting, That the Jesuits keep men upon
the rack of this Confession, never knowing what will be come of their souls, nor
an end of their misery, further than it suits their conceits. And the Popish
School who were more ingenuous, have delivered in their Judgments, from these
unnecessary burdens, which the Jesuits as hard Task-Misters, have laid upon
other men's (...), and which they will neither (...) nor move the least finger to
(...) any ease.

That which the soul has obtained from Heaven at the hands of God, that is
needless we should desire from the hands of men, whose only help is to evidence
Gods mind. But by humble confession in secret to God, the soul has received
pardon srom Heaven, sealed up in his bosom by Gods Spirit, and the testimony of
his own (...); therefore it is needless to desire it from the hands of men, when
we have what we desire, and that in a better manner than they can give it.

Again, To be wise above that which is written, is unlawful; and to do more
than we have warrant for, is ever unacceptable to God: but the Lord in his Word
requires no more before the Sacrament, but that a man should (...) himself, and
by the exercise of Faith and Repentance, gain assurance of the pardon of his
sin, not go to confess his secret sin to another; therefore to do that, is more
than Christ and the Gospel (...), or God will accept.

When the soul lies under the guilt of secret sins, if the Rule. 2.
Lord in the use of all other means, denies either POWER or PEACE. Power to
oppose and master the Corruption; so that still the soul is overborn by the
violence and malignity of it. Or denies Peace, so that the old guilt returns
afresh, after all prayers and confessions we make, cries and (...) we put up in
fervency and importunity unto the Lord: After the improvement of al means of
Reformation and Repentance; yet the Lord, for Reasons best known to himself,
denies to seal up the assurance of Love, and the forgiveness of sin unto the
Conscience, then the Lord calls to this Duty of Confession, to such who are
fitted and enabled to lend help and relief under God in such a case. That which
the Lord has promised to bestow, and we are bound to obtain, we are bound
consequently to use al (...) means appointed by God for this purpose, that we
may be made (...) thereof. But the pardon of our (...), the acceptance of our
(...), and the peace of our (...), God has promised to bestow, and we (...)
bound to obtain; therefore we must improve al means to this end. If then we
find by experience that God is not pleased to dispense power or peace by our
own (...), on improvements of al means by our selves, he then calls us to use
the help of the prayers and counsels of others, who are called the (...) of
Acts. 18. 27. 1. These. 5. 14.
our Faith and Joy; who are appointed to build us up in our holy Faith: whose
duty it is, to comfort the feeble minded, and to instruct the ignorant; and
whose prayers are effectual means to obtain the removal of sicknesses, and the
forgiveness of sins. James, 5. 15.

And some sins there be, as secret Adultery and murder, which God never usually
pardons to the heart of the Offender, but he compels him to lay open those
Hellish corruptions by open confession unto some other. Nay, as he never
usually pardons them to his, commonly he never suffers them to go away (...)
even in the wicked; but when men are not willing to take shame by private
confession, he forces them by horror of Conscience to vomit out their (...) in
the face of the world, and to bear their (...), and leave (...) names an
everlasting reproach when they (...) out their (...) upon the (...), or upon
the (...) of their sicknesses, before their bodies drop down to the (...), and
their souls be dragged by the Devils into Hell.

In case of secret (...), If the wrong have been done, Rule, 3.
either (...) by some (...) (...) of deceit, or injuriously by (...) to take
away the goods of another; if (...) cannot be made otherwise, God (...) calls,
either to reveal the evil to some other, who is faithful, and may do it; or
(...) the party himself, who may (...) the satisfaction. (...) (I say) (...)
cannot otherwise be made; for if (...) may, then we should never spread a
Scandal, when we may cover it without prejudice of the Rule, and our Brothers
profit. But if restitution cannot comfortably and conscienciously be made,
without the manifestation of the evil, as in many cases it cannot, then God
calls for the use of this means to attain this end.

2. When is this Confession serious and hearty?

It (...) be discerned when Confession comes to be serious and hearty, if it
have the equal (...), and is made up of the (...) following, it is then of the
right make, and (...) (...) according to (...) course of the (...).

It must be free: It comes off a hand cleverly, flows And (...) appears thus in
the manner of their (...), in (...) mannaging this, occasion in three Things.

They (...) easy to yield to (...) (...) (...) evidence is brought in against
them, to (...) to any (...) guments of weight, to (...) before the strength
(...) Reason that shall be rendered, to lay forth their guilt, and (...)
loathsomness of their evil, (...), they are glad of that light. And therefore
if men for (...) of the right (...) of the several and particular (...) of a
practice, cannot so fully give in Evidence of the evil, because it was hid srom
them in some (...), or (...) for want of consideration, did not pursue it (...)
(...) as they might and ought, but that there is (...) and room left for a
Cavil: A distressed Convert will not take the advantage of men's ignorance,
mistakes; or misapprehensione to make an escape from the evidence of Truth;
which the Conscience tells that it deeply (...) him; or espies on every side to
find a muse by the mistaking of a word, to put off an apparent testimony of
that which his heart knows he is faulty in, and that which the party fully
intended. But he answers to the scope of the Question, Evidence or Accusation,
and that which he knows to be suitable to the Nature and substance of the
Charge, and that which touches his miscarriage, and that in the aim of the
Speaker; he sees the parties aim, and is privy to his own guilt; and he owns
the thing, and yields the Conviction: this you would, though your words do
(...) reach it, and this is true, and this was my practice, and is my sin,
without either cavilling or excusing, or mineing the matter; this is the guize
of the sinner that is heart-sick of sin: but he that is Sermon sick; or
shame-sick, etc. he stands upon his fence, (...) (...) catch for words, spies
out any advantage in (...) manner of the expression, if there be but the least
syllable of a circumstance, either too much or too little, and if there be but
a (...) he creeps out at it, and conceits and concludes he (...) safe. No man
ever heard me say so; no man can prove that I ever said those words: It Is
(...), No, did I? Here (...) such and such that are able to witness it from
your own mouth; and when testimony is produced, and they constrained to yield,
they (...) indeed so and so, but such and such was not their expression: in the
mean time, the (...) is al one, and the scope of the speech they well perceived,
carried nothing but the reallity of the matter with it. What a (...) kind of
falsness, and foolish wiliness of spirit is this, to (...) the passage and
power of the Truth, mine own conviction, and peace, by a wilful (...) filly
mistake of a word? And thus (...) (...) deal with their sins; as (...) such as
be (...) with Traitors, deal with the search and enquiry after them; instead of
helping others to seek and find them, they by their wiliness lead aside the
Officers, and make them overlook the secret conveyances which are most
suspicious, and most likely to receive them; which shows they are of the pack
of the Conspiracy, and intend rather to hide the Rebels, than to pursue and
attach them: The sinner truly distressed, is of another temper; in an easy
kind of plainness lays open his heart to any (...) of light, that may discover
his evil without any shifting and doubling. He is suspicious of the evil of his
own spirit, and as willing to see them as any man besides, because they more
hazard his welfare, and therefore he is willing to welcome any light that any
one brings him to that end; Nathans Accusation, and David's Confession, are as
the Voice, and the Echo, I have sinned against the Lord, 2 Samuel 12. 13. he
needed not to bring in the great Inquest for the Trial: So it was with Judah,
when Thamar his Daughter was found to play the Harlot, and was now brought to
her examination, and so to her punishment, she sends the Message to her Father
in Law; By the man whose these are, am I with Child: And she said, discern I
pray thee whose these are, the Signet, the Bracelet, and the Staff: Mark his
return, how easily he yields, would not so much as traverse the cause, or call
for a proof, when the thing was plain without any brabling or cavilling,
confesses the thing, cease any further suit, no not a debate; Judah (...),
and said, She is more righteous than I, Genesis 38. 25. In the things that are
doubtful, it is usual, and no more but what Conscience and Command requires, to
debate to see, the Truth; but when the fault and offense is plain, then to
maintain debates and eavils, is indeed to devise ways how to darken the
discovery of the Truth by confused quarrelling, to make an escape out of a
fault, as a Malefactor to convey himself away in a crowd: Thus fals-hearted
Saul, when he pretended the accomplishment of Gods will and the execution of the
work about which he was sent; Come thou blessed of the Lord, I have performed
the commandment of the Lord, to whom Samuel, (...) (...) the (...) of sheep,
and (...) of the (...) etc. 1. (...) 15. 14. 15. one would have thought there
had been so much convicting evidence, as would have stopped the mouth and sunk
the heart of the man under the (...) of so gross (...) falsehood. Yet he will not
yield, (...) (...) about the business (...), the people spared (...) (...) of
the (...), and the (...) for sacrifice, and the rest we have (...), I construed
the command so, and took your (...) to be that, namely sacrifice must ever be
attended, and then all the rest must be cut off. How is it possible that common
sense could put such a (...) (...) so (...) (...) charge, go kill al etc. that
is, spare (...)? yet a wily heart must have some way to raise a cavil, he comes
heavily off to confession.

As a contrite sinner is easy to yield the evil by way of so ready to (...) it
by open (...) (...) acknowledgment, upon any occasion according to (...) nature
of the offense; he (...) so (...) from being troubled to do this; that he is
troubled and restless in himself until it be done; and therefore if there be an
opportunity to invite him, he takes it without (...); if a (...), he longs for
it, and desires it, (...) if none will provoke him he is studious to seek an
occasion, and to press in upon some opportunity, that if it be a public evil
he may publish his acknowledgment: if a wrong he desires not until another
comes or sends, but he sends, he goes to him to be wail it. (...) (...) secret
he will not stay to be asked or have his confession wrested from him, by (...)
of reason, and (...) argument, but (...) more ready to tell al, than another is
willing to bear, not give (...) man to guess at some wickedness by (...) (...),
but (...) out (...) (...) (...) some discovery to make his evil appear most
(...). A (...) a right (...) position of (...) of spirit, is like a body in a
right temper and constitution, if it be (...) in a (...) there is more trouble
to stay and (...) the bleeding than to provoke it for to bleed. So here, And
hence though there was no horror of (...) to (...), no authority to require, no
counsel (...) persuade he could not satisfy his own heart, he could not be
quiet before he had satisfied the rule, and proceeded in open hostile manner
against his sin; but a false heart after conviction which was (...) with great
difficulty; he must be drawn like a (...) to a stake to make open confession
(...) the cause may require; and when he comes by constraint, Conscience
dragges him, or Authority compells him thereunto. His (...) sticks in his
teeth, he lispes them out so wearishly, hacks and (...), stops here and (...)
there, as though he would say something because he must speak; and yet is afraid
he shall say more then he would: therefore bites in his words one way, sometimes
turns his speech another way, if any speech seems too open, or to give too
much advantage to the truth, he (...) himself and begins to qualify what he
has said, he would not be mistaken, he meant thus and thus, i. e. his meaning
is to conceal as much as he can.

And hence a man must propound so many interrogatories, ask so many questions,
(...) interpretations of what a (...) has said when he has (...) what he will,
(...) though a man should pull a confession from a man, as an untimely (...),
which he were not (...) willing to bring into the world, and when he has (...)
on what he can, he can hardly make any thing of what confession he has made;
But a heart that is burdened to (...), pricked to the quick and parted from his
(...), his expressions come off kindly and issue naturally from him, not in a
(...), quaint kind of strayn as though he would coin a confession, but with
that freedom and rediness as though his spirit was (...) into such expressions;
his heart was severed from his (...), the passage (...) plain, and he would
banish them by an open confession, and therefore watchfully takes the occasion
that may suit the work; Acts, 19. 19. they that used unlawful and curious arts,
they brought their books and burned them in the sight of al, they were not
summoned to this service by authority, they came of their own accord etc. And
this was (...) with Paul to take advantage by the solemnity of the place and
people, to publish (...) sin and shame, and to be (...) it in the view of the
world, no man either (...) or expecting any such thing, and he freely unbosomed
his heart and said more against himself than all the world could say, the (...)
(...) you may read, Acts. 26. 9 I utterly thought I ought to (...) (...) things
against the name of (...), which thing I also did, (...) up the prison,
compelling them to (...) and being exceeding mad (...) them, etc.

The (...) (...) (...) it in (...) of the stomach, and the (...) in (...) and
(...) which (...) from the (...) (...) (...), (...) (...) be a (...) before
(...), (...) (...) severing before a (...); he that (...) the (...) (...) it be
(...), (...) (...) (...), (...) (...) (...) of the disease (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) any ease to the (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) removed at once, look say we, the (...) (...) comes out (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) constraint, and the
passage once made it runs, without any stay; but if you pour out (...) out of
abarrel, some may issue out, but you must by (...) and (...) pull out the rest,
this is the difference between a heart truly burdened and (...) hypocrite
perplexed with horror; the contrite soul poures out his complaints into a man's
bosom without any stay, the soul has full vent; but with the hypocrite you must
take out his confession, by (...) of reason; As the difference between water in
the channel and in the pumpe; the stream runs currently, kindly, readily, you
must force it to stay, but the other you; must force it to run; a man must pump
and press out a confession by power of argument, or else there is no water to
be gotten to purpose.

He takes the evil to himself and does not lay it upon another, and is carried
with greatest vehemence against that in the sin that was most vile, and that he
will not mince; he is far from (...) blame upon another, to (...) other men's
evils, when he comes to acknowledge his own, as conceiving the more (...) they
appear, his may appear less; Nay, now is the time wholly to attend his own, and
especially to bewail that most whereby he has most offended. When the potion
or vomit works upon the humor mainly, then it works kindly. So Judah Genesis 38.
26. (...) is more righteous than I, and they 1 Samuel 12, 19. we have added unto
al our other sins this evil.

As it must be free so it must be full: it comes from the the apprehension of
the soul, it sets (...) al; the scandal will apparently argue these, and a wise
(...) christian will (...) al these in their working, and a sincere heart
desires to take most shame (...) these, and therefore is full in the confession,
so David goes to the root of those (...) miscarriages, even (...) sin, and his
accursed contrivements to give content to his lusts, and therefore he
complains of that, Psalm. 51. 3. 4. thou love truth in the inward parts, and
the truth I have despised and opposed; This is to be attended as another thing
in the comparison, to pour out the heart like water in acknowledgments, there
is nothing that remains behind, as there is in oil and those kind of things
that be of a more tenacious disposition. This was eminent in the acknowledgment
of the holy Apostle, 1 Timothy 1. 13. I was a blasphemer, a persecuter, and
injurious, but I did it ignorantly through unbelief, not to lessen his evil,
but that he might look to the bottom of it. A true contrite (...) deals with
these hid treasures of evil, as (...) did with the treasures of his house to
the Babylonish (...), Isa. 39. 4. then said Isaiah, what (...) they (...)?
(...) answered, all that (...) in my house, there is nothing in (...) treasures
that I have not showed them; so it (...) (...) a simple hearted convert, he will
turn the inside of his heart outward, there will be nothing amongst the hid
treasures of iniquity, when he is called to confession, that he will not nakedly
present (...) God and the world, and that without stickage, without demurs and
(...), he will not cut off his (...) by (...) as though his heart (...), for
what he had (...), but (...) open the floodgate to the full, that he may leave
nothing behind that he may fully and plainly see the bottom; he is ready to
(...) (...) frame of (...), as (...) were wrought (...) (...) heart, that so he
(...) dissolve, (...) (...) and undo the web and work of (...), and therefore
he will tell you, my (...) you (...), and the world knows, it has been
scandalous my carriage loathsome, Oh but my heart in that sin was worse than my
carriage, the pride and malice, perverseness and (...) of mine own heart carried
me by main force against many checks of my Conscience and in ward misguidings
to that practice to serve mine own distempered lusts, and when it was done, and
discerned to be scandalous, the invincible (...) of mine own heart would not
suffer me to stoop to the evidence of the truth, but I set carnal reason on
work, that since I could not deny it were done, yet I might put color,
construction, some meaning and interpretation upon it, that it might appear to
be done lawfully, at the utmost that it was only a mistake and out of
ignorance, which the most able and exact is incident unto. And all this was with
reluctance and against mine own (...): therefore if I found any that were easy
and favorable and were ready to be carried away with some (...) appearances, to
those I often repaired, to them I complained and professed my simplicity, and
yet willingness to see, that so I might screw my self into their affections to
pity me, and so to be unwilling to hear any thing against my person or cause
and (...) the man speaks honestly and means plainly, I wish there may be no
prejudice and then sat I in counsel with my own corrupt heart, and mind, how to
carry the frame of the buisiness in the fairest pretense; I plotted how I might
make an escape, and wind away from such evidences and expressions which pinched
most narrowly, and there I would put in some word, or else (...) they were
spoken to some other end, or start up some new occasson to (...) the discourse
another way, and to another thing, and made them loose the pursuit of that
which indeed pinched, and thus I committed many evils in the defending of one,
and broke many rules under prtence of making up one breach; but from these
wretched grounds, to these wicked ends in this disorderly manner by a plotted
kind of studied villainy, I have wronged God, the truth, my profession, my
(...), mine own soul, this is my wretched disposition I would see and say the
worst of it etc. this is as I said to (...) the clew of a wretched course that
he may see the end and utmost of it. So to lance the sore that the core may
come out from the bottom, and then the cure will undoubtedly follow, which
cannot be so attained, as long as it continues.

Sometimes persons that want bouldness, and ability, cannot so fully open
themselves in public always; yet the frame of their spirits and expressions
will ever aim at such a thing, to the apprehension of such as have any spiritual
eye salve about them because their confessions (...) ever minted out of their
own hearts, and the loathsomness of such evils wherewith they are and have been
loaded. But for a man that comes to confess his evil, to forget the main evil
he came to confess, is such a heavy hand of God, to discover a counterfeit
confession, that it would make a moral man that had but understanding about him
sit down confounded, under the (...) curse of Gods displeasure, and the right
consideration of the (...) of his heart.

And this is the second ingredient into a serious confession, it must be full,
the whole compass is contained (...) these two particulars that I may sum up that
shortly which has been largely spoken. 1. Full in regard of relation of the
things, My sonsayes Joshua give Glory to God, and tell me what thou have done,
bide nothing from me, Jos. 7. 19. 2. Full in regard of opposition of the heart,
the (...) fully relates all the heart, fully opposes al, sets it self wholly to
drag al to the place of judgment and see execution done upon al; As it were
said in the law and enjoined to him that should discover a brother or a friend
that enticed to Idolatry, his eye should not pity, nor his hand spare, but he
should fling the first stone at him, so here in (...) we should bring out al
our distempers, yet they may receive the sentence of Condemnation; neither
should I pity, nor your hearts spare, but see execution upon them, that I may
take away evil; to confess, is to speak as God does, to speak together with
him, to see sin, to sentence sin as the Lord does. To make a full relation of a
sin, and yet the heart to maintain a reserved device how to contrive some
colorable (...), by some Caution and Interpretation to entertain it, it is
Hellish Hypocrisy. As the (...) brabbles with her Mate before her Husband,
(...) so she may meet with him without the suspicion of her Husband. So the
(...) (...) he will readily without any hunching, acknowledge his sin and error
in one sense, that so as occasions serves, he may plead for it, and only
pretend another sense.

The Confession in then serious, when (...) is leaves the soul base, and makes
the sinner put his mouth in the dust; looks at himself as vile, loathes his sin,
and himself for it, and is desirous that the evil, and he for it, may be
loathed of all that have heard and known it, willing that (...) himself and sin,
should by all, for ever be dishonored, who have dishonored God; Dan. 9. 8. Unto
us belongs shame and (...) of face, for ever to be opposed and rejected, who
have rejected his Truth, that (...) hearts of all should be estranged from it,
and from that frame of Spirit which acted him, because they have estranged him
and others from God: he would shame himself, and therefore is content others
should cast shame upon him, Ezekiel. 36. 31, 32. Then they shall (...) themselves
for all their abominations which they have committed: Lam. 3. 29, 30. He (...)
alone, and (...) silence, because he has born it upon him; be puts his mouth
in the dust, if so be there may be hope.

The Soul by this serious Confession, intends to take an ADVANTAGE against his
sin, and so much more engages his heart, by the Witness of God, and Men, and
Angels, to keep himself for (...) from al (...) and provocations thereunto, and
holds his heart in a holy bent of (...) for ever, not once to admit any
consideration or pretense of any carnal Reason, that may seem to leave the
least inticement that way; when temptations come, and corruptions stir as
formerly, this stops him, I have (...) these (...) before al, and they are
condemned by all, therefore I will not, I dare not give way; (...). 16. last,
That thou may remember, and be confounded, and (...) open (...) mouth any
more, because of thy (...).

3. How does Contrition bring in this Confession, and enlarge the Heart this
way?

I Answer upon Three Grounds; all which are so many Arguments of the Point
propounded

Taken from that bitterness which the soul in this contrite disposition, (...)
(...), and that undeniably to be in those distempers in which it has taken so
much content in former time; the poisoned loathsomness which now it has (...)
experimentally to be in such pleasing lusts, and which formerly have (...) the
delight and diet of the soul: And therefore it is the heart (...) the sinner is
not able to brook or (...) them, (...) vomits them out with vehement distaste,
and unsufferable disdain, abandons them by open confession. In the Body we see
it, the Stomach when it was clogged with abundance of gross and foul Humors, as
in the disease called Pica, it will (...) upon (...) and ashes, and loom wall
will down as desirable diet, because such noysom diet suits best with (...)
(...) Humors which (...) in the Stomach, but when it is recovered and brought to
any wholesome constitution, if (...) with any such provision which is (...)
loathsome and (...) upto it, it is (...) sick, and (...) be eased before (...)
cast it out. It Is so with the (...) when once he has attained this wholfom
constitution, and disposition of a contrite spirit. Those noysom abominations
which seemed so sweet and savory to his sensual and base heart, that it could
digest them as its only diet and delight; corrupt lusts were most suitable to
corrupt nature, and no marvel that the Toad and Spiders lick up poison which is
so agreeable to their poysonful Nature; but when the Lord has wrought this
through contrition, as a wholesome disposition and constitution of soul, so that
not only the punishment of it which is tedious, but the poison and filth
becomes more detestable and grievous to the sinner, the heart is not able to
suffer the loathsome bitterness thereof, but forthwith endeavors to cashier it
utterly by acknowledgment, and confession, that the very scent and savor, yea,
the least remembrance of it may be for ever removed. Pain will make the dog
vomit out his meat, sense of punishment constrained Judas to cast out his
morsel, fling away his money, the bribe of the bloody Treachery and Treason of
his; but had they been both poisoned, the one with his meat, the other with the
venom of his sin, it would have wrought more freely and fully in both; That
Godly Sorrow which was wrought in the hearts of the Corinthians, who bore with
the (...) person a long while, and the (...) person (...) who committed the
evil 2 (...). 7. 10. It wrought a clearing in the one, as the Text expresses
(...), and no question in the other upon the same ground, i. e. a naked, full,
and free-hearted acknowledgment; Godly Sorrow like a strong Potion, cleers the
Stomach, casts out the core, suffers no remainders behind, of any secret
reservation of a wretched distemper, in any degree or circumstance, makes a
clear Conscience quit of any combination, with any lust in the least
correspondence. When the corruption which is gathered in the (...) ered sore,
grows ripe and rotten, it will break presently, though no man lance or touch it,
and (...) plentifully and abundantly. So with this through contrition, it works
a separation, and therefore an evacuation, loosens the affection from the sin
inwardly, and (...) it wholly by acknowledgment.

It Is true, In Nature, and Grace, and Reason, each thing (...) it self, and
therefore expels its contraty, to the utmost distance it may, that it may
neither find nor fear any annoyance, or hazard therefrom; and therefore we find
in diseases, Agues and Fevers, when Nature by the help of Physic has gained
some strength, forces the malignant humor as far from the heart as it can, it
breaks forth into the lips, and then it is conceived and (...), the fits will
end, the danger is over. So it is with the soul when it is helped by the Spirit
in piercing the soul with Godly Sorrow, he causes the disease and distemper to
break forth into the lips by open confession, and forces it as far as may be,
from ever annoying the heart any more. The sweetness of sin is in this taken
off, contrition severs it from the heart, confession vomits out and removes it,
that it may never annoy the soul, or disturb the peace of a man's Conscience any
more.

The distressed sinner now comes (...) to feel, and so to know the danger of
sin, as undoubtedly hazarding a man's everlasting happiness and welfare, and to
find also by woeful proof his own weakness, and inability either to prevent it
or bear it, or remove it and help himself against that eternal ruin and
confusion which God has threatened, and he must expect, and shall endure by
reason of the same. He thought indeed in the time of his folly, That Preachers
in point of policy, presenting sin in a more dreadful visage and appearance,
than there was just cause, or Reason would in truth conclude; at least he
imagined (if the worst befell) that either he would remove the guilt, or avoid
the plague, or subdue the strength of such distempers that did threaten Gods
displeasure, and his destruction: but now he finds it otherwise, yea his own
Conscience, nay his own sense and experience does abundantly confute his folly
and mistakes, that notwithstanding all the ways he can take, and means he can
use, guilt still continues, he cannot remove it, plagues he cannot avoid,
violence and venom of his corruption he cannot master, nor help himself against
the (...) Command and Authority, they yet live, and are mighty: And therefore
he is forced to send up to Heaven daily, yea to seek out unto the faithful
Servants of the Lord, that they may lend a helping hand for his relief that may
help him by their prayers when he sees his own prevail not, guide him by their
Counsel, when through his own ignorance he is at a loss in his thoughts, and
cannot direct himself, that they may tent and heal his sore, when out of
unskilfulness he cannot (...) how to dress the wounds of his own diseased and
distressed spirit: Thus Nature does not only teach men, but necessity compels
al when they find themselves helpless to call, yea, cry for help, yea, to send
far and near for succor unto such in whose power it is to support; when men
have used al Kitchen Physic, and taken some Ancient Receipts they have by
them, and yet the disease grows desperate, and the cure more difficult, they
presently speed out to those who are able and learned Physicians for Counsel
and Cure. He that fears an onset, he would have a Second in the field with
him: So here. God has given the tongue of the Learned to some to speak a word
in season to a weary Conscience, Isai. 50. 4. To others God has given a
dexterous hand to joint the souls and comforts of such, who by some dangerous
fall, and sudden surprizal of distempers have made a breach in their spirits
and peace, Gal. 6. 1. You that are spiritual, joint such a man with a spirit of
meekness, handle hin skilfully, yea gently and tenderly: To some again God has
given precious Receipts, rare experiences of his peculiar mercies, to their own
souls, which few have heard, almost none besides themselves have had the like
proof, 2 Cor. 4. 1. 4. Paul was afflicted and comforted, that he might (...)
and comfort others in afflictions: 2 Cor. 2. 11. he professes he was not
ignorant of Satan's Methods, but was well acquainted with his Stratagems, having
been in so many pitched fields, so many Sieges. Hence it is that these poor
wounded sinners in the Text, press in upon the Apostles as skilful and
experienced (...) for such as were in spiritual distress, Men and Brethren what
shall we do? q. d. You understand we are ignorant, and know not what way to
take; you are experienced, and we unacquainted wholly with Gods dealings and
directions, and perceive not what to do. Besides, were men's abilities equal,
yet many eyes see more, and many hands can do more than one; as in some wounds
which we cannot reach by our own hands, another though weak and unskilful, will
lend ready help, will search and tent the wound we cannot touch nor reach; the
meanest Christian has more Experience in some Case than those who are far more
able, and thou can not reach it, nor come at it, he will search it with ease.

A Contrite sinner is willing to take shame, and therefore willing to open
himself and sin, that he may bear shame that is due unto him for it. He sees
now the vileness of sin, and himself vile because of it, and therefore looks at
shame as his due desert, which he has mericed at the hands of God and man, and
therefore accounts it but reasonable that he should be dishonored and rejected
of others, who has (...) the great Name of God, and cast shame and contempt
upon the good ways of his Grace; he sits down really convinced of his own
baseness, and therefore does not complement and speak words of course against
himself; he will say, I am so and so vile, and wretched, and does not condemn
himself that others might acquit him, not (...) his person and practice that
others might praise and pity him. But as it was said of them, They should wash
themselves, and judge themselves worthy to be cut off, and condemned, and
therefore worthy to be despised and trampled upon as unsavory salt; and hence
he is willing out of a holy indignation to shame himself, and the sinfulness of
(...) heart and life, which has been a shame to his profession, and cast shame
upon the righteous and holy ways of the Lord.

That which takes away all the hindrances of this holy duty of Confession, and
puts the soul upon the necessity of the performance, that must needs fit the
soul for the discharge of this Service. But Contrition takes away the
hindrances, which are these three: Either a man would not have his sin removed
and subdued: Or else he need not help to that purpose: Or else he is afraid and
ashamed to take help, which is provided in that behalf.

But this Work of Contrition makes a man willing to be helped against his sin,
makes him see a need, and seek for help; makes him willing to take shame, and
he sees a necessity he should, that he may receive help against his sins.
Therefore Contrition fits and enables the soul to a right Confession of sin.

INSTRUCTION. We here see the reason of Use 1.
those sinful windings and turnings of Devices, which generally appear in men's
practices after the commissions of evil, when they should be brought to a naked
acknowledgment of their errors herein: So many muses to escape, so many sleepy,
senceless shifts to save their own stake, their credit and respect, yield
nothing, though they can gainsay nothing with color of Reason, they spend their
wits and thoughts, and lay about them to the utmost skill of all the carnal
reason they have, to latch the blow, to defeat and put by the stroke of the
Truth, the dint and evidence of the Argument that would discover their evil. In
a word; here is the root and reason of those turnings aside from the Authority
of the Truth, They never came where this Contrition of heart grew, nor yet
indeed knew what it means; they never saw sin aright, their souls were never
sensibly affected with the direfulness of the scandal they give unto others,
and the guilt they bring upon their own Consciences; for all which they must
one day answer. It Is said, Luke, 3. 6, 7. that when God prepares way for the
coming of the Lord Jesus, or the coming of it within the sight and ken of
Salvation, That crooked things must be made straight, before any flesh can see
the salvation of the Lord. There be crookings of carnal reason in the heart of
every man naturally; it was the great Ingredient into the first sin of Adam,
and has been his Curse ever since, to find out findings, Eccles. 7. last, to
invent inventions, to make an escape from the Truth, and so to walk in the
vanity of their own mind; and unless the Lord heat a man in the fire of his
fury, hold him upon the Anvil, beat him, and break him by the hammer of the
Law, in this work of Contrition, this crookedness will never be removed, nor he
come within the sight of Salvation, and it is made one part of the description
of a man that is out of the path of peace, Isay, 59. 8. They have made their
(...) crooked.

By way of REPROOF, It dasheth that dream of Use 2.
the wicked, and cursed imagination of carnal men who conceit, that to fall
under the foot of contempt according to the desert of our evil doings, they
conceive it a point of greatest dispar agement and wickedness that can be
imagined, and to take up (...) abode in that abased condition, either by some
reach of policy not to prevent such an evil; or when it does befall, to be
shistless, as to sink under it, and not to be able to struggle out, they look
at such, and leave it upon Record in their Observation, as very simplicians,
such as are destitute either of wit or courage, to swallow down such
indignities, and never be sick of them, these persons they note as feeble, and
the (...) base. A hellish delusion, directly contrary to the truth here
delivered, and the practice of these Converts, now truly brokenhearted with
Godly sorrow for their sins, That which issues from the power and work of Gods
Spirit upon the soul, it argues neither feebleness nor (...) and such is this
practice, and therefore it argues neither.

1. Not feebleness, because it is of a conquering, of a commanding power, and
that against the greatest forces of sin and Satan, which they bring into the
field, our own carnal ends, and high conceited excellency of our worth, the
seeking our selves, and setting up our own persons, and names, and praises, are
the very stumps of Dagon, which stand longest, the very heart blood of the body
of death; the high and overweening thoughts of the Sovereignty of our wills, and
worth, they are the holds of Satan: to batter down the strong holds, and to
make us lie down in the dust, and to be abased in the sight of God and man in
quiet subjection, is indeed to subdue the power of darkness, a work unto which
we must be enabled by the power of the Almighty, far beyond the might of al
Creatures, much less shall feebleness be able ever to compass it; if thou
conceitest it is so easy, go thy ways, and do thou likewise: Alas poor
deluded Creature, it is such a task that thy heart misgives thee at the very
onset, and thou art never able to turn thy hand to it: thou must have
allowance from thy lusts, and stubbornness of thy own heart, and ask leave of
thy pride and vain glory; and when al is done, thou can not so much as fain a
confession, such a slave and underling thou art to thy sinful distempers, even
slavery it self, that they will not suffer thee to speak a word to cross thine
own way ward spirit, and condemn the wretchedness of thy carnal carriage; which
by the power of the spirit of contrition, these poor Servants of the Lord can
do; not verbally, but really and seriously, as in the sight of God. Which shows
there is more than the strength of a man's self that must (...) yea destroy a
man's self; that is his self pride and praise.

2. As there is no feebleness in this, so neither is there the least baseness
in so blessed a service, and work of such excellency as this is, a behavior
truly honorable and such as indeed beseems persons of the greatest account with
God and man: (...) were the diamond in Solomon's Crown, Eccles. 1. 1. The words
of a soul gathered to his people, the son of David, King in Jerusalem, they
were titles of honor but this was the top of al. It was a higher sovereignty,
to bewail his sin, and seek unfeyned reconciliation to the Church, and by
serious and thorough satisfaction, to (...) acceptance, than to sit in the
throne of Israel; by that he was above his subjects, by this he was above
himself; by that he had power over his people; by (...) he prevayled over the
power of darkness, hell and devils and distempers; by that he was above the
Kingdom and ruled it according to his own will, by this he is above his will,
which was above the King, yea above his corruption, and lusts who lorded over
will, and King, and Kingdom, and al. Yea this is so eminent a service however it
seems other to the deluded minds of men, it makes way for the (...) pitch of all that happiness we ever hope to obtayn, here on earth or hereafter in heaven; 1
Cor. 15. 28. the pinnacle of al perfection unto which we can be advanced, (...)
that God may be al (...) all, (...) when a sinner lies under the foot of
loathsomness, has nothing, does nothing, receives nothing (...) himself
unworthy to be looked at, worthy to be loathed of heaven and earth; Now God is
al in all not only (...) al for him such is his nothingness in himself, but
here is the glory of al power and wisdom and mercy to overcom his unworthyness
and to make him fit to receive any thing; besides, look at (...) (...) work it
self, (...) is (...) greatest victory, and those must be the greatest
conquerors of al, who have conquered and made spoil of all the Glory of the
world. The heathen King wished there were more worlds to conquer, he that is
willing to bewail his sins and take shame for them, he has conquered al those
worlds and the conqueror himself, and those high thoughts that conquered him;
its a degree above glory willingly to be content to want it, than indeed to
enjoy it.

Ground of EXAMINATION and TRIAL: Use 3.
If we would ever gain assurance or bring in evidence and proof to our own
souls and others, that indeed our hearts have been broken for our sins and so
turned from our sins in a saving manner unto God here in the kingdom of Grace,
that we may undoubtedly assure our selves that we shall see his face in glory in
another world; try thy heart and condition by the former truth Exodus 8. 19.
lay thy soul level to the doctrine formerly delivered; if thou find this
work of God, thou may undoubtedly conclude there is the spirit of God. And
however it seems so mean in the eyes of men, yet the greater the power of the
Almighty is seen in it, to lay mountains low and level; the hand of the Lord
must do this; As the Magicians in Egypt professed touching the liee, that
wonder which the Lord then expressed though it were in a thing very little and
despicable to the eye, yet they confessed, this the (...) finger of God, they
were not able to turn their hand to that work. So do thou upon through search
find this disposition of spirit, that thou do see that infinite loathsomness
in thy corruptions, and in thy heart being taynted therewith; so noysom the
plague sore of sin, and thy soul and self, so defiled with running provocations
thereof, that in truth thou art loath to see thy heart, to own it or to have
it, which has nothing but loathsomness in it, and conceivest thou art worthy
indeed others should judge so of thee, as thou judge of thy self; how ever
this frame of spirit may seem mervailous mean and despicable in the eye of the
world, know thou may and conclude thou should, this is the very finger of
God; flesh and blood has not revealed this has not wrought this in thee, but
the spirit which is from God. That which is at ods with all the excellency that
is flesh and blood, that which is opposite to it and tramples upon the glory
and pride of it, that must needs be more than flesh and blood, Ezekiel. 16. 2.
last. I will establish my covenant, and thou shall know I am the Lord, thou shall
know me, and own me, and believe in me, as thy God and thy Lord, then thou
shall remember and be confounded, and never open thy mouth any more because of
thy shame; When God sets open the fountain of his free grace in the soul, these
streams will follow.

Hence then this doctrine brings in a heavy indictment against sundry sorts of
men, and gives undeniable evidence that as yet they never knew what it was to
be brokenhearted for sin, or turned savingly from sin, the stupid
sencelessness of whose spirits is wholly incapable of this holy blush, and
confusion of face and heart.

First of those who through the hardness of their hearts by their constant
custom and continuance in their sin are beyond the sense of it or shame for
it; whose faces are settled, and their consciences seared with a hot iron, so
that there is no sting at al or check that (...) them, but (...) a seared part
is without sense or feeling, they practice their wret chedness, and profess it,
are convinced of it and go away not touched, nor troubled with it, shrink not
retire not with any sense of fear or shame, for what they have done; such are
never like to see the filth of their sins, before they see them by the flames
of the fierceness of Gods wrath in the fire of hell, of this helish temper were
those forlorn creatures Jer. 8. 6. I hearkend and heard but no man repented him
saying what have I done? they take not their sins into consideration, nor
attend the danger but every man turned to his own course as the horse rusheth
into the battle, nothing stops them or affrights them, v. 12. were they ashamed
when they committed abomination nay they were not at al ashamed, neither could
they be ashamed, their minds were wholly (...), they did not see the vileness
of their sins, and their hearts hardened, they could not be sensible of them,
so the Prophet Isa. compluins, chap. 3. 9. they declare (...) sin as Sodom,
they commit, evil openly and they are bold and brazen-faced, to persist in what
they do commit, they sear not who know it and they shame not to own it, I knew
says the Lord, thy brow was brass, and thy neck like an iron sinnew, the heart
buckles not, its an iron sinnew the face blusheth (...), its brass, harlot-like.

Another sort who are so far from bearing the shame they do deserve, that out
of their impudency they do rather cast shame upon the truth itself that would
discover their sin and so the messenger that brings it. Thus out of this
devilish wretchedness and (...) they dare to flout God to his face, and cast
scorn and contempt upon the truth, rather than they will lie under contempt
themselves; and therefore it is the prophet looks at it as desperate, beyond
hope or help, Hos. 4. 4. let no man strive with another or reprove him, for
this people, are as they that strive with the priest, they contemn him and his
repro of, so far are they srom being content to take it, or the due shame which
it discovers; of this stamp were those impudent scorners, who jeared the
Prophet to his face, and made a jest of the threatenings he delivered, Isa. 22.
12. In the day the Lord called to weeping and mourning and baldness and to
girding with sackcloath and behold joy and gladness, slaying of oxen and
killing of sheep, let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye, q. d. do you
not hear the dreadful threatening that Isaiah has denounced, do ye not expect
to dye masters? do not your hearts shake within you to hear such tidings, let
us not dye fasting, we will take our meat sure before our enemies take away our
lives, if we must die as the prophet says, let us be merry before our death, It
were revealed to me says the Prophet from the Lord of hosts, surely this
iniquity shall not be purged from you, til you dye, that is, never; so tell the
rebellious servant of his or her rugged carriage, unruly language, that they
have tongues set on fire of hell, (...) in wording of it, slighting and
gainsaying, Titus. 2. 9. Exhort servants to be obedient to their own masters to
please them well in all things, not answering again; because they are stopped
from answering frampfully, therefore they will not modestly and in meekness of
wisdom ask counsel and direction from a Governor, wish them ask your Mistres,
enquire of your Master, no no, I must not speak, I promise you, would I were
Governor, they cannot sin, they must be pleased in all things, whether they
please God or no.

Thus because their devilish heart cannot bear the truth, they flout the truth
and cast it away in a scorn, as though they should say, you may see what sweet
rules the scripture gives for the Government of servants, nay how unequal and
unreasonable they be, which is such hideous and hellish blasphemy, that the
heart of Beelzebub in his cold blood would blush to vent it. These two sorts out
of a stupid impudency are not capable there be two other sorts that out of
subtilty of pride are unwilling to bear it, such are those who in the third
rank, seek up (...) shameful hidings that may be imagined, strugle as for life
to the utmost of their power and policy, that they may shift off the shame,
and make an escape from under that righteous reproach and contempt (...) (...)
(...) vileness of their carriages, have justly brought upon themselves,
sometimes in silence burying and hiding of it. As Judah his incest Genesis 38. 23.
When he sent the kid and found not the harlot, he was content to let her go
away with his ring and bracelet, lest (says he) we be ashamed. So David would
have covered his solly with (...), by sending Uriah to his own house, 2 Samuel
11. And for a push the very servants of the Lord may be surprised with this
sinful shifting away of their shame from them, and all that while never see
their sincerity nor find peace, but when they are brought to see their sin,
then they yield immediately 2 Samuel 12. 13. I have (says David) sinned against
the Lord. Sometime by falsehood gainsaying and denying, so Gehazi 2 Kings, 5.
25. Where have thou been Gehazi, thy servant went no whither. Sometime
coloring, excusing putting it off as Saul to Samuel first it were not done,
then the people did it, then he did it, but for sacrifice, and for love to Gods
worship, 1 Samuel 15. and in the issue he would be helped against his shame but
not against his sin, yet honor me before the people v. 30. he does not say let
me be humbled before the people who have sinned before them; of this rank are
these, when the stals of Conscience and the pressures of their spirits
constrain them to confess, and seek for ease, their complaints are like
Lapwings cries, farthest from their nest or their bosom distempers which lie in
the deck, only their acknowledgments are so general and of such evils that
more or less belong to al and therefore they conceive they are yet under a safe
cover, little shame will fall to their share; Oh they are proud, and dead
hearted, and have a deal of self within them; the issue is here, and the
English is this, I say I am thus, and who is not so more or less? and so a
little shame will come to their allowance and allotment; And if their words
which fall from them give a prudent man advantage of further inquiry, and just
suspicion to lay his hand upon the loathsome sore, you will see what shuffling,
and winding and biting of the lip, will presently appear.

The fourth and last sort are such who when the arrows of the Lord have stuck
fast in them, and the venom thereof has drunk up their spirits, when the poison
of their sin and pangs of conscience like a strong potion has made them
extremely sick that they are not able to conceal their evils any longer, but
the vengeance of the Lord forces them to vomit out al their filth to the full,
as a stiring potion kept in, works with much violence, but when its over and
they have thus taken the shame, its with no content to them, its a secret
torment, that their own tongues have gone beyond their own intents, they do
inwardly repine, and befool themselves and could eat their flesh that ever they
should lay themselves open so to contempt: and therefore they begin to devise
ways and means, how to mitigate the matter that it may not seem loathsome nor
they so vile by reason of it and therefore they make constructions of some
things, and interpretations of others, and then lay the extremity upon their
distemper which was fired and followed by Satan, that they belyed themselves in
some things and said they knew not what and thus like the unclean dog they lick
up their vomit again they cannot be quit of the shame and wash away the filth,
they have flung in their own faces, but they are in no wise content with it,
and therefore would fain get it off, by all the means they can devise, thus
their sins come to be healed too soon, like a sore that closes too fast, not
being daily tented and opened, and so it festers again and proves dangerous, so
it is with the soul when it is not tented with daily taking shame for the evil,
and so kept open, it again rankles and grows worse;

But how shall we know that we are content to take Quest.
shame for sin, by a right confession of it.

I answer, that will appear in four particular evidences. Answ.


The heart that is indeed content to take shame fon the sin it has committed,
and stands guilty of, it has this disposition wrought in it, and expresses
this affection also, as occasion serves; namely, it opposes not that Truth
which does evidently discover a man's (...), and how worthily he deserves it,
though it does it sharply. To be content with a thing, and to be opposite
against the same thing, implies a professed contradiction, which neither Reason
allows, nor common sense will admit: He that is content in earnest with the
portion and condition that is carved out to him, in the course of Providence,
when it is offered he welcoms it, when it is come, and that he has it in his
possession, closes therewith as that which is a suitable good, and most
serviceable to him for the present necessity, all circumstances considered: An
humbled heart takes his shame as a sick man does his physic, he could heartily
wish he did not need it, and yet as the case stands, he cannot want it, but in
reason he shall want his Cure and health; the potion is loathsome to take, and
troublesome in the working of it, but the disease he knows to be far worse, and
more dangerous, which he conceives may be purged by the use of this means, and
therefore seeks it earnestly, and is not content without it, and glad indeed to
be so troubled, because he may be eased as he hopes: So it is with a heart
truly sensible of sin, and turned from it, looks at this shame as a most
loathsome and tedious potion, and could have wished, and that heartily, he had
never need of it, had never so miscarried himself as to have deserved it; but
as the case now stands, the dishonor done to Gods Name and Truth, the scandal
to others, the danger to the spiritual and everlasting welfare of his own soul,
he looks at the Truth which shall be most evident, and most sharply set on as
the most special Receipt, and Sovereign Medicine, which he is glad to seek, and
more glad to take, that the noysom distempers may be taken from his soul, the
dishonor from Gods Name, and scandal from before the way of his Brethren: (...)
to have a thing, and crossness of spirit to resist that which brings it, cannot
stand together; and in this sense it is you shall find the Saints pray so
earnestly, and affectionately for the keeping away of shame sometimes, Psalm.
119. Turn from me rebuke and shame; and again, Let me not be ashamed. And
sometime again so willingly to welcome and entertain it, We lie down in our
shame, and are covered with confusion, Jer. 3. (...) Shame is a heavy curse, as
deserved by sin, and justly inflicted from the Lord; but to accept of it with
an under abasedness of heart, as the punishment of our (...) from the hand of
the Lord, this is indeed the work of Grace; and a gracious heart will not side
it against that Truth, which will pass the sentence of shame upon it, as the
just fruit of our evil doings, and as a means so sanctified, to work a hatred
against it in our selves, and to remove the scandal of it from others; and
therefore strives not by restless cavils and evasions to make an escape from
the evidence of the Word in the work of Conviction, when a man's errors should
be discovered; nor yet does repine at, nor bear a privy grudg after the
conviction, lies not under the Truth as the (...) upon the rack, which he
therefore bears, not because indeed he cannot help himself against it, with all
the troublesome (...) he can use; but his soul inwardly approves of that word
which judges his person and practice vile as himself does: Thus the word in
the Original, which sign sies confession properly, (...), to speak as God
speaks, to judge as God judges of his sin; this has been the constant guize of
the Saints, touched sincerely with remorse for their sin: A word snibs David,
Thou art the man; presently, I have sinned, says he. A wink or a look of the
Lord Jesus, makes Peter lie at his foot, Go out and weep bitterly, who had
immediately before in a faithless cowardice basely denied him. As it is with a
Steed of a tender mouth, feels his Bit (...), the (...) check of the Rider
stays him, turns him which way he will: So it is with a tender Conscience, falls
under the greatest shame that the least evidence of Argument will check him
withal: So Ezekiah, though i. were a sharp word, and the threatening (...),
Isai. 39. last, yet says he, The Word of the Lord is a good Wond; my heart is
naught, my carriage naught, my apprehensions naught and erroneous, but the Word
of the Lord is good; and the holy Apostle in that inward combat, speaks in the
Name of all the Saints in the like case, Romans 7. 14. For we know that the Law
is spiritual, holy, and good. [WE] i. e. all that know God, the work of his
Grace, the purity of the Truth; they, and I and al, confess the Law is
Spiritual, that is for ever to be honored, loved, obeyed, but I am carnal; a
good and holy Law, but an evil and unholy heart; true it is, that carnal and
hollow-hearted Hypocrites, may sometimes have their Consciences so far awed with
the Sovereign power of the Truth, that they may yield (...) thereunto, and in
outward appearance readily profess their approbation thereof, with the
condemnation of themselves, and their own courses, because they have no other
way to gain ease and quiet to their own Consciences, now clamoring against
them, or their acceptance with men, their carriages being gross and
inexcusable, and therefore must so far bear the shame, because he sees he
cannot excuse his folly, or sin being so open, but he shall be accounted
impudent in denying and sinning; but all this while his heart is carried with an
inward distaste against it, and by a privy spleen imbittered so as to conspire
secretly the disparagement of it: As it fared with those treacherous Jews when
they saw no way, and therefore had no hope to take away the life of Paul by
open violence; then they did cunningly plot it, by a color of fair pretense,
and carried it, thus: Acts, 23. 14. They would have him brought down out of the
Castle, as though they would enquire something more perfectly of him; and we,
ere ever he come near, will be ready to kill him. So these fals-hearted
Creatures make it by their (...) pretenses, that they would enquire more
perfectly concerning the Truth; the Servant craves Counsel how he should subdue
the ruggedness of his Spirit, the froward wife how she should overcome her way
ward, peevish (...), they will enquire more perfectly, as though they would obey
perfectly, submit perfectly, be perfect Servants, wives, etc. But alas, there
is a conspiracy in their hearts against the strict ways of God: So it was with
Balaam, he has never done sacrificing to enquire the will of God, and yet his
heart inwardly opposes and resists his will, and this showed it self in open
violence, and contempt of the Command and Charge, Numb. 24. 1.

A heart content to take the shame, is not offended with the party, friend, or
enemy, that will lay the shame upon him; he knows it is the burden which he
ought to (...), and if therefore any man will give him a lift, and help him to
take it up, he will take it kindly at his hands: It Is against common sense to
conceive that one should be offended with another, or take it grievously that
he does any thing which he knows would, and he conceives will give him content:
No man can be offended in Reason with the party for such a carriage or doing,
such a thing. wherein he is contented, and with which he is pleased: True it
is, shame in it self, is exceeding distastful to flesh and blood, and in truth
nothing more cross and contrary to an ingenious spirit; Praise is the privilege
and prerogative of a reasonable Agent, who acts by Counsel, and therefore other
Creatures are not so capable of it, nor do we give it as their due, we commend
not the fire for burning heavy things, for falling donward; they cannot but do
their work, and therefore no praise, no thanks to them for their deed; but
Agents as Men and Angels who work by Counsel, who have wit and wisdom to
contrive several ways, conceive the best, and will and care to follow that when
they might have done other out of their liberty: Shame therefore crossing a man
in his special privilege, his proper free hold, it must in it self be very
grievous, and a tedious burden, but as he sees his duty in it, and the good
that comes by it, and withal his just desert by reason of his vileness, he is
not offended with the presence of the Surgeon, but he is glad to see him,
and his (...), though sharp and (...) which may lance his imposthume, and so
save his (...), whenas a naughty heart who would not have another take away his
(...), he is vexed inwardly at the least, that he lays the shame and
disparagement upon him for it: See this odds in those two Kings, Ahab and
(...), the one a self-seeking deluded (...), when he was under the whip and
terror of Gods stroke and wrath, he then humbles his soul, fasts and prays,
and that in print as it were, acts his part in that extraordinary duty with
outward (...), and therefore in reason it cannot but be conceived he bewailed
his sin, confessed his failings, and yet he that hated Elijah, 1 Kings, 21. 20.
he hates also Micaiah, 1 Kings, 22. 8. There is yet one Micaiah, q. d. We are
rid of the most of them, but yet One is our vexation, and I hate him, because
he hates my sin, and will never speak good, that is, speak that which pleases
my corruption, and therefore displeases me. But good Jehosaphat he was not
willing to hear his words, much less able to bear them, and therefore expresses
himself quite contrary, Let not the King say so; and of the same frame he was
when it came home to his own particular, 2 Chronicles. 19. 2. When Jehu the Seer met
him after the Battle, and his (...), and set a heavy reproof upon him,
should thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? therefore
there is wrath upon thee from the Lord; the Text intimates he was no whit
offended with the Message, or the man, but yielded to the one, and lovingly
(...) the other, and set presently about the reformation. When Abigail met
David now upon his march so justly provoked, armed also with power and rage;
and therefore if we should look at her, that was to discover the (...) of his
proceedings, and stop him therein, or at David so wronged and provoked, and now
upon the sign as the chief Commander in the head of his troops, to be (...),
and that by the voice of a woman, in reason it (...) be conceived that ever she
should have brought him, whose heart was like the heart of a Lion, and now in
his heat transported with wrath, to have (...) himself, and (...) down under
the shame of his wrath; yet Oh, the power of a gracious Spirit, he is content
upon all these disadvantages to see his sin, and take his shame with a thankful
heart, Blessed be God, and blessed be thy Counsel, and blessed be thou, who
have discovered the sinfulness of my rage, and have kept me from shedding
blood, 1 Samuel 25. 32. and it is not only his practice, but his prayer, Let the
righteous sinite me, it shall not break my head, it shall be as a precious Oil,
Psalm. 141.

But may not, and do not many times, even such who Quest.
are truly gracious, have their spirits imbittered, and their boisterous
passions carried against such who shall lay the shame upon them by reason of
their sin? See what (...) did unto the Seer, when he handled him hardly, and
dealt roughly with him, Herein thou have dealt foolishly; the Text says, he
was wroth with the Seer, and put him into prison, 2 Chronicles. 16. 10.

As touching the Example, the strangeness of the carriage, Answ.
his practice so gross, he imprisoneth the Prophet, and crusheth others who in
likelihood stood for the Prophet, increases in his evil, and grows further off
from God, goes off the Stage without any record of Repentance, as ver. 11, 12.
The strangeness of the carriage I confess, makes me sometimes wonder where the
Truth of Grace was; and if a man (...) to be troublesome, and to quarrel with
(...) course, he might darken the evidence of his uprightness: That which is
said of him, is only two things; 1. His heart was perfect all his days: 2. He
did that which was right, as David his Father: To which I could say, That this
comparison, and so perfection is only to be attended in regard of that
particular at which it points, namely, in maintaining the Truth of Worship, and
therein he held it out from first to last; which (...) (...); but whether in
his whole he were so, the story evinceth not, and his miscarriages expressed,
and in which he lives and dies, without any record of reformation, speaks
dreadfully against him, his last being the worst, He sought to the Physician,
and not unto God, and so dies; the same Phrase you may see used in a like
sense, 1 Kings, 11. 6. Solomon's heart was not perfect with God as David's was,
i. e. Though he had truth of Grace, yet he was not perfect and entire in
maintaining the Truth of his Worship: If a man may not be perfect in some case,
and yet sincere; so he may be perfect in some other, and yet not sincere: For
if the absence of it does not take away sincerity, the presence of it will not
argue and conclude it: But we will keep the Road, because the consent of the
Judicious carries it that way; and so I Answer Secondly.

It Is possible for a gracious heart in a present push of a

Nay Thirdly, In case the party be not convinced of Asa his former proceeding
in so fierce a manner with the Propher, as conceiving that he had gone beyond
his commission, and either reproved him not so justly as he should, at the
least not in that under and respective manner, as became the power and
Sovereignty of Asa, or subjection which the Prophet should have remembered and
acknowledged to be due; and this may seem somewhat probable because he claps him
close prisoner, puts him into little Ease, as being guilty of no less than high
Treason committed against his person, Jun. in locum. But while the soul is thus
doluded and taken aside with a proud, self-deceiving frame, if we may look at
the remarkable hand of God against such distempers as the example of Asa
presents it before us, such persons will each day be more blinded and unable to
see their sin, so was he; more acted by the power of it, and taken aside by it,
so was he, he puts others into prison not long after; more liable to some
direful destroying plagues, so was he, his disease strange and irrecoverable;
and in reason is like to die without comfort to his Conscience, or honor to his
name; so did he.

In the fourth place, Whatever becomes of the former Zion, and will never fail:
He that after conviction by any Instrument sent of God, and revealing his way
according to his will, despises such a messenger, despises him that sent him,
Luke 10. 16. He that after Conviction, seeing the Truth and Authority of
Christ, stumbles yet at him, and is offended at Christ, it is a note he shall be
ruinated by the Lord, he that falls upon this stone, shall be broken to pieces;
he that is offended at the Lord Jesus, shall perish; he that is offended at such
whom he sends as Messengers of his Mind and Truth, and that after Conviction
and Information, is offended at the Lord Jesus; therefore such a one must (...)
perish, has no part in the Lord Jesus, nor yet were ever made partakers (...)
the saving work of his Grace.

He that (...) (...) with a contented heart, is neither Evid. 3.
restlesly (...), nor discouraged in the bearing of it; for to be contented,
and yet discouraged, cannot stand together; but such a soul sits down in
silence, submits himself (...) under the hand of the (...), (...) away well
(...) with whatever disparagement is cast upon him, by reason of his desert,
and takes it as an allowance set out unto him by the Lord; he can look upon it,
and lie down (...) it, with (...) and quietness of Spirit: So the Apostle
recals and recounts his former loathsome miscarriages upon each occasion, breaks
kindly with the fresh abasement of himself in the sight of God and man; I was a
persecuter, blasphemous. 1 Timothy 1 13. 15.
and injurious, not worthy to be called an Apostle, for I persecuted the
Church, Christ came to save sinners, of whom I am chief. So Dan. 9. 17. Oh
Lord, Righteousness belongs to thee, but unto us, shame and confusion of
face; he looks at it as their due, owns it as their portion, which is
appropriated to them, and belongs to them of right, and rests satisfied
therein. Nay, the heart truly called, is here indeed most comforted, when it
can take the greatest shame with greatest content, and that when it seems most
loathsome, and himself for it. The sick Patient is most comforted with the Vomit
when it works most vehemently, (...) he knows the more sick it makes him, the
sooner it will make him well; but when it lies like a dead drug in the stomach,
stirs him least, endangers him most, Oh says the Patient, it made me marvelous
sick, but I was marvelous glad, it wrought kindly upon the Humor, and I expect
a Cure, my stomach is much cleansed, periissem, nisi (...); the greatest shame
that ever I received, did me the most good, was the best Physic I could ever
take, I had never parted with my sin, but my shame weaned me from it. Whereas a
false heart never yet truly turned from his sin, and sincerely humbled; if the
venom of Gods vengeance give him a Vomit, and make him cast out all his (...)
by confession in his own face, there follows such wearish wrastlings of Spirit,
such restless and (...) hurries of thoughts, sits down disconsolate, Rachel
like, cannot be comforted, because their Honor is not, their Credit and Respect
is not, lies a bleeding as they suppose, and not likely to be recovered; he
cannot look upon his reproach, but he is weary of his life, his spirit faints,
his (...) will not down, his (...) departs, what avails all if yet his shame
remains? he would be any thing and any where, rather than under the foot of
contempt.

A heart that is content to take shame will not choose Evid. 4.
unlawful means in cold blood and upon consideration to remove it; he is
discontended with his sin, not with his shame, he will not therefore choose
sinful means to be freed from it; So the good theif Luk, 23. 41. we are justly
here receiving the due reward of (...) deeds; the punishment and plague a heart
absed takes as just, and therefore will not do that which is unjust to be quit
of them, whereas the haughty (...) is so impatient under reproach that he will
rather break under his shame than with quietness bear it, he cares not what he
does or suffers if he may not suffer that, So Abimelech. Judge. 9. 54. Saul: 1.
Sam. 31. 4. Achitophel, 2. Sam. 17. 23. al of them used unlawful means to be
rid of their shame, Job. was of another temper though his (...) were strong to
carry him, and counsel wretched which was given to persuade him to another
course, Job. 2. 9. do thou still continue in thine (...) blessing God, and
dying, q. d. you may see what you get by your holiness and dependence, is it
not better not to be than to be thus, this is the meaning, but his answer
shows another resolution shall we receive good from the hand of God and not
evil? the good God owes us not, and yet he gives it, the evil we deserve and
therefore should be quiet if he bring it.

The fourth use is for EXHORTATION, If you Use 4.
know these things as I am persuaded you do; then be entreated in the name of
the Lord Jesus to walk in that way that God has revealed, this is the baseness
of our hearts we are loath to unbuckle our vile and secret distempers, they are
shameful themselves and yet we are loath to take shame for them; therefore deal
openly and freely with your selves, and confess your sins (...) and fully that
God may deal (...) with you; has the (...) at any time (...) in this horror
into thy soul and is thy heart now troubled at the word, and after al thy
prayers and tears, and pains and means using with uprightness, do thy (...)
still remain? are they not yet subdued? can thou not yet get assurance of the
pardon of them, I say then cast away thy shameful hideing and (...) of sin; and
do not say what will men and Ministers say of me, away with these shifts, God
calls thee to confession, the Saints have done it, and thou must, nay thou will
if ever thy (...) be kindly broken as it should be, in some measure pleasing to
God and profitable to thy self.

But some may say how should we do it? Quest.


For answer hereunto, I will first give some directions Answ.
how to do it; Secondly I will give some motives to work our hearts to the same.

Be wise in choosing the party to whom you confess your sins, for every wide
mouthed vessel is not fit to receive precious liquor; so this confession is not
to be opened to every carnal wretch that will blaze it abroad, nor to every
Godly man, no nor Minister neither. The Minister to whom you confess ought to
have these three graces.

First he must be a skilful and able Minister of God, to approve himself as the
Minister of God; he must have the tongue of the learned and be able to speak a
word in season Isa. 50. 4. he must be able to break the heart and prepare the
soul for Christ, and then to apply the promises of the Gospel to him.

He must be a merciful Physician, one that will pity a poor soul; they that have
experience of trouble and misery in themselves are most compassionate to others
in distress, he that has been tossed in the sea will pity others that have been
in the same danger.

Lastly he must be a faithful Minister, one that will but his faithfulness must
appear in two things, 1. In dealing plainly with a man about his spiritual
estate; what ever a man's place and condition be, if he have a proud heart he
must labor to humble him, he must apply a salve fitting for the sore; 2. And he
must be faithful in keeping secret the sin that is laid open to him, that
nothing may fly abroad no not after his death except it be in some cases.

Now what remains but that you al be moved to take up this duty, and provoke
your hearts freely to confess your evil ways, to which purpose let me give you
three motives.

First because it is a very honorable thing and will Motive, 1.
exceedingly promote the cause of a Christian: you will hardly yield to this on
the sudden; a man thinks that if the Minister knew his vileness he will abhor
him for it; but (I assure you brethren,) then is nothing that does more set
forth the honor of a Christian, and win the love of a Minister than this;
Indeed it is a shame to commit sin but no shame to confess sin upon good
grounds: nay when the heart comes kindly off, its (...) to see how a faithful
Minister will approve of such persons, his love is so great toward them, Oh
says the Minister it did me good to hear that man confess so freely, I hope
the Lord has wrought kindly in him; certainly now he is in the way to
happiness; Oh how I love him, I could be (...) to put that man in my bosom;
whereas this overly and loos dealing of yours is loathsome to us, do you think
we perceive it not, yes we may feel it with our fingers and when you are gone I
tell you what we think, surely that man is an (...) he has an hollow heart, he
is not willing to take shame to himself for his sin, his confession never came
to the bottom.

(...) is a (...) of great (...): I take this to Motive, 2.
be the only cause why many a man goes troubled and gets neither comfort in
the pardon (...) his sin, nor strength against it, (...) he (...) not off
kindly in this (...) of confession; when you do nakedly open your sins to a
faithful Minister, you go out in battle against sin and you have a second in
the field to stand by you; but especially there is comfort in this particular,
(...) the Minister will discover the lusts and deceits of your heart which you
could not find out, and he will lay open the (...) of Satan, and that means of
comsort that you never knew; I am able to speak it by experience, this has
broke the neck of many a soul, even because he would go out in single combat
against Satan and do what he could, not revealing himself to others for help,
was overthrown for ever. As it is with the impostumed part of a man's body, when
a man lets out some of the corrupt matter and so skins it over, never healing
it to the bottom, at last it cankers inwardly and comes to a gangrene, and the
part must be cut off or else a man is in danger of his life, so when you let
out some corruptions by an overly confession but suffer some bosom lust to
remain still, as malice or uncleanness, etc. then the soul cankers and Satan
takes possession of it, and the soul is carried into fearful abominations. Many
have fallen foully, and lived long in their sins and al because they would not
confess freely, therefore as you desire to find out the deceitfulness of your
corruptions confess them from the bottom of your souls.

This open and free confession may maintain the secrecy Motive, 3.
of the soul, for the only way to have a man's sins covered, is to confess
them, that so they may (...) be brought upon the stage before all the world.

Oh says one, this is contrary to common reason; we Object.
are afraid to have our sins known, that is our trouble, we keep our sins
close, because we would preserve our honor.

I say the only way for Secrecy, is to reveal our sins Answ.
to some faithful Minister, for if we confess our sins God will cover them; if
you take shame to your selves God will honor you; but if you will not confess
your sins, God will break open the door of your hearts, and let in the light of
his truth and the convicting power of his spirit and make it known to men and
Angels to the shame of your persons for ever. If Judas had taken notice of his
sin and yielded to Christ's accusation, and desired some conference with Christ
privately, and said good Lord, I am that Judas that hel-hound, that have
received mercy from thee in the outward means, and have been entertained among
thy people, yet it is I that have taken the thirty pence, Lord pardon this sin
and let this iniquity never be (...) to my charge. I doubt not but though
Judas his soul could not be saved (because that now we know Gods decree of him)
yet God would have saved him from the public shame that was cast upon him for
it; but he did not so but hid his malice in his heart, and professed great
matters of love to Christ and killed him, and thus he thought to cover his
(...) wisey; but what become of that? the Lord forced him to come and throw
down his thirty pieces, and to vomit out his sin to the everlasting shame of
his person, I have sinned says he in betraying innocent blood. So you that
keep your sins as sugar under your tongues, you will be loos and unclean and
malicious and covetous still, well, you will have your thirty pieces still, and
they are laid up safe as Achans wedg of gold (...), remember this, God will one
day open the closets of your hearts; and lay you upon your deathbeds, and then
happily you will prove mad and vomit up al, were it not better to confess your
sins to some faithful Minister now? If you will not give the Lord his glory, he
will distrain for it, and have it from your heart blood as Julian the Apostat
said, when the arrow was shot into his heart he plucked it (...) and cried
saying, Thou Galilean, thou have overcome me, the Lord distrained for his
glory, and had it out of his heart blood.

We are now come to the last Doctrine laid forth in the words, and that is.

The soul that is truly pierced with Godly sorrow Doct.
for sin, is carried with a restless dislike against it, and separation from
it.

This is the main thing that was in the eye and aim of these (...), and
intended principally in their complaint; Men and brethren the sins which you
have discovered we cannot but own, and therefore we do confess them openly and
freely, in the sight of God and you his servants and the dangers which you have
also made known by reason thereof, we cannot but expect, the evils are great
which we fear, oh the sins are far worse by which we have offended, what shall
we do? direct any thing we will follow it, command any thing we will obey and
submit thereunto with glad hearts that we may be rid of those evils; It had
been happy for us that we had never listened to the counsel of the scribes and
pharisees and been led by their examples, or carried with the crowd, to the
commission of such bloody evils, the guilt whereof is so great vileness of
loathsomenoss whereof is so hellish and unconceiveable, but that which is done
and past cannot be recalled; but what shall we now do, is there nothing to be
done against these high-handed abominations, which have done so much dishonor
to Gods name, indignity to the Lord Jesus the Lord of life, so much injury to
our own souls, and hazarded our everlasting happiness and comfort, what shall we
do? If any thing that can be done by others, we will seek far and near for help,
If any thing that can be done by our selves we shall (...) it to the utmost of
our power, is there nothing to be done that we might have the blood of these
sins of ours which have taken away the blood of the Lord Jesus this is not an
estate to be rested in, a (...) in which we must continu and quiet our selves,
we should be willing to do any thing against (...) sins and selves; therefore
the doctrine hence follows, (...), Sound contrition brings the soul to
detestation against sin and sequestration from it. When the people lamented
(...) the Lord who had (...) himself so long time from them, Samuel that he
might have assurance of their sorrow that it were good, and that they might
give in evidence their hearts were upright, he puts them upon this trial If
indeed you will return unto the Lord, put away your Idol, 1 Samuel 7. 3. This was
the practice of those converts Hosea. 14. 1. 2. 3. 4. When they had taken
words, and desired the Lord to take away their iniquity, the proof of their
sorrow and repentance is showed in that profession of theirs, Ashur shall not
save us, nor will we go down to Egypt, nor will we say to the works of our hands,
ye are our Gods; these were their special sins and their protestation is bent
in a peculiar manner to abandon them for ever; Those also who were convinced of
their sinful departings from God by their curious arts, Acts. 19. 19. To show
(...) detestation of their sins, they came al as one man, and were al of one
mind; they burn their books in the view of all the people, before al men that
the memory of such evils might be abhorred, and the very instruments which had
been abused to the practice of them might be removed from the face of the
Earth, a (...) heart that makes a true (...), he is said in phrase of scripture
to speak and judge as God does of sin, and to (...) the same sentence (...) it;
Now Gods mind is, and the conclusion he has set down is this, thou shall blot
out the memory of them from under heaven, and so would a broken heart do with
his distempers.

There be two Particulars in the Doctrine, wherein the double Effect of sound
Contrition is discovered:

1. Detestation of sin. 2. Sequestration from sin.
We will handle them both apart. Begin we first with that hatred and
detestation, which the heart truly burdened carries against sin: For the
opening whereof we shall discover,

1. What is the Nature of this hatred. 2. How it does discover it self, and
may be discerned. 3. The Reasons why this is required in this Work of
Preparation.
To the First.

To difference this work of Hatred, as it is appropriate to this place, and
comes now to consideration, from the like disposition and operation of soul
which (...) wrought by the holy Ghost, and expressed by the Saints in the
further progress of the work of Application; before it arises to the full
breadth and further perfection, unto which the Believer arrives: It Is a
discovery which is attended with much difficulty and hardness; to lay out the
peculiar bounds and limits of it, that each work may take that which is
peculiar to it self, and not interfer upon the other; it is a matter marvelous
intricate and narrow for the search: we shall labor to be wise to sobriety, so
far as light goes, and the Lord helps: We shall cast that which we would speak
by way of Explication, into several Conclusions, as apprehending that the (...)
and most familiar way to communicate what may lend some little Direction this
way.

As the first Adam did depart from God, and in him Conclus. 1.
all (...) Posterity; so the second Adam, the Lord Christ, does bring back all
his again unto God the Father by the contrary way. In the departure of Adam and
his Seed, this is plain to common apprehension, There was first an Aversion, or
turning from God; then a Conversion, or turning of the soul to the Creature:
this is the usual course, and the usual (...), They have (...) the Fountain of
Living Waters, and dug to themselves, Pits that will hold no water, Jer. 2.
13. Adam attends not Gods Direction, and then he attends the delusion of the
Enemy, contents not himself in what God had found, but finds out findings,
therefore our Savior brings back his contrary way, begins where Satan ends as
it were, there must be an Aversion and turning from the Creature, before there
can be a conversion unto God; he came from God to the Creature, he must return
from the Creature to God: but (...) aversion is first, that is, from his
abusive cleaving to the Creature; for in truth, (...) is nothing else but an
(...) affecting of these inferior things, Ambition is the inordinate affecting
of praise, the aerie applause of men; Covetousness an inordinate seeking and
(...) upon the world; Uncleanness, an unruly (...) unreasonable pursuit of the
delights of the Flesh; in a word, a perverted and exorbitant will inordinately
following and pursuing the Creature, not from God, for God, but from a sinful
disposition to self ends; this is the frame of evil in the heart, the woof and
web of wickedness lie, there. Now the Lord Jesus he comes, 1 John, 3. 8, 9 to
destroy the works of the Devil; the Original is, to (...), and unravel, undo,
or take down (...) work, as the word implies; and therefore he begins to pull
down his work where he ended it, viz. He first works an Aversion from sin, and
the Creature sinfully affected, and then in Nature and Order there will be
conversion to God. The Point of the Compass cannot stand North and South
together; first it must stand from the South, before it stand North: The face
of the soul cannot stand Godward, and Sin-ward, and Creature-ward. 1 These. 1.
9.
This is the course of the Scripture, and the constant expression of it; To
turn from Idols to the living God, Acts. 26. 18.
from darkness to light, from Satan to God.

There is nothing in the soul that can turn the soul from sin and the Creature,
that which is wholly possessed Conclus. 2.
and wholly acted by an inordinate affection to the Creature that can never
turn from the Creature, 1 Pet. 4. 2. All men live according to the lusts of
men, and the will of the Gentiles; yea, fulfill the desires of the flesh, and
walk after the Prince of the Air. Ephesians. 2. 2.

As a man cannot turn himself, so this first Aversion Conclus. 2.
from sin, and the Creature, is not wrought by any gracious habit that is put
into the soul by the Lord, i. e. That is not the way and means by which this
first Aversion and turning from sin is wrought; And the Reasons are,

First, All gracious qualities and habits (as all other Reas. 1.
accidents and attendants upon things) never have any being but in a subject;
and therefore must first be there, before they can put forth any operation.
Wisdom must first be in the mind before a man can act wisely; Skill must be in
the Head and Understanding of the Artificer, before he can work, build, and
plant skilfully; Holiness, Righteousness, Patience in our Hearts, before we can
work holily, patiently; and that is the Reason though we have the same faculties
of mind and will before our Conversion, as we have after, yet we neither do nor
can put forth any gracious action before, but after Grace.

Hence it follows, That if the first Aversion from sin were wrought by a habit
of Grace, we should first have this, i. e. The Habit of Grace should be in the
soul before it should work this Aversion of the soul from sin: but that implies
a contradiction, that a man should have Grace, and yet be wholly averted from
God for the least moment.

Secondly, If the soul be incapable in that condition, Reas. 2.
and under that consideration to receive the Habit of Grace, then there cannot
be a gracious habit in the soul to work any thing: but while the soul is wholly
possessed and acted by sin, it is not capable of a gracious habit, no more than
it is possible to be in light and darkness together. The wisdom of the Flesh is
enmity against God, it is not subject, nay it cannot be subject to the Law; if
not subject, then it cannot receive the gracious impressions of it, Romans 8. 7.
and John, 14. 17. it is said of the Comforter, that the world cannot receive
him; the issue is, if a gracious Habit neither is, nor can be there in the soul
wholly possessed and averted from God by sin, then this Aversion from sin
cannot be wrought by it.

Though the Lord does not put a gracious habit Conclus. 4.
INTO the Soul, by which this may be done, yet the Spirit of Contrition puts
forth an irresistible power by which it works UPON the Soul; thus turned from
God to sin, to return it from sin to God. For the Spirit in the Work of
Application sustains a double Office, and so a double Respect:

As a Spirit Assisting,

As a Spirit Inhabiting,

And yet the same Spirit of Regeneration in such as shall be saved (taking
Regeneration in the breadth thereof, including the whole Work) though the
operation be double or diverse, according to the diversity of the subject, as
the soul of a sinner, upon which the work of Application must be made according
to the degrees thereof.

The Spirit works upon the Soul in Preparation, to make way for gracious
habits, but never inhabits the heart, makes the soul a Temple without some
gracious qualisication; 1 Cor. 6. 18, 19. Ye are the Temples of the holy Ghost:
Christ dwells in our hearts by Faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. there is the Spirit
inhabiting; yet it is said, The world cannot receive the Spirit, because they
do not see him, nor know him, but you know him, for he dwells in you, and abides
with you, John, 14. 17. yet those who are nothing for the while, but the world,
the Spirit does work upon such to call them out of the world, by turning of them
from darkness to light.

The Lord Christ as the Second Adam, and the Head Conclus. 5.
of those whom he shall bring back, and beget unto God the Father, in the virtue
of his death he brings a Release from under the hand of Divine Justice, to
reverse that Commission which sin and Satan had, to fasten the soul to the
Creature, and so to sin, and by sin and the Creature to rule in it: For when
Adam jarred and justled against the Law, the Law was strong and hard, i. e.
just; the Law and the Lord in Justice pushed Adam away from him, sin takes
occasion to fall in, and by that advantage (when Divine Justice, by reason of
his provocation, pushed him away) it carries him to the Creature, and the Devil
by sin and the Creature challenges Sovereignty over him: The Lord Jesus by and
in the virtue of his death, suffering and satisfying Divine Justice, delivers
both himself and his from the Authority of sin: God raised him from the Grave,
because it was impossible be should be held by the sorrows and power of the
grave, and therefore not by the power of sin and darkness, Acts, 2. 24. for
they had no power but by virtue of Divine Justice; which being now appeased,
their Commission is reversed and repealed: By Death Christ destroyed him that
had the power of Death, that is, the Devil, Heb. 2. 14. So our Savior gives the
ground of comfort and release to his, I was dead, and (...) alive, and behold I
have the keys of Hell and Death, Rev. 1. 18. The Lord says to sin, hands off,
that soul is mine, and does therefore by the power of his Spirit, not only stop
the work-of sin, but over-bears, and abolisheth, and takes off the right of
Rule which Satan by sin challenged, he brings the soul off from the Sovereignty
of sin, into another Jurisdiction.

The Lord having forced the sinner (whereof I formerly Conclus. 6.
disputed) to feel sin as it is sin, to be cross to the end of his being,
though not to the corruption of the soul, yet to the Nature of the soul; and
therefore as it is possible that the soul may be forced to (...), so now upon
feeling, the soul finds it to be a most bitter thing, and that unto the being
of the soul, as an immortal Creature made next for God as its last end. And
therefore (Observe) though it want Spiritual and Supernatural ability to enter
into combat, or vanquish a corruption by any Grace received, yet being
sensible by the Spirit of Contrition of the evil of it, and so loosened from
it, it becomes subject, and stands readily prepared to (...) any impression of
the power of the Spirit, whereby the exercise and power of sin may be stopped,
and the challenge of any right of Rule and Sovereignty may be shaken off, and
for ever destroyed, and the soul be carried to God in Christ, to be owned,
ruled, and blessed for ever. So that when Christ as the Second Adam, and Head
of the Covenant, comes to take a soul, and to (...) him from sin to God the
Father; look by what irresistible power he acts in opposition and (...) against
it, as cross to his Glory, the soul wanting power of its own, it takes
advantage to fall in and yield to that power, and is acted and moved by the
like opposition and detestation against its sin, according as the impression of
the Spirit is left upon him: And hence it comes, the sinner is transported with
that holy (...), and indignation at such times (...) (...) ward he does never
find, (...) may be, can never again attain unto. As the Gibeonites when all
(...), 9. 10. chap.
the Princes of the Cities and Provinces were gathered together against them,
they had not power in themselves to oppose, yet withdraw themselves they would
from under their Rule and Confederacy, and yielded themselves to the Authority
and Sovereignty of Joshua, though it were to hew wood and draw water; or as the
Boat that is run a ground, and has neither tackling nor (...), yet by a mighty
wind, and a Spring Tide, he is carried with more speed to the Haven than by all
(...) and helps he could ever after attain: So the Soul being acted wholly by
that power and impression of the (...), having yet no principle of its own,
it is carried with a detestation against sin; here Christ applies this power
only, afterward in Sanctification we apply the power of Christ's death to this
end with him.

This is the first work of God in the extent of it, and the way he takes to
turn the soul from sin and the Creature: Fear stops him, sorrow tires him,
hatred turns him. Fear troubles his sin, sorrow loosens it, hatred abandons it.
Fear finds the knot, Griefunties it, Hatred dissolves and breaks it off. Fear
questions the Lawfulness of the match between sin and the soul, Sorrow gives in
proof and evidence out of sense of the evil of it, Hatred disanuls the League,
and fues out an everlasting Divorce betwixt sin and the soul. This Hatred is
the hatred of Preparation, not of Sanctification; the difference between which
may be discerned by the former Discourse.

That in Sanctification is from the Spirit inhabiting; Assisting.

That of Sanctification is by a gracious habit infused into the Soul; this is
without a habit, the Spirit only by (...) irresistible motion working upon the
soul.

In that there is an inward Principle received, whereby principle to meet with
Christ, he wholly and only (...) upon us, and we act, as acted by him. Take the
wheels of a Watch out of place, if you will bring them into the right room and
place, they will then move, because there is a principle of motion put into it.
So of a Member out of Joint, if you will by strong hand pull and move it unto the
place, being wholly moved, it will move into his order and rank, it does not
concur or meet with your hand for the joynting of it self, but stirs wholly and
only as stirred; but being settled and confirmed in the place, it will move to
your hand, and concur with your hand to help it self. So here: That hatred in
Sanctification we receive from our union with Christ; this the Spirit works
upon us to make way to bring us to Union with the Lord Jesus; we must turn from
our sins, before we come to God, there must be an aversion from sin, before
there can be a conversion unto God; we cannot be under two Covenants; in the
first Adam, and the second; grow upon two stocks together. It Is said that Adam
begot a son in his own Image, that a Son was Genesis 5.
generated by the first Adam, the act of Generation was no part of the Image,
but the Image is the corruption of Nature that came by Generation: So that we
are united, that is none (...) Christ's Image, but the Image of Christ, which is
(...) communion with him in his Graces, this Image and these graces issue from
our union. The sum in short then is this: There must be an aversion from sin,
before conversion unto God: there is nothing in the soul that can work this,
but Christ must do it. When Christ works this, it is not by any habit of Grace
infused into the soul, but by the motion and work of the Spirit upon the Soul.
In this work, Christ as the Head of the Covenant by (...) of his death, whereby
he satisfied the Law, brings a release from the hand of Divine Justice, to
reverse and repeal that Commission by which sin had Authority over the soul and
Satan by sin; (...) that the act of sin is stopped, and the right of the Rule
of sin is wholly (...) and made void; the contrite sinner feeling the evil of
sin and yet no power of himself to oppose and subdu, look in what opposition
and detestation the (...) power of the spirit goes out against sin as acted by
the impression of that power, it acts by opposition and detestation against its
sin and is turned from it.

2. How this hatred discovers it self and how it may be discerned.

This hatred is attended with a continual fear of the presence and the deadly
infection of sin, and so with a constant watch against it; or a watchful fear
is a never failing work whereby this hatred (...) it felf, in the carriage and
daily conversation of a (...) sinner, the venom of sin which formerly he has
felt, the plague and vengeance which those his distempers has brought upon
him, leaves so fresh and yet so (...) a remembrance of them upon his soul that
the very thoughts of them afright him, but any temptation or provocation that
may draw him to the (...) of the like is so loathsome that the least appearance
that looks that way he sees presently and shakes at it, (...) it as the (...)
of hell, as that which will hazard the happiness of the soul and (...) as
present (...) to him. As it is in the work of nature in the body of a man, he
that has surfeted upon some sweet meat or some pleasing potion that has been
prepared in a gilded cup, and happily suited with his palate for the present,
but in issue had in reason hazarded his life, in his own sense and each man's
apprehension, but that the Lord was merciful; you need not (...) him with
arguments, the loathing of (...) stomach and the very hatred and Antipathie
that nature has against that which procured the hazard, will make him watchful
and shy how he is deceived in that kind any (...), the very sight of the
gally-pot, the sent or smell of the potion, yea the least suspicion that such a
receipt is coming toward him, (...) him to fear and fly, his stomach begins to
turn, rises from the (...), removes out of the room, (...) frame of nature
begins to fail and shake with the remembrance of the (...) and with the fear of
the like danger; It behooves me to look what I take, it had like to have cost my
life, therefore I will come there no more. So it is with a (...) sinner that
has felt the poison of those pleasing distempers upon which his sensual (...)
has (...) it self in the days of his folly which now he has found by woeful
(...) to be gal and wormwood to his Conscience, the bane of his peace, and
would have been the ruin of him, and his soul before this day, but that it has
pleased the Lord to (...) him for the present, and not to execute his vengeance
upon him, as he has deserved by reason of his former (...); therefore he
cannot abide the sight of the place where the sin was committed, the presence
of the party, the companion that enticed, yea fears the the falsness and
treachery of his own heart, least that again should betray him, thus you see in
David's (...), Psalm. 101. 3. I hate the work of them that turn aside it shall not
cleave to me; Hatred is Eagle-eyed to observe the proceedings of the enemy, and
out of a watchful fear (...) stop the passage, and to keep his approach that he
cannot come near unto us. Happily temptations may press in with violence upon
the soul, and the strength of distempers may make fierce (...), make batteries,
nay make a breach happily and over-bear the sinner, for the push: (...) (...)
is the fear and watch that the heart is carried (...) through this (...), that
it will prevent their approach or at least never yield to their power; A chaste
Matron that truly hates the unchaste (...) of adulterous mates, they may pester
her, trouble her, lie at her from day to day, though she cannot keep her self
happily from being tempted, yet she will keep her self unspotted, she will not be
unchaste nor unfaithful: So it is with a heart that (...) carried with
detestation against evil, though distempers and temptation may pester it, yet
they shall not cleave to it, nor it cleave to them; It may do that which it
hates as Paul Romans 7. 15. what I hate that I do, yet it will hate its own
doings, and its own self so far as overborn thereby; the outworks may be taken,
yet the soul ever entrencheth herself in this holy hatred of heart, and either
it will force them to fly, or it will fly from them; though it cannot be quit of
these In-mates but still they will abide in the soul, yea (...) them, and the
soul for them, This is the order and method, that the Apostle lays forth in
this work, when the Corinthians came to be touched with Godly sorrow, what
indignation, what fear, what zeal, what revenge? etc. 2 Cor. 7. 11. When the
heart carries a detestation toward a corruption it stands against it as an
enemy, then follows fear which is a behavior suitable to provide and prevent
the policies, plottings, and waylayings thereof upon al occasions, look as it
is with a City that has been besiedged with a potent and Malicious enemy, if
once the siedge be raised and the forces of the enemy put to rout and
scattered, how will the besiedged party by a watchful fear stand upon their
guard, stand sentinel night and day, send out their perdues, and dispatch a
party in every coast to discover the carriage of the enemy, takes all the
passages, maintains a narrow search, no man goes out, no man comes in, but
enquires and learns the intent of the enemy, whether he gathers forces, and
maks head again, watches strictly to (...) his approach with the first
apperance, its (...) fresh in their minds into what great distress they were
formerly brought, what cruelty they suffered, and that there was but a hairs
breadth between them and death, with what fear and care will they labor to
prevent the like bondage again, as the Phylistians cried one to another when
the ark came into the field, for the safeguarding of their lives and liberties,
quit your selves like (...), Oh ye Phylistins, least you become servants to the
Hebrowes. So it is with the sinner who has been besiedged and held captive,
under the tyranny and sovereignty of sin and Satan, when the Lord by the power
of ordinances shall cast down the strong holds, stop the act of sin in the
strength and stream of it, disanul and make void the authority of any right or
claym the sin could challenge in this work of contrition, and so rescues the
soul and rayses the sieg that Satan laid and maintained against its distempers
as the deadliest enemy it has in all the world. No sooner is the soul revolted
from under the tyranny of corruption, but the fear of the former misery forces
a man to mervailous circumspection, to maintayn a careful watch, as suspicious
of a surprisal, least the old distempers should gather head again; if any
temptation or occasion be presented, any appearance of any provocation which
may lead to the entertainment of any evil be cast in, how does the heart shrink
and shake as though the enemy were now afresh approaching; what narrow search
and inquisition does the soul set up in its daily course, weighs the words he
speaks, examines each thought and stirring of affection, whether there be any
treacheries plotted, any correspondence held, any preparation made for the
recalling and entertainment of the former lusts and corruptions. Fear gives the
Alarm presently, sets (...) a work to prevent the evil, cries out to heaven
for succor and relief; the disobedient child, the stubborn and careless
servant, were their hearts brought to this detestation of these their
distempers you would see a new world, they would mind themselves of their own
misearriages, though you never remembered them, they would check themselves for
carelessness though you never reproved them, they would be heart sick of the
stirrings of such rebellions, though you never reckoned with them in that
behalf; their own heart would call to their remembrance their former
extremities; It was not long since you were reigned before the tribunal of the
Lord, cast and condemned by the witness of the word, the verdict of (...) own
Consciences and by the testimony of God (...) who is greater than your
consciences; and yet (...) respited, through the long sufferance of the Lord,
and (...) riches of his mercy, you saw cause enough for ever (...) abhor those
abominations and your selves for (...) therefore God forbid I should rush into
those evils (...) and plunge my self into everlasting confusion (...) of body
and soul, I have cause to hate them as mine (...) mies, I will never harbor them
as my friends.

Where this hatred is thoroughly wrought in the (...) against sin, it seeks the
destruction of sin in ones (...) first, and in other also, so far as comes
within the compass of a man's place and (...); The indignation (...) at home,
and its carried most strongly against the (...) of our own hearts, which are
our greatest enemies, and have done us the greatest harm, and we by them (...)
done the Lord the greatest dishonor, and we know (...) most in all the
loathsomness of them, and in all the (...) nousness and heightning circumstances
thereof, then (...) can be acquainted with the measure and scantling of any
others miscarriages, and therefore the true convert sets himself most to seek
the ruin and rooting out of them which would have wrought the ruin of his soul,
but there he rests not, but what ever sins come within his reach, (...) labors
the removal of them, out of the familyes (...) he dwells, out of the plantations
where he lives, out (...) the companies and occasions, with whom he has
occasion to meet and meddle at any time; he that (...) treason indeed, pursues
the pack of conspirators, (...) ever they become, until there be not one
remaining (...) the Nation; open both these a little.

1 He labors the destruction of sin in his own (...) and that two ways. 1. He
does what he can himself. 2. He seeks for help from others that they may send
in new supply of forces to do what he cannot.

He sets himself to the utmost of his power to procure the utter ruin of his
lusts; as (...) enemies, if there be a settled hatred indeed, they are not
satisfied, until they have the blood of each other, So it is here. Its not to
weaken the work of sin, to stop the spreading of it, to confine the compass of
it, to some private course, or yet to imprison (...) by restraint that it may
not stir abroad, nor yet have the liberty of the prison, but be laid aside as
the malifactor in the dungeon, no this hatred seeks the death and the not being
of it, and until then its restless in pursuit. As David with his enemies Psalm.
78. 37. I have pursued mine enemies and overtaken them, neither did I turn
again until they were consumed, A contrite heart deals so with his distempers.
He cease not until he see his desire upon his (...), until he has his will of
him. And if we view the expression of the scripture, we shall see how hatred
vents itself against such as be enemies, whose destruction it intends, partly
by (...), partly by conspiracy, its said of the Egiptians, that God turned
their hearts to hate his people, and the fruit of that is in the following
words, and they dealt subtly with them, what that subtilty was, the text
discovers Exodus 1. 10. first they oppressed them with heavy burdens, then they
plotted by treachery to kill their males in the birth, that so in issue they
might take away their strength and numbers also, in the issue (...) is subtilty
which is one way how hatred expresses itself. Again if we look Psalm. 83. 2 to
6. the enemies of the Lord and his Church, who (...) his hidden ones, (...)
have consulted together with one consent and are confederate, Moab, Ammon, and
(...), etc. there is a combination of al policies and power to overbear and
destroy them. This is the nature of hatred when it is disordred and
unwarrantable in a wrong way; and the exercise and expression of it will be in
some measure proportionable When its put forth in a right manner according to
the rule of God and the operation of his spirit against sin. The contrite soul
when its carried with this hateful detestation against its own abominations, by
a spiritual kind of prudence, observes where the first stirrings and male
strength of our corruptions appear in the birth and breeding of them, in our
minds and hearts, where the root (...) spawn of those loathsome abominations
have their warming and hatching in the heart. There hatred improves al prudence
that may be to stifle those distempers in the first stirrings of them, crush
the Cockatrice in the shel, kill the Serpent in the egg, that they may never
have being nor be brought forth into the world if it be possible. But if by
policy, these spiritual enemies cannot be undermined, then this hatred brings
the combined forces of confederated power of the whole man and his whole endeavor
to destroy the nests of those noysom lufts, what head can contrive, heart
desire, handwork, the endeavor accomplish, head, and heart, and hand, desires,
endeavors, tears, prayers, in a deadly feud to pursue the (...) enemies to
their not being.

Thus he does what he can in himself, and when that is not enough (...) seeks
for help against these hellish abominations from God by his Saints and al such
ordinances which he has appointed for his succor. In a word the carriage of
the heart of a contrite sinner under this kindly hatred thus discovers it self,
he is willing to attend any means, but gives most welcome to such as will do
most execution in the slaughter and destruction of his sins for that is his
aim; nor will he complement with the Lord, nor is he squeamish, (...)
stomached, that each dispensation must answer his expectation point vice, or
else it will not down; As it was with Naaman when Courtier-like-state-complement
more prevailed with him than his own health, I had thought he would have come
and laid his hand upon (...), and called upon his God, so if the counsel be
suggested in such a (...), and such intimations, the admonition with such
meekness or by such a man etc. then he can hear and receive, otherwise he will
be well contented rather to quarrel with the manner that crosses him than
embrace the truth which may help hmi against his sin, no this is far from a
contrite heart, he passes not much how or what the means are, or manner of the
dispensation, if he find it to give a deadly blow to his distemper, its that
which pleases him, he can easily pass by all the rest, as, be the person never
so mean and (...) to the service, or the time unseasonable, as in Abigail, A
General upon his design to be crossed and countermanded by a woman; A spirit
that had not been very under, and hated his sin more than any enemy would have
found many cavils, but he saw how it suited the slaughter of his sins, and he
receives it gladly; nay be the manner rude and rugged, either not suiting the
place of him that speaks, nor the person to whom its spoken, yet the broken
heart takes it quietly, As in that of Joab to David; 2. Sam. 19. 5. 6. 7.
though the physic was good it was too hot, yet because it was wholesome, the
King took it down; nay when neither the person nor manner nor matter it self
which is spoken are answerable to the service, yet if he sees the hand of God
to come out against his corruptions, he takes that advantage against his
distemper and passes by the other. 2 Samuel 16. 7. 11. when Shimei cursed David,
let him alone says he, the Lord has bidden him curse it may be the Lord will
look upon me for good. etc. As Saul entertained the message of the Ziphites,
concerning David whom he hated and whose death he hunted after; 1 Samuel 23. 19.
then came the Ziphites to Saul saying, does not David hide himself with us in
strong holds, in the wood, in the hill of Hackelah, now therefore O King come
down according to all the desire of thy heart, and our part shall be to deliver
him into the Kings hand. And Saul said blessed be the Lord, for ye have had
compassion upon me, go and prepare, see his place where his haunt is, and take
knowledge of his lurking places where he hides himself, so the contrite sinner
that seeks the death and (...) of his sins, it gladly welcomes what ever means
are most searching, sharpest reproves, clearest discoveries, convicting
arguments that will discover the haunts and lurking places of a man's lusts and
secret shiftings of devices; Oh these hit the desire of his heart, he counts
them blessed counsels blessed reproves blessed be ye of the Lord that have
compassion on my soul, to take those distempers from me that would take away my
soul from God, and life and happiness from my soul; nay the soul will say, I see
something but O search more narrowly, examine yet more thoroughly all the sinful
windings and turnings of my heart and I will ioyn with you in all such
convictions and (...), and if there be any way of wickedness, any crevis and
corner of falsehood to be found in the whole frame of my heart, I hope God will
reveal and remove, and I will deal nakedly. Such smitings are as precious balms
that do not break the head, but bring a healing virtue, comfort a man's heart,
content his head and apprehensions also.

Thus he proceeds against his own sin, but there this hatred (...) not; but he
labors also the removal of sin in whomsoever he finds it, wheresoever he is,
and with whomsoever he converseth: If there be any corruption stirring, his
enemies appearing, his hatred stirs presently, his heart rises against it,
attacheth the Traitor; if any be under pressures, he pities them tenderly; if
in distress of Spirit, he comforts in much compassion, and fortifies against
the common enemy: If he sees any go out of the way, led aside with their own
distempers, Satan's delusion, he cannot keep off from counselling, reproving,
persuading. The Servant that could side it with fellow Servants in stubborn,
idle, and (...) (...), (...) with (...), and consent with them, suit with them,
give them counsel, keep their counsel, before, they were brethren in iniquity;
but when his heart comes to be pierced, and the soul transported with hatred,
you shall (...) the wind in another door; if he see them lazy and idle, he will
quicken them; if stubborn and perverse, he will seasonably advise and pursue
them with reproofs, and if his (...) cannot take place, he will make his
complaints to the Governor for redress, he cannot endure to see sin thrive, and
the Traitor live. But if the Lord put any Authority into his hand, he will
express it to the utmost of al his power, and that with the utmost indignation
that the nature of the thing will bear. As good Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34. 4, 5, 6. He
commanded to break down the Altars, cut down the Groves, carved and molten
Images, made dust of them, and burnt the bones of the Priests upon the Altar in
the detestation of their Sacrifices; nay, he took away all the abominations of
all the Countries that appertained to Israel, and made all that were present to
serve the Lord: This Indignation expresses it self against sin, and all that
appertains to it, and have been Instruments to the commission of it. As an
Adulterous woman in (...) of conscience, tore the hair that she had crisped,
and disfigured the face that she had painted, and prided her self, Ioathed to
look upon the tyres and garments which she had worn to make her beauty a bait
and a (...) to others. So Mary Magdalen, etc.

But if yet the Nation of those noysom corruptions cannot be utterly destroyed,
but sins live, and are mighty abroad, and remain in the heart: this hatred is
beyond all hope and possibility of reconciliation, admits no terms of peace, no
condition of agreement that can be devised or offered, will be entertained,
holds out the quarrel and opposition unto death; nay, is willing to die, and
put an end to his days, that he may see an end of his abominations: As God
with Amaleck, Exodus 17. last, he commanded it to be writ (...) a memorial in a
book, for God has sworn he will have war with (...) for ever, and put out his
name from under Heaven; this hatred as in deadly feuds gives no quarter, the
soul will not tribute his Corruptions, and serve his own turn of them, but wages
War with them until they be utterly destroyed from off the face of the Earth:
The Counsel that God gave to the Israelites, (...) carefully and exactly keeps;
Be sure you make no Covenant with them, but smite them, and utterly destroy
them. Deuteronomy. 7. 23. etc.

Reasons of the Point are Three.

Without this; there (...) no way to come to Christ; for Reas. 1.
there is no coming of Faith into the soul: No man can serve two Masters; for
if he love the one, he will hate the other; if he cleave to the one, he will
despise the other: ye cannot serve God and Mammon, Matthew. 6. 24. If (says
Samuel) you will prepare your hearts to seek the Lord, put away your Idols, 1 Samuel 7. 3. Those must first be removed, if God be received: there is no halting
bet wixt two: no man can be in the first and second Adam together: the soul
cannot be married to two husbands at once. The conclusion of our Savior is
(...) and (...) Luk 14. 26. If any man come (...) me, and hate not his father
and mother, wife and children and friends (and therefore much more his sins) in
comparison of Christ, he cannot be my disciple, he is not worthy, i. e. not fit
to be Christ's disciple.

Without this there is no salvation can be expected Reas. 2.
from Christ; for this is the method of mercy, the order of God in the
dispensation of life to lost man, and so (...) was intended and appointed, God
sent (...) son from heaven to bless you by turning every one of you from his
iniquity Acts 3. 26. He will turn you from your evil way if ever he bless you;
and it was the way the prophet prescribed of old. (...). 18. 30. turn you from
al your transgressions so iniquity shall not be your ruin, and Christ came to
save his people from their (...). Math. 1. 21. that is the first (...) to
Salvation, you cannot be safe if your sins be safe, Christ will not (...) you
and your sins too, if you will save them he will not save you; this is the great
condemnation that light is come into the world and men love darkness more than
light, he that loves his sins, loves his death.

Sin is the only enemy of the soul, that which is hateful Reas. 3.
to God and man and makes us hateful also. And therefore is the fittest, (...)
indeed the only proper object of our hatred. They are lusts that (...) against
the soul 1 Pet. 2. 11. there is nothing in the world that could prejudice the
peace and comfort of the soul, were it not poisoned with sin; blessed (...) ye
when men persecute you and hate you and speak al manner of evil of you falsely.
Math. 5. 12. could men speak al evil and do al evil against us and let (...) do
that (...) is sinful to deserve it, these cannot hinder our blessedness but
increase it.

Matter of bitter COMPLAINT to see how few there (...) 1.
be in the world who ever knew what this hatred of sin meant. And therefore yet
were never (...) with any sound broken heartedness for it such as Job (...) of
Job. 20. 1 13
who hide their corruptions under their tongues as (...) pleasant morsel, spare
it and will not forsake it. Instead of hating their sin, they hate the word that
would discover it, the Minister, that preaches against it, the man, the
Magistrate the Law that would reform it. Instead of loathing their sins, they
loath the (...) of the lives, the exactness of the ways of such who indeed set
themselves most against sinful carriages, once cross them in their courses, you
have stirred a (...) nest; they ruin al on heaps.

This is a (...)-stone of the truth of (...) work of contrition, Use 2.
whether (...) Lord have left the mighty impression of this preparative (...)
upon the soul of a sinner. That the league betwixt the heart and (...) lusts is
(...), not alone (...) the (...), (...) (...) (...) of evil, nor yet to avoid,
and go aside from the occasion that may lead to it under some present pang, but
thou have put off the love of sining, (why blessed be God) the combination is
come to naught; sorrow has (...) the knot and union betwixt thy soul and thy
darling (...). This hatred breaks the knot and union fully, thou art now
divorced from thy former lovers, thou fear the approach of them, rather
choosest to see the blood of them, than to enjoy the presence of them. Stay but
Gods time, and be persuaded, in his best season he will take thee into the bosom
of his love, which will be better than life it self to thee. Thou art in the
hand of Jesus and under his charge, he that has rescued thee from the rage of
the Devils, and from the right that sin ever claymed in thee, he will never
loose his labor, nor shall thou loose thy (...) and happiness Luke 11. 12.
in the issue. He has bound the strong man the strongest of thy corruptions
that heretofore have too much, and too easily prevayled with thee: had got thy
affection, and the strong holds of thy heart, those strong temptations and
(...) by which Satan; as by so many garrison soldiers, maintained possession
in thy soul; yet now this strong man is bound, his holds battered and his
garrison abandoned. So that there is a spoil made of al his goods; the
temptations that formerly found entertainment, they are now abhorred, his
suggestions and delusions that found easy entertance and acceptance are now
loathed, and thy heart set against them; the Lord Christ is now about to own
thee as his proper possession, and then he will never part with thee more, thy
heart trembles at the least inkling of the return of thy distempers, seeks the
destruction, and would see the not being; art a weary of life merely because
they live, and art resolved never to entertayn terms of peace with them, though
thou never see quiet day in the world. (...) the work is the Lord Christ's he
will own it; it is true and thorough, he will never leave it, until he have
brought it to perfection and thy soul to eternal happiness but alas this truth
as a touchstone shows the contrition of most in the world to be counterfeit,
that many have been in the fire heated but never melted, as with metal the
parts of it battered, but never severed fully, the dross from the oar, and
therefore there can never vessel be be made for any honorable use, and service
thereof. In a word, the doctrine passes sentence of sad condemnation upon four
sorts of persons as such who never (...) in the work, we shall point very
briefly at the particulars, that each man may take his portion.

First the CARELESS and fearless Christian is cast out of the number of these
contrite sinners whom God does prepare for his Christ and mercy, such as walk
heedlesly up and down the world, not awed with any watchful fear of the
temptations and occasions and snares which are laid in their way to entrap
them, or with the treachery and deceivable lusts which suddenly draw them
aside, to common neglect of duties which they reform not, or transport and
carry them with pangs of passions and distempers, and they amend not; certainly
either these know not these to be sins, or else do not know them and hate them
as direful and dreadful enemies to their souls; It could not be but their
hearts should shake at the sight of them, and the dangerous assaults which they
cannot but know, if they know them to be (...), but they will hazard their
everlasting happiness. People who live without watch or fear they have no
enemies, or no war (...) hand, and if thou live in this Laish-like fearless
fashion, thou never knew the war of a Christian, nor the enemies they have,
nor art in the condition of a Christian, (...) have the heart of a Christian to
this hour within thee; And therefore Jude so (...) those Atheists and sensual
wretches, who were (...) of Gods spirit, which are spots in your feasts,
feeding themselves without fear. Jude. 22 these are blaynes in the body of the
Church, spots in the Assemblies of Christians, speak without fear in the
companies where they converse, walk without fear in families where they live,
walk without fear in the occasions with which they have to deal, and the
Apostle adds, they are withered, twice dead and plucked up by the roots, far
enough from having any spiritual life or any preparation, thereunto, look as in
nature, reason (...) and experience evidenceth, if there were a malicious enemy
with a puissant and mighty army now making his approaches to the City, and
attempting the siege, if the allarum should be given by the watch to the City,
a messenger dispatched to each man's door, if any were so careless that he would
not attend; or attending the (...) stirred not, or happily for fashion
stirring, if yet he labored not by a watchful fear to provide for the assault,
and attend the (...) of command, repayr to the place for defense of the City;
there is no man but would conclude, certainly he is a party, he is not an enemy
to the army that does besiedg, every loyal and faithful subject shakes at the
apprehension of the power and rage of the adversary, who is now likely to make
havoc of al and that without mercy, so it is here, the violence of temptation
from without, and the strength of corruptions from within, fight against the
soul, thou that are a disobedient child, a rebellious self-willy servant, a
perverse and (...) wife, an ignorant, (...) hearer, the allarum is given in
public, concerning these armies of lusts that are come out against thee,
notice given in private, thy fellow servants counsel, the master he commands,
nay confessions are made of thy evils (...) thou resists, petitions put up for
Grace before thou (...) abroad, and yet no sooner off thy knees out of the
presence of the Lord, but thou art as though thou had never known any such
thing, thou stumblest at the same stone, taken aside with the same temptations
and distempers, as though thou had never heard thy sin discovered, as though
thou had never been counseled, never been commanded, as though thou had
never bewailed it to this day, Idle and stubborn and perverse and way-ward and
self-willie, so far from fearing these evils, that thou did not remember
them, or think of them or if thou did, thou fear rather thou should be
forced to reform them, rather than thou should commit them, As sure as the
Lord lives thou art a party and in league with these distempers, thou art not
an enemy; if (...) thou had found the venom and poison of these (...) and
had been persuaded of the destroying nature of these spiritual (...), which
make hayock of thy soul, the very appearance and apprehension of these would
have been dreadful if there were but a roving thought in a man's mind, any small
stirring of a distemper in a man's heart, any temptation, any the (...)
enticement to the committing of the evil, how would thy heart shake at the
sight of it, fear and fly and cry for help against it, if thou had known it
and hated it as thy deadly enemy, so Paul cries out as fearful men do, when he
perceived the stirrings of those noysom distempers of his heart, the law of the
flesh, how to avoid or prevent or overbear he could not tell, he cries out Oh
'Miserable man that I am who shall deliver me from this body of death? Romans 7.
last. The want of this is the cause of all that heedlesness and adventurousness
in (...) carriages, that they are so commonly taken aside with their distempers
before they scant tell where they (...). For I appeal to any (...) Conscience,
nay to common senco, whether it is possible or no (and let any man make work of
it) that a city who has the enemy (...) should (...) remember it is besiedged?
that cannons should now be playing and battering, and the people within not
think that they are assaulted? unless either they know not what war means, or
else they join with the enemies in it; So it is here, when a (...) mind is
plotting how to act, his heart stirrs, and (...) corruption boiling and bubling
in his bosom, that the allarum is given, the Phylistins are upon thee, sins and
devils are upon thee, and yet a man forgets the condition he is in, (...) what
he is commanded, counseled, admonished; this in Prove. 13. 13. is given as a
note of destruction, he that despises the command shall dye, and tha'ts
contrary to fearing a command mentioned before and.

A second sort are NEUTERS in religion who care not much which end goes
forward, provided they (...) go on quietly in their way, they would be of no
side if they could be safe so, Much they would not do against sin, only that
which is grossly vile they could wish might be reformed. They will no great
matter for religion, only they could wish that this rigor and strictness might
not be pressed, because in both these extremes they conceive there is trouble.
Oh peace is a precious thing, this wretched politician would have peace with
sin, peace with Christ, and peace with ordinances, peace with drunkards and
profane wretches, and peace with such as walk exactly before God. His motto
that writ upon his door, and that his measure, every man's good word, love of al
men, so in (...) he loves neither God nor (...), nor his own soul in the
conclusion, but our saviors determination is definitive and peremtory, he that
is not with me, is against me, and (...) that gathers not, (...), nay James, 4.
4. he that will be a friend to the world is an enemy to God. Moderation and
descretion is the compass by which this man stears; it is not men and brethren
what shall we do? but rather what shall we do? of little meddling comes much ease,
if he may have that, he has his end, to be at war with his enemies is a (...)
life, the temper of his zeal is like the warmth of his bed, not as hot as fire
that would scorch him, nor yet so cold as fire as would chil him but just so
warm as he may sleep in it. As neutral Cities in time of war they pay to both
sides because they would have war with neither, with the sincere and upright he
will seem as they are, and with the ungodly he will be and do as they:
Gallio-like he cares for none of those matters, if he may have his own matters
if any thing appertaining to sin or godliness, he will not trouble himself
further than his own (...), and profit are interested in it; he will do nothing
against his sin, and he is like to have nothing at the hand of the Lord, for he
loathes and hates him that never loathed nor hated his corruption, he will vomit
with indignation such luk-warm varlets out of his mouth, Rev. 3.

The third sort is your LAZY HYPOCRITE Who will be abundant in his purposes and
professions against his sin, smoaks out his days in powerless and (...)
resolutions, wishings and wouldings but does nothing to purpose, (...) not
himself in a restless pursuit against his evil. Hatred where its settled and
through it carries al a man's endeavors with it, calls a man into the field,
when Hanum 2 Samuel 10. 6.
saw he was hated of David, he gathers al his forces for offense and defense,
and byres besides. War amongst (...) requires the whole man, with his time and
strength, he that goes to war does not entangle himself, but leaves al his
occasions, that might attend the enemy, he spies privily where his haunts are,
what (...) he may take, where his hold, are to demolish them, where his
provision comes, to intercept (...), and to cut of his convoy, levies what
forces he may and sends far off for succor and supply. When the Lazy hypocrite
makes his complaints against his distempers, and rests in his complaints,
bewayles his wretchedness and corruptions, but to a resolved war he will (...)
go. You will do nothing upon point against those lusts, that have done so much
evil against Christ and your own soul, Is not the day yet to dawn, the time yet
to come, that ever you set your selves in earnest in battle array against your
evils Luke 13. 24. a sleepy kind of seeking that many do which shall never enter
into grace, many shall seek to enter and shall not be able, but to strive to rise
up against your corruptions and to maintain professed war against your sin that
you do not that you will not do, how many directions have you heard and yet
attend not counsels and (...) not, means and ways have been presented and
pressed and you improve none Lam. 3. 40.
of them? have you ever searched and tried your own ways, that you might see
the haunts of your hearts and prevent them? have you observed where the strong
holds of sin and satan are, high thoughts and self conceitedness and labor to
raze them, where the Provisions Romans 13 last.
have been made by musings and meditations that so you might stop and stifle
those thoughts and so starve and famish your lusts? have you cast yourself into
the holy communion of the Saints that you might levy new forces of counsels and
directions? have you sent to heaven and pursued God with importunate
entreaties, for to send in succor and support, against those abominations which
are too many and too strong for you? your endeavor is not thorough, your (...)
therefore is not sound.

The fourth sort is your TREACHEROUS HYPOCRITE Who pretends great indignation
against his sins, that he may keep them and that without suspicion, as such who
are the receivers of thieves, they cannot hide them in their own houses, unless
they make hue-and-cry after them in other places. The adulterous woman rayles
against her (...) in the view and hearing of others that she may meet him in
secret when no man may mistrust him or her; these are spies and Satan's
intelligencers that hold privy correspondence with their corruptions while
they profess greatest opposition against them; As Hushai, David's friend he
pretended service to Absalom, that he might serve David, discover and defeat
the counsel of Achitophel and (...) proceedings, 2 Samuel 15. 3. 4. 5. So here;
they cannot divour widows houses, unless they make long prayers, so they
(...). 58. 2. 3. they fast and pray against their sins, that they may more
freely commit them, not that they may please God, but that they may do their
own pleasure; they can do any thing against counsel, they quarrel at it,
against the power of a (...), they endeavor to defeat it, against the evidence
of Conviction, they strive to darken it, and cavil at it, sees how the Coast
is, gives intelligence to his distempers; this and that Argument is alleged,
devises how to answer it; this reproof is administered, devises how to defeat
it. As Rahab sent the men of the City upon a sleeveless Errand, Josh. 2. 5.
Pursue after them quickly, and you shall overtake them, when she had brought
them up, and hid them in (...) Housetop. So it is also with Conspirators and
receivers of Traitors; if they can lead the Officer or Searcher into some by
place, they will be as (...) and (...) to follow things to the utmost; but come
home once to their own houses where the Traitor is indeed, if they cannot hide
them, rather than they shall do execution, they will defend them, but not
deliver them up into the hands of the Officer. How often and ordinary is it to
every man's experience to cry out of pride and (...), carnal confidence that is
in their (...), and that truly and justly, the stumps of that Dagon remains,
the body of death yet continues, those lustings of the old man, but bring it
home to their own doors, let it concern them in their (...) occasions, in any
controversy between man and man, where the fault is to be found, and the blame
to be laid, sin to be confessed, that these distempers are to be attached in
their hands, they will do any thing against Arguments and the evidence of
Reason, but nothing against their sins; such are they, John, 6. 60. That sought
Christ for (...), etc. If Christ will be their Cook, he shall be their King. But
if they press them beyond their pace, and discover their falsness, and how far
short they fall of the Spiritual work of Faith in Christ, they fall out (...);
It Is a hard saying, who can hear it? And those Dissemblers, Jer. 43. 2. when
the Prophet did but cross them in their courses, would have plucked the carnal
corrupt desires from their heart; they fly in his face, and profess they will
die in the quarrel, they hate not their sin, but the Ordinance that would
discover their sins, they would not destroy their sins, but the evidence of
Reason that would condemn their sins.

So much for detestation of sin. The Second part of Doctr.


The Second Particular to be considered in the Doctrine is a SEQUESTRATION FROM
SIN. It is a word common among those that attend upon the Law, when men are at
a controversy about Goods and Land, and the Cause is depending, the Goods or
Land is sequestered, set aside and put into the power of any parties, but set
aside til the case be decided. So under this preparative work the soul is
sequestered from sin: when God has made a man see sin, and willing to hate it,
the soul and sin are at controversy, the soul revolts from under the Authority
of sin, and says sin is not my Ruler, I cannot rule my self, and sin shall not
rule me; it was by usurpation that it has had so long possession of me, but it
shall not domineer in my soul any longer: and therefore the poor distressed
sinner is glad that Christ is stirring in the word, and says he, I am resolved
never to yield to the Authority of sin more, I will sue out a sequestration, and
Oh that my heart may be left in the hand of the Spirit of Christ. I was not
made for sin, but for God, Oh that I may be delivered from my sin, that I may
come at God again, and now he is content that God would (...) him into Hell. So
he would free him from his sins, Hos. 14. 8. Ephraim shall say, what have I to
do any more with Idols? Romans 11. 24. The soul is now as a graft cut off from
the Stock of old Adam, it grows not to it, nor is fed by it any more.

This Sequestration discovers itself by two Acts,

1 There is no allurement can entice the soul. 2 No evils that can drive the
soul to its former sin.
First, Nothing can entice the soul to (...) sins, no allurements can prevayl
with him, no thoughts of (...) delights or future pleasure can (...) him to fall
in with his old (...). (...) (...) (...) (...), but (says he) I know the hook,
(...) none (...) that bait, I know the cup and the guilt, but I know the poison
also, he will never (...) again to folly, he resolves never to see the faces of
his sins more.

No present evils, (...), (...) (...) (...) the soul to entertain (...) (...),
he has found (...) (...) than these, better to be in chains, than in the
(...) of darkness: fire and faggot (...) wildfire, but he has felt (...),
(...) (...) rather to fear (...) (...) of a God rather than the (...) of all the
(...) the world, And Hence the face of the (...) (...) toward God and as (...)
(...) the King (...) he (...) not (...) to the (...) again to dye there, So it
(...) with a broken (...) (...), (...) his great request unto God that he may
not go (...) again to his (...) In this (...) from sin the (...) (...) as (...)
(...), etc.

We here see the reason of al those (...) and (...) Use 1.
of such (...) promised better things, the (...) to his (...), the (...) to his
(...), and the (...) man to the world after (...) (...) (...) they are the same
men they (...), (...) (...) to their former follyes, and are as bad as ever.
These men were never cut off from their corruptions, the union was there still,
the soul was in league and love with sin still, and therefore it (...) (...),
(...) (...): (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) be (...),
and therefore they (...), and grow worse and worse many years after. If thou
have a privy lust harbored in thy heart that will be thy ruin, thou will be as
bad or (...) than ever.

EXHORTATION, To (...) all our endeavors to see a (...) of it, and to seek to
heaven that God may work it in us, let this be always in thy prayers, Lord
that I may hate my sin, that I may put off the love of sinning whatever thou
hate, sin is worse than that, its worse than reproach, disgrace, sickness,
poverty; thy love to sin should be turned into hatred, and thy hatred to it,
should be greater than ever thy love has been. And if thou do not hate thy
sin, its certain the God of Heaven will hate thee, the froward in heart is an
(...) to the Lord, Prove. 3. 32. Thou thy self (...) an abomination to the
Lord, if thy (...) be not an abomination to thee.

If thou will part with thy sins the Lord will set his love upon thee, Jer. 3.
1. though thou (...) done evil things as thou could, yet return unto me.
It Is said Judge. 10. 15. 16. when the people of Israel came bewailing their
sins, crying for mercy, and putting away their Gods, that then the soul of the
Lord was grieved for the misery of Israel, and he had mercy on them. He is the
same God still, and if he sees thee grieving for thy sins, he will grieve for thy
sorrows. When Ephraim bemoaning himself, judging himself for his sin, and
crying out unto the Lord, turn me, and I shall be turned, its said, he heard
Ephraim bemoaning himself, and his bowels were troubled for him, and I do
earnestly remember him still, I will surely have mercy upon thee, says the Lord.
Jer. 31. 18. 19. 20.

FINIS.
The Contents.
BOOK IX. On Isa. 57. 15. I dwell with him that is of an humble and contrite
spirit.
DOCT.
THe Heart must be contrite and humble before the Lord will take up his
dwelling in it. 5 Reasons two. In regard, 1 Of our selves, there be two
Hindrances 7 1 Contentedness in a Natural (...) ibid (...) removes (...). 2
Sufficiency to help a man's self Humiliation removes that 9 2 Of God, his Word
will not, cannot take place till the soul (...) contrite and (...) 10 Uses
(...) (...). 1 Terror to hard-hearted sinners, God will not dwell with them 11 2
Instruction, teaching us to delight in, choose and dwell with such as are
contrite and humble 13 3 Exhortation, to seek for (...) in Gods way and order,
viz. (...) and (...). 14

BOOK X. On Acts, 2. 37. When they heard this, they were pricked to the heart,
and said to Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, Men and Brethren, what shall
we do? 15
DOCT. 1.
Stubborn and bloody sinners may be made brokenhearted. 20 Reasons three,
taken from 1 The infinite Mercy of God 22 2 The infinite (...) of Christ's
Merits 23 3 The Almighty. Power of the Spirit 24 Uses three, hence 1 Matter of
Admiration at the riches of Grace 25 2 Encouragement to keep distressed sinners
from despair, yet no ground of presumption 26 3 Instruction, showing the (...)
nature of despair, It Is 29 1 Injurious to God 30 2 Dangerous to the Soul 32
Helps against Despair are two, 1 Listen not to (...) Conclusions 34 2 Attend
not our own (...), but Gods Mercy and Power 34

DOCT. 2.
There must be a true sight of sin, before the heart can be broken for it 35
For Explication, four things: 1 How God works this sight of sin 37 1 The Law of
God discovers our sins ibid 2 There is a new Light put into the mind 38 3 The
Spirit takes (...) the Rule of darkness out of the mind 41 4 The Spirit leaves
a set upon the understanding Godward 42 2 How far the sinner is (...) in this
sight of sin 43 1 There is an insufficiency in the Understanding to reach the
right discovery of sin 1 ibid 2 An incapability also to receive Spiritual
Light. 45 3 Christ forces the Understanding to bear the (...) of his Spirit,
whereby (...) 47 1 Destroys the Sovereignty of (...) Reason 48 2 Fits it to
receive the impression of Spiritual Light 50 4 This Light received, the
Understanding is acted by it, and so acts in virtue of it, and so the sinner
comes truly to see his sins. 51 3 Wherein this true sight of sin is discovered
52 1 It is a clear sight of sin 53 1 In regard of God, as 54 1 It would
dispossess God of his Sovereignty 55 2 It smites at the Essence of God 57 3 It
spoils all the Works of God 59 2 In regard of our selves, as ibid 1 It
separates (...) God and (...) ibid 2 It makes us incapable of any good 60 3
It Is the Cause of all other evils 62 4 It brings a Curse upon all Blessings
ibid Hence sin is the greatest evil ibid Why do not men see sin thus? 166 The
Causes are ibid 1 The Delusions of Satan ibid 2 Men judge of sin by present
sense 67 3 Or by present pleasure and profit 68 4 Or by the long suffering of
God 70 5 Want of Spiritual Light 71 The Cure of these mistakes 72 1 Look upon
sin so as it will look upon thee at death and Judgment ibid 2 Get a clear sight
of God 73 2 It is a convicting (...) 75 That implies 1 A particular application
to our selves ibid 1 A man must reflect upon his own sins ibid 2 And pass an
impartial Sentence against them 78 1 An over-powring settling of them upon the
Conscience, and that 79 1 Undeniably 80 2 Immovably 82 3 Invincibly 85 Reasons
two. Because 1 Nothing comes to the heart but by the Understanding 86 2
Ignorance frustrates all our Endeavors in the use of means 88 Uses five, hence
1 Instruction: An ignorant heart is a naughty heart 90 Such a one 1 Is liable
to all evil 92 2 He can receive no good ibid 3 He can expect no mercy 93 2 To
be hard to be convinced, is 94 1 A dangerous sin ibid 1 Against a man's own soul
ibid 2 Against Gods Ordinances 95 3 Against the Spirit of God ibid 2 A dreadful
Curse 97 1 It makes way for Satan ibid 2 God delivers up such a one to Satan
ibid 3 He will deal no more with him ibid 4 Such a one is every day ripening
for ruin 98 3 See the reason why men of deepest understanding are hardliest
brought to brokenness of heart, because so hardly brought to see their sins
ibid 4 Trial 101 1 Whether we have been brought to see sin clearly. Such a one
will not, dare not carelessly adventure upon sin ibid 2 Whether we have seen sin
convictingly 105 Four Evidences of persons not convinced of sin ibid 1 When a
man is unwilling to attend that Truth that would discover (...) sins 105 2 When
he (...) to gainsaying when he cannot avoid the light 107 3 When he is
restless to raise quarrels against the determination of the Truth 109 4 When he
sets himself against the Truth 110 5 Exhortation to get this true (...) of sin
111 The Means are six, 1 Labor to see the excellency of the holiness of the
Lord and his Word 114 2 When the Lordlets in any light by his Word, (...)
Conscience attend both 117 3 Take off, and cast away all cavils and shifts
which (...) the work of (...) ibid Shifts and Excuses for sin referred to three
Heads 1 To lighten the evil of sin ibid 1 By the commonness of it ibid Answ.
This shows 1 The sin is the more (...) 120 2 Thy Curse more dreadful ibid 3 Thy
self destitute of Grace 121 2 By the Naturalness of it 122 Answ. Hence it
appears 1 Thou have no Grace 122 2 Thy Disease is incurable 223 3 Thy person is
abborred of the Lord 124 3 By Example and Companionship in sin 125 Answ. Hereby
thou do 1 Prefer men before God 126 2 Encourage the wicked 128 3 Thou shall
be damned as well as they 129 4 By strength of provocations 131 Answ. Whereas 1
Though Nature cannot hold out, yet Grace oan 132 2 This is unreasonable in thee
133 3 It Is dishonorable to God ibid 5 By forgetfulness 134 Answ. This argues
thou have 1 No love to Gods (...) 137 2 A slight esteem of them 138 3 An
Atheistical heart 139 6 By their straights ibid Answ. These cannot excuse (...)
For the Scriptures require Obedience notwithstanding these. 7 By the Holiness
of the Law 141 Answ. This will not excuse. (...) 1 Thou do not what thou
can 142 2 Thou art (...) to be made able 143 3 Thou art the Cause of thine
inability 145 8 By the littleness of sins, as but 145 1 Either sinful words 146
Answ. Thy words 1 Will condemn thee. ibid. 2 In some regard are worse than evil
in thy heart, because they 150 1 Bring (...) the evil of the heart. 148 2
Sometimes hold forth more than is in the heart. 149 3 Are more hurtful to
others 151 3 In some regard worse than evil in thy practice, because they taint
more 151 1 Universally ibid. 2 (...) ibid. 3 The Tongue is untamable. 152 4 It
is a world of evil. 154 2 Or sinful thoughts 155 Answ. See the (...) of them
ibid. 1 In regard of God, they 156 1 Estrange them from God 156 2 Carry thy
heart to oppose him. 158 2 They are the Causes of all thy other sins. 161 3 In
the large extent of them 164 4 They do nourish all other evils 165 5 They keep
off the power of the Word. 166 3 Or a small matter in practice 167 Answ. The
less the thing is 1 The more heinous thy sin 168 2 The less care and conscience
have thou. 170 3 The greater the wickedness of thy heart. 171 2 The second sort
of Shifts and Excuses, whereby a man thinks the danger of sin may some ways be
prevented 174 Conceiving that 1 Either God takes no notice of their sins. 175 2
Or he will not call them to account 176 3 Or they can satisfy for them 177 4
Or the Lord will not be so rigorous, but will abate 179 All these confuted
ibid. 3 The third sort of Shifts, whereby if a man can neither lessen the
danger, nor prevent it, he says he will, and thinks he can bear it. 179 This
also confuted, and the impossibility of bearing Gods wrath is showed ibid. 1
The dreadfulness of Gods wrath 180 2 The weakness of man. 181 3 The sufferings
of Christ ibid. 4 Means, Yield to the Evidence of the truth when it is clear and
convincing 182 5 Means, All those truths we hear or read in the Word which
concerns our corruption, we must take home, and apply to our selves, as the
special portion the Lord has appointed to us 185 6 Means, Make and keep the
evil of sin ever really present with us 186 1 See it in the execution of it
upon others 187 2 Act that upon thy self by present consideration 189 Motives
to persuade to this endeavor to see our sins. 1 The danger of the mistake here
190 2 It Is the easiest way to see sin now. 191 3 It Is a safe and sure way 192

DOCT. 3.
Application of special sins by the Ministry, is a means to bring men to sight
of, and sorrow for them. 193 Reasons three, taken from 1 The Office of
Ministers. 195 2 The necessity of sinners 196 3 The Nature of the Word 197 Uses
four, hence. 1 See the Reason why so little good is done by the Ministry, viz.
Want of Application 198 2 See the Reason why the best kind of Preaching finds
the worst acceptance 200 3 It Is the Duty of Ministers as the Text suits, and
the condition of the Hearers requires, to use Particular Application of special
sins. 202 (...) 1 To the Ministers, what they should do 204 2 To the People,
what they should desire 206

DOCT. 4.
Meditation of sin, a special means to break the heart 208 What Meditation is,
viz. 210 A serious (...) of the mind, whereby we search out the Truth, and
settle it effectually upon the heart. ibid. Reasons three. Because Meditation 1
Causes the sting of sin to pierce more deeply 217 2 Holds the heart under the
pressures of it 219 3 Increases and presses down the weight of it upon the
Conscience 221 Uses three, hence 1 Humiliation that there is so little
Meditation. 223 This in special concerns 1 Such as studiously avoid it. 224
Terror to such; they take the way to increase their misery when they would
avoid it. 225 Advice to such: Be afraid to commit sin, but never be afraid to
see it 226 2 Such (...) approve the Practice, but plead Excuses why they may
neglect it ibid. 1 Meditation is but a matter of indifferency, not of Duty 227
2 The want of time 229 3 Unsteadiness of their thoughts ibid. 4 (...) in the
Service 238 All these confuted, and Remedies prescribed 239 2 Caution: Loose
Company an Enemy to the Conversion of a sinner, because a hindrance of
Meditation 240 3 Exhortation to attend this duty of Meditation 241 Motives
four, 1 It Is a Duty belonging to all 244 2 How far we are cast behind hand for
want of it. 245 3 What need we have of it ibid. 4 The Sovereign virtue of it
247 Directions to help in the practice of Meditation. 249 1 Enquire after the
Nature of a sin. ibid. In this Enquiry 1 Look to the Rule, to Authorize us to
the work. ib. 2 For the manner of proceeding 250 1 Survey particular sins 251 1
In the Root ibid. 2 In the fruits of them. ibid. 2 Sum them up jointly 262 2
Fasten it upon the soul 265 1 By grappling with the heart ibid. 2 By getting
the better of the heart ibid. Here take heed of three extremes 272 1 Desperate
discouragements 273 2 Hellish provocations 274 3 False conceivings of the
measure and manner of Gods work 275 Directions to help here, are three: 1
Possess the heart with the fear of thy sinful and dangerous estate 276 2 Awaken
and call for the help of Conscience 279 3 Seek to the Lord for the Almighty
hand of his Spirit to set on thy Meditations 282

DOCT. 5.
The same Word is profitable to some, not to others 283 Reasons two. Because 1
God has several ends to attain by the dispensations of his Word 284 2 God will
show the Sovereignty of his good pleasure. ibid. Uses four, hence 1 Learn to
fear in the enjoyment of greatest means. 285 2 The profitable fruit of the
means, is not in the means. ibid. 3 Exhortation: Use means in dependence upon
God. 386 4 Be thankful when thou do profit by them. ibid.

DOCT. 6.
The Lord sometimes makes the Word prevail most, when it is most opposed 287 The
Lord works many times 1 Upon men when they seek not (...). 289 2 Upon the worst
of men. 294 3 In the height of Rebellion ibid. Reasons four. Because 1 The
greatness of his Power, is hereby discovered. 292 2 The (...) of his mercy
(...) is (...) 294 3 The Lord will stain the Glory of all flesh 295 4 And
discovers the depths of his (...). 296 (...) Three, hence. 1 Instruction: The
work of Conversion depends (...) upon any preparation that man can make 297
Hence that is a dangerous Error. (...) If a man do what he can, God will give
(...) Grace 300 1 It undermines the Sovereign good pleasure of God ibid. 2 It
cuts the sinews of the Covenant of Grace 301 3 It crosses the end of the means
of Grace 302 2 To support the hearts of the most wretched sinners with some
hopes of good, notwithstanding all their wickedness. God may and can if he will
work upon them. Cautions here 309 1 God will do thee good in his own way 316 2
Fear lest thou make an escape from the hand of the Lord 317 If thou do 1
It Is suspicious the Lord has lest thee ibid. 2 He will deliver thee up to thy
sins again 219 3 Exhortation to quicken our desires and endeavors in the use of
the means 320 4 Admiration at the riches and freeness of Grace. 323

DOCT. 7.
Sins unrepented of, make way for piercing Terrors 325 Reas. Because the heart
is more estranged from God, and bardened in sin 327 Uses Three, hence. 1 Judge
not of sin by the present sweetness, but by the after sorrows. ibid. 2 It
should be our greatest care to rise presently after falls into sin 329 3 Terror
to such as continue in their sins 330

DOCT. 8.
The Truth is terrible to a guilty Conscience. 332 Reas. Because it is a Witness
to accuse; a Judge to condemn; an Executioner to torment ibid. Use. It discovers
the guiltiness and falsness of such as are afraid of the Truth ibid.
Differences between the Saints trembling at the Truth, and an Hypocrite 333 1
Though the Word speaks against the corruption, yet it speaks for the condition
of the Saints ibid. 2 The Saints (...) sweetness in the sharpest Truths, and
close with God in them. ibid.

DOCT. 9.
Gross and scandalous sinners, God usually exercises with heavy breakings of
heart before they be brought to Christ 334 Reasons Three: 1 From the Holiness
of Gods Nature 340 2 That sinners may not be encouraged in their sins. 341 3
That the sinner himself may be 342 1 Thoroughly recovered from (...) sin for the
present. ibid. 2 Preserved from sin for the time to come ibid. Uses Five,
hence. 1 The easy and sudden Conversion of scandalous sinners, is to be
suspected. God does not use to save men per (...). 343 2 Support to scandalous
sinners when they meet with (...) (...). 347 1 Such are in the way of Mercy.
349 2 The workmay prove speedy and successful 350 3 This makes way for Comforts
351 4 It Is honorable for such to be under heavy breakings of heart 353 3 Advice
to Ministers, who by their Calling are to deal with scandalous sinners in such
horrors 354 1 Be not (...) in the search 355 2 Nor (...) to heal the wound
ibid. 3 Nor suddenly confident of the Cure 356 4 Direction to such persons who
have had experience of such heart-breakings ibid. Be not weary of Gods
Dispensations. 5 Exhortation to keep our selves and ours from scandalous sins
357

DOCT. 10.
Sorrow for sin rightly set on, pierces the heart of the sinner through, that
is rightly affected therewith. 358 For Explication, four Things: 362 1 The
Manner how Sorrow for (...) (...) on the soul. 363 1 Either successively, or by
degrees in some ibid. 1 The evil and danger of his sin, is (...) in the general
ibid. 2 He is surprised and pursued with fear 364 3 The Curses and Punishments
of sin are fastened upon him 366 4 He is made to feel the evil of sin (...)
sin, and that as his greatest evil 368 2 Or suddenly and thoroughly (...) once
in some others 372 3 Or secretly and insensibly in others. 374 1 Some are
Sanctified in the Womb, 375 2 Some wrought upon in Childhood ibid. 3 Some
under good Education, Counsels, Means, are gradually, yet really wrought upon.
ibid. Cautions here. 1 Though the manner and measure of Contrition differ in
most, yet the substance of the Work is the same in all. ibid. 2 Though some may
not know the time, yet every one should, and if gracious, can give evidence of
the Workwrought 360 3 It Is a safe way often to review, and to act over the
first workings of Contrition. 377 For 1 A wound here is never recovered 378 2
Clear this, and clear all. ibid. 2 How this Sorrow comes to be set on, and the
soul made to feel sin its greatest evil 379 1 Sin is cross to the Nature of the
soul as such. 380 2 If the evil of sin be discovered to the Nature of the soul,
it may be made sensible thereof. 382 3 While the soul is fully and only
possessed with sin, it cannot feel the evil of it. ibid. 4 The Spirit
countermands the Authority of sin. 383 5 Christ by the virtue of his death,
puts an end to the Commission of sin. 384 3 How far the soul is active in
Contrition. 385 1 There is no power in man to remove the resistance of his
heart against God and Grace. 385 2 The Lord must put a Spiritual power into the
will before it can put forth an act for removing this resistance. 386 3 The
influence of this spiritual power, is not by a gracious habit, but by the
motion of the spirit upon the soul 388 4 In removing this resistance, the will
is a mere Patient. (...) 5 This resistance being removed, the will consents to
a divorce between it self and sin 393 4 The behavior of the heart under this
work 396 1 The contrite sinner has the loath somness of fin ever in sight
ibid. 2 He is tender and easy to be convinced 399 3 He loathes himself for his
sins. 404 4 He fears all fin, and provocations thereunto. 406 5 He delights
most in those means that discover and remove corruptions 407 6 He is restlesly
importunate in seeking Christ and mercy. 411 Reasons four: Because 1 Such a
sorrow for sin, is only true in Gods account 414 2 Without this, the heart can
never be separated from fin 415 3 By this the resistance of the heart against
Christ, is removed. 416 4 Without this, he cannot receive Christ. ibid. Uses
four, hence. 1 Humiliation for the want of this saving sorrow. ibid. Five sorts
want it. 1 The heedless Professor 417 2 The treacherous (...) 419 3 The
self-conceited Pharisee 423 4 The complaining (...) 425 5 The discouraged
Hypocrite. 427 2 Terror to (...) sinners. As 428 1 Secure sinners that never
were (...) to (...) and feel their sins 429 1 Such are out of the way of God
431 2 So continuing, God has appointed no good for them. 432 3 Christ came not
to save such 434 2 Relapsed sinners, who have been awakened to see and feel
their sins, but have fallen back again, and their hearts grown harder than
before. ibid. 1 It is suspicious the day of Grace is past with such a one 436 2
Their Judgment hastens 438 3 Comfort ibid. 1 To brokenhearted sinners
themselves, their sorrows are not to death, but in the way to deliver from
death, and so to bring unto life 439 2 To their friends and well-wishers: they
are now, and were never before in the way of mercy 444 4 Exhortation: Labor for
this saving sorrow of Contrition 447 1 Do not tug with the resistance of thy
heart by thine own power 449 2 Do not fear the terror of the Truth so as to
step aside from under it, but think of the goodness of it. 450 3 Possess thy
soul with the ticklishness and danger of miscarrying in this work. 451

DOCT. 11.
They whose hearts are pierced by the Word, are carried with Love and respect
to the Ministers of it. 453 Reasons two: Because 1 They know more now than they
did before. 454 2 (...) has more Liberty now to express what they know 455
Uses two, hence. 1 Sound Contrition makes a strange and sudden (...) 557 2
Terror to such as after Conviction, hate both the Word and Ministers of it 558

DOCT. 12.
He that is pierced by the Word truly, is busy to enquire, and ready to submit
to the mind of God. 560 1 He is busy to enquire. ibid Reasons two. Because 1
He now finds the evil of sin. 562 2 And the folly of his former conceits 563
Uses two, hence. 1 Terror to hard-hearted sinners, who never enquire after the
mind of God 564 2 Direction, teaching the way to make men serious in their
enquiries after Christ, viz. Maintain the work of Contrition 570 2 He is ready
to submit to the Ministers, making known the mind of God ibid. Reasons three.
Because 1 The pride of their carnal Reason is conquered. 572 2 The stubbornness
of their wills is tamed 573 3 They have found the truth and terror of the Word
ibid. Uses two, hence. 1 See the Reason of that unreadiness and unwillingness
of man to submit to the evidence of the Word, they want broken-heartedness.
ibid. 2 Trial, discovering such as were never brokenhearted at all. 574 1 Open
Rebels. ibid. 2 Secret Traitors. 575

DOCT. 13.
Sinners in distress of Conscience, are ignorant what they should do 576
Reasons two, taken from 1 The Secrecy of the ways of God 577 2 The blindness
of the distraction of their minds. 579 Uses two, hence. 1 Instruction: Men in
distress of Conscience are apt to be misled 580 2 Advice to mourners in Sion;
Be careful to whose Counsel you commit your selves. 582

DOCT. 14.
A Contrite sinner sees a necessity of coming out of his sinful Condition 583 1
He propounds no terms of tolleration 584 2 He maintains no reservation ibid. 3
He admits no case of exception 385 Reasons three. Because 1 He has felt the
severity of Gods Justice against every sin. ibid. 2 He finds it impossible to
bear the weight of the least sin 587 3 He perceives the combination of all
Lusts. So that any one sin 589 1 Keeps possession for Satan ibid. 2 Keeps off
the power of Gods Ordinances. 590 Uses three, hence. 1 Trial, whether we have
found this absolute necessity of parting with all sin ibid. It discovers the
falsehood of 1 Neuters 593 2 Formal Professors 594 2 Instruction: See the reason
of men's un-even and unsteady walking. viz. The want of (...) 593 3 Direction
how to keep the heart opposite to every sin. ibid. 1 Be convinced sin is the
greatest evil ibid. 2 Confider not of any cavil to the contrary. ibid.

DOCT. 15.
There is a secret Hope wherewith the Lord supports the hearts of contrite
sinners. 596 This Hope differs from that which a Believer has, in two things 1
In the ground of it 598 2 In the uncertainty 600 Reasons two. That so he may
thereby 1 Secretly support the (...) 601 2 Make way for the work of the means
ibid. Uses three, hence. 1 Instruction: See the reason why Satan so much
endeavors to dead the hopes of the Contrite by suggesting 602 1 He is not
elected ibid. 2 The day of Grace is past 606 3 He has sinned against the holy
Ghost All which are answered. ibid. 2 Observe how easy it is with the Lord to
confound a sinner with his own imagination 607 3 Exhortation to nourish this
Hope ibid. Therefore be persuaded 1 Of thine own ignorance, and inability to
relieve thy self 608 2 Of Gods All Sufficiency, who can do beyond what thou
can conceive. ibid.

DOCT. 16.
They who are truly pierced for their sins, do prize and covet deliverance from
their sins. ibid. 1 In the want of this, the soul is not quieted 610 2 He is
content with this, though he want other things 611 3 He is resolved to submit
to any Counsel 613 4 His (...) is upon it, his prayers daily about it. 614
Reasons three. Because he finds that 1 The presence of other evils will not
hinder him in his spiritual estate 615 2 The presence of sin alone poisons all
good things to him 616 3 The removal of this would set open the floodgates of
mercy. 617 Uses two, hence. 1 See the reason why most men prize not Salvation,
because never brokenhearted. ibid 2 Reproof to 1 Secure sinners 618 2 (...)
Professors. ibid.

DOCT. 17.
True Contrition is accompanied with Confession of sin, when God calls
thereunto. 619 For Explication, three things. 1 When a sinner is called to
Confession 619 1 Public sins must be publicly confessed 621 2 Private sins to
the persons wronged 624 3 Secret sins 625 1 If a man has confessed them to
God, and he has pardoned, he need not, should not confess them to men. 626 2
If the Lord deny pardon and power, then he calls him to confess unto man 628 3
In case restitution cannot otherwise be made, he must confess to man 629 2 When
is Confession serious and hearty 630 1 When it is free; that is, when a man is,
1 Easy to be convinced ibid. 2 Ready to acknowledge 633 3 And takes the evil to
himself 636 2 When it is full, and that in regard of ibid. 1 Relating sins as
they are 638 2 The opposition of the heart against them. 639 3 When it leaves
the sinner base in his own eyes. 640 4 When he intends to take advantage
against himself and his sin by it. ibid. 3 How does Contrition bring in this
Confession? 641 It causes a man 1 To see the danger of sin ibid. 2 To feel the
bitterness of it 643 3 To be ashamed of himself and sin 645 Uses four, hence. 1
Instruction: See the reason of sinful turnings and windings to hide sin 646 2
Reproof to such as think it weakness and baseness thus to confess a man's sins
647 3 Trial whether a man has been brought to this frame of spirit, thus to
confess sin when called thereunto. 650 It discovers the falsness of four sorts
1 Such as out of hardness of heart, and custom, are without all sense of sin.
651 2 Such as instead of bearing the shame of their sins, cast shame upon the
Truth that discovers sin. 652 3 Such as seek for shameful hidings to cover sin.
653 4 Such as repent of their Confessions. 654 How to know we are content to
take shame for sin by a right Confession of it 655 1 He opposes not the Truth
that discovers his sin and shame. ibid. 2 He is not offended with the man that
is the Instrument. 656 3 He is not disquieted in the bearing of it 636 4 He
will not choose unlawful means to be rid of it. 665 4 Exhortation to attend the
duty of Confession when thou art called thereunto. ibid. Be wise in choosing the
Party to whom you confess: He must be 1 Skilful 666 2 Merciful ibid. 3
Faithful. 667 Motives to Confession, 1 It Is an honorable thing ibid. 2 A matter
of safety 668 3 A Means of Secrecy. ibid.

DOCT. 18.
The soul that is pierced for sin, is carried with a restless dislike against
it, and separation from it. 670 Branch 1. Detestation, or hatred of sin.
Concerning which, for Explication two things 672 1 What is the Nature of this
hatred of sin here in Contrition, discovered in six Conclusions 673 1 As Adam,
and all his departed from God, so Christ brings back all his to God in a
contrary way. 673 2 There is nothing in the soul can turn it from sin. 674 3
This first aversion from sin, is not wrought by any habit of Grace put into the
soul. ibid. Reasons two. Because 1 Gracious habits cannot act before they have
being in the soul, as the subject of them. 675 2 The soul in its natural
estate, is incapable of receiving the habit of Grace ibid. 4 Yet the Spirit
puts forth its power upon the soul to turn it from sin to God ibid. 5 Christ as
the Head of the Covenant, takes away the Commission that sin and Satan had to
hold the soul. 676 6 The soul in the Nature of it, being forced to find sin
bitter, is loosened from it, and so becomes subject to the power of the Spirit,
turning of it from sin to God 677 2 How this hatred may be discerned 680 1 It
is attended with a continual fear of the deadly infection of sin ibid. 2 It
seeks the destruction of sin. Hence 684 1 He opposes sin most in himself ibid.
1 He does what he can against it. 685 2 He seeks help from God in Christ. 686 2
He seeks the removal of it in others wherever he finds it 688 3 It admits no
terms of agreement 689 Reasons three. Because 1 Without this, there is no room
for faith 690 2 Without this no expectation of Salvation from Christ. ibid. 3
Sin is the only enemy of the Soul. 691 Uses two, hence. 1 Humiliation that
there are so few in the world, that know what this hatred against sin means.
ibid. 2 Trial, discovering such as never had this hatred against sin wrought,
were never contrite. As ibid. 1 Careless, fearless Professors 693 2 Neuters in
Religion 696 3 Lazy Hypocrites 697 4 Treacherous Hypocrites 698 Branch 2.
Sequestration from sin. Which discovers it self in two things, 1 No allurements
can entice 700 2 Nor miseries force the soul to former sins. ibid. Uses two,
hence, 1 Instruction: See the reason of all revolts and backslidings, want of
this separation. 701 2 Exhortation, to seek to the Lord that he would work this
in us. ibid.

FINIS.
The Names of several Books Printed by Peter Cole in Leaden Hall, London, and
are to be sold at his Shop at the sign of the Printingpress in Cornhil, near
the Exchange.
Eight several Books, by Nich. Culpeper, Gent. Student in Physic and
Astrology.
1 The Practice of Physic, containing seventeen several Books. Wherein is
plainly set forth, The Nature, Cause, Differences, and Several Sorts of Signs;
Together (...) the Cure of all Diseases in the Body of Man. (...) chiefly a
Translation of The Works of that Learned and Renowned Doctor, Lazarus Riverius,
Now living; Councellor and Physician to the present King of France. Above
sifteen thousand of the said Books in Latin have been Sold in a very few Years,
having been eight times printed, though all the former Impressions wanted the
Nature, Causes, Signs, and Differences of the Diseases, and had only the
Medicines for the Cure of them; as plainly appears by the Authors Epistle. 2
The Anatomy of the Body of Man, Wherein is exactly described, the several parts
of the Body of Man, illustrated with very many larger Brass Plates than ever
was in English before. 3 A Translation of the New Dispensatory, made by the
College of Physicians of London. Whereunto is added, The Key to Galen's Method
of Physic. 4 The English Physician Enlarged; being an Astrologo-Physical
Discourse of the vulgar Herbs of this Nation; wherein is showed, how to cure a
man's self of most Diseases incident to Man's Body, with such things as grow in
England, and for three pence charge. Also in the same Book is showed, 1 The
time of gathering all Herbs, both Vulgarly and Astrologically. 2 The way of
drying, and keeping them, and their Juyces. 3 The way of making and keeping all
manner of useful Compounds, made of those Herbs. The way of mixing the
Medicines according to the Cause, and Mixture of the Disease, and the part of
the Body afflicted. 5 A Directory for Midwives, or a Guide for Women. Newly
enlarged by the Author in every sheet, and Illustrated with diverse new Plates.
6 Galen's Art of Physic, with a large Comment. 7 A New Method both of studying
and practicing Physic. 8 A Treatise of the Rickets, being a Disease common to
Children; wherein is showed, 1 The Essence, 2 The Causes, 3 The Signs, 4 The
Remedies of the Disease; Published in Latin by Dr. Glisson, Dr. Bate, and Dr.
Regemorter, translated into English. And corrected by N. (...).
A Godly and Fruitful Exposition, on the first Epistle of Peter. By Mr. John
Rogers, Minister of the Word of God at Dedham in Essex.

The Wonders of the Lodestone. By Samuel Ward of Ipswitch.

An Exposition on the Gospel of the Evangelist St. Matthew. By Mr. Ward.

Clows Chyrurgery.

Marks of Salvation.

Christians Engagement for the Gospel, by John Goodwin.

Great Church Ordinance of Baptism.

Mr. Love's Case, containing his Petitions, Narrative, and Speech.

Vox Pacifica, or a persuasive to peace.

Dr. Prestons Saints submission, and Satan's Overthrow.

Pious Man's Practice in Parliament Time.

Mr. Symsons Sermon at Westminster.

Mr. Feaks Sermon before the Lord Major.

Mr. Phillips Treatise of Hell. -- of Christ's Genealogy.

Eaton on the Oath of Allegiance and Covenant, showing that they oblidge not.

Eleven Books of Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs lately published; As also the Texts of
Scripture upon which they are grounded.
1 The Rare Jewel of Christian Contentment on Phil. 4. 11. Wherein is showed, 1
What Contentment is, 2 It is an Holy Art and Mystery, 3 The Excellencies of it,
4 The Evil of the contrary sin of Murmuring, and the Aggravations of it. 2
Gospel Worship, on Levit. 10. 3. Wherein is showed, 1 The right manner of the
Worship of God in general; and particularly, In Hearing the Word, Receiving the
Lords Supper, and Prayer. 3 Gospel Conversation, on Phil. 1. 17. Wherein is
showed, 1 That the Conversations of Believers must be above what could be by
the Light of Nature, 2 Beyond those that lived under the Law, 3 And suitable to
what Truths the Gospel holds forth. To which is added, The Misery of those men
that have their Portion in this Life only, on Psalm. 17. 14. 4 A Treatise of
Earthly-Mindedness, Wherein is showed, 1 What Earthlymindedness is, 2 The great
Evil thereof, on Phil. 3. part of the 19. Verse. Also to the same Book is
joined, A Treatise of (...) and, Walking with God, on Genesis 5. 24. and on Phil.
3. 20. 5 An (...), on the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh Chapters of the
Prophecy of Hosea. 6 An Exposition on the eighth, ninth, and tenth Chapters of
Hosea. 7 An (...) on the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth Chapters of Hosea,
being now complete. 8 The Evil of Evils, (...) the (...) Sinfulness of Sin, on
Job, 36. 21. 9 Precious Faith, on 2 Pet. 1. 1. 10 Of Hope, on 1 John. 3. 3. 11
Of (...) by Faith, on 2 Cor. 5. 7.
Twelve several Books of Mr. William Bridge, Collected into one Volumn. Viz.
1 The Great Gospel Mystery of the Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and
applied from Christ's Priestly Office. 2 Satan's Power to Tempt; and Christ's Love
to, and Care of His People under Temptation. 3 Thankfulness required in every
Condition. 4 Grace for Grace; or, the Overflowing of Christ's Fullness received
by all Saints. 5 The Spiritual Actings of Faith through Natural
Impossibilities. 6 Evangelical Repentance. 7 The Spiritual Life, and In-being
of Christ in all Believers. 8 The Woman of Canaan. 9 The Saints Hiding Place in
time of Gods Anger. 10 Christ's Coming is at our Midnight. 11 A Vindication of
Gospel Ordinances. 12 Grace and Love beyond Gifts.
A Congregational Church is a Catholic Visible Church. By Samuel Stone in New
England.

A Treatise of Politic Powers, wherein seven Questions are Answered, 1 Whereof
Power is made, and for what ordained. 2 Whether Kings and Governors have an
Absolute Power over the People. 3 Whether Kings and Governors be subject to the
Laws of God, or the Laws of their Country. 4 How far the People are to obey
their Governors. 5 Whether all the people have, be their Governors. 6 Whether
it be Lawful to depose an evil Governor 7 What Confidence is to be given to
Princes.

The (...) Samaritan.

Dr. Sibbs on the Philippians.

The Best and Worst Magistrate. By (...) Sedgwick.

The Craft and Cruelty of the Churches Adversaries. By Matthew Newcomen.

A Sacred Penegerick. By (...) (...).

Barriffs Military Discipline.

The Immortality of Man's Soul.

The Anatomist Anatomized.

King Charles his Case, or an Appeal to all Rational Men concerning his Trial.

Mr. Owens stedfastness of the Promises.

A Vindication of Free Grace; Endeavoring to prove, 1 That we are not elected
as holy, but that we should be holy; and that Election is not of kinds, but
persons. 2 That Christ did not by his Death intend to save all men, and
touching those whom he intended to save, that he did not die for them only if
they would believe, but that they might believe. 3 That we are not justified
properly by our believing in Christ but by our Christ, believing in him 4, that
which differenceth one man from another, is not the improvement of a common
ability restored through Christ to all men in general, but a principle of Grace
wrought by the Spirit of God in the Elect. By John Pawson.

Six Sermons preached by Doctor Hill. Viz.
1 The Beauty and Sweetness of an Olive (...) of Peace, and Brotherly
Accommodation budding. 2 Truth and Love happily married in the Church of
Christ. 3 The Spring of strengthening Grace in the Rock of Ages Christ Jesus. 4
The strength of the Saints to make Jesus Christ their strength. 5 The Best and
Worst of Paul. 6 Gods eternal preparation for his Dying Saints.
The Bishop of Canterbury's Speech on the Scaffold. The King's Speech on the
Scaffold.

The Magistrates Support and Burden. By Mr. John Cordel.

The Discipline of the Church in New England, by the Churches and Synod there.

A Relation of the Barbados.

A Relation of the Repentance and Conversion of the Indians in New England; By
Mr. Eliot, and Mr. (...).

The History of Monstross: and his Actions for (...) the First. His passions
for Charles the Second King of Scots.

The Institutes of the Laws of England by John Cowel, Octavo.

A description of the Grand Signiors Seraglio; or the Turkish Emperors Court.
By John Greaves. Octavo.

The reigning error Arraigned at the Bar of scripture, and Reason. By Franscis
Fulwood. Octavo.

The state of Future Life. By Thomas White. Twelves.

The Royal and delightful Game of Picquet, written in French, and now rendered
into English. Octavo.

De copore Politico: or, The Elements of Law, moral, and politic. By Thomas
Hobbs of Malmsbury.

The History of the Rites, Customs, and manner of life, of the present Jews
throughout the World. Octavo.

The London Dispensatory in Latin in Folio.

The London Dispensatory in Latin in Twelves.

A Poem upon the late Fight at sea, between the two great Fleets of England and
Holland.

These several Books of Physic and Chyrurgerie will shortly be printed in
English.
Riverius Observations, with fifteen hundred and seventie other Histories and
Observations of other men.

Riolanus Anatomy.

Bartholinus Anatomy.

All the Works of Daniel Sennertus, except some few, not proper for Translation.

The Idea of Practical Physic, being a complete Body of Physic.

And Fernelius his Works.

These Books of Divinity will speedily be printed.
Mr. Buroughs, on 1 Cor. 5. 7. and 18, 19. 29. And fifty nine Sermons on
Matthew, 11. 28, 29, 30.

Seventeen Books of Mr. Thomas Hooker, being the substance of many Sermons
preached in New England.

There will speedily be printed these Several (...) of Mr. Bridge of Yarmouth.
Viz.
1 Scripture Light the most sure Light: compared with, 1. Revelations and
Visions. 2. Natural and (...) Dreams. 3. Impressions with and without Word. 4.
Light and Law (...). 5. Divine Providence. 6. (...) Experience. 7. Humane
Reason. 8. Judicial Astrology. (...) in (...) Sermons on 2 Pet. 1. 19. 2 Christ
in (...): Wherein, 1 The Travel of his soul. 2. The first and (...) (...) of
his (...). 3 His Assurance of Issue. 4. And His (...) therein. Are opened and
cleared in three Sermons, on Esaias, 53. 11. 3 A Lifting up for the Cast-down, in
case of 1. (...) sin. 2. Weakness of (...). 3. Miscarriage of Duties. 4. Want
of Assurance. 5. Affliction. 6. Temptation. 7. Dissertion. 8. (...). 9.
Discouragements from the Condition it self. Delivered in thirteen Sermons on
Psalm, 42. 11.
His Four Sermons concerning

1 Sin against the Holy Ghost. 2 Sins of Infirmities. 3 The fifth Monarchy. 4
The Good and means of Establishment.
Francisci Tayleri, Capitula Patrum: Hebraice and Latin edita. Una cum
Annotationibus sensum locorum difficilium Experimentibus.

Francisci Tayleri, Lamentationes (...) vatis, Denuo e fontibus Hebraicis
translatae, cum Paraphrasi Chaldaica, Masora magna and parva, and Commentariis
Rabbi Shelomoh, Jarchi and (...), Ezrae, c Buxtorfii (...) magnis excerptis.


