By the Council of the ROYAL SOCIETY of London for Improving of Natural
Knowledge.

Ordered, That the Book written by Robert Hook, M.A. Fellow of this Society,
Entitled, Micrographia, or some Physiological Descriptions of Minute Bodies,
made by Magnifying Glasses, with Observations and Inquiries thereupon, Be
printed by John Martyn, and James Allestry, Printers to the said Society.

BROUNCKER. P.R.S.
Novem. 23. 1664.
MICROGRAPHIA: OR SOME Physiological Descriptions OF MINUTE BODIES MADE BY
MAGNIFYING GLASSES WITH OBSERVATIONS and INQUIRIES thereupon.

By R. HOOK, Fellow of the ROYAL SOCIETY.

Non possis oculo quantum contendere Linceus, Non tamen idcirco contemnas
Lippus inungi. Horat. Ep. lib. 1.

LONDON, Printed by Io. Martyn, and Ia. Allestry, Printers to the ROYAL
SOCIETY, and are to be sold at their Shop at the Bell in S. Paul's Churchyard.
M DC LX V.

TO THE KING.
SIR,
I Do here most humbly lay this small Present at Your Majesty's Royal feet. And
though it comes accompanied with two disadvantages, the meanness of the Author,
and of the Subject; yet in both I am encouraged by the greatness of your Mercy
and your Knowledge. By the one I am taught, that you can forgive the most
presumptuous Offenders: And by the other, that you will not esteem the least
work of Nature, or Art, unworthy your Observation. Amidst the many felicities
that have accompanied your Majesty's happy Restoration and Government, it is
none of the least considerable, that Philosophy and Experimental Learning have
prosper'd under your Royal Patronage. And as the calm prosperity of your Reign
has given us the leisure to follow these Studies of quiet and retirement, so it
is just, that the Fruits of them should, by way of acknowledgement, be returned
to your Majesty. There are, Sir, several other of your Subjects, of your Royal
Society, now busy about Nobler matters: The Improvement of Manufactures and
Agriculture, the Increase of Commerce, the Advantage of Navigation: In all
which they are assisted by your Majesty's Encouragement and Example. Amidst all
those greater Designs, I here presume to bring in that which is more
proportionable to the smalness of my Abilities, and to offer some of the least
of all visible things, to that Mighty King, that has established an Empire over
the best of all Invisible things of this World, the Minds of Men.

Your Majesty's most humble and most obedient Subject and Servant, ROBERT HOOK.


TO THE ROYAL SOCIETY.
AFter my Address to our Great Founder and Patron, I could not but think my
self obliged, in consideration of those many Engagements you have laid upon me,
to offer these my poor Labors to this MOST ILLUSTRIOUS ASSEMBLY. YOU have been
pleased formerly to accept of these rude Draughts. I have since added to them
some Descriptions, and some Conjectures of my own. And therefore, together with
YOUR Acceptance, I must also beg YOUR pardon. The Rules YOU have prescrib^d
YOUR selves in YOUR Philosophical Progress do seem the best that have ever yet
been practiced. And particularly that of avoiding Dogmatizing, and the espousal
of any Hypothesis not sufficiently grounded and confirmed by Experiments. This
way seems the most excellent, and may preserve both Philosophy and Natural
History from its former Corruptions. In saying which, I may seem to condemn my
own Course in this Treatise; in which there may perhaps be some Expressions,
which may seem more positive then YOUR Prescriptions will permit: And though I
desire to have them understood only as Conjectures and Quaeries (which YOUR
Method does not altogether disallow) yet if even in those I have exceeded, it is
fit that I should declare, that it was not done by YOUR Directions. For it is
most unreasonable, that YOU should undergo the imputation of the faults of my
Conjectures, seeing YOU can receive so small advantage of reputation by the
slight Observations of

YOUR most humble and most faithful Servant ROBERT HOOK.

THE PREFACE.
IT is the great prerogative of Mankind above other Creatures, that we are not
only able to behold the works of Nature, or barely to sustein our lives by
them, but we have also the power of considering, comparing, altering,
assisting, and improving them to various uses. And as this is the peculiar
privilege of humane Nature in general, so is it capable of being so far
advanced by the helps of Art, and Experience, as to make some Men excel others
in their Observations, and Deductions, almost as much as they do Beasts. By the
addition of such artificial Instruments and methods, there may be, in some
manner, a reparation made for the mischiefs, and imperfection, mankind has
drawn upon it self, by negligence, and intemperance, and a wilful and
superstitious deserting the Prescripts and Rules of Nature, whereby every man,
both from a derived corruption, innate and born with him, and from his breeding
and converse with men, is very subject to slip into all sorts of errors.

The only way which now remains for us to recover some degree of those former
perfections, seems to be, by rectifying the operations of the Sense, the
Memory, and Reason, since upon the evidence, the strength, the integrity, and
the right correspondence of all these, all the light, by which our actions are
to be guided, is to be renewed, and all our command over things is to be
established.

It is therefore most worthy of our consideration, to recollect their seseveral
defects, that so we may the better understand how to supply them, and by what
assistances we may enlarge their power, and secure them in performing their
particular duties.

As for the actions of our Senses, we cannot but observe them to be in many
particulars much outdone by those of other Creatures, and when at best, to be
far short of the perfection they seem capable of: And these infirmities of the
Senses arise from a double cause, either from the disproportion of the Object
to the Organ, whereby an infinite number of things can never enter into them,
or else from error in the Perception, that many things, which come within their
reach, are not received in a right manner.

The like frailties are to be found in the Memory; we often let many things
slip away from us, which deserve to be retained; and of those which we treasure
up, a great part is either frivolous or false; and if good, and substantial,
either in tract of time obliterated, or at best so overwhelmed and buried under
more frothy notions, that when there is need of them, they are in vain sought
for.

The two main foundations being so deceivable, it is no wonder, that all the
succeeding works which we build upon them, of arguing, concluding, defining,
judging, and all the other degrees of Reason, are liable to the same
imperfection, being, at best, either vain, or uncertain: So that the errors of
the understanding are answerable to the two other, being defective both in the
quantity and goodness of its knowledge; for the limits, to which our thoughts
are confind, are small in respect of the vast extent of Nature it self; some
parts of it are too large to be comprehended, and some too little to be
perceived. And from thence it must follow, that not having a full sensation of
the Object, we must be very lame and imperfect in our conceptions about it, and
in all the propositions which we build upon it; hence we often take the shadow
of things for the substance, small appearances for good similitudes,
similitudes for definitions; and even many of those, which we think to be the
most solid definitions, are rather expressions of our own misguided
apprehensions then of the true nature of the things themselves.

The effects of these imperfections are manifested in different ways, according
to the temper and disposition of the several minds of men, some they incline to
gross ignorance and stupidity, and others to a presumptuous imposing on other
men's Opinions, and a confident dogmatizing on matters, whereof there is no
assurance to be given.

Thus all the uncertainty, and mistakes of humane actions, proceed either from
the narrowness and wandering of our Senses, from the slipperiness or delusion of
our Memory, from the confinement or rashness of our Understanding, so that it is
no wonder, that our power over natural causes and effects is so slowly
improv^d, seeing we are not only to contend with the obscurity and difficulty
of the things whereon we work and think, but even the forces of our own minds
conspire to betray us.

These being the dangers in the process of humane Reason, the remedies of them
all can only proceed from the real, the mechanical, the experimental
Philosophy, which has this advantage over the Philosophy of discourse and
disputation, that whereas that chiefly aims at the subtilty of its Deductions
and Conclusions, without much regard to the first groundwork, which ought to
be well laid on the Sense and Memory; so this intends the right ordering of
them all, and the making them serviceable to each other.

The first thing to be undertaken in this weighty work, is a watchfulness over
the failings and an enlargement of the dominion, of the Senses.

To which end it is requisite, first; That there should be a scrupulous choice,
and a strict examination, of the reality, constancy, and certainty of the
Particulars that we admit; This is the first rise whereon truth is to begin,
and here the most severe, and most impartial diligence, must be employed; the
storing up of all, without any regard to evidence or use, will only tend to
darkness and confusion. We must not therefore esteem the riches of our
Philosophical treasure by the number only, but chiefly by the weight; the most
vulgar Instances are not to be neglected, but above all, the most instructive
are to be entertained; the footsteps of Nature are to be traced, not only in
her ordinary course, but when she seems to be put to her shifts, to make many
doublings and turnings, and to use some kind of art in endeavoring to avoid
our discovery.

The next care to be taken, in respect of the Senses, is a supplying of their
infirmities with Instruments, and, as it were, the adding of artificial Organs
to the natural; this in one of them has been of late years accomplished with
prodigious benefit to all sorts of useful knowledge, by the invention of
Optical Glasses. By the means of Telescopes, there is nothing so far distant
but may be represented to our view; and by the help of Microscopes, there is
nothing so small, as to escape our inquiry; hence there is a new visible World
discovered to the understanding. By this means the Heavens are opened, and a
vast number of new Stars, and new Motions, and new Productions appear in them,
to which all the ancient Astronomers were utterly Strangers. By this the Earth
it self, which lies so near us, under our feet, shows quite a new thing to us,
and in every little particle of its matter, we now behold almost as great a
variety of Creatures, as we were able before to reckon up in the whole Universe
it self.

It seems not improbable, but that by these helps the subtilty of the
composition of Bodies, the structure of their parts, the various texture of
their matter, the instruments and manner of their inward motions, and all the
other possible appearances of things, may come to be more fully discovered; all
which the ancient Peripateticks were content to comprehend in two general and
(unless further explained) useless words of Matter and Form. From whence there
may arise many admirable advantages, toward the increase of the Operative, and
the Mechanic Knowledge, to which this Age seems so much inclined, because we
may perhaps be enabled to discern all the secret workings of Nature, almost in
the same manner as we do those that are the productions of Art, and are managed
by Wheels, and Engines, and Springs, that were devised by humane Wit.

In this kind I here present to the World my imperfect Endeavors; which though
they shall prove no other way considerable, yet, I hope, they may be in some
measure useful to the main Design of a reformation in Philosophy, if it be only
by showing, that there is not so much required toward it, any strength of
Imagination, or exactness of Method, or depth of Contemplation (though the
addition of these, where they can be had, must needs produce a much more
perfect composure) as a sincere Hand, and a faithful Eye, to examine, and to
record, the things themselves as they appear.

And I beg my Reader, to let me take the boldness to assure him, that in this
present condition of knowledge, a man so qualified, as I have endeavored to
be, only with resolution, and integrity, and plain intentions of employing his
Senses aright, may venture to compare the reality and the usefulness of his
services, toward the true Philosophy, with those of other men, that are of
much stronger, and more acute speculations, that shall not make use of the same
method by the Senses.

The truth is, the Science of Nature has been already too long made only a work
of the Brain and the Fancy: It is now high time that it should return to the
plainness and soundness of Observations on material and obvious things. It is
said of great Empires, That the best way to preserve them from decay, is to
bring them back to the first Principles, and Arts, on which they did begin. The
same is undoubtedly true in Philosophy, that by wandering far away into
invisible Notions, has almost quite destroyed it self, and it can never be
recovered, or continued, but by returning into the same sensible paths, in
which it did at first proceed.

If therefore the Reader expects from me any infallible Deductions, or
certainty of Axioms, I am to say for my self, that those stronger Works of Wit
and Imagination are above my weak Abilities; or if they had not been so, I
would not have made use of them in this present Subject before me: Wherever he
finds that I have ventured at any small Conjectures, at the causes of the
things that I have observed, I beseech him to look upon them only as doubtful
Problems, and uncertain ghesses, and not as unquestionable Conclusions, or
matters of unconfutable Science; I have produced nothing here, with intent to
bind his understanding to an implicit consent; I am so far from that, that I
desire him, not absolutely to rely upon these Observations of my eyes, if he
finds them contradicted by the future Ocular Experiments of sober and impartial
Discoverers.

As for my part, I have obtained my end, if these my small Labors shall be
thought fit to take up some place in the large stock of natural Observations,
which so many hands are busy in providing. If I have contributed the meanest
foundations whereon others may raise nobler Superstructures, I am abundantly
satisfied; and all my ambition is, that I may serve to the great Philosophers
of this Age, as the makers and the grinders of my Glasses did to me; that I may
prepare and furnish them with some Materials, which they may afterward order
and manage with better skill, and to far greater advantage.

The next remedies in this universal cure of the Mind are to be applied to the
Memory, and they are to consist of such Directions as may inform us, what
things are best to be stored up for our purpose, and which is the best way of
so disposing them, that they may not only be kept in safety, but ready and
convenient, to be at any time produced for use, as occasion shall require. But
I will not here prevent my self in what I may say in another Discourse, wherein
I shall make an attempt to propose some Considerations of the manner of
compiling a Natural and Artificial History, and of so ranging and registring
its Particulars into Philosophical Tables, as may make them most useful for the
raising of Axioms and Theories.

The last indeed is the most hazardous Enterprise, and yet the most necessary;
and that is, to take such care that the Judgment and the Reason of Man (which
is the third Faculty to be repaired and improved) should receive such
assistance, as to avoid the dangers to which it is by nature most subject. The
Imperfections, which I have already mentioned, to which it is liable, do either
belong to the extent, or the goodness of its knowledge; and here the difficulty
is the greater, least that which may be thought a remedy for the one should
prove destructive to the other, least by seeking to enlarge our Knowledge, we
should render it weak and uncertain; and least by being too scrupulous and
exact about every Circumstance of it, we should confine and streighten it too
much.

In both these the middle ways are to be taken, nothing is to be omitted, and
yet every thing to pass a mature deliberation: No Intelligence from Men of all
Professions, and quarters of the World, to be slighted, and yet all to be so
severely examined, that there remain no room for doubt or instability; much
rigor in admitting, much strictness in comparing and above all, much slowness
in debating, and shyness in determining, is to be practiced. The Understanding
is to order all the inferior services of the lower Faculties; but yet it is to
do this only as a lawful Master, and not as a Tyrant. It must not incroach upon
their Offices, nor take upon it self the employments which belong to either of
them. It must watch the irregularities of the Senses, but it must not go before
them, or prevent their information. It must examine, range, and dispose of the
bank which is laid up in the Memory; but it must be sure to make distinction
between the sober and well collected heap, and the extravagant Idea's, and
mistaken Images, which there it may sometimes light upon. So many are the
links, upon which the true Philosophy depends, of which, if anyone be loose, or
weak, the whole chain is in danger of being dissolved; it is to begin with the
Hands and Eyes, and to proceed on through the Memory, to be continued by the
Reason; nor is it to stop there, but to come about to the Hands and Eyes again,
and so, by a continual passage round from one Faculty to another, it is to be
maintained in life and strength, as much as the body of man is by the
circulation of the blood through the several parts of the body, the Arms, the
Fat, the Lungs, the Heart, and the Head.

If once this method were followed with diligence and attention, there is
nothing that lies within the power of human Wit (or which is far more
effectual) of human Industry, which we might not compass; we might not only
hope for Inventions to equalize those of Copernicus, Galileo, Gilbert Harvy,
and of others, whose Names are almost lost, that were the Inventor's of
Gunpowder, the Seamans Compass, Printing, Etching, Graving, Microscopes, etc.
but multitudes that may far exceed them: for even those discoveries seem to
have been the products of some such method, though but imperfect; What may not
be therefore expected from it if thoroughly prosecuted? Talking and contention
of Arguments would soon be turned into labors; all the fine dreams of
Opinions, and universal metaphysical natures, which the luxury of subtle Brains
has devised, would quickly vanish, and give place to solid Histories,
Experiments and Works. And as at first, mankind fell by tasting of the
forbidden Tree of Knowledge, so we, their Posterity, may be in part restored by
the same way, not only by beholding and contemplating, but by tasting too those
fruits of Natural knowledge, that were never yet forbidden.

From hence the World may be assisted with variety of Inventions, new matter
for Sciences may be collected, the old improved, and their rust rubbed away;
and as it is by the benefit of Senses that we receive all our Skill in the
works of Nature, so they also may be wonderfully benefited by it, and may be
guided to an easier and more exact performance of their Offices; it is not
unlikely, but that we may find out wherein our Senses are deficient, and as
easily find ways of repairing them.

The Endeavors of Skilful men have been most conversant about the assistance
of the Eye, and many noble Productions have followed upon it; and from hence we
may conclude, that there is a way opened for advancing the operations, not only
of all other Senses, but even of the Eye it self; that which has been already
done ought not to content us, but rather to encourage us to proceed further,
and to attempt greater things in the same and different ways.

It Is not unlikely, but that there may be yet invented several other helps for
the eye, as much exceeding those already found, as those do the bare eye, such
as by which we may perhaps be able to discover living Creatures in the Moon, or
other Planets, the figures of the compounding Particles of matter, and the
particular Schematisms and Textures of Bodies.

And as Glasses have highly promoted our seeing, so it is not improbable, but
that there may be found many Mechanical Inventions to improve our other Senses,
of hearing, smelling, tasting, touching. It Is not impossible to hear a whisper
a furlongs distance, it having been already done; and perhaps the nature of the
thing would not make it more impossible, though that furlong should be ten
times multiplied. And though some famous Authors have affirmed it impossible to
hear through the thinnest plate of Muscovy-glass; yet I know a way, by which
it is easy enough to hear one speak through a wall a yard thick. It has not
been yet thoroughly examined, how far Otocousticons may be improved, nor what
other ways there may be of quickening our hearing, or conveying sound through
other bodies then the Air: for that that is not the only medium, I can assure
the Reader, that I have, by the help of a distended wire, propagated the sound
to a very considerable distance in an instant, or with as seemingly quick a
motion as that of light, at least, incomparably swifter then that, which at the
same time was propagated through the Air; and this not only in a straight line,
or direct, but in one bended in many angles.

Nor are the other three so perfect, but that diligence, attention, and many
mechanical contrivances, may also highly improve them. For since the sense of
smelling seems to be made by the swift passage of the Air (impregnated with the
steams and effluvia of several odorous Bodies) through the grisly meanders of
the Nose whose surfaces are covered with a very sensible nerve, and moistened by
a transudation from the processus mamillares of the Brain, and some adjoining
glandules, and by the moist steam of the Lungs, with a Liquor convenient for
the reception of those effluvia and by the adhesion and mixing of those steams
with that liquor, and thereby affecting the nerve, or perhaps by insinuating
themselves into the juices of the brain, after the same manner, as I have in
the following Observations intimated, the parts of Salt to pass through the
skins of Effs, and Frogs. Since, I say, smelling seems to be made by some such
way, it is not improbable, but that some contrivance, for making a great
quantity of Air pass quick through the Nose, might as much promote the sense of
smelling, as the any ways hindering that passage does dull and destroy it.
Several trials I have made, both of hindering and promoting this sense, and have
succeeded in some according to expectation; and indeed to me it seems capable
of being improved, for the judging of the constitutions of many Bodies. Perhaps
we may thereby also judge (as other Creatures seem to do) what is wholesome,
what poison; and in a word, what are the specific properties of Bodies.

There may be also some other mechanical ways found out, of sensibly
perceiving the effluvia of Bodies; several Instances of which, were it here
proper, I could give of Mineral steams and exhalations; and it seems not
impossible, but that by some such ways improved, may be discovered, what
Minerals lie buried under the Earth, without the trouble to dig for them; some
things to confirm this Conjecture may be found in Agricola, and other Writers
of Minerals, speaking of the Vegetables that are apt to thrive, or pine, in
those steams.

Whether also those steams, which seem to issue out of the Earth, and mix with
the Air (and so to precipitate some aqueous Exhalations, wherewith it is
impregnated) may not be by some way detected before they produce the effect,
seems hard to determine; yet something of this kind I am able to discover, by
an Instrument I contrived to show all the minute variations in the pressure of
the Air; by which I constantly find, that before, and during the time of rainy
weather, the pressure of the Air is less, and in dry weather, but especially
when an Eastern Wind (which having past over vast tracts of Land is heavy with
Earthy Particles) blows, it is much more, though these changes are varied
according to very odd Laws.

The Instrument is this. I prepare pretty capaceous Bolt-head AB, with a small
stem about two foot and a half long DC; upon the end of this DI put on a small
bended Glass, or brazen Siphon DEF (open at D, E and F, but to be closed with
cement at F and E, as occasion serves) whose stem F should be about six or
eight inches long, but the bore of it not above half an inch diameter, and very
even; these I fix very strongly together by the help of very hard Cement, and
then fit the whole Glass ABCDEF into a long Board, or Frame, in such manner,
that almost half the head AB may lie buried in a concave Hemisphere cut into
the Board RS; then I place it so on the Board RS, as is expressed in the first
Figure of the first Scheme; and fix it very firm and steady in that posture, so
as that the weight of the Mercury that is afterward to be put into it, may not
in the least shake or stir it; then drawing a line XY on the Frame RT, so that
it may divide the ball into two equal parts, or that it may pass, as 'twere,
through the center of the ball. I begin from that, and divide all the rest of
the Board toward UT into inches, and the inches between the 25 and the end E
(which need not be above two or three and thirty inches distant from the line
XY) I subdivide into Decimals; then stopping the end F with soft Cement, or
soft Wax, I invert the Frame, placing the head downwards, and the Orifice E
upwards; and by it, with a small Funnel, I fill the whole Glass with
Quicksilver; then by stopping the small Orifice E with my finger, I oftentimes
erect and invert the whole Glass and Frame, and thereby free the Quicksilver
and Glass from all the bubbles or parcels of lurking Air; then inverting it as
before, I fill it top full with clear and well strained Quicksilver, and having
made ready a small ball of pretty hard Cement, by heat made very soft, I press
it into the hole E, and thereby stop it very fast; and to secure this Cement
from flying out afterward, I bind over it a piece of Leather, that is spread
over in the inside with Cement, and wound about it whilst the Cement is hot:
Having thus fastened it, I gently erect again the Glass after this manner: I
first let the Frame down edge-wayes, till the edge RV touch the Floor, only
horizontal; and then in that edging posture raise the end RS; this I do, that
if there chance to be any Air hidden in the small Pipe E, it may ascend into
the Pipe F, and not into Pipe DC: Having thus erected it, and hung it by the
hole Q, or fixed it perpendicularly by any other means, I open the end F, and by
a small Siphon I draw out the Mercury so long, till I find the surface of it AB
in the head to touch exactly the line XY; at which time I immediately take away
the Siphon, and if by chance it be run somewhat below the line XY, by pouring
in gently a little Mercury at F, I raise it again to its desired height, by
this contrivance I make all the sensible rising and falling of the Mercury to
be visible in the surface of the Mercury in the Pipe F, and scarce any in the
head AB. But because there really is some small change of the upper surface
also, I find by several Observations how much it rises in the Ball, and falls
in the Pipe F, to make the distance between the two surfaces an inch greater
then it was before; and the measure that it falls in the Pipe is the length of
the inch by which I am to mark the parts of the Tube F, or the Board on which
it lies, into inches and Decimals: Having thus justned and divided it, I have a
large Wheel MNOP, whose outmost limb is divided into two hundred equal parts;
this by certain small Pillars is fixed on the Frame RT, in the manner expressed in
the Figure. In the middle of this, on the back side, in a convenient frame, is
placed a small Cylinder, whose circumference is equal to twice the length of
one of those divisions, which I find answer to an inch of ascent, or descent,
of Mercury: This Cylinder I, is movable on a very small Needle, on the end of
which is fixed a very light Index KL, all which are so poised on the Axis, or
Needle, that no part is heavier then another: Then about this Cylinder is wound
a small Clew of Silk, with two small steel Bullets at each end of it GH; one of
these, which is somewhat the heavier, ought to be so big, as freely to move to
and fro in the Pipe F; by means of which contrivance, every the least variation
of the height of the Mercury will be made exceeding visible by the motion to
and fro of the small Index KL.

But this is but one way of discovering the effluvia of the Earth mixed with the
Air; there may be perhaps many others, witness the Hygroscope, an Instrument
whereby the watery steams volatile in the Air are discerned, which the Nose it
self is not able to find. This I have described in the following Tract in the
Description of the Beard of a wild Oat. Others there are, may be discovered
both by the Nose, and by other ways also. Thus the smoke of burning Wood is
smelt, seen, and sufficiently felt by the eyes: The fumes of burning Brimstone
are smelt and discovered also by the destroying the Colors of Bodies, as by
the whitening of a red Rose: And who knows, but that the Industry of man,
following this method, may find out ways of improving this sense to as great a
degree of perfection as it is in any Animal, and perhaps yet higher.

It Is not improbable also, but that our taste may be very much improved, either
by preparing our taste for the Body, as, after eating bitter things, Wine, or
other Vinous liquors, are more sensibly tasted; or else by preparing Bodies for
our taste; as the dissolving of Metals with acid Liquors, make them tastable,
which were before altogether insipid; thus Lead becomes sweeter then Sugar, and
Silver more bitter then Gall, Copper and Iron of most loathsome tastes. And
indeed the business of this sense being to discover the presence of dissolved
Bodies in Liquors put on the Tongue, or in general to discover that a fluid
body has some solid body dissolved in it, and what they are; whatever
contrivance makes this discovery improves this sense. In this kind the mixtures
of Chemical Liquors afford many Instances; as the sweet Vinegar that is
impregnated with Lead may be discovered to be so by the affusion of a little of
an Alcalizate solution: The bitter liquor of Aqua fortis and Silver may be
discovered to be charged with that Metal, by laying in it some plates of
Copper: It Is not improbable also, but there may be multitudes of other ways of
discovering the parts dissolved, or dissoluble in liquors; and what is this
discovery but a kind of secundary tasting.

It Is not improbable also, but that the sense of feeling may be highly
improved, for that being a sense that judges of the more gross and robust
motions of the Particles of Bodies, seems capable of being improved and
assisted very many ways. Thus for the distinguishing of Heat and Cold, the
Weather-glass and Thermometer, which I have described in this following
Treatise, do exceedingly perfect it; by each of which the least variations of
heat or cold, which the most Acute sense is not able to distinguish, are
manifested. This is oftentimes further promoted also by the help of
Burning-glasses, and the like, which collect and unite the radiating heat. Thus
the roughness and smoothness of a Body is made much more sensible by the help
of a Microscope, then by the most tender and delicate Hand. Perhaps, a
Physician might, by several other tangible proprieties, discover the
constitution of a Body as well as by the Pulse. I do but instance in these, to
show what possibility there may be of many others, and what probability and
hopes there were of finding them, if this method were followed; for the Offices
of the five Senses being to detect either the subtle and curious Motions
propagated through all pellucid or perfectly homogeneous Bodies; Or the more
gross and vibrative Pulse communicated through the Air and all other convenient
mediums, whether fluid or solid: Or the effluvia of Bodies dissolved in the
Air; Or the particles of bodies dissolved or dissoluble in Liquors, or the more
quick and violent shaking motion of heat in all or any of these: whatsoever
does any ways promote any of these kinds of criteria, does afford a way of
improving some one sense. And what a multitude of these would a diligent Man
meet with in his inquiries? And this for the helping and promoting the
sensitive faculty only.

Next, as for the Memory, or retentive faculty, we may be sufficiently
instructed from the written Histories of civil actions, what great assistance
may be afforded the Memory, in the committing to writing things observable in
natural operations. If a Physician be therefore accounted the more able in his
Faculty, because he has had long experience and practice, the remembrance of
which, though perhaps very imperfect, does regulate all his after actions: What
ought to be thought of that man, that has not only a perfect register of his
own experience, but is grown old with the experience of many hundreds of years,
and many thousands of men.

And though of late, men, beginning to be sensible of this convenience, have
here and there registered and printed some few Centuries, yet for the most part
they are set down very lamely and imperfectly, and, I fear, many times not so
truly, they seeming, sever^l of them, to be designed more for Ostentation then
public use: For, not to instance, that they do, for the most part, omit those
Experiences they have made, wherein their Patients have miscarried, it is very
easy to be perceived, that they do all along hyperbolically extol their own
Prescriptions, and vilify those of others. Notwithstanding all which, these
kinds of Histories are generally esteemed useful, even to the ablest Physician.

What may not be expected from the rational or deductive Faculty that is
furnished with such Materials, and those so readily adapted, and ranged for use,
tha^ in a moment, as 'twere, thousands of Instances, serving for the
illustration, determination, or invention, of almost any inquiry, may be
represented even to the sight? How near the nature of Axioms must all those
Propositions be which are examined before so many Witnesses? And how difficult
will it be for any, though never so subtle an error in Philosophy, to escape
from being discovered, after it has endured the touch, and so many other trials?

What kind of mechanical way, and physical invention also is there required,
that might not this way be found out? The Invention of a way to find the
Longitude of places is easily performed, and that to as great perfection as is
desired, or to as great an accurateness as the Latitude of places can be found
at Sea; and perhaps yet also to a greater certainty then that has been hitherto
found, as I shall very speedily freely manifest to the world. The way of flying
in the Air seems principally unpracticable, by reason of the want of strength
in humane muscles; if therefore that could be suppli^d, it were, I think, easy
to make twenty contrivances to perform the office of Wings: What attempts also
I have made for the supplying that Defect, and my successes therein, which, I
think, are wholly new, and not inconsiderable, I shall in another place relate.

It Is not unlikely also, but that Chemists, if they followed this method, might
find out their so much sought for Alkahest. What an universal Menstruum, which
dissolves all sorts of Sulphurous Bodies, I have discovered (which has not
been before taken notice of as such) I have shown in the sixteenth Observation.

What a prodigious variety of Inventions in Anatomy has this latter Age
afforded, even in our own Bodies, in the very Heart, by which we live, and the
Brain, which is the seat of our knowledge of other things? witness all the
excellent Works of Pecquet, Bartholinus, Billius, and many others; and at home,
of Doctor Harvy, Doctor Ent, Doctor Willis, Doctor Glisson. In Celestial
Observations we have far exceeded all the Ancients, even the Chaldeans and
Egyptians themselves, whose vast Plains, high Towers, and clear Air, did not
give them so great advantages over us, as we have over them by our Glasses. By
the help of which, they have been very much outdone by the famous Galileo,
Hevelius, Zulichem; and our own Countrymen, Mr. Rook, Doctor Wren, and the
great Ornament of our Church and Nation, the Lord Bishop of Exeter. And to say
no more in Aerial Discoveries, there has been a wonderful progress made by the
Noble Engine of the most Illustrious Mr. Boil, whom it becomes me to mention
with all honor, not only as my particular Patron, but as the Patron of
Philosophy it self; which he every day increases by his Labors, and adorns by
his Example.

The good success of all these great Men, and many others, and the now
seemingly great obviousness of most of their and diverse other Inventions, which
from the beginning of the world have been, as 'twere, trod on, and yet not
minded till these last inquisitive Ages (an Argument that there may be yet
behind multitudes of the like) puts me in mind to recommend such Studies, and
the prosecution of them by such methods, to the Gentlemen of our Nation, whose
leisure makes them fit to undertake, and the plenty of their fortunes to
accomplish, extraordinary things in this way. And I do not only propose this
kind of Experimental Philosophy as a matter of high rapture and delight of the
mind, but even as a material and sensible Pleasure. So vast is the variety of
Objects which will come under their Inspections, so many different ways there
are of handling them, so great is the satisfaction of finding out new things,
that I dare compare the contentment which they will enjoy, not only to that of
contemplation, but even to that which most men prefer of the very Senses
themselves.

And if they will please to take any encouragement from so mean and so
imperfect endeavors as mine, upon my own experience, I can assure them,
without arrogance, That there has not been any inquiry or Problem in
Mechanics, that I have hitherto propounded to my self, but by a certain method
(which I may on some other opportunity explain) I have been able presently to
examine the possibility of it; and if so, as easily to excogitate diverse ways
of performing it: And indeed it is possible to do as much by this method in
Mechanics, as by Algebra can be performed in Geometry. Nor can I at all doubt,
but that the same method is as applicable to Physical Enquiries, and as likely
to find and reap thence as plentiful a crop of Inventions; and indeed there
seems to be no subject so barren, but may with this good husbandry be highly
improved.

Toward the prosecution of this method in Physical Inquiries, I have here and
there gleaned up an handful of Observations, in the collection of most of which
I made use of Microscopes, and some other Glasses and Instruments that improve
the sense; which way I have herein taken, not that there are not multitudes of
useful and pleasant Observables, yet uncollected, obvious enough without the
helps of Art, but only to promote the use of Mechanical helps for the Senses,
both in the surveying the already visible World, and for the discovery of many
others hitherto unknown, and to make us, with the great Conqueror, to be
affected that we have not yet overcome one World when there are so many others
to be discovered, every considerable improvement of Telescopes or Microscopes
producing new Worlds and Terra-Incognita's to our view.

The Glasses I used were of our English make, but though very good of the kind,
yet far short of what might be expected, could we once find a way of making
Glasses Elliptical, or of some more true shape; for though both Microscopes,
and Telescopes, as they now are, will magnify an Object about a thousand
thousand times bigger then it appears to the naked eye; yet the Apertures of
the Object-glasses are so very small, that very few Rays are admitted, and even
of those few there are so many false, that the Object appears dark and
indistinct: And indeed these inconveniences are such, as seem inseparable from
Spherical Glasses, even when most exactly made; but the way we have hitherto
made use of for that purpose is so imperfect, that there may be perhaps ten
wrought before one be made tolerably good, and most of those ten perhaps every
one differing in goodness one from another, which is an Argument, that the way
hitherto used is, at least, very uncertain. So that these Glasses have a double
defect; the one, that very few of them are exactly true wrought; the other,
that even of those that are best among them, none will admit a sufficient
number of Rays to magnify the Object beyond a determinate bigness. Against
which Inconveniences the only Remedies I have hitherto met with are these.

First, for Microscopes (where the Object we view is near and within our power)
the best way of making it appear bright in the Glass, is to cast a great
quantity of light on it by means of unequal glasses, for thereby, though the
aperture be very small, yet there will throng in through it such multitudes,
that an Object will by this means endure to be magnified as much again as it
would be without it. The way for doing which is this. I make choice of some
Room that has only one window open to the South, and at about three or four
foot distance from this Window, on a Table, I place my Microscope, and then so
place either a round Globe of Water, or a very deep clear plano unequal Glass
(whose unequal side is turned toward the Window) that there is a great quantity
of Rays collected and thrown upon the Object: Or if the Sun shine, I place a
small piece of oily Paper very near the Object, between that and the light;
then with a good large Burning-Glass I so collect and throw the Rays on the
Paper, that there may be a very great quantity of light pass through it to the
Object; yet I so proportion that light, that it may not singe or burn the
Paper. Instead of which Paper there may be made use of a small piece of
Looking-glass plate, one of whose sides is made rough by being rubbed on a flat
Tool with very fine sand, this will, if the heat be leisurely cast on it,
endure a much greater degree of heat, and consequently very much augment a
convenient light. By all which means the light of the Sun, or of a Window, may
be so cast on an Object, as to make it twice as light as it would otherwise be
without it, and that without any inconvenience of glaring, which the immediate
light of the Sun is very apt to create in most Objects; for by this means the
light is so equally diffused, that all parts are alike enlightened; but when the
immediate light of the Sun falls on it, the reflections from some few parts are
so vivid, that they drown the appearance of all the other, and are themselves
also, by reason of the inequality of light, indistinct, and appear only radiant
spots.

But because the light of the Sun, and also that of a Window, is in a continual
variation, and so many Objects cannot be viewed long enough by them to be
thoroughly examined; besides that, oftentimes the Weather is so dark and cloudy,
that for many days together nothing can be viewed: And because also there are
many Objects to be met with in the night, which cannot so conveniently be kept
perhaps till the day, therefore to procure and cast a sufficient quantity of
light on an Object in the night, I thought of, and often used this, Expedient.

I procured me a small Pedestal, such as is described in the fifth Figure of
the first Scheme on the small Pillar AB, of which were two movable Arms CD,
which by means of the Screws OF, I could fix in any part of the Pillar; on the
undermost of these I placed a pretty large Globe of Glass G, filled with
exceeding clear Brine, stopped, inverted, and fixed in the manner visible in the
Figure; out of the side of which Arm proceeded another Arm H, with many joints;
to the end of which was fastened a deep plain Unequal glass I, which by means of
this Arm could be moved to and fro, and fixed in any posture. On the upper Arm
was placed a small Lamp K, which could be so moved upon end of the Arm, as to
be set in a fit posture to give light through the Ball: By means of this
Instrument duly placed, as is expressed in the Figure, with the small flame of a
Lamp may be cast as great and convenient a light on the Object as it will well
endure; and being always constant, and to be had at any time. I found most
proper for drawing the representations of those small Objects I had occasion to
observe.

None of all which ways (though much beyond any other hitherto made use of by
any I know) do afford a sufficient help, but after a certain degree of
magnifying, they leave us again in the lurch. Hence it were very desirable,
that some way were thought of for making the Object-glass of such a Figure as
would conveniently bear a large Aperture.

As for Telescopes, the only improvement they seen capable of, is the
increasing of their length; for the Object being remote, there is no thought of
giving it a greater light then it has; and therefore to augment the Aperture,
the Glass must be ground of a very large sphere; for, by that means, the longer
the Glass be, the bigger aperture will it bear, if the Glasses be of an equal
goodness in their kind. Therefore a six will endure a much larger Aperture then
a three foot Glass; and a sixty foot Glass will proportionably bear a greater
Aperture then a thirty, and will as mush excel it also as a six foot does a
three foot, as I have experimentally observed in one of that length made by Mr.
Richard Reives here at London, which will bear an Aperture above three inches
over, and yet make the Object proportionably big and distinct; whereas there
are very few thirty foot Glasses that will endure an Aperture of more then two
inches over. So that for Telescopes, supposing we had a very ready way of
making their Object Glasses of exactly spherical Surfaces, we might, by
increasing the length of the Glass, magnify the Object to any assignable
bigness. And for performing both these, I cannot imagine any way more easy,
and more exact, then by this following Engine, by means of which, any Glasses,
of what lenght soever, may be speedily made. It seems the most easy, because
with one and the same Tool may be with care ground an Object Glass, of any
length or breadth requisite, and that with very little or no trouble in fitting
the Engine, and without much skill in the Grinder. It seems to be the most
exact, for to the very last stroke the Glass does regulate and rectify the
Tool to its exact Figure; and the longer or more the Tool and Glass are wrought
together, the more exact will both of them be of the desired Figure. Further,
the motions of the Glass and Tool do so cross each other, that there is not one
point of eithers Surface, but has thousands of cross motions thwarting it, so
that there can be no kind of Rings or Gutters made either in the Tool or Glass.

The contrivance of the Engine is, only to make the ends of two large Mandrils
so to move, that the Centers of them may be at any convenient distance asunder,
and that the Axis of the Mandrils lying both in the same plain produced, may
meet each other in any assignable Angle; both which requisites may be very well
performed by the Engine described in the third Figure of the first Scheme:
where AB signifies the Beam of a Lath fixed perpendicularly or Horizontally, CD
the two Poppet heads, fixed at about two foot distance, OF an Iron Mandril,
whose tapering neck F runs in an adapted tapering brass Collar; the other end E
runs on the point of a Screw G; in a convenient place of this is fastened H a
pully Wheel, and into the end of it, that comes through the Poppet head C, is
screwed a Ring of a hollow Cylinder K, or some other conveniently shaped Tool,
of what wideness shall be thought most proper for the cize of Glasses, about
which it is to be employed: As, for Object glasses, between twelve foot and an
hundred foot long, the Ring may be about six inches over, or indeed somewhat
more for those longer Glasses. It would be convenient also, and not very
chargeable, to have four or five several Tools; as one for all Glasses between
an inch and a foot, one for all Glasses between a foot and ten foot long,
another for all between ten and an hundred, a fourth for all between a hundred
and a thousand foot long; and if Curiosity shall ever proceed so far, one for
all lengths between a thousand and ten thousand foot long; for indeed the
principle is such, that supposing the Mandrils well made, and of a good length,
and supposing great care be used in working and polishing them, I see no
reason, but that a Glass of a thousand, nay of ten thousand foot long, may be
as well made as one of ten; for the reason is the same, supposing the Mandrils
and Tools be made sufficiently strong, so that they cannot bend; and supposing
the Glass, out of which they are wrought, be capable of so great a regularity
in its parts as to refraction: this hollow Cylinder K is to contain the Sand,
and by being drove round very quick to and fro by means of a small Wheel, which
may be moved with ones foot, serves to grind the Glass: The other Mandril is
shaped like this, but it has an even neck instead of a taper one, and runs in a
Collar, that by the help of a Screw, and a joint made like M in the Figure, it
can be still adjustned to the wearing or wasting neck: into the end of this
Mandril is screwed a Chock N, on which with Cement or Glue is fastened the piece
of Glass Q that is to be formed; the middle of which Glass is to be placed just
on the edge of the Ring, and the Lath OP is to be set and fixed (by means of
certain pieces and screws, the manner whereof will be sufficiently evidenced by
the Figure) in such an Angle as is requisite to the forming of such a Sphere as
the Glass is designed to be of; the geometrical ground of which being
sufficiently plain, though not heeded before, I shall, for brevities sake, pass
over. This last Mandril is to be made (by means of the former, or some other
Wheel) to run round very swift also, by which two cross motions the Glass
cannot choose (if care be used) but be wrought into a most exactly spherical
Surface.

But because we are certain, from the Laws of refraction (which II have
experimentally found to be so, by an Instrument I shall presently describe)
that the lines of the angles of Incidence are proportionate to the lines of the
angles of Refraction, therefore if Glasses could be made of those kind of
Figures, or some other, such as the most incomparable Des Carts has invented,
and demonstrated in his Philosophical and Mathematical Works, we might hope for
a much greater perfection of Optics then can be rationally expected from
spherical ones; for though, caeteris paribus, we find, that the larger the
Telescope Object Glasses are, and the shorter those of the Microscope, the
better they magnify, yet both of them, beside such determinate dimensions, are
by certain inconveniences rendered unuseful; for it will be exceeding difficult
to make and manage a Tube above an hundred foot long, and it will be as
difficult to inlighten an Object less then an hundred part of an inch distant
from the Object Glass.

I have not as yet made any attempts of that kind, though I know two or three
ways, which, as far as I have yet considered, seem very probable, and may
invite me to make a trial as soon as I have an opportunity, of which I may
hereafter perhaps acquaint the world. In the Interim, I shall describe the
Instrument I even now mentioned, by which the refraction of all kinds of
Liquors may be most exactly measured, thereby to give the curious an
opportunity of making what further trials of that kind they shall think
requisite to any of their intended trials; and to let them see that the laws of
Refraction are not only notional.

The Instrument consisted of five Rulers, or long pieces placed together, after
the manner expressed in the second Figure of the first Scheme, where AB denotes a
straight piece of wood about six foot and two inches long, about three inches
over, and an inch and half thick, on the back side of which was hung a small
plummet by a line stretched from top to bottom, by which this piece was set
exactly upright, and so very firmly fixed; in the middle of this was made a hole
or center, into which one end of a hollow cylindrical brass Box CC, fashioned
as I shall by and by describe, was placed, and could very easily and truly be
moved to and fro; the other end of this Box being put into, and moving in, a
hole made in a small arm DD; into this box was fastened the long Ruler OF, about
three foot and three or four inches long, and at three foot from the above
mentioned Centers PP was a hole E, cut through, and crossed with two small
threads, and at the end of it was fixed a small fight G, and on the back side of
it was fixed a small Arm H, with a Screw to fix it in any place on the Ruler LM;
this Ruler LM was moved on the Center B (which was exactly three foot distance
from the middle Center P) and a line drawn through the middle of it LM, was
divided by a Line of cords into some sixty degrees, and each degree was
sub-divided into minutes, so that putting the cross of the threads in E upon
any part of this divided line, I presently knew what Angle the two Rules AB and
OF made with each other, and by turning the Screw in H, I could fix them in any
position. The other Ruler also RS was made much after the same manner, only it
was not fixed to the hollow cylindrical Box, but, by means of two small brass
Arms or Ears, it moved on the Centers of it; this also, by means of the cross
threads in the hole S, and by a Screw in K, could be fastened on any division of
another line of cords of the same radius drawn on NO. And so by that means, the
Angle made by the two Rulers, AB and RS, was also known. The Brass box CC in
the middle was shaped very much like the Figure X, that is, it was a
cylindrical Box stopped close at either end, off of which a part both of the
sides and bottomes was cut out, so that the Box, when the Pipe and that was
joined to it, would contain the Water when filled half full, and would
likewise, without running over, endure to be inclined to an Angle, equal to
that of the greatest refraction of Water, and no more, without running over.
The Ruler OF was fixed very fast to the Pipe V, so that the Pipe V directed the
length of the Ruler OF and the Box and Ruler were moved on the Pin TT, so as to
make any desirable Angle with the Ruler AB. The bottom of this Pipe V was
stopped with a small piece of exactly plain Glass, which was placed exactly
perpendicular to the Line of direction, or Axis of the Ruler OF. The Pins also
TT were drilled with small holes through the Axis, and through those holes was
stretched and fastened a small Wire. There was likewise a small Pipe of Tin
loosly put on upon the end of V, and reaching down to the sight G; the use of
which was only to keep any false Rays of light from passing through the bottom
of V, and only admitting such to pass as pierced through the sight G: All
things being placed together in the manner described in the Figure; that is,
the Ruler AB being fixed perpendicular, I filled the Box CC with Water, or any
other Liquor, whose refraction I intended to try, till the Wire passing through
the middle of it were just covered: then I moved and fixed the Ruler FE at any
assignable Angle, and placed the flame of a Candle just against the sight G;
and looking through the sight I, I moved the Ruler RS to and fro, till I
perceived the light passing through G to be covered, as 'twere, or divided by
the dark Wire passing through PP: then turning the Screw in K; I fixed it in
that posture: And through the hole S, I observed what degree and part of it was
cut by the cross threads in S. And this gave me the Angle of Inclination, APS
answering to the Angle of Refraction BPE: for the surface of the Liquor in the
Box will be always horizontal, and consequently AB will be a perpendicular to
it; the Angle therefore APS will measure, or be the Angle of Inclination in the
Liquor; next EPB must be the Angle of Refraction, for the Ray that passes
through the sight G, passes also perpendicularly through the Glass Diaphragme
at F, and consequently also perpendicularly through the lower surface of the
Liquor contiguous to the Glass, and therefore suffers no refraction till it
meet with the horizontal surface of the Liquor in CC, which is determined by
the two Angles.

By means of this Instrument I can with little trouble, and a very small
quantity of any Liquor, examine, most accurately, the refraction of it, not
only for one inclination, but for all; and thereby am enabled to make very
accurate Tables; several of which I have also experimentally made, and find,
that Oil of Turpentine has a much greater Refraction then Spirit of Wine,
though it be lighter; and that Spirit of Wine has a greater Refraction then
Water, though it be lighter also; but that salt Water also has a greater
Refraction then fresh, though it be heavier: but Alum water has a less
refraction then common Water, though heavier also. So that it seems, as to the
refraction made in a Liquor, the specific gravity is of no efficacy. By this I
have also found, that look what proportion the Sine of the Angle of one
Inclination has to the Sine of the Angle of Refraction, correspondent to it,
the same proportion have all the Sines of other Inclinations to the Sines of
their appropriate Refractions.

My way for measuring how much a Glass magnifies an Object, placed at a
convenient distance from my eye, is this. Having rectified the Microscope, to
see the desired Object through it very distinctly, at the same time that I look
upon the Object through the Glass with one eye, I look upon other Objects at
the same distance with my other bare eye; by which means I am able, by the help
of a Ruler divided into inches and small parts, and laid on the Pedestal of the
Microscope, to cast, as it were, the magnified appearance of the Object upon
the Ruler, and thereby exactly to measure the Diameter it appears of through
the Glass, which being compared with the Diameter it appears of to the naked
eye, will easily afford the quantity of its magnifying.

The Microscope, which for the most part I made use of, was shaped much like
that in the sixth Figure of the first Scheme, the Tube being for the most part
not above six or seven inches long, though, by reason it had four Drawers, it
could very much be lengthened, as occasion required; this was contrived with
three Glasses; a small Object Glass at A, a thinner Eye Glass about B, and a
very deep one about C: this I made use of only when I had occasion to see much
of an Object at once; the middle Glass conveying a very great company of
radiating Pencils, which would go another way, and throwing them upon the deep
Eye Glass. But when ever I had occasion to examine the small parts of a Body
more accurately, I took out the middle Glass, and only made use of one Eye
Glass with the Object Glass, for always the fewer the Refractions are, the more
bright and clear the Object appears. And therefore it is not to be doubted, but
could we make a Microscope to have one only refraction, it would, ceteris
paribus, far excel any other that had a greater number. And hence it is, that
if you take a very clear piece of a broken Venice Glass, and in a Lamp draw it
out into very small hairs or threads, then holding the ends of these threads in
the flame, till they melt and run into a small round Global, or drop, which
will hang at the end of the thread; and if further you stick several of these
upon the end of a stick with a little sealing Wax, so, as that the threads
stand upwards, and then on a Whetstone first grind off a good part of them, and
afterward on a smooth Metal plate, with a little Tripoly, rub them till they
come to be very smooth; if one of these be fixed with a little soft Wax against
a small needle hole, pricked through a thin Plate of Brass, Lead, Pewter, or
any other Metal and an Object, placed very near, be looked at through it, it
will both magnify and make some Objects more distinct then any of the great
Microscopes. But because these, though exceeding easily made, are yet very
troublesome to be used, because of their smalness, and the nearness of the
Object; therefore to prevent both these, and yet have only two Refractions, I
provided me a Tube of Brass, shaped much like that in the fourth Figure of the
first Scheme; into the smaller end of this I fixed with Wax a good plano unequal
Object Glass, with the unequal side toward the Object, and into the bigger end
I fixed also with wax a pretty large plano Unequal Glass, with the unequal side
toward my eye, then by means of the small hole by the side, I filled the
intermediate space between those two Glasses with very clear Water, and with a
Screw stopped it in; then putting on a Cell for the Eye, I could perceive an
Object more bright then I could when the intermediate space was only filled
with Air, but this, for other inconveniences, I made but little use of.

My way for fixing both the Glass and Object to the Pedestal most conveniently
was thus: Upon one side of a round Pedestal AB, in the sixth Figure of the
first Scheme, was fixed a small Pillar CC, on this was fitted a small Iron Arm
D, which could be moved up and down, and fixed in any part of the Pillar, by
means of a small Screw E; on the end of this Arm was a small Ball fitted into a
kind of socket F, made in the side of the Brass Ring G, through which the small
end of the Tube was screwed; by means of which contrivance I could place and
fix the Tube in what posture I desired (which for many Observations was
exceeding necessary) and adjusten it most exactly to any Object.

For placing the Object, I made this contrivance; upon the end of a small brass
Link or Staple HH, I so fastened a round Plate II, that it might be turned round
upon its Center K, and going pretty stiff, would stand fixed in any posture it
was set; on the side of this was fixed a small Pillar P, about three quarters of
an inch high, and through the top of this was thrust a small Iron pin M, whose
top just stood over the Center of the Plate; on this top I fixed a small Object,
and by means of these contrivances I was able to turn it into all kind of
positions, both to my Eye and the Light; for by moving round the small Plate on
its center, I could move it one way, and by turning the Pin M, I could move it
another way, and this without stirring the Glass at all, or at least but very
little: the Plate likewise I could move to and fro to any part of the Pedestal
(which in many cases was very convenient) and fix it also in any Position, by
means of a Nut N, which was screwed on upon the lower part of the Pillar CC.
All the other Contrivances are obvious enough from the draught, and will need
no description

Now though this were the Instrument I made most use of, yet I have made
several other Trials with other kinds of Microscopes, which both for matter and
form were very different from common spherical Glasses. I have made a
Microscope with one piece of Glass, both whose surfaces were plains. I have
made another only with a plano concave, without any kind of reflection, diverse
also by means of reflection. I have made others of Waters, Gums, Resins, Salts,
Arsenick, Oils, and with diverse other mixtures of watery and oily Liquors. And
indeed the subject is capable of a great variety; but I find generally none
more useful then that which is made with two Glasses, such as I have already
described.

What the things are I observed, the following descriptions will manifest; in
brief, they were either exceeding small Bodies, or exceeding small Pores, or
exceeding small Motions, some of each of which the Reader will find in the
following Notes, and such, as I presume, (many of them at least) will be new,
and perhaps not less strange: Some specimen of each of which Heads the Reader
will find in the subsequent delineations, and indeed of some more then I was
willing there should be; which was occasioned by my first Intentions to print a
much greater number then I have since found time to complete. Of such therefore
as I had, I selected only some few of every Head, which for some particulars
seemed most observable, rejecting the rest as superfluous to the present Design.

What each of the delineated Subjects are, the following descriptions annexed to
each will inform, of which I shall here, only once for all, add, That in diverse
of them the Gravers have pretty well followed my directions and draughts; and
that in making of them, I endeavored (as far as I was able) first to discover
the true appearance, and next to make a plain representation of it. This I
mention the rather, because of these kind of Objects there is much more
difficulty to discover the true shape, then of those visible to the naked eye,
the same Object seeming quite differing, in one position to the Light, from
what it really is, and may be discovered in another. And therefore I never
began to make any draught before by many examinations in several lights, and in
several positions to those lights, I had discovered the true form. For it is
exceeding difficult in some Objects, to distinguish between a prominency and a
depression, between a shadow and a black stain, or a reflection and a whiteness
in the color. Besides, the transparency of most Objects renders them yet much
more difficult then if they were opacous. The Eyes of a Fly in one kind of
light appear almost like a Lattice, drilled through with abundance of small
holes; which probably may be the Reason, why the Ingenious Dr. Power seems to
suppose them such. In the Sunshine they look like a Surface covered with golden
Nails; in another posture, like a Surface covered with Pyramids; in another
with Cones; and in other postures of quite other shapes; but that which
exhibits the best, is the Light collected on the Object, by those means I have
already described.

And this was undertaken in prosecution of the Design which the ROYAL SOCIETY
has proposed to it self. For the Members of the Assembly having before their
eyes so many fatal Instances of the errors and falsehoods, in which the greatest
part of mankind has so long wandered, because they relied upon the strength of
humane Reason alone, have begun anew to correct all Hypotheses by sense, as
Seamen do their dead Reckonings by Celestial Observations; and to this purpose
it has been their principal endeavor to enlarge and strengthen the Senses by
Medicine, and by such outward Instruments as are proper for their particular
works. By this means they find some reason to suspect, that those effects of
Bodies, which have been commonly attributed to Qualities, and those confessed
to be occult, are performed by the small Machines of Nature, which are not to
be discerned without these helps, seeming the mere products of Motion, Figure,
and Magnitude; and that the Natural Textures, which some call the Plastic
faculty, may be made in Looms, which a greater perfection of Optics may make
discernable by these Glasses; so as now they are no more puzzled about them,
then the vulgar are to conceive, how Tapestry or f^owred Stuffs are woven. And
the ends of all these Inquiries they intend to be the Pleasure of Contemplative
minds, but above all, the ease and dispatch of the labors of men's hands. They
do indeed neglect no opportunity to bring all the rare things of Remote
Countries within the compass of their knowledge and practice. But they still
acknowledge their most useful Informations to arise from common things, and from
diversifying their most ordinary operations upon them. They do not wholly
reject Experiments of mere light and theory; but they principally aim at such,
whose Applications will improve and facilitate the present way of Manual Arts.
And though some men, who are perhaps taken up about less honorable
Employments, are pleased to censure their proceedings, yet they can show more
fruits of their first three years, wherein they have assembled, then any other
Society in Europe can for a much larger space of time. It Is true, such
undertakings as theirs do commonly meet with small encouragement, because men
are generally rather taken with the plausible and discursive, then the real and
the solid part of Philosophy; yet by the good fortune of their institution, in
an Age of all others the most inquisitive, they have been assisted by the
contribution and presence of very many of the chief Nobility and Gentry, and
others, who are some of the most considerable in their several Professions. But
that that yet farther convinces me of the Real esteem that the more serious
part of men have of this Society, is, that several Merchants, men who act in
earnest (whose Object is meum and tuum, that great Rudder of humane affairs)
have adventured considerable sums of Money, to put in practice what some of our
Members have contrived, and have continued steadfast in their good opinions of
such Endeavors, when not one of a hundred of the vulgar have believed their
undertakings feasible. And it is also fit to be added, that they have one
advantage peculiar to themselves, that very many of their number are men of
Converse and Traffic; which is a good Omen, that their attempts will bring
Philosophy from words to action, seeing the men of Business have had so great a
share in their first foundation.

And of this kind I ought not to conceal one particular Generosity, which more
nearly concerns my self. It is the munificence of Sir John Cutler, in endowing
a Lecture for the promotion of Mechanic Arts, to be governed and directed by
This Society. This Bounty I mention for the Honourableness of the thing it
self, and for the expectation which I have of the efficacy of the Example; for
it cannot now be objected to them, that their Designs will be esteemed
frivolous and vain, when they have such a real Testimony of the Approbation of
a Man that is such an eminent Ornament of this renowned City, and one, who, by
the Variety, and the happy Success, of his negotiations, has given evident
proofs, that he is not easy to be deceived. This Gentleman has well observed,
that the Arts of life have been too long imprisoned in the dark shops of
Mechanics themselves, and there hindered from growth, either by ignorance, or
self-interest: and he has bravely freed them from these inconveniences: He has
not only obliged Tradesmen, but Trade it self: He has done a work that is
worthy of London, and has taught the chief City of Commerce in the world the
right way how Commerce is to be improved. We have already seen many other great
signs of Liberality and a large mind, from the same hand: For by his diligence
about the Corporation for the Poor; by his honorable Subscriptions for the
rebuilding of St. Paul's* by his cheerful Disbursment for the replanting of
Ireland, and by many other such public works, he has shown by what means he
endeavors to establish his Memory; and now by this last gift he has done that,
which became one of the wisest Citizens of our Nation to accomplish, seeing one
of the wisest of our Statesmen, the Lord Verulam, first propounded it.

But to return to my Subject, from a digression, which, I hope, my Reader will
pardon me, seeing the Example is so rare that I can make no more such
digressions. If these my first Labors shall be any ways useful to inquiring
men, I must attribute the encouragement and promotion of them to a very
Reverend and Learned Person, of whom this ought in justice to be said, That
there is scarce any one Invention, which this Nation has produced in our Age,
but it has some way or other been set forward by his assistance. My Reader, I
believe, will quickly ghess, that it is Dr. Wilkins that I mean. He is indeed a
man born for the good of mankind, and for the honor of his Country. In the
sweetness of whose behavior, in the calmness of his mind, in the unbounded
goodness of his heart, we have an evident Instance, what the true and the
primitive unpassionate Religion was, before it was sowred by particular
Factions. In a word, his Zeal has been so constant and effectual in advancing
all good and profitable Arts, that as one of the Ancient Romans said of Scipio,
That he thanked God that he was a Roman; because wherever Scipio had been
born, there had been the seat of the Empire of the world: So may I thank God,
that Dr. Wilkins was an Englishman, for wherever he had lived, there had been
the chief Seat of generous Knowledge and true Philosophy. To the truth of this,
there are so many worthy men living that will subscribe, that I am confident,
what I have here said, will not be looked upon, by any ingenious Reader, as a
Panegyric, but only as a real testimony.

By the Advice of this Excellent man I first set upon this Enterprise, yet
still came to it with much Reluctance, because I was to follow the footsteps of
so eminent a Person as Dr. Wren, who was the first that attempted any thing of
this nature; whose original draughts do now make one of the Ornaments of that
great Collection of Rarities in the Kings Closet. This Honor, which his first
beginnings of this kind have received, to be admitted into the most famous
place of the world, did not so much encourage, as the hazard of coming after
Dr. Wren did affright me; for of him I must affirm, that, since the time of
Archimedes, these scarce ever met in one man, in so great a perfection, such a
Mechanical Hand, and so Philosophical a Mind.

But at last, being assured both by Dr. Wilkins, and Dr. Wren himself, that he
had given over his intentions of prosecuting it, and not finding that there was
any else designed the pursuing of it, I set upon this undertaking, and was not
a little encouraged to proceed in it, by the Honor the Royal Society was
pleased to favor me with, in approving of those draughts (which from time to
time as I had an opportunity of describing) I presented to them. And
particularly by the Incitements of diverse of those Noble and excellent Persons
of it, which were my more especial Friends, who were not less urgent with me
for the publishing, then for the prosecution of them.

After I had almost completed these Pictures and Observations (having had
diverse of them engraven, and was ready to send them to the Press) I was
informed, that the Ingenious Physician Dr. Henry Power had made several
Microscopical Observations, which had I not afterward, upon our interchangably
viewing each others Papers, found that they were for the most part differing
from mine, either in the Subject it self, or in the particulars taken notice
of; and that his design was only to print Observations without Pictures, I had
even then suppressed what I had so far proceeded in. But being further excited
by several of my Friends, in compliance with their opinions, that it would not
be unacceptable to several inquisitive Men, and hoping also, that I should
thereby discover something New to the World, I have at length cast in my Mite,
into the vast Treasury of A Philosophical History. And it is my hope, as well
as belief, that these my Labors will be no more comparable to the Productions
of many other Natural Philosophers, who are now every where busy about greater
things; then my little Objects are to be compared to the greater and more
beautiful Works of Nature, A Flea, a Mite, a Gnat, to an Horse, an Elephant, or
a Lion.

Schem: I.


MICROGRAPHIA, OR SOME Physiological Descriptions OF MINUTE BODIES, MADE BY
MAGNIFYING GLASSES; WITH OBSERVATIONS and INQUIRIES thereupon.
Observe. I. Of the Point of a sharp small Needle.
AS in Geometry, Schem. 2. Fig. 1.
the most natural way of beginning is from a Mathematical point; so is the same
method in Observations and Natural history the most genuine, simple, and
instructive. We must first endeavor to make letters, and draw single strokes
true, before we venture to write whole Sentences, or to draw large Pictures.
And in Physical Enquiries, we must endeavor to follow Nature in the more plain
and easy ways she treads in the most simple and uncompounded bodies, to trace
her steps, and be acquainted with her manner of walking there, before we
venture our selves into the multitude of meanders she has in bodies of a more
complicated nature; lest, being unable to distinguish and judge of our way, we
quickly lose both Nature our Guide, and our selves too, and are left to wander
in the labyrinth of groundless opinions; wanting both judgment, that light, and
experience, the clew, which should direct our proceedings.

We will begin these our Inquiries therefore with the Observations of Bodies of
the most simple nature first, and so gradually proceed to those of a more
compounded one. In prosecution of which method, we shall begin with a Physical
point; of which kind the Point of a Needle is commonly reckoned for one; and is
indeed, for the most part, made so sharp, that the naked eye cannot distinguish
any parts of it: It very easily pierces, and makes its way through all kind of
bodies softer then it self: But if viewed with a very good Microscope, we may
find that the top of a Needle (though as to the sense very sharp) appears a
broad, blunt, and very irregular end; not resembling a Cone, as is imagined,
but only a piece of a tapering body, with a great part of the top removed, or
deficient. The Points of Pins are yet more blunt, and the Points of the most
curious Mathematital Instruments do very seldom arrive at so great a
sharpness; how much therefore can be built upon demonstrations made only by
the productions of the Ruler and Compasses, he will be better able to consider
that shall but view those points and lines with a Microscope.

Now though this point be commonly accounted the sharpest (whence when we would
express the sharpness of a point the most superlatively, we say, As sharp as a
Needle) yet the Microscope can afford us hundreds of Instances of Points many
thousand times sharper: such as those of the hairs, and bristles, and claws of
multitudes of Insects; the thorns, or crooks, or hairs of leaves, and other
small vegetables; nay, the ends of the stiriae or small parallelipipeds of
Amianthus, and alumen plumosum; of many of which, though the Points are so
sharp as not to be visible, though viewed with a Microscope (which magnifies
the Object, in bulk, above a million of times) yet I doubt not, but were we
able practically to make Microscopes according to the theory of them, we might
find hills, and dales, and pores, and a sufficient breadth, or expansion, to
give all those parts elbow-room, even in the blunt top of the very Point of any
of these so very sharp bodies. For certainly the quantity or extension of any
body may be Divisible in infinitum, though perhaps not the matter.

But to proceed: The Image we have here exhibited in the first Figure, was the
top of a small and very sharp Needle, whose point a a nevertheless appeared
through the Microscope above a quarter of an inch broad, not round nor flat,
but irregular and uneven; so that it seemed to have been big enough to have
afforded a hundred armed Mites room enough to be ranged by each other without
endangering the breaking one another necks, by being thrust off on either
side. The surface of which, though appearing to the naked eye very smooth,
could not nevertheless hide a multitude of holes and scratches and ruggednesses
from being discovered by the Microscope to invest it, several of which
inequalities (as A, B, C, seemed holes made by some small specks of Rust; and D
some adventitious body, that stuck very close to it) were casual. All the rest
that roughen the surface, were only so many marks of the rudeness and bungling
of Art. So unaccurate is it, in all its productions, even in those which seem
most neat, that if examined with an organ more acute then that by which they
were made, the more we see of their shape, the less appearance will there be of
their beauty: whereas in the works of Nature, the deepest Discoveries show us
the greatest Excellencies. An evident Argument, that he that was the Author of
all these things, was no other then Omnipotent; being able to include as great
a variety of parts and contrivances in the yet smallest Discernable Point, as
in those vaster bodies (which comparatively are called also Points) such as the
Earth, Sun, or Planets. Nor need it seem strange that the Earth it self may be
by an Analogy called a Physical Point: For as its body, though now Schem ^^
so near us as to fill our eyes and fancies with a sense of the vastness of it,
may by a little Distance, and some convenient Diminishing Glasses, be made
vanish into a scarce visible Speck, or Point (as I have often tried on the
Moon, and (when not too bright) on the Sun it self.) So, could a Mechanical
contrivance succesfully answer our Theory, we might see the least spot as big
as the Earth it self; Disp. chapter 10 9.
and Discover, as Des Carts also conjectures, as great a variety of bodies in
the Moon, or Planets, as in the Earth.

But leaving these Discoveries to future Industries, we shall proceed to add
one Observation more of a point commonly so called, that is, the mark of a full
stop, or period. And for this purpose I observed many both printed ones and
written; and among multitudes I found few of them more round or regular then
this which I have delineated in the third figure of the second Scheme, but very
many abundantly more disfigured; and for the most part if they seemed equally
round to the eye, I found those points that had been made by a Copper-plate,
and Roll-press, to be as misshapen as those which had been made with Types, the
most curious and smothly engraven strokes and points, looking but as so many
furrows and holes, and their printed impressions, but like smutty daubings on a
matt or uneven floor with a blunt extinguished brand or stick's end. And as for
points made with a pen they were much more rugged and deformed. Nay, having
viewed certain pieces of exceeding curious writing of the kind (one of which in
the breadth of a twopence comprised the Lords prayer, the Apostles Creed, the
ten Commandments, and about half a dozen verses besides of the Bible, whose
lines were so small and near together, that I was unable to number them with my
naked eye, a very ordinary Microscope, I had then about me, enabled me to see
that what the Writer of it had asserted was true, but withal discovered of
what pitiful bungling scribbles and scrawls it was composed, Arabian and China
characters being almost as well shaped; yet thus much I must say for the Man,
that it was for the most part legible enough, though in some places there
wanted a good fantsy well preposest to help one through. If this manner of
small writing were made easy and practicable (and I think I know such a one,
but have never yet made trial of it, whereby one might be enabled to write a
great deal with much ease, and accurately enough in a very little room) it
might be of very good use to convey secret Intelligence without any danger of
Discovery or mistrusting. But to come again to the point. The Irregularities of
it are caused by three or four coadjutors, one of which is, the uneven surface
of the paper, which at best appears no smother then a very course piece of
shag'd cloth, next the irregularity of the Type or Ingraving, and a third is
the rough Daubing of the Printing-Ink that lies upon the instrument that makes
the impression, to all which, add the variation made by the Different lights
and shadows, and you may have sufficient reason to ghess that a point may
appear much more ugly then this, which I have here presented, which though it
appeared through the Microscope gray, like a great splatch of London dirt,
about three inches over; yet to the naked eye it was black, and no bigger then
that in the midst of the Circle A. And could I have found Room in this Plate to
have inserted an O you should have seen that the letters were not more distinct
then the points of Distinction, nor a drawn circle more exactly so, then we
have now shown a point to be a point.

Observe. II. Of the Edge of a Razor.
Schem. 2. Fig. 2.
THe sharpest Edge has the same kind of affinity to the sharpest Point in
Physics, as a line has to a point in Mathematics; and therefore the Treaty
concerning this, may very properly be annexed to the former. A Razor does
appear to be a Body of a very neat and curious aspect, till more closely viewed
by the Microscope, and there we may observe its very Edge to be of all kind of
shapes, except what it should be. For examining that of a very sharp one, I
could not find that any part of it had any thing of sharpness in it; but it
appeared a rough surface of a very considerable breadth from side to side, the
narrowest part not seeming thinner then the back of a pretty thick Knife. Nor
is it likely that it should appear any otherwise, since as we just now showed
that a point appeared a circle, it is rational a line should be a parallelogram.

Now for the drawing this second Figure (which represents a part of the Edge
about half a quarter of an inch long of a Razor well set) I so placed it
between the Object-glass and the light, that there appeared a reflection from
the very Edge, represented by the white line a b c d e f. In which you may
perceive it to be somewhat sharper then elsewhere about d, to be indented or
pitted about b, to be broader and thicker about c, and unequal and rugged about
e, and pretty even between a b and e f. Nor was that part of the Edge g h i k
so smooth as one would imagine so smooth bodies as a Hone and Oil should leave
it; for besides those multitudes of scratches, which appear to have razed the
surface g h i k, and to cross each other every way which are not half of them
expressed in the Figure, there were several great and deep scratches, or furrows,
such as g h and i k, which made the surface yet more rugged, caused perhaps by
some small Dust casually falling on the Hone, or some harder or more flinty
part of the Hone it self. The other part of the Razor l l, which is polished on
a grinding-stone, appeared much rougher then the other, looking almost like a
plowed field, with many parallels, ridges, and furrows, and a cloddy, as
'twere, or an uneven surface: nor shall we wonder at the roughnesses of those
surfaces, since even in the most curious wrought Glasses for Microscopes, and
other Optical uses, I have, when the Sun has shone well on them, discovered
their surface to be variously razed or scratched, and to consist of an infinite
of small broken surfaces, which reflect the light of very various and differing
colors. And indeed it seems impossible by Art to cut the surface of any hard
and brittle body smooth, since Put, or even the most curious Powder that can
be made use of, to polish such a body, must consist of little hard rough
particles, and each of them must cut its way, and consequently leave some kind
of gutter or furrow behind it. And though Nature does seem to do it very
readily in all kinds of fluid bodies, yet perhaps future observators may
discover even those also rugged; it being very probable, as I elsewhere show,
that fluid bodies are made up of small solid particles variously and strongly
moved, and may find reason to think there is scarce a surface in rerum natura
perfectly smooth. The black spot m n, I ghess to be some small speck of rust,
for that I have often observed to be the manner of the working of Corrosive
Juyces. To conclude, this Edge and piece of a Razor, if it had been really such
as it appeared through the Microscope, would scarcely have served to cleave
wood, much less to have cut off the hair of beards, unless it were after the
manner that Lu^cian merrily relates Charon to have made use of, when with a
Carpenters Axe he chopped off the beard of a sage Philosopher, whose gravity he
very cautiously feared would endanger the oversetting of his Wherry.

Observe. III. Of fine Lawn, or Linen Cloth.
THis is another product of Art, Schem. 14: Fig. 3.
A piece of the finest Lawn I was able to get, so curious that the threads were
scarce discernable by the naked eye, and yet through an ordinary Microscope you
may perceive what a goodly piece of coarse Matting it is; what proportionable
cords each of its threads are, being not unlike, both in shape and size, the
bigger and coarser kind of single Rope-yarn, wherewith they usually make
Cables. That which makes the Lawn so transparent, is by the Microscope, nay by
the naked eye, if attentively viewed, plainly enough evidenced to be the
multitude of square holes which are left between the threads, appearing to have
much more hole in respect of the intercurrent parts then is for the most part
left in a lattice-window, which it does a little resemble, only the crossing
parts are round and not flat.

These threads that compose this fine contexture, though they are as small as
those that constitute the finer sorts of Silks, have notwithstanding nothing of
their glossie, pleasant, and lively reflection. Nay, I have been informed both
by the Inventor himself, and several other eyewitnesses, that though the flax,
out of which it is made, has been (by a singular art, of that excellent Person,
and Noble Vertuoso, M. Charles Howard, brother to the Duke of Norfolk) so
curiously dressed and prepared, as to appear both to the eye and the touch,
full as fine and as glossie, and to receive all kinds of colors, as well as
Sleave-Silk; yet when this Silken Flax is twisted into threads, it quite loses
its former luster, and becomes as plain and base a thread to look on, as one of
the same bigness, made of common Flax.

The reason of which odd Phenomenon seems no other then this; that though the
curiously dressed Flax has its parts so exceedingly small, as to equallize, if
not to be much smaller then the clew of the Silkworm, especially in thinness,
yet the differences between the figures of the constituting filaments are so
great, and their substances so various, that whereas those of the Silk are
small, round, hard, transparent, and to their bigness proportionably stiff, so
as each filament preserves its proper Figure, and consequently its vivid
reflection entire, though twisted into a thread, if not too hard; those of Flax
are flat, limber, softer, and less transparent, and in twisting into a thread
they join, and lie so close together, as to lose their own, and destroy each
others particular reflections. There seems therefore three Particulars very
requisite to make the so dressed Flax appear Silk also when spun into threads.
First, that the substance of it should be made more clear and transparent, Flax
retaining in it a kind of opacating brown, or yellow; and the parts of the
whitest kind I have yet observed with the Microscope appearing white, like
flaw'd Horn or Glass, rather then clear, like clear Horn or Glass. Next that,
the filaments should each of them be rounded, if that could be done, which yet
is not so very necessary, if the first be performed, and this third, which is,
that each of the small filaments be stifned; for though they be square, or
flat, provided they be transparent and stiff, much the same appearances must
necessarily follow. Now, though I have not yet made trial, yet I doubt not, but
that both these proprieties may be also indue'd upon the Flax, and perhaps too
by one and the same Expedient, which some trials may quickly inform any
ingenious attempter of, who from the use and profit of such an Invention, may
find sufficient argument to be prompted to such Inquiries. As for the tenacity
of the substance of Flax, out of which the thread is made, it seems much
inferior to that of Silk, the one being a vegetable, the other an animal
substance. And whether it proceed from the better concoction, or the more
homogeneous constitution of animal substances above those of vegetables, I do
not here determine; yet since I generally find, that vegetable substances do
not equalize the tenacity of animal, nor these the tenacity of some purified
mineral substances; I am very apt to think, that the tenacity of bodies does
not proceed from the hamous, or hooked particles, as the Epicureans, and some
modern Philosophers have imagined; but from the more exact congruity of the
constituent parts, which are contiguous to each other, and so bulky, as not to
be easily separated, or shattered, by any small pulls or concussion of heat.

Observe. IV. Of fine waled Silk, or Taffety.
Schem. 3. Fig. 1.
THis is the appearance of a piece of very fine Taffety-riband in the bigger
magnifying Glass, which you see exhibits it like a very convenient substance to
make Bed-matts, or Door-matts of, or to serve for Beehives, Corn-scuttles,
Chairs, or Corn-tubs, it being not unlike that kind of work, wherewith in many
parts in England, they make such Utensils of Straw, a little wreathed, and
bound together with thongs of Brambles. For in this Contexture, each little
filament, fiber, or clew of the Silkworm, seemed about the bigness of an
ordinary Straw, as appears by the little irregular Schem: III
regular pieces, a b, c d, and e f; The Warp, or the thread that ran crossing
the Riband, appeared like a single Rope of an Inch Diameter; but the Woof, or
the thread that ran the length of the Riband, appeared not half so big. Each
Inch of six-peny-broad Riband appearing no less then a piece of Matting Inch
and half thick, and twelve foot square; a few yards of this, would be enough to
floor the long Gallery of the Loure at Pa^is. But to return to our piece of
Riband: It affords us a not unpleasant object, appearing like a bundle, or
wreath, of very clear and transparent Cylinders, if the Silk be white, and
curiously tinged; if it be colored, each of those small horney Cylinders
affording in some place or other of them, as vivid a reflection, as if it had
been sent from a Cylinder of Glass or Horn. In-so-much, that the reflections of
Red, appeared as if coming from so many Granates, or Rubies. The loveliness of
the colors of Silks above those of hairy Stuffs, or Linen, consisting as I
elsewhere intimate, chiefly in the transparency, and vivid reflections from
the Concave, or inner surface of the transparent Cylinder, as are also the
colors of Precious Stones; for most of the reflections from each of these
Cylinders, come from the Concave surface of the air, which is as 'twere the
foil that incompasses the Cylinder. The colors with which each of these
Cylinders are tinged, seem partly to be superficial, and sticking to the
outsides of them; and partly, to be imbibed, or sunck into the substance of
them: for Silk, seeming to be little else then a dried thread of Glue, may be
supposed to be very easily relaxt, and softened, by being steeped in warm, nay
in cold, if penetrant, juyces or liquors. And thereby those tinctures, though
they tinge perhaps but a small part of the substance, yet being so highly
impregnated with the color, as to be almost black with it, may leave an
impression strong enough to exhibit the desired color. A pretty kind of
artificial Stuff I have seen, looking almost like transparent Parchment, Horn,
or Ising-glass, and perhaps some such thing it may be made of, which being
transparent, and of a glutinous nature, and easily mollified by keeping in
water, as I found upon trial, had imbibed, and did remain tinged with a great
variety of very vivid colors, and to the naked eye, it looked very like the
substance of the Silk. And I have often thought, that probably there might be a
way found out, to make an artificial glutinous composition, much resembling, if
not full as good, nay better, then that Excrement, or whatever other substance
it be out of which, the Silkworm wire-draws his clew. If such a composition
were found, it were certainly an easy matter to find very quick ways of
drawing it out into small wires for use. I need not mention the use of such an
Invention, nor the benefit that is likely to accrue to the finder, they being
sufficiently obvious. This hint therefore, may, I hope, give some Ingenious
inquisitive Person an occasion of making some trials, which if successful, I
have my aim, and I suppose he will have no occasion to be displeased.

Observe. V. Of watered Silks, or Stuffs.
Schem. 3. Fig. 2.
THere are but few Artificial things that are worth observing with a Microscope;
and therefore I shall speak but briefly concerning them. For the Productions of
art are such rude misshapen things, that when viewed with a Microscope, there
is little else observable, but their deformity. The most curious Carvings
appearing no better then those rude Russian Images we find mentioned in
Purchase, where three notches at the end of a Stick, stood for a face. And the
most smooth and burnished surfaces appear most rough and unpolisht: So that my
first Reason why I shall add but a few observations of them, is, their
misshapen form; and the next, is their uselessness. For why should we trouble
our selves in the examination of that form or shape (which is all we are able
to reach with a Microscope) which we know was designed for no higher a use,
then what we were able to view with our naked eye? Why should we endeavor to
discover mysteries in that which has no such thing in it? And like Rabbis find
out Caballisms, and aenigmas in the Figure, and placing of Letters, where no
such thing lies hid: whereas in natural forms there are some so small, and so
curious, and their designed business so far removed beyond the reach of our
sight, that the more we magnify the object, the more excellencies and mysteries
do appear; And the more we discover the imperfections of our senses, and the
Omnipotency and Infinite perfections of the great Creator. I shall therefore
only add one or two Observations more of artificial things, and then come to
the Treaty concerning such matters as are the Productions of a more curious
Workman. One of these, shall be that of a piece of watered Silk, represented in
the second Figure of the third Scheme, as it appeared through the least
magnifying Glass. AB. signifying the long way of the Stuff, and CD the broad
way. This Stuff, if the right side of it be looked upon, appears to the naked
eye, all over so waved, undulated, or grained, with a curious, though irregular
variety of brighter and darker parts, that it adds no small gracefulness to the
Gloss of it. It is so known a propriety, that it needs but little explication,
but it is observable, which perhaps every one has not considered, that those
parts which appear the darker part of the wave, in one position to the light,
in another appears the lighter, and the contrary; and by this means the
undulations become transient, and in a continual change, according as the
position of the parts in respect of the incident beams of light is varied. The
reason of which odd phenomenon, to one that has but diligently examined it even
with his naked eye, will be obvious enough. But he that observes it with a
Microscope, may more easily perceive what this Proteus is, and how it comes to
change its shape. He may very easily perceive, that it proceeds only from the
variety of the Reflections of light, which is caused by the various shape of
the Particles, or little protuberant parts of the thread that compose the
surface; and that those parts of the waves that appear the brighter, throw
toward the eye a multitude of small reflections of light, whereas the darker
scarce afford any. The reason of which reflection, the Microscope plainly
discovers, as appears by the Figure. In which you may perceive, that the
brighter parts of the surface consist of an abundance of large and strong
reflections, denoted by a, a, a, a, a, etc. for the surfaces of those threads
that run the long way, are by the Mechanical process of watering, creas'd or
angled in another kind of posture then they were by the weaving: for by the
weaving they are only bent round the warping threads; but by the watering,
they are bent with an angle, or elbow, that is in stead of lying, or being bent
round the threads, as in the third Figure, a, a, a, a, a, are about b, b, b (
b, b, b representing the ends, as 'twere, of the cross threads, they are bent
about) they are creas'd on the top of those threads, with an angle, as in the
fourth Figure, and that with all imaginable variety; so that, whereas before
they reflected the light only from one point of the round surface, as about c,
c, c, they now when watered, reflect the beams from more then half the whole
surface, as de, de, de, and in other postures they return no reflections at all
from those surfaces. Hence in one posture they compose the brighter parts of
the waves, in another the darker. And these reflections are also varied,
according as the particular parts are variously bent. The reason of which
creasing we shall next examine; and here we must fetch our information from the
Mechanism or manner of proceeding in this operation; which, as I have been
informed, is no other then this.

They double all the Stuff that is to be watered, that is, they crease it just
through the middle of it, the whole length of the piece, leaving the right side
of the Stuff inward, and placing the two edges, or silvages just upon one
another, and, as near as they can, place the wale so in the doubling of it,
that the wale of the one side may lie very near parallel, or even with the wale
of the other; for the nearer that posture they lie, the greater will the
watering appear; and the more obliquely, or across to each other they lie, the
smaller are the waves. Their way for folding it for a great wale is thus: they
take a Pin, and begin at one side of the piece in any wale, and so moving it
toward the other side, thereby direct their hands to the opposite ends of the
wale, and then, as near as they can, place the two opposite ends of the same
wale together, and so double, or fold the whole piece, repeating this enquiry
with a Pin at every yard or two's distance through the whole length; then they
sprinkle it with water, and fold it the longways, placing between every fold a
piece of Pastboard, by which means all the wrong side of the watered Stuff
becomes flat, and with little wales, and the wales on the other side become the
more protuberant; whence the creasings or angular bendings of the wales become
the more perspicuous. Having folded it in this manner, they place it with an
interjacent Pastboard into an hot Press, where it is kept very violently pressed,
till it be dry and stiff; by which means, the wales of either contiguous sides
leave their own impressions upon each other, as is very manifest by the second
Figure, where it is obvious enough, that the wale of the piece ABCD runs
parallel between the pricked lines of, of, of, and as manifest to discern the
impressions upon these wales, left by those that were pressed upon them, which
lying not exactly parallel with them, but a little athwart them, as is denoted
by the lines of, o o o o, gh, gh, gh, between which the other wales did lie
parallel; they are so variously, and irregularly creas'd that being put into
that shape when wet, and kept so till they be dry, they so set each others
threads, that the Moldings remain almost as long as the Stuff lasts.

Hence it may appear to any one that attentively considers the Figure, why the
parts of the wale a, a, a, a, a, a, should appear bright; and why the parts b,
b, b, b, b, b, should appear shadowed, or dark; why some, as d, d, d, d, d, d,
should appear partly light, and partly dark: the varieties of which reflections
and shadows are the only cause of the appearance of watering in Silks, or any
other kind of Stuffs.

From the variety of reflection, may also be deduced the cause why a small
breez or gale of wind ruffling the surface of a smooth water, makes it appear
black; as also, on the other side, why the smoothing or burnishing the surface
of whitened Silver makes it look back; and multitudes of other phenomenon might
hereby be solved, which are too many to be here insisted on.

Observe. VI. Of small Glass Canes.
Schem. 4.
THat I might be satisfied, whether it were not possible to make an Artificial
pore as small as any Natural I had yet found, I made several attemps with small
glass p^pes, melted in the flame of a Lamp, and then very suddenly drawn out
into a great length. And, by that means, without much difficulty, I was able to
draw some almost as small as a Cobweb, which yet, with the Microscope, I could
plainly perceive to be perforated, both by looking on the ends of it, and by
looking on it against the light; which was much the easier way to determine
whether it were solid or perforated; for, taking a small pipe of glass, and
closing one end of it, then filling it half full of water, and holding it
against the light, I could, by this means, very easily find what was the
differing aspect of a solid and a perforated piece of glass; and so easily
distinguish, without seeing either end, whether any Cylinder of glass I looked
on, were a solid stick, or a hollow cane. And by this means, I could also
presently judge of any small filament of glass, whether it were hollow or not,
which would have been exceeding tedious to examine by looking on the end. And
many such like ways I was fain to make use of, in the examining of diverse other
particulars related in this Book, which would have been no easy task to have
determined merely by the more common way of looking on, or viewing the Object.
For, if we consider first, the very faint light wherewith the object is
enlightened, whence many particles appear opacous, which when more enlightened,
appear very transparent, so that I was fain to determine its transparency by
one glass, and its texture by another Next, the unmanageableness of most
Objects, by reason Schem: IIII
of their smalness, 3. The difficulty of finding the desired point, and of
placing it so, as to reflect the light conveniently for the Inquiry, Lastly,
ones being able to view it but with one eye at once, they will appear no small
obstructions, nor are they easily removed without many contrivances. But to
proceed, I could not find that water, or some deeply tinged liquors would in
small ones rise so high as one would expect; and the highest I have found it
yet rise in any of the pipes I have tried, was to 21 inches above the level of
the water in the vessel: for though I found that in the small pipes it would
nimbly enter at first, and run about 6 or 7 inches upwards; yet I found it then
to move upwards so slow, that I have not yet had the patience to observe it
above that height of 21 inches (and that was in a pretty large Pipe, in
comparison of those I formerly mentioned; for I could observe the progress of a
very deep tinged liquor in it with my naked eye, without much trouble; whereas
many of the other pipes were so very small, that unless in a convenient posture
to the light, I could not perceive them:) But it is very probable, that a
greater patience and assiduity may discover the liquors to rise, at least to
remain suspended, at heights that I should be loath now even to ghess at, if at
least there be any proportion kept between the height of the ascending liquor,
and the bigness of the holes of the pipes.

An Attempt for the Explication of this Experiment.
My Conjecture, Schem. 4. Fig. 1.
That the unequal height of the surfaces of the water, proceeded from the
greater pressure made upon the water by the Air without the Pipes ABC, then by
that within them; I shall endeavor to confirm from the truth of the two
following Propositions:

The first of which is, That an unequal pressure of the incumbent Air, will
cause an unequal height in the water's Surfaces.

And the second is, That in this experiment there is such an unequal pressure.

That the first is true, the following Experiment will evince. For if you take
any Vessel so contrived, as that you can at pleasure either increase or
diminish the pressure of the Air upon this or that part of the Superficies of
the water, the equality of the height of those parts will presently be lost;
and that part of the Superficies that sustains the greater pressure, will be
inferior to that which undergoes the less. A fit Vessel for this purpose, will
be an inverted Glass Siphon, such an one as is described in the Sixth Figure.
For if into it you put Water enough to fill it as high as AB, and gently blow
in at D, you shall depress the Superficies B, and thereby raise the opposite
Superficies A to a considerable height, and by gently sucking you may produce
clean contrary effects.

Next, That there is such an unequal pressure, I shall prove from this, That
there is a much greater incongruity of Air to Glass, and some other Bodies,
then there is of Water to the same.

By Congruity, I mean a property of a fluid Body, whereby any part of it is
readily united with any other part, either of it self, or of any other Similar,
fluid, or solid body: And by Incongruity a property of a fluid, by which it is
hindered from uniting with any dissimilar, fluid, or solid Body.

This last property, any one that has been observingly conversant about fluid
Bodies, cannot be ignorant of. For (not now to mention several Chemical Spirits
and Oils, which will very hardly, if at all, be brought to mix with one
another; insomuch that there may be found some 8 or 9, or more, several
distinct Liquors, which swimming one upon another, will not presently mix) we
need seek no further for Examples of this kind in fluids, then to observe the
drops of rain falling through the air, and the bubbles of air which are by any
means conveyed under the surface of the water; or a drop of common Sallet Oil
swimming upon water. In all which, and many more examples of this kind that
might be enumerated, the incongruity of two fluids is easily discernable. And
as for the Congruity or Incongruity of Liquids, with several kinds of firm
Bodies, they have long since been taken notice of, and called by the Names of
Dryness and Moisture (though these two names are not comprehensive enough,
being commonly used to signify only the adhering or not adhering of water to
some other solid Bodies) of this kind we may observe that water will more
readily wet some woods then others; and that water, let fall upon a Feather,
the whiter side of a Colwor^, and some other leaves, or upon almost any dusty,
unctuous, or resinous superficies, will not at all adhere to them, but easily
tumble off from them, like a solid Bowl; whereas, if dropped upon Linen, Paper,
Clay, green Wood, etc. it will not be taken off, without leaving some part of
it behind adhering to them. So Quicksilver, which will very hardly be brought
to stick to any vegetable body, will readily adhere to, and mingle with,
several clean metalline bodies.

And that we may the better find what the cause of Congruity and Incongruity
in bodies is, it will be requisite to consider, First, what is the cause of
fluidness; And this, I conceive, to be nothing else but a certain pulse or
shake of heat; for Heat being nothing else but a very brisk and vehement
agitation of the parts of a body (as I have elsewhere made probabable) the
parts of a body are thereby made so loose from one another, that they easily
move any way, and become fluid. That I may explain this a little by a gross
Similitude, let us suppose a dish of sand set upon some body that is very much
agitated, and shaken with some quick and strong vibrating motion, as on a
Millstone turned round upon the under stone very violently whilst it is empty;
or on a very stiff Drum-head, which is vehemently or very nimbly beaten with
the Drumsticks. By this means, the sand in the dish, which before lay like a
dull and unactive body, becomes a perfect fluid; and ye can no sooner make a
hole in it with your finger, but it is immediately filled up again, and the
upper surface of it levelled. Nor can you bury a light body, as a piece of Cork
under it, but it presently emerges or swims as 'twere on the top; nor can you
lay a heavier on the top of it, as a piece of Lead, but it is immediately
buried in Sand, and (as 'twere) sinks to the bottom. Nor can you make a hole in
the side of the Dish, but the sand shall run out of it to a level, not an
obvious property of a fluid body, as such, but this dos imitate; and all this
merely caused by the vehement agitation of the containing vessel; for by this
means, each sand becomes to have a vibrative or dancing motion, so as no other
heavier body can rest on it, unless sustained by some other on either side: Nor
will it suffer any Body to be beneath it, unless it be a heavier then it self.
Another Instance of the strange loosening nature of a violent jarring Motion,
or a strong and nimble vibrative one, we may have from a piece of iron grated
on very strongly with a file: for if into that a pin be screwed so firm and
hard, that though it has a convenient head to it, yet it can by no means be
unscrew'd by the fingers; if, I say, you attempt to unscrew this whilst grated
on by the file, it will be found to undo and turn very easily. The first of
these Examples manifests, how a body actually divided into small parts, becomes
a fluid: And the latter manifest by what means the agitation of heat so easily
loosens and unties the parts of solid and firm bodies. Nor need we suppose heat
to be any thing else, besides such a motion; for supposing we could
Mechanically produce such a one quick and strong enough, we need not spend fuel
to melt a body. Now that I do not speak this altogether groundless, I must
refer the Reader to the Observations I have made upon the shining sparks of
Steel, for there he shall find that the same effects are produced upon small
chips or parcels of Steel by the flame, and by a quick and violent motion; and
if the body of steel may be thus melted (as I there show it may) I think we
have little reason to doubt that almost any other may not also. Every Smith can
inform one how quickly both his File and the Iron grows hot with filing, and if
you rub almost any two hard bodies together, they will do the same: And we
know, that a sufficient degree of heat causes fluidity, in some bodies much
sooner, and in others later; that is, the parts of the body of some are so
loose from one another, and so unapt to cohere, and so minute and little, that
a very small degree of agitation keeps them always in the state of fluidity. Of
this kind, I suppose, the Ether, that is the medium or fluid body, in which
all other bodies do as it were swim and move; and particularly, the Air, which
seems nothing else but a kind of tincture or solution of terrestrial and
aqueous particles dissolved into it, and agitated by it, just as the tincture
of Cocheneel is nothing but some finer dissoluble parts of that Concrete licked
up or dissolved by the fluid water. And from this Notion of it, we may easily
give a more Intelligible reason how the Air becomes so capable of Rarefaction
and Condensation. For, as in tinctures, one grain of some strongly tinging
substance may sensibly color some hundred thousand grains of appropriated
Liquors, so as every drop of it has its proportionate share, and be sensibly
tinged, as I have tried both with Logwood and Cocheneel: And as some few grains
of Salt is able to infect as great a quantity, as may be found by
praecipitations, though not so easily by the sight or aste; so the Air, which
seems to be but as 'twere a tincture or saline substance, dissolved and
agitated by the fluid and agil Ether, may disperse* and expand it self into a
vast space, if it have room enough, and infect, as it were, every part of that
space. But, as on the other side, if there be but some few grains of the
liquor, it may extract all the color of the tinging substance, and may
dissolve all the Salt, and thereby become much more impregnated with those
substances, so may all the air that sufficed in a rarified state to fill some
hundred thousand spaces of Ether, be comprised in only one, but in a position
proportionable dense. And though we have not yet found out such strainers for
Tinctures and Salts as we have for the Air, being yet unable to separate them
from their dissolving liquors by any kind of filtre, without praecipitation, as
we are able to separate the Air from the Ether by Glass, and several other
bodies. And though we are yet unable and ignorant of the ways of praecipitating
Air out of the Ether as we can Tinctures, and Salts out of several
dissolvents; yet neither of these seeming impossible from the nature of the
things, nor so improbable but that some happy future industry may find out ways
to effect them; nay, further, since we find that Nature does really perform
(though by what means we are not certain) both these actions, namely, by
praecipitating the Air in Rain and Dews, and by supplying the Streams and
Rivers of the World with fresh water, strained through secret subterraneous
Caverns: And since, that in very many other proprieties they do so exactly seem
of the same nature; till further observations or trials do inform us of the
contrary, we may safely enough conclude them of the same kind. For it seldom
happens that any two natures have so many properties coincident or the same, as
I have observed Solutions and Air to have, and to be different in the rest. And
therefore I think it neither impossible, irrational, nay nor difficult to be
able to predict what is likely to happen in other particulars also, besides
those which Observation or Experiment have declared thus or thus; especially,
if the circumstances that do often very much conduce to the variation of the
effects be duly weighed and considered. And indeed, were there not a
probability of this, our inquiries would be endless, our trials vain, and our
greatest inventions would be nothing but the mere products of chance, and not
of Reason; and, like Mariners in an Ocean, destitute both of a Compass and the
sight of the Celestial guids, we might indeed, by chance, Steer directly
toward our desired Port, but it is a thousand to one but we miss our aim. But
to proceed, we may hence also give a plain reason, how the Air comes to be
darkened by clouds, etc. which are nothing but a kind of precipitation, and how
those precipitations fall down in Showrs. Hence also could I very easily, and I
think truly, deduce the cause of the curious six angular figures of Snow, and
the appearances of Haloes, etc. and the sudden thickning of the Sky with
Clouds, and the vanishing and disappearing of those Clouds again; for all these
things may be very easily imitated in a glass of liquor, with some slight
Chemical preparations as I have often tried, and may somewhere else more
largely relate, but have not now time to set them down. But to proceed, there
are other bodies that consist of particles more Gross, and of a more apt figure
for cohesion, and this requires a somewhat greater agitation; such, I suppose.
fermented vinous Spirits, several Chemical Oils, which are much of a kin to
those Spirits, etc. Others yet require a greater, as water, and so others much
greater, for almost infinite degrees: For, I suppose there are very few bodies
in the world that may not be made aliquatenus fluid, by some or other degree of
agitation or heat.

Having therefore in short set down my Notion of a Fluid body, I come in the
next place to consider what Congruity is; and this, as I said before, being a
Relative property of a fluid, whereby it may be said to be like or unlike to
this or that other body, whereby it does or does not mix with this or that
body. We will again have recourse to our former Experiment, though but a rude
one; and here if we mix in the dish several kinds of sands, some of bigger,
others of less and finer bulks, we shall find that by the agitation the fine
sand will eject and throw out of it self all those bigger bulks of small stones
and the like, and those will be gathered together all into one place; and if
there be other bodies in it of other natures, those also will be separated into
a place by themselves, and united or tumbled up together. And though this do
not come up to the highest property of Congruity, which is a Cohaesion of the
parts of the fluid together, or a kind of attraction and tenacity, yet this
does as 'twere shadow it out, and somewhat resemble it; for just after the same
manner, I suppose the pulse of heat to agitate the small parcels of matter, and
those that are of a like bigness, and figure, and matter, will hold, or dance
together, and those which are of a differing kind will be thrust or should out
from between them; for particles that are all similar, will, like so many equal
musical strings equally strecht, vibrate together in a kind of Harmony or
unison; whereas others that are dissimilar, upon what account soever, unless
the disproportion be otherwise counter-ballanc'd, will, like so many strings
out of tun to those unisons, though they have the same agitating pulse, yet
make quite differing kinds of vibrations and repercussions, so that though they
may be both moved, yet are their vibrations so different, and so untuned, as
'twere to each other, that they cross and jar against each other, and
consequently, cannot agree together, but fly back from each other to their
similar particles. Now, to give you an instance how the disproportion of some
bodies in one respect, may be counter-ballanc'd by a contrary disproportion of
the same body in another respect, whence we find that the subtle vinous spirit
is congruous, or does readily mix with water, which in many properties is of a
very differing nature, we may consider that a unison may be made either by two
strings of the same bigness, length, and tension, or by two strings of the same
bigness, but of differing length, and a contrary differing tension; or 3 ly. by
two strings of unequal length and bigness, and of a differing tension, or of
equal length, and differing bigness and tension, and several other such
varieties. To which three properties in strings, will correspond three
proprieties also in sand, or the particles of bodies, their Matter or
Substance, their Figure or Shape, and their Body or Bulk. And from the
varieties of these three, may arise infinite varieties in fluid bodies, though
all agitated by the same pulse or vibrative motion. And there may be as many
ways of making Harmonies and Discords with these, as there may be with musical
strings. Having therefore seen what is the cause of Congruity or Incongruity,
those relative properties of fluids, we may, from what has been said, very
easily collect, what is the reason of those Relative proprieties also between
fluid bodies and solid; for since all bodies consist of particles of such a
Substance, Figure, and Bulk; but in some they are united together more firmly
then to be loosened from each other by every vibrative motion (though I imagine
that there is no body in the world, but that some degree of agitation may, as I
hinted before, agitate and loosen the particles so as to make them fluid) those
cohering particles may vibrate in the same manner almost as those that are
loose and become unisons or discords, as I may so speak, to them. Now that the
parts of all bodies, though never so solid, do yet vibrate, I think we need go
no further for proof, then that all bodies have some degrees of heat in them,
and that there has not been yet found any thing perfectly cold: Nor can I
believe indeed that there is any such thing in Nature, as a body whose
particles are at rest, or lazy and unactive in the great Theater of the World,
it being quite contrary to the grand Economy of the Universe. We see therefore
what is the reason of the Sympathy or uniting of some bodies together, and of
the antipathy or flight of others from each other: For Congruity seems nothing
else but a Sympathy, and Incongruity an Antipathy of bodies; hence similar
bodies once united will not easily part, and dissimilar bodies once disjoined
will not easily unite again; from hence may be very easily deduced the reason
of the suspension of water and Quicksilver above their usual station, as I
shall more at large anon show.

These properties therefore (always the concomitants of fluid bodies) produce
these following visible Effects:

First, They unite the parts of a fluid to its similar Solid, or keep them
separate from its dissimilar. Hence Quicksilver will (as we noted before)
stick to Gold, Silver, Tin, Lead, etc. and unite with them: but roll off from
Wood, Stone, Glass, etc. if never so little situated out of its horizontal
level; and water that will wet salt and dissolve it, will slip off from Tallow,
or the like, without at all adhering; as it may likewise be observed to do upon
a dusty superficies. And next they cause the parts of homogeneal fluid bodies
readily to adhere together and mix, and of heterogeneal, to be exceeding averse
thereunto. Hence we find, that two small drops of water, on any superficies
they can roll on, will, if they chance to touch each other, readily unite and
mix into one 3d. drop: The like may be observed with two small Bowls of
Quicksilver upon a Table or Glass, provided their surfaces be not dusty; and
with two drops of Oil upon fair water, etc. And further, water put unto wine,
salt water, vinegar, spirit of wine, or the like, does immediately (especially
if they be shaken together) disperse it self all over them. Hence, on the
contrary, we also find, that Oil of Tartar poured upon Quicksilver, and Spirit
of Wine on that Oil of Turpentine on that Spirit, and Air upon that Oil, though
they be stopped closely up into a Bottle, and shaken never so much, they will by
no means long suffer any of their bigger parts to be united or included within
any of the other Liquors (by which recited Liquors, may be plainly enough
represented the four Peripatetical Elements, and the more subtle Ether above
all.) From this property it is, that a drop of water does not mingle with, or
vanish into Air, but is driven (by that Fluid equally protruding it on every
side) and forced into as little a space as it (...) possibly be contained in,
namely, into a Round Globule. So likewise a title Air blown under the water, is
united or thrust into a Bubble by the ambient water. And a parcel of
Quicksilver enclosed with Air, Water, or almost any other Liquor, is formed
into a round Ball.

Now the cause why all these included Fluids, newly mentioned, or as many
others as are wholly included within a heterogeneous fluid, are not exactly of
a Spherical Figure (seeing that if caused by these Principles only, it could be
of no other) must proceed from some other kind of pressure against the two
opposite flatted sides. This adventitious or accidental pressure may proceed
from diverse causes, and accordingly must diversifie the Figure of the included
heterogeneous fluid: For seeing that a body may be included either with a fluid
only, or only with a solid, or partly with a fluid, and partly with a solid, or
partly with one fluid, and partly with another; there will be found a very
great variety of the terminating surfaces, much differing from a Spherical,
according to the various resistance or pressure that belongs to each of those
encompassing bodies.

Which Properties may in general be deduced from two heads, viz. Motion, and
Rest. For, either this Globular Figure is altered by a natural Motion, such as
is Gravity; or a violent, such as is any accidental motion of the fluids, as we
see in the wind ruffling up the water, and the purlings of Streams, and foaming
of Catarracts, and the like. Of thirdly, By the Rest, Firmness and Stability of
the ambient Solid. For if the including Solid be of an angular or any other
irregular Form, the included fluid will be near of the like, as a Pint- Pot
full of water, or a Bladder full of Air. And next, if the including or included
fluid have a greater gravity one than another, then will the globular Form be
deprest into an Elliptico-Spherical: As if, for example, we suppose the Circle
ABCD, in the fourth Figure, to represent a drop of water, Quicksilver, or the
like, included with the Air or the like, which supposing there were no gravity
at all in either of the fluids, or that the contained and containing were of
the same weight, would be equally comprest into an exactly Spherical body (the
ambient fluid forcing equally against every side of it.) But supposing either a
greater gravity in the included, by reason whereof the parts of it being pressed
from A toward B, and thereby the whole put into motion, and that motion being
hindered by the resistance of the subjacent parts of the ambient, the globular
Figure ADBC will be deprest into the Ellipticospherical, EGFH. For the side A
is detruded to E by the Gravity, and B to F by the resistance of the subjacent
medium: and therefore C must neccessarily be thrust to G; and D to H. Or else,
supposing a greater gravity in the ambient, by whose more then ordinary
pressure against the under side of the included globule; E will be forced to F,
and by its resistance of the motion upwards, the side A will be deprest to E,
and therefore C being thrust to G and D to H; the globular Figure by this means
also will be made an Elliptico-Spherical. Next if a fluid be included partly
with one, and partly with another fluid, it will be found to be shaped
diversely, according to the proportion of the gravity and incongruity of the 3
fluids one to another: As in the Second Figure, let the upper MMM be Air, the
middle LMNO be common Oil, the lower OOO be Water, the Oil will be formed, not
into a Spherical Figure, such as is represented by the pricked Line, but into
such a Figure as LMNO, whose side LMN will be of a flatter Elliptical Figure,
by reason of the great disproportion between the Gravity of Oil and Air, and
the side LOM of a rounder, because of the smaller difference between the weight
of Oil and Water. Lastly, The globular Figure will be changed, if the ambient
be partly fluid and partly solid. And here the termination of the encompassed
fluid toward the incompassing is shaped according to the proportion of the
congruity or incongruity of the fluids to the solids, and of the gravity and
incongruity of the fluids one to another. As suppose the subjacent medium that
hinders an included fluids descent, be a solid, as let KI, in the fourth
Figure, represent the smooth superficies of a Table; EGFH, a parcel of running
Mercury; the side GFH will be more flatted, according to the proportion of the
incongruity of the Mercury and Air to the Wood, and of the gravity of Mercury
and Air one to another; The side GEH will likewise be a little more deprest by
reason the subjacent parts are now at rest, which were before in motion.

Or further in the third Figure, let AILD represent an including solid medium
of a cylindrical shape (as suppose a small Glass Iar) Let FGEMM represent a
contained fluid, as water; this toward the bottom and sides, is figured
according to the concavity of the Glass: But its upper Surface, (which by
reason of its gravity, (not considering at all the Air above it, and so neither
the congruity or incongruity of either of them to the Glass) should be
terminated by part of a Sphere whose diameter should be the same with that of
the earth, which to our sense would appear a straight Line, as FGE, Or which by
reason of its having a greater congruity to Glass than Air has, (not
considering its Gravity) would be thrust into a concave Sphere, as CHB, whose
diameter would be the same with that of the concavity of the Vessel:) Its upper
Surface, I say, by reason of its having a greater gravity then the Air, and
having likewise a greater congruity to Glass then the Air has, is terminated,
by a concave Elliptico-Spherical Figure, as CKB. For by its congruity it easily
conforms it self, and adheres to the Glass, and constitutes as it were one
containing body with it, and therefore should thrust the contained Air on that
side it touches it, into a Spherical Figure, as BHC, but the motion of Gravity
depressing a little the Corners B and C, reduces it into the aforesaid Figure
CKB. Now that it is the greater congruity of one of the two contiguous fluids,
then of the other, to the containing solid, that causes the separating surfaces
to be thus or thus figured: And that it is not because this or that figurated
surface is more proper, natural, or peculiar to one of these fluid bodies, then
to the other, will appear from this; that the same fluids will by being put
into differing solids, change their surfaces. For the same water, which in a
Glass or wooden Vessel will have a concave surface upwards, and will rise
higher in a smaller then a greater Pipe, the same water, I say, in the same
Pipes greased over or oyled, will produce quite contrary effects; for it will
have a protuberant and unequal surface upwards, and will not rise so high in
small, as in bigger Pipes: Nay, in the very same solid Vessel, you may make the
very same two contiguous Liquids to alter their Surfaces; for taking a small
Wine-glass, or such like Vessel, and pouring water gently into it, you shall
perceive the surface of the water all the way concave, till it rise even with
the top, when you shall find it (if you gently and carefully pour in more) to
grow very protuberant and unequal; the reason of which is plain, for that the
solid sides of the containing body are no longer extended, to which the water
does more readily adhere then the air; but it is henceforth to be included with
air, which would reduce it into a hemisphere, but by reason of its gravity, it
is flatted into an Oval. Quicksilver also which to Glass is more incongruous
then Air (and thereby being put into a Glass-pipe, will not adhere to it, but
by the more congruous air will be forced to have a very protuberant surface;
and to rise higher in a greater then a lesser Pipe) this Quicksilver to clean
Metal, especially to Gold, Silver, Tin, Lead, etc. Iron excepted, is more
congruous then Air, and will not only stick to it, but have a concave Surface
like water, and rise higher in a less, then in a greater Pipe.

In all these Examples it is evident, that there is an extraordinary and
adventitious force, by which the globular Figure of the contained heterogeneous
fluid is altered; neither can it be imagined, how it should otherwise be of any
other Figure then Globular: For being by the heterogeneous fluid equally
protruded every way, whatsoever part is protuberant, will be thereby deprest.
From this cause it is, that in its effects it does very much resemble a round
Spring (such as a Hoop.) For as in a round Spring there is required an
additional pressure against two opposite sides, to reduce it into an Oval Form,
or to force it in between the sides of a Hole, whose Diameter is less then that
of the Spring, there must be a considerable force or protrusion against the
concave or inner side of the Spring; So to alter this Spherical constitution of
an included fluid body, there is required more pressure against opposite sides
to reduce it into an Oval; and, to press it into an Hole less in Diameter then
it self, it requires a greater protrusion against all the other sides. What
degrees of force are requisite to reduce them into longer and longer Ovals, or
to press them into less and less holes, I have not yet experimentally
calculated; but thus much by experiment I find in general, that there is
always required a greater pressure to close them into longer Ovals, or protude
them into smaller holes. The necessity and reason of this, were it requisite, I
could easily explain: but being not so necessary, and requiring more room and
time then I have for it at present, I shall here omit it; and proceed to show,
that this may be presently found true, if Experiment be made with a round
Spring (the way of making which trials is obvious enough.) And with the fluid
bodies of Mercury, Air, etc, the way of trying which, will be somewhat more
difficult; and therefore I shall in brief describe it. He therefore that would
try with Air, must first be provided of a Glass-pipe, made of the shape of that
in the fifth Figure, whereof the side AB, represents a straight Tube of about
three foot long, C, represents another part of it, which consists of a round
Bubble; so ordered, that there is left a passage or hole at the top, into which
may be fastened with cement several small Pipes of determinate cylindrical
cavities: as let the hollow of F. be of an inch. G. be of an inch. H. be of an
inch. I. be 1/12 of an inch. K. be 1/16 of an inch. L. be 1/24 of an inch. M.
be 1/34 of an inch. etc --
There may be added as many more, as the Experimenter shall think fit, with
holes continually decreasing by known quantities, so far as his senses are able
to help him; I say, so far, because there may be made Pipes so small that it
will be impossible to perceive the perforation with ones naked eye, though by
the help of a Microscope, it may easily enough be perceived: Nay, I have made a
Pipe perforated from end to end, so small, that with my naked eye I could very
hardly see the body of it, insomuch that I have been able to knit it up into a
knot without breaking: And more accurately examining one with my Microscope, I
found it not so big as a sixteenth part of one of the smaller hairs of my head
which was of the smaller and finer sort of hair, so that sixteen of these Pipes
bound faggot-wi^e together, would but have equalized one single hair; how small
therefore must its perforation be? It appearing to me through the Microscope to
be a proportionably thick-sided Pipe.

To proceed then, for the trial of the Experiment, the Experimenter must place
the Tube AB, perpendicular, and fill the Pipe F (cemented into the hole E) with
water, but leave the bubble C full of Air, and then gently pouring in water
into the Pipe AB, he must observe diligently how high the water will rise in it
before it protrude the bubble of Air C, through the narrow passage of F, and
denote exactly the height of the Cylinder of water, then cementing in a second
Pipe as G, and filling it with water; he may proceed as with the former,
denoting likewise the height of the Cylinder of water, able to protrude the
bubble C through the passage of G, the like may he do with the next Pipe, and
the next, etc. as far as he is able: then comparing the several heights of the
Cylinders, with the several holes through which each Cylinder did force the air
(having due regard to the Cylinders of water in the small Tubes) it will be
very easy to determine, what force is requisite to press the Air into such and
such a hole, or (to apply it to our present experiment) how much of the
pressure of the Air is taken off by its ingress into smaller and smaller holes.
From the application of which to the entering of the Air into the bigger hole of
the Vessel, and into the smaller hole of the Pipe, we shall clearly find, that
there is a greater pressure of the air upon the water in the Vessel or greater
pipe, then there is upon that in the lesser pipe: For since the pressure of the
air every way is found to be equal, that is, as much as is able to press up and
sustain a Cylinder of Quicksilver of two foot and a half high, or thereabouts;
And since of this pressure so many more degrees are required to force the Air
into a smaller then into a greater hole that is full of a more congruous fluid.
And lastly, since those degrees that are requisite to press it in, are thereby
taken off from the Air within, and the Air within left with so many degrees of
pressure less then the Air without; it will follow, that the Air in the less
Tube or pipe, will have less pressure against the superficies of the water
therein, then the Air in the bigger: which was the minor Proposition to be
proved.

The Conclusion therefore will necessarily follow, viz. That this unequal
pressure of the Air caused by its ingress into unequal holes, is a cause
sufficient to produce this effect, without the help of any other concurrent;
and therefore is probably the principal (if not the only) cause of these
Phenomenon.

This therefore being thus explained, there will be diverse Phenomenon
explicable thereby, as, the rising of Liquors in a Filtre, the rising of Spirit
of Wine, Oil, melted Tallow, etc. in the Week of a Lamp, (though made of small
Wire, Threeds of Asbestus, Strings of Glass, or the like) the rising of Liquors
in a Sponge, piece of Bread, Sand, etc. perhaps also the ascending of the Sap
in Trees and Plants, through their small, and some of them imperceptible pores,
(of which I have said more, on another occasion) at least the passing of it out
of the earth into their roots. And indeed upon the consideration of this
Principle, multitudes of other uses of it occurred to me, which I have not yet
so well examined and digested as to propound for Axioms, but only as Queries
and Conjectures which may serve as hints toward some further discoveries.

As first, Upon the consideration of the congruity and incongruity of Bodies,
as to touch, I found also the like congruity and incongruity (if I may so
speak) as to the Transmitting of the Rays of Light: For as in this regard,
water (not now to mention other Liquors) seems nearer of affinity to Glass then
Air, and Air then Quicksilver: whence an oblique Ray out of Glass, will pass
into water with very little refraction from the perpendicular, but none out of
Glass into Air, excepting a direct, will pass without a very great refraction
from the perpendicular, nay any oblique Ray under thirty degrees, will not be
admitted into the Air at all. And Quicksilver will neither admit oblique or
direct, but reflects all; seeming, as to the transmitting of the Rays of
Light, to be of a quite differing constitution, from that of Air, Water, Glass,
etc. and to resemble most those opacous and strong reflecting bodies of Metals:
So also as to the property of cohesion or congruity, Water seems to keep the
same order, being more congruous to Glass then Air, and Air then Quicksilver.

A Second thing (which was hinted to me, by the consideration of the included
fluids globular form, caused by the protrusion of the ambient heterogeneous
fluid) was, whether the Phenomenon of gravity might not by this means be
explained, by supposing the Globe of Earth, Water, and Air to be included with
a fluid, heterogeneous to all and each of them, so subtle, as not only to be
every where interspersed through the Air, (or rather the air through it) but to
pervade the bodies of Glass, and even the closest Metals, by which means it may
endeavor to detrude all earthly bodies as far from it as it can; and partly
thereby, and partly by other of its properties may move them toward the Center
of the Earth. Now that there is some such fluid, I could produce many
Experiments and Reasons, that do seem to prove it: But because it would ask
some time and room to set them down and explain them, and to consider and
answer all the Objections (many whereof I foresee) that may be alleged against
it; I shall at present proceed to other Queries, contenting my self to have
here only given a hint of what I may say more elsewhere.

A Third Query then was, Whether the heterogeneity of the ambient fluid may not
be accounted a secondary cause of the roundness or globular form of the greater
bodies of the world, such as are those of the Sun, Stars, and Planets, the
substance of each of which seems altogether heterogeneous to the circum-ambient
fluid ether? And of this I shall say more in the Observation of the Moon.

A Fourth was, Whether the globular form of the smaller parcels of matter here
upon the Earth, as that of Fruits, Pebbles, or Flints, etc. (which seem to have
been a Liquor at first) may not be caused by the heterogeneous ambient fluid.
For thus we see that melted Glass will be naturally formed into a round Figure;
so likewise any small Parcel of any fusible body, if it be perfectly enclosed
by the Air, will be driven into a globular Form; and, when cold, will be found
a solid Ball. This is plainly enough manifested to us by their way of making
shot with the drops of Lead; which being a very pretty curiosity, and known but
to a very few, and having the liberty of publishing it granted me, by that
Eminent Virtuoso Sir Robert Moray, who brought in this Account of it to the
Royal Society, I have here transcribed and inserted.

To make small shot of different sizes; Communicated by his Highness P. R.
TAke Lead out of the Pig what quantity you please, melt it down, stir and
clear it with an iron Ladle, gathering together the blackish parts that swim at
top like scum, and when you see the color of the clear Lead to be greenish,
but no sooner, strew upon it Auripigmentum powdered according to the quantity
of Lead, about as much as will lie upon a half Crown piece will serve for
eighteen or twenty pound weight of some sorts of Lead; others will require
more, or less. After the Auripigmentum is put in, stir the Lead well, and the
Auripigmentum will flame: when the flame is over, take out some of the Lead in
a Ladle having a lip or notch in the brim for convenient pouring out of the
Lead, and being well warmed amongst the melted Lead, and with a stick make some
single drops of Lead trickle out of the Ladle into water in a Glass, which if
they fall to be round and without tails, there is Auripigmentum enough put in,
and the temper of the heat is right, otherwise put in more. Then lay two bars
of Iron (or some more proper Iron-tool made on purpose) upon a Pail of water,
and place upon them a round Plate of Copper, of the size and figure of an
ordinary large Pewter or Silver Trencher, the hollow whereof is to be about
three inches over, the bottom lower then the brims about half an inch, pierced
with thirty, forty, or more small holes; the smaller the holes are, the smaller
the shot will be; and the brim is to be thicker then the bottom, to conserve
the heat the better.

The bottom of the Trencher being some four inches distant frum the water in
the Pail, lay upon it some burning Coals, to keep the Lead melted upon it. Then
with the hot Ladle take Lead off the Pot where it stands melted, and pour it
softly upon the burning Coals over the bottom of the Trencher, and it will
immediately run through the holes into the water in small round drops. Thus
pour on new Lead still as fast as it runs through the Trencher till all be
done; blowing now and then the Coals with hand-Bellows, when the Lead in the
Trencher cools so as to stop from running.

Whilst one pours on the Lead, another must, with another Ladle, thrusted four
or five inches under water in the Pail, catch from time to time some of the
shot, as it drops down, to see the size of it, and whether there be any faults
in it. The greatest care is to keep the Lead upon the Trencher in the right
degree of heat; if it be too cool, it will not run through the Trencher, though
it stand melted upon it; and this is to be helped by blowing the Coals a
little, or pouring on new Lead that is hotter: but the cooler the Lead, the
larger the Shot; and the hotter, the smaller; when it is too hot, the drops
will crack and fly; then you must stop pouring on new Lead, and let it cool;
and so long as you observe the right temper of the heat, the Lead will
constantly drop into very round Shot, without so much as one with a tail in
many pounds.

When all is done, take your Shot out of the Pail of water, and put it in a
Drying Pan over the fire to dry them, which must be done warily, still shaking
them that they melt not; and when they are dry you may separate the small from
the great, in Pearl Sives made of Copper or Lattin let into one another, into
as many sizes as you please. But if you would have your Shot larger then the
Trencher makes them, you may do it with a Stick, making them trickle out of the
Ladle, as has been said.

If the Trencher be but touched a very little when the Lead stops from going
through it, and be not too cool, it will drop again, but it is better not to
touch it at all. At the melting of the Lead take care that there be no kind of
Oil, Grease, or the like, upon the Pots, or Ladles, or Trencher.

The Chief cause of this Globular Figure of the Shot, seems to be the
Auripigmentum; for, as soon as it is put in among the melted Lead, it loses its
shining brightness, contracting instantly a grayish film or skin upon it, when
you scum it to make it clean with the Ladle. So that when the Air comes at the
falling drop of the melted Lead, that skin constricts them every where equally:
but upon what account, and whether this be the true cause, is left to further
disquisition,

Much after this same manner, when the Air is exceeding cold through which it
passes, do we find the drops of Rain, falling from the Clouds, congealed into
round Hailstones by the freezing Ambient.

To which may be added this other known Experiment, That if you gently let fall
a drop of water upon small sand or dust, you shall find, as it were, an
artificial round stone quickly generated. I cannot upon this occasion omit the
mentioning of the strange kind of Grain, which I have observed in a stone
brought from Kettering in Northamptonshire, and therefore called by Masons
Kettering-Stone, of which see the Description. Which brings into my mind what I
long since observed in the fiery Sparks that are struck out of a Steel. For
having a great desire to see what was left behind, after the Spark was gone
out, I purposely struck fire over a very white piece of Paper, and observing
diligently where some conspicuous sparks went out, I found a very little black
spot no bigger then the point of a Pin, which through a Microscope appeared to
be a perfectly round Ball, looking much like a polisht ball of Steel, insomuch
that I was able to see the Image of the window reflected from it. I cannot here
stay (having done it more fully in another place) to examine the particular
Reasons of it, but shall only hint, that I imagine it to be some small parcel
of the Steel, which by the violence of the motion of the stroke (most of which
seems to be impressed upon those small parcels) is made so glowing hot, that it
is melted into a Vitrum, which by the ambient Air is thrust into the form of a
Ball.

A Fifth thing which I thought worth Examination was, Whether the motion of all
kind of Springs, might not be reduced to the Principle whereby the included
heterogeneous fluid seems to be moved; or to that whereby two Solids, as
Marbles, or the like, are thrust and kept together by the ambient fluid.

A Sixth thing was, Whether the Rising and Ebullition of the Water out of
Springs and Fountains (which lie much higher from the Center of the Earth then
the Superficies of the Sea, from whence it seems to be derived) may not be
explicated by the rising of Water in a smaller Pipe: For the Seawater being
strained through the Pores or Crannies of the Earth, is, as it were, included
in little Pipes, where the pressure of the Air has not so great a power to
resist its rising: But examining this way, and finding in it several
difficulties almost irremovable, I thought upon a way that would much more
naturally and conceivably explain it, which was by this following Experiment: I
took a Glass-Tube, of the form of that described in the sixth Figure, and
choosing two heterogeneous fluids, such as Water and Oil, I poured in as much
Water as filled up the Pipes as high as AB, then putting in some Oil into the
Tube AC, I deprest the superficies A of the Water to E, and BY raised to G,
which was not so high perpendicularly as the superficies of the Oil F, by the
space FI, wherefore the proportion of the gravity of these two Liquors was as
GH to FE.

This Experiment I tried with several other Liquors, and particularly with
fresh Water and Salt (which I made by dissolving Salt in warm Water) which two
though they are nothing heterogeneous, yet before they would perfectly mix one
with another, I made trial of the Experiment: Nay, letting the Tube wherein I
tried the Experiment remain for many days, I observed them not to mix; but the
superficies of the fresh was rather more then less elevated above that of the
Salt. Now the proportion of the gravity of Seawater, to that of River-water,
according to Stevinus and Varenius, and as I have since found pretty true by
making trial my self, is as 46. to 45. that is, 46. Ounces of the salt Water
will take up no more room then 45. of the fresh. Or reciprocally 45 pints of
salt water weigh as much as 46 of fresh.

But I found the proportion of Brine to fresh Water to be near 13 to 12:
Supposing therefore GHM to represent the Sea, and FI the height of the Mountain
above the Superficies of the Sea, FM a Cavern in the Earth, beginning at the
bottom of the Sea, and terminated at the top of the Mountain, LM the Sand at
the bottom, through which the Water is as it were strained, so as that the
fresher parts are only permitted to transude, and the saline kept back; if
therefore the proportion of GM to FM be as 45 to 46, then may the Cylinder of
Salt Water GM make the Cylinder of Fresh Water to rise as high as E, and to run
over at N. I cannot here stand to examine or confute their Opinion, who make
the depth of the Sea, below its Superficies, to be no more perpendicularly
measured then the height of the Mountains above it: It Is enough for me to say,
there is no one of those that have asserted it, have experimentally known the
perpendicular of either; nor shall I here determine, whether there may not be
many other causes of the separation of the fresh water from the salt, as
perhaps some parts of the Earth through which it is to pass, may contain a
Salt, that mixing and uniting with the Sea Salt, may precipitate it; much after
the same manner as the Alkalizate and Acid Salts mix and precipitate each other
in the preparation of Tartarum Vitriolatum. I know not also whether the
exceeding cold (that must necessarily be) at the bottom of the Water, may not
help toward this separation, for we find, that warm Water is able to dissolve
and contain more Salt, then the same cold; insomuch that Brines strongly
impregnated by heat, if let cool, do suffer much of their Salt to subside and
crystallize about the bottom and sides. I know not also whether the exceeding
pressure of the parts of the Water one against another, may not keep the Salt
from descending to the very bottom, as finding little or no room to insert it
self between those parts, protruded so violently together, or else squeeze it
upwards into the superior parts of the Sea, where it may more easily obtain
room for it self, amongst the parts of the Water, by reason that there is more
heat and less pressure. To this Opinion I was somewhat the more induced by the
relations I have met with in Geograhical Writers, of drawing fresh Water from
the bottom of the Sea, which is salt above. I cannot now stand to examine,
whether this natural perpetual motion may not artificially be imitated: Nor can
I stand to answer the Objections which may be made against this my Supposition:
As, First, How it comes to pass, that there are sometimes salt Springs much
higher then the Superficies of the Water? And, Secondly, Why Springs do not run
faster and slower, according to the varying height made of the Cylinder of
Seawater, by the ebbing and flowing of the Sea?

As to the First, In short, I say, the fresh Water may receive again a saline
Tincture near the Superficies of the Earth, by passing through some salt Mines,
or else many of the saline parts of the Sea may be kept back, though not all.

And as to the Second, The same Spring may be fed and supplied by diverse
Caverns, coming from very far distant parts of the Sea, so as that it may in
one place be high, in another low water; and so by that means the Spring may be
equally supplied at all times. Or else the Cavern may be so straight and
narrow, that the water not having so ready and free passage through it, cannot
upon so short and quick mutations of pressure, be able to produce any sensible
effect at such a distance. Besides that, to confirm this hypothesis, there are
many Examples found in Natural Historians, of Springs that do ebb and flow like
the Sea: As particularly, those recorded by the Learned Camden, and after him
by Speed, to be found in this Island: One of which, they relate to be on the
Top of a Mountain, by the small Village Kilken in Flintshire, Maris aemulus qui
statis temporibus suas evomit and resorbet Aquas; Which at certain times rises
and falls after the manner of the Sea. A Second in Caermardenshire, near
Caermarden, at a place called Cantred Bichan; Qui (ut scribit Giraldus)
naturali die ^is undis deficiens, and toties exuberans, marinos imitatur
instabilitates; That twice in four and twenty hours ebbing and flowing,
resembles the unstable motions of the Sea. The Phenomenon of which two may be
easily made out, by supposing the Cavern, by which they are fed, to arise from
the bottom of the next Sea. A Third, is a Well upon the River Ogmore in
Glamorganshire, and near unto Newton, of which Camden relates himself to be
certified, by a Letter from a Learned Friend of his that observed it, Fons
abest hinc, etc. The Letter is a little too long to be inserted, but the
substance is this; That this Well ebbs and flows quite contrary to the flowing
and ebbing of the Sea in those parts: for it is almost empty at Full Sea, but
full at Low water. This may happen from the Channel by which it is supplied,
which may come from the bottom of a Sea very remote from those parts, and where
the Tides are much differing from those of the approximate shores. A Fourth,
lies in Westmorland, near the River Loder; Qui instar Euripi saepius in die
reciprocantibus undis fluit and refluit, which ebbs and flows many times a day.
This may proceed from its being supplied from many Channels, coming from
several parts of the Sea, lying sufficiently distant asunder to have the times
of High Water differing enough one from the other; so as that whenever it
shall be High water over any of those places, where these Channels begin, it
shall likewise be so in the Well; but this is but a supposition.

A Seventh Query was, Whether the dissolution or mixing of several bodies,
whether fluid or solid, with saline or other Liquors, might not partly be
attributed to this Principle of the congruity of those bodies and their
dissolvents? As of Salt in Water, Metals in several Menstruums, Unctuous Gums
in Oils, the mixing of Wine and Water, etc. And whether precipitation be not
partly made from the same Principle of Incongruity? I say partly, because there
are in some Dissolutions, some other Causes concurrent.

I shall lastly make a much more seemingly strange and unlikely Query; and that
is, Whether this Principle, well examined and explained, may not be found a
co-efficient in the most considerable Operations of Nature? As in those of
Heat, and Light, and consequently, of Rarefaction and Condensation, Hardness,
and Fluidness, Perspicuity and Opacousness, Refractions and Colors, etc. Nay,
I know not whether there may be many things done in Nature, in which this may
not (be said to) have a Finger? This I have in some other passages of this
Treatise further enquired into and shown, that as well Light as Heat may be
caused by corrosion, which is applicable to congruity, and consequently all the
rest will be but subsequents: In the mean time I would not willingly be guilty
of that Error, which the thrice Noble and Learned Verulam justly takes notice
of, as such, and calls Philosophiae Genus Empiricum, quod in paucorum
Experimentorum Angustiis and Obscuritate fundatum est. For I neither conclude
from one single Experiment, nor are the Experiments I make use of, all made
upon one Subject: Nor wrest I any Experiment to make it quadrare with any
preconceiv'd Notion. But on the contrary (...) endeavor to be conversant in
diverse kinds of Experiments, and all (...) every one of those Trials, I make
the Standards or Touchstones, by which I try all my former Notions, whether
they hold out in weight, and measure, and touch, etc. For as that Body is no
other then a Counterfeit Gold, which wants any one of the Proprieties of Gold,
(such as are the Malleableness, Weight, Color, Fixtness in the Fire,
Indissolubleness in Aqua fortis, and the like) though it has all the other; so
will all those Notions be found to be false and deceitful, that will not
undergo all the Trials and Tests made of them by Experiments. And therefore
such as will not come up to the desired Apex of Perfection, I rather wholly
reject and take new, then by piecing and patching, endeavor to retain the old,
as knowing such things at best to be but lame and imperfect. And this course I
learned from Nature; whom we find neglectful of the old Body, and suffering its
Decaies and Infirmities to remain without repair, and altogether sollicitous
and careful of perpetuating the Species by new Individuals. And it is certainly
the most likely way to erect a glorious Structure and Temple to Nature, such as
she will be found (by any zealous Votary) to refide in; to begin to build a new
upon a sure Foundation of Experiments.

But to digress no further from the consideration of the Phenomenon, more
immediately explicable by this Experiment, we shall proceed to show, That, as
to the rising of Water in a Filtre, the reason of it will be manifest to him,
that does take notice, that a Filtre is constituted of a great number of small
long solid bodies, which lie so close together, that the Air in its getting in
between them, does lose of its pressure that it has against the Fluid without
them, by which means the Water or Liquor not finding so strong a resistance
between them as is able to counter-ballance the pressure on its superficies
without, is raised upward, till it meet with a pressure of the Air which is
able to hinder it. And as to the Rising of Oil, melted Tallow, Spirit of Wine,
etc. in the Week of a Candle or Lamp, it is evident, that it differs in nothing
from the former, save only in this, that in a Filtre the Liquor descends and
runs away by another part; and in the Week the Liquor is dispersed and carried
away by the Flame; something there is ascribable to the Heat, for that it may
ratify the more volatile and spirituous parts of those combustible Liquors, and
so being made lighter then the Air, it may be protruded upwards by that more
ponderous fluid body in the Form of Vapors; but this can be ascribed to the
ascension of but a very little, and most likely of that only which ascends
without the Week. As for the Rising of it in a Sponge, Bread, Cotton* etc.
above the superficies of the subjacent Liquor; what has been said about the
Filtre (if considered) will easily suggest a reason, considering that all these
bodies abound with small holes or pores.

From this same Principle also ( viz. the unequal pressure of the Air against
the unequal superficies of the water) proceeds the cause of the accession or
incursion of any floating body against the sides of the containing Vessel, or
the appropinquation of two floating bodies, as Bubbles, Corks, Sticks, Straws,
etc. one toward another. As for instance, Take a Glass-jar, such as AB in the
seventh Figure, and filling it pretty near the top with water, throw into it a
small round piece of Cork, as C, and plunge it all over in water, that it be
wet, so as that the water may rise up by the sides of it, then placing it any
where upon the superficies, about an inch, or one inch and a quarter from any
side, and you shall perceive it by degrees to make perpendicularly toward the
nearest part of the side, and the nearer it approaches, the faster to be moved;
the reason of which Phenomenon will be found no other then this, that the Air
has a greater pressure against the middle of the superficies, then it has
against those parts that approach nearer, and are contiguous to the sides. Now
that the pressure is greater, may (as I showed before in the explication of the
third Figure) be evinced from the flatting of the water in the middle, which
arises from the gravity of the under fluid: for since, as I showed before, if
there were no gravity in the under fluid, or that it were equal to that of the
upper, the terminating Surface would be spherical, and since it is the
additional pressure of the gravity of water that makes it so flat, it follows,
that the pressure upon the middle must be greater then toward the sides. Hence
the Ball having a stronger pressure against that side of it which respects the
middle of the superficies, then against that which respects the approximate
side, must necessarily move toward that part, from whence it finds least
resistance, and so be accelerated, as the resistance decreases. Hence the more
the water is raised under that part of its way it is passing above the middle,
the faster it is moved: And therefore you will find it to move faster in E then
in D, and in D then in C. Neither could I find the floating substance to be
moved at all, until it were placed upon some part of the Superficies that was
sensibly elevated above the height of the middle part. Now that this may be the
true cause, you may try with a blown Bladder, and an exactly round Ball upon a
very smooth side of some pliable body, as Horn or Quicksilver. For if the Ball
be placed under a part of the Bladder which is upon one side of the middle of
its pressure, and you press strongly against the Bladder, you shall find the
Ball moved from the middle toward the sides. Having therefore shown the reason
of the motion of any float toward the sides, the reason of the incursion of
any two floating bodies will easily appear: For the rising of the water against
the sides of either of them, is an Argument sufficient, to show the pressure of
the Air to be there less, then it is further from it, where it is not so much
elevated; and therefore the reason of the motion of the other toward it, will
be the same as toward the side of the Glass; only here from the same reason,
they are mutually moved toward each other, whereas the side of the Glass in the
former remains fixed. If also you gently fill the Jar so full with water, that
the water is protuberant above the sides, the same piece of Cork that before
did hasten toward the sides, does now fly from it as fast toward the middle
of the Superficies; the reason of which will be found no other then this, that
the pressure of the Air is stronger against the sides of the Superficies G and
H, then against the middle I; for since, as I showed before, the Principle of
congruity would make the terminating Surface Spherical, and that the flatting
of the Surface in the middle is from the abatement of the waters pressure
outward, by the contrary endeavor of its gravity; it follows that the
pressure in the middle must be less then on the sides; and therefore the
consecution will be the same as in the former. It is very odd to one that
considers not the reason of it, to see two floating bodies of wood to approach
each other, as though they were endued with some magnetical vigor; which
brings into my mind what I formerly tried with a piece of Cork or such like
body, which I so ordered, that by putting a little stick into the same water,
one part of the said Cork would approach and make toward the stick, whereas
another would discede and fly away, nay it would have a kind of verticity, so
as that if the Equator (as I may so speak) of the Cork were placed toward the
stick, if let alone, it would instantly turn its appropriate Pole toward it,
and then run a-tilt at it: and this was done only by taking a dry Cork, and
wetting one side of it with one small stroke; for by this means gently putting
it upon the water, it would depress the superficies on every side of it that
was dry, and therefore the greatest pressure of the Air, being near those sides
caused it either to chase away, or else to fly off from any other floating
body, whereas that side only, against which the water ascended, was thereby
able to attract.

It remains only, that I should determine how high the Water or other Liquor
may by this means be raised in a smaller Pipe above the Superficies of that
without it, and at what height it may be sustained: But to determine this, will
be exceeding difficult, unless I could certainly know how much of the Airs
pressure is taken off by the smallness of such and such a Pipe, and whether it
may be wholly taken off, that is, whether there can be a hole or pore so small,
into which Air could not at all enter, though water might with its whole force;
for were there such, it is manifest, that the water might rise in it to some
five or six and thirty English Foot high. I know not whether the capillary
Pipes in the bodies of small Trees, which we call their Microscopical pores,
may not be such; and whether the congruity of the sides of the Pore may not yet
draw the juice even higher then the Air was able by its bare pressure to raise
it: For, Congruity is a principle that not only unites and holds a body joined
to it, but, which is more, attracts and draws a body that is very near it, and
holds it above its usual height.

And this is obvious even in a drop of water suspended under any Similar or
Congruous body: For, besides the ambient pressure that helps to keep it
sustein'd, there is the Congruity of the bodies that are contiguous. This is
yet more evident in Tenacious and Glutinous bodies; such as Gummous Liquors,
Syrups, Pitch, and Rosin melted etc. Tar, Turpentine, Balsom, Bird-lime, etc.
for there it is evident, that the Parts of the tenacious body, as I may so call
it, do stick and adhere so closely together, that though drawn out into long
and very slender Cylinders, yet they will not easily relinquish one another;
and this, though the bodies be aliquatenus fluid, and in motion by one another;
which, to such as consider a fluid body only as its parts are in a confused
irregular motion, without taking in also the congruity of the parts one among
another, and incongruity to some other bodies, does appear not a little
strange. So that besides the incongruity of the ambient fluid to it, we are to
consider also the congruity of the parts of the contained fluid one with
another.

And this Congruity (that I may here a little further explain it) is both a
Tenaceous and an Attractive power; for the Congruity, in the Vibrative motions,
may be the cause of all kind of attraction, not only Electrical, but Magnetical
also, and therefore it may be also of Tenacity and Glutinousness. For, from a
perfect congruity of the motions of two distant bodies, the intermediate fluid
particles are separated and droven away from between them, and thereby those
congruous bodies are, by the incompassing mediums, compelled and forced nearer
together; wherefore that attractiveness must needs be stronger, when, by an
immediate contact, they are forced to be exactly the same: As I show more at
large in my Theory of the Magnet. And this hints to me the reason of the
suspension of the Mercury many inches, nay many feet, above the usual station
of 30 inches. For the parts of Quicksilver, being so very similar and
congruous to each other, if once united, will not easily suffer a divulsion:
And the parts of water, that were any ways heterogeneous, being by exantlation
or rarefaction exhausted, the remaining parts being also very similar, will not
easily part neither. And the parts of the Glass being solid, are more
difficulty disjoined; and the water, being somewhat similar to both, is, as it
were, a medium to unite both the Glass and the Mercury together. So that all
three being united, and not very dissimilar, by means of this contact, if care
be taken that the Tube in erecting be not shogged, the Quicksilver will remain
suspended, notwithstanding its contrary endeavor of Gravity, a great height
above its ordinary Station; but if this immediate Contact be removed, either by
a mere separation of them one from another by the force of a shog, whereby the
other becomes imbodied between them, and licks up from the surface some agil
parts, and so hurling them makes them air; or else by some small heterogeneous
agil part of the Water, or Air, or Quicksilver, which appears like a bubble,
and by its jumbling to and fro there is made way for the heterogeneous Ether
to obtrude it self between the Glass and either of the other Fluids, the
Gravity of Mercury precipitates it downward with very great violence; and if
the Vessel that holds the restagnating Mercury be convenient, the Mercury will
for a time vibrate to and fro with very large reciprocations, and at last will
remain kept up by the pressure of the external Air at the height of near thirty
inches. And whereas it may be objected, that it cannot be, that the mere
imbodying of the Ether between these bodies can be the cause, since the Ether
having a free passage always, both through the Pores of the Glass, and through
those of the Fluids, there is no reason why it should not make a separation at
all times whilst it remains suspended, as when it is violently dis-joyned by a
shog. To this I answer, That though the Ether passes between the Particles,
that is, through the Pores of bodies, so as that any chasme or separation being
made, it has infinite passages to admit its entry into it, yet such is the
tenacity or attractive virtue of Congruity, that till it be overcome by the
mere strength of Gravity, or by a shog assisting that Conatus of Gravity, or by
an agil Particle, that is like a leaver agitated by the Ether; and thereby the
parts of the congruous substances are separated so far asunder, that the
strength of congruity is so far weakened, as not to be able to reunite them,
the parts to be taken hold of being removed out of the attractive Sphere, as I
may so speak, of the congruity; such, I say, is the tenacity of congruity, that
it retains and holds the almost contiguous Particles of the Fluid, and suffers
them not to be separated, till by mere force that attractive or retentive
faculty be overcome: But the separation being once made beyond the Sphere of
the attractive activity of congruity, that virtue becomes of no effect at all,
but the Mercury freely falls downwards till it meet with a resistance from the
pressure of the ambient Air, able to resist its gravity, and keep it forced up
in the Pipe to the height of about thirty inches.

Thus have I gently raised a Steel pendulum by a Loadstone to a great Angle,
till by the shaking of my hand I have chanced to make a separation between
them, which is no sooner made, but as if the Loadstone had retained no
attractive virtue, the Pendulum moves freely from it toward the other side. So
vast a difference is there between the attractive virtue of the Magnet when it
acts upon a contiguous and upon a disjoined body: and much more must there be
between the attractive virtues of congruity upon a contiguous and disjoined
body; and in truth the attractive virtue is so little upon a body disjoined,
that though I have with a Microscope observed very diligently, whether there
were any extraordinary protuberance on the side of a drop of water that was
exceeding near to the end of a green stick, but did not touch it, I could not
perceive the least; though I found, that as soon as ever it touched it the whole
drop would presently unite it self with it; so that it seems an absolute
contact is requisite to the exercising of the tenacious faculty of congruity.

Observe. VII. Of some Phenomenon of Glass drops.
THese Glass Drops are small ^parcels of coarse green Glass taken out of the
Pots that contain the Metal (as they call it) in fusion, upon the end of an
Iron Pipe; and being exceeding hot, and thereby of a kind of sluggish fluid
Consistence, are suffered to drop from thence into a Bucket of cold Water, and
in it to lie till they be grown sensibly cold.

Some of these I broke in the open air, by snapping off a little of the small
stem with my fingers, others by crushing it with a small pair of Plyers; which
I had no sooner done, then the whole bulk of the drop flew violently, with a
very brisk noise, into multitudes of small pieces, some of which were as small
as dust, though in some there were remaining pieces pretty large, without any
flaw at all, and others very much flaw'd, which by rubbing between ones fingers
was easily reduced to dust; these dispersed every way so violently, that some
of them pierced my skin. I could not find, either with my naked Eye, or a
Microscope, that any of the broken pieces were of a regular figure, nor any one
like another, but for the most part those that flaw'd off in large pieces were
prettily branched.

The ends of others of these drops I nipt off whilst all the bodies and ends of
them lay buried under the water, which, like the former, flew all to pieces
with as brisk a noise, and as strong a motion.

Others of these I tried to break, by grinding away the blunt end, and though I
took a seemingly good one, and had ground away near two thirds of the Ball, yet
would it not fly to pieces, but now and then some small rings of it would snap
and fly off, not without a brisk noise and quick motion, leaving the Surface of
the drop whence it flew very prettily branched or creased, which was easily
discoverable by the Microscope. This drop, after I had thus ground it, without
at all impairing the remnant that was not ground away, I caused to fly
immediately all into sand upon the nipping off the very tip of its slender end.

Another of these drops I began to grind away at the smaller end, but had not
worn away on the stone above a quarter of an inch before the whole drop flew
with a brisk crack into sand or small dust; nor would it have held so long, had
there not been a little flaw in the piece that I ground away, as I afterward
found.

Several others of these drops I covered over with a thin but very tuff skin of
Icthyocolla, which being very tough and very transparent, was the most
convenient substance for these trials that I could imagine, having dipped, I say,
several of these drops in this transparent Glue whilst hot, and suffering them
to hang by a string tied about the end of them till they were cold, and the
skin pretty tough; then wrapping all the body of the drop (leaving out only the
very tip) in fine supple Kids-leather very closely, I nipped off the small top,
and found, as I expected, that notwithstanding this skin of Glue, and the close
wrapping up in Leather, upon the breaking of the top, the drop gave a crack
like the rest, and gave my hand a pretty brisk impulse: but yet the skin and
leather was so strong as to keep the parts from flying out of their former
posture; and, the skin being transparent, I found that the drop retained
exactly its former figure and polish, but was grown perfectly opacous and all
over flaw'd, all those flaws lying in the manner of rings, from the bottom or
blunt end, to the very top of small point. And by several examinations with a
Microscope, of several thus broken, I found the flaws, both within the body of
the drop, and on the outward surface, to lie much in this order.

Let AB in the Figure X of the fourth Scheme represent the drop cased over with
Icthyocolla or Isinglass, and (by being ordered as is before prescribed) crazed
or flawed into pieces, but by the skin or case kept in its former figure, and
each of its flawed parts preserved exactly in its due posture; the outward
appearance of it somewhat plainly to the naked eye, but much more conspicuous
if viewed with a small senss appeared much after this shape. That is, the blunt
end B for a pretty breadth, namely, as far as the Ring CCC seemed irregularly
flawed with diverse clefts, which all seemed to tend toward the Center of it,
being, as I afterward found, and shall anon show in the description of the
figure Y, the Basis, as it were, of a Cone, which was terminated a little above
the middle of the drop, all the rest of the Surface from CCC to A was flawed
with an infinite number of small and parallel Rings, which as they were for the
most part very round, so were they very thick and close together, but were not
so exactly flaw'd as to make a perfect Ring, but each circular part was by
irregular cracks flawed likewise into multitudes of irregular flakes or tiles;
and this order was observed likewise the whole length of the neck,

Now though I could not so exactly cut this conical Body through the Axis, as
is represented by the figure Y; yet by anatomizing, as it were, of several, and
taking notice of diverse particular circumstances, I was informed, that could I
have artificially divided a flaw'd drop through the Axis or Center, I should
with a Microscope have found it to appear much of this form, where A signifies
the Apex, and B the blunt end, CC the Cone of the Basis, which is terminated at
T the top or end of it, which seems to be the very middle of the blunt end in
which, not only the conical body of the Basis CC is terminated, but as many of
the parts of the drop as reach as high as DD.

And it seemed to be the head or beginning of a Pith, as it were, or a a part
of the body which seemed more spungy then the rest, and much more irregularly
flawed, which from T ascended by EE, though less visible, into the small neck
toward A. The Grain, as it were, of all the flaws, that from all the outward
Surface ADCCDA, was much the same, as is represented by the black strokes that
meet in the middle DT, DT, DE, DE, etc.

Nor is this kind of Grain, as I may call it, peculiar to Glass drops thus
quenched; for (not to mention Coperas-stones, and diverse other Marchasites and
Minerals, which I have often taken notice of to be in the very same manner
flaked or grained, with a kind of Pith in the middle) I have observed the same
in all manner of cast Iron, especially the coarser sort, such as Stoves, and
Furnaces, and Backs, and Pots are made of: For upon the breaking of any of
those Substances it is obvious to observe, how from the outsides toward the
middle, there is a kind of Radiation or Grain much resembling this of the
Glass-drop; but this Grain is most conspicuous in Iron-bullets, if they be
broken: the same Phenomenon may be produced by casting regulus of Antimony into
a Bullet-mold, as also with Glass of Antimony, or with almost any such kind of
Vitrified substance, either cast into a cold Mold or poured into Water.

Others of these Drops I heat red hot in the fire, and then suffered them to
cool by degrees. And these I found to have quite lost all their fulminating or
flying quality, as also their hard, brittle and springy texture; and to emerge
of a much softer temper, and much easier to be broken or snapt with ones
finger; but its strong and brittle quality was quite destroyed, and it seemed
much of the same consistence with other green Glass well nealed in the Oven.

The Figure and bigness of these for the most part was the same with that of
the Figure Z; that is, all the surface of them was very smooth and polisht, and
for the most part round, but very rugged or knobbed about D, and all the length
of the stem was here and there pitted or flatted. About D, which is at the
upper part of the drop under that side of the stem which is concave, there
usually was made some one or more little Hillocks or Prominences. The drop it
self, before it be broken, appears very transparent, and toward the middle of
it, to be very full of small Bubbles, of some kind of aerial substance, which
by the refraction of the outward surface appear much bigger then really they
are; and this may be in good part removed, by putting the drop under the
surface of clear Water, for by that means most part of the refraction of the
unequal Surface of the drop is destroyed, and the bubbles will appear much
smaller. And this, by the by, minds me of the appearing magnitude of the
aperture of the iris, or pupil of the eye, which though it appear, and be
therefore judged very large, is yet not above a quarter of the bigness it
appears of, by the lenticular refraction of the Cornea.

The cause of all which Phenomenon I imagine to be no other then this, That the
Parts of the Glass being by the excessive heat of the fire kept off and
separated one from another, and thereby put into a kind of sluggish fluid
consistence, are suffered to drop off with that heat or agitation remaining in
them, into cold Water; by which means the outsides of the drop are presently
cooled and crusted, and are thereby made of a loose texture, because the parts
of it have not time to settle themselves leisurely together, and so to lie very
close together: And the innermost parts of the drop, retaining still much of
their former heat and agitations, remain of a loose texture also, and,
according as the cold strikes inwards from the bottom and sides, are quenched,
as it were, and made rigid in that very posture wherein the cold finds them.
For the parts of the crust being already hardened, will not suffer the parts to
shrink any more from the outward Surface inward; and though it shrink a little
by reason of the small parcels of some Aerial substances dispersed through the
matter of the Glass, yet that is not near so much as it appears (as I just now
hinted;) nor if it were, would it be sufficient for to consolidate and condense
the body of Glass into a tuff and close texture, after it had been so
excessively rarefied by the heat of the glass-Furnace.

But that there may be such an expansion of the aerial substance contained in
those little blebbs or bubbles in the body of the drop, this following
Experiment will make more evident.

Take a small Glass-Cane about a foot long, seal up one end of it hermetically,
then put in a very small bubble of Glass, almost of the shape of an
Essence-viol with the open mouth toward the sealed end, then draw out the
other end of the Pipe very small, and fill the whole Cylinder with water, then
set this Tube by the Fire till the Water begin to boil, and the Air in the
bubble be in good part rarefied and driven out, then by sucking at the smalling
Pipe, more of the Air or vapors in the bubble may be sucked out, so that it
may sink to the bottom; when it is sunk to the bottom, in the flame of a
Candle, or Lamp, nip up the slender Pipe and let it cool: whereupon it is
obvious to observe, first, that the Water by degrees will subside and shrink
into much less room: Next, that the Air or vapors in the Glass will expand
themselves so, as to buoy up the little Glass: Thirdly, that all about the
inside of the Glass-pipe there will appear an infinite number of small bubbles,
which as the Water grows colder and colder will swell bigger and bigger, and
many of them buoy themselves up and break at the top.

From this Disceding of the heat in Glass drops, that is, by the quenching or
cooling Irradiations propagated from the Surface upwards and inwards, by the
lines CT, CT, DT, DE, etc. the bubbles in the drop have room to expand
themselves a little, and the parts of the Glass contract themselves; but this
operation being too quick for the sluggish parts of the Glass, the contraction
is performed very unequally and irregularly, and thereby the Particles of the
Glass are bent, some one way, and some another, yet so as that most of them
draw toward the Pith or middle TEEE, or rather from that outward: so that they
cannot extricate or unbend themselves, till some part of TEEE be broken and
loosened, for all the parts about that are placed in the manner of an Arch, and
so till their hold at TEEE be loosened they cannot fly asunder, but uphold, and
shelter, and fix each other much like the stones in a Vault, where each stone
does concur to the stability of the whole Fabric, and no one stone can be
taken away but the whole Arch falls. And wheresoever any of those radiating
wedges DTD, etc. are removed, which are the component parts of this Arch, the
whole Fabric presently falls to pieces; for all the Springs of the several
parts are set at liberty, which immediately extricate themselves and fly
asunder every way; each part by its spring contributing to the darting of it
self and some other contiguous part. But if this drop be heat so hot as that
the parts by degrees can unbend themselves, and be settled and annealed in that
posture, and be then suffered gently to subside and cool; The parts by this
nealing losing their springiness, constitute a drop of a more soft but less
brittle texture, and the parts being not at all under a flexure, though any
part of the middle or Pith TEEE be broken, yet will not the drop at all fly to
pieces as before.

This Conjecture of mine I shall endeavor to make out by explaining each
particular Assertion with analogous Experiments: The Assertions are these.

First, That the parts of the Glass, whilst in a fluid Consistence and hot, are
more rarefied, or take up more room, then when hard and cold.

Secondly, That the parts of the drop do suffer a twofold contraction.

Thirdly, That the dropping or quenching the glowing metal in the Water makes
it of a hard, springing, and rarefied texture.

Fourthly, That there is a flexion or force remaining upon the parts of the
Glass thus quenched, from which they endeavor to extricate themselves.

Fifthly, That the Fabric of the drop, that is able to hinder the parts from
extricating themselves, is analogus to that of an Arch.

Sixthly, That the sudden flying asunder of the parts proceeds from their
springiness.

Seventhly, That a gradual heating and cooling does anneal or reduce the parts
of Glass to a texture that is more loose, and easilier to be broken, but not so
brittle.

That the first of these is true may be gathered from this, That Heat is a
property of a body arising from the motion or agitation of its parts; and
therefore whatever body is thereby touched must necessarily receive some part of
that motion, whereby its parts will be shaken and agitated, and so by degrees
free and extricate themselves from one another, and each part so moved does by
that motion exert a conatus of protruding and displacing all the adjacent
Particles. Thus Air included in a vessel, by being heated will burst it to
pieces. Thus have I broke a Bladder held over the fire in my hand, with such a
violence and noise, that it almost made me deaf for the present, and much
surpassed the noise of a Musket: The like have I done by throwing into the fire
small glass Bubbles hermetically sealed, with a little drop of Water included
in them. Thus Water also, or any other Liquor, included in a convenient vessel,
by being warmed, manifestly expands it self with a very great violence, so as
to break the strongest vessel, if when heated it be narrowly imprisoned in it.
This is very manifest by the sealed Thermometers, which I have, by several
trials, at last brought to a great certainty and tenderness: for I have made
some with stems above four foot long, in which the expanding Liquor would so
far vary, as to be very near the very top in the heat of Summer, and pretty near
the bottom at the coldest time of the Winter. The Stems I use for them are very
thick, straight, and even Pipes of Glass, with a very small perforation, and
both the head and body I have made on purpose at the Glass-house, of the same
metal whereof the Pipes are drawn: these I can easily in the flame of a Lamp,
urged with the blast of a pair of Bellows, seal and close together, so as to
remain very firm, close and even; by this means I join on the body first, and
then fill both it and a part of the stem, proportionate to the length of the
stem and the warmth of the season I fill it in with the best rectified spirit
of Wine highly tinged with the lovely color of Cocheneel, which I deepen the
more by pouring some drops of common spirit of Urine, which must not be too
well rectified, because it will be apt to make the Liquor to curdle and stick
in the small perforation of the stem. This Liquor I have upon trial found the
most tender of any spirituous Liquor, and those are much more sensibly affected
with the variations of heat and cold then other more phlegmatic and ponderous
Liquors, and as capable of receiving a deep tincture, and keeping it, as any
Liquor whatsoever; and (which makes it yet more acceptable) is not subject to
be frozen by any cold yet known. When I have thus filled it, I can very easily
in the forementioned flame of a Lamp seal and join on the head of it.

Then, for graduating the stem, I fix that for the beginning of my division
where the surface of the liquor in the stem remains when the ball is placed in
common distilled water, that is so cold that it just begins to freeze and shoot
into flakes; and that mark I fix at a convenient place of the stem, to make it
capable of exhibiting very many degrees of cold, below that which is requisite
to freeze water: the rest of my divisions, both above and below this (which I
mark with a [o] or naught) I place according to the Degrees of Expansion, or
Contraction of the Liquor in proportion to the bulk it had when it endured the
newly mentioned freezing cold. And this may be very easily and accurately
enough done by this following way; Prepare a Cylindrical vessel of very thin
plate Brass or Silver, ABCD of the figure Z; the Diameter AB of whose cavity
let be about two inches, and the depth BC the same; let each end be covered
with a flat and smooth plate of the same substance, closely soder'd on, and in
the midst of the upper cover make a pretty large hole OF, about the bigness of
a fifth part of the Diameter of the other; into this fasten very well with
cement a straight and even Cylindrical pipe of Glass, EFGH, the Diameter of
whose cavity let be exactly one tenth of the Diameter of the greater Cylinder.
Let this pipe be marked at GH with a Diamant, so that G from E may be distant
just two inches, or the same height with that of the cavity of the greater
Cylinder, then divide the length EG exactly into 10 parts, so the capacity of
the hollow of each of these divisions will be 1/1000 part of the capacity of
the greater Cylinder. This vessel being thus prepared, the way of marking and
graduating the Thermometers may be very easily thus performed:

Fill this Cylindrical vessel with the same liquor wherewith the Thermometers
are filled, then place both it and the Thermometer you are to graduate, in
water that is ready to be frozen, and bring the surface of the liquor in the
Thermometer to the first mark or [o]; then so proportion the liquor in the
Cylindrical vessel, that the surface of it may just be at the lower end of the
small glass-Cylinder; then very gently and gradually warm the water in which
both the Thermometer and this Cylindrical vessel stand, and as you perceive the
tinged liquor to rise in both stems, with the point of a Diamond give several
marks on the stem of the Thermometer at those places, which by comparing the
expansion in both Stems, are found to correspond to the divisions of the
cylindrical vessel, and having by this means marked some few of these divisions
on the Stem, it will be very easy by these to mark all the rest of the Stem,
and accordingly to assign to every division a proper character.

A Thermometer, thus marked and prepared, will be the fittest Instrument to
make a Standard of heat and cold that can be imagined. For being sealed up, it
is not at all subject to variation or wasting, nor is it liable to be changed
by the varying pressure of the Air, which all other kind of Thermometers that
are open to the Air are liable to. But to proceed.

This property of Expansion with Heat, and Contraction with Cold, is not
peculiar to Liquors only, but to all kind of solid Bodies also, especially
Metals, which will more manifestly appear by this Experiment.

Take the Barrel of a Stopcock of Brass, and let the Key, which is well fitted
to it, be riveted into it, so that it may slip, and be easily turned round,
then heat this Cock in the fire, and you will find the Key so swollen, that you
will not be able to turn it round in the Barrel; but if it be suffered to cool
again, as soon as it is cold it will be as movable, and as easy to be turned
as before.

This Quality is also very observable in Lead, Tin, Silver, Antimony, Pitch,
Rosin, Beeswax, Butter, and the like; all which, if after they be melted you
suffer gently to cool, you shall find the parts of the upper Surface to subside
and fall inwards, losing that plumpness and smoothness it had whilst in fusion.
The like I have also observed in the cooling of Glass of Antimony, which does
very near approach the nature of Glass,

But because these are all Examples taken from other materials then Glass, and
argue only, that possibly there may be the like property also in Glass, not
that really there is; we shall by three or four Experiments endeavor to
manifest that also.

And the First is an Observation that is very obvious even in these very drops,
to wit, that they are all of them terminated with an unequal or irregular
Surface, especially about the smaller part of the drop, and the whole length of
the stem; as about D, and from thence to A, the whole Surface, which would have
been round if the drop had cooled leisurely, is, by being quenched hastily,
very irregularly flatted and pitted; which I suppose proceeds partly from the
Waters unequally cooling and pressing the parts of the drop, and partly from
the self-contracting or subsiding quality of the substance of the Glass: For
the vehemence of the heat of the drop causes such sudden motions and bubbles in
the cold Water, that some parts of the Water bear more forcibly against one
part then against another, and consequently do more suddenly cool those parts
to which they are contiguous.

A Second Argument may be drawn from the Experiment of cutting Glasses with a
hot Iron. For in that Experiment the top of the Iron heats, and thereby
rarifies the parts of the Glass that lie just before the crack, whence each of
those agitated parts endeavoring to expand its self and get elbow-room,
thrusts off all the rest of the contiguous parts, and consequently promotes the
crack that was before begun.

A third Argument may be drawn from the way of producing a crack in a sound
piece or plate of Glass, which is done two ways, either First, by suddenly
heating a piece of Glass in one place more then in another. And by this means
Chemists usually cut off the necks of Glass-bodies, by two kinds of
Instruments, either by a glowing hot round Iron-Ring, which just incompasses
the place that is to be cut, or else by a Sulphur'd Thread, which is often
wound about the place where the separation is to be made, and then fired. Or
Secondly, A Glass may be cracked by cooling it suddenly in any place with
Water, or the like, after it has been all leisurely and gradually heated very
hot. Both which Phenomenon seem manifestly to proceed from the expansion and
contraction of the parts of the Glass, which is also made more probable by this
circumstance which I have observed, that a piece of common window-glass being
heated in the middle very suddenly with a live Coal or hot Iron, does usually
at the first crack fall into pieces, whereas if the Plate has been gradually
heated very hot, and a drop of cold Water and the like be put on the middle of
it, it only flaws it, but does not break it asunder immediately.

A Fourth Argument may be drawn from this Experiment; Take a Glass-pipe, and
fit into it a solid stick of Glass, so as it will but just be moved in it. Then
by degrees heat them whilst they are one within another, and they will grow
stiffer, but when they are again cold, they will be as easy to be turned as
before. This Expansion of Glass is more manifest in this Experiment.

Take a stick of Glass of a considerable length, and fit it so between the two
ends or screws of a Lath, that it may but just easily turn, and that the very
ends of it may be just touched and sustained thereby; then applying the flame of
the Candle to the middle of it, and heating it hot, you will presently find the
Glass to stick very fast on those points, and not without much difficulty to be
convertible on them, before that by removing the flame for a while from it, it
be suffered to cool, and en^ you will find it as easy to be turned round as at
the first.

From all which Experiments it is very evident, that all those Bodies, and
particularly Glass, suffers an Expansion by Heat, and that a very considerable
one, whilst they are in a state of Fusion. For Fluidity, as I elsewhere
mention, being nothing but an effect of a very strong and quick shaking motion,
whereby the parts are, as it were, loosened from each other, and consequently
leave an interjacent space or vacuity; it follows, that all those shaken
Particles must necessarily take up much more room then when they were at rest,
and lay quietly upon each other. And this is further confirmed by a Pot of
boiling Alabaster, which will manifestly rise a sixth or eighth part higher in
the Pot, whilst it is boiling, then it will remain at, both before and after it
be boiled. The reason of which odd Phenomenon (to hint it here only by the
way) is this, that there is in the curious powder of Alabaster, and other
calcining Stones, a certain watery substance, which is so fixed and included
with the solid Particles, that till the heat be very considerable they will not
fly away; but after the heat is increased to such a degree, they break out
every way in vapors, and thereby so shake and loosen the small corpusles of
the Powder from each other, that they become perfectly of the nature of a fluid
body, and one may move a stick to and fro through it, and stir it as easily as
water, and the vapors burst and break out in bubbles just as in boiling water,
and the like; whereas, both before those watery parts are flying away, and
after they are quite gone; that is, before and after it have done boiling, all
those effects cease, and a stick is as difficultly moved to and fro in it as in
sand, or the like. Which Explication I could easily prove, had I time; but this
is not a fit place for it.

To proceed therefore, I say, that the dropping of this expanded Body into cold
Water, does make the parts of the Glass suffer a double contraction: The first
is, of those parts which are near the Surface of the Drop. For Cold, as I said
before, contracting Bodies, that is, by the abatement of the agitating faculty
the parts falling nearer together; the parts next adjoying to the Water must
needs lose much of their motion, and impart it to the Ambient-water (which the
Ebullition and commotion of it manifests) and thereby become a solid and hard
crust, whilst the innermost parts remain yet fluid and expanded; whence, as
they grow cold also by degrees, their parts must necessarily be left at liberty
to be condensed, but because of the hardness of the outward crust, the
contraction cannot be admitted that way; but there being many very small, and
before inconspicuous, bubbles in the substance of the Glass, upon the subsiding
of the parts of the Glass, the agil substance contained in them has liberty of
expanding it self a little, and thereby those bubbles grow much bigger, which
is the second Contraction. And both these are confirmed from the appearance of
the Drop it self: for as for the outward parts, we see, first, that it is
irregular and shrunk, as it were, which is caused by the yielding a little of
the hardened Skin to a Contraction, after the very outmost Surface is settled;
and as for the internal parts, one may with ones naked Eye perceive abundance
of very conspicuous bubbles, and with the Microscope many more.

The Consideration of which Particulars will easily make the Third Position
probable, that is, that the parts of the drop will be of a very hard, though of
a rarefied Texture; for if the outward parts of the Drop, by reason of its hard
crust, will endure very little Contraction, and the agil Particles, included in
those bubbles, by the losing of their agitation, by the decrease of the Heat,
lose also most part of their Spring and Expansive power; it follows (the
withdrawing of the heat being very sudden) that the parts must be left in a
very loose Texture, and by reason of the implication of the parts one about
another, which from their sluggishnes and glutinousness I suppose to be much
after the manner of the sticks in a Thorn-bush, or a Lock of Wool; It will
follow, I say, that the parts will hold each other very strongly together, and
endeavor to draw each other nearer together, and consequently their Texture
must be very hard and stiff, but very much rarefied.

And this will make probable my next Position, That the parts of the Glass are
under a kind of tension or flexure, out of which they endeavor to extricate
and free themselves, and thereby all the parts draw toward the Center or
middle, and would, if the outward parts would give way, as they do when the
outward parts cool leisurely (as in baking of Glasses) contract the bulk of the
drop into a much less compass. For since, as I proved before, the Internal
parts of the drop, when fluid, were of a very rarefied Texture, and, as it
were, tos'd open like a Lock of Wool, and if they were suffered leisurely to
cool, would be again pressed, as it were, close together: And since that the
heat, which kept them bended and open, is removed, and yet the parts not
suffered to get as near together as they naturally would; It follows, that the
Particles remain under a kind of tension and flexure, and consequently have an
endeavor to free themselves from that bending and distension, which they do,
as soon as either the tip be broken, or as soon as by a leisurely heating and
cooling, the parts are nealed into another posture.

And this will make my next Position probable, that the parts of the Glass
drops are contignated together in the form of an Arch, and cannot any where
yield or be drawn inwards, till by the removing of some one part of it (as it
happens in the removing one of the stones of an Arch) the whole Fabric is
shattered, and falls to pieces, and each of the Springs is left at liberty,
suddenly to extricate it self: for since I have made it probable, that the
internal parts of the Glass have a contractive power inwards, and the external
parts are incapable of such a Contraction, and the figure of it being
spherical; it follows, that the superficial parts must bear against each other,
and keep one another from being condensed into a less room, in the same manner
as the stones of an Arch conduce to the upholding each other in that Figure.
And this is made more probable by another Experiment which was communicated to
me by an excellent Person, whose extraordinary Abilities in all kind of
Knowledge, especially in that of Natural things, and his generous Disposition in
communicating, encouraged me to have recourse to him on many occasions. The
Experiment was this: Small Glass-balls (about the bigness of that represented
in the Figure and.) would, upon rubbing or scratching the inward Surface, fly
all insunder, with a pretty brisk noise; whereas neither before nor after the
inner Surface had been thus scratcht, did there appear any flaw or crack. And
putting the pieces of one of those broken ones together again, the flaws
appeared much after the manner of the black lines on the Figure, and. These
Balls were small, but exceeding thick bubbles of Glass, which being cracked off
from the Puntilion whilst very hot, and so suffered to cool without nealing
them in the Oven over the Furnace, do thereby (being made of white Glass, which
cools much quicker then green Glass, and is thereby made much brittler) acquire
a very porous and very brittle texture: so that if with the point of a Needle
or Bodkin, the inside of any of them be rubbed pretty hard, and then laid on a
Table, it will, within a very little while, break into many pieces with a brisk
noise, and throw the parts above a span asunder on the Table: Now though the
pieces are not so small as those of a fulminating drop, yet they as plainly
show, that the outward parts of the Glass have a great Conatus to fly asunder,
were they not held together by the tenacity of the parts of the inward Surface:
for we see as soon as those parts are crazed by hard rubbing, and thereby their
tenacity spoiled, the springiness of the more outward parts quickly makes a
divulsion, and the broken pieces will, if the concave Surface of them be
further scratcht with a Diamond, fly again into smaller pieces.

From which preceding considerations it will follow Sixthly, That the sudden
flying asunder of the parts as soon as this Arch is any where disordered or
broken, proceeds from the springing of the parts; which, endeavoring to
extricate themselves as soon as they get the liberty, they perform it with such
a quickness, that they throw one another away with very great violence: for the
Particles that compose the Crust have a Conatus to lie further from one
another, and therefore as soon as the external parts are loosened they dart
themselves outward with great violence, just as so many Springs would do, if
they were detained and fastened to the body, as soon as they should be suddenly
loosened; and the internal parts drawing inward, they contract so violently,
that they rebound back again and fly into multitude of small shivers or sands.
Now though they appear not, either to the naked Eye, or the Microscope, yet I
am very apt to think there may be abundance of small flaws or cracks, which, by
reason the strong reflecting Air is not got between the contiguous parts,
appear not. And that this may be so, I argue from this, that I have very often
been able to make a crack or flaw, in some convenient pieces of Glass, to
appear and disappear at pleasure, according as by pressing together, or pulling
asunder the contiguous parts, I excluded or admitted the strong reflecting Air
between the parts: And it is very probable, that there may be some Body, that
is either very rarefied Air, or something analogous to it, which fills the
bubbles of these drops; which I argue, first, from the roundness of them, and
next, from the vivid reflection of Light which they exhibit: Now though I
doubt not, but that the Air in them is very much rarefied, yet that there is
some in them, to such as well consider this Experiment of the disappearing of a
crack upon the extruding of the Air, I suppose it will seem more then probable.

The Seventh and last therefore that I shall prove, is, That the gradual
heating and cooling of these so extended bodies does reduce the parts of the
Glass to a looser and softer temper. And this I found by heating them, and
keeping them for a pretty while very red hot in a fire; for thereby I found them
to grow a little lighter, and the small Stems to be very easily broken and
snapt any where, without at all making the drop fly; whereas before they were
so exceeding hard, that they could not be broken without much difficulty; and
upon their breaking the whole drop would fly in pieces with very great
violence. The Reason of which last seems to be, that the leisurely heating and
cooling of the parts does not only wast some part of the Glass it self, but
ranges all the parts into a better order, and gives each Particle an
opportunity of relaxing its self, and consequently neither will the parts hold
so strongly together as before, nor be so difficult to be broken: The parts now
more easily yielding, nor will the other parts fly in pieces, because the parts
have no bended Springs. The relaxation also in the temper of hardened Steel, and
hammered Metals* by nealing them in the fire, seems to proceed from much the
same cause. For both by quenching suddenly such Metals as have vitrified parts
interspersed, as Steel has, and by hammering of other kinds that do not so much
abound with them, as Silver, Brass, etc. the parts are put into and detained in
a bended posture, which by the agitation of Heat are shaken, and loosened, and
suffered to unbend themselves.

Observe. VIII. Of the fiery Sparks struck from a Flint or Steel.
Schem. 5.
IT is a very common Experiment, by striking with a Flint against a Steel, to
make certain fiery and shining Sparks to fly out from between those two
compressing Bodies. About eight years since, upon casually reading the
Explication of this odd Phenomenon, by the most Ingenious Des Carts, I had a
great desire to be satisfied, what that Substance was that gave such a shining
and bright Light: And to that end I spread a sheet of white Paper, and on it,
observing the place where several of these Sparks seemed to vanish, I found
certain very small, black, but glistering Spots of a movable Substance, each of
which examining with my Miscrocope, I found to be a small round Globule; some
of which, as they looked pretty small, so did they from their Surface yield a
very bright and strong reflection on that side which was next the Light; and
each looked almost like a pretty bright Iron-Ball, whose Surface was pretty
regular, such as is represented by the Figure A. In this I could perceive the
Image of the Window pretty well, or of a Stick, which I moved up and down
between the Light and it. Others I found, which were, as to the bulk of the
Ball, pretty regularly round, but the Surface of them, as it was not very
smooth, but rough, and more irregular, so was the reflection from it more faint
and confused. Such were the Surfaces of B. C. D. and E. Some of these I found
cleft or cracked, as C, others quite broken in two and hollow, as D. which
seemed to be half the hollow shell of a Granado, broken irregularly in pieces.
Several others I found of other shapes; but that which is represented by E, I
observed to be a very big Spark of Fire, which went out upon one side of the
Flint that I struck fire withal, to Schem: V
which it s^uck by the root F, at the end of which small Stem was fastened-on a
Hemisphere, or half a hollow Ball, with the mouth of it open from the
stemwards, so that it looked much like a Funnel, or an old fashioned Bowl
without a foot. This night, making many trials and observations of this
Experiment, I met, among a multitude of the Globular ones which I had observed,
a couple of Instances, which are very remarkable to the confirmation of my
Hypothesis.

And the First was of a pretty big Ball fastened on to the end of a small
sliver of Iron, which Compositum seemed to be nothing else but a long thin chip
of Iron, one of whose ends was melted into a small round Globul; the other end
remaining unmelted and irregular, and perfectly Iron.

The Second Instance was not less remarkable then the First; for I found, when
a Spark went out, nothing but a very small thin long sliver of Iron or Steel,
unmelted at either end. So that it seems, that some of these Sparks are the
slivers or chips of the Iron vitrified, Others are only the slivers melted into
Balls without vitrification, And the third kind are only small slivers of the
Iron, made red-hot with the violence of the stroke given on the Steel by the
Flint.

He that shall diligently examine the Phenomenon of this Experiment, will, I
doubt not, find cause to believe, that the reason I have heretofore given of
it, is the true and genuine cause of it, namely, That the Spark appearing so
bright in the falling, is nothing else but a small piece of the Steel or Flint,
but most commonly of the Steel, which by the violence of the stroke is at the
same time severed and heatt red-hot, and that sometimes to such a degree, as to
make it melt together into a small Globule of Steel; and sometimes also is that
heat so very intense, as further to melt it and vitrifie it; but many times the
heat is so gentle, as to be able to make the sliver only red hot, which
notwithstanding falling upon the tinder (that is only a very curious small Coal
made of the small threads of Linen burnt to coals and char'd) it easily sets
it on fire. Nor will any part of this Hypothesis seem strange to him that
considers, First, that either hammering, or filing, or otherwise violently
rubbing of Steel, will presently make it so hot as to be able to burn ones
fingers. Next, that the whole force of the stroke is exerted upon that small
part where the Flint and Steel first touch: For the Bodies being each of them
so very hard, the pulls cannot be far communicated, that is, the parts of each
can yield but very little, and therefore the violence of the concussion will be
exerted on that piece of Steel which is cut off by the Flint. Thirdly, that the
filings or small parts of Steel are very apt, as it were, to take fire, and are
presently red hot, that is, there seems to be a very combustible sulphurous
Body in Iron or Steel, which the Air very readily preys upon, as soon as the
body is a little violently heated.

And this is obvious in the filings of Steel or Iron cast through the flame of
a Candle; for even by that sudden transitus of the small chips of Iron, they
are heat red hot, and that combustible sulphurous Body is presently preyed
upon and devoured by the aereal incompassing Menstruum, whose office in this
Particular I have shown in the Explication of Charcole.

And in prosecution of this Experiment, having taken the filings of Iron and
Steel, and with the point of a Knife cast them through the flame of a Candle, I
observed where some conspicuous shining Particles fell, and looking on them
with my Microscope, I found them to be nothing else but such round Globules, as
I formerly found the Sparks struck from the Steel by a stroke to be, only a
little bigger; and shaking together all the filings that had fallen upon the
sheet of Paper underneath, and observing them with the Microscope, I found a
great number of small Globules, such as the former, though there were also many
of the parts that had remained untoucht, and rough filings or chips of Iron. So
that, it seems, Iron does contain a very combustible sulphurous Body, which
is, in all likelihood, one of the causes of this Phenomenon, and which may be
perhaps very much concerned in the business of its hardening and tempering: of
which somewhat is said in the Description of Muscovy-glass.

So that, these things considered, we need not trouble our selves to find out
what kind of Pores they are, both in the Flint and Steel, that contain the
Atoms of fire, nor how those Atoms come to be hindered from running all out,
when a door or passage in their Pores is made by the concussion: nor need we
trouble our selves to examine by what Prometheus the Element of Fire comes to
be fetched down from above the Regions of the Air, in what Cells or Boxes it is
kept, and what Epimetheus lets it go: Nor to consider what it is that causes so
great a conflux of the atomical Particles of Fire, which are said to fly to a
flaming Body, like Vultures or Eagles to a putrefying Carcass, and there to
make a very great pudder. Since we have nothing more difficult in this
Hypothesis to conceive, first, as to the kindling of Tinder, then how a large
Iron-bullet, let fall red or glowing hot upon a heap of Small-coal, should set
fire to those that are next to it first: Nor secondly, is this last more
difficult to be explicated, then that a Body, as Silver for Instance, put into
a weak Menstruum, as unrectified Aqua fortis should, when it is put in a great
heat, be there dissolved by it, and not before; which Hypothesis is more
largely explicated in the Description of Charcoal. To conclude, we see by this
Instance, how much Experiments may conduce to the regulating of Philosophical
notions. For if the most Acute Des Carts had applied himself experimentally to
have examined what substance it was that caused that shining of the falling
Sparks struck from a Flint and a Steel, he would certainly have a little
altered his Hypothesis, and we should have found, that his Ingenious Principles
would have admitted a very plausible Explication of this Phenomenon; whereas
by not examining so far as he might, he has set down an Explication which
Experiment does contradict.

But before I leave this Description, I must not forget to take notice of the
Globular form into which each of these is most curiously formed. And this
Phenomenon, as I have elsewhere more largely shown, proceeds from a propriety
which belongs to all kinds of fluid Bodies more or less, and is caused by the
Incongruity of the Ambient and included Fluid, which so acts and modulates each
other, that they acquire, as near as is possible, a sperical or globular form,
which propriety and several of the Phenomenon that proceed from it, I have more
fully explicated in the sixth Observation.

One Experiment, which does very much illustrate my present Explication, and is
in it self exceeding pretty, I must not pass by: And that is a way of making
small Globules or Balls of Lead, or Tin, as small almost as these of Iron or
Steel, and that exceeding easily and quickly, by turning the filings or chips
of those Metals also into perfectly round Globules. The way, in short, as I
received it from the Learned Physician Doctor I. G. is this;

Reduce the Metal you would thus shape, into exceeding fine filings, the finer
the filings are, the finer will the Balls be: Stratifie these filings with the
fine and well dried powder of quick Lime in a Crucible proportioned to the
quantity you intend to make: When you have thus filled your Crucible, by
continual stratifications of the filings and powder, so that, as near as may
be, no one of the filings may touch another, place the Crucible in a gradual
fire, and by degrees let it be brought to a heat big enough to make all the
filings, that are mixed with the quick Lime, to melt, and no more; for if the
fire be too hot, many of these filings will join and run together; whereas if
the heat be proportioned, upon washing the Lime-dust in fair Water, all those
small filings of the Metal will subside to the bottom in a most curious powder,
consisting all of exactly round Globules, which, if it be very fine, is very
excellent to make Hour-glasses of.

Now though quick Lime be the powder that this direction makes choice of, yet I
doubt not, but that there may be much more convenient ones found out, one of
which I have made trial of, and found very effectual; and were it not for
discovering, by the mentioning of it, another Secret, which I am not free-to
impart, I should have here inserted it.

Observe. IX. Of the Colors observable in Muscovy Glass, and other thin Bodies.
MOscovy-glass, or Lapis specularis, is a Body that seems to have as many
Curiosities in its Fabric as any common Mineral I have met with: for first, It
is transparent to a great thickness: Next, it is compounded of an infinite
number of thin flakes joined or generated one upon another so close and smooth,
as with many hundreds of them to make one smooth and thin Plate of a
transparent flexible substance, which with care and diligence may be slit into
pieces so exceedingly thin as to be hardly perceivable by the eye, and yet even
those, which I have thought the thinnest, I have with a good Microscope found
to be made up of many other Plates, yet thinner; and it is probable, that, were
our Microscopes much better, we might much further discover its divisibility.
Nor are these flakes only regular as to the smoothness of their Surfaces; but
thirdly, In many Plates they may be perceived to be terminated naturally with
edges of the figure of a Rhomboeid. This Figure is much more conspicuous in our
English talk, much whereof is found in the Lead Mines, and is commonly called
Spar, and Kauck, which is of the same kind of substance with the Selenitis, but
is seldom found in so large flakes as that is, nor is it altogether so tuff,
but is much more clear and transparent, and much more curiously shaped, and yet
may be cleft and flak'd like the other Selenitis. But fourthly, this stone has
a property, which in respect of the Microscope, is more notable, and that is,
that it exhibits several appearances of Colors, both to the naked Eye, but
much more conspicuously to the Microscope; for the exhibiting of which, I took
a piece of Muscovy-glass, and splitting or cleaving it into thin Plates, I
found that up and down in several parts of them I could plainly perceive
several white specks or flaws, and others diversely colored with all the
Colors of the Rainbow; and with the Microscope I could perceive, that these
Colors were ranged in rings that encompassed the white speck or flaw, and were
round or irregular, according to the shape of the spot which they terminated;
and the position of Colors, in respect of one another, was the very same as in
the Rainbow. The consecution of those Colors from the middle of the spot
outward being Blew, Purple, Scarlet, Yellow, Green; Blew, Purple, Scarlet, and
so onwards, sometimes half a score times repeated, that is, there appeared six,
seven, eight, nine or ten several colored rings or lines, each incircling the
other, in the same manner as I have often seen a very vivid Rainbow to have
four or five several Rings of Colors, that is, accounting all the Gradations
between Red and Blew for one: But the order of the Colors in these Rings was
quite contrary to the primary or innermost Rainbow, and the same with those of
the secondary or outermost Rainbow; these colored Lines or Irises, as I may so
call them, were some of them much brighter then others, and some of them also
very much broader, they being some of them ten, twenty, nay, I believe, near a
hundred times broader then others; and those usually were broadish which were
nearest the center or middle of the flaw. And oftentimes I found, that these
Colors reached to the very middle of the flaw, and then there appeared in the
middle a very large spot, for the most part, all of one color, which was very
vivid, and all the other Colors incompassing it, gradually ascending, and
growing narrower toward the edges, keeping the same order, as in the secundary
Rainbow, that is, if the middle were Blew, the next incompassing it would be a
Purple, the third a Red, the fourth a Yellow, etc. as above; if the middle were
a Red, the next without it would be a Yellow, the third a Green, the fourth a
Blew, and so onward,. And this order it always kept whatsoever were the middle
Color.

There was further observable in several other parts of this Body, many Lines
or Threads, each of them of some one peculiar Color, and those so exceedingly
bright and vivid, that it afforded a very pleasant object through the
Microscope. Some of these threads I have observed also to be pieced or made up
of several short lengths of differently colored ends (as I may so call them)
as a line appearing about two inches long through the Microscope, has been
compounded of about half an inch of a Peach color, of a lovely Grass-green, of
an inch more of a bright Scarlet, and the rest of the line of a Watchet blew.
Others of them were much otherwise colored; the variety being almost infinite.
Another thing which is very observable, is, that if you find any place where
the colors are very broad and conspicuous to the naked eye, you may, by
pressing that place with your finger, make the colors change places, and go
from one part to another.

There is one Phenomenon more, which may, if care be used, exhibit to the
beholder, as it has diverse times to me, an exceeding pleasant; and not less
instructive Spectacle; And that is, if curiosity and diligence be used, you may
so split this admirable Substance, that you may have pretty large Plates (in
comparison of those smaller ones which you may observe in the Rings) that are
perhaps an or a part of an inch over, each of them appearing through the
Microscope most curiously, entirely, and uniformly adorned with some one vivid
color: this, if examined with the Microscope, may be plainly perceived to be
in all parts of it equally thick. Two, three, or more of these lying one upon
another, exhibit oftentimes curious compounded colors, which produce such a
Compositum, as one would scarce imagine should be the result of such
ingredients: As perhaps a faint yellow and a blew may produce a very deep
purple. But when anon we come to the more strict examination of these
Phenomenon, and to inquire into the causes and reasons of these productions, we
shall, I hope, make it more conceivable how they are produced, and show them to
be no other then the natural and necessary effects arising from the peculiar
union of concurrent causes.

These Phenomenon being so various, and so truly admirable, it will certainly
be very well worth our inquiry, to examine the causes and reasons of them, and
to consider, whether from these causes demonstratively evidenced, may not be
deduced the true causes of the production of all kind of Colors. And I the
rather now do it, instead of an Appendix or Digression to this History, then
upon the occasion of examining the Colors in Peacocks, or other Feathers,
because this Subject, as it does afford more variety of particular Colors, so
does it afford much better ways of examining each circumstance. And this will
be made manifest to him that considers, first, that this laminated body is more
simple and regular then the parts of Peacocks feathers, this consisting only of
an indefinite number of plain and smooth Plates, heaped up, or incumbent on
each other. Next, that the parts of this body are much more manageable, to be
divided or joined, then the parts of a Peacocks feather, or any other substance
that I know. And thirdly, because that in this we are able from a colorless
body to produce several colored bodies, affording all the variety of Colors
imaginable: And several others, which the subsequent Inquiry will make manifest.

To begin therefore, it is manifest from several circumstances, that the
material cause of the apparition of these several Colors, is some Lamina or
Plate of a transparent or pellucid body of a thickness very determinate and
proportioned according to the greater or less refractive power of the pellucid
body. And that this is, so abundance of Instances and particular Circumstances
will make manifest.

As first, if you take any small piece of the Muscovy-glass, and with a Needle,
or some other convenient Instrument, cleave it oftentimes into thinner and
thinner Laminae, you shall find, that till you come to a determinate thinness
of them, they shall all appear transparent and colorless, but if you continue
to split and divide them further, you shall find at last, that each Plate,
after it comes to such a determinate thickness, shall appear most lovely tinged
or imbued with a determinate color. If further, by any means you so flaw a
pretty thick piece, that one part does begin to cleave a little from the other,
and between those two there be by any means gotten some pellucid medium, those
laminated pellucid bodies that fill that space, shall exhibit several Rainbows
or colored Lines, the colors of which will be disposed and ranged according
to the various thicknesses of the several parts of that Plate. That this is so,
is yet further confirmed by this Experiment.

Take two small pieces of ground and polisht Looking-glass-plate, each about
the bigness of a shilling, take these two dry, and with your fore-fingers and
thumbs press them very hard and close together, and you shall find, that when
they approach each other very near, there will appear several Irises or
colored Lines, in the same manner almost as in the Muscovy-glass; and you may
very easily change any of the Colors of any part of the interposed body, by
pressing the Plates closer and harder together, or leaving them more lax; that
is, a part which appeared colored with a red, may be presently tinged with a
yellow, blew, green, purple, or the like, by altering the appropinquation of
the terminating Plates. Now that air is not necessary to be the interposed
body, but that any other transparent fluid will do much the same, may be tried
by wetting those approximated Surfaces with Water, or any other transparent
Liquor, and proceeding with it in the same manner as you did with the Air; and
you will find much the like effect, only with this difference, that those
comprest bodies, which differ most, in their refractive quality, from the
compressing bodies, exhibit the most strong and vivid tinctures. Nor is it
necessary, that this laminated and tinged body should be of a fluid substance,
any other substance, provided it be thin enough and transparent, doing the same
thing: this the Laminae of our Muscovy-glass hint; but it may be confirmed by
multitudes of other Instances.

And first, we shall find, that even Glass it self may, by the help of a Lamp,
be blown thin enough to produce these Phenomenon of Colors: which Phenomenon
accidentally happening, as I have been attempting to frame small Glasses with a
Lamp, did not a little surprise me at first, having never heard or seen any
thing of it before; though afterward comparing it with the Phenomenon, I had
often observed in those Bubbles which Children use to make with Soap-water, I
did the less wonder; especially when upon Experiment I found, I was able to
produce the same Phenomenon in thin Bubbles made with any other transparent
Substance. Thus have I produced them with Bubbles of Pitch, Rosin, C^lophony,
Turpentine, Solutions of several Gums, as (...) Arabic in water; any glutinous
Liquor, as Wort, Wine, Spirit of Wine, Oil of Turpentine, Glare of Snails, etc.

It would be needless to enumerate the several Instances, these being enough to
show the generality or universality of this propriety. Only I must not omit,
that we have instances also of this kind even in metalline Bodies and animal;
for those several Colors which are observed to follow each other upon the
polisht surface of hardened Steel, when it is by a sufficient degree of heat
gradually tempered or softened, are produced from nothing else but a certain
thin Lamina of a vitrum or vitrified part of the Metal, which by that degree of
heat, and the concurring action of the ambient Air, is driven out and fixed on
the surface of the Steel.

And this hints to me a very probable (at least, if not the true) cause of the
hardening and tempering of Steel, which has not, I think; been yet given, nor,
that I know of, been so much as thought of by any. And that is this, that the
hardness of it arises from a greater proportion of a vitrified Substance
interspersed through the pores of the Steel. And that the tempering or softning
of it arises from the proportionate or smaller parcels of it left within those
pores. This will seem the more probable, if we consider these Particulars.

First, That the pure parts of Metals are of themselves very flexible and tuff;
that is, will endure bending and hammering, and yet retain their continuity.

Next, That the Parts of all vitrified Substances, as all kinds of Glass; the
Scoria of Metals, etc. are very hard, and also very brittle, being neither
flexible nor malleable, but may by hammering or beating be broken into small
parts or powders.

Thirdly, That all Metals (excepting Gold and Silver, which do not so much with
the bare fire, unless assisted by other saline Bodies) do more or less vitrifie
by the strength of fire, that is, are corroded by a saline Substance, which I
elsewhere show to be the true cause of fire; and are thereby, as by several
other Menstruums, converted into Scoria; And this is called, calcining of them,
by Chimists. Thus Iron and Copper by heating and quenching do turn all of them
by degrees into Scoria, which are evidently vitrified Substances, and unite
with Glass, and are easily fusible; and when cold, very hard, and very brittle.

Fourthly, That most kind of Vitrifications or Calcinations are made by Salts,
uniting and incorporating with the metalline Particles. Nor do I know any one
calcination wherein a Saline body may not, with very great probability, be said
to be an agent or coadjutor.

Fifthly, That Iron is converted into Steel by means of the incorporation of
certain salts, with which it is kept a certain time in the fire.

Sixthly, That any Iron may, in a very little time, be case hardened, as the
Tradesmen call it, by casing the iron to be hardened with clay, and putting
between the clay and iron a good quantity of a mixture of Urine, Soot,
Sea Salt, and Horses hoofs (all which contein great quantities of Saline
bodies) and then putting the case into a good strong fire, and keeping it in a
considerable degree of heat for a good while, and afterward heating, and
quenching or cooling it suddenly in cold water.

Seventhly, That all kind of vitrify'd substances, by being suddenly cooled,
become very hard and brittle. And thence arises the pretty Phoenomena of the
Glass Drops, which I have already further explained in its own place.

Eighthly, That those metals which are not so apt to vitrifie, do not acquire
any hardness by quenching in water, as Silver, Gold, etc.

These considerations premised, will, I suppose, make way for the more easy
reception of this following Explication of the Phenomenon of hardened and
tempered Steel. That Steel is a substance made out of Iron, by means of a
certain proportionate Vitrification of several parts, which are so curiously
and proportionately mixed with the more tough and unaltered parts of the Iron,
that when by the great heat of the fire this vitrify'd substance is melted, and
consequently rarified, and thereby the pores of the Iron are more open, if then
by means of dipping it in cold water it be suddenly cold, and the parts
hardened, that is, stayed in that same degree of Expansion they were in when
hot, the parts become very hard and brittle, and that upon the same account
almost as small parcels of glass quenched in water grow brittle, which we have
already explicated. If after this the piece of Steel be held in some convenient
heat, till by degrees certain colors appear upon the surface of the brightned
metal, the very hard and brittle tone of the metal, by degrees relaxes and
becomes much more tough and soft; namely, the action of the heat does by
degrees loosen the parts of the Steel that were before streached or set atilt
as it were, and stayed open by each other, whereby they become relaxed and set
at liberty, whence some of the more brittle interjacent parts are thrust out
and melted into a thin skin on the surface of the Steel, which from no color
increases to a deep Purple, and so onward by these gradations or consecutions,
White, Yellow, Orange, Minium, Scarlet, Purple, Blew, Watchet, etc. and the
parts within are more conveniently, and proportionately mixed; and so they
gradually subside into a texture which is much better proportioned and closer
joined, whence that rigidnesse of parts ceases, and the parts begin to acquire
their former ductilness.

Now, that it is nothing but the vitrify'd metal that sticks upon the surface of
the colored body, is evident from this, that if by any means it be scraped and
rubbed off, the metal underneath it is white and clear; and if it be kept
longer in the fire, so as to increase to a considerable thickness, it may, by
blows, be beaten off in flakes. This is further confirmed by this observable,
that that Iron or Steel will keep longer from rusting which is covered with
this vitrify'd case: Thus also Lead will, by degrees, be all turned into a
litharge; for that color which covers the top being scum'd or should aside,
appears to be nothing else but a litharge or vitrify'd Lead.

This is observable also in some sort, on Brass, Copper, Silver, Gold, Tin, but
is most conspicuous in Lead; all those Colors that cover the surface of the
Metal being nothing else, but a very thin vitrifi'd part of the heated Metal.

The other Instance we have, is in Animal bodies, as in Pearls, Mother of
Pearl-shels, Oyster-shels, and almost all other kinds of stony shells
whatsoever. This have I also sometimes with pleasure observed even in Muscles
and Tendons. Further, if you take any glutinous substance and run it
exceedingly thin upon the surface of a smooth glass or a polisht metaline body,
you shall find the like effects produced: and in general, wheresoever you meet
with a transparent body thin enough, that is terminated by reflecting bodies of
differing refractions from it, there will be a production of these pleasing and
lovely colors.

Nor is it necessary, that the two terminating Bodies should be both of the
same kind, as may appear by the vitrified Laminae on Steel, Lead, and other
Metals, one surface of which Laminae is contiguous to the surface of the Metal,
the other to that of the Air.

Nor is it necessary, that these colored Laminae should be of an even
thickness, that is, should have their edges and middles of equal thickness, as
in a Looking-glass-plate, which circumstance is only requisite to make the
Plate appear all of the same color; but they may resemble a Lens, that is,
have their middles thicker then their edges; or else a double concave, that is,
be thinner in the middle then at the edges; in both which cases there will be
various colored rings or lines, with differing consecutions or orders of
Colors; the order of the first from the middle outward being Red, Yellow,
Green, Blew, etc. And the latter quite contrary.

But further, it is altogether necessary, that the Plate, in the places where
the Colors appear, should be of a determinate thickness: First, It must not be
more then such a thickness, for when the Plate is increased to such a
thickness, the Colors cease; and besides, I have seen in a thin piece of
Muscovy-glass, where the two ends of two Plates, which appearing both single,
exhibited two distinct and differing Colors; but in that place where they were
united, and constituted one double Plate (as I may call it) they appeared
transparent and colorless. Nor, Secondly, may the Plates be thinner then such
a determinate cize; for we always find, that the very outmost Rim of these
flaws is terminated in a white and colorless Ring.

Further, in this Production of Colors there is no need of a determinate Light
of such a bigness and no more, nor of a determinate position of that Light,
that it should be on this side, and not on that side; nor of a terminating
shadow, as in the Prisme, and Rainbow, or Water-ball: for we find, that the
Light in the open Air, either in or out of the Sunbeams, and within a Room,
either from one or many Windows, produces much the same effect: only where the
Light is brightest, there the Colors are most vivid. So does the light of a
Candle, collected by a Glass-ball. And further, it is all one whatever side of
the colored Rings be toward the light; for the whole Ring keeps its proper
Colors from the middle outward in the same order as I before related, without
varying at all, upon changing the position of the light.

But above all it is most observable, that here are all kind of Colors
generated in a pellucid body, where there is properly no such refraction as Des
Carts supposes his Globules to acquire a verticity by: For in the plain and
even Plates it is manifest, that the second refraction (according to Des Carts
his Principles in the fifth Section of the eighth Chapter of his Meteors) does
regulate and restore the supposed turbinated Globules unto their former uniform
motion. This Experiment therefore will prove such a one as our thrice excellent
Verulam calls Experimentum Crucis, serving as a Guide or Landmark, by which to
direct our course in the search after the true cause of Colors. Affording us
this particular negative Information, that for the production of Colors there
is not necessary either a great refraction, as in the Prisme; nor Secondly, a
determination of Light and shadow, such as is both in the Prisme and
Glass-ball. Now that we may see likewise what affirmative and positive
Instruction it yields, it will be necessary, to examine it a little more
particularly and strictly; which that we may the better do, it will be
requisite to premise somewhat in general concerning the nature of Light and
Refraction.

And first for Light, it seems' very manifest, that there is no luminous Body
but has the parts of it in motion more or less.

First, That all kind of fiery burning Bodies have their parts in motion, I
think, will be very easily granted me. That the spark struck from a Flint and
Steel is in a rapid agitation, I have elsewhere made probable. And that the
Parts of rotten Wood, rotten Fish, and the like, are also in motion, I think,
will as easily be conceded by those, who consider, that those parts never begin
to shine till the Bodies be in a state of putrefaction; and that is now
generally granted by all, to be caused by the motion of the parts of putrefying
bodies. That the Bononian stone shines no longer then it is either warmed by
the Sunbeams, or by the flame of a Fire or of a Candle, is the general report
of those that write of it, and of others that have seen it. And that heat
argues a motion of the internal parts, is (as I said before) generally granted.

But there is one Instance more, which was first shown to the Royal Society by
Mr. Clayton a worthy Member thereof, which does make this Assertion more
evident then all the rest: And that is, That a Diamond being rubbed, struck, or
beated in the dark, shines for a pretty while after, so long as that motion,
which is imparted by any of those Agents, remains (in the same manner as a
Glass, rubbed, struck, or (by a means which I shall elsewhere mention) he^^ed,
yields a sound which lasts as long as the vibrating motion of that sonorous
body) several Experiments made on which Stone, are since published in a
Discourse of Colors, by the truly honorable Mr. Boil. What may be said of
those Ignes fatus that appear in the night, I cannot so well affirm, having
never had the opportunity to examine them my self, nor to be informed by any
others that had observed them: And the relations of them in Authors are so
imperfect, that nothing can be built on them. But I hope I shall be able in
another place to make it at least very probable, that there is even in those
also a Motion which causes this effect. That the shining of Seawater proceeds
from the same cause, may be argued from this, That it shines not till either it
be beaten against a Rock, or be some other ways broken or agitated by Storms,
or Oars, or other pereussing bodies. And that the Animal Energyes or Spirituous
agil parts are very active in Cats eyes when they shine, seems evident enough,
because their eyes never shine but when they look very intensly either to find
their prey, or being hunted in a dark room, when they seek after their
adversary, or to find a way to escape. And the like may be said of the shining
Bellies of Gloworms, since it is evident they can at pleasure either increase or
extinguish that Radiation.

It would be somewhat too long a work for this place Zeictically to examine,
and positively to prove, what particular kind of motion it is that must be the
efficient of Light; for though it be a motion, yet it is not every motion that
produces it, since we find there are many bodies very violently moved; which
yet afford not such an effect; and there are other bodies, which to our other
senses, seem not moved so much, which yet shine. This Water and quicksilver,
and most other liquors heated, shine not; and several hard bodies, as Iron,
Silver, Brass, Copper. Wood, etc. though very often struck with a hammer* shine
not presently, though they will all of them grow exceeding hot; whereas rotten
Wood, rotten Fish, Sea water, Gloworms, etc. have nothing of tangible heat in
them, and yet (where there is no stronger light to affect the Sensory) they
shine some of them so Vividly, that one may make a shift to read by them.

It would be too long, I say, here to insert the discursive progress by which I
inquired after the proprieties of the motion of Light, and therefore I shall
only add the result.

And, First, I found it ought to be exceeding quick, such as those motions of
fermentation and putrefaction; whereby, certainly, the parts are exceeding
nimbly and violently moved; and that, because we find those motions are able
more minutely to shatter and divide the body, then the most violent heats or
menstruums we yet know. And that fire is nothing else but such a dissolution of
the Burning body, made by the most universal menstruum of all sulphurous
bodies, namely, the Air, we shall in an other place of this Tractate endeavor
to make probable. And that, in all extremely hot shining bodies, there is a
very quick motion that causes Light, as well as a more robust that causes Heat,
may be argued from the celerity wherewith the bodies are dissolved.

Next, it must be a Vibrative motion. And for this the newly mentioned Diamond
affords us a good argument; since if the motion of the parts did not return,
the Diamond must after many rubbings decay and be wasted: but we have no reason
to suspect the latter, especially if we consider the exceeding difficulty that
is found in cutting or wearing away a Diamond. And a Circular motion of the
parts is much more improbable, since, if that were granted, and they be
supposed irregular and Angular parts, I see not how the parts of the Diamond
should hold so firmly together, or remain in the same sensible dimensions,
which yet they do. Next, if they be Globular, and moved only with a turbinated
motion, I know not any cause that can impress that motion upon the pellucid
medium, which yet is done. Thirdly, any other irregular motion of the parts one
amongst another, must necessarily make the body of a fluid consistence, from
which it is far enough. It must therefore be a Vibrating motion.

And Thirdly, That it is a very short vibrating motion, I think the instances
drawn from the shining of Diamonds will also make probable. For a Diamond being
the hardest body we yet know in the World, and consequently the least apt to
yield or bend, must consequently also have its vibrations exceeding short.

And these, I think, are the three principal proprieties of a motion, requisite
to produce the effect called Light in the Object.

The next thing we are to consider, is the way or manner of the trajection of
this motion through the interposed pellucid body to the eye: And here it will
be easily granted,

First, That it must be a body susceptible and impartible of this motion that
will deserve the name of a Transparent. And next, that the parts of such a body
must be Homogeneous, or of the same kind. Thirdly, that the constitution and
motion of the parts must be such, that the appulse of the luminous body may be
communicated or propagated through it to the greatest imaginable distance in
the least imaginable time; though I see no reason to affirm, that it must be in
an instant: For I know not any one Experiment or observation that does prove
it. And, whereas it may be objected, That we see the Sun risen at the very
instant when it is above the sensible Horizon, and that we see a Star hidden by
the body of the Moon at the same instant, when the Star, the Moon, and our Eye
are all in the same line; and the like Observations, or rather suppositions,
may be urged. I have this to answer, That I can as easily deny as they affirm;
for I would fain know by what means any one can be assured any more of the
Affirmative, then I of the Negative. If indeed the propagation were very slow,
it is possible something might be discovered by Eclypses of the Moon; but though
we should grant the progress of the light from the Earth to the Moon, and from
the Moon back to the Earth again to be full two Minutes in performing, I know
not any possible means to discover it; nay, there may be some instances perhaps
of Horizontal Eclypses that may seem very much to favor this supposition of
the slower progression of Light then most imagine. And the like may be said of
the Eclypses of the Sun, etc. But of this only by the by. Fourthly, That the
motion is propagated every way through an Homogeneous medium by direct or
straight lines extended every way like Rays from the center of a Sphere.
Fifthly, in an Homogeneous medium this motion is propagated every way with
equal velocity, whence necessarily every pulse or vitration of the luminous
body will generate a Sphere, which will continually increase, and grow bigger,
just after the same manner (though indefinitely swifter) as the waves or rings
on the surface of the water do swell into bigger and bigger circles about a
point of it, where, by the sinking of a Stone the motion was begun, whence it
necessarily follows, that all the parts of these Spheres undulated through an
Homogeneous medium cut the Rays at right angles.

But because all transparent mediums are not Homogeneous to one another,
therefore we will next examine how this pulse or motion will be propagated
through differingly transparent mediums. And here, according to the most acute
and excellent Philosopher Des Carts, I suppose the sign of the angle of
inclination in the first medium to be to the sign of refraction in the second,
As the density of the first, to the density of the second. By density, I mean
not the density in respect of gravity (with which the refractions or
transparency of mediums hold no proportion) but in respect only to the
trajection of the Rays of light, in which respect they only differ in this;
that the one propagates the pulse more easily and weakly, the other more
slowly, but more strongly. But as for the pulses themselves, they will by the
refraction acquire another propriety, which we shall now endeavor to explicate.

We will suppose therefore in the first Figure ACFD to be a physical Ray, or
ABC and DEF to be two Mathematical Rays, trajected from a very remote point of
a luminous body through an Homogeneous transparent medium LLL, and DA, EB, FC,
to be small portions of the orbicular impulses which must therefore cut the
Rays at right angles; these Rays meeting with the plain surface NO of a medium
that yields an easier transitus to the propagation of light, and falling
obliquely on it, they will in the medium MMM be refracted toward the
perpendicular of the surface. And because this medium is more easily trajected
then the former by a third, therefore the point C of the orbicular pulse FC
will be moved to H four spaces in the same time that F the other end of it is
moved to G three spaces, therefore the whole refracted pulse GH shall be
oblique to the refracted Rays CHK and GI; and the angle GHC shall be an acute,
and so much the more acute by how much the greater the refraction be, then
which nothing is more evident, for the sign of the inclination is to be the
sign of refraction as GF to TC the distance between the point C and the
perpendicular from G on CK, which being as four to three, HC being longer then
GF is longer also then TC, therefore the angle GHC is less than GTC. So that
henceforth the parts of the pulses GH and IK are moved ascew, or cut the Rays
at oblique angles.

It is not my business in this place to set down the reasons why this or that
body should impede the Rays more, others less: as why Water should transmit the
Rays more easily, though more weakly than air. Only thus much in general I
shall hint, that I suppose the medium MMM to have less of the transparent
undulating subtle matter, and that matter to be less implicated by it, whereas
LLL I suppose to contain a greater quantity of the fluid undulating substance,
and this to be more implicated with the particles of that medium.

But to proceed, the same kind of obliquity of the Pulses and Rays will happen
also when the refraction is made out of a more easy into a more difficult
medium; as by the calculations of GQ and CSR which are refracted from the
perpendicular. In both which calculations it is obvious to observe, that always
that part of the Ray toward which the refraction is made has the end of the
orbicular pulse precedent to that of the other side. And always, the oftener the
refraction is made the same way, Or the greater the single refraction is, the
more is this unequal progress. So that having found this odd propriety to be an
inseparable concomitant of a refracted Ray, not straightened by a contrary
refraction, we will next examine the refractions of the Sunbeams, as they are
suffered only to pass through a small passage, obliquely out of a more
difficult, into a more easy medium.

Let us suppose therefore ABC in the second Figure to represent a large
Chimical Glass-body about two foot long, filled with very fair Water as high as
AB, and inclined in a convenient posture with B toward the Sun: Let us further
suppose the top of it to be covered with an op^cous body, all but the hole ab,
through which the Sunbeams are suffered to pass into the Water, and are
thereby refracted to cdef against which part, if a Paper be expanded on the
outside, there will appear all the colors of the Rainbow, that is, there will
be generated the two principal colors, Scarlet and Blue, and all the
intermediate ones which arise from the composition and dilutings of these two,
that is, cd shall exhibit a Scarlet, which toward d is diluted into a Yellow;
this is the refraction of the Ray, ik, which comes from the underside of the
Sun; and the Ray of shall appear of a deep Blue, which is gradually toward e
diluted into a pale Watchet-blue. Between d and e the two diluted colors, Blue
and Yellow are mixed and compounded into a Green; and this I imagine to be the
reason why Green is so acceptable a color to the eye, and that either of the
two extremes are, if intense, rather a little offensive, namely, the being
placed in the middle between the two extremes, and compounded out of both
those, diluted also, or somewhat qualified, for the composition, arising from
the mixture of the two extremes undiluted, makes a Purple, which though it be a
lovely color, and pretty acceptable to the eye, yet is it nothing comparable
to the ravishing pleasure with which a curious and well tempered Green affects
the eye. If removing the Paper, the eye be placed against cd, it will perceive
the lower side of the Sun (or a Candle at night which is much better, because
it offends not the eye, and is more easily manageable) to be of a deep Re^, and
if against of it will perceive the upper part of the luminous body to be of a
deep Blue; and these colors will appear deeper and deeper, according as the
Rays from the luminous body fall more obliquely on the surface of the Water,
and thereby suffer a greater refraction, and the more distinct, the further
cdef is removed from the trajecting hole.

So that upon the whole, we shall find that the reason of the Phenomenon seems
to depend upon the obliquity of the orbicular pulse, to the Lines of Radiation,
and in particular, that the Ray cd which constitutes the Scarlet has its inner
parts, namely those which are next to the middle of the luminous body,
precedent to the outermost which are contiguous to the dark and unradiating
sky. And that the Ray of which gives a Blue, has its outward part, namely,
that which is contiguous to the dark sky precedent to the pulse from the
innermost, which borders on the bright area of the luminous body.

We may observe further, that the cause of the diluting of the colors toward
the middle, proceeds partly from the wideness of the hole through which the
Rays pass, whereby the Rays from several parts of the luminous body, fall upon
many of the same parts between c and f as is more manifest by the Figure: And
partly also from the nature of the refraction it self, for the vividness or
strength of the two terminating colors, arising chiefly as we have seen, from
the very great difference that is betwixt the outsides of those oblique
undulations and the dark Rays circumambient, and that disparity betwixt the
approximate Rays, decaying gradually: the further inward toward the middle of
the luminous body they are removed, the more must the color approach to a
white or an undisturbed light.

Upon the calculation of the refraction and reflection from a Ball of Water or
Glass, we have much the same Phenomenon namely, an obliquity of the undulation
in the same manner as we have found it here. Which, because it is very much to
our present purpose, and affords such an Instancia crucis, as no one that I
know has hitherto taken notice of, I shall further examine. For it does very
plainly and positively distinguish, and show, which of the two Hypotheses,
either the Cartesian or this is to be followed, by affording a generation of
all the colors in the Rainbow, where according to the Cartesian Principles
there should be none at all generated. And secondly, by affording an instance
that does more closely confine the cause of these Phenomenon of colors to this
present Hypothesis.

And first, for the Cartesian, we have this to object against it, That whereas
he says ( Meteorum Cap. 8. Sect. 5.) Sed judicabam unicam (refractione^
scilicet) ad minimu^ requiri, and quidem talem ut ejus effectus alia contraria
(refractione) non destruatur: Nam experientia docet si superficies NM and NP
(nempe refringentes) Parallelae forent, radios tantundem per alteram iterum
erectos quantum per unam frangerentur, nullos colores depicturos; This
Principle of his holds true indeed in a prisme where the refracting surfaces
are plain, but is contradicted by the Ball or Cylinder, whether of Water or
Glass, where the refracting surfaces are Orbicular or Cylindrical. For if we
examine the passage of any Globule or Ray of the primary Iris, we shall find it
to pass out of the Ball or Cylinder again, with the same inclination and
refraction that it entered in withal, and that that last refraction by means
of the intermediate reflection shall be the same as if without any reflection
at all the Ray had been twice refracted by two Parallel surfaces.

And that this is true, not only in one, but in every Ray that goes to the
constitution of the Primary Iris; nay, in every Ray, that suffers only two
refractions, and one reflection, by the surface of the round body, we shall
presently see most evident, if we repeat the Cartesian Scheme, mentioned in the
tenth Section of the eighth Chapter of his Meteors, where EFKNP in the third
Figure is one of the Rays of the Primary Iris, Schem. 6. Fig. 3.
twice refracted at F and N, and once reflected at K by the surface of the
Water-ball. For, first it is evident, that KF and KN are equal, because KN
being the reflected part of KF they have both the same inclination on the
surface K that is the angles FKT, and NKV made by the two Rays and the Tangent
of K are equal, which is evident by the Laws of reflection; whence it will
follow also, that KN has the same inclination on the surface N, or the Tangent
of it XN that the Ray KF has to the surface F, or the Tangent of it FIE, whence
it must necessarily follow, that the refractions at F and N are equal, that is,
KFE and KNP are equal. Now, that the surface N is by the reflection at K made
parallel to the surface at F, is evident from the principles of reflection; for
reflection being nothing but an inverting of the Rays, if we re-invert the Ray
KNP, and make the same inclinations below the line TKV that it has above, it
will be most evident that KH the inverse of KN will be the continuation of the
line FK, and that LHI the inverse of OX is parallel to FIE. And HM the inverse
of NP is Parallel to OF for the angle KHI is equal to KNO which is equal to
KFY, and the angle KHM is equal to KNP which is equal to KFE which was to be
proved.

So that according to the above mentioned Cartesian principles there should be
generated no color at all in a Ball of Water or Glass by two refractions and
one reflection, which does hold most true indeed, if the surfaces be plain, as
may be experimented with any kind of prisme where the two refracting surfaces
are equally inclined to the reflecting; but in this the Phenomenon are quite
otherwise.

The cause therefore of the generation of color must not be what Des Carts
assigns, namely, a certain rotation of the Globuli aetherei, which are the
particles which he supposes to constitute the Pellucid medium, But somewhat
else, perhaps what we have lately supposed, and shall by and by further
prosecute and explain.

But, First I shall crave leave to propound some other difficulties of his,
notwithstanding exceedingly ingenious Hypothesis, which I plainly confess to me
seem such; and those are,

First, if that light be (as is affirmed, Diopt. cap. 1.. 8.) not so properly a
motion, as an action or propension to motion, I cannot conceive how the eye can
come to be sensible of the verticity of a Globule, which is generated in a drop
of Rain, perhaps a mile off from it. For that Globule is not carried to the eye
according to his formerly recited Principle; and if not so, I cannot conceive
how it can communicate its rotation, or circular motion to the line of the
Globules between the drop and the eye. It cannot be by means of every ones
turning the next before him; for if so, then only all the Globules that are in
the odd places must be turned the same Schem. VI.
way with the first, namely, the 3.5.7.9.11, etc. but all the Globules
interposited between them in the even places; namely, the 2.4.6.8.10. etc. must
be the quite contrary; whence, according to the Cartesian Hypothesis, there
must be no distinct color generated, but a confusion. Next, since the
Cartesian Globuli are supposed ( Principiorum Philosoph. Part. 3.. 86.) to be
each of them continually in motion about their centers, I cannot conceive how
the eye is able to distinguish this new generated motion from their former
inherent one, if I may so call that other wherewith they are moved or
turbinated, from some other cause than refraction. And thirdly, I cannot
conceive how these motions should not happen sometimes to oppose each other,
and then, instead of a rotation, there would be nothing but a direct motion
generated, and consequently no color. And fourthly, I cannot conceive, how by
the Cartesian Hypothesis it is possible to give any plausible reason of the
nature of the Colors generated in the thin laminae of these our Microscopical
Observations; for in many of these, the refracting and reflecting surfaces are
parallel to each other, and consequently no rotation can be generated, nor is
there any necessity of a shadow or termination of the bright Rays, such as is
supposed ( Chap. 8.. 5. Et preterea observavi umbram quoque, aut limitationem
luminis requiri: and Chap. 8.. 9.) to be necessary to the generation of any
distinct colors; Besides that, here is oftentimes one color generated without
any of the other appendant ones, which cannot be by the Cartesian Hypothesis.

There must be therefore some other propriety of refraction that causes color.
And upon the examination of the thing, I cannot conceive any one more general,
inseparable, and sufficient, than that which I have before assigned. That we
may therefore see how exactly our Hypothesis agrees also with the Phenomenon of
the refracting round body, whether Globe or Cylinder, we shall next subjoyn our
Calculation or Examen of it.

And to this end, Schem. 6. Fig. 3.
we will calculate any two Rays: as for instance; let OF be a Ray cutting the
Radius CD (divided into 20. parts) in G 16. parts distant from C, and of
another Ray, which cuts the same Radius in g 17. parts distant, these will be
refracted to K and k and from thence reflected to N and n, and from thence
refracted toward P and p; therefore the Arch F f will be 5.d 5. The Arch FK
106.d 30. the Arch fk 101.d 2. The line FG 6000. and fg 5267. therefore h f.
733. therefore F c 980, almost. The line FK 16024. and fk 15436. therefore N d
196. and no 147 almost, the line Nn 1019 the Arch N n 5.d 51. therefore the
Angle N no is 34.d 43. therefore the Angle N on. is 139.d 56. which is almost
50.d more than a right Angle.

It is evident therefore by this Hypothesis, that at the same time that of
touches f. OF is arrived at c. And by that time efkn is got to n, EFKN is got
to d, and when it touches N, the pulse of the other Ray is got to o, and no
farther, which is very short of the place it should have arrived to, to make
the Ray np to cut the orbicular pulse. N o at right Angles: therefore the Angle
N op is an acute Angle, but the quite contrary of this will happen, if 17. and
18. be calculated in stead of 16. and 17. both which does most exactly agree
with the Phenomenon: For if the Sun, or a Candle (which is better) be placed
about E e, and the eye about P p, the Rays OF of. at 16. and 17. will paint the
side of the luminous object toward np Blue, and toward NP Red. But the quite
contrary will happen when OF is 17. and of 18. for then toward NP shall be a
Blue, and toward np a Red, exactly according to the calculation. And there
appears the Blue of the Rainbow, where the two Blue sides of the two Images
unite, and there the Red where the two Red sides unite, that is, where the two
Images are just disappearing; which is, when the Rays OF and NP produced till
they meet, make an Angle of about 41. and an half; the like union is there of
the two Images in the Production of the Secundary Iris, and the same causes, as
upon calculation may appear; only with this difference, that it is somewhat
more faint, by reason of the duplicate reflection, which does always weaken the
impulse the oftener it is repeated.

Now, though the second refraction made at N n be convenient, that is, do make
the Rays glance the more, yet is it not altogether requisite; for it is plain
from the calculation, that the pulse dn is sufficiently oblique to the Rays KN
and kn, as well as the pulse fc is oblique to the Rays FK and fk. And therefore
if a piece of very fine Paper be held close against N n and the eye look on it
either through the Ball as from D, or from the other side, as from B. there
shall appear a Rainbow, or colored line painted on it with the part toward X
appearing Red, toward O, Blue; the same also shall happen, if the Paper be
placed about K k, for toward T shall appear a Red, and toward V a Blue, which
does exactly agree with this my Hypothesis, as upon the calculation of the
progress of the pulse will most easily appear.

Nor do these two observations of the colors appearing to the eye about p
differing from what they appear on the Paper at N contradict each other; but
rather confirm and exactly agree with one another, as will be evident to him
that examines the reasons set down by the ingenious. Des Carts in the 12.
Sect. of the 8. Chapter of his Meteors, where he gives the true reason why the
colors appear of a quite contrary order to the eye, to what they appeared on
the Paper if the eye be placed in steed of the Paper: And as in the Prisme, so
also in the Water, Drop, or Globe the Phenomenon and reason are much the same.

Having therefore shown that there is such a propriety in the prisme and water
Globule whereby the pulse is made oblique to the progressive, and that so much
the more, by how much greater the refraction is, I shall in the next place
consider, how this conduces to the production of colors, and what kind of
impression it makes upon the bottom of the eye; and to this end it will be
requisite to examine this Hypothesis a little more particularly.

First therefore, if we consider the manner of the progress of the pulse, it
will seem rational to conclude, that that part or end of the pulse which
precedes the other, must necessarily be somewhat more obtunded, or impeded by
the resistance of the transparent medium, than the other part or end of it
which is subsequent, whose way is, as it were, prepared by the other*
especially if the adjacent medium be not in the same manner enlightened or
agitated. And therefore (in the fourth Figure of the sixth Iconism*) the Ray
AAAHB will have its side HH more deadned by the resistance of the dark or quiet
medium PPP, Whence there will be a kind of deadness superinduced on the side
HHH, which will continually increase from B, and strike deeper and deeper into
the Ray by the line BR; Whence all the parts of the triangle, RBHO will be of a
dead Blue color, and so much the deeper, by how much the nearer they lie to
the line BHH, which is most deaded or impeded, and so much the more dilute, by
how much the nearer it approaches the line BR. Next on the other side of the
Ray AAN, the end A of the pulse AH will be promoted, or made stronger, having
its passage already prepared as 'twere by the other parts preceding, and so its
impression will be stronger; And because of its obliquity to the Ray, there will
be propagated a kind of faint motion into QQ the adjacent dark or quiet medium,
which faint motion will spread further and further into QQ as the Ray is
propagated further and further from A, namely, as far as the line MA, whence
all the triangle MAN will be tinged with a Red, and that Red will be the deeper
the nearer it approaches the line MA, and the paler or yellower the nearer it
is the line NA. And if the Ray be continued, so that the lines AN and BR (which
are the bounds of the Red and Blue diluted) do meet and cross each other, there
will be beyond that intersection generated all kinds of Greens.

Now, these being the proprieties of every single refracted Ray of light, it
will be easy enough to consider what must be the result of very many such Rays
collateral: As if we suppose infinite such Rays interjacent between AKSB and
ANOB, which are the terminating: For in this case the Ray AKSB will have its
Red triangle entire, as lying next to the dark or quiet medium, but the other
side of it BS will have no Blue, because the medium adjacent to it SBO, is
moved or enlightened, and consequently that light does destroy the color. So
likewise will the Ray ANOB lose its Red, because the adjacent medium is moved
or enlightened, but the other side of the Ray that is adjacent to the dark,
namely, AHO will preserve its Blue entire, and these Rays must be so far
produced as till AN and BR cut each other, before there will be any Green
produced. From these Proprieties well considered, may be deduced the reasons of
all the Phenomenon of the prisme, and of the Globules or drops of Water which
conduce to the production of the Rainbow.

Next for the impression they make on the Retina* we will further examine this
Hypothesis: Suppose therefore ABCDEF, in the fifth Figure, to represent the
Ball of the eye: on the Cornea of which ABC two Rays GACH and KCAI (which are
the terminating Rays of a luminous body) falling, are by the refraction thereof
collected or converg'd into two points at the bottom of the eye. Now, because
these terminating Rays, and all the intermediate ones which come from any part
of the luminous body, are supposed by some sufficient refraction before they
enter the eye, to have their pulses made oblique to their progression, and
consequently each Ray to have potentially superinduced two proprieties, or
colors, viz. a Red on the one side, and a Blue on the other, which
notwithstanding are never actually manifest, but when this or that Ray has the
one or the other side of it bordering on a dark or unmoved medium, therefore as
soon as these Rays are entered into the eye, and so have one side of each of
them bordering on a dark part of the humors of the eye, they will each of them
actually exhibit some color; therefore ADC the production GACH will exhibit a
Blue, because the side CD is adjacent to the dark medium CQDC, but nothing of a
Red, because its side AD is adjacent to the enlightened medium ADFA: And all the
Rays that from the points of the luminous body are collected on the parts of
the Retina between D and F shall have their Blue so much the more diluted by
how much the farther these points of collection are distant from D toward F;
and the Ray AFC the production of KCAI, will exhibit a Red, because the side AF
is adjacent to the dark or quiet medium of the eye APFA, but nothing of a Blue,
because its side CF is adjacent to the enlightened medium CFDC, and all the Rays
from the intermediate parts of the luminous body that are collected between F
and D shall have their Red so much the more diluted, by how much the farther
they are distant from F toward D.

Now, because by the refraction in the Cornea, and some other parts of the eye,
the sides of each Ray, which before were almost parallel, are made to converge
and meet in a point at the bottom of the eye, therefore that side of the pulse
which preceded before these refractions, shall first touch the Retina, and the
other side last. And therefore according as this or that side, or end of the
pulse shall be impeded, accordingly will the impressions on the Retina be
varied; therefore by the Ray GACH refracted by the Cornea to D there shall be
on that point a stroke or impression confused, whose weakest end, namely, that
by the line CD shall precede, and the stronger, namely, that by the line AD
shall follow. And by the Ray KCAI refracted to F, there shall be on that part a
confused stroke or impression, whose strongest part, namely, that by the line
CF shall precede, and whose weakest or impeded, namely, that by the line AF
shall follow, and all the intermediate points between F and D will receive
impression from the converg'd Rays so much the more like the impressions on F
and D by how much the nearer they approach that or this.

From the consideration of the proprieties of which impressions, we may collect
these short definitions of Colors: That Blue is an impression on the Retina of
an oblique and confused pulse of light, whose weakest part precedes, and whose
strongest follows. And, that Red is an impression on the Retina of an oblique
and confused pulse of light, whose strongest part precedes, and whose weakest
follows.

Which proprieties, as they have been already manifested, in the Prisme and
falling drops of Rain, to be the causes of the colors there generated, may be
easily found to be the efficients also of the colors appearing in thin
laminated transparent bodies; for the explication of which, all this has been
premised.

And that this is so, a little closer examination of the Phenomenon and the
Figure of the body, by this Hypothesis, will make evident.

For first (as we have already observed) the laminated body must be of a
determinate thickness, that is, it must not be thinner then such a determinate
quantity; for I have always observed, that near the edges of those which are
exceeding thin, the colors disappear, and the part grows white; nor must it be
thicker then another determinate quantity; for I have likewise observed, that
beyond such a thickness, no colors appeared, but the Plate looked white,
between which two determinate thicknesses were all the colored Rings; of which
in some substances I have found ten or twelve, in others not half so many,
which I suppose depends much upon the transparency of the laminated body. Thus
though the consecutions are the same in the scumm or the skin on the top of
metals; yet in those consecutions the same color is not so often repeated as
in the consecutions in thin Glass, or in Sope-water, or any other more
transparent and glutinous liquor; for in these I have observed, Red, Yellow,
Green, Blue, Purple; Red, Yellow, Green, Blue, Purple; Red, Yellow, Green,
Blue, Purple; Red, Yellow, etc. to succeed each other, ten or twelve times, but
in the other more opacous bodies the consecutions will not be half so many.

And therefore secondly, the laminated body must be transparent, and this I
argue from this, that I have not been able to produce any color at all with an
opacous body, though never so thin. And this I have often tried, by pressing a
small Globule of Mercury between two smooth Plates of Glass, whereby I have
reduced that body to a much greater thinness then was requisite to exhibit the
colors with a transparent body.

Thirdly, there must be a considerable reflecting body adjacent to the under or
further side of the lamina or plate: for this I always found, that the greater
that reflection was, the more vivid were the appearing colors.

From which Observations, it is most evident, that the reflection from the
under or further side of the body is the principal cause of the production of
these colors; which, that it is so, and how it conduces to that effect, I
shall further explain in the following Figure, which is here described of a
very great thickness, as if it had been viewed through the Microscope; and it is
indeed much thicker than any Microscope (I have yet used) has been able to show
me those colored plates of Glass, or Muscovie-glass, which I have not without
much trouble viewed with it; for though I have endeavored to magnify them as
much as the Glasses were capable of, yet are they so exceeding thin, that I
have not hitherto been able positively to determine their thickness. This
Figure therefore I here represent, is wholly Hypothetical.

Let ABCDHFE in the sixth Figure be a frustum of Muscovy-glass, thinner toward
the end AE, and thicker toward DF. Let us first suppose the Ray aghb coming
from the Sun, or some remote luminous object to fall obliquely on the thinner
plate BAE, part therefore is reflected back, by cghd, the first Superficies;
whereby the perpendicular pulse ab is after reflection propagated by cd, cd,
equally remote from each other with ab, ab, so that ag + gc, or bh + hd are
either of them equal to aa, as is also cc, but the body BAE being transparent,
a part of the light of this Ray is refracted in the surface AB, and propagated
by gikh to the surface OF, whence it is reflected and refracted again by the
surface AB. So that after two refractions and one reflection, there is
propagated a kind of fainter Ray emnf, whose pulse is not only weaker by reason
of the two refractions in the surface AB, but by reason of the time spent in
passing and repassing between the two surfaces AB and OF, of which is this
fainter or weaker pulse comes behind the pulse cd; so that hereby (the surfaces
AB, and OF being so near together, that the eye cannot discriminate them from
one) this confused or duplicated pulse, whose strongest part precedes, and
whose weakest follows, does produce on the Retina (or the optic nerve that
covers the bottom of the eye) the sensation of a Yellow.

And secondly, this Yellow will appear so much the deeper, by how much the
further back toward the middle between cd and cd the spurious pulse of is
removed, as in 2 where the surface BC being further removed from OF, the weaker
pulse of will be nearer to the middle, and will make an impression on the eye
of a Red.

But thirdly, if the two reflecting surfaces be yet further removed asunder'
(as in 3 CD and OF are) then will the weaker pulse be so far behind, that it
will be more then half the distance between cd and cd. And in this case it will
rather seem to precede the following stronger pulse, then to follow the
preceding one, and consequently a Blue will be generated. And when the weaker
pulse is just in the middle between two strong ones, then is a deep and lovely
Purple generated; but when the weaker pulse of is very near to cd, then is
there generated a Green, which will be bluer, or yellower, according as the
approximate weak pulse does precede or follow the stronger.

Now fourthly, if the thicker Plate chance to be cleft into two thinner Plates,
as CDFE is divided into two Plates by the surface GH then from the composition
arising from the three reflections in the surfaces CD, GH, and OF, there will
be generated several compounded or mixed colors, which will be very differing,
according as the proportion between the thicknesses of those two divided Plates
CDHG, and GHFE are varied.

And fifthly, if these surfaces CD and FE are further removed asunder, the
weaker pulse will yet lagg behind much further, and not only be coincident
with the second, cd, but lagg behind that also, and that so much the more, by
how much the thicker the Plate be; so that by degrees it will be coincident
with the third cd backward also, and by degrees, as the Plate grows thicker
with a fourth, and so onward to a fifth, sixth, seventh, or eighth; so that if
there be a thin transparent body, that from the greatest thinness requisite to
produce colors, does, in the manner of a Wedge, by degrees grow to the
greatest thickness that a Plate can be of, to exhibit a color by the
reflection of Light from such a body, there shall be generated several
consecutions of colors, whose order from the thin end toward the thick, shall
be Yellow, Red, Purple, Blue, Green; Yellow, Red, Purple, Blue, Green; Yellow,
Red, Purple, Blue, Green; Yellow, etc. and these so often repeated, as the
weaker pulse does lose paces with its Primary, or first pulse, and is
coincident with a second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth etc. pulse behind the
first. And this, as it is coincident, or follows from the first Hypothesis I
took of colors, so upon exeriment have I found it in multitudes of instances
that seem to prove it. One thing which seems of the greatest concern in this
Hypothesis, is to determine the greatest or least thickness requisite for these
effects, which, though I have not been wanting in attempting, yet so exceeding
thin are these colored Plates, and so imperfect our Microscope, that I have
not been hitherto successful, though if my endeavors shall answer my
expectations, I shall hope to gratify the curious Reader with some things more
removed beyond our reach hitherto.

Thus have I, with as much brevity as I was able, endeavored to explicate (
Hypothetically at least) the causes of the Phenomenon I formerly recited, on
the consideration of which I have been the more particular.

First, because I think these I have newly given are capable of explicating all
the Phenomenon of colors, not only of those appearing in the Prisme,
Water-drop, or Rainbow, and in laminated or plated bodies, but of all that are
in the world, whether they be fluid or solid bodies, whether in thick or thin,
whether transparent, or seemingly opacous, as I shall in the next Observation
further endeavor to show. And secondly, because this being one of the two
ornaments of all bodies discoverable by the sight, whether looked on with, or
without a Microscope, it seemed to deserve (somewhere in this Tract, which
contains a description of the Figure and Color of some minute bodies) to be
somewhat the more intimately inquired into.

Observe. X. Of Metalline, and other real Colors.
HAving in the former Discourse, from the Fundamental cause of Color, made it
probable, that there are but two Colors, and shown, that the Phantasm of
Color is caused by the sensation of the oblique or uneven pulse of Light which
is capable of no more varieties than two that arise from the two sides of the
oblique pulse, though each of those be capable of infinite gradations or
degrees (each of them beginning from White, and ending the one in the deepest
Scarlet or Yellow, the other in the deepest Blue) I shall in this Section set
down some Observations which I have made of other colors, such as Metalline
powders tinging or colored bodies and several kinds of tinctures or tinged
liquors, all which, together with those I treated of in the former Observation
will, I suppose, comprise the several subjects in which color is observed to
be inherent, and the several manners by which it inheres, or is apparent in
them. And here I shall endeavor to show by what composition all kind of
compound colors are made, and how there is no color in the world but may be
made from the various degrees of these two colors, together with the
intermixtures of Black and White.

And this being so, as I shall anon show, it seems an evident argument to me,
that all colors whatsoever, whether in fluid or solid, whether in very
transparent or seemingly opacous, have the same efficient cause, to wit, some
kind of refraction whereby the Rays that proceed from such bodies, have their
pulse obliquated or confused in the manner I explicated in the former Section;
that is, a Red is caused by a duplicated or confused pulse, whose strongest
pulse precedes, and a weaker follows: and a Blue is caused by a confused pulse,
where the weaker pulse precedes, and the stronger follows. And according as
these are, more or less, or variously mixed and compounded, so are the
sensations, and consequently the phantasms of colors diversified.

To proceed therefore; I suppose, that all transparent colored bodies, whether
fluid or solid, do consist at least of two parts, or two kinds of substances,
the one of a substance of a somewhat differing refraction from the other. That
one of these substances which may be called the tinging substance, does consist
of distinct parts, or particles of a determinate bigness which are
disseminated, or dispersed all over the other: That these particles, if the
body be equally and uniformly colored, are evenly ranged and dispersed over
the other contiguous body; That where the body is deepest tinged, there these
particles are ranged thickest; and where it is but faintly tinged, they are
ranged much thinner, but uniformly. That by the mixture of another body that
unites with either of these, which has a differing refraction from either of
the other, quite differing effects will be produced, that is, the consecutions
of the confused pulses will be much of another kind, and consequently produce
other sensations and phantasms of colors, and from a Red may turn to a Blue,
or from a Blue to a Red, etc.

Now, that this may be the better understood, I shall endeavor to explain my
meaning a little more sensible by a Scheme: Suppose we therefore in the seventh
Figure of the sixth Scheme, that ABCD represents a Vessel holding a tinged
liquor, let IIIII, etc. be the clear liquor, and let the tinging body that is
mixed with it be EE, etc. FF, etc. GG, etc. HH, etc. whose particles (whether
round, or some other determinate Figure is little to our purpose) are first of
a determinate and equal bulk. Next, they are ranged into the form of Quincunx,
or Equilaterotriangular order, which that probably they are so, and why they
are so, I shall elsewhere endeavor to show. Thirdly, they are of such a
nature, as does either more easily or more difficultly transmit the Rays of
light then the liquor; if more easily, a Blue is generated, and if more
difficultly, a Red or Scarlet.

And first, let us suppose the tinging particles to be of a substance that does
more impede the Rays of light, we shall find that the pulse or wave of light
moved from AD to BC, will proceed on, through the containing medium by the
pulses or waves KK, LL, MM, NN, OO; but because several of these Rays that go
to the constitution of these pulses will be slugged or stopped by the tinging
particles E, F, G, H; therefore there shall be a secondary and weak pulse that
shall follow the Ray, namely PP which will be the weaker: first, because it has
suffered many refractions in the impeding body; next, for that the Rays will be
a little dispersed or confused by reason of the refraction in each of the
particles, whether round or angular; and this will be more evident, if we a
little more closely examine any one particular tinging Globule.

Suppose we therefore AB in the eighth Fgure of the sixth Scheme, to represent
a tinging Globule or particle which has a greater refraction than the liquor in
which it is contained: Let CD be a part of the pulse of light which is
propagated through the containing medium; this pulse will be a little stopped or
impeded by the Globule, and so by that time the pulse is past to OF that part
of it which has been impeded by passing through the Globule, will get but to
LM, and so that pulse which has been propagated through the Globule, to wit,
LM, NO, PQ, will always come behind the pulses OF, GH, IK, etc.

Next, by reason of the greater impediment in AB, and its Globular Figure, the
Rays that pass through it will be dispersed, and very much scattered. Whence CA
and DB which before went direct and parallel, will after the refraction in AB,
diverge and spread by AP, and BQ; so that as the Rays do meet with more and
more of these tinging particles in their way, by so much the more will the
pulse of light further lagg behind the clearer pulse, or that which has fewer
refractions, and thence the deeper will the color be, and the fainter the
light that is trajected through it; for not only many Rays are reflected from
the surfaces of AB, but those Rays that get through it are very much disordered.

By this Hypohesis there is no one experiment of color that I have yet met
with, but may be, I conceive, very rationably solved, and perhaps, had I time
to examine several particulars requisite to the demonstration of it, I might
prove it more than probable, for all the experiments about the changes and
mixings of colors related in the Treatise of Colors, published by the
Incomparable Mr. Boil, and multitudes of others which I have observed, do so
easily and naturally flow from those principles, that I am very apt to think it
probable, that they own their production to no other secondary cause: As to
instance in two or three experiments. In the twentieth Experiment, this Noble
Author has shown that the deep bluish purple-colour of Violets, may be turned
into a Green, by Alcalizate Salts, and to a Red by acid; that is, a Purple
consists of two colors, a deep Red, and a deep Blue; when the Blue is diluted,
or altered, or destroyed by acid Salts, the Red becomes predominant, but when
the Red is diluted by Alcalizate, and the Blue heightened, there is generated a
Green; for of a Red diluted, is made a Yellow, and Yellow and Blue make a Green.

Now, because the spurious pulses which cause a Red and a Blue, do the one
follow the clear pulse, and the other precede it, it usually follows, that
those Saline refracting bodies which do dilute the color of the one, do deepen
that of the other. And this will be made manifest by almost all kinds of
Purples, and many sorts of Greens, both these colors consisting or mixed
colors; for if we suppose A and A in the ninth Figure, to represent two pulses
of clear light, which follow each other at a convenient distance, AA, each of
which has a spurious pulse preceding it, as BB, which makes a Blue, and another
following it, as CC, which makes a Red, the one caused by tinging particles
that have a greater refraction, the other by others that have a less refracting
quality then the liquor or Menstruum in which these are dissolved, whatsoever
liquor does so alter the refraction of the one, without altering that of the
other part of the tinged liquor, must needs very much alter the color of the
liquor; for if the refraction of the dissolvent be increased, and the
refraction of the tinging particles not altered, then will the preceding
spurious pulse be shortened or stopped, and not outrun the clear pulse so much;
so that BB will become EE, and the Blue be diluted, whereas the other spurious
pulse which follows will be made to lagg much more, and be further behind AA
than before, and CC will become f f, and so the Yellow or Red will be heightened.

A Saline liquor therefore, mixed with another tinged liquor, may alter the
color of it several ways, either by altering the refraction of the liquor in
which the color swims: or secondly by varying the refraction of the colored
particles, by uniting more intimately either with some particular corpuscles of
the tinging body, or with all of them, according as it has a congruity to some
more especially, or to all alike: or thirdly, by uniting and interweaving it
self with some other body that is already joined with the tinging particles,
with which substance it may have a congruity, though it have very little with
the particles themselves: or fourthly, it may alter the color of a tinged
liquor by dis-joyning certain particles which were before united with the
tinging particles, which though they were somewhat congruous to these
particles, have yet a greater congruity with the newly infused Saline
menstruum. It may likewise alter the color by further dissolving the tinging
substance into smaller and smaller particles, and so diluting the color; or by
uniting several particles together as in precipitations, and so deepning it,
and some such other ways, which many experiments and comparisons of differing
trials together, might easily inform one of.

From these Principles applied, may be made out all the varieties of colors
observable, either in liquors, or any other tinged bodies, with great ease, and
I hope intelligible enough, there being nothing in the notion of color, or in
the supposed production, but is very conceivable, and may be possible.

The greatest difficulty that I find against this Hypothesis, is, that there
seem to be more distinct colors then two, that is, then Yellow and Blue. This
Objection is grounded on this reason, that there are several Reds, which
diluted, make not a Saffron or pale Yellow, and therefore Red, or Scarlet seems
to be a third color distinct from a deep degree of Yellow.

To which I answer, that Saffron affords us a deep Scarlet tincture, which may
be diluted into as pale a Yellow as any, either by making a weak solution of
the Saffron, by infusing a small parcel of it into a great quantity of liquor,
as in spirit of Wine, or else by looking through a very thin quantity of the
tincture, and which may be heightn'd into the loveliest Scarlet, by looking
through a very thick body of this tincture, or through a thinner parcel of it,
which is highly impregnated with the tinging body, by having had a greater
quantity of the Saffron dissolved in a smaller parcel of the liquor.

Now, though there may be some particles of other tinging bodies that give a
lovely Scarlet also, which though diluted never so much with liquor, or looked
on through never so thin a parcel of tinged liquor, will not yet afford a pale
Yellow, but only a kind a faint Red; yet this is no argument but that those
tinged particles may have in them the faintest degree of Yellow, though we may
be unable to make them exhibit it; For that power of being diluted depending
upon the divisibility of the tinged body, if I am unable to make the tinging
particles so thin as to exhibit that color, it does not therefore follow, that
the thing is impossible to be done; now, the tinging particles of some bodies
are of such a nature, that unless there be found some way of comminuting them
into less bulks then the liquor does dissolve them into, all the Rays that pass
through them must necessarily receive a tincture so deep, as their appropriate
refractions and bulks compared with the proprieties of the dissolving liquor
must necessarily dispose them to empress, which may perhaps be a pretty deep
Yellow, or pale Red.

And that this is not gratis dictum, I shall add one instance of this kind,
wherein the thing is most manifest.

If you take Blue Smalt, you shall find, that to afford the deepest Blue, which
caeteris paribus has the greatest particles or sands; and if you further
divide, or grind those particles on a Grindstone, or porphyry stone, you may by
comminuting the sands of it, dilute the Blue into as pale a one as you please,
which you cannot do by laying the color thin; for wheresoever any single
particle is, it exhibits as deep a Blue as the whole mass. Now, there are other
Blues, which though never so much ground, will not be diluted by grinding,
because consisting of very small particles, very deeply tinged, they cannot by
grinding be actually separated into smaller particles then the operation of the
fire, or some other dissolving menstruum, has reduced them to already.

Thus all kind of Metalline colors, whether precipitated, sublimed, calcined,
or otherwise prepared, are hardly changed by grinding, as ultra marine is not
more diluted; nor is Vermilion or Red-lead made of a more faint color by
grinding; for the smallest particles of these which I have viewed with my
greatest Magnifying-Glass, if they be well enlightened, appear very deeply
tinged with their peculiar colors; nor, though I have magnified and enlightened
the particles exceedingly, could I in many of them, perceive them to be
transparent, or to be whole particles, but the smallest specks that I could
find among well ground Vermilion and Red-lead, seemed to be a Red mass,
compounded of a multitude of less and less motes, which sticking together,
composed a bulk, not one thousand thousandth part of the smallest visible sand
or mote.

And this I find generally in most Metalline colors, that though they consist
of parts so exceedingly small, yet are they very deeply tinged, they being so
ponderous, and having such a multitude of terrestrial particles thronged into a
little room; so that it is difficult to find any particle transparent or
resembling a precious stone, though not impossible; for I have observed diverse
such shining and resplendent colors intermixed with the particles of Cinnaber,
both natural and artificial, before it has been ground and broken or flaw'd
into Vermilion: As I have also in Orpiment, Red-lead, and Bise, which makes me
suppose, that those metalline colors are by grinding, not only broken and
separated actually into smaller pieces, but that they are also flaw'd and
bruised, whence they, for the most part, become opacous, like flaw'd Crystal or
Glass, etc. But for Smalt's and verditures, I have been able with a Microscope
to perceive their particles very many of them transparent.

Now, that the others also may be transparent, though they do not appear so to
the Microscope, may be made probable by this Experiment: that if you take ammel
that is almost opacous, and grind it very well on a Porphyry, or Serpentine,
the small particles will by reason of their flaws, appear perfectly opacous;
and that it is the flaws that produce this opacousness, may be argued from this,
that particles of the same Ammel much thicker if unflaw'd will appear somewhat
transparent even to the eye; and from this also, that the most transparent and
clear Crystal, if heated in the fire, and then suddenly quenched, so that it be
all over flaw'd, will appear opacous and white.

And that the particles of Metalline colors are transparent, may be argued yet
further from this, that the Crystals, or Vitriols of all Metals, are
transparent, which since they consist of metalline as well as saline particles,
those metalline ones must be transparent, which is yet further confirmed from
this, that they have for the most part, appropriate colors; so the vitriol of
Gold is Yellow; of Copper, Blue, and sometimes Green; of Iron, green; of Tinn
and Lead, a pale White; of Silver, a pale Blue, etc.

And next, the Solution of all Metals into menstruums are much the same with
the Vitriols, of Crystals. It seems therefore very probable, that those colors
which are made by the precipitation of those particles out of the menstruums by
transparent precipitating liquors should be transparent also. Thus Gold
precipitates with oil of Tartar, or spirit of Urine into a brown Yellow. Copper
with spirit of Urine into a Mucous blue, which retains its transparency. A
solution of sublimate (as the same Illustrious Author I lately mentioned shows
is his 40. Experiment) precipitates with oil of Tartar per deliquium, into an
Orange colored precipitate; nor is it less probable, that the calcination of
those Vitriols by the fire, should have their particles transparent: Thus
Saccarum Saturni, or the Vitriol of Lead by calcination becomes a deep
Orange-colour'd minium, which is a kind of precipitation by some Salt which
proceeds from the fire; common Vitriol calcined, yields a deep Brown Red, etc.

A third Argument, that the particles of Metals are transparent, is, that being
calcined, and melted with Glass, they tinge the Glass with transparent colors.
Thus the Calx of Silvertinges the Glass on which it is anneal'd with a lovely
Yellow, or Gold color, etc.

And that the parts of Metals are transparent, may be farther argued from the
transparency of Leaf-gold, which held against the light, both to the naked eye,
and the Microscope, exhibits a deep Green. And though I have never seen the
other Metals laminated so thin, that I was able to perceive them transparent,
yet, for Copper and Brass, if we had the same convenience for laminating them,
as we have for Gold, we might, perhaps, through such plates or leaves, find
very differing degrees of Blue, or Green; for it seems very probable, that
those Rays that rebound from them tinged, with a deep Yellow, or pale Red, as
from Copper, or with a pale Yellow, as from Brass, have past through them; for
I cannot conceive how by reflection alone those Rays can receive a tincture;
taking any Hypothesis extant.

So that we see there may a sufficient reason be drawn from these instances,
why those colors which we are unable to dilute to the palest Yellow, or Blue,
or Green, are not therefore to be concluded not to be a deeper degree of them;
for supposing we had a great company of small Globular essence Bottles, or
round Glass bubbles, about the bigness of a Walnut, filled each of them with a
very deep mixture of Saffron, and that every one of them did appear of a deep
Scarlet color, and all of them together did exhibit at a distance, a deep died
Scarlet body. It does not follow, because after we have come nearer to this
congeries, or mass, and divided it into its parts, and examining each of its
parts severally or apart, we find them to have much the same color with the
whole mass; it does not, I say, therefore follow, that if we could break those
Globules smaller, or any other ways come to see a smaller or thinner parcel of
the tinged liquor that filled those bubbles, that that tinged liquor must
always appear Red, or of a Scarlet hue, since if Experiment be made, the quite
contrary will ensue; for it is capable of being diluted into the palest Yellow.

Now, that I might avoid all the Objections of this kind, by exhibiting an
Experiment that might by ocular proof convince those whom other reasons would
not prevail with, I provided me a Prismatical Glass, made hollow, just in the
form of a Wedge, such as is represented in the tenth Figure of the sixth
Scheme. The two parallelogram sides ABCD, ABEF, which met at a point, were made
of the clearest Looking-glass plates well ground and polished that I could get;
these were joined with hard cement to the triangular sides, BCE, ADF, which
were of Wood; the Parallelogram base BCEF, likewise was of Wood joined on to
the rest with hard cement, and the whole Prismatical Box was exactly stopped
every where, but only a little hole near the base was left, whereby the Vessel
could be filled with any liquor, or emptied again at pleasure.

One of these Boxes (for I had two of them) I filled with a pretty deep
tincture of Aloes, drawn only with fair Water, and then stopped the hole with a
piece of Wax, then, by holding this Wedge against the Light, and looking
through it, it was obvious enough to see the tincture of the liquor near the
edge of the Wedge where it was but very thin, to be a pale but well colored
Yellow, and further and further from the edge, as the liquor grew thicker and
thicker, this tincture appeared deeper and deeper, so that near the blunt end,
which was seven Inches from the edge and three Inches and an half thick; it was
of a deep and well colored Red. Now, the clearer and purer this tincture be,
the more lovely will the deep Scarlet be, and the fouler the tincture be, the
more dirty will the Red appear; so that some dirty tinctures have afforded
their deepest Red much of the color of burnt Oker or Spanish brown; others as
lovely a color as Vermilion, and some much brighter; but several others,
according as the tinctures were worse or more foul, exhibited various kinds of
Reds, of very differing degrees.

The other of these Wedges, I filled with a most lovely tincture of Copper,
drawn from the filings of it, with spirit of Urine, and this Wedge held as the
former against the Light, afforded all manner of Blues, from the faintest to
the deepest, so that I was in good hope by these two, to have produced all the
varieties of colors imaginable; for I thought by this means to have been able
by placing the two Parallelogram sides together, and the edges contrary ways,
to have so moved them to and fro one by another, as by looking through them in
several places, and through several thicknesses, I should have compounded, and
consequently have seen all those colors, which by other like compositions of
colors would have ensued.

But instead of meeting with what I looked for, I met with somewhat more
admirable; and that was, that I found my self utterly unable to see through
them when placed both together, though they were transparent enough when
asunder; and though I could see through twice the thickness, when both of them
were filled with the same colored liquors, whether both with the Yellow, or
both with the Blue, yet when one was filled with the Yellow, the other with the
Blue, and both looked through, they both appeared dark, only when the parts
near the tops were looked through, they exhibited Greens, and those of very
great variety, as I expected, but the Purples and other colors, I could not by
any means make, whether I endeavored to look through them both against the
Sun, or whether I placed them against the hole of a darkened room.

But notwithstanding this mis-ghessing, I proceeded on with my trial in a dark
room, and having two holes near one another, I was able, by placing my Wedges
against them, to mix the tinged Rays that past through them, and fell on a
sheet of white Paper held at a convenient distance from them as I pleased; so
that I could make the Paper appear of what color I would, by varying the
thicknesses of the Wedges, and consequently the tincture of the Rays that past
through the two holes, and sometimes also by varying the Paper, that is,
instead of a white Paper, holding a gray, or a black piece of Paper.

Whence I experimentally found what I had before imagined, that all the
varieties of colors imaginable are produced from several degrees of these two
colors, namely, Yellow and Blue, or the mixture of them with light and
darkness, that is, white and black. And all those almost infinite varieties
which Limners and Painters are able to make by compounding those several
colors they lay on their Shells or Palads, are nothing else, but some
compositum, made up of some one or more, or all of these four.

Now, whereas it may here again be objected, that neither can the Reds be made
out of the Yellows, added together, or laid on in greater or less quantity, nor
can the Yellows be made out of the Reds though laid never so thin; and as for
the addition of White or Black, they do nothing but either whiten or darken the
colors to which they are added, and not at all make them of any other kind of
color: as for instance, Vermilion, by being tempered with White Lead, does not
at all grow more Yellow, but only there is made a whiter kind of Red. Nor does
Yellow Oker, though laid never so thick, produce the color of Vermilion, nor
though it be tempered with Black, does it at all make a Red; nay, though it be
tempered with White, it will not afford a fainter kind of Yellow, such as
masticut, but only a whitened Yellow; nor will the Blues be dibated or deepned
after the manner I speak of, as Indico will never afford so fine a Blue as
Vltramarine or Bise; nor will it, tempered with Vermilion, ever afford a Green,
though each of them be never so much tempered with white.

To which I answer, that there is a great difference between diluting a color
and whitening of it; for diluting a color, is to make the colored parts more
thin, so that the tinged light, which is made by trajecting those tinged
bodies, does not receive so deep a tincture; but whitening a color is only an
intermixing of many clear reflections of light among the same tinged parts;
deepning also, and darkning or blacking a color, are very different; for
deepning a color, is to make the light pass through a greater quantity of the
same tinging body; and darkning or blacking a color, is only interposing a
multitude of dark or black spots among the same tinged parts, or placing the
color in a more faint light.

First therefore, as to the former of these operations, that is, diluting and
deepning, most of the colors used by the Limners and Painters are incapable
of, to wit, Vermilion and Red-lead, and Oker, because the tinged parts are so
exceeding small, that the most curious Grindstones we have, are not able to
separate them into parts actually divided so small as the tinged particles are;
for looking on the most curiously ground Vermilion, and Oker, and Red-lead, I
could perceive that even those small corpuscles of the bodies they left were
compounded of many pieces, that is, they seemed to be small pieces compounded
of a multitude of lesser tinged parts: each piece seeming almost like a piece
of Red Glass, or tinged Crystal all flaw'd; so that unless the Grindstone could
actually divide them into smaller pieces then those flaw'd particles were,
which compounded that tinged mote I could see with my Microscope, it would be
impossible to dilute the color by grinding, which, because the finest we have
will not reach to do in Vermilion or Oker, therefore they cannot at all, or
very hardly be diluted.

Other colors indeed, whose tinged particles are such as may be made smaller,
by grinding their color, may be diluted. Thus several of the Blues may be
diluted, as Smalt and Bise; and Masticut, which is Yellow, may be made more
faint: And even Vermilion it self may, by too much grinding, be brought to the
color of Red-lead, which is but an Orange color, which is confessed by all to
be very much upon the Yellow. Now, though perhaps somewhat of this diluting of
Vermilion by overmuch grinding may be attributed to the Grindstone, or muller,
for that some of their parts may be worn off and mixed with the color, yet
there seems not very much, for I have done it on a Serpentine-stone with a
muller made of a Pebble, and yet observed the same effect follow.

And secondly, as to the other of these operations on colors, that is, the
deepning of them, Limners and Painters colors are for the most part also
incapable. For they being for the most part opacous; and that opacousness, as I
said before, proceeding from the particles, being very much flaw'd, unless we
were able to join and reunite those flaw'd particles again into one piece, we
shall not be able to deepen the color, which since we are unable to do with
most of the colors which are by Painters accounted opacous, we are therefore
unable to deepen them by adding more of the same kind.

But because all those opacous colors have two kinds of beams of Rays
reflected from them, that is, Rays unting'd, which are only reflected from the
outward surface, without at all penetrating of the body, and tinged Rays which
are reflected from the inward surfaces or flaws after they have suffered a
twofold refraction; and because that transparent liquors mixed with such
corpuscles, do, for the most part, take off the former kind of reflection;
therefore these colors mixed with Water or Oil, appear much deeper than when
dry, for most part of that white reflection from the outward surface is
removed. Nay, some of these colors are very much deepned by the mixture with
some transparent liquor, and that because they may perhaps get between those
two flaws, and so consequently join two or more of those flaw'd pieces
together; but this happens but in a very few.

Now, to show that all this is not gratis dictum, I shall set down some
Experiments which do manifest these things to be probable and likely, which I
have here delivered.

For, first, if you take any tinged liquor whatsoever, especially if it be
pretty deeply tinged, and by any means work it into a froth, the congeries of
that froth shall seem an opacous body, and appear of the same color, but much
whiter than that of the liquor out of which it is made. For the abundance of
reflections of the Rays against those surfaces of the bubbles of which the
froth consists, does so often rebound the Rays backwards, that little or no
light can pass through, and consequently the froth appears opacous.

Again, if to any of these tinged liquors that will endure the boiling there be
added a small quantity of fine flower (the parts of which through the
Microscope are plainly enough to be perceived to consist of transparent
corpuscles) and suffered to boil till it thicken the liquor, the mass of the
liquor will appear opacous, and tinged with the same color, but very much
whitened.

Thus, if you take a piece of transparent Glass that is well colored, and by
heating it, and then quenching it in Water, you flaw it all over, it will
become opacous, and will exhibit the same color with which the piece is
tinged, but fainter and whiter.

Or, if you take a Pipe of this transparent Glass, and in the flame of a Lamp
melt it, and then blow it into very thin bubbles, then break those bubbles, and
collect a good parcel of those laminae together in a Paper, you shall find that
a small thickness of those Plates will constitute an opacous body, and that you
may see through the mass of Glass before it be thus laminated, above four times
the thickness: And besides, they will now afford a color by reflection as
other opacous (as they are called) colors will, but much fainter and whiter
than that of the Lump or Pipe out of which they were made.

Thus also, if you take Putty, and melt it with any transparent colored Glass,
it will make it become an opacous colored lump, and to yield a paler and
whiter color than the lump by reflection.

The same thing may be done by a preparation of Antimony, as has been shown by
the Learned Physician, Dr. C. M. in his Excellent Observations and Notes on
Nery's Art of Glass; and by this means all transparent colors become opacous,
or ammels. And though by being ground they lose very much of their color,
growing much whiter by reason of the multitude of single reflections from their
outward surface, as I showed before, yet the fire that in the nealing or melting
re-unites them, and so renews those spurious reflections, removes also those
whitenings of the color that proceed from them.

As for the other colors which Painters use, which are transparent, and used
to varnish over all other paintintings, it is well enough known that the laying
on of them thinner or thicker, does very much dilute or deepen their color.

Painters Colors therefore consisting most of them of solid particles, so
small that they cannot be either reunited into thicker particles by any Art
yet known, and consequently cannot be deepned; or divided into particles so
small as the flaw'd particles that exhibit that color, much less into smaller,
and consequently cannot be diluted; It is necessary that they which are to
imitate all kinds of colors, should have as many degrees of each color as can
be procured.

And to this purpose, both Limners and Painters have a very great variety both
of Yellows and Blues, besides several other colored bodies that exhibit very
compounded colors, such as Greens and Purples; and others that are compounded
of several degrees of Yellow, or several degrees of Blue, sometimes unmixt, and
sometimes compounded with several other colored bodies.

The Yellows, from the palest to the deepest Red or Scarlet, which has no
intermixture of Blue, are pale and deep Masticut, Orpament, English Oker, brown
Oker, Red Lead, and Vermilion, burnt English Oker, and burnt brown Oker, which
last have a mixture of dark or dirty parts with them, etc.

Their Blues are several kinds of Smalts, and Verditures, and Bise, and
Vltramarine, and Indico, which last has many dirty or dark parts intermixed with
it.

Their compounded colored bodies, as Pink, and Verdigrese, which are Greens,
the one a Popingay, the other a Seagreen; then Lac, which is a very lovely
Purple.

To which may be added their Black and White, which they also usually call
Colors, of each of which they have several kinds, such as Bone Black, made of
Ivory burnt in a close Vessel, and Blue Black, made of the small coal of
Willow, or some other Wood; and Cullens earth, which is a kind of brown Black,
etc. Their usual Whites are either artificial or natural White Lead, the last
of which is the best they yet have, and with the mixing and tempering these
colors together, are they able to make an imitation of any color whatsoever:
Their Reds or deep Yellows, they can dilute by mixing pale Yellows with them,
and deepen their pale by mixing deeper with them; for it is not with Opacous
colors as it is with transparent, where by adding more Yellow to yellow, it is
deepned, but in opacous diluted. They can whiten any color by mixing White
with it, and darken any color by mixing Black, or some dark and dirty color.
And in a word, most of the colors, or colored bodies they use in Limning and
Painting, are such, as though mixed with any other of their colors, they
preserve their own hue, and by being in such very small parts dispersed through
the other colored bodies, they both, or altogether represent to the eye a
compositum of all; the eye being unable, by reason of their smalness, to
distinguish the peculiarly colored particles, but receives them as one entire
compositum: whereas in many of these, the Microscope very easily distinguishes
each of the compounding colors distinct, and exhibiting its own color.

Thus have I by gently mixing Vermilion and Bise dry, produced a very fine
Purple, or mixed color, but looking on it with the Microscope, I could easily
distinguish both the Red and the Blue particles, which did not at all produce
the Phantasm of Purple.

To sum up all therefore in a word, I have not yet found any solid colored
body, that I have yet examined, perfectly opacous; but those that are least
transparent are Metalline and Mineral bodies, whose particles generally,
seeming either to be very small, or very much flaw'd, appear for the most part
opacous, though there are very few of them that I have looked on with a
Microscope, that have not very plainly or circumstantially manifested
themselves transparent.

And indeed, there seem to be so few bodies in the world that are in minimi^
opacous, that I think one may make it a rational Query, Whether there be any
body absolutely thus opacous? For I doubt not at all (and I have taken notice
of very many circumstances that make me of this mind) that could we very much
improve the Microscope, we might be able to see all those bodies very plainly
transparent, which we now are fain only to ghess at by circumstances. Nay, the
Object Glasses we yet make use of are such, that they make many transparent
bodies to the eye, seem opacous through them, which if we widen the Aperture a
little, and cast more light on the objects, and not charge the Glasses so deep,
will again disclose their transparency.

Now, as for all kinds of colors that are dissolvable in Water, or other
liquors, there is nothing so manifest, as that all those tinged liquors are
transparent; and many of them are capable of being diluted and compounded or
mixed with other colors, and diverse of them are capable of being very much
changed and heightened, and fixed with several kinds of Saline menstruums. Others
of them upon compounding, destroy or vitiate each others colors, and
precipitate, or otherwise very much alter each others tincture. In the true
ordering and diluting, and deepning, and mixing, and fixing of each of which,
consists one of the greatest mysteries of the Dyers; of which particulars,
because our Microscope affords us very little information, I shall add nothing
more at present; but only that with a very few tinctures ordered and mixed
after certain ways, too long to be here set down, I have been able to make an
appearance of all the various colors imaginable, without at all using the help
of Salts, or Saline menstruums to vary them.

As for the mutation of Colors by Saline menstruums, they have already been so
fully and excellently handled by the lately mentioned Incomparable Author,
that I can add nothing, but that of a multitude of trials that I made, I have
found them exactly to agree with his Rules and Theories; and though there may
be infinite instances, yet may they be reduced under a few Heads, and comprised
within a very few Rules. And generally I find, that Saline menstruums are most
operative upon those colors that are Purple, or have some degree of Purple in
them, and upon the other colors much less. The spurious pulses that compose
which, being (as I formerly noted) so very near the middle between the true
ones, that a small variation throws them both to one side, or both to the
other, and so consequently must make a vast mutation in the formerly appearing
Color.

Observe. XI. Of Figures observed in small Sand.
SAnd generally seems to be nothing else but exceeding small Pebbles, or at
least some very small parcels of a bigger stone; the whiter kind seems through
the Microscope to consist of small transparent pieces of some pellucid body,
each of them looking much like a piece of Alum, or Salt Gem; and this kind of
Sand is angled for the most part irregularly, without any certain shape, and
the granules of it are for the most part flaw'd, though amongst many of them it
is not difficult to find some that are perfectly pellucid, like a piece of
clear Crystal, and diverse likewise most curiously shaped, much after the manner
of the bigger Stiriae of Crystal, or like the small Diamants I observed in
certain Flints, of which I shall by and by relate; which last particular seems
to argue, that this kind of Sand is not made by the comminution of greater
transparent Crystaline bodies, but by the concretion or coagulation of Water,
or some other fluid body.

There are other kinds of courser Sands, which are browner, and have their
particles much bigger; these, viewed with a Microscope, seem much courser and
more opacous substances, and most of them are of some irregularly rounded
Figures; and though they seem not so opacous as to the naked eye, yet they seem
very foul and cloudy, but neither do these want curiously transparent, no more
than they do regularly figured and well colored particles, as I have often
found.

There are multitudes of other kinds of Sands, which in many particulars,
plainly enough discoverable by the Microscope, differ both from these last
mentioned kinds of Sands, and from one another: there seeming to be as great
variety of Sands, as there is of Stones. And as amongst Stones some are called
precious from their excellency, so also are there Sands which deserve the same
Epithet for their beauty; for viewing a small parcel of East India Sand (which
was given me by my highly honored friend, Mr. Daniel Colwall) and, since that,
another parcel, much of the same kind, I found several of them, both very
transparent like precious Stones, and regularly figured like Crystal, Cornish
Diamants, some Rubies, etc. and also tinged with very lively and deep colors,
like Rubys, Saphyrs, Emeralds, etc. These kinds of granuls I have often found
also in English Sand. And it is easy to make such a counterfeit Sand with
deeply tinged Glass, Enamels and Painters colors.

It were endless to describe the multitudes of Figures I have met with in these
kind of minute bodies, such as Spherical, Oval, Pyramidal, Conical,
Prismatical, of each of which kinds I have taken notice.

But amongst many others, I met with none more observable than this pretty
Shell (described in the Figure X. of the fifth Scheme) which, though as it was
light on by chance, deserved to have been omitted (I being unable to direct any
one to find the like) yet for its rarity was it not inconsiderable, especially
upon the account of the information it may afford us. For by it we have a very
good instance of the curiosity of Nature in another kind of Animals which are
removed, by reason of their minuteness, beyond the reach of our eyes; so that
as there are several sorts of Insects, as Mites, and others, so small as not
yet to have had any names; (some of which I shall afterward describe) and
small Fishes, as Leeches in Vinegar; and small vegetables, as Moss, and
Rose-Leave-plants; and small Mushroms, as mould: so are there, it seems, small
Shel-fish likewise, Nature showing her curiosity in every Tribe of Animals,
Vegetables, and Minerals.

I was trying several small and single Magnifying Glasses, and casually viewing
a parcel of white Sand, when I perceived one of the grains exactly shaped and
wreathed like a Shell, but endeavoring to distinguish it with my naked eye, it
was so very small, that I was fain again to make use of the Glass to find it;
then, whilst I thus looked on it, with a Pin I separated all the rest of the
granules of Sand, and found it afterward to appear to the naked eye an
exceeding small white spot, no bigger than the point of a Pin. Afterward I
viewed it every way with a better Microscope* and found it on both sides, and
edge-ways, to resemble the Shell of a small Water-Snail with a flat spiral
Shell: it had twelve wreathings, a, b, c, d, e, etc. all very proportionably
growing one less than another toward the middle or center of the Shell, where
there was a very small round white spot. I could not certainly discover whether
the Shell were hollow or not, but it seemed filled with somewhat, and it is
probable that it might be petrified as other larger Shells often are, such as
are mentioned in the seventeenth Observation.

Observe. XII. Of Gravel in Urine.
I Have often observed the Sand or Gravel of Urine, which seems to be a
tartareous substance, generated out of a Saline and a terrestrial substance
crystalliz^d together, in the form of Tartar, sometimes sticking to the sides
of the Vrinal, but for the most part sinking to the bottom, and there lying in
the form of coorse common Sand; these, through the Microscope, appear to be a
company of small bodies, partly transparent, and partly opacous, some White,
some Yellow, some Red, others of more brown and duskie colors.

The Figure of them is for the most part flat, in the manner of Slats, or such
like plated Stones, that is, each of them seem to be made up of several other
thinner Plates, much like Muscovie Glass, or English Sparr, to the last of
which, the white plated Gravel seems most likely; for they seem not only
plated like that, but their sides shaped also into Rhombs, Rhomboeids, and
sometimes into Rectangles and squares. Their bigness and Figure may be seen in
the second Figure of the sixth Plate, which represents about a dozen of them
lying upon a plate ABCD, some of which, as a, b, c, d, seemed more regular than
the rest, and e, which was a small one, fricking on the top of another, was a
perfect Rhomboeid on the top, and had four Rectagular sides.

The line E which was the measure of the Microscope, is 1/3^ part of an English
Inch, so that the greatest breadth of any of them, exceeded not 1/12^ part of an
Inch.

Putting these into several liquors, I found Oil of Vitriul, Spirit of Urine,
and several other Satine menstru^ms to dissolve them; and the first of these in
less than a minute without Ebullition, Water, and several other liquors, had no
sudden operation upon them. This I mention, because those liquors that dissolve
them, first make them very white, not vitiating, but rather rectifying their
Figure, and thereby make them afford a very pretty object for the Microscope.

How great an advantage it would be to such as are troubled with the Stone, to
find some menstruum that might dissolve them without hurting the Bladder, is
easily imagined, since some injections made of such bodies might likewise
dissolve the stone, which seems much of the same nature. It may therefore,
perhaps, be worthy some Physicians enquiry, whether there may not be something
mixed with the Urine in which the Gravel or Stone lies, which may again make it
dissolve it, the first of which seems by it is regular Figures to have been
sometimes Crystalliz'd out of it. For whether this Crystallization be made in
the manner as Alum, Peter, etc. are crystallized out of a cooling liquor, in
which, by boiling they have been dissolved; or whether it be made in the manner
of Tartarum Vitriolatum, that is, by the Coalition of an acid and a Sulphurous
substance, it seems not impossible, but that the liquor it lies in, may be
again made a dissolvent of it. But leaving these inquiries to Physicians or
Chemists, to whom it does more properly belong, I shall proceed.

Observe. XIII. Of the small Diamants, or Sparks in Flints.
CHancing to break a Flint stone in pieces, I found within it a certain cavity
all crusted over with a very pretty candied substance, some of the parts of
which, upon changing the posture of the Stone, in respect of the Incident
light, exhibited a number of small, but very vivid reflections; and having made
use of my Microscope, I could perceive the whole surface of that cavity to be
all beset with a multitude of little Crystaline or Adamantine bodies, so
curiously shaped, that it afforded a not unpleasing object.

Having considered those vivid repercussions of light, I found them to be made
partly from the plain external surface of these regularly figured bodies (which
afforded the vivid reflections) and partly to be made from within the somewhat
pellucid body, that is, from some surface of the body, opposite to that
superficies of it which was next the eye.

And because these bodies were so small, that I could not well come to make
Experiments and Examinations of them, I provided me several small stiriae of
Crystals or Diamants, found in great quantities in Cornwall, and are therefore
commonly called Cornish Diamants: these being very pellucid, and growing in a
hollow cavity of a Rock (as I have been several times informed by those that
have observed them) much after the same manner as these do in the Flint; and
having besides their outward surface very regularly shaped, retaining very near
the same Figures with some of those I observed in the other, became a
convenient help to me for the Examination of the properties of those kinds of
bodies.

And first for the Reflections; in these I found it very observable, That the
brightest reflections of light proceeded from within the pellucid body; that
is, that the Rays admitted through the pellucid substance in their getting out
on the opposite side, were by the contiguous and strong reflecting surface of
the Air very vividly reflected, so that more Rays were reflected to the eye by
this surface, though the Ray in entering and getting out of the Crystal had
suffered a double refraction, than there were from the outward surface of the
Glass where the Ray had suffered no reftraction at all.

Sche: VII


And that this was the surface of the Air that gave so vivid a re-percussion I
tried by this means. I sunk half of a stiria in Water, so that only Water was
contiguous to the under surface, and then the internal reflection was so
exceedingly faint, that it was scarce discernable. Again, I tried to alter this
vivid reflection by keeping off the Air, with a body not fluid, and that was by
rubbing and holding my finger very hard against the under surface, so as in
many places the pulp of my finger did touch the Glass, without any interjacent
air between; then observing the reflection, I found, that wheresoever my finger
or skin touched the surface, from that part there was no reflection, but in the
little furrows or creases of my skin, where there remained little small lines
of air, from them was returned a very vivid reflection as before. I tried
further, by making the surface of very pure Quicksilver to be contiguous to the
under surface of this pellucid body, and then the reflection from that was so
exceedingly more vivid than from the air, as the reflection from air was than
the reflection from the Water; from all which trials I plainly saw, that the
strong reflecting air was the cause of this Phenomenon.

And this agrees very well with the Hypothesis of light and Pellucid bodies
which I have mentioned in the description of Muscovy-glass; for we there
suppose Glass to be a medium, which does less resist the pulse of light, and
consequently, that most of the Rays incident on it enter into it, and are
refracted toward the perpendicular; whereas the air I suppose to be a body
that does more resist it, and consequently more are re-percuss'd then do enter
it: the same kind of trials have I made, with Crystallin^ Glass, with drops of
fluid bodies, and several other ways, which do all seem to agree very exactly
with this Theory. So that from this Principle well established, we may deduce
several Corollaries not unworthy observation.

And the first is, that it plainly appears by this, that the production of the
Rainbow is as much to be ascribed to the reflection of the concave surface of
the air, as to the refraction of the Globular drops: this will be evidently
manifest by these Experiments, if you foliate that part of a Glass-ball that is
to reflect an Iris, as in the Cartesian Experiment, above mentioned, the
reflections will be abundantly more strong, and the colors more vivid: and if
that part of the surface be touched with Water, scarce affords any sensible
color at all.

Next we learn, that the great reason why pellucid bodies beaten small are
white, is from the multitude of reflections, not from the particles of the
body, but from the contiguous surface of the air. And this is evidently
manifested, by filling the Interstitia of those powdered bodies with Water,
whereby their whiteness presently disappears. From the same reason proceeds the
whiteness of many kinds of Sands, which in the Microscope appear to be made up
of a multitude of little pellucid bodies, whose brightest reflections may by
the Microscope be plainly perceived to come from their internal surfaces; and
much of the whiteness of it may be destroyed by the affusion of fair. Water to
be contiguous to those surfaces.

The whiteness also of froth, is for the most part to be ascribed to the
reflection of the light from the surface of the air within the Bubbles, and
very little to the reflection from the surface of the Water it self: for this
last reflection does not return a quarter so many Rays, as that which is made
from the surface of the air, as I have certainly found by a multitude of
Observations and Experiments.

The whiteness of Linen, Paper, Silk, etc. proceeds much from the same reason,
as the Microscope will easily discover; for the Paper is made up of an
abundance of pellucid bodies, which afford a very plentiful reflection from
within, that is, from the concave surface of the air contiguous to its
component particles; wherefore by the affusion of Water, Oil, Tallow,
Turpentine, etc. all those reflections are made more faint, and the beams of
light are suffered to traject and run through the Paper more freely.

Hence further we may learn the reason of the whiteness of many bodies, and by
what means they may be in part made pellucid: As white Marble for instance, for
this body is composed of a pellucid body exceedingly flaw'd, that is, there are
abundance of thin, and very fine cracks or chinks amongst the multitude of
particles of the body, that contain in them small parcels of air, which do so
re-percuss and drive back the penetrating beams, that they cannot enter very
deep within that body, which the Microscope does plainly inform us to be made
up of a Congeries of pellucid particles. And I further found it somewhat more
evidently by some attempts I made toward the making transparent Marble, for by
heating the Stone a little, and soaking it in Oil, Turpentine, Oil of
Turpentine, etc, I found that I was able to see much deeper into the body of
Marble then before; and one trial, which was not with an unctuous substance,
succeeded better than the rest, of which, when I have a better opportunity, I
shall make further trial.

This also gives us a probable reason of the so much admired Phenomenon of the
Oculus Mundi, an Oval stone, which commonly looks like white Alabaster, but
being laid a certain time in Water, it grows pellucid, and transparent, and
being suffered to lie again dry, it by degrees loses that transparency, and
becomes white as before. For the Stone being of a hollow spongie nature, has in
the first and last of these appearances, all those pores filled with the
obtunding and reflecting air; whereas in the second, all those pores are filled
with a medium that has much the same refraction with the particles of the
Stone, and therefore those two being contiguous, make, as twere, one continued
medium, of which more is said in the 15. Observation.

There are a multitude of other Phenomenon, that are produced from this same
Principle, which as it has not been taken notice of by any yet that I know, so
I think, upon more diligent observation, will it not be found the least
considerable. But I have here only time to hint Hypotheses, and not to
prosecute them so fully as I could with; many of them having a vast extent in
the production of a multitude of Phenomenon, which have been by others, either
not attempted to be explained, or else attributed to some other cause than what
I have assigned, and perhaps than the right; and therefore I shall leave this
to the prosecution of such as have more leisure: only before I leave it, I
must not pretermit to hint, that by this Principle, multitudes of the
Phenomenon of the air, as about Mists, Clouds, Meteors, Haloes, etc. are most
plainly and (perhaps) truly explicable; multitudes also of the Phenomenon in
colored bodies, as liquors, etc. are deducible from it.

And from this I shall proceed to a second considerable Phenomenon which these
Diamants exhibit, and that is the regularity of their Figure, which is a
propriety not less general than the former; It comprising within its extent,
all kinds of Metals, all kinds of Minerals, most Precious stones, all kinds of
Salts, multitudes of Earths, and almost all kinds of fluid bodies. And this is
another propiety, which, though a little superficially taken notice of by some,
has not, that I know, been so much as attempted to be explicated by any.

This propriety of bodies, as I think it the most worthy, and next in order to
be considered after the contemplation of the Globular Figure, so have I long
had a desire as well as a determination to have prosecuted it if I had had an
opportunity, having long since proposed to my self the method of my enquiry
therein, it containing all the allurements that I think any enquiry is capable
of: For, first I take it to proceed from the most simple principle that any
kind of form can come from, next the Globular, which was therefore the first I
set upon, and what I have therein performed, I leave the Judicious Reader to
determine. For as that form proceeded from a propiety of fluid bodies, which I
have called Congruity, or Incongruity; so I think, had I time and opportunity,
I could make probable, that all these regular Figures that are so conspicuously
various and curious, and do so adorn and beautify such multitudes of bodies,
as I have above hinted, arise only from three or four several positions or
postures of Globular particles, and those the most plain, obvious, and
necessary conjunctions of such figured particles that are possible, so that
supposing such and such plain and obvious causes concurring the coagulating
particles must necessarily compose a body of such a determinate regular Figure,
and no other; and this with as much necessity and obviousness as a fluid body
encompast with a Heterogeneous fluid must be protruded into a Spherule or
Globe. And this I have ad oculum demonstrated with a company of bullets, and
some few other very simple bodies; so that there was not any regular Figure,
which I have hitherto met withal, of any of those bodies that I have above
named, that I could not with the composition of bullets or globules, and one or
two other bodies, imitate, even almost by shaking them together. And thus for
instance may we find that the Globular bullets will of themselves, if put on an
inclining plain, so that they may run together, naturally run into a triangular
order, composing all the variety of figures that can be imagined to be made out
of aequilateral triangles; and such will you find, upon trial, all the surfaces
of Alum to be composed of: For three bullets lying on a plain, as close to one
another as they can compose an aequilatero-triangular form, as in A in the 7.
Scheme. If a fourth be joined to them on either side as closely as it can, they
four compose the most regular Rhombus consisting of two aequilateral triangles,
as B. If a fifth be joined to them on either side in as close a position as it
can, which is the propriety of the Texture, it makes a Trapexium, or four-sided
Figure, two of whose angles are 120. and two 60. degrees, as C. If a sixth be
added, as before, either it makes an aequilateral triangle, as D, or a
Rhomboeid, as E, or an Hex-angular Figure, as F, which is composed of two
primary Rhombes. If a seventh be added, it makes either an
aequilatero-hexagonal Figure, as G, or some kind of six-sided Figure, as H, or
I. And though there be never so many placed together, they may be ranged into
some of these lately mentioned Figures, all the angles of which will be either
60. degrees, or 120. as the figure K. which is an aequiangular hexagonal Figure
is compounded of 12. Globules, or may be of 25, or 27, or 36, or 42, etc. and
by these kinds of texture, or position of globular bodies, may you find out all
the variety of regular shapes, into which the smooth surfaces of Alum are
formed, as upon examination any one may easily find; nor does it hold only in
superficies, but in solidity also, for it is obvious that a fourth Globule laid
upon the third in this texture, composes a regular Tetrahedron, which is a very
usual Figure of the Crystals of Alum. And (to hasten) there is no one Figure
into which Alum is observed to be crystallized, but may by this texture of
Globules be imitated, and by no other.

I could instance also in the Figure of Sea Salt, and Sal-gem, that it is
composed of a texture of Globules, placed in a cubical form, as L, and that all
the Figures of those Salts may be imitated by this texture of Globules, and by
no other whatsoever. And that the forms of Vitriol and of Saltpeter, as also
of Crystal, Hore-frost, etc. are compounded of these two textures, but
modulated by certain proprieties: But I have not here time to insist upon, as I
have not neither to show by what means Globules come to be thus context, and
what those Globules are, and many other particulars requisite to a full and
intelligible explication of this propriety of bodies. Nor have I hitherto found
indeed an opportunity of prosecuting the inquiry so far as I designed; nor do
I know when I may, it requiring abundance of time, and a great deal of
assistance to go through with what I designed; the model of which was this:

First, to get as exact and full a collection as I could, of all the differing
kinds of Geometrical figured bodies, some three or four several bodies of each
kind.

Secondly, with them to get as exact a History as possibly I could learn of
their places of Generation or finding, and to enquire after as many
circumstances that tended to the Illustrating of this Enquiry, as possibly I
could observe.

Thirdly, to make as many trials as upon experience I could find requisite, in
Dissolutions and Coagulations of several crystallizing Salts; for the needful
instruction and information in this Enquiry.

Fourthly, to make several trials on diverse other bodies, as Metals, Minerals,
and Stones, by dissolving them in several Menstruums, and crystalizing them, to
see what Figures would arise from those several Composstums.

Fitfthly, to make Compositions and Coagulations of several Salts together into
the same mass, to observe of what Figure the product of them would be; and in
all, to note as many circumstances as I should judge conducive to my Enquiry.

Sixthly, to enquire the closeness or rarity of the texture of these bodies, by
examining their gravity, and their refraction, etc.

Seventhly, to enquire particularly what operations the fire has upon several
kinds of Salts, what changes it causes in their Figures, Textures, of Energies.

Eighthly, to examine their manner or dissolution, or acting upon those bodies
dissoluble in them; The texture of those bodies before and after the process.
And this for the History.

Next for the Solution, To have examined by what, and how many means, such and
such Figures, actions and effects could be produced possibly.

And lastly, from all circumstances well weighed, I should have endeavored to
have shown which of them was most likely, and (if the informations by these
Enquiries would have born it) to have demonstrated which of them it must be,
and was.

But to proceed, As I believe in next to the Globular the most simple; so do I,
in the second place, judge it not less pleasant; for that which makes an
Enquiry pleasant, are, first a noble Inventum that promises to crown the
successful endeavor; and such must certainly the knowledge of the efficient
and concurrent causes of all these curious Geometrical Figures be, which has
made the Philosophers hitherto to conclude nature in these things to play the
Geometrician, according to that saying of Plato, (...). Or next, a great
variety of matter in the Enquiry; and here we meet with nothing less than the
Mathematics of nature, having every day a new Figure to contemplate, or a
variation of the same in another body,

Which do afford us a third thing, which will yet more sweeten the Enquiry, and
that is, a multitude of information; we are not so much to grope in the dark,
as in most other Enquiries, where the Inventum is great; for having such a
multitude of instances to compare, and such easy ways of generating, or
compounding and of destroying the form, as in the Solution and Crystallization
of Salts, we cannot but learn plentiful information to proceed by. And this
will further appear from the universality of the Principle which Nature has
made use of almost in all inanimate bodies. And therefore, as the contemplation
of them all conduces to the knowledge of any one; so from a Scientifical
knowledge of any one does follow the same of all, and every one.

And fourthly, for the usefulness of this knowledge, when acquired, certainly
none can doubt, that considers that it caries us a step forward into the
Labirinth of Nature, in the right way toward the end we propose our selves in
all Philosophical Enquiries. So that knowing what is the form of Inanimate or
Mineral bodies, we shall be the better able to proceed in our next Enquiry
after the forms of Vegetative bodies; and last of all, of Animate ones, that
seeming to be the highest step of natural knowledge that the mind of man is
capable of.

Observe. XIV. Of several kinds of frozen Figures.
I Have very often in a Morning, when there has been a great hoar-frost, with
an indifferently magnifying Microscope, observed the small Stiri^, or
Crystalline beard, which then usually covers the face of most bodies that lie
open to the cold air, and found them to be generally Hexangular prismatical
bodies, much like the long Crystals of Saltpeter, save only that the ends of
them were differing: for whereas those of Nitre are for the most part
pyramidal, being terminated either in a point or edges these of Frost were
hollow, and the cavity in some seemed pretty deep, and this cavity was the more
plainly to be seen, because usually one or other of the six parallelogram sides
was wanting, or at least much shorter then the rest.

But this was only the Figure of the Bearded hoar-frost; and as for the
particles of other kinds of hoar-frosts, they seemed for the most part
irregular, or of no certain Figure. Nay, the parts of those curious branchings,
or vertices, that usually in cold weather tarnish the surface of Glass, appear
through the Microscope very rude and unshapen, as do most other kinds of frozen
Figures, which to the naked eye seem exceeding neat and curious, such as the
Figures of Snow, frozen Urine, Hail, several Figures frozen in common Water,
etc. Some Observations of each of which I shall hereunto annex, because if well
considered and examined, they may, perhaps, prove very instructive for the
finding out of what I have endeavored in the preceding Observation to show, to
be (next the Globular Figure which is caused by congruity, as I hope I have
made probable in the sixth Observation) the most simple and plain operation of
Nature, of which, notwithstanding we are yet ignorant.

I. Several Observables in the six-branched Figures formed on the surface of
Urine by freezing.
Schem. ^. Fig. 1.
1 The Figures were all frozen almost even with the surface of the Urine in the
Vessel, but the bigger stems were a little prominent above that surface, and
the parts of those stems which were nearest the center ( a) were biggest above
the surface.

2 I have observed several kinds of these Figures, some smaller, no bigger then
a Twopence, others so bigg, that I have by measure found one of its stems or
branches above four foot long; and of these, some were pretty round, having all
their branches pretty near alike; other of them were more extended toward one
side, as usually those very large ones ^chem: VIII.
were, which I have observed in Ditches which have been f^ll of font water.

3 None of all these Figures I have yet taken notice of, had any regular
position in respect of one another, or of the sides of the Vessel; not did I
find any of them equally to exactness extended every way from the center a.

4 Where ever there was a center, the branchings from it, ab, ac, ad, ae, af,
ag, were never fewer, or more then six, which usually concurred, or met one
another very near in the same point or center, a; though oftentimes not
exactly; and were inclined to each other by an angle, of very near sixty
degrees. I say, very near, because, though having endeavored to measure them
the most acurately I was able, with the largest Compasses I had, I could not
find any sensible variation from that measure, yet the whole six-branched
Figure seeming to compose a solid angle, they must necessarily be somewhat less.

5 The middle lines or stems of these branches, ab, ac, ad, ae, af, ag, seemed
somewhat whiter, and a little higher then any of the intermediate branchings of
these Figures; and the center a, was the most prominent part of the whole
Figure, seeming the apex of a solid angle or pyramid, each of the six plains
being a little inclined below the surface of the Vri^.

6 The lateral branchings issuing out of the great ones, such as op, mq, etc.
were each of them inclined to the great ones, by the same angle of about sixty
degrees, as the great ones were one to another, and always the bigger
branchings were prominent above the less, and the less above the least, by
proportionate gradations.

7 The lateral branches shooting out of the great ones, went all of them from
the center, and each of them was parallel to that great branch, next to which
it lay; so that as all the branches on one side were parallel to one another,
so were they all of them to the approximate great branch, as po, qr, as they
were parallel to each other, and shot from the center, so were they parallel
also to the great branch ab.

8 Some of the stems of the six branches proceeded straight, and of a thickness
that gradually grew sharper toward the end, as ag.

9 Others of the stems of those branches grew bigger and kno^^y toward the
middle, and the branches also as well as stems, from Cylinders grew into
Plates, in a most admirable and curious order, so exceeding regular and
delicate, as nothing could be more, as is visible in ab, ac, ad, ae, af, but
toward the end of some of these stems, they began again to grow smaller and to
recover their former branchings, as about k and n.

10 Many of the lateral branches had collateral branches (if I may so call
them) as qm had many such as st, and most of those again subcollateral, as vw,
and these again had others less, which one may call laterosubcollateral, and
these again others, and they others, etc. in greater Figures.

11 The branchings of the main Stems joined not together by any regular line,
nor did one side of the one lie over the other side of the other, but the small
collateral and subcollateral branches did lie at top of one another according
to a certain order or method, which I always observed to be this.

12 That side of a collateral or subcollateral, etc. branch, lay over the side
of the approximate (as the feathers in the wing of a Bird) whose branchings
proceeded parallel to the last biggest stem from which it sprung, and not to
the biggest stem of all, unless that were a second stem backwards.

13 This rule that held in the branchings of the Sexangular Figure held also in
the branchings of any other great or small stem, though it did not proceed from
a center.

14 The exactness and curiosity of the figuration of these branches, was in
every particular so transcendent, that I judge it almost impossible for humane
art to imitate.

15 Tasting several clear pieces of this Ice, I could not find any Vrinous
taste in them, but those few I tasted, seemed as insipid as water.

16 A figuration somewhat like this, though indeed in some particulars much
more curious, I have several times observed in regulus martis stellatus, but
with this difference, that all the stems and branchings are bended in a most
excellent and regular order, whereas in Ice the stems and branchings are
straight, but in all other particulars it agrees with this, and seems indeed
nothing but one of these stars, or branched Figures frozen on Urine, distorted,
or wreathed a little, with a certain proportion: Lead also that has Arsenick
and some other things mixed with it, I have found to have its surface, when
suffered to cool, figured somewhat like the branchings of Urine, but much
smaller.

17 But there is a Vegetable which does exceedingly imitate these branches, and
that is, Fearn, where the main stem may be observed to shoot out branches, and
the stems of each of these lateral branches, to send forth collateral, and
those subcollateral, and those latero subcollateral, etc. and all those much
after the same order with the branchings, divisions, and subdivisions in the
branchings of these Figures in frozen Urine; so that if the Figures of both be
well considered, one would ghess that there were not much greater need of a
seminal principle for the production of Fearn, then for the production of the
branches of Urine, or the Stella martis, there seeming to be as much form and
beauty in the one as in the other.

And indeed, this Plant of Fearn, if all particulars be well considered, will
seem of as simple, and uncompounded a form as any Vegetable, next to Mould or
Mushromes, and would next after the invention of the forms of those, deserve to
be inquired into; for notwithstanding several have affirmed it to have seed,
and to be propagated thereby; yet, though I have made very diligent enquiry
after that particular, I cannot find that there is any part of it that can be
imagined to be more seminal then another: But this only here by the by:

For the freezing Figures in Urine, I found it requisite,

First, that the Superficies be not disturbed with any wind, or other commotion
of the air, or the like.

Secondly, that it be not too long exposed, so as that the whole bulk be
frozen, for oftentimes, in such cases, by reason of the swelling the of Ice, or
from some other cause, the curious branched Figures disappear.

Thirdly, an artificial freezing with Snow and Salt, applied to the outside of
the containing Vessel, succeeds not well, unless there be a very little
quantity in the Vessel.

Fourthly, If you take any clear and smooth Glass, and wetting all the inside
of it with Urine, you expose it to a very sharp freezing, you will find it
covered with a very regular and curious Figure.

II. Observables in figured Snow.
Exposing a piece of black Cloth, Schem. 8. Fig. ^.
or a black Hatt to the falling Snow, I have often with great pleasure,
observed such an infinite variety of curiously figured Snow, that it would be
as impossible to draw the Figure and shape of every one of them, as to imitate
exactly the curious and Geometrical Mechanisme of Nature in any one. Some
coorse draughts, such as the coldness of the weather, and the ill provisions, I
had by me for such a purpose, would permit me to make, I have here added in the
Second Figure of the Eighth Scheme.

In all which I observed, that if they were of any regular Figures, they were
always branched out with six principal branches, all of equal length, shape and
make, from the center, being each of them inclined to either of the next
branches on either side of it, by an angle of sixty degrees.

Now, as all these stems were for the most part in one flake exactly of the
same make, so were they in differing Figures of very differing ones; so that in
a very little time I have observed above an hundred several cizes and shapes of
these starry flakes.

The branches also out of each stem of any one of these flakes, were exactly
alike in the same flake; so that of whatever Figure one of the branches were,
the other five were sure to be of the same, very exactly, that is, if the
branchings of the one were small Perallelipipeds or Plates, the branchings of
the other five were of the same; and generally, the branchings were very
conformable to the rules and method observed before, in the Figures on Urine,
that is, the branchings from each side of the stems were parallel to the next
stem on that side, and if the stems were plated, the branches also were the
same; if the stems were very long, the branches also were so, etc.

Observing some of these figured flakes with a Microscope, I found them not to
appear so curious and exactly figured as one would have imagined, but like
Artificial Figures, the bigger they were magnified, the more irregularites
appeared in them; but this irregularity seemed ascribable to the thawing and
breaking of the flake by the fall, and not at all to the defect of the plastic
virtue of Nature, whose curiosity in the formation of most of these kind of
regular Figures, such as those of Salt, Minerals, etc. appears by the help of
the Microscope, to be very many degrees smaller then the most acute eye is able
to perceive without it. And though one of these six-branched Stars appeared
here below much of the shape described in the Third Figure of the Eighth
Scheme; yet I am very apt to think, that could we have a sight of one of them
through a Microscope as they are generated in the Clouds before their Figures
are vitiated by external accidents, they would exhibit abundance of curiosity
and neatness there also, though never so much magnified: For since I have
observed the Figures of Salts and Minerals to be some of them so exceeding
small, that I have scarcely been able to perceive them with the Microscope, and
yet have they been regular, and since (as far as I have yet examined it) there
seems to be but one and the same cause that produces both these effects, I
think it not irrational to suppose that these pretty figured Stars of Snow,
when at first generated might be also very regular and exact.

III. Several kinds of Figures in Water frozen.
Putting fair Water into a large capacious Vessel of Glass, and exposing it to
the cold, I observed after a little time, several broad, flat, and thin
laminae, or plates of Ice, crossing the bulk of the water and one another very
irregularly, only most of them seemed to turn one of their edges toward that
side of the Glass which was next it, and seemed to grow, as 'twere from the
inside of the Vessel inwards toward the middle, almost like so many blades of
Fern. Having taken several of these plates out of water on the blade of a
Knife, I observed them figured much after the manner of Herring bones, or Fern
blades, that is, there was one bigger stem in the middle like the backbone,
and out of it, on either side, were a multitude of small stiriae, or icicles,
like the smaller bones, or the smaller branches in Fern, each of these branches
on the one side, were parallel to all the rest on the same side, and all of
them seemed to make an angle with the stem, toward the top, of sixty degrees,
and toward the bottom or root of this stem, of 120. See the fourth Figure of
the 8. Plate.

I observed likewise several very pretty varieties of Figures in Water, frozen
on the top of a broad flat Marble-stone, exposed to the cold with a little
Water on it, some like feathers, some of other shapes, many of them were very
much of the shape expressed in the fifth Figure of the 8. Scheme, which is
extremely differing from any of the other Figures.

I observed likewise, that the shootings of Ice on the top of Water, beginning
to freez, were in straight prismatical bodies much like those of roch-peter,
that they crossed each other usually without any kind of order or rule, that they
were always a little higher then the surface of the Water that lay between
them; that by degrees those interjacent spaces would be filled with Ice also,
which usually would be as high as the surface of the rest.

In flakes of Ice that had been frozen on the top of Water to any considerable
Schem. I^
thickness, I observed that both the upper and the under sides of it were
curiously quill'd, furrowed or grained, as it were, which when the Sun shone on
the Plate, was exceeding easily to be perceived to be much after the shape of
the lines in the 6. Figure of the 8. Scheme, that is, they consisted of several
straight ends of parallel Plates, which were of diverse lengths and angles to
one another without any certain order.

The cause of all which regular Figures (and of hundreds of others, namely of
Salts, Minerals, Metals, etc. which I could have here inserted; would it not
have been too long) seems to be deducible from the same Principles, which I
have (in the 13. Observation) hinted only, having not yet had time to complete
a Theory of them. But indeed (which I there also hinted) I judge it the second
step by which the Pyramid of natural knowledge (which is the knowledge of the
form of bodies) is to be ascended: And whosoever will climb it, must be well
furnished with that which the Noble Verulam calls Scalam Intellectus; he must
have scaling Ladders, otherwise the steps are so large and high, there will be
no getting up them, and consequently little hopes of attaining any higher
station, such as to the knowledge of the most simple principle of Vegetation
manifested in Mould and Mushromes, which, as I elsewhere endeavored to show,
seems to be the third step; for it seems to me, that the Intellect of man is
like his body, destitute of wings, and cannot move from a lower to a higher and
more sublime station of knowledge, otherwise then step by step, nay even there
where the way is prepared and already made passible; as in the Elements of
Geometry, or the like, where it is fain to climb a whole series of Propositions
by degrees, before it attains the knowledge of one Problem. But if the ascent
be high, difficult and above its reach, it must have recourse to a novum
organum, some new engine and contrivance, some new kind of Algebra, or
Analytick Art before it can surmount it.

Observe. XV. Of Kettering-stone, and of the pores of Inanimate bodies.
THis Stone which is brought from Kettering in Northamptonshire, Schem. 9.
Fig. 1.
and dug out of a Quarry, as I am informed, has a grain altogether
admirable, nor have I ever seen or heard of any other stone that has the like.
It is made up of an innumerable company of small bodies, not all of the same
cize or shape, but for the most part, not much differing from a Globular form,
nor exceed they one another in Diameter above three or four times; they appear
to the eye, like the Cobb or Ovary of a Herring, or some smaller fishes, but
for the most part, the particles seem somewhat less, and not so uniform; but
their variation from a perfect globular ball, seems to be only by the pressure
of the contiguous bals which have a little deprest and protruded those touched
sides inward, and forced the other sides as much outward beyond the limits of
a Globe; just as it would happen, if a heap of exactly round Balls of soft Clay
were heaped upon one another; or, as I have often seen a heap of small Globules
of Quicksilver, reduced to that form by rubbing it much in a glazed Vessel,
with some slimy or sluggish liquor, such as Spittle, when though the top of the
upper Globules be very near spherical, yet those that are pressed upon by others,
exactly imitate the forms of these lately mentioned grains.

Where these grains touch each other, they are so firmly united or settled
together, that they seldom part without breaking a hole in one or the other of
them, such as a, a, a, b, c, c, etc. Some of which fractions, as a, a, a, a,
where the touch has been but light, break no more then the outward crust, or
first shell of the stone, which is of a white color, a little dashed with a
brownish Yellow, and is very thin, like the shell of an Egg: and I have seen
some of those grains perfectly resemble some kind of Eggs, both in color and
shape: But where the union of the contiguous granules has been more firm, there
the divulsion has made a greater Chasm, as at b, b, b, in so much that I have
observed some of them quite broken in two, as at c, c, c, which has discovered
to me a further resemblance they have to Eggs, they having an appearance of a
white and yelk, by two differing substances that envelope and encompass each
other.

That which we may call the white was pretty whitish near the yelk, but more
duskie toward the shell; some of them I could plainly perceive to be shot or
radiated like a Pyrites or fire-stone; the yelk in some I saw hollow, in others
filled with a duskie brown and porous substance like a kind of pith.

The small pores, or interstitia e e e e betwixt the Globules, I plainly saw,
and found by other trials to be every way pervious to air and water, for I
could blow through a piece of this stone of a considerable thickness, as easily
as I have blown through a Cane, which minded me of the pores which Des Carts
allow his materia subtilis between the ethereal globules.

The object, through the Microscope, appears like a Congeries or heap of
Pibbles, such as I have often seen cast up on the shore, by the working of the
Sea after a great storm, or like (in shape, though not color) a company of
small Globules of Quicksilver, looked on with a Microscope, when reduced into
that form by the way lately mentioned. And perhaps, this last may give some
hint at the manner of the formation of the former: For supposing some
Lapidescent substance to be generated, or some way brought (either by some
commixture of bodies in the Sea it self, or protruded in, perhaps, out of some
subterraneous caverns) to the bottom of the Sea, and there remaining in the
form of a liquor like Quicksilver, heterogeneous to the ambient Saline fluid,
it may by the working and tumblings of the Sea to and fro be jumbled and
comminuted into such Globules as may afterward be hardened into Flints, the
lying of which one upon another, when in the Sea, being not very hard, by
reason of the weight of the incompassing fluid, may cause the undermost to be a
little, though not much, varied from a globular Figure. But this only by the by.

After what manner this Kettering-stone should be generated I cannot learn,
having never been there to view the place, and observe the circumstances; but
it seems to me from the structure of it to be generated from some substance
once more fluid, and afterward by degrees growing harder, almost after the
same manner as I supposed the generation of Flints to be made.

But whatever were the cause of its curious texture, we may learn this
information from it; that even in those things which we account vile, rude, and
coorse, Nature has not been wanting to show abundance of curiosity and
excellent Mechanisme.

We may here find a Stone by help of a Microscope, to be made up of abundance
of small Balls, which do but just touch each other, and yet there being so many
contacts, they make a firm hard mass, or a Stone much harder then Freestone.

Next, though we can by a Microscope discern so curious a shape in the
particles, yet to the naked eye there scarce appears any such thing; which may
afford us a good argument to think, that even in those bodies also, whose
texture we are not able to discern, though helped with Microscopes, there may
be yet latent so curious a Schematisme, that it may abundantly satisfy the
curious searcher, who shall be so happy as to find some way to discover it.

Next, we here find a Stone, though to the naked eye a very close one, yet
every way perforated with innumerable pores, which are nothing else but the
interstitia, between those multitudes of minute globular particles, that
compose the bulk it self; and these pores are not only discovered by the
Microscope, but by this contrivance.

I took a pretty large piece of this stone, and covering it all over with
cement, save only at two opposite parts, I found my self able, by blowing in at
one end that was left open, to blow my spittle, with which I had wet the other
end, into abundance of bubbles, which argued these pores to be open and
pervious through the whole stone, which affords us a very pretty instance of
the porousness of some seemingly close bodies, of which kind I shall anon have
occasion to subjoyn many more, tending to prove the same thing.

I must not here omit to take notice, that in this body there is not a
vegetative faculty that should so contrive this structure for any peculiar use
of Vegetation or growth, whereas in the other instances of vegetable porous
bodies, there is an anima, or forma informans, that does contrive all the
Structures and Mechanismes of the constituting body, to make them subservient
and useful to the great Work or Function they are to perform. And so I ghess
the pores in Wood, and other vegetables, in bones, and other Animal substances,
to be as so many channels, provided by the Great and Alwise Creator, for the
conveyance of appropriated juyces to particular parts. And therefore, that this
may tend, or be pervious all toward one part, and may have impediments, as
valves or the like, to any other; but in this body we have very little reason
to suspect there should be any such design, for it is equally pervious every
way, not only forward, but backwards, and side-ways, and seems indeed much
rather to be Homogeneous or similar to those pores, which we may with great
probability believe to be the channels of pellucid bodies, not directed, or
more open any one way, then any other, being equally pervious every way. And,
according as these pores are more or greater in respect of the interstitial
bodies, the more transparent are the so constituted concretes; and the smaller
those pores are, the weaker is the Impulse of light communicated through them,
though the more quick be the progress.

Upon this Occasion, I hope it will not be altogether unseasonable, if I
propound my conjectures and Hypothesis about the medium and conveyance of light.

I suppose then, that the greatest part of the Interstitia of the world, that
lies between the bodies of the Sun and Stars, and the Planets, and the Earth,
to be an exceeding fluid body, very apt and ready to be moved, and to
communicate the motion of any one part to any other part, though never so far
distant: Nor do I much concern my self, to determine what the Figure of the
particles of this exceedingly subtle fluid medium must be; nor whether it have
any interstitiated pores or vacuities, it being sufficient to solve all the
Phenomenon to suppose it an exceedingly fluid, or the most fluid body in the
world, and as yet impossible to determine the other difficulties.

That being so exceeding fluid a body, it easily gives passage to all other
bodies to move to and fro in it.

That it neither receives from any of its parts, or from other bodies; nor
communicates to any of its parts, or to any other body, any impulse, or motion
in a direct line, that is not of a determinate quickness. And that when the
motion is of such determinate swiftness, it both receives, and communicates, or
propagates an impulse or motion to any imaginable distance in straight lines,
with an unimaginable celerity and vigor.

That all kind of solid bodies consist of pretty massy particles in respect of
the particles of this fluid medium, which in many places do so touch each
other, that none of this fluid medium interposes much after the same mannner
(to use a gross similitude) as a heap of great stones compass one great
congeries or mass in the midst of the water.

That all fluid bodies which we may call tangible, are nothing but some more
subtle parts of those particles, that serve to constitute all tangible bodies.

That the water, and such other fluid bodies, are nothing but a congeries of
particles agitated or made fluid by it in the same manner as the particles of
Salt are agitated or made fluid by a parcel of water, in which they are
dissolved, and subsiding to the bottom of it, constitute a fluid body, much
more massy and dense, and less fluid then the pure water it self.

That the air on the other side is a certain company of particles of quite
another kind, that is, such as are very much smaller, and more easiely moveable
by the motion of this fluid medium; much like those very subtle parts of
Cochenel, and other very deep tinging bodies, where by a very small parcel of
matter is able to tinge and diffuse it self over a very great quantity of the
fluid dissolvent; or somewhat after that manner, as smoke, and such like minute
bodies, or steams, are observed to tinge a very great quantity of air; only
this last similitude is deficient in one propriety, and that is a perpetuity or
continuance in that state of commixture with the air, but the former does more
nearly approach to the nature and manner of the air's being dissolved by this
fluid or Ether. And this Similitude will further hold in these proprieties;
that as those tinctures may be increased by certain bodies, so may they be
precipitated by others; as I shall afterward show it to be very probable, that
the like accidents happen even to the Air it self.

Further, as these solutions and tinctures do alter the nature of these fluid
bodies, as to their aptness to propagate a motion or impulse through them, even
so does the particles of the Air, Water, and other fluid bodies, and of Glass,
Crystal, etc. which are commixt with this bulk of the Ether, alter the motion
of the propagated pulse of light; that is, where these more bulkie particles
are more plentiful, and consequently a lesser quantity of the Ether between
them to be moved, there the motion must necessarily be the swifter, though not
so robust, which will produce those effects, which I have (I hope) with some
probability, ascribed to it in the digression about Colors, at the end of the
Observations on M^scovy-glass.

Now, that other Stones, and those which have the closest and hardest textures,
and seem (as far as we are able to discover with our eyes, though helped with
the best Microscopes) freest from pores, are yet notwithstanding replenished
with them; an Instance or two will, I suppose, make more probable.

A very solid and unflaw'd piece of clear white Marble, i^ it be well polished
and glazed, has so curiously smooth a surface, that the best and most polished
surface of any wrought-glass, seems not to the naked eye, nor through a
Microscope, to be more smooth, and less porons. And yet, that this hard close
body is replenished with abundance of pores, I think these following
Experiments will sufficiently prove.

The first is, That if you take such a piece, and for a pretty while boil it in
Turpentine and Oil of Turpentine, you shall find that the stone will be all
imbued with it; and whereas before it looked more white, but more opacous, now
it will look more greasy, but be much more transparent, and if you let it lie
but a little while, and then break off a part of it, you shall find the
unctuous body to have penetrated it to such a determinate depth every way
within the surface. This may be yet easier tried with a piece of the same
Marble, a little warmed in the fire, and then a little Pitch or Tarr melted on
the top of it; for these black bodies, by their ^^sinoating themselves into the
invisible pores of the stone ting it with so black a hue, that there can be no
further doubt of the truth of this assertion, that it abounds with small
imperceptible pores.

Now, that other bodies will also sink into the pores of Marble, besides
unctuous, I have tried, and found, that a very Blue tincture made in spirit of
Urine would very readily and easily sink into it, as would also several
tinctures drawn with spirit of Wine.

Nor is Marble the only seemingly close stone, which by other kinds of
Experiments may be found porous; for I have by this kind of Experiment on
diverse other stones found much the same effect, and in some, indeed much more
notable. Other stones I have found so porous, that with the Microscope I could
perceive several small winding holes, much like Worm-holes, as I have noted in
some kind of Purbeck-stone, by looking on the surface of a piece newly flaw'd
off; for if otherwise, the surface has been long exposed to the Air, or has
been scraped with any tool, those small caverns are filled with dust, and
disappear.

And to confirm this Conjecture, yet further, I shall here insert an excellent
account; given into the Royal Society by that Eminently Learned Physician,
Doctor Goddard, of an Experiment, not less instructive then curious and
accurate, made by himself on a very hard and seemingly close stone called
Oculus Mundi, as I find it preserved in the Records of that Honorable Society.

A small stone of the kind, called by some Authors, Oculus Mundi, being dry
and cloudy, weighed 5 209/256 Grains.

The same put under water for a night, and somewhat more, became transparent,
and the superficies being wiped dry, weighed 6 3/256 Grains.

The difference between these two weights, 0 50/256 of a Grain.

The same Stone kept out of water one Day and becoming cloudy again weighed, 5
225/256 Grains.

Which was more then the first weight, 0 16/256 of a Grain.

The same being kept two Days longer weighed, 5 20^/256 Grains.

Which was less then at first, 0 7/256 of a Grain.

Being kept dry something longer it did not grow sensibly lighter.

Being put under water for a night and becoming again transparent and wiped
dry, the weight was, 6 3/256 Grains, the same with the first after putting in
water, and more then the last weight after keeping of it dry, ^ 57/256 of a
Grain.

Another Stone of the same kind being variegated with milky white and gray like
some sorts of Agates, while it lay under water, was always environed with
little Bubbles, such as appear in water a little before boiling, next the sides
of the Vessel.

There were also some the like Bubbles on the Surface of the water just over
it, as if either some exhalations came out of it, or that it did excite some
fermentation in the parts of the water contiguous to it.

There was little sensible difference in the transparency of this Stone, before
the putting under water, and after: To be sure the milky- white parts continued
as before, but more difference in weight then in the former. For whereas before
the putting into the water the weight was 18 9^/128 Grains. After it had lain
in about four and twenty hours the weight was 20 ^7/128 Grains, so the
difference was, 1 58/128 Grains.

The same Stone was infused in the water scalding hot, and so continued for a
while after it was cold, but got no more weight then upon infusing in the cold,
neither was there any sensible Difference in the weight both times.

In which Experiment, there are three Observables, that seem very manifestly to
prove the porousness of these seemingly close bodies: the first is their
acquiring a transparency, and losing their whiteness after sleeping in water,
which will seem the more strongly to argue it, if what I have already said
about the making transparent, or clarifying of some bodies, as the white powder
of beaten Glass, and the froth of some glutinous transparent liquor be well
considered; for thereby it will seem rational to think that this transparency
arises from the insinuation of the water (which has much the same refraction
with such stony particles, as may be discoverd by Sand viewed with a
Microscope) into those pores which were formerly repleat with air (that has a
very differing refraction, and consequently is very reflective) which seems to
be confirmed by the second Observable, namely, the increase of weight after
steeping, and decrease upon drying. And thirdly, seemed yet more sensibly
confirmed by the multitude of bubbles in the last Experiment.

We find also most Acid Salts very readily to dissolve and separate the parts
of this body one from another; which is yet a further Argument to confirm the
porousness of bodies, and will serve as such, to show that even Glass also has
an abundance of pores in it, since there are several liquors, that with long
staying in a Glass, will so Corrode and eat into it, as at last, to make it
perviou^ to the liquor it contained, of which I have seen very many Instances.

Since therefore we find by other proofs, that many of those bodies which we
think the most solid ones, and appear so to our sight, have notwithstanding
abundance of those grosser kind of pores, which will admit several kinds of
liquors into them, why should we not believe that Glass, and all other
transparent bodies abound with them, since we have many other arguments,
besides the propagation of light, which seem to argue for it?

And whereas it may be objected, that the propagation of light is no argument
that there are those atomical pores in glass, since there are Hypotheses
plausible enough to solve those Phenomenon, by supposing the pulse only to be
communicated through the transparent body.

To this I answer, that that Hypothesis which the industrious Moreanus has
published about the slower motion of the end of a Ray in a denser medium, then
in a more rare and thin, seems altogether unsufficient to solve abundance of
Phenomenon, of which this is not the least considerable, that it is impossible
from that supposition, that any colors should be generated from the refraction
of the Rays; for since by that Hypothesis the undulating pulse is always
carried perpendicular, or at right angles with the Ray or Line of direction, it
follows, that the stroke of the pulse of light, after it has been once or twice
refracted (through a Prisme, for example) must affect the eye with the same
kind of stroke as if it had not been refracted at all. Nor will it be enough
for a Defendant of that Hypothesis, to say, that perhaps it is because the
refractions have made the Rays more weak, for if so, then two refractions in
the two parallel sides of a Quadrangular Prisme would produce colors, but we
have no such Phenomenon produced.

There are several Arguments that I could bring to evince that there are in all
transparent bodies such atomical pores. And that there is such a fluid body as
I am arguing for, which is the medium, or Instrument, by which the pulse of
Light is conveyed from the lucid body to the enlightn'd. But that it being a
digression from the Observations I was recording, about the Pores of Kettering
Stone, it would be too much such, if I should protract it too long; and
therefore I shall proceed to the next Observation.

Observe. XVI. Of Charcoal, or burnt Vegetables.
CHarcoal, or a Vegetable burnt black, affords an object no less pleasant than
instructive; for if you take a small round Charcoal, and break it short with
your fingers, you may perceive it to break with a very smooth and sleek
surface, almost like the surface of black sealing Wax; this surface, if it be
looked on with an ordinary Microscope, does manifest abundance of those pores
which are also visible to the eye in many kinds of Wood, ranged round the pith,
both a in kind of circular order, and a radiant one. Of these there are a
multitude in the substance of the Coal, every where almost perforating and
drilling it from end to end; by means of which, be the Coal never so long, you
may easily blow through it; and this you may presently find, by wetting one end
of it with Spittle, and blowing at the other.

But this is not all, for besides those many great and conspicuous irregular
spots or pores, if a better Microscope be made use of, there will appear an
infinite company of exceedingly small, and very regular pores, so thick and so
orderly set, and so close to one another, that they leave very little room or
space between them to be filled with a solid body, for the apparent
interstitia, or separating sides of these pores seem so thin in some places,
that the texture of a Honeycomb cannot be more porous. Though this be not
every where so, the intercurrent partitions in some places being very much
thicker in proportion to the holes.

Most of these small pores seemed to be pretty round, and were ranged in rows
that radiated from the pith to the bark; they all of them seemed to be
continued open pores, running the whole length of the Stick; and that they were
all perforated. I tried by breaking off a very thin sliver of the Coal
cross-ways, and then with my Microscope, diligently surveying them against the
light, for by that means I was able to see quite through them.

These pores were so exceeding small and thick, that in a line of them, 1/28
part of an Inch long, I found by numbering them no less then 150. small pores;
and therefore in a line of them an Inch long, must be no less then 2700. pores,
and in a circular area of an Inch diameter, must be about 5725350. of the like
pores; so that a Stick of an Inch Diameter, may contain no less then seven
hundred and twenty five thousand, besides 5 Millions of pores, which would, I
doubt not, seem even incredible, were not every one left to believe his own
eyes. Nay, having since examined Cocus, black and green Ebony, Lignum Vitae,
etc. I found, that all these Woods have their pores, abundantly smaller then
those of soft light Wood; in so much, that those of Guajacum seemed not above
in eighth part of the bigness of the pores of Beech, but then the Interstitia
were thicker; so prodigiously curious are the contrivances, pipes, or sluices by
which the Succus nutritious, or Juice of a Vegetable is conveyed from place to
place.

This Observation seems to afford us the true reason of several Phenomenon of
Coals; as

First, why they look black; and for this we need go no further then the
Scheme, for certainly, a body that has so many pores in it as this is
discovered to have, from each of which no light is reflected, must necessarily
look black, especially, when the pores are somewhat bigger in proportion to the
intervals then they are cut in the Scheme, black being nothing else but a
privation of Light, or a want of reflection; and wheresover this reflecting
quality is deficient, there does that part look black, whether it be from a
porousness of the body, as in this Instance, or in a deadning and dulling
quality, such as I have observed in the Scoria of Lead, Tin, Silver, Copper,
etc.

Next, we may also as plainly see the reason of its shining quality, and that
is from the even breaking off of the stick, the solid interstitia having a
regular termination or surface, and having a pretty strong reflecting quality,
the many small reflections become united to the naked eye, and make a very
pretty shining surface.

Thirdly, the reason of its hardness and brittleness seems eviden^, for since
all the watery or liquid substance that moistn'd and toughn'd those Interstitia
of the more solid parts, are evaporated and removed, that which is left behind
becomes of the nature almost of a stone, which will not at all, or very little,
bend without a divalsion or solution of its continuity.

It is not my design at present, to examine the use and Mechanisme of these
parts of Wood, that being more proper to another Enquiry; but rather to hint,
that from this Experiment we may learn,

First, what is the cause of the blackness of many burnt bodies, which we may
find to be nothing else but this; that the heat of the fire agitating and
rarifying the waterish, transparent, and volatile water that is contained in
them, by the continuation of that action, does so totally expel and drive away
all that which before filled the pores, and was dispersed also through the
solid mass of it, and thereby caused an universal kind of transparency, that it
not only leaves all the pores empty, but all the Interstitia also so dry and
^pacous, and perhaps also yet further persorated, that that light only is
reflected back which falls upon the very outward edges of the pores, all they
that enter into the pores of the body, never returning, but being lost in it.

Now, that the Charring or coaling of a body is nothing else, may be easily
believed by one that shall consider the means of its production, which may be
done after this, or any such manner. The body to be charr'd or coal'd, may be
put into a Cracible, Pot, or any other Vessel that will endure to be made
red-hot in the Fire without breaking, and then covered over with Sand, so as no
part of it be suffered to be open to the Air, then set into a good Fire, and
there kept till the Sand has continued red hot for a quarter, half, an hour or
two, or more, according to the nature and bigness of the body to be coal'd or
charr'd, then taking it out of the Fire, and letting it stand till it be quite
cold, the body may be taken out of the Sand well charr'd and cleans'd of its
waterish parts; but in the taking of it out, care must be had that the Sand be
very near cold, for else, when it comes into the free air, it will take fire,
and readily burn away.

This may be done also in any close Vessel of Glass, as a Retort, or the like,
and the several fluid substances that come over may be received in a fit
Recipient, which will yet further countenance this Hypothesis: And their manner
of charring Wood in great quantity comes much to the same thing, namely, an
application of a great heat to the body, and preserving it from the free access
of the devouring air; this may be easily learned from the History of Charring
of Coal, most excellently described and published by that most accomplished
Gentleman, Mr. John Evelin, in the 100, 101, 103, pages of his Sylva, to which
I shall therefore refer the curious Reader that desires a full information of
it.

Next, we may learn what part of the Wood it is that is the combustible matter;
for since we shall find that none, or very little of those fluid substances
that are driven over into the Receiver are combustible, and that most of that
which is left behind is so, it follows, that the solid interstitia of the Wood
are the combustible matter. Further, the reason why uncharr'd Wood burns with a
greater flame then that which is charr'd, is as evident, because those waterish
or volatile parts issuing out of the fired Wood, every way, not only shatter
and open the body, the better for the fire to enter, but issuing out in vapors
or wind, they become like so many little aeolipiles, or Bellows, whereby they
blow and agitate the fired part, and conduce to the more speedy and violent
comsumption or dissolution of the body.

Thirdly, from the Experiment of charring of Coals (whereby we see that
notwithstanding the great heat, and the duration of it, the solid parts of the
Wood remain, whilst they are preserved from the free access of the air
undissipated) we may learn, that which has not, that I know of, been published
or hinted, nay, not so much as thought of, by any; and that in short is this.

First, that the Air in which we live, move, and breath, and which encompasses
very many, and cherishes most bodies it encompasses, that this Air is the
menstruum, or universal dissolvent of all Sulphurous bodies.

Secondly, that this action it performs not, till the body be first
sufficiently heated, as we find requisite also to the dissolution of many other
bodies by several other menstruums.

Thirdly, that this action of dissolution, produces or generates a very great
heat, and that which we call Fire; and this is common also to many dissolutions
of other bodies, made by menstruums, of which I could give multitudes of
Instances.

Fourthly, that this action is performed with so great a violence, and does so
minutely act, and rapidly agitate the smallest parts of the combustible matter,
that it produces in the diaphanous medium of the Air, the action or pulse of
light, which what it is, I have elsewhere already shown.

Fifthly, that the dissolution of sulphurous bodies is made by a substance
inherent, and mixed with the Air, that is like, if not the very same, with that
which is fixed in Saltpeter, which by multitudes of Experiments that may be
made with Saltpeter, will, I think, most evidently be demonstrated.

Sixthly, that in this dissolution of bodies by the Air, a certain part is
united and mixed, or dissolved and turned into the Air, and made to fly up and
down with it in the same manner as a metalline or other body dissolved into any
menstruums, does follow the motions and progresses of that menstruum till it be
precipitated.

Seventhly, That as there is one part that is dissoluble by the Air, so are
there other parts with which the parts of the Air mixing and uniting, do make a
Coagulum, or precipitation, as one may call it, which causes it to be separated
from the Air, but this precipitate is so light, and in so small and rarified or
porous clusters, that it is very volatile, and is easily carried up by the
motion of the Air, though afterward, when the heat and agitation that kept it
rarified ceases, it easily condenses, and commixt with other indissoluble
parts, it sticks and adheres to the next bodies it meets withal; and this is a
certain Salt that may be extracted out of Soot.

Eighthly, that many indissoluble parts being very apt and prompt to be
rarified, and so, whilst they continue in that heat and agitation, are lighter
then the Ambient Air, are thereby thrust and carried upwards with great
violence, and by that means carry along with them, not only that Saline
concrete I mentioned before, but many terrestrial, or indissoluble and
irrarefiable parts, nay, many parts also which are dissoluble, but are not
suffered to stay long enough in a sufficient heat to make them prompt and apt
for that action. And therefore we find in Soot, not only a part, that being
continued longer in a competent heat, will be dissolved by the Air, or take
fire and burn; but a part also which is fixed, terrestrial, and irrarefiable.

Ninthly, that as there are these several parts that will rarifie and fly, or
be driven up by the heat, so are there many others, that as they are
indissoluble by the aerial menstruum, so are they of such sluggish and gross
parts, that they are not easily rarified by heat, and therefore cannot be
raised by it; the volatility or fixtness of a body seeming to consist only in
this, that the one is of a texture, or has component parts that will be easily
rarified into the form of Air, and the other, that it has such as will not,
without much ado, be brought to such a constitution; and this is that part
which remains behind in a white body called Ashes, which contains a substance,
or Salt, which Chemists call Alkali: what the particular natures of each of
these bodies are, I shall not here examine, intending it in another place, but
shall rather add that this Hypothesis does so exactly agree with all Phenomenon
of Fire, and so genuinely explicate each particular circumstance that I have
hitherto observed, that it is more then probable, that this cause which I have
assigned is the true adequate, real, and only cause of those Phenomena; And
therefore I shall proceed a little further, to show the nature and use of the
Air.

Tenthly, therefore the dissolving parts of the Air are but few, that is, it
seems of the nature of those Saline menstruums, or spirits, that have very much
phlegm mixed with the spirits, and therefore a small parcel of it is quickly
glutted, and will dissolve no more; and therefore unless some fresh part of
this menstruum be applied to the body to be dissolved, the action ceases, and
the body leaves to be dissolved and to shine, which is the Indication of it,
though placed or kept in the greatest heat; whereas Saltpeter is a menstruum,
when melted and red-hot, that abounds more with those Dissolvent particles, and
therefore as a small quantity of it will dissolve a great sulphurous body, so
will the dissolution be very quick and violent.

Therefore in the Eleventh place, it is observable, that, as in other
solutions, if a copious and quick supply of fresh menstruum, though but weak,
he poured on, or applied to the dissoluble body, it quickly consumes it: So
this menstruum of the Air, if by Bellows, or any other such contrivance, it be
copiously applied to the shining body, is found to dissolve (it as soon, and as
violently as the more strong menstruum of melted Nitre.

Therefore twelfthly, it seems reasonable to think that there is no such thing
as an Element of Fire that should attract or draw up the flame, or toward
which the flame should endeavor to ascend out of a desire or appetite of
uniting with that as its Homogeneal primitive and generating Element; but that
that shining transient body which we call Flame, is nothing else but a mixture
of Air, and volatile sulphurous parts of dissoluble or combustible bodies,
which are acting upon each other whilst they ascend, that is, flame seems to
be a mixture of Air, and the combustible volatile parts of any body, which parts
the encompassing Air does dissolve or work upon, which action, as it does
intend the heat of the aerial parts of the dissolvent, so does it thereby
further rarifie, those parts that are acting, or that are very near them,
whereby they growing much lighter then the heavy parts of that Menstruum that
are more remote, are thereby protruded and driven upward; and this may be
easily observed also in dissolutions made by any other menstruum, especially
such as either create heat or bubbles. Now, this action of the Menstuum, or
Air, on the dissoluble parts, is made with such violence, or is such, that it
imparts such a motion or pulse to the diaphanous parts of the Air, as I have
elsewhere shown is requisite to produce light.

This Hypothesis I have endeavored to raise from an Infinite of Observations
and Experiments, the process of which would be much too long to be here
inserted, and will perhaps another time afford matter copious enough for a much
larger Discourse, the Air being a Subject which (though all the world has
hitherto lived and breathed in, and been unconversant about) has yet been so
little truly examined or explained, that a diligent enquirer will be able to
find but very little information from what has been (till of late) written of
it: But being once well understood, it will, I doubt not, enable a man to
render an intelligible, nay probable, if not the true reason of all the
Phenomenon of Fire, which, as it has been found by Writers and Philosophers of
all Ages a matter of no small difficulty, as may be sufficiently understood by
their strange Hypotheses, and unintelligible Solutions of some few Phenomenon
of it; so will it prove a matter of no small concern and use in humane affairs,
as I shall elsewhere endeavor to manifest when I come to show the use of the
Air in respiration, and for the preservation of the life, nay, for the
conservation and restoration of the health and natural constitution of mankind
as well as all other aereal animals, as also the uses of this principle or
propriety of the Air in chemical, mechanical, and other operations. In this
place I have only time to hint an Hypothesis, which, if God permit me life and
opportunity, I may elsewhere prosecute, improve and publish. In the mean time,
before I finish this Discourse, I must not forget to acquaint the Reader, that
having had the liberty granted me of making some trials on a piece of Lignum
fossile shown to the Royal Society, by the eminently Ingenious and Learned
Physician, Doctor Ent, who received it for a Present from the famous Ingenioso
Cavalliero de Pozzi, it being one of the fairest and best pieces of Lignum
fossile he had seen; Having (I say) taken a small piece of this Wood, and
examined it, I found it to burn in the open Air almost like other Wood, and
instead of a resinous smoke or fume, it yielded a very bituminous one, smelling
much of that kind of sent: But that which I chiefly took notice of, was, that
cutting off a small piece of it, about the bigness of my Thumb, and charring it
in a Crucible with Sand, after the manner I above prescribed, I found it
infinitely to abound with the smaller sort of pores, so extreme thick, and so
regularly per^orating the substance of it long-ways, that breaking it off
across, I found it to look very like an Honeycomb; but as for any of the
second, or bigger kind of pores, I could not find that it had any; so that it
seems, whatever were the cause of its production, it was not without those
small kind of pores which we have only hitherto found in Vegetable bodies: and
comparing them with the pores which I have found in the Charcoals that I by
this means made of several other kinds of Wood, I find it resemble none so much
as those of Firr, to which it is not much unlike in grain also, and several
other proprieties.

And therefore, what ever is by some, who have written of it, and particularly
by Francisco Stelluto, who wrote a Treatise in Italian of that Subject, which
was Printed at Rome, 1637. affirmed that it is a certain kind of Clay or Earth,
which in tract of time is turned into Wood, I rather suspect the quite
contrary, that it was at first certain great Trees of Fir or Pine, which by
some Earthquake, or other casualty, came to be buried under the Earth, and was
there, after a long time's re^idence (according to the several natures of the
encompassing adjacent parts) either rotted and turned into a kind of Clay, or
petrified and turned into a kind of Stone, or else had its pores filled with
certain Mineral juices, which being stayed in them, and in tract of time
coagulated, appeared, upon cleaving out, like small Metaline Wires, or else
from some flames or scorching forms that are the occasion oftentimes, and
usually accompany Earthquakes, might be blasted and turned into Coal, or else
from certain subterraneous fires which are affirmed by that Author to abound
much about those parts (namely, in a Province of Italy, called Vmbria, now the
Duchy of Spoletto, in the Territory of Todi, anciently called Tudor; and
between the two Villages of Collesecco and Rosaro not far distant from the
highway leading to Rome, where it is found in greater quantity then elsewhere)
are by reason of their being encompassed with Earth, and so kept close from the
dissolving Air, charr'd and converted into Coal. It would be too long a work to
describe the several kinds of pores which I met withal, and by this means
discovered in several other Vegetable bodies; nor is it my present design to
expatiate upon Instances of the same kind, but rather to give a Specimen of as
many kinds as I have had opportunity as yet of observing, reserving the
prosecution and enlarging on particulars till a more (...) opportunity; and in
prosecution of this design, I shall here add: Schem: X.


Observe. XVII. Of Petrified wood, and other Petrified bodies.
OF this sort of substance, I observed several pieces of very differing kinds,
both for their outward shape, color, grain, texture, hardness, etc. some being
brown and redish; others gray, like a Hone; others black, and Flint-like: some
soft, like a Slate or Whetstone, others as hard as a Flint, and as brittle.
That which I more particular examined, was a piece about the bigness of a man's
hand, which seemed to have been a part of some large tree, that by rottenness
had been broken off from it before it began to be petrified.

And indeed, all that I have yet seen, seem to have been rotten Wood before the
petrifaction was begun; and not long since, examining and viewing a huge great
Oak, that seemed with mere age to be rotten as it stood, I was very much
confirmed in this opinion; for I found, that the ^^ain, color, and shape of
the Wood, was exactly like this petrified substance; and with a Microscope, I
found, that all those Microscopical pores, which in sappy or firm and sound
Wood are filled with the natural or innate juices of those Vegetables, in this
they were all empty, like those of Vegetables charr'd; but with this
difference, that they seemed much larger then I have seen any in Char-coals;
nay, even then those of Coals made of great blocks of Timber, which are
commonly called Old-coals.

The reason of which difference may probably be, that the charring of
Vegetables, being an operation quickly performed, and whilst the Wood is
sappy, the more solid parts may more easily shrink together, and contract the
pores or interstitia between them, then in the rotten Wood, where that natural
juice seems only to be washed away by adventitious or unnatural moisture; and
so though the natural juice be wasted from between the firm parts, yet those
parts are kept asunder by the adventitious moystures, and so by degrees settled
in those postures.

And this I likewise found in the petrified Wood, that the pores were somewat
bigger then those of Charcoal, each pore being near upon half as bigg again,
but they did not bear that disproportion which is expressed in the tenth Scheme,
between the small specks or pores in the first Figure (which represents the
pores of Coal or Wood charr'd) and the black spots of the second Figure (which
represent the like Microscopical pores in the petrified Wood) for these last
were drawn by a Microscope that magnified the object above six times more in
Diameter then the Microscope by which those pores of Coal were observed.

Now, though they were a little bigger, yet did they keep the exact figure and
order of the pores of Coals and of rotten Wood, which last also were much of
the same cize.

The other Observations on this petrified substance, that a while since, by the
appointment of the Royal Society, I made, and presented to them an account of,
were these that follow, which had the honor done them by the most accomplished
Mr. Evelin, my highly honored friend, to be inserted and published among those
excellent Observations wherewith his Sylva is replenished, and would therefore
have been here omitted, had not the Figure of them, as they appeared through
the Microscope been before that engraven.

This Petrified substance resembled Wood, in that

First, all the parts of it seemed not at all dislocated, or altered from their
natural Position, whilst they were Wood, but the whole piece retained the
exact shape of Wood, having many of the conspicuous pores of wood still
remaining pores, and showing a manifest difference visible enough between the
grain of the Wood and that of the bark, especially when any side of it was cut
smooth and polite; for then it appeared to have a very lovely grain, like that
of some curious close Wood.

Next (it resembled Wood) in that all the smaller and (if I may so call those
which are only visible with a good magnifying Glass) M^^^^^^opical pores of it
appear (both when the substance is cut and polish (...) and parallel to the
pores of it) perfectly like the Microscopical (...) of several kinds of Wood,
especially like and equal to those of several sorts of rotten Wood which I have
since observed, retaining both the shape, position and magnitude of such pores.
It was differing from Wood:

First, in weight, being to common water as 3 to 1. whereas there are few of
our English Woods, that when very dry are found to be full as heavy as water.

Secondly, in hardness, being very near as hard as a Flint; and in some places
of it also resembling the grain of a Flint: and, like it, it would very readily
cut Glass, and would not without difficulty, especially in some parts of it, be
scratched by a black hard Flint: It would also as readily strike fire against a
Steel, or against a Flint, as any common Flint.

Thirdly, in the closeness of it, for though all the Microscopical pores of
this petrified substance were very conspicuous in one position, yet by altering
that position of the polished surface to the light, it was also manifest, that
those pores appeared darker then the rest of the body, only because they were
filled up with a more duskie substance, and not because they were hollow.

Fourthly, in its incombustibleness, in that it would not burn in the fire;
nay, though I kept it a good while red-hot in the flame of a Lamp, made very
intense by the blast of a small Pipe, and a large Charcoal, yet it seemed not
at all to have diminished its extension; but only I found it to have changed
its color, and to appear of a more dark and duskie brown color; nor could I
perceive that those parts which seemed to have been Wood at first, were any
thing wasted, but the parts appeared as solid and close as before. It was
further observable also, that as it did not consume like Wood, so neither did
it crack and fly like a Flint, or such like hard Stone, nor was it long before
it appeared red-hot.

Fifthly, in its dissolubleness; for putting some drops of distilled Vinegar
upon the Stone, I found it presently to yield very many Bubbles, just like
those which may be observed in spirit of Vinegar when it corrodes corals,
though perhaps many of those small Bubbles might proceed from some small
parcels of Air which were driven out of the pores of this petrified substance
by the insinuating liquid menstruum.

Sixthly, in its rigidness and friability, being not at all flexible but
brittle like a Flint, insomuch that I could with one knock of a Hammer break
off a piece of it, and with a few more, reduce that into a pretty fine powder.

Seventhly, it seemed also very differing from Wood to the touch, feeling more
cold then Wood usually does, and much like other close stones and Minerals.

The Reasons of all which Phenomenon seem to be,

That this petrified Wood having lain in some place where it was well soaked
with petrifying water (that is such a wares as is well impregnated with stony
and earthly particles) did by degrees separate, either by straining and
filtration, or perhaps, by precipitation, co^esion or coagulation, abundance of
stony particles from the permeating water, which stony particles, being by
means of the fluid vehicle conveyed, not only into the Microscopical pores,
and so perfectly stoping them up, but also into the pores or interstitia, which
may, perhaps, be even in the texture or Schematism^ of that part of the Wood,
which, through the Microscope, appears most solid, do thereby so a^gment the
weight of the Wood, as to make it above three times heavier then water, and
perhaps, six times as heavy as it was when Wood.

Next, they thereby so lock up and ^etter the parts of the Wood, that the fire
cannot easily make them fly away but the action of the fire upon them is only
able to Char those parts, as it were, like a piece of Wood, if it be closed
very fast up in Clay, and kept a good while red-hot in the fire, will by the
heat of the fire be charr'd and not consumed, which may, perhaps, also be
somewhat of the cause, why the petrified substance appeared of a dark brown
color after it had been burnt.

By this intrusion of the petrifying particles, this substance also becomes
hard and friable; for the smaller pores of the Wood being perfectly wedged, and
stuffed up with those stony particles, the small parts of the Wood have no places
or pores into which they may slide upon bending, and consequently little or no
flexion or yielding at all can be caused in such a substance.

The remaining particles likewise of the Wood among the stony particles, may
keep them from cracking and flying when put into the fire, as they are very apt
to do in a Flint.

Nor is Wood the only substance that may by this kind of trans^^tation be
changed into stone; for I my self have seen and examined very many kinds of
substances, and among very credible Authors, we may meet with Histories of
such Metamorphoses wrought almost on all kind of substances, both Vegetable and
Animal, which Histories, it is not my business at present, either to relate, or
epitomize, but only to set down some Observation I lately made on several kind
of petrified Shells, found about Keinsham, which lies within four or five miles
of Bris^ol, which are commonly called Serpentine-stones.

Examining several of these very curiously figured bodies. (which are commonly
thought to be Stones formed by some extraordinary Plastic virtue latent in the
Earth itself) I took notice of these particulars:

First, that these figured bodies, or stones, were of very differing
substances, as to hardness: some of Clay, some Marle, some soft Stone, almost
of the hardness of those soft stones which Masons call Fire-stone, others as
hard as Portland stone, others as hard as Marble, and some as hard a a Flint or
Crystal.

Next, they were of very differing substances as to transparency and color;
some white, some almost black, some brown, some Metalline, or like Marchasites;
some transparent like white Marble, others like flaw'd Crystal, some gray, some
of diverse colors; some radiated like these long petrified drops, which are
commonly found at the Peak, and in other subterraneous caverns, which have a
kind of pith in the middle.

Thirdly, that they were very different as to the manner of their outward
figuration; for some of them seemed to have been the substance that had filled
the Shell of some kind of Shel-fish; others, to have been the substance that
had contained or enwrapp'd one of those Shells, on both which, the perfect
impression either of the inside or outside of such Shells seemed to be left,
but for the most part, those impressions seemed to be made by an imperfect or
broken Shell, the great end or mouth of the Shell being always wanting, and
oftentimes the little end, and sometimes half, and in some there were
impressions, just as if there had been holes broken in the figurating,
imprinting or moulding Shell; some of them seemed to be made by such a Shell
very much bruised or flaw'd, insomuch that one would verily have thought that
very figured stone had been broken or bruised whilst a gelly, as 'twere, and so
hardened, but within in the grain of the stone, there appeared not the least
sign of any such bruise or breaking, but only on the very uttermost superficies.

Fourthly, they were very different, as to their outward covering, some having
the perfect Shell, both in figure, color, and substance, sticking on upon its
surface, and adhering to it, but might very easily be separated from it, and
like other common Cockle or Scolop-shels, which some of them most accurately
resembled, were very dissoluble in common Vinegar, others of them, especially
those Serpentine, or Helical stones were covered or retained the shining or
Pearl-colour'd substance of the inside of a Shel, which substance, on some
parts of them, was exceeding thin, and might very easily be rubbed off; on
other parts it was pretty thick, and retained a white coat, or flaky substance
on the top, just like the outsides of such Shells; some of them had very large
pieces of the Shell very plainly sticking on to them, which were easily to be
broken or flaked off by degrees: they likewise, some of them retained all along
the surface of them very pretty kind of sutures, such as are observed in the
skulls of several kinds of living creatures, which sutures were most curiously
shaped in the manner of leaves, and every one of them in the same Shell,
exactly one like another, which I was able to discover plainly enough with my
naked eye, but more perfectly and distinctly with my Microscope; all these
sutures, by breaking some of these stones, I found to be the termini* or
boundings of certain diaphragms, or partitions, which seemed to divide the
cavity of the Shell into a multitude of very proportionate and regular cells or
caverns, these Diaphragms, in many of them, I found very perfect and complete,
of a very distinct substance from that which filled the cavities, and exactly
of the same kind with that which covered the outside, being for the most part
whitish, or mother-of-pearl colored.

As for the cavities between those Diaphragms, I found some of them filled with
Marle, and others with several kinds of stones, others, for the most part
hollow, only the whole cavity was usually covered over with a kind of
tartareous petrified substance, which stuck about the sides, and was there shot
into very curious regular Figures, just as Tartar, or other dissolved Salts are
observed to stick and crystallize about the sides of the containing Vessels; or
like those little Diamants which I before observed to have covered the vaulted
cavity of a Flint; others had these cavities all lined with a kind of metalline
or marchasite-like substance, which with a Microscope I could as plainly see
most curiously and regularly figured, as I had done those in a Flint.

From all which, and several other particulars which I observed, I cannot but
think, that all these, and most other kinds of stony bodies which are found
thus strangely figured, do owe their formation and figuration, not to any kind
of Plastic virtue inherent in the earth, but to the Shells of certain
Shel-fishes, which, either by some Deluge, Inundation, Earthquake, or some such
other means, came to be thrown to that place, and there to be filled with some
kind of Mudd or Clay, or petrifying Water, or some other substance, which in
tract of time has been settled together and hardened in those shelly moulds into
those shaped substances we now find them; that the great and thin end of these
Shells by that Earthquake, or what ever other extraordinary cause it was that
brought them thither, was broken off; and that many others were otherwise
broken, bruised and disfigured; that these Shells which are thus spirallied and
separated with Diaphragmes, were some kind of Nautili or Porcelane shells; and
that others were shells of Cockles, Muscles, Periwincles, Scolops, etc. of
various sorts; that these Shells in many, from the particular nature of the
containing or enclosed Earth, or some other cause, have in tract of time rotted
and mouldred away, and only left their impressions, both on the containing and
contained substances; and so left them pretty loose one within another, so that
they may be easily separated by a knock or two of a Hammer. That others of
these Shells, according to the nature of the substances adjacent to them, have,
by a long continuance in that posture, been petrified and turned into the
nature of stone, just as I even now observed several sorts of Wood to be. That
oftentimes the Shell may be found with one kind of substance within, and quite
another without, having, perhaps, been filled in one place, and afterward
translated to another, which I have very frequently observed in Cockle, Muscle,
Periwincle, and other shells, which I have found by the Sea side. Nay, further,
that some parts of the same Shell may be filled in one place, and some other
caverns in another, and others in a third, or a fourth, or a fifth place, for
so many differing substances have I found in one of these petrified Shells, and
perhaps all these differing from the encompassing earth or stone; the means how
all which varieties may be caused, I think, will not be difficult to conceive,
to any one that has taken notice of those Shells, which are commonly found on
the Sea shore: And he that shall thoroughly examine several kinds of such
curiously formed stones, will (I am very apt to think) find reason to suppose
their generation or formation to be ascribable to some such accidents as I have
mentioned, and not to any Plastic virtue: For it seems to me quite contrary to
the infinite prudence of Nature, which is observable in all its works and
productions, to design every thing to a determinate end, and for the attaining
of that end, makes use of such ways as are (as far as the knowledge of man has
yet been able to reach) altogether consonant, and most agreeable to man's
reason, and of no way or means that does contradict, or is contrary to humane
Ratiocination; whence it has a long time been a general observation and maxim,
that Nature does nothing in vain; It seems, I say, contrary to that great
Wisdom of Nature, that these prettily shaped bodies should have all those
curious Figures and contrivances (which many of them are adorned and contrived
with) generated or wrought by a Plastic virtue, for no higher end then only
to exhibit such a form; which he that shall thoroughly consider all the
circumstances of such kind of Figured bodies, will, I think, have great reason
to believe, though, I confess, one cannot presently be able to find out what
Nature's designs are. It were therefore very desirable, that a good collection
of such kind of figured stones were collected; and as many particulars,
circumstances, and informations collected with them as could be obtained, that
from such a History of Observations well ranged, examined and digested, the
true original or production of all those kinds of stones might be perfectly and
surely known; such as are Thunderstones, Lapides Stellares, Lapides Iudaici,
and multitudes of other, whereof mention is made in Aldrovandus Wormius, and
other Writers of Minerals.

Observe. XVIII. Of the Schematisme or Texture of Cork, and of the Cells and
Pores of some other such frothy Bodies.
I Took a good clear piece of Cork, and with a Penknife sharpened as keen as a
Razor, I cut a piece of it off, and thereby left the surface of it exceeding
smooth, then examining it very diligently with a Microscope, me thought* I
could perceive it to appear a little porous; but I could not so plainly
distinguish them, as to be sure that they were pores, much less what Figure
they were of: But judging from the lightness and yielding quality of the Cork,
that certainly the texture could not be so curious, but that possibly, if I
could use some further diligence, I might find it to be discernable with a
Microscope, I with the same sharp Penknife, cut off from the former smooth
surface an exceeding thin piece of it, and placing it on a black object Plate,
because it was it self a white body, and casting the light on it with a deep
plano-convex Glass, I could exceeding plainly perceive it to be all perforated
and porous, much like a Honeycomb, but that the pores of it were not regular;
yet it was not unlike a Honeycomb in these particulars.

First, in that it had a very little solid substance, in comparison of the
empty cavity that was contained between, as does more manifestly appear by the
Figure A and B of the XI. Scheme, for the Interstitia, or walls (as I may so
call them) or partitions of those pores were near as thin in proportion to
their pores, as those thin films of Wax in a Honeycomb (which enclose and
constitute the sexangular cells) are to theirs.

Next, in that these pores, or cells, were not very deep, but consisted of a
great many little Boxes, separated out of one continued long pore, by certain
Diaphragms, as is visible by the Figure B, which represents a sight of those
pores split the long-ways.

I no sooner discerned these (which were indeed the first microscopical pores I
ever saw, and perhaps, that were ever seen, for I had not met with any Writer
or Person, that had made any mention of them before this) but me thought I had
with the discovery of them, presently hinted to me the true and intelligible
reason of all the Phenomenon of Cork; As,

First, if I inquired why it was so exceeding light a body? my Microscope could
presently inform me that here was the same reason evident that there is found
for the lightness of froth, an empty Honeycomb, Wool, a Sponge, a
Pumice-stone, or the like; namely, a very small quantity of a solid body,
extended into exceeding large dimensions.

Next, it seemed nothing more difficult to give an intelligible reason, why
Cork is a body so very unapt to suck and drink in Water, and consequently
preserves it self, floating on the top of Water, though left on it never so
long: and why it is able to stop and hold air in a Bottle, though it be there
very much condensed and consequently presses very strongly to get a passage
out, without suffering the least bubble to pass through its substance. For, as
to the first, since our Microscope informs us that the substance of Cork is
altogether filled with Air, and that that Air is perfectly enclosed in little
Boxes or Cells distinct from one another. It seems very plain, why neither the
Water, nor any other Air can easily insinuate it self into them, since there is
already within them an intus existens, and consequently, why the pieces of Cork
become so good floats for Nets, and stopples for Viols, or other close Vessels.

And thirdly, if we enquire why Cork has such a springiness and swelling nature
whem compressed? and how it comes to suffer so great a compression, or seeming
penetration of dimensions, so as to be made a substance as heavy again and
more, bulk for bulk, as it was before compression, and yet suffered to return,
is found to extend it self again into the same space? Our Microscope will
easily inform us, that the whole mass consists of an infinite company of small
Boxes or Bladders of Air, which is a substance of a springy nature, and that
will suffer a considerable condensation (as I have several times found by
diverse trials, by which I have most evidently condensed it into less then a
twentieth part of its usual dimensions near the Earth, and that with no other
strength then that of my hands without any kind of forcing Engine, such as
Racks, Leavers, Wheels, Pullies, or the like, but this only by and by) and
besides, it seems very probable that those very films or sides of the pores,
have in them a springing quality, as almost all other kind of Vegetable
substances have, so as to help to restore themselves to their former position.

And could we so easily and certainly discover the Schematisme and Texture even
of these films, and of several other bodies, as we can these of Cork; there
seems no probable reason to the contrary, but that we might as readily render
the true reason of all their Phenomenon; as namely, what were the cause of the
springiness, and toughness of some, both as to their flexibility and
restitution. What, of the friability or brittleness of some others, and the
like; but till such time as our Microscope, or some other means, enable us to
discover the true Schematism and Texture of all kinds of bodies, we must grope,
as it were, in the dark, and only ghess at the true reasons of things by
similitudes and comparisons.

But, to return to our Observations. I told several lines of these pores, and
found that there were usually about threescore of these small Cells placed
end-ways in the eighteenth part of an Inch in length, whence I concluded there
must be near eleven hundred of them, or somewhat more then a thousand in the
length of an Inch, and therefore in a square Inch above a Million, or 1166400.
and in a Cubick Inch, above twelve hundred Millions, or 1259712000. a thing
almost incredible, did not our Microscope assure us of it by ocular
demonstration; nay, did it not discover to us the pores of a body, which were
they diaphragm'd, like those of Cork, would afford us in one Cubick Inch, more
then ten times as many little Cells, as is evident in several charr'd
Vegetables; so prodigiously curious are the works of Nature, that even these
conspicuous pores of bodies, which seem to be the channels or pipes through
which the Succus untritius, or natural juices of Vegetables are conveyed and
seem to correspond to the veins, arteries and other Vessels in sensible
creatures, that these pores I say, which seem to be the Vessels of nutrition to
the vastest body in the World, are yet so exceeding small, that the Atoms which
Epicurus fancied would go near to prove too bigg to enter them, much more to
constitute a fluid body in them. And how infinitely smaller then must be the
Vessels of a Mite, or the pores of one of those little Vegetables I have
discovered to grow on the backside of a Rose-leaf, and shall anon more fully
describe, whose bulk is many millions of times less then the bulk of the small
shrub it grows on; and even that shrub, many millions of times less in bulk
then several trees (that have heretofore grown in England, and are this day
flourishing in other hotter Climates, as we are very credibly informed) if at
least the pores of this small Vegetable should keep any such proportion to the
body of it, as we have found these pores Schem: XI.
of other Vegetables to do to their bulk. But of these pores I have said more
elsewhere.

To proceed then, Cork seems to be by the transverse constitution of the pores,
a kind of Fungus or Mushrome, for the pores lie like so many Rays tending from
the center, or pith of the tree, outward; so that if you cut off a piece from
a board of Cork transversly, to the flat of it* you will, as it were, split the
pores, and they will appear just as they are expressed in the Figure B of the
XI. Scheme. But if you shave off a very thin piece from this board, parallel to
the plain of it, you will cut all the pores transversly, and they will appear
almost as they are expressed in the Figure A, save only the solid Interstitia
will not appear so thick as they are there represented.

So that Cork seems to suck its nourishment from the subjacent bark of the Tree
immediately, and to be a kind excrescence, or a substance distinct from the
substances of the entire Tree, something analogus to the Mushrome, or Moss on
other Trees, or to the hairs on Animals. And having inquired into the History
of Cork, I find it reckoned as an excrescency of the bark of a certain Tree,
which is distinct from the two barks that lie within it, which are common also
to other trees; That it is some time before the Cork that covers the young and
tender sprouts comes to be discernable; That it cracks, flaws, and cleaves into
many great chaps, the bark underneath remaining entire; That it may be
separated and removed from the Tree, and yet the two under-barks (such as are
also common to that with other Trees) not at all injured, but rather helped and
freed from an external injury. Thus Ionstonus in Dendrologia, speaking de
Subere, says Arbor est procera, Lignum est robustum, dempto cortice in aquis
non fluitat, Cortice in orbem detracto juvatur, crascescens enim praestringit
and strangulat, intra triennium iterum repletur: Caudex ubi adolescit crassus,
cortex superior densus carnosus, duos digitos crassus, scaber, rimosus, and qui
nisi detrahatur dehiscit, alioque subnascente expellitur, interior qui subest
novellus ita rubet ut arbor minio picta videatur. Which Histories, if well
considered, and the tree, substance, and manner of growing, if well examined,
would, I am very apt to believe, much confirm this my conjecture about the
origination of Cork.

Nor is this kind of Texture peculiar to Cork only; for upon examination with
my Microscope, I have found that the pith of an Elder, or almost any other
Tree, the inner pulp or pith of the Cany hollow stalks of several other
Vegetables: as of Fennel, Carrets, Daucus, Bur-docks, Teasels, Fearn, some
kinds of Reeds, etc. have much such a kind of Schematisme, as I have lately
shown that of Cork, save only that here the pores are ranged the long-ways, or
the same ways with the length of the Cane, whereas in Cork they are transverse.

The pith also that fills that part of the stalk of a Feather that is above the
Quil, has much such a kind of texture, save only that which way soever I set
this light substance, the pores seemed to be cut transversly; so that I ghess
this pith which fills the Feather, not to consist of abundance of long pores
separated with Diaphragms, as Cork does, but to be a kind of solid or hardened
froth, or a congeries of very small bubbles consolidated in that form, into a
pretty stiff as well as tough concrete, and that each Cavern, Bubble, or Cell,
is distinctly separate from any of the rest, without any kind of hole in the
encompassing films, so that I could no more blow through a piece of this kind
of substance, then I could through a piece of Cork, or the sound pith of an
Elder.

But though I could not with my Microscope, nor with my breath, nor any other
way I have yet tried, discover a passage out of one of those cavities into
another, yet I cannot thence conclude, that therefore there are none such, by
which the Succus nutritious, or appropriate juices of Vegetables, may pass
through them; for, in several of those Vegetables, whilst green, I have with
my Microscope, plainly enough discovered these Cells or Poles filled with
juices, and by degrees sweating them out: as I have also observed in green Wood
all those long Microscopical pores which appear in Charcoal perfectly empty of
any thing but Air.

Now, though I have with great diligence endeavored to find whether there be
any such thing in those Microscopical pores of Wood or Piths, as the Valves in
the heart, veins, and other passages of Animals, that open and give passage to
the contained fluid juices one way, and shut themselves, and impede the passage
of such liquors back again, yet have I not hitherto been able to say any thing
positive in it; though, me thinks, it seems very probable, that Nature has in
these passages, as well as in those of Animal bodies, very many appropriated
Instruments and contrivances, whereby to bring her designs and end to pass,
which it is not improbable, but that some diligent Observer, if helped with
better Microscopes, may in time detect.

And that this may be so, seems with great probability to be argued from the
strange Phenomenon of sensitive Plants, wherein Nature seems to perform several
Animal actions with the same Schematism or Orginization that is common to all
Vegetables, as may appear by some no less instructive then curious Observations
that were made by diverse Eminent Members of the Royal Society on some of these
kind of Plants, whereof an account was delivered in to them by the most
Ingenious and Excellent Physician, Doctor Clark, which, having that liberty
granted me by that most Illustrious Society, I have hereunto adjoined.

Observations on the Humble and Sensible Plants in Mr. Chiffin's Garden in
Saint James's Park, made August the 9th, 1661. Present, the Lord Brouncker, Sr.
Robert Moray, Dr. Wilkins, Mr. Evelin, Dr. Henshaw, and Dr. Clark.
There are four Plants, two of which are little shrub Plants, with a little
short stock, about an Inch above the ground, from whence are spread several
sticky branches, round, straight, and smooth in the distances between the
Sprouts, but just under the Sprouts there are two sharp thorny prickles, broad
in the letting on, as in the Bramble, one just under the Sprout, the other on
the opposite side of the branch.

The distances betwixt the Sprouts are usually something more then an Inch, See
Schem. 11. Fig. 2.
and many upon a Branch, according to its length, and they grew so, that if the
lower Sprout be on the left side of the Branch, the next above is on the right,
and so to the end, not sprouting by pairs.

At the end of each Sprout are generally four sprigs, two at the Extremity, and
one on each side, just under it. At the first sprouting of these from the
Branch to the Sprig where the leaves grow, they are full of little short white
hairs, which wear off as the leaves grow, and then they are smooth as the
Branch.

Upon each of these sprigs, are, for the most part, eleven pair of leaves,
neatly set into the uppermost part of the little sprig, exactly one against
another, as it were in little articulations, such as Anatomists call
Enarthrosis, where the round head of a Bone is received into another fitted for
its motion; and standing very fitly to shut themselves and touch, the pairs
just above them closing somewhat upon them, as in the shut sprig; so is the
little round Pedunculus of this leaf fitted into a little cavity of the sprig,
visible to the eye in a sprig new plucked, or in a sprig withered on the
Branch, from which the leaves easily fall by touching.

The leaf being almost an oblong square, and set into the Pedunculus, at one of
the lower corners, receives from that not only a Spine, as I may call it,
which, passing through the leaf, divides it so length-ways that the outer-side
is broader then the inner next the sprig, but little fibers passing obliquely
toward the opposite broader side, seem to make it here a little muscular, and
fitted to move the whole leaf, which, together with the whole sprig, are set
full with little short whitish hairs.

One of these Plants, whose branch seemed to be older and more grown then the
other, only the tender Sprouts of it, after the leaves are shut, fall and hang
down; of the other, the whole branches fall to the ground, if the Sun shine
very warm, upon the first taking off the Glass, which I therefore call the
humble Plant.

The other two, which do never fall, nor do any of their branches flagg and
hang down, shut not their leaves, but upon somewhat a hard stroke; the stalks
seem to grow up from a root, and appear more herbaceous, they are round and
smooth, without any prickle, the Sprouts from them have several pairs of
sprigs, with much less leaves then the other on them, and have on each sprig
generally seventeen pair.

Upon touching any of the sprigs with leaves on, all the leaves on that sprig
contracting themselves by pairs, joined their upper superficies close together.

Upon the dropping a drop of Aqua fortis on the sprig betwixt the leaves, f f
all the leaves above shut presently, those below by pairs successively after,
and by the lower leaves of the other branches, l l, k k, etc. and so every pair
successively, with some little distance of time betwixt, to the top of each
sprig, and so they continued shut all the time we were there. But I returning
the next day, and several days since, found all the leaves dilated again on two
of the sprigs; but from f f, where the Aqua fortis had dropped upwards, dead
and withered; but those below on the same sprig, green, and closing upon the
touch, and are so at this day, August 14.

With a pair of Scissers, as suddenly as it could be done, one of the leaves b
b was clipped off in the middle, upon which that pair, and the pair above,
closed presently, after a little interval, d d, then e e, and so the rest of
the pairs, to the bottom of the sprig, and then the motion began in the lower
pairs, l l, on the other sprigs, and so shut them by pairs upwards, though not
with such distinct distances.

Under a pretty large branch with its sprigs on, there lying a large Shell
betwixt two and three Inches below it, there was rubbed on a strong sented oil,
after a little time all the leaves on that sprig were shut, and so they
continued all the time of our stay there, but at my return the next day, I
found the position of the Shell altered, and the leaves expanded as before, and
closing upon the touch.

Upon the application of the Sunbeams by a Burning-glass, the more humble
Plant fell, the other shut their leaves.

We could not so apply the smoke of Sulpher, as to have any visible effect from
that, at two or three times trial; but on another trial, the smoke touching the
leaves, it succeeded.

The humble Plant fell upon taking off the Glass wherewith it was covered.

Cutting off one of the little Sprouts, two or three drops of liquor were
thrust out of the part from whence that was cut, very clear, and pellucid, of a
bright greenish color, tasting at first a little bitterish, but after leaving
a licorish-like taste in my mouth.

Since, going two or three times when it was cold, I took the Glasses from the
more humble Plant, and it did not fall as formerly, but shut its leaves only.
But coming afterward, when the Sun shone very warm, as soon as it was taken
off, it fell as before.

Since I plucked off another sprig, whose leaves were all shut, and had been so
some time, thinking to observe the liquor should come from that I had broken
off, but finding none, though with pressing, to come, I, as dexterously as I
could, pulled off one whose leaves were expanded, and then had upon the
shutting of the leaves, a little of the mentioned liquor, from the end of the
sprig I had broken from the Plant. And this twice successively, as often almost
as I durst rob the Plant.

But my curiosity carrying me yet further, I cut off one of the harder branches
of the stronger Plant, and there came of the liquor, both from that I had cut,
and that I had cut it from, without pressure.

Which made me think, that the motion of this Plant upon touching, might be
from this, that there being a constant intercourse betwixt every part of this
Plant and its root, either by a circulation of this liquor, or a constant
pressing of the subtiler parts of it to every extremity of the Plant. Upon
every pressure, from whatsoever it proceeds, greater then that which keeps it
up, the subtle parts of this liquor are thrust downwards, toward its
articulations of the leaves, where, not having room presently to get into the
sprig, the little round pedunculus, from whence the Spine and those oblique
Fibers I mentioned rise, being dilated, the Spine and Fibers (being continued
from it) must be contracted and shortened, and so draw the leaf upwards to join
with its fellow in the same condition with it self, where, being closed, they
are held together by the implications of the little whitish hair, as well as by
the still retreating liquor, which distending the Fibers that are continued
lower to the branch and root, shorten them above; and when the liquor is so
much forced from the Sprout, whose Fibers are yet tender, and not able to
support themselves, but by that tensness which the liquor filling their
interstices gives them, the Sprout hangs and flags.

But, perhaps, he that had the ability and leisure to give you the exact
Anatomy of this pretty Plant, to show you its Fibers, and visible Canales,
through which this fine liquor circulateth, or is moved, and had the faculty of
better and more copiously expressing his Observations and conceptions, such
a^one would easily from the motion of this liquor, solve all the Phenomenon,
and would not fear to affirm, that it is no obscure sensation this Plant has.
But I have said too much, I humbly submit, and am ready to stand corrected.

I have not yet made so full and satisfactory Observations as I desire on this
Plant, which seems to be a Subject that will afford abundance of information.
But as far as I have had opportunity to examine it, I have discovered with my
Microscope very curious structures and contrivances; but designing much more
accurate examinations and trials, both with my Microscope, and otherwise, as
soon as the season will permit, I shall not till then add anything of what I
have already taken notice of; but as far as I have yet observed, I judge the
motion of it to proceed from causes very differing from those by which
Gut-strings, or Lute-strings, the beard of a wild Oat, or the beard of the
Seeds of Geranium, Moscatum, or Muskgrass and other of kinds of Cranes-bill,
move themselves. Of which I shall add more in the subsequent Observations on
those bodies.

Observe. XIX. Of a Plant growing in the blighted or yellow specks of
Damask-rose-leaves, Bramble-leaves, and some other kind of leaves.
I Have for several years together, in the Months of June, July, August, and
September (when any of the green leaves of Roses begin to dry and grow yellow)
observed many of them, especially the leaves of the old shrubs of Damask-Roses,
all bespecked with yellow stains, and the undersides just against them, to have
little yellow hillocks of a gummous substance, and several of them to have
small black spots in the midst of those yellow ones, which, to the naked eye,
appeared no bigger then the point of a Pin, or the smallest black spot or
tittle of Ink one is able to make with a very sharp pointed Pen.

Examining these with a Microscope, I was able plainly to distinguish, up and
down the surface, several small yellow knobs, of a kind of yellowish red gummy
substance, out of which I perceived there sprung multitudes of little cases or
black bodies like Seed-cods, and those of them that were quite without the
hillock of Gumm, disclosed themselves to grow out of it with a small
Straw-colour'd and transparent stem, the which seed and stem appeared very like
those of common Moss (which I elsewhere describe) but that they were abundantly
less, many hundreds of them being not able to equalize one single seed Cod of
Moss.

I have often doubted whether they were the seed Cods of some little Plant, or
some kind of small Buds, or the Eggs of some very small Insect, they appeared
of a dark brownish red, some almost quite black, and of a Figure much
resembling the seed-cod of Moss, but their stalks on which they grew were of a
very fine transparent substance, almost like the stalk of mould, but that they
seemed somewhat more yellow.

That which makes me to suppose them to be Vegetables, is for that I perceived
many of those hillocks bare or destitute, as if those bodies lay yet concealed,
as G. In others of them, they were just springing out of their gummy hillocks,
which all seemed to shoot directly outward, as at A. In others, as at B, I
found them just gotten out, with very little or no stalk, and the Cods of an
indifferent cize; but in others, as C, I found them begin to have little short
stalks, or stems; in others, as D, those stems were grown bigger, and larger;
and in others, as at E, F, H, I, K, L, etc. those stems and Cods were grown a
great deal bigger, and the stalks were more bulky about the root, and very much
taper'd toward the top, as at F and L is most visible.

I did not find that any of them had any seed in them, or that any of them were
hollow, but as they grew bigger and bigger, I found those heads of Cods begin
to turn their tops toward their roots, in the same manner as I had observed
that of Moss to do; so that in all likelihood, Nature did intend in that
posture, what she does in the like seed-cods of greater bulk, that is, that the
seed, when ripe, should be shaken out and dispersed at the end of it, as we
find in Columbine Cods, and the like.

The whole Oval OOOO in the second Figure of the 12. Scheme represents a small
part of a Rose leaf, about the bigness of the little Oval in the hillock, C,
marked with the Figure X. in which I have not particularly observed all the
other forms of the surface of the Rose-leaf, as being little to my present
purpose.

Now, if these Cods have a seed in them so proportioned to the Cod, as those of
Pinks, and Carnations* and Columbines, and the like, how unimaginably small
must each of those seeds necessarily be, for the whole length of one of the
largest of those Cods was not 1/^00 part of an Inch; some not above 1/1000, and
therefore certainly, very many thousand of them would be unable to make a bulk
that should be visible to the naked eye; and if each of these contain the
Rudiments of a young Plant of the same kind, what must we say of the pores and
constituent parts of that?

The generation of this Plant seems in part, ascribable to a kind of Mildew or
Blight, whereby the parts of the leaves grow scabby, or putrified, as it were,
so as that the moisture breaks out in little scabs or spots, which, as I said
before, look like little knobs of a red gummous substance.

From this putrified scabb breaks out this little Vegetable; which may be
somewhat like a Mould or Moss; and may have its equivocal generation much after
the same manner as I have supposed Moss or Mould to have, and to be a more
simple and uncompounded kind of vegetation, which is set a moving by the
putrifactive and fermentative heat, joined with that of the ambient aerial,
when (by the putrefaction and decay of some other parts of the vegetable, that
for a while staid its progress) it is unfettered and left at liberty to move in
its former course, but by reason of its regulators, moves and acts after quite
another manner then it did when a coagent in the more compounded machine of the
more perfect Vegetable.

And from this very same Principle, I imagine the Misleto of Oaks, Thorns,
Appletrees, and other Trees, to have its original: It seldom or never growing
on any of those Trees, till they begin to wax decrepid, and decay with age, and
are pestered with many other infirmities.

Hither also may be referred those multitudes and varieties of Mushroms, such
as that, called Iew-ears, all sorts of gray and green Mosses, etc. which infest
all kind of Trees, shrubs, and the like, especially when they come to any
bigness. And this we see to be very much the method of Nature throughout its
operations, putrifactive Vegetables very often producing a Vegetable of a much
less compounded nature, and of a much inferior tribe; and putrefactive animal
substances degenerating into some kind of animal production of a much inferior
rank, and of a more simple nature*

Thus we find the humors and substances of the body, upon putrefaction, to
produce strange kinds of moving Vermin: the putrefaction of the slimes and
juices of the Stomach and Guts, produce Worms almost like Earthworms, the
Wheals in childrens hands produce a little Worm, called a Wheal-worm: The blood
and milk, and other humors, produce other kinds of Worms, at least, if we may
believe what is delivered to us by very famous Authors; though, I confess, I
have not yet been able to discover such my self.

And whereas it may seem strange that Vinegar, Meal, musty Casks, etc. are
observed to breed their differing kinds of Insects, or living creatures,
whereas they being Vegetable substances, seem to be of an inferior kind, and
so unable to produce a creature more noble, or of a more compounded nature then
they themselves are of, and so without some concurrent seminal principle, may
be thought utterly unfit for such an operation; I must add, that we cannot
presently positively say, there are no animal substances, either mediately, as
by the soil or fatning of the Plant from whence they sprung, or more
immediately, by thereal mixture or composition of such substances, joined with
them; or perchance some kind of Insect, in such places where such kind of
putrefying or fermenting bodies are, may, by a certain instinct of nature,
eject some sort of seminal principle, which cooperating with various kinds of
putrefying substances, may produce various kinds of Insects, or Animate bodies:
For we find in most sorts of those lower degrees of Animate bodies, that the
putrefying substances on which these Eggs, Seeds, or seminal principles are
cast by the Insect, become, as it were, the Matrices or Wombs, that conduce
very much to their generation, and may perchance also to their variation and
alteration, much after the same manner, as, by strange and unnatural
copulations, several new kinds of Animals are produced, as Mules, and the like,
which are usually called Monstrous, because a little unusual, though many of
them have all their principal parts as perfectly shaped and adapted for their
peculiar uses, as any of the most perfect Animals. If therefore the putrefying
body, on which any kind of seminal or vital principle chances to be cast,
become somewhat more then merely a nursing and fostering helper in the
generation and production of any kind of Animate body, the more near it
approaches the true nature of a Womb, the more power will it have on the
by-blow it incloses. But of this somewhat more in the description of the
Water-gnat. Perhaps some more accurate Enquiries and Observations about these
matters might bring the Question to some certainty, which would be of no small
concern in Natural Philosophy.

But the putrefying animal substances may produce animals of an inferior kind,
I see not any so very great a difficulty, but that one may, without much
absurdity, admit: For as there may be multitudes of contrivances that go to the
making up of one complete Animate body; so, That some of those coadjutors, in
the perfect existence and life of it, may be vitiated, and the life of the
whole destroyed, and yet several of the constituting contrivances remain
entire, I cannot think it beyond imagination or possibility; no more then that
a like accidental process, as I have elsewhere hinted, may also be supposed to
explicate the method of Nature in the Metamorphosis of Plants. And though the
difference between a Plant and an Animal be very great, yet I have not hitherto
met with any so cogent an Argument, as to make me positive in affirming these
two to be altogether Heterogeneous, and of quite differing kinds of Nature: And
besides, as there are many Zoophyts, and sensitive Plants (diverse of which I
have seen, which are of a middle nature, and seem to be Natures transition from
one degree to another, which may be observed in all her other passages, wherein
she is very seldom observed to leap from one step to another) so have we, in
some Authors, Instances of Plants turning into Animals, and Animals into
Plants, and the like; and some other very strange (because unheeded)
proceedings of Nature; something of which kind may be met with, in the
description of the Water-Gnat, though it be not altogether so direct to the
present purpose.

But to refer this Discourse of Animals to their proper places, I shall add,
that though one should suppose, or it should be proved by Observations, that
several of these kinds of Plants are accidentally produced by a casual
putrefaction, I see not any great reason to question, but that, notwithstanding
its own production was as 'twere casual, yet it may germinate and produce seed,
and by it propagate its own, that is, a new Species. For we do not know, but
that the Omnipotent and All-wise Creator might as directly design the structure
of such a Vegetable, or such an Animal to be produced out of such or such a
putrefaction or change of this or that body, toward the constitution or
structure of which, he knew it necessary, or thought it fit to make it an
ingredient; as that the digestion or moderate heating of an Egg, either by the
Female, or the Sun, or the heat of the Fire, or the like, should produce this
or that Bird; or that Putrifactive and warm steams should, out of the blowings,
as they call them, that is, the Eggs of a Fly, produce a living Magot, and
that, by degrees, be turned into an Aurelia, and that, by a longer and a
proportioned heat, be transmuted into a Fly. Nor need we therefore to suppose
it the more imperfect in its kind, then the more compounded Vegetable or Animal
of which it is a part; for he might as completely furnish it with all kinds of
contrivances necessary for its own existence, and the propagation of its own
Species, and yet make it a part of a more compounded body: as a Clock-maker
might make a Set of Chimes to be a part of a Clock, and yet, when the watch
part of striking part are taken away, and the hindrances of its motion removed,
this chiming part may go as accurately, and strike its tune as exactly, as if
it were still a part of the compounded Automaton. So, though the original
cause, or Schem.
seminal principle from which this minute Plant on Ro^e leaves did spring,
were, before the corruption caused by the Mill-dew, a component part of the
leaf on which it grew, and did serve as a coagent in the production and
constitution of it, yet might it be so consummate, as to produce a seed which
might have a power of propagating the same species the works of the Creator
seeming of such an excellency, that though they are unable to help to the
perfecting of the more compounded existence of the greater Plant or Animal,
they may have notwithstanding an ability of acting singly upon their own
internal principle, so as to produce a Vegetable body, though of a less
compounded nature, and to proceed so far in the method of other Vegetables, as
to bear flowers and seeds, which may be capable of propagating the like. So
that the little cases which appear to grow on the top of the slender stalks,
may, for ought I know, though I should suppose them to spring from the
perverting of the usual course of the parent Vegetable, contain a seed, which,
being scattered on other leaves of the same Plant, may produce a Plant of much
the same kind.

Nor are Damask-Rose leaves the only leaves that produce these kinds of
Vegetable sproutings; for I have observed them also in several other kinds of
Rose leaves, and on the leaves of several sorts of Briers, and on Bramble
leaves they are oftentimes to be found in very great clusters; so that I have
found in one cluster, three, four, or five hundred of them, making a very
conspicuous black spot or scab on the back side of the leaf.

Observe. XX. Of blue Mould, and the first Principles of Vegetation arising from
Putrefaction.
THe Blue and White and several kinds of hairy moldy spots, which are
observable upon diverse kinds of putrified bodies, whether Animal substances, or
Vegetable, such as the skin, raw or dressed, flesh, blood, humors, milk, green
Cheese, etc. or rotten sappy Wood, or Herbs, Leaves, Barks, Roots, etc. of
Plants, are all of them nothing else but several kinds of small and variously
figured Mushroms, which, from convenient materials in those putrefying bodies,
are, by the concurrent heat of the Air, excited to a certain kind of
vegetation, which will not be unworthy our more serious speculation and
examination, as I shall by and by show. But, first, I must premise a short
description of this Specimen, which I have added of this Tribe, in the first
Figure of the XII. Scheme, which is nothing else but the appearance of a small
white spot of hairy mould, multitudes of which I found to bespeck and whiten
over the red covers of a small book, which, it seems, were of Sheeps-skin, that
being more apt to gather mould, even in a dry and clean rooth, then other
leathers. These spots appeared, through a good Microscope, to be a very pretty
shaped Vegetative body, which, from almost the same part of the Leather, sho^
out multitudes of small long cylindrical and transparent stalks, not exactly
straight, but a little bended with the weight of a round and white knob that
grew on the top of each of them; many of these knobs I observed to be very
round, and of a smooth surface, such as A A, etc. others smooth likewise, but a
little oblong, as B; several of them a little broken, or cloven with chops at
the top, as C; others flitter'd as 'twere, or flown all to pieces, as DD. The
whole substance of these pretty bodies was of a very tender constitution, much
like the substance of the softer kind of common white Mushroms, for by touching
them with a Pin, I found them to be bruised and torn; they seemed each of them
to have a distinct root of their own; for though they grew near together in a
cluster, yet I could perceive each stem to rise out of a distinct part or pore
of the Leather; some of these were small and short, as seeming to have been but
newly sprung up, of these the balls were for the most part round, others were
bigger, and taller, as being perhaps of a longer growth, and of these, for the
most part, the heads were broken, and some much wasted, as E; what these heads
contained I could not perceive; whether they were knobs and flowers, or seed
cases, I am not able to say, but they seemed most likely to be of the same
nature with those that grow on Mushroms, which they did, some of them, not a
little resemble.

Both their smell and taste, which are active enough to make a sensible
impression upon those organs, are unpleasant and noisome.

I could not find that they would so quickly be destroyed by the actual flame
of a Candle, as at first sight of them I conceived they would be, but they
remained entire after. I had past that part of the Leather on which they stuck
three or four times through the flame of a Candle; so that, it seems they are
not very apt to take fire, no more then the common white Mushroms are when they
are sappy.

There are a multitude of other shapes, of which these Microscopical Mushroms
are figured, which would have been a long Work to have described, and would not
have suited so well with my design in this Treatise, only, amongst the rest, I
must not forget to take notice of one that was a little like to, or resembled,
a Sponge, consisting of a multitude of little Ramifications almost as that body
does, which indeed seems to be a kind of Water-Mushrom, of a very pretty
texture, as I elsewhere manifest. And a second, which I must not omit, because
often mingled, and near adjoining to these I have described, and this appeared
much like a Thicket of bushes, or brambles, very much branched, and extended,
some of them, to a great length, in proportion to their Diameter, like creeping
brambles.

The manner of the growth and formation of this kind of Vegetable, is the third
head of Enquiry, which, had I time, I should follow: the figure and method of
Generation in this concrete seeming to me, next after the Enquiry into the
formation, figuration, or chrystalization of Salts, to be the most simple,
plain, and easy; and it seems to be a medium through which he must necessarily
pass, that would with any likelihood investigate the forma informans of
Vegetables: for as I think that he shall find it a very difficult task, who
undertakes to discover the form of Saline crystallizations, without the
consideration and prescience of the nature and reason of a Globular form, and
as difficult to explicate this configuration of Mushroms, without the previous
consideration of the form of Salts; so will the enquiry into the forms of
Vegetables be no less, if not much more difficult, without the foreknowledge
of the forms of Mushroms, these several Enquiries having no less dependence one
upon another then any select number of Propositions in Mathematical Elements
may be made to have.

Nor do I imagine that the skips from the one to another will be found very
great, if beginning from fluidity, or body without any form, we descend
gradually, till we arrive at the highest form of a brute Animal's Soul, making
the steps or foundations of our Enquiry, Fluidity, Orbiculation, Fixation,
Angulization, or Crystallization Germination or ^hultition, Vegetation,
Plantanimation, Animation, Sensation, Imagination.

Now, that we may the better proceed in our Enquiry, It will be requisite to
consider:

First, that Mould and Mushroms require no seminal property, but the former may
be produced at any time from any kind of putrefying Animal, or Vegetable
Substance, as Flesh, etc. kept moist and warm, and the latter, if what
Mathiolus relates be true, of making them by Art, are as much within our
command, of which Matter take the Epitomie which Mr. Parkinson has delivered in
his Herbal, in his Chapter of Mushroms, because I have not Mathiolus now by me:
Unto these Mushroms (says he) may also be adjoined those which are made of Art
( whereof Mathiolus makes mention) that grow naturally among certain stones in
Naples, and that the stones being dug up, and carried to Rome, and other
places, where they set them in their Wine Cellars, covering them with a little
Earth, and sprunkling a little warm water thereon, would within four days
produce Mushroms fit to be eaten, at what time one will: As also that Mushroms
may be made to grow at the foot of a wild Poplar Tree, within four days after,
warm water wherein some leaves have been dissolved shall be poured into the
Root (which must be slit) and the stock above ground.

Next, that as Mushroms may be generated without seed, so does it not appear
that they have any such thing as seed in any part of them; for having
considered several kinds of them, I could never ^^nd any thing in them that I
could with any probability ghess to be the ^eed of it, so that it does not as
yet appear (that I know of) that Mushroms may be generated from a seed, but
they rather seem to depend merely upon a convenient constitution of the matter
out of which they are made, and a concurrence of either natural or artificial
heat.

Thirdly, that by several bodies (as Salts and Metals both in Water and in the
air, and by several kinds of sublimations in the Air) actuated and guided with
a congruous heat, there may be produced several kinds of bodies as curiously,
if not of a more composed Figure; several kinds of rising or Ebulliating
Figures seem to manifest; as witness the ^^ooting in the Rectification of
spirits of Urine, Hart-horn, Eloud, etc. witness also the curious branches of
evaporated dissolutions, some of them against the sides of the containing Jar:
others standing up, or growing an end, out of the bottom, of which I have taken
notice of a very great variety. But above all the rest, it is a very pretty
kind of Germination which is afforded us in the Silver Tree, the manner of
making which with Mercury and Silver, is well known to the Chemists, in which
there is an Ebullition or Germination, very much like this of Mushroms, if I
have been rightly informed of it.

Fourthly, I have very often taken notice of, and also observed with a
Microscope, certain excrescencies or Ebullitions in the snuff of a Candle,
which, partly from the sticking of the smoaky particles as they are carried
upwards by the current of the rarified Air and flame, and partly also from a
kind of Germination or Ebullition of some actuated unctuous parts which creep
along and filter through some small string of the Week, are formed into pretty
round and uniform heads, very much resembling the form of hooded Mushroms,
which, being by any means exposed to the fresh Air, or that air which
encompasses the flame, they are presently licked up and devoured by it, and
vanish.

The reason of which Phenomenon seems to me, to be no other then this:

That when a convenient thread of the Week is so bent out by the sides of the
snuff that are about half an Inch or more, removed above the bottom, or lowest
part of the flame, and that this part be wholly included in the flame; the Oil
(for the reason of filtration, which I have elsewhere rendered) being continualy
driven up the snuff, is driven likewise into this ragged bended-end, and this
being removed a good distance, as half an Inch or more, above the bottom of the
flame, the parts of the air that passes by it, are already, almost satiated
with the dissolution of the boiling unctuous steams that issued out below, and
therefore are not only glutted, that is, can dissolve no more then what they
are already acting upon, but they carry up with them abundance of unctuous and
sooty particles, which meeting with that rag of the Week, that is plentifully
filled with Oil, and only spends it as fast as it evaporates, and not at all
by dissolution of burning, by means of these steamy parts of the filterated Oil
issuing out at the sides of this ragg, and being enclosed with an air that is
already satiated and cannot prey upon them nor burn them, the ascending sooty
particles are stayed about it and fixed so as that about the end of that ragg
or filament of the snuff, whence the greatest part of the steams issue, there
is conglobated or fixed a round and pretty uniform cap, much resembling the
head of a Mushrom, which, if it be of any great bigness, you may observe that
its undersid^ will be bigger then that which is above the ragg or stem of it;
for the Oil that is brought into it by filtration, being by the bulk of the cap
a little sheltered from the heat of the flame, does by that means issue as much
out from beneath from the stalk or downwards, as it does upwards, and by reason
of the great access of the adventitious smoke from beneath, it increases most
that way. That this may be the true reason of this Phenomenon, I could produce
many Arguments and Experiments to make it probable: As,

First, that the Filtration carries the Oil to the top of the Week, at least as
high as these rags, is visible to one that will observe the snuff of a burning
Candle with a Microscope, where he may see an Ebullition or bubbling of the
Oil, as high as the snuff looks black.

Next, that it does steam away more then burn; I could tell you of the dim
burning of a Candle, the longer the snuff be which arises from the abundance of
vapors out of the higher parts of it.

And, thirdly, that in the middle of the flame of the Candle, near the top of
the snuff, the fire or dissolving principle is nothing near so strong, as near
the bottom and out edges of the flame, which may be observed by the burning
asunder of a thread, that will first break in those parts that the edges of the
flame touch, and not in the middle.

And I could add several Observables that I have taken notice of in the flame
of a Lamp actuated with Bellows, and very many others that confirm me in my
opinion, but that it is not so much to my present purpose, which is only to
consider this concreet in the snuff of a Candle, so far as it has any
resemblance of a Mushrom, to the consideration of which, that I may return, I
say, we may also observe:

In the first place, that the droppings or trillings of Lapidescent waters in
Vaults under ground, seem to constitute a kind of petrified body, formed almost
like some kind of Mushroms inverted, in so much that I have seen some knobb'd a
little at the lower end, though for the most part, indeed they are otherwise
shaped, and taper'd toward the end; the generation of which seems to be from
no other reason but this, that the water by soaking through the earth and Lime
(for I ghess that substance to add much to it petrifying quality) does so
impregnate it self with stony particles, that hanging in drops in the roof of
the Vault, by reason that the soaking of the water is but slow, it becomes
exposed to the Air, and thereby the outward part of the drop by degrees grows
hard, by reason that the water gradually evaporating the stony particles near
the outsides of the drop begin to touch, and by degrees, to dry and grow closer
together, and at length constitute a crust or shell about the drop; and this
soaking by degrees, being more and more supplied, the drop grows longer and
longer, and the sides harden thicker and thicker into a Quill or Cane, and at
length, that hollow or pith becomes almost stopped up, and solid: afterward the
soaking of the petrifying water, finding no longer a passage through the
middle, bursts out, and trickles down the outside, and as the water evaporates,
leaves new superinduced shells, which more and more swell the bulk of those
Iceicles; and because of the great supply from the Vault, of petrifying water,
those bodies grow bigger and bigger next to the Vault, and taper or sharpen
toward the point; for the access from the arch of the Vault being but very
slow, and consequently the water being spread very thinly over the surface of
the Iceicle, the water begins to settle before it can reach to the bottom, or
corner end of it; whence, if you break one of these, you would almost imagine
it a stick of Wood petrified, it having so pretty a resemblance of pith and
grain, and if you look on the outside of a piece, or of one whole, you would
think no less, both from its vegetable roundness and tapering form; but whereas
all Vegetables are observed to shoot and grow perpendicularly upwards, this
does shoot or propend directly downwards.

By which last Observables, we see that there may be a very pretty body shaped
and concreeted by Mechanical principles, without the least show or probability
of any other seminal formatrix.

And since we find that the great reason of the Phenomenon of this pretty
petrifaction, are to be reduced from the gravity of a fluid and pretty volatile
body impregnated with stony particles, why may not the Phenomenon of Ebullition
or Germination be in part possibly enough deduced from the levity of an
impregnated liquor, which therefore perpendicularly ascending by degrees,
evaporates and leaves the more solid and fixed parts behind in the form of a
Mushrom, which is yet further diversified and specificated by the forms of the
parts that impregnated the liquor, and compose or help to constitute the
Mushrom.

That the forementioned Figures of growing Salts, and the Silver Tree, as from
this principle, I could very easily manifest; but that I have not now a
convenient opportunity of following it, nor have I made a sufficient number of
Experiments and Observations to propound, explicate, and prove so useful a
Theory as this of Mushroms: for, though the contrary principle to that of
petrified Iceicles may be in part a cause; yet I cannot but think, that there
is somewhat a more complicated cause, though yet Mechanical, and possible to be
explained.

We therefore have further to enquire of it, what makes it to be such a liquor,
and to ascend, whether the heat of the Sun and Air, or whether that of
firmentiation and putrefaction, or both together; as also whether there be not
a third or fourth; whether a Saline principle be not a considerable agent in
this business also as well as heat; whether also a fixation, precipitation or
settling of certain parts out of the aerial Mushrom may not be also a
considerable coadjutor in the business. Since we find that many pretty beards
or stiriae of the particles of Silver may be precipitated upon a piece of Brass
put into a solution of Silver very much diluted with fair water, which look not
unlike a kind of mould or hoar upon that piece of metal; and the hoar frost
looks like a kind of mould; and whether there may not be several others that do
concurt to the production of a Mushrom, having not yet had sufficient time to
prosecute according to my desires, I must referr this to a better opportunity
of my own, or leave and recommend it to the more diligent enquiry and
examination of such as can be masters both of leisure and conveniences for
such an Enquiry.

And in the mean time, I must conclude, that as far as I have been able to look
into the nature of this Primary kind of life and vegetation, I cannot find the
least probable argument to persuade me there is any other concurrent cause then
such as is purely Mechanical, and that the effects or productions are as
necessary upon the concurrence of those causes as that a Ship, when the Sails
are hoist up, and the Rudder is set to such a position, should, when the Wind
blows, be moved in such a way or course Sch^m: 13
to that or the other place; Or, as that the brushed Watch, which I mention in
the description of Moss, should, when those parts which hindered its motion were
fallen away, begin to move, but after quite another manner then it did before.

Observe. XXI. Of Moss, and several other small vegetative Substances.
MOss is a Plant, that the wisest of Kings thought neither unworthy his
speculation, nor his Pen, and though amongst Plants it be in bulk one of the
smallest, yet it is not the least considerable: For, as to its shape, it may
compare for the beauty of it with any Plant that grows, and bears a much bigger
breadth; it has a root almost like a seedy Parsnep, furnished with small
strings and suckers, which are all of them finely branched, like those of the
roots of much bigger Vegetables; out of this springs the stem or body of the
Plant, which is somewhat Quadrangular, rather then Cylindrical, most curiously
fluted or strung with small creases, which run, for the most part, parallel the
whole stem; on the sides of this are close and thick set, a multitude of fair,
large, well-shap'd leaves, some of them of a rounder, others of a longer shape,
according as they are younger or older when plucked; as I ghess by this, that
those Plants that had the stalks growing from the top of them, had their leaves
of a much longer shape, all the surface of each side of which, is curiously
covered with a multitude of little oblong transparent bodies, in the manner as
you see it expressed in the leaf B, in the XIII. Scheme.

This Plant, when young and springing up, does much resemble a Housleek, having
thick leaves, almost like that, and seems to be somewhat of kin to it in other
particulars; also from the top of the leaves, there shoots out a small white
and transparent hair, or thorn: This stem, in time, come to shoot out into a
long, round and even stalk, which by cutting transversly, when dry, I
manifestly found to be a stiff, hard, and hollow Cane, or Reed, without any
kind of knot, or stop, from its bottom, where the leaves encompassed it, to the
top, on which there grows a large seed case, A, covered with a thin, and more
whitish skin, B, terminated in a long thorny top, which at first covers all the
Case, and by degrees, as that swells, the skin cleaves, and at length falls
off, with its thorny top and all (which is a part of it) and leaves the seed
Case to ripen, and by degrees, to shatter out its seed at a place underneath
this cap, B, which before the seed is ripe, appears like a flat barred button,
without any hole in the middle; but as it ripens, the button grows bigger, and
a hole appears in the middle of it, E, out of which, in all probability, the
seed falls: For as it ripens by a provision of Nature, that end of this Case
turns downward after the same manner as the ears of Wheat and Barley usually
do; and opening several of these dry red Cases, F, I found them to be quite
hollow, without any thing at all in them; whereas when I cut them asunder with
a sharp Penknife when green, I found in the middle of this great Case, another
smaller round Case, between which two, the interstices were filled with
multitudes of stringie fibers, which seemed to suspend the lesser Case in the
middle of the other, which (as far as I was able to discern) seemed full of
exceeding small white seeds, much like the seed-bagg in the knop of a
Carnation, after the flowers have been two or three days, or a week, fallen
off; but this I could not so perfectly discern, and therefore cannot positively
affirm it.

After the seed was fallen away, I found both the Case, Stalk, and Plant, all
grow red and wither, and from other parts of the root continually to spring new
branches or slips, which by degrees increased, and grew as bigg as the former,
seeded, ripened, shattered, and withered.

I could not find that it observed any particular seasons for these several
kinds of growth, but rather found it to be springing, mature, ripe, seedy, and
withered at all times of the year; But I found it most to flourish and increase
in warm and moist weather.

It gathers its nourishments, for the most part, out of some Lapidescent, or
other substance corrupted or changed from its former texture, or substantial
form; for I have found it to grow on the rotten parts of Stone, of Bricks, of
Wood, of Bones, of Leather, etc.

It often grows on the barks of several Trees, spreading it self, sometimes from
the ground upwards, and sometimes from some chink or cleft of the bark of the
Tree, which has some putrified substance in it; but this seems of a distinct
kind from that which I observed to grow on putrified inanimate bodies, and
rotten earth.

There are also great varieties of other kinds of Mosses, which grow on Trees,
and several other Plants, of which I shall here make no mention, nor of the
Moss growing on the skull of a dead man, which much resembles that of Trees.

Whether this Plant does sometimes originally spring or rise out of corruption,
without any disseminated seed, I have not yet made trials enough to be very
much, either positive or negative; for as it seems very hard to conceive how
the seed should be generally dispersed into all parts where there is a
corruption begun, unless we may rationally suppose, that this seed being so
exceeding small, and consequently exceeding light, is thereby taken up, and
carried to and fro in the Air into every place, and by the falling drops of
rain is washed down out of it, and so dispersed into all places, and there
only takes root and propagates, where it finds a convenient soil or matrix for
it to thrive in; so if we will have it to proceed from corruption, it is not
less difficult to conceive,

First, how the corruption of any Vegetable, much less of any Stone or Brick,
should be the Parent of so curiously figured, and so perfect a Plant as this
is. But here indeed, I cannot but add, that it seems rather to be a product of
the Rain in those bodies where it is stayed, then of the very bodies
themselves, since I have found it growing on Marble, and Flint; but always the
Microscope, if not the naked eye, would discover some little hole of Dirt in
which it was rooted.

Next, how the corruption of each of those exceedingly differing bodies should
all conspire to the production of the same Plant, that is, that Stones, Bricks,
Wood, or vegetable substances, and Bones, Leather, Horns, or animate
substances, unless we may with some plausibleness say, that Air and Water are
the coadjutors, or menstruums, in all kinds of putrifactions, and that thereby
the bodies (though whilst they retained their substantial forms, were of
exdceeing differing natures, yet) since they are dissolved and mixed into
another, they may be very Homogeneous, they being almost resolved again into
Air, Water, and Earth; retaining, perhaps, one part of their vegetative faculty
yet entire, which meeting with congruous assistants, such as the heat of the
Air, and the fluidity of the Water, and such like coadjutors and conveniences,
acquires a certain vegetation for a time, wholly differing perhaps from that
kind of vegetation it had before.

To explain my meaning a little better by a gross Similitude:

Suppose a curious piece of Clock-work, that had had several motions and
contrivances in it, which, when in order, would all have moved in their
designed methods and Periods. We will further suppose, by some means, that this
Clock comes to be broken, bruised, or otherwise disordered, so that several
parts of it being dislocated, are impeded, and so stand still, and not only
hinder its own progressive motion, and produce not the effect which they were
designed for, but because the other parts also have a dependence upon them, put
a stop to their motion likewise; and so the whole Instrument becomes
unserviceable,, and not fit for any use. This Instrument afterward, by some
shaking and tumbling, and throwing up and down, comes to have several of its
parts shaken out, and several of its curious motions, and contrivances, and
particles all fallen asunder; here a Pin falls out, and there a Pillar, and
here a Wheel, and there a Hammer, and a Spring, and the like, and among the
rest, away falls those parts also which were bruised and disordered, and had all
this while impeded the motion of all the rest; hereupon several of those other
motions that yet remain, whose springs were not quite run down, being now at
liberty, begin each of them to move, thus or thus, but quite after another
method then before, there being many regulating parts and the like, fallen away
and lost. Upon this, the Owner, who chances to hear and observe some of these
effects, being ignorant of the Watch-makers Art, wonders what is betid his
Clock, and presently imagines that some Artist has been at work, and has set
his Clock in order, and made a new kind of Instrument of it, but upon examining
circumstances, he finds there was no such matter, but that the casual slipping
out of a Pin had made several parts of his Clock fall to pieces, and that
thereby the obstacle that all this while hindered his Clock, together with other
useful parts were fallen out, and so his Clock was set at liberty. And upon
winding up those springs again when run down, he finds his Clock to go, but
quite after another manner then it was wont heretofore.

And thus may it be perhaps in the business of Moss and Mould, and Mushroms,
and several other spontaneous kinds of vegetations, which may be caused by a
vegetative principle, which was a coadjutor to the life and growth of the
greater Vegetable, and was by the destroying of the life of it stopped and
impeded in performing its office; but afterward, upon a further corruption of
several parts that had all the while impeded it, the heat of the Sun winding
up, as it were, the spring, sets it again into a vegetative motion, and this
being single, and not at all regulated as it was before (when a part of that
greater machine the pristine vegetable) is moved after quite a differing manner
and produces effects very differing from those it did before.

But this I propound only as a conjecture, not that I am more inclined to this
Hypothesis then the seminal, which upon good reason I ghess to be Mechanical
also, as I may elsewhere more fully show: But because I may, by this, hint a
possible way how this appearance may be solved; supposing we should be driven
to confess from certain Experiments and Observations made, that such or such
Vegetables were produced out of the corruption of another, without any
concurrent seminal principle (as I have given some reason to suppose, in the
description of a Microscopical Mushrome) without derogating at all from the
infinite wisdom of the Creator. For this accidental production, as I may call
it, does manifest as much, if not very much more, of the excellency of his
contrivance as any thing in the more perfect vegetative bodies of the world,
even as the accidental motion of the Automaton does make the owner see, that
there was much more contrivance in it then at first he imagined. But of this I
have added more in the description of Mould, and the Vegetables on Rose leaves,
etc. those being much more likely to have their original from such a cause then
this which I have here described, in the 13. Scheme, which indeed I cannot
conceive otherwise of, then as of a most perfect Vegetable, wanting nothing of
the perfections of the most conspicuous and vastest Vegetables of the world,
and to be of a rank so high, as that it may very properly be reckoned with the
tall Cedar of Lebanon, as that Kingly Botanist has done.

We know there may be as much curiosity of contrivance, and excellency of form
in a very small Pocket-clock, that takes not up an Inch square of room, as
there may be in a Church-clock that fills a whole room; And I know not whether
all the contrivances and Mechanisms requisite to a perfect Vegetable, may not
be crowded into an exceedingly less room then this of Moss, as I have heard of
a striking Watch so small, that it served for a Pendant in a Ladies ear; and I
have already given you the description of a Plant growing on Rose leaves, that
is abundantly smaller then Moss; insomuch, that near 1000. of them would hardly
make the bigness of one single Plant of Moss. And by comparing the bulk of
Moss, with the bulk of the biggest kind of Vegetable we meet with in Story (of
which kind we find in some hotter climates, as Guine, and Brasile, the stock or
body of some Trees to be twenty foot in Diameter, whereas the body or stem of
Moss, for the most part, is not above one sixtieth part of an Inch) we shall
find that the bulk of the one will exceed the bulk of the other, no less then
2985984 Millions, or 2985984000000, and supposing the production on a Rose leaf
to be a Plant, we shall have of those Indian Plants to exceed a production of
the same Vegetable kingdom no less then 1000 times the former number; so
prodigiously various are the works of the Creator, and so All-sufficient in he
to perform what to man would seem unpossible, they being both alike easy to
him, even as one day, and a thousand years are to him as one and the same time.

I have taken notice of such an infinite variety of those smaller kinds of
vegetations, that should I have described every one of them, they would almost
have filled a Volume, and proved bigg enough to have made a new Herbal, such
multitudes are there to be found in moist hot weather, especially in the Summer
time, on all kind of putrefying substances, which, whether they do more
properly belong to the Classis of Mushroms, or Moulds, or Mosses, I shall not
now dispute, there being some that seem more properly of one kind, others of
another, their colors and magnitudes being as much differing as their Figures
and substances.

Nay, I have observed, that putting fair Water (whether Rainwater or
Pump-water, or May-dew, or Snow-water, it was almost all one) I have often
observed, I say, that this Water would, with a little standing, tarnish and
cover all about the sides of the Glass that lay under water, with a lovely
green; but though I have often endeavored to discover with my Microscope
whether this green were like Moss, or long striped Sea-weed, or any other
peculiar form, yet so ill and imperfect are our Microscopes, that I could not
certainly discriminate any.

Growing Trees also, and any kinds of Woods, Stones, Bones, etc. that have been
long exposed to the Air and Rain, will be all over covered with a greenish
scurff, which will very much foul and green any kind of clothes that are rubbed
against it; viewing this, I could not certainly perceive in many parts of it
any determinate form, though in many I could perceive a Bed as 'twere of young
Moss, but in other parts it looked almost like green bushes, and very confused,
but always of what ever irregular Figures the parts appeared of, they were
always green, and seemed to be either some Vegetable, or to have some
vegetating principle.

Observe. XXII. Of common Sponges, and several other Spongie fibrous bodies.
A Sponge is commonly reckoned among the Zoephyts, or Plant Animals; and the
texture of it, which the Microscope discovers, seems to confirm it; for it is
of a form whereof I never observed any other Vegetable, and indeed, it seems
impossible that any should be of it, for it consists of an infinite number of
small short fibers, or nervous parts, much of the same bigness, curiously
jointed or contex'd together in the form of a Net, as is more plainly manifest
by the little Draught which I have added, in the third Figure of the IX.
Scheme, of a piece of it, which you may perceive represents a confused heap of
the fibrous parts curiously jointed and implicated. The joints are, for the
most part, where three fibers only meet, for I have very seldom met with any
that had four.

At these joints there is no one of the three that seems to be the stock
whereon the other grow, but each of the fibers are, for the most part, of an
equal bigness, and seem each of them to have an equal share in the joint; the
fibers are all of them much about the same bigness, not smaller toward the top
of the Sponge, and bigger nearer the bottom or root, as is usual in Plants,
the length of each between the joints, is very irregular and different; the
distance between some two joints, being ten or twelve times more then between
some others.

Nor are the joints regular, and of an equitriagonal Figure, but, for the most
part, the three fibers so meet, that they compose three angles very differing
all of them from one another.

The meshes likewise, and holes of this reticulated body, are not less various
and irregular: some bilateral, others trilateral, and quadrilateral Figures;
nay, I have observed some meshes to have 5, 6, 7, 8, or 9. sides, and some to
have only one, so exceeding various is the Lusus Naturae in this body.

As to the outward appearance of this Vegetative body, they are so usual every
where, that I need not describe them, consisting of a soft and porous
substance, representing a Lock, sometimes a fleece of Wool; but it has besides
these small microscopical pores which lie between the fibers, a multitude of
round pores or holes, which, from the top of it, pierce into the body, and
sometimes go quite through to the bottom.

I have observed many of these Sponges, to have included likewise in the midst
of their fibrous contextures, pretty large friable stones, which must either
have been enclosed whilst this Vegetable was in formation, or generated in
those places after it was perfectly shaped. The later of which seems the more
improbable, because I did not find that any of these stony substances were
perforated with the fibers of the Sponge.

I have never seen nor been enform'd of the true manner of the growing of
Sponges on the Rock; whether they are found to increase from little to great,
like Vegetables, that is, part after part, or like Animals, all parts equally
growing together; or whether they be matrices or seed-baggs of any kind of
Fishes, or some kind of watery Insect; or whether they are at any times more
soft and tender, or of another nature and texture, which things, if I knew, I
should much desire to be informed of: but from a cursory view that I at first
made with my Microscope, and some other trials, I supposed it to be some Animal
substance cast out, and fastened upon the Rocks in the form of a froth, or
congeries of bubbles, like that which I have often observed on Rosemary, and
other Plants (wherein is included a little Insect) that all the little films
which divide these bubbles one from another, did presently, almost after the
substance began to grow a little harder, break, and leave only the thread
behind, which might be, as 'twere, the angle or thread between the bubbles,
that the great holes or pores observable in these Sponges were made by the
eruption of the included Heterogeneous substance (whether air, or some other
body, for many other fluid bodies will do the same thing) which breaking out of
the lesser, were collected into very large bubbles, and so might make their way
out of the Sponge, and in their passage might leave a round cavity; and if it
were large, might carry up with it the adjacent bubbles, which may be perceived
at the outside of the Sponge, if it be first thoroughly wetted, and suffered to
plump it self into its natural form, or be then wrung dry, and suffered to
expand it self again, which it will freely do whilst moist: for when it has
thus plump'd it self into its natural shape and dimensions, it is obvious enough
that the mouths of the larger holes have a kind of lip or rising round about
them, but the other smaller pores have little or none. It may further be found,
that each of these great pores has many other small pores below, that are
united unto it, and help to constitute it, almost like so many rivulets or
small streams that contribute to the maintenance of a large River. Nor from
this Hypothesis would it have been difficult to explicate, how those little
branches of Coral, small Stones, Shells, and the like, come to be included by
these frothy bodies: But this inded was but a conjecture; and upon a more
accurate enquiry into the form of it with the Microscope, it seems not to be
the true origin of them; for whereas Sponges have only three arms which join
together at each knot, if they had been generated from bubbles they must have
had four.

But that they are Animal Substances, the Chemical examination of them seems to
manifest, they affording a volatile Salt and spirit, like Hartshorn, as does
also their great strength and toughness, and their smell when burned in the
Fire or a Candle, which has a kind of fleshy sent, not much unlike to hair. And
having since examined several Authors concerning them, among others, I find
this account given by Bellonius, in the XI. Chap. of his 2d Book, De
Aquatilibus. spongiae recentes, says he, a siccis long diversae, scopulis
aquae marinae ad duos vel tres cubitos, nonu^nquam quatuor tantum digitos
immersis, ut fungi arboribus adhaerent, sordido quodam succo aut mucosa potius
sanie refaertae, usque adeo faetida, ut vel eminus nauseam excitet, continetur
autem iis cavernis, quas inanes in siccis and lotis Spongiis cernimus: Putris
pulmonis modo nigrae conspiciuntur, verum quae in sublimi aquae nascuntur multo
magis opaca nigredine suffusae sunt. Vivere quidem Spongios adhaerendo
Aristoteles censet: absolute vero minime: sensumque aliquem habere, vel eo
argumento (inquit) credantur, quod difficillime abstrahantur, nisi clanculum
agatur: Atque ad avulsoris accessum it a contrahantur, ut eos evellere
difficile sit, quod idem etiam faciunt quoties flatus tempestatesque urgent.
Puto autem illis succum sordidum quem supra diximus carnis loco e natura
attributum fuisse: atque meatibus latioribus tanquam intefrinis aut interancis
uti. Caeterum pars ea quae Spongiae contibus adhaerent est tanquam folii
petiolus, a quo veluti collum quoddam gracile incipit: quod deinde in
latitudinem diffusum capitis globum facit. Recentibus nibil est sistulosuen,
haesitanque tanquam radicibus. Superne omnes propemodam meatus concreti latent:
inferne vero quaterni aut quini patent, per quos eas sugere existimamus. From
which Description, they seem to be a kind of Plant-Animal that adheres to a
Rock, and these small fibers or threads which we have described, seem to have
been the Vessels which ('it is very probable) were very much bigger whilst the
Interstitia were filled (as he affirms) with a mucous, pulpy or fleshy
substance; but upon the drying were shrunk into the bigness they now appear.

The texture of it is such, that I have not yet met with any other body in the
world that has the like, but only one of a larger sort of Sponge (which is
preserved in the Museum Harveanum belonging to the most Illustrious and most
learned Society of the Physicians of London) which is of a horney, or rather of
a petrified substance. And of this indeed, the texture and make is exactly the
same with common Sponges, but only that both the holes and the fibers, or
texture of it is exceedingly much bigger, for some of the holes were above an
Inch and half over, and the fibers and texture of it was bigg enough to be
distinguished easily with ones eye, but conspicuously with an ordinary single
Microscope. And these indeed, seemed to have been the habitation of some
Animal; and examining Aristotle, I find a very consonant account hereunto,
namely, that he had known a certain little Animal, called Pinnothera, like a
Spider, to be bred in those caverns of a Sponge, from within which, by opening
and closing those holes, he insnares and catches the little Fishes; and in
another place he says, That it is very confidently reported, that there are
certain Moths or Worms that reside in the cavities of a Sponge, and are there
nourished: Notwithstanding all which Histories, I think it well worth the
enquiring into the History and nature of a Sponge, it seeming to promise some
information of the Vessels in Animal substances, which (by reason of the
solidity of the interserted flesh that is not easily removed, without
destroying also those interspersed Vessels) are hitherto undiscovered; whereas
here in a Sponge, the Parenchyma, it seems, is but a kind of mucous gelly,
which is very easily and clearly washed away.

The reason that makes me imagine, that there may probably be some such texture
in Animal substances, is, that examining the texture of the filaments of tanned
Leather, I find it to be much of the same nature and strength of a Sponge; and
with my Microscope, I have observed many such joints and knobs, as I have
described in Sponges, the fibers also in the hollow of several sorts of Bones,
after the Marrow has been removed, I have found somewhat to resemble this
texture, though, I confess, I never yet found any texture exactly the same, nor
any for curiosity comparable to it.

The filaments of it are much smaller then those of Silk, and through the
Microscope appear very near as transparent, nay, some parts of them I have
observed much more.

Having examined also several kinds of Mushroms, I find their texture to be
somewhat of this kind, that is, to consist of an infinite company of small
filaments, every way contex'd and woven together, so as to make a kind of
cloth, and more particularly, examining a piece of Touch-wood (which is a kind
of Iews-ear, or Mushrom, growing here in England also, on several sorts of
Trees, such as Elders, Maples, Willows, etc. and is commonly called by the name
of Spunk; but that we meet with to be sold in Shops, is brought from beyond
Seas) I found it to be made of an exceeding delicate texture: For the substance
of it feels, and looks to the naked eye, and may be stretched any way, exactly
like a very fine piece of Chamois Leather, or washed Leather, but it is of
somewhat a browner hew, and nothing near so strong; but examining it with my
Microscope; I found it of somewhat another make then any kind of Leather; for
whereas both Chamois, and all other kinds of Leather I have yet viewed, consist
of an infinite company of filaments, somewhat like bushes inter-woven one
within another, that is, of bigger parts or stems, as it were, and smaller
branchings that grow out of them; or like a heap of Ropes ends, where each of
the larger Ropes by degrees seem to split or untwist, into many smaller Cords,
and each of those Cords into smaller Lines, and those Lines into Threads, etc.
and these strangely entangled, or inter-woven one within another: The texture
of this Touch-wood seem^ more like that of a Lock or a Fleece of Wool, for it
consists of an infinite number of small filaments, all of them, as far as I
could perceive, of the same bigness like those of a Sponge, but that the
filaments of this were not a twentieth part of the bigness of those of a
Sponge; and I could not so plainly perceive their joints, or their manner of
interweaving, though, as far as I was able to discern with that Microscope I
had, I suppose it to have some kind of resemblance, but the joints are nothing
near so thick, nor without much trouble visible.

The filaments I could plainly enough perceive to be even, round, cylindrical,
transparent bodies, and to cross each other every way, that is, there were not
more seemed to lie horizontally then perpendicularly and thwart-way, so that it
is somewhat difficult to conceive how they should grow in that manner. By
tearing off a small piece of it, and looking on the ragged edge, I could among
several of those fibers perceive small joints, that is, one of those hairs
split into two, each of the same bigness with the other out of which they
seemed to grow, but having not lately had an opportunity of examining their
manner of growth, I cannot positively affirm any thing of them.

But to proceed, The swelling of Sponges upon wetting, and the rising of the
Water in it above the surface of the Water that it touches, are both from the
same cause, of which an account is already given in the sixth Observation.

The substance of them indeed, has so many excellent properties, scarce to be
met with in any other body in the world, that I have often wondered that so
little use is made of it, and those only vile and sordid; certainly, if it
were well considered, it would afford much greater conveniences.

That use which the Diverse are said to make of it, seems, if true, very
strange, but having made trial of it my self, by dipping a small piece of it in
very good Sallet-oyl, and putting it in my mouth, and then keeping my mouth and
nose under water, I could not find any such thing; for I was as soon out of
breath, as if I had had no Sponge, nor could I fetch my breath without taking
in water at my mouth; but I am very apt to think, that were there a contrivance
whereby the expired air might be forced to pass through a wet or oily Sponge
before it were again inspired, it might much cleanse, and strain away from the
Air diverse fuliginous and other noisome steams, and the dipping of it in
certain liquors might, perhaps, so renew that property in the Air which it
loses in the Lungs, by being breathed, that one square foot of Air might last a
man for respiration much longer, perhaps, then ten will now serve him of common
Air.

Observe. XXIII. Of the curious texture of Sea-weeds.
FOr curiosity and beauty, I have not among all the Plants or Vegetables I have
yet observed, seen any one comparable to this Sea-weed I have here described,
of which I am able to say very little more then what is represented by the
second Figure of the ninth Scheme: Namely, that it is a Plant which grows upon
the Rocks under the water, and increases and spreads it self into a great tuft,
which is not only handsomely branched into several leaves, but the whole
surface of the Plant is covered over with a most curious kind of carved work,
which consist of a texture much resembling a Honeycomb; for the whole surface
on both sides is covered over with a multitude of very small holes, being no
bigger then so many holes made with the point of a small Pinn, and ranged in
the neatest and most delicate order imaginable, they being placed in the manner
of a Quincunx, or very much like the rows of the eyes of a Fly, the rows or
orders being very regular, which way soever they are observed: what the texture
was, as it appeared through a pretty bigg Magnifying Microscope, I have here
adjoin'd in the first Figure of the 14. Scheme. which round Area ABCD
represents a part of the surface about one eighth part of an Inch in Diameter:
Those little holes, which to the eye looked round, like so many little spots,
here appeared very regularly shaped holes, representing almost the shape of the
sole of a round toed shoe, the hinder part of which, is, as it were, trod on or
covered by the toe of that next below it; these holes seemed walled about with
a very thin and transparent substance, looking of a pale straw-colour; from the
edge of which, against the middle of each hole, were sprouted out four small
transparent straw-colour'd Thorns, which seemed to protect and cover those
cavities, from either side two; near the root of this Plant, were sprouted out
several small branches of a kind of bastard Coralline, curiously branched,
though small.

And to confirm this, having lately the opportunity of viewing the large Plant
(if I may so call it) of a Sponge petrified, of which I made mention in the
last Observation, I found, that each of the Branches or Figures of it, did, by
the range of its pores, exhibit just such a texture, Schem: XIIII.
the rows of pores crossing one another, much after the manner as the rows of
eyes do which are described in the 26. Scheme: Coralline also, and several
sorts of white Cor^l, I have with a Microscope observed very curiously shaped.
And I doubt not, but that he that shall observe these several kinds of Plants
that grow upon Rocks, which the Sea sometimes overflows, and those heaps of
others which are vomited out of it upon the shore, may find multitudes of
little Plants, and other bodies, which like this will afford very beautiful
objects for the Microscope; and this Specimen here is adjoin'd only to excite
their curiosities who have opportunity of observing to examine and collect what
they find worthy their notice; for the Sea, among terrestrial bodies, is also a
prolifich mother, and affords as many Instances of spointeneous generations as
either the Air or Earth.

Observe. XXIV. Of the surfaces of Rosemary, and other leaves.
THis which is delineated within the circle of the second Figure of the 14.
Scheme, is a small part of the back or under side of a leaf of Rosemary, which
I did not therefore make choice of, because it had any thing peculiar which was
not observable with a Microscope in several other Plants, but because it
exhibits at one view,

First, a smooth and shining surface, namely, AB, which is a part of the upper
side of the leaf, that by a kind of hem or doubling of the leaf appears on this
side. There are multitudes of leaves, whose surfaces are like this smooth, and
as it were quilted, which look like a curious quilted bagg of green Silk, or
like a Bladder, or some such pliable transparent substance, full stuffed out
with a green juice or liquor; the surface of Rue, or Herbgrass, is polished,
and all over indented, or pitted, like the Silk-worm's Egg, which I shall anon
describe; the smooth surfaces of other Plants are otherwise quilted, Nature in
this, as it were, expressing her Needle Work, or imbroidery.

Next a downy or bushy surface, such as is all the under side almost, appearing
through the Microscope much like a thicket of bushes, and with this kind of
Down or Hair the leaves and stalks of multitudes of Vegetables are covered; and
there seems to be as great a variety in the shape, bulk, and manner of the
growing of these secundary Plants, as I may call them (they being, as it were,
a Plant growing out of a Plant, or somewhat like the hairs of Animals) as there
is to be found amongst small shrub^ that compose bushes; but for the most part,
they consist of small transparent parts, some of which grow in the shape of
small Needles or Bodkins, as on the Thistle, Cowag-ecod and Nettle; others in
the form of Cat's claws, as in Cliders, the beards of Barley, the edges of
several sorts of Grass and Reeds, etc. in other, as Coltsfoot, Rose-campion,
Aps, Poplar, Willow, and almost all other downy Plants, they grow in the form
of bushes very much diversified in each particular Plant. That which I have
before in the 19. Observation noted on Rose-leaves, is of a quite differing
kind, and seems indeed a real Vegetable, distinct from the leaf.

Thirdly, among these small bushes are observable an infinite company of small
round Balls, exactly Globular, and very much resembling Pearls, namely, CCCC,
of these there may be multitudes observed in Sage, and several other Plants,
which I suppose was the reason why Athanasius Kircher supposed them to be all
covered with Spiders Eggs, or young Spiders, which indeed is nothing else but
some kind of gummous exsudation, which is always much of the same bigness. At
first sight of these, I confess, I imagined that they might have been some kind
of matrices, or nourishing receptacles for some small Insect, just as I have
found Oak-apples, and multitudes of such other large excrescencies on the
leaves and other parts of Trees and shrubs to be for Flies, and diverse other
Insects, but observing them to be there all the year, and scarce at all to
change their magnitude, that conjecture seemed not so probable. But what ever
be the use of it, it affords a very pleasant object through the Microscope, and
may, perhaps, upon further examination, prove very luciferous.

Observe. XXV. Of the stinging points and juice of Nettles, and some other
venomous Plants.
A Nettle is a Plant so well known to every one, as to what the appearance of
it is to the naked eye, that it needs no description; and there are very few
that have not felt as well as seen it; and therefore it will be no news to tell
that a gentle and slight touch of the skin by a Nettle, does oftentime, not
only create very sensible and acute pain, much like that of a burn or scald,
but often also very angry and hard swellings and inflammations of the parts,
such as will presently rise, and continue swollen diverse hours. These
observations, I say, are common enough; but how the pain is so suddenly
created, and by what means continued, augmented for a time, and afterward
diminished, and at length quite extinguished, has not, that I know, been
explained by any.

And here we must have recourse to our Microscope, and that will, if almost any
part of the Plant be looked on, show us the whole surface of it very thick set
with turn-Pikes, or sharp Needles, of the shape of those represented in the 15.
Scheme and first Figure by AB, which are visible also to the naked eye; each of
which consists of two parts very distinct for shape, and differing also in
quality from one another. For the part A, is shaped very much like a round
Bodkin, from B tapering till it end in a very sharp point; it is of a substance
very hard and stiff, exceedingly transparent and clear, and, as I by many
trials certainly found, is hollow from top to bottom.

This I found by this Experiment, I had a very convenient Microscope Schem. XV.
with a single Glass which drew about half an Inch, this I had fastened into a
little frame, almost like a pair of Spectacles, which I placed before mine
eyes, and so holding the leaf of a Nettle at a convenient distance from my eye,
I did first, with the thrusting of several of these bristles into my skin,
perceive that presently after I had thrust them in I felt the burning pain
begin; next I observed in diverse of them, that upon thrusting my finger against
their tops, the Bodkin (if I may so call it) did not in the least bend, but I
could perceive moving up and down within it a certain liquor, which upon
thrusting the Bodkin against its bafis, or bagg B, I could perceive to rise
toward the top, and upon taking away my hand, I could see it again subside,
and shrink into the bagg; this I did very often, and saw this Phenomenon as
plain as I could ever see a parcel of water ascend and descend in a pipe of
Glass. But the basis underneath these Bodkins on which they were fast, were
made of a more pliable substance, and looked almost like a little bagg of green
Leather, or rather resembled the shape and surface of a wild Cucumber, or
cucumeris asinini, and I could plainly perceive them to be certain little
baggs, bladders, or receptacles full of water, or as I ghess, the liquor of the
Plant, which was poisonous, and those small Bodkins were but the Syringe-pipes,
or Glyster-pipes, which first made way into the skin, and then served to convey
that poisonous juice, upon the pressing of those little baggs, into the
interior and sensible parts of the skin, which being so discharged, does
corrode, or, as it were, burn that part of the skin it touches; and this pain
will sometimes last very long, according as the impression is made deeper or
stronger.

The other parts of the leaf or surface of the Nettle, have very little
considerable, but what is common to most of these kinds of Plants, as the
ruggedness or indenting, and hairiness, and other roughnesses of the surface or
outside of the Plant, of which I may say more in another place. As I shall
likewise of certain little pretty clear Balls or Apples which I have observed
to stick to the sides of these leaves, both on the upper and under side, very
much like the small Apples which I have often observed to grow on the leaves of
an Oak called Oak-apples which are nothing but the Matrices of an Insect, as I
elsewhere show.

The chief thing therefore is, how this Plant comes, by so slight a touch, to
create so great a pain; and the reason of this seems to be nothing else, but
the corrosive penetrant liquor contained in the small baggs or bladders, upon
which grow out those sharp Syringe-pipes, as I before noted; and very consonant
to this, is the reason of the pain created by the sting of a Be, Wasp, etc. as
I elsewhere show: For by the Dart, which is likewise a pipe, is made a deep
passage into the skin, and then by the anger of the Fly, is his gally poisonous
liquor injected; which being admitted among the sensible parts, and so mixed
with the humors or stagnating juices of that part, does create an Ebullition
perhaps, or effervescens, as is usually observed in the mingling of two
differing Chemical saline liquors, by which means the parts become swelled,
hard, and very painful; for thereby the nervous and sensible parts are not
only stretched and strained beyond their natural tone, but are also pricked,
perhaps, or corroded by the pungent and incongruous pores of the intruded
liquor.

And this seems to be the reason, why Aqua fortis, and other saline liquors, if
they come to touch the sensitive parts, as in a cut of the skin, or the like,
do so violently and intollerably excruciate and torment the Patient. And it is
not unlikely, but the Inventors of that Diabolical practice of poisoning the
points of Arrows and Ponyards, might receive their first hint from some such
Instance in natural contrivances, as this of the Nettle: for the ground why
such poisoned weapons kill so infallibly as they do, seems no other then this
of our Nettle's stinging; for the Poniard or Dart makes a passage or entrance
into the sensitive or vital parts of the body, whereby the contagious substance
comes to be dissolved by, and mixed with the fluid parts or humors of the
body, and by that means spreads it self by degrees into the whole liquid part
of the body, in the same manner, as a few grains of Salt, put into a great
quantity of Water, will by degrees diffuse it self over the whole.

And this I take to be the reason of killing of Toads, Frogs, Effs, and several
Fishes, by strewing Salt on their backs (which Experiment was shown to the
Royal Society by a very ingenious Gentleman, and a worthy Member of it) for
those creatures having always a continual exsudation, as it were, of slimy and
watery parts, sweating out of the pores of their skin, the saline particles, by
that means obtain a vehicle, which conveys them into the internal and vital
parts of the body.

This seems also to be the reason why bathing in Mineral waters are such
sovereign remedies for multitudes of distempers, especially chronical; for the
liquid and warm vehicles of the Mineral particles, which are known to be in
very considerable quantities in those healing baths, by the body's long stay in
them, do by degrees steep and insinuate themselves into the pores and parts of
the skin, and thereby those Mineral particles have their ways and passages
opened to penetrate into the inner parts, and mingle themselves with the
stagnant juices of the several parts; besides, many of those offensive parts
which were united with those stagnant juices, and which were contrary to the
natural constitution of the parts, and so become irksome and painful to the
body, but could not be discharged, because Nature had made no provision for
such accidental mischiefs, are, by means of this soaking, and filling the pores
of the skin with a liquor, afforded a passage through that liquor that fills
the pores into the ambient fluid, and thereby the body comes to be discharged.

So that it is very evident, there may be a good as well as an evil application
of this Principle. And the ingenious Invention of that Excellent person, Doctor
Wren, of injecting liquors into the veins of an Animal, seems to be reducible
to this head: I cannot stay, nor is this a fit place, to mention the several
Experiments made of this kind by the most incomparable Mr. Boil, the
multitudes made by the lately mentioned Physician Doctor Clark, the History
whereof, as he has been pleased to communicate to the Royal Society, so he may
perhaps be prevailed with to make public himself: But I shall rather hint,
that certainly, if this Principle were well considered, there might, besides
the further improving of Bathing and Syringing into the veins, be thought on
several ways, whereby several obstinate distempers of a humane body, such as
the Gout, Dropsy, Stone, etc. might be mastered, and expelled; and good men
might make as good a use of it, as evil men have made a perverse and Diabolical.

And that the filling of the pores of the skin with some fluid vehicle, is of
no small efficacy toward the preparing a passage for several kinds of
penetrant juices, and other dissoluble bodies, to insinuate themselves within
the skin, and into the sensitive parts of the body, may be, I think, proved by
an Instance given us by Bellonius, in the 26. Chapter of the second Book of his
Observations, which containing a very remarkable Story I have here transcribed:
Cum Cha^aeleonis nigri r^dices (says he) apud Pagum quendam Livadochorio
nuncupatum erui curaremus, plurimi Graeci and Turcae spectatum venerunt quid
erueremus, eas vere frustulatim secabamus, and filo trajiciebamus ut facilius
exsiccari possent. Turcae in eo negotio occupatos nos videntes, similiter eas
radices tractare and secare voluerunt: at cum summus esset aestus, and omnes
sudore maderent, quicunque eam radicem manibus tract averant sudoremque
absterserant, aut faciem digitis scalpserant, tantam pruriginem iis loci^ quos
attigerant postea senserunt, ut aduri viderentur. Chamalconis enim nigri radix
ea virtute pollet, ut ^uti applicata ipsam adeo inflammet, ut nec squillae, nec
urticae ullae centesima part ita adurent: At prurigo non adeo celeriter sese
prodit. Post unam aut alteram porro horam, singuli variis faciei locis cutem
adeo inflammatam babere caepimus ut tota sanguinea videretur, atque quo magis
eam confricabamus, tanto magis excitabatur prurigo. Fonti assidebamus sub
platano, atque initio pro bidicro habebamus and ridebamus: at tandem illi
plurimum indignati sunt, and nisi esseverassemus nunquam expertos tali virtute
eam plantam pollere, hand dubie male nos multassent. Attamen nostra excusatio
fuit ab illis facilius accepta cum eodem incommodo nos affectos conspicerent.
Mirum sane quod in tantillo radice tam ingentem efficaciam nostro malo experti
sumus.

By which observation of his, it seems manifest, that their being all covered
with sweat who gathered and cut this root of the black Chameleon Thistle, was
the great reason why they suffered that inconvenience, for it seems the like
circumstance had not been before that noted, nor do I find any mention of such
a property belonging to this Vegetable in any of the Herbals I have at present
by me.

I could give very many Observations which I have made of this kind, whereby I
have found that the best way to get a body to be insinuated into the substance
or insensible pores of another, is first, to find a fluid vehicle that has some
congruity, both to the body to be insinuated, and to the body into whose pores
you would have the other conveyed. And in this Principle lies the great mystery
of staining several sorts of bodies, as Marble, Woods, Bones, etc. and of Dying
Silks, Clothes, Wools, Feathers, etc. But these being digressions, I shall
proceed to:

Observe. XXVI. Of Cowage, and the itching operation of some bodies.
THere is a certain Down of a Plant, brought from the East Indies, called
commonly, though very improperly, Cow-itch, the reason of which mistake is
manifest enough from the description of it, which Mr. Parkinson sets down in
his Herbal, Tribe XI. Chap. 2. Phasiolus siliqua hirsuta; The hairy
Kidney-bean, called in Zurratte where it grows, Couhage: We have had (says he)
another of this kind brought us out of the East Indies, which being planted,
was in show like the former, but came not to perfection, the unkindly season
not suffering it to show the flower; but of the Cods that were brought, some
were smaller, shorter, and rounder then the Garden kind; others much longer,
and many growing together, as it were in clusters, and covered all over with a
brown short hairiness, so fine, that if any of it be rubbed, or fall on the
back of ones hand, or other tender parts of the skin, it will cause a kind of
itching, but not strong, nor long enduring, but passing quickly away, without
either danger or harm; the Beans were smaller then ordinary, and of a black
shining color.

Having one of these Cods given me by a Sea-Captain, who had frequented those
parts, I found it to be a small Cod, about three Inches long, much like a short
Cod of French Beans, which had six Beans in it, the whole surface of it was
covered over with a very thick and shining brown Down or Hair, which was very
fine, and for its bigness stiff; taking some of this Down, and rubbing it on
the back of my hand, I found very little or no trouble, only I was sensible
that several of these little downy parts with rubbing did penetrate, and were
sunk, or stuck pretty deep into my skin. After I had thus rubbed it for a
pretty while, I felt very little or no pain, in so much that I doubted, whether
it were the true Couhage; but whilst I was considering, I found the Down begin
to make my hand itch, and in some places to smart again, much like the stinging
of a Flea or Gnat, and this continued a pretty while, so that by degrees I
found my skin to be swelled with little red pustules, and to look as if it had
been itchie. But suffering it without rubbing or scratching, the itching
tickling pain quickly grew languid, and within an hour I felt nothing at all,
and the little protuberancies were vanished.

The cause of which odd Phenomenon, I suppose to be much the same with that of
the stinging of a Nettle, for by the Microscope, I discovered this Down to
consist of a multitude of small and slender conical bodies, much resembling
Needles or Bodkins, such as are represented by AB. CD. OF. of the first Figure
of the XVI. Scheme; that their ends AAA, were very sharp, and the substance of
them stiff and hard, much like the substance of several kinds of Thorns and
crooks growing on Trees. And though they appeared very clear and transparent,
yet I could not perceive whether they were hollow or not, but to me they
appeared like solid transparent bodies, without any cavity in them; whether,
though they might not be a kind of Cane, filled with some transparent liquor
which was hardened (because the Cod which I had was very dry) I was not able to
examine.

Now, being such stiff, sharp bodies, it is easy to conceive, how with rubbing
they might easily be thrust into the tender parts of the skin, and there, by
reason of their exceeding fineness and dryness, not create any considerable
trouble or pain, till by remaining in those places moistened with the humors of
the body, some caustic part sticking on them, or residing within them might be
dissolved and mixed with the ambient juices of that place, and thereby those
fibers and tender parts adjoining become affected, and as it were corroded by
it; whence, while that action lasts, the pains created are pretty sharp and
pungent, though small, which is the essential property of an itching one.

That the pain also caused by the stinging of a Flea, a Gnat, a Fly, a Wasp,
and the like, proceeds much from the very same cause, I elsewhere in their
proper places endeavor to manifest. The stinging also of shred Hors-hair,
which in meriment is often strewn between the sheets of a Bed, seems to
proceed from the same cause.

Observe. XXVII. Of the Beard of a wild Oat, and the use that may be made of it
for exhibiting always to the Eye the temperature of the Air, as to dryness and
moisture.
THis Beard of a wild Oat, is a body of a very curious structure, though to the
naked Eye it appears very slight, and inconsiderable, it being only a small
black or brown Beard or Bristle, which grows out of the side of the inner Husk
that covers the Grain of a wild Oat; the whole length of it, when put in Water,
so that it may extend it self to its full length, is not above an Inch and a
half, and for the most part somewhat shorter, but when the Grain is ripe, and
very dry, which is usualy in the Months of July, and August, this Beard is
bent somewhat below the middle, namely, about 2/5 from the bottom of it, almost
to a right Angle, and the under part of it is wreathed lik a With; the
substance of it is very brittle when dry, and it will very easily be broken
from the husk on which it grows.

If you take one of these Grains, and wet the Beard in Water, you will
presently see the small bended top to turn and move round, as if it were
sensible; and by degrees, if it be continued wet enough, the joint or knee will
streighten it self; and if it be suffered to dry again, it will by degrees move
round another way, and at length bend again into its former posture.

If it be viewed with an ordinary single Microscope, it will appear like a
small wreathed Sprig, with two clefts; and if wet as before, and then looked on
with this Microscope, it will appear to unwreath it self, and by degrees, to
streighten its knee, and the two clefts will become straight, and almost on
opposite sides of the small cylindrical body.

If it be continued to be looked a little longer with a Microscope, it will
within a little while begin to wreath it self again, and soon after return to
its former posture, bending it self again near the middle, into a kind of knee
or angle.

Several of those bodies I examined with larger Microscopes, and there found
them much of the make of those two long wreathed cylinders delineated in the
second Figure of the 15. Scheme, which two cylinders represent the wreathed
part broken into two pieces, whereof the end AB is to be supposed to have
joined to the end CD, so that EACF does represent the whole wreathed part of
the Beard, and EG a small piece of the upper part of the Beard which is beyond
the knee, which as I had not room to insert, so was it not very considerable,
either for its form, or any known property; but the under or wreathed part is
notable for both: As to its form, it appeared, if it were looked on side-ways,
almost like a Willow, or a small tapering rod of Hazel, the lower or bigger
half of which only, is twisted round several times, in some three, in others
more, in others less, according to the bigness and maturity of the Grain on
which it grew, and according to the dryness and moisture of the ambient Air, as
I shall show more at large by and by.

The whole outward Superficies of this Cylindrical body is curiously adorned or
fluted with little channels, and interjacent ridges, or little protuberances
between them, which run the whole length of the Beard, and are straight where
the Beard is not twisted, and wreathed where it is, just after the same manner:
each of those sides is beset pretty thick with small Brisles or Thorns,
somewhat in form resembling that of Porcupines Quills, such as aaaaa in the
Figure; all whose points are directed like so many Turn-pikes toward the small
end or top of the Beard, which is the reason, why, if you endeavor to draw the
Beard between your fingers the contrary way, you will find it to stick, and
grate, as it were, against the skin.

The proportion of these small conical bodies aaaaa to that whereon they grow,
the Figure will sufficiently show, as also their manner of growing, their
thickness, and neerness to each other, as, that toward the root or bottom of
the Beard, they are more thin, and much shorter, insomuch that there is usually
left between the top of the one, and the bottom of that next above it, more
then the length of one of them, and that toward the top of the Beard they grow
more thick and close (though there be fewer ridges) so that the root, and
almost half the upper are hid by the tops of those next below them.

I could not perceive any transverse pores, unless the whole wreathed part were
separated and cleft, in those little channels, by the wreathing into so many
little strings as there were ridges, which was very difficult to determine; but
there were in the wreathed part two very conspicuous channels or clefts, which
were continued from the bottom F to the elbow EH, or all along the part which
was wreathed, which seemed to divide the wreathed Cylinder into two parts, a
bigger and a less; the bigger was that which was at the unequal side of the
knee, namely, on the side A, and was wreathed by OOOOO; this, as it seemed the
broader, so did it also the longer, the other PPPPP, which was usually purs'd
or wrinckled in the bending of the knee, as about E, seemed both the shorter
and narrower, so that at first I thought the wreathing and unwreathing of the
Beard might have been caused by the shrinking or swelling of that part; but
upon further examination, I found that the clefts, KK, LL, were stuffed up with a
kind of Spongie substance, which, for the most part, was very conspicuous near
the knee, as in the cleft KK, when the Beard was dry; upon the discovery of
which, I began to think, that it was upon the swelling of this porous pith upon
the access of moisture or water that the Beard, being made longer in the midst,
was straightened, and by the shrinking or subsiding of the parts of that Spongie
substance together, when the water or moisture was exhaled or dried, the pith
or middle parts growing shorter, the whole became twisted.

But this I cannot be positive in, for upon cutting the wreathed part in many
places transversly, I was not so well satisfied with the shape and manner of
the pores of the pith; for looking on these transverse Sections with a very
good Microscope, I found that the ends of those transverse Sections appeared
much of the manner of the third Figure of the 15. Scheme ABCFE, and the middle
or pith CC, seemed very full of pores indeed, but all of them seemed to run the
long-ways.

This Figure plainly enough shows in what manner those clefts, K and L divided
the wreathed Cylinder into two unequal parts, and also of what kind of
substance the whole body consists; for by cutting the same Beard in many
places, with transverse Sections, I found much the same appearance with this
expressed; so that those pores seem to run, as in most other such Cany bodies,
the whole length of it.

The clefts of this body KK, and LL, seemed (as is also expressed in the
Figure) to wind very oddly in the inner part of the wreath; and in some parts
of them, they seemed stuffed, as it were, with that Spongie substance, which I
just now described.

This so oddly constituted Vegetable substance, is first (that I have met with)
taken notice of by Baptista Porta, in his Natural Magic, as a thing known to
children and Juglers, and it has been called by some of those last named
persons, the better to cover their cheat, the Leg of an Arabian Spider, or the
Leg of an enchanted Egyptian Fly, and has been used by them to make a small
Index, Cross, or the like, to move round upon the wetting of it with a drop of
Water, and muttering certain words.

But the use that has been made of it, for the discovery of the various
constitutions of the Air, as to dryness and moistness, is incomparably beyond
any other; for this it does to admiration: The manner of contriving it so, as
to perform this great effect, is only thus:

Provide a good large Box of Ivory, about four Inches over, and of what depth
you shall judge convenient (according to your intention of making use of one,
two, three, or more of these small Beards, ordered in the manner which I shall
by and by describe) let all the sides of this Box be turned of Basket-work
(which here in London is easily enough procured) full of holes, in the manner
almost of a Lettice, the bigger, or more the holes are, the better, that so the
Air may have the more free passage to the enclosed Beard, and may the more
easily pass through the Instrument; it will be better yet, though not
altogether so handsome, if instead of the Basket-work on the sides of the Box,
the bottom and top of the Box be joined together only with three or four small
Pillars, after the manner represented in the 4. Figure of the 15. Scheme. Or,
if you intend to make use of many of these small Beards joined together, you
may have a small long Case of Ivory, whose sides are turned of Basket-work,
full of holes, which may be screwed on to the underside of a broad Plate of
Ivory, on the other side of which is to be made the divided Ring or Circle, to
which divisions the pointing of the Hand or Index, which is moved by the
conjoined Beard, may show all the Minute variations of the Air.

There may be multitudes of other ways for contriving this small Instrument, so
as to produce this effect, which any one may, according to his peculiar use,
and the exigency of his present occasion, easily enough contrive and take, on
which I shall not therefore insist. The whole manner of making any one of them
is thus: Having your Box or frame AABB, fitly adapted for the free passage of
the Air through it, in the midst of the bottom BBB, you must have a very small
hole C, into which the lower end of the Beard is to be fi'xd, the upper end of
which Beard ab, is to pass through a small hole of a Plate, or top AA, if you
make use only of a single one, and on the top of it e, is to be fixed a small
and very light Index fg, made of a very thin sliver of a Reed or Cane; but if
you make use of two or more Beards, they must be fixed and bound together,
either with a very fine piece of Silk, or with a very small touch of hard Wax,
or Glue, which is better, and the Index fg, is to be fixed on the top of the
second, third, or fourth in the same manner as on the single one.

Now, because that in every of these contrivances, the Index fg, will with some
temperatures of Air, move two, three, or more times round, which without some
other contrivance then this, will be difficult to distinguish, therefore I
thought of this Expedient: The Index or Hand fg, being raised a pretty way
above the surface of the Plate AA, fix in at a little distance from the middle
of it a small Pin h, so as almost to touch the surface of the Plate AA, and
then in any convenient place of the surface of the Plate, fix a small Pin, on
which put on a small piece of Paper, or thin Past-board, Vellom, or Parchment,
made of a convenient cize, and shaped in the manner of that in the Figure
expressed by i k, so that having a convenient number of teeth every turn or
return of the Pin h, may move this small indented Circle, a tooth forward or
backwards, by which means the teeth of the Circle, being marked, it will be
thereby very easy to know certainly, how much variation any change of weather
will make upon the small wreathed body. In the making of this Secundary Circle
of Vellom, or the like, great care is to be had, that it be made exceeding
light, and to move very easily, for otherwise a small variation will spoil the
whole operation. The Box may be made of Brass, Silver, Iron, or any other
substance, if care be taken to make it open enough, to let the Air have a
sufficiently free access to the Beard. The Index also may be various ways
contrived, so as to show both the number of the revolutions it makes, and the
Minute divisions of each revolution.

I have made several trials and Instruments for discovering the dryness and
moisture of the Air with this little wreathed body, and find it to vary
exceeding sensibly with the least change in the constitution of the Air, as to
dryness and moisture, so that with one breathing upon it, I have made it
untwist a whole bout, and the Index or Hand has showed or pointed to various
divisions on the upper Face or Ring of the Instrument, according as it was
carried nearer and nearer to the fire, or as the heat of the Sun increased upon
it.

Other trials I have made with Gut-strings, but find them nothing near so
sensible, though they also may be so contrived as to exhibit the changes of the
Air, as to dryness and moisture, both by their stretching and shrinking in
length, and also by their wreathing and unwreathing themselves; but these are
nothing near so exact or so tender, for their varying property will in a little
time change very much. But there are several other Vegetable substances that
are much more sensible then even this Beard of a wild Oat; such I have found
the Beard of the seed of Musk-grass, or Geranium moschatum, and those of other
kinds of Cranesbil seeds, and the like. But always the smaller the wreathing
substance be, the more sensible is it of the mutations of the Air, a conjecture
at the reason of which I shall by and by add.

The lower end of this wreathed Cylinder being stuck upright in a little soft
Wax, so that the bended part or Index of it lay horizontal, I have observed it
always with moisture to unwreath it self from the East (For instance) by the
South to the West, and so by the North to the East again, moving with the Sun
(as we commonly say) and with heat and drouth to re-twist, and wreath it self
the contrary way, namely, from the East, (for instance) by the North to the
West, and so onwards.

The cause of all which Phenomenon, seems to be the differing texture of the
parts of these bodies, each of them (especially the Beard of a wild Oat, and
of Mosk-grass seed) seeming to have two kind of substances, one that is very
porous, loose, and spongie, into which the watery steams of the Air may be very
easily forced, which will be thereby swelled and extended in its dimensions,
just as we may observe all kind of Vegetable substance upon steeping in water
to swell and grow bigger and longer. And a second that is more hard and close,
into which the water can very little, or not at all penetrate, this therefore
retaining always very near the same dimensions, and the other stretching and
shrinking, according as there is more or less moisture or water in its pores,
by reason of the make and shape of the parts, the whole body must necessarily
unwreath and wreath it self.

And upon this Principle, it is very easy to make several sorts of
contrivances that should thus wreath and unwreath themselves, either by heat
and cold, or by dryness and moisture, or by any greater or less force, from
whatever cause it proceed, whether from gravity or weight, or from wind which
is motion of the Air, or from some springing body, or the like.

This, had I time, I should enlarge much more upon; for it seems to me to be
the very first footstep of Sensation, and Animate motion, the most plain,
simple, and obvious contrivance that Nature has made use of to produce a
motion, next to that of Rarefaction and Condensation by heat and cold. And were
this Principle very well examined, I am very apt to think, it would afford us a
very great help to find out the Mechanism of the Muscles, which indeed, as far
as I have hitherto been able to examine, seems to me not so very perplex as one
might imagine, especially upon the examination which I made of the Muscles of
Crabs, Lobsters, and several sorts of large Shellfish, and comparing my
Observations on them, with the circumstances I observed in the muscles of
terrestrial Animals.

Now, as in this Instance of the Beard of a wild Oat, we see there is nothing
else requisite to make it wreath and unwreath it self, and to streighten and
bend its knee, then only a little breath of moist or dry Air, or a small atome
almost of water or liquor, and a little heat to make it again evaporate; for,
by holding this Beard, placed and fixed as I before directed, near a Fire, and
dipping the tip of a small shred of Paper in well rectified spirit of Wine, and
then touching the wreathed Cylindrical part, you may perceive it to untwist it
self; and presently again, upon the avolation of the spirit, by the great heat,
it will re-twist it self, and thus will it move forward and backwards as often as
you repeat the touching it with the spirit of Wine; so may, perhaps, the
shrinking and relaxing of the muscles be by the influx and evaporation of some
kind of liquor or juice. But of this Enquiry I shall add more elsewhere.

Observe. XXVIII. Of the Seeds of Venus looking-glass, or Corn Violet.
FRom the Leaves, and Downs, and Beards of Plants, we come at last to the
Seeds; and here indeed seems to be the Cabinet of Nature, wherein are laid up
its Jewels. The providence of Nature about Vegetables, is in no part manifested
more, then in the various contrivances about the seed, nor indeed is there in
any part of the Vegetable so curious carvings, and beautiful adornments, as
about the seed; this in the larger sorts of seeds is most evident to the eye;
nor is it less manifest through the Microscope, in those seeds whose shape and
structure, by reason of their smalness, the eye is hardly able to distinguish.

Of these there are multitudes, many of which I have observed through a
Microscope, and find, that they do, for the most part, every one afford
exceeding pleasant and beautiful objects. For besides those that have various
kinds of carved surfaces, there are other that have smooth and perfectly
polished surfaces, others a downy hairy surface; some are covered only with a
skin, others with a kind of shell, others with both, as is observable also in
greater seeds.

Of these seeds I have only described four sorts which may serve as a Specimen
of what the inquisitive observers are likely to find among the rest. The first
of these seeds which are described in the 17. Scheme, are those of
Corn-Violets, the seed is very small, black, and shining, and, to the naked
eye, looks almost like a very small Flea; But through the Schem: XVII.
Schem. XVIII.
Microscope, it appears a large body, covered with a tough thick and bright
reflecting skin very irregularly shrunk and pitted, insomuch that it is almost
an impossibility to find two of them wrinkled alike, so great a variety may
there be even in this little seed.

This, though it appeared one of the most promising seeds for beauty to the
naked eye, yet through the Microscope it appeared but a rude misshapen seed,
which I therefore drew, that I might thereby manifest how unable we are by the
naked eye to judge of beauteous or less curious microscopical Objects; cutting
some of them in sunder, I observed them to be filled with a greenish yellow
pulp, and to have a very thick husk, in proportion to the pulp.

Observe. XXIX. Of the seeds of Time.
THese pretty fruits here represented, in the 18. Scheme, are nothing else, but
nine several seeds of Time; they are all of them in differing posture, both as
to the eye and the light; nor are they all of them exactly of the same shape,
there being a great variety both in the bulk and figure of each seed; but they
all agreed in this, that being looked on with a Microscope, they each of them
exactly resembled a Lemmon or Orange dried; and this both in shape and color.
Some of them are a little rounder, of the shape of an Orange, as A and B, they
have each of them a very conspicuous part by which they were joined to their
little stalk, and one of them had a little piece of stalk remaining on; the
opposite side of the seed, you may perceive very plainly by the Figure, is very
copped and prominent, as is very usual in Lemmons, which prominencies are
expressed in D, E and F.

They seemed each of them a little creas'd or wrinckled, but E was very
conspicuously furrowed, as if the inward make of this seed had been somewhat
like that of a Lemmon also, but upon dividing several seeds with a very sharp
Penknife, and examining them afterward, I found their make to be in nothing
but bulk differing from that of Peace, that is, to have a pretty thick coat, and
all the rest an indifferent white pulp, which seemed very close; so that it
seems Nature does not very much alter her method in the manner of enclosing and
preserving the vital Principle in the seed, in these very small grains, from
that of Beans, Peace, etc.

The Grain affords a very pretty Object for the Microscope, namely, a Dish of
Lemmons placed in a very little room; should a Lemmon or Nut be proportionably
magnified to what this seed of Time is, it would make it appear as bigg as a
large Hay-teek, and it would be no great wonder to see Homers Iliads, and Homer
and all, crammed into such a Nut-shell. We may perceive even in these small
Grains, as well as in greater, how curious and careful Nature is in preserving
the seminal principle of Vegetable bodies, in what delicate, strong and most
convenient Cabinets she lays them and closes them in a pulp for their safer
protection from outward dangers, and for the supply of convenient alimental
juice, when the heat of the Sun begins to animate and move these little
automan^^s or Engines; as if she would, from the ornaments wherewith she as
decked these Cabinets, hint to us, that in them she has laid up her Jewels and
Masterpieces. And this, if we are but diligent in observing, we shall find her
method throughout. There is no curiosity in the Elemental kingdom, if I may so
call the bodies of Air, Water, Earth, that are comparable in form to those of
Minerals; Air and Water having no form at all, unless a potentiality to be
formed into Globules; and the clods and parcels of Earth are all irregular,
whereas in Minerals she does begin to Geometrize, and practice, as 'twere, the
first principles of Mechanics, shaping them of plain regular figures, as
triangles, squares, etc. and tetraedrons, cubes, etc. But none of their forms
are comparable to the more compounded ones of Vegetables; For here she goes a
step further, forming them both of more complicated shapes, and adding also
multitudes of curious Mechanic contrivances in their structure; for whereas in
Vegetables there was no determinate number of the leaves or branches, nor no
exactly certain figure of leaves, or flowers, or seeds, in Animals all those
things are exactly defined and determined; and wherever there is either an
excess or defect of those determinate parts or limbs, there has been some
impediment that has spoiled the principle which was most regular: Here we shall
find, not only most curiously compounded shapes, but most stupendous
Mechanisms and contrivances, here the ornaments are in the highest perfection,
nothing in all the Vegetable kingdom that is comparable to the deckings of a
Peacock; nay, to the curiosity of any feather, as I elsewhere show; nor to that
of the smallest and most despicable Fly. But I must not stay on these
speculations, though perhaps it were very well worth while for one that had
leisure, to see what Information may be learned of the nature, or use, or
virtues of bodies, by their several forms and various excellencies and
properties. Who knows but Adam might from some such contemplation, give names
to all creatures? If at least his names had any significancy in them of the
creature's nature on which he imposed it; as many (upon what grounds I know
not) have supposed: And who knows, but the Creator may, in those characters,
have written and engraven many of his most mysterious designs and counsels, and
given man a capacity, which, assisted with diligence and industry, may be able
to read and understand them. But not to multiply my digression more then I can
the time, I will proceed to the next, which is,

Observe. XXX. Of the Seeds of Poppy.
THe small seeds of Poppy, which are described in the 19. Scheme, both for
their smalness, multiplicity and prettiness, as also for their admirable
soporifick quality, deserve to be taken notice of among the Schem: XIX.
Schem: XX.
other microscopical seeds of Vegetables: For first, though they grow in a Case
or Hive oftentimes bigger then one of these Pictures of the microscopical
appearance, yet are they for the most part so very little, that they exceed not
the bulk of a small Nitt, being not above ^/32 part of an Inch in Diameter,
whereas the Diameter of the Hive of them oftentimes exceeds two Inches, so that
it is capable of containing near two hundred thousand, and so in all likelihood
does contain a vast quantity, though perhaps not that number. Next, for their
prettiness, they may be compared to any microscopical seed I have yet seen; for
they are of a dark brownish red color, curiously Honey combed all over with a
very pretty variety of Network, or a small kind of imbosment of very orderly
raised ridges, the surface of them looking not unlike the inside of a Beev's
stomach. But that which makes it most considerable of all, is, the medicinal
virtues of it, which are such as are not afforded us by any Mineral
preparation; and that is for the procuring of sleep, a thing as necessary to
the well-being of a creature as his meat, and that which refreshes both the
voluntary and rational faculties, which, whilst this affection has seized the
body, are for the most part unmoved, and at rest. And, methinks, Nature does
seem to hint some very notable virtue or excellency in this Plant from the
curiosity it has bestowed upon it. First, in its flower, it is of the highest
scarlet-Dye, which is indeed the prime and chiefest color, and has been in all
Ages of the world most highly esteemed: Next, it has as much curiosity showed
also in the husk or case of the seed, as any one Plant I have yet met withal;
and thirdly, the very seeds themselves, the Microscope discovers to be very
curiously shaped bodies; and lastly, Nature has taken such abundant care for
the propagation of it, that one single seed grown into a Plant, is capable of
bringing some hundred thousands of seeds.

It were very worthy some able man's enquiry whether the intention of Nature,
as to the secundary end of Animal and Vegetable substances might not be found
out by some such characters and notable impressions as these, or from diverse
other circumstances, as the figure, color, place, time of flourishing,
springing and fading, duration, taste, smell, etc. For if such there are (as an
able Physician upon good grounds has given me cause to believe) we might then,
instead of studying Herbals (where so little is delivered of the virtues of a
Plant, and less of truth) have recourse to the Book of Nature it self, and
there find the most natural, useful, and most effectual and specific
Medicines, of which we have amongst Vegetables, two very noble Instances to
encourage such a hope, the one of the Jesuit powder for the cure of
intermitting Fea^^^s, and the other of the juice of Poppy for the curing the
defect of sleeping.

Observe. XXXI. Of Purslane-seed.
THe Seeds of Purslane seem of very notable shapes, appearing through the
Microscope shaped somewhat like a nautilus or Porcelane shell, as may be seen
in the XX. Scheme, it being a small body, coyl'd round in the manner of a
Spiral; at the greater end whereof, which represents the mouth or orifice of
the Shell, there is left a little white transparent substance, like a skin,
represented by BBBB, which seems to have been the place whereunto the stem was
joined. The whole surface of this Coclea or Shell, is covered over with
abundance of little prominencies or buttons very orderly ranged into Spiral
rows, the shape of each of which seemed much to resemble a Wart upon a man's
hand. The order, variety, and curiosity in the shape of this little seed, makes
it a very pleasant object for the Microscope, one of them being cut asunder
with a very sharp Penknife, discovered this carved Casket to be of a brownish
red, and somewhat transparent substance, and manifested the inside to be filled
with a whitish green substance or pulp, the Bed wherein the seminal principle
lies invelop'd.

There are multitudes of other seeds which in shape represent or imitate the
forms of diverse other sorts of Shells: as the seed of Scurvygrass, very much
resembles the make of a Concha Venerea, a kind of Purcelane Shell; others
represent several sorts of larger fruits, sweat Marjerome and Pot-marjerome
represent Olives. Carret seeds are like a cleft of a Coco-Nut Husk; others are
like Artificial things, as Succory seeds are like a Quiver full of Arrows, the
seeds of Amaranthus are of an exceeding lovely shape, somewhat like an Eye: The
skin of the black and shrivled seeds of Onyons and Leeks, are all over knobbed
like a Seals skin. Sorrel has a pretty black shining three-square seed, which
is picked at both ends with three ridges, that are bent the whole length of it.
It were almost endless to reckon up the several shapes, they are so many and so
various; Leaving them therefore to the curious observer, I shall proceed to the
Observations on the parts of Animals.

Observe. XXXII. Of the Figure of several sorts of Hair, and of the texture of
the skin.
VIewing some of the Hairs of my Head with a very good Microscope, I took
notice of these particulars: 1. That they were, for the most part, Cylindrical,
some of them were somewhat Prismatical, but generally they were very near
round, such as are represented in the second Figure of the 5. Schems, by the
Cylinders EEE. nor could I find any that had sharp angules. 2. That that part
which was next the top, was bigger then that which was nearer the root. 3. That
they were all along from end to end transparent, though not very clear, the end
next the root appearing like a black transparent piece of Horn, the end next
the top more brown, somewhat like transparent Horn. 4. That the root of the
Hairs were pretty smooth, tapering inwards, almost like a Parsneb; nor could I
find that it had any filaments, or any other vessels, such as the fibers of
Plants. 5. That the top when split (which is common in long Hair) appeared like
the end of a stick, beaten till it be all flitter'd, there being not only two
splinters, but sometimes half a score and more. 6. That they were all, as far
as I was able to find, solid Cylindrical bodies, not pervious, like a Cane or
Bulrush; nor could I find that they had any Pith, or distinction of Rind, or
the like, such as I had observed in Horse-hairs, the Bristles of a Cat, the
Indian Deer's Hair, etc.


Observations on several other sorts of Hair.
For the Brisles of a Hogg, I found them to be first a hard transparent horny
substance, without the least appearance of pores or holes in it; and this I
tried with the greatest care I was able, cutting many of them with a very sharp
Razor, so that they appeared, even in the Glass, to have a pretty smooth
surface, but somewhat waved by the sawing to and fro of the Razor, as is
visible in the end of the Prismatical body A of the same Figure; and then
making trials with causing the light to be cast on them all the various ways I
could think of, that was likely to make the pores appear, if there had been
any, I was not able to discover any.

Next, the Figure of the Brisles was very various, neither perfectly round, nor
sharp edged, but Prismatical, with diverse sides, and round angles, as appears
in the Figure A. The bending of them in any part where they before appeared
clear, would all flaw them, and make them look white.

The Mustacheos of a Cat (part of one of which is represented by the short
Cylinder B of the same Figure) seemed to have, all of them that I observed, a
large pith in the middle, like the pith of an Elder, whose texture was so
close, that I was not able to discover the least sign of pores; and those parts
which seem to be pores, as they appeared in one position to the light, in
another I could find a manifest reflection to be cast from them.

This I instance in, to hint that it is not safe to conclude any thing to be
positively this or that, though it appear never so plain and likely when looked
on with a Microscope in one posture, before the same be examined by placing it
in several other positions.

And this I take to be the reason why many have believed and asserted the Hairs
of a man's head to be hollow, and like so many small pipes perforated from end
to end.

Now, though I grant that by an Analogy one may suppose them so, and from the
Polonian disease one may believe them such, yet I think we have not the least
encouragement to either from the Microscope, much less positively to assert
them such. And perhaps the very essence of the Plicae Polonica may be the hairs
growing hollow, and of an unnatural constitution.

And as for the Analogy, though I am apt enough to think that the hairs of
several Animals may be perforated somewhat like a Cane, or at least have a kind
of pith in them, first, because they seem as 'twere a kind of Vegetable growing
on an Animal, which growing, they say, remains a long while after the Animal is
dead, and therefore should like other Vegetables have a pith; and secondly,
because Horns and Feathers, and Porcupine's Quils, and Cats Brisles, and the
long hairs of Horses, which come very near the nature of a man's hair, seem all
of them to have a kind of pith, and some of them to be porous, yet I think it
not (in these cases, where we have such helps for the sense as the Microscope
affords) safe concluding or building on more then we sensibly know, since we
may, with examining, find that Nature does in the make of the same kind of
substance, often vary her method in framing of it: Instances enough to confirm
this we may find in the Horns of several creatures: as what a vast difference
is there between the Horns of an Ox, and those of some sorts of Staggs as to
their shape? and even in the hairs of several creatures, we find a vast
difference; as the hair of a man's head seems, as I said before, long,
Cylindrical and sometime a little Prismatical, solid or impervious, and very
small; the hair of an Indian Deer (a part of the middle of which is described
in the third Figure of the fifth Scheme, marked with F) is bigger in compass
through all the middle of it, then the Brisle of an Hogg, but the end of it is
smaller then the hair of any kind of Animal (as may be seen by the Figure G)
the whole belly of it, which is about two or three Inches long, looks to the
eye like a thread of course Canvass, that has been newly unwreath'd, it being
all waved or bended to and fro, much after that manner, but through the
Microscope, it appears all perforated from side to side, and Spongie, like a
small kind of spongy Coral, which is often found upon the English shores; but
though I cut it transversly, I could not perceive that it had any pores that
ran the long-way of the hair: the long hairs of Horses CC and D, seem
Cylindrical and somewhat pithy; the Brisles of a Cat B, are conical and pithy:
the Quils of Porcupines and Hedghoggs, being cut transversly, have a whitish
pith, in the manner of a Starr, or Spur-rowel: Piggs-hair (A) is somewhat
triagonal, and seems to have neither pith nor pore: And other kinds of hair
have quite a differing structure and form. And therefore I think it no way
agreeable to a true natural Historian, to pretend to be so sharp-sighted, as to
see what a pre-conceiv'd Hyphothesis tells them should be there, where another
man, though perhaps as seeing, but not forestalled, can discover no such matter.

But to proceed; I observed several kind of hairs that had been Dyed, and found
them to be a kind of horny Cylinder, being of much about the transparency of a
pretty clear piece of Ox horn; these appeared quite throughout tinged with the
colors they exhibited. And it is likely, that those hairs being boiled or
steeped in those very hot tinged liquors in the Dye-fat, And the substance of
the hair being much like that of an Oxes Horn, the penetrant liquor does so far
mollify and soften the substance, that it sinks into the very center of it,
and so the tinged parts come to be mixed and united with the very body of the
hair, and do not (as some have thought) only stick on upon the outward surface.
And this, the boiling of Horn will make more probable; for we shall find by
that action, that the water will insinuate it self to a pretty depth within the
surface of it, especially if this penetrancy of the water be much helped by the
Salts that are usually mixed with the Dying liquors. Now, whereas Silk may be
dyed or tinged into all kind of colors without boiling or dipping into hot
liquors, I ghess the reason to be twofold: First, because the filaments, or
small cylinders of Silk, are abundantly smaller and finer, and so have a much
less depth to be penetrated then most kind of hairs; and next, because the
substance or matter of Silk, is much more like a Glue then the substance of
Hair is. And that I have reason to suppose: First, because when it is spun or
drawn out of the Worm, it is a perfect glutinous substance, and very easily
sticks and cleaves to any adjacent body, as I have several times observed, both
in Silkworms and Spiders. Next, because that I find that water does easily
dissolve and mollify the substance again, which is evident from their manner
of ordering those bottoms or pods of Silkworm before they are able to unwind
them. It is no great wonder therefore, if those Dies or tinged liquors do very
quickly mollify and tinge the surfaces of so small and so glutinous a body.
And we need not wonder that the colors appear so lovely in the one, and so
dull in the other, if we view but the tinged cylinders of both kinds with a
good Microscope; for whereas the substance of Hair at best, is but a dirty
duskish white somewhat transparent, the filaments of Silk have a most lovely
transparency and cleerness, the difference between those two being not much
less then that between a piece of Horn, and a piece of Crystal; the one
yielding a bright and vivid reflection from the concave side of the cylinder,
that is, from the concave surface of the Air that incompasses the back-part of
the cylinder; the other yielding a dull and perturb'd reflection from the
several Heterogeneous parts that compose it. And this difference will be
manifest enough to the eye, if you get a couple of small Cylinders, the smaller
of Crystal Glass, the other of Horn, and then varnishing them over very thinly
with some transparent color, which will represent to the naked eye much the
same kind of object which is represented to it from the filaments of Silk and
Hair by the help of the Microscope. Now, since the threads of Silk and Serge
are made up of a great number of these filaments, we may henceforth cease to
wonder at the difference. From much the same reason proceeds the vivid and
lovely colors of Feathers, wherein they very far exceed the natural as well
as Artificial colors of hair, of which I shall say more in its proper place.

The Teguments indeed of creatures are all of them adapted to the peculiar use
and convenience of that Animal which they inwrap; and very much also for the
ornament and beauty of it, as will be most evident to any one that shall
attentively consider the various kinds of cloathings wherewith most creatures
are by Nature invested and covered. Thus I have observed, that the hair or furr
of those Northern white Bears that inhabit the colder Regions, is exeeeding
thick and warm: the like have I observed of the hair of a Greenland Deer, which
being brought alive to London, I had the opportunity of viewing; its hair was
so exceeding thick, long and soft, that I could hardly with my hand, grasp or
take hold of his skin, and it seemed so exceeding warm, as I had never met with
any before. And as for the ornamentative use of them, it is most evident in a
multitude of creatures, not only for color, as the Leopards, Cats, Rhein
Deer, etc. but for the shape, as in Horses manes, Cats beards, and several
other of the greater sort of terrestrial Animals, but is much more conspicuous,
in the Vestments of Fishes, Birds, Insects, of which I shall by and by give
some Instances.

As for the skin, the Microscope discovers as great a difference between the
texture of those several kinds of Animals, as it does between their hairs; but
all that I have yet taken notice of, when tanned or dressed, are of a Spongie
nature, and seem to be constituted of an infinite company of small long fibers
or hairs, which look not unlike a heap of Tow or Okum; every of which fibers
seem to have been some part of a Muscle, and probably, whilst the Animal was
alive, might have its distinct function, and serve for the contraction and
relaxation of the skin, and for the stretching and shrinking of it this or that
way.

And indeed, without such a kind of texture as this, which is very like that of
Spunk, it would seem very strange, how any body so strong as the skin of an
Animal usually is, and so close as it seems, whilst the Animal is living,
should be able to suffer so great an extension any ways, without at all hurting
or dilacerating any part of it. But, since we are informed by the Microscope,
that it consists of a great many small filaments, which are implicated, or
entangled one within another, almost no otherwise then the hairs in a lock of
Wool, or the flakes in a heap of Tow, though not altogether so loose; but the
filaments are here and there twisted, as twere, or interwoven, and here and
there they join and unite with one another, so as indeed the whole skin seems
to be but one piece, we need not much wonder: And though these fibers appear
not through a Microscope, exactly jointed and contex'd, as in Sponge; yet, as I
formerly hinted, I am apt to think, that could we find some way of discovering
the texture of it, whilst it invests the living Animal, or had some very easy
way of separating the pulp or intercurrent juices, such as in all probability
fill those Interstitia, without dilacerating, brusing, or otherwise spoiling
the texture of it (as it seems to be very much by the ways of tanning and
dressing now used) we might discover a much more curious texture then I have
hitherto been able to find; perhaps, somewhat like that of Sponges.

That of Chamoise Leather is indeed very much like that of Spunk, save only
that the filaments seem nothing near so even and round, nor altogether so
small, nor has it so curious joints as Spunk has, some of which I have lately
discovered like those of a Sponge, and perhaps all these three bodies may be of
the same kind of substance, though two of them indeed are commonly accounted
Vegetable (which, whether they be so or no, I shall not now dispute) But this
seems common to all three, that they undergo a tanning or dressing, whereby the
interspersed juices are wasted and washed away before the texture of them can
be discovered.

What their way is of dressing, or curing Sponges, I confess, I cannot learn;
but the way of dressing Spunk, is, by boiling it a good while in a strong
Lixivium, and then beating it very well; and the manner of dressing Leather is
sufficiently known.

It were indeed extremely desirable, if such a way could be found whereby the
Parenchyma or flesh of the Muscles, and several other parts of the bod,y might
be washed, or wasted clean away, without vitiating the form of the fibrous
parts or vessels of it, for hereby the texture of those parts, by the help of
a good Microscope, might be most accurately found.

But to digress no further, we may, from this discovery of the Microscope,
plainly enough understand how the skin, though it looks so close as it does,
comes to give a passage to so vast a quantity of excrementitious substances, as
the diligent Sanctorius has excellently observed it to do, in his medicina
statica; for it seems very probable, from the texture after dressing, that
there are an infinite of pores that every way pierce it, and that those pores
are only filled with some kind of juice, or some very pulpy soft substance,
and thereby the steams may almost as easily find a passage through such a fluid
vehicle as the vaporous bubbles which are generated at the bottom of a Kettle
of hot water do find a passage through that fluid medium into the ambient Air.

Nor is the skin of animals only thus pervious, but even those of vegetables
also seem to be the same; for otherwise I cannot conceive why, if two sprigs of
Rosemary (for Instance) be taken as exactly alike in all particulars as can be,
and the one be set with the bottom in a Glass of water, and the other be set
just without the Glass, but in the Air only, though you stop the lower end of
that in the Air very carefully with Wax, yet shall it presently almost wither,
whereas the other that seems to have a supply from the subjacent water by its
small pipes, or microscopical pores, preserves its greenness for many days, and
sometimes weeks.

Now, this to me, seems not likely to proceed from any other cause then the
avolation of the juice through the skin; for by the Wax, all those other pores
of the stem are very firmly and closely stopped up. And from the more or less
porousness of the skins or rinds of Vegetables may, perhaps, be somewhat of the
reason given, why they keep longer green, or sooner wither; for we may observe
by the bladdering and craking of the leaves of Bays, Holly, Laurel, etc. that
their skins are very close, and do not suffer so free a passage through them of
the included juices.

But of this, and of the Experiment of the Rosemary, I shall elsewhere more
fully consider, it seeming to me an extreme luciferous Experiment, such as
seems indeed very plainly to prove the Schematism or structure of Vegetables
altogether mechanical, and as necessary, that (water and warmth being applied
to the bottom of the sprig of a Plant) some of it should be carried upwards
into the stem, and thence distributed into the leaves, as that the water of the
Thames covering the bottom of the Mills at the Bridge foot of London, and by
the ebbing and flowing of it, passsing strongly by them, should have some part
of it conveyed to the Cesterns above, and thence into several houses and
Cesterns up and down the City.

Observe. XXXIII. Of the Scales of a Soal, and other Fishes.
HAving hinted somewhat of the skin and covering of terrestrial Animals, I
shall next add an Observation I made on the skin and Scales of a Soal, a small
Fish, commonly enough known; and here in Fishes, as well as other Animals,
Nature follows its usual method, framing all parts so, as that they are both
useful and ornamental in all its composures, mingling utile and dulce
together; and both these designs it seems to follow, though our unassisted
senses are not able to peceive them: This is not only manifest in the covering
of this Fish only, but in multitudes of others, which it would be too long to
enumerate, witness particularly that small Sand Shell, which I mentioned in the
XI. Observation, and infinite other small Shells and Scales, diverse of which I
have viewed. This skin I viewed, was flead from a pretty large Soal, and then
expanded and dried, the inside of it, when dry, to the naked eye, looked very
like a piece of Canvass, but the Microscope discovered that texture to be
nothing else, but the inner ends of those curious Scolop'd Scales I, I, I, in
the second Figure of the XXI. Scheme, namely, the part of GGGG (of the larger
representation of a single Scale, in the first Figure of the same Scheme) which
on the back side, through an ordinary single Magnifying Glass, looked not
unlike the Tyles on an house.

The outside of it, to the naked eye, exhibited nothing more of ornament, save
the usual order of ranging the Scales into a triagonal form, only the edges
seemed a little to shine, the finger being rubbed from the tail-wards toward
the head, the Scales seemed to stay and raze it; But through an ordinary
Magnifying glass, it exhibited a most curiously carved and adorned surface,
such as is visible in the second Figure, each of those (formerly almost
imperceptible) Scales appearing much of the shape I, I, I, that is, they were
round, and protuberant, and somewhat shaped like a Scolop, the whole Scale
being creas'd with curiously waved and indented ridges, with proportionable
furrows between; each of which was terminated with a very sharp transparent
bony substance, which, like so many small Turnpikes, seemed to arm the edges.

The back part KKK was the skin into which each of these Scales were very
deeply fixed, in the curious regular order, visible in the second Schem. XXI
Schem: XVI
Figure. The length and shape of the part of the Scale which was buried by the
skin, is evidenced by the first Figure; which is the representation of one of
them plucked out and viewed through a good Microscope, namely, the part LFGGFL,
wherein is also more plainly to be seen, the manner of carving of the scolopt
part of every particular Scale, how each ridge or bar EEE is alternately
hollowed or engraven, and how every gutter between them is terminated with very
transparent and hard pointed spikes, and how every other of these, as AAAA, are
much longer then the interjacent ones, DDD.

The texture or form also of the hidden part appears, namely, the middle part,
GGG, seems to consist of a great number of small quills or pipes, by which,
perhaps, the whole may be nourished; and the side parts FF consist of a more
fibrous texture, though indeed the whole Scale seemed to be of a very tough
grisly substance, like the larger Scales of other Fishes.

The Scales of the skin of a Dog-fish (which is used by such as work in Wood,
for the smoothing of their work, and consists plainly enough to the naked eye,
of a great number of small horny points) through the Microscope appeared each
of them curiously ridg'd, and very neatly carved; and indeed, you can hardly
look on the scales of any Fish, but you may discover abundance of curiosity and
beautifying; and not only in these Fishes, but in the shells and crusts or
armor of most sorts of Marine Animals so invested.

Observe. XXXIV. Of the Sting of a Be.
THe Sting of a Be, delineated in the second Figure of the XVI. Scheme, seems
to be a weapon of offense, and is as great an Instance, that Nature did realy
intend revenge as any, and that first, because there seems to be no other use
of it. Secondly, by reason of its admirable shape, seeming to be purposely
shaped for that very end. Thirdly, from the virulency of the liquor it ejects,
and the sad effects and symptoms that follow it.

But whatever be the use of it, certain it is, that the structure of it is very
admirable; what it appears to the naked eye, I need not describe, the thing
being known almost to every one, but it appears through the Microscope, to
consist of two parts, the one a sheath, without a chape or top, shaped almost
like the Holster of a Pistol, beginning at d, and ending at b, this sheath I
could most plainly perceive to be hollow, and to contain in it, both a Sword or
Dart, and the poisonous liqnor that causes the pain. The sheath or case seemed
to have several joints or settings together, marked by fghiklmno, it was armed
moreover near the top, with several crooks or forks ( pqrst) on one side, and (
pqrstu) on the other, each of which seemed like so many Thorns growing on a
briar, or rather like so many Cat's Claws; for the crooks themselves seemed to
be little sharp transparent points or claws, growing out of little
protuberancies on the side of the sheath, which, by observing the Figure
diligently, is easy enough to be perceived; and from several particulars, I
suppose the Animal has a power of displaying them, and shutting them in again
as it pleases, as a Cat does its claws, or as an Adder or Viper can its teeth
or fangs.

The other part of the Sting was the Sword, as ^ may so call it, which is
sheathed, as it were, in it, the top of which a b appears quite through at the
smaller end, just as if the chape of the sheath of a Sword were lost, and the
end of it appeared beyond the Scabbard; the end of this Dart( a) was very
sharp, and it was armed likewise with the like Tenterhooks or claws with those
of the sheath, such as ( v x y, x y z z) these crooks, I am very apt to think,
can be closed up also, or laid flat to the sides of the Sword when it is drawn
into the Scabbard, as I have several times observed it to be, and can be spread
again or extended when ever the Animal pleases.

The consideration of which very pretty structure, has hinted to me, that
certainly the use of these claws seems to be very considerable, as to the main
end of this Instrument, for the drawing in, and holding the sting in the flesh;
for the point being very sharp, the top of the Sting or Dagger ( a b) is very
easily thrust into an Animal's body, which being once entered, the Be, by
endeavoring to pull it into the sheath, draws (by reason of the crooks ( v x
y) and ( x y z z) which lay hold of the skin on either side) the top of the
sheath ( t s r v) into the skin after it, and the crooks t, s, and r, v, being
entered, when the Be endeavors to thrust out the top of the sting out of the
sheath again, they lay hold of the skin on either side, and so not only keep
the sheath from sliding back, but helps the top inwards, and thus, by an
alternate and successive retracting and emitting of the Sting in and out of the
sheath, the little enraged creature by degrees makes his revengfull weapon
pierce the toughest and thickest Hides of his enemies, in so much that some few
of these stout and resolute soldiers with these little engines, do often put to
flight a huge masty Bear, one of their deadly enemies, and thereby show the
world how much more considerable in War a few skillful Engineers and resolute
soldiers politickly ordered, that know how to manage such engines, are, then a
vast unweildy rude force, that confides in, and acts only by, its strength.
But (to proceed) that he thus gets in his Sting into the skin, I conjecture,
because, when I have observed this creature living, I have found it to move the
Sting thus, to and fro, and thereby also, perhaps, does, as 'twere, pump or
force out the poisonous liquor, and make it hang at the end of the sheath about
b in a drop. The crooks, I suppose also to be the cause why these angry
creatures, hastily removing themselves from their revenge, do often leave these
weapons behind them, sheathed, as 'twere, in the flesh, and, by that means,
cause the painful symptoms to be greater, and more lasting, which are very
probably caused, partly by the piercing and tearing of the skin by the Sting,
but chiefly by the corrosive and poisonous liquor that is by this Syringe-pipe
conveyed among the sensitive parts thereof and thereby more easily gnaws and
corrodes those tender fibers: As I have showed in the description of a Nettle
and of Cowhage.

Observe. XXXV. Of the contexture and shape of the particles of Feathers.
EXamining several sorts of Feathers, I took notice of these particulars in all
sorts of wing-Feathers, especially in those which served for the beating of the
air in the action of flying.

That the outward surface of the Quill and Stem was of a very hard stiff, and
horny substance, which is obvious enough, and that the part above the Quill was
fill^d with a very white and light pith, and, with the Microscope, I found this
pith to be nothing else, but a kind of natural congeries of small bubbles, the
films of which seem to be of the same substance with that of the Quill, that
is, of a stiff transparent horny substance.

Which particular seems to me, very worthy a more serious consideration; For
here we may observe Nature, as 'twere, put to its shifts, to make a substance,
which shall be both light enough, and very stiff and strong, without varying
from its own established principles, which we may observe to be such, that very
strong bodies are for the most part very heavy also, a strength of the parts
usually requiring a density, and a density a gravity; and therefore should
Nature have made a body so broad and so strong as a Feather, almost, any other
way then what it has taken, the gravity of it must necessarily have many times
exceeded this, for this pith seems to be like so many stops or cross pieces in
a long optical tube, which do very much contribute to the strength of the
whole, the pores of which were such, as that they seemed not to have any
communication with one another, as I have elsewhere hinted.

But the Mechanism of Nature is usually so excellent, that one and the same
substance is adapted to serve for many ends. For the chief use of this, indeed,
seems to be for the supply of nourishment to the downy or feathery part of the
stem; for it is obvious enough in all sorts of Feathers, that it is placed just
under the roots of the branches that grow out of either side of the quill or
stalk, and is exactly shaped according to the ranking of those branches, coming
no lower into the quill, then just the beginning of the downy branches, and
growing only on the under side of of the quill where those branches do so.
Now, in a ripe Feather (as one may call it) it seems difficult to conceive how
the Succus nutritious should be conveyed to this pith; for it cannot, I think,
be well imagined to pass through the substance of the quill, since, having
examined it with the greatest diligence I was able, I could not find the least
appearance of pores; but he that shall well examine an unripe or pinned
Feather, will plainly enough perceive the Vessel for the conveyance of it to be
the thin filmy pith (as it is called) which passes through the middle of the
quill.

As for the make and contexture of the Down it self, it is indeed very rare and
admirable, and such as I can hardly believe, that the like is to be discovered
in any other body in the world; for there is hardly a large Feather in the wing
of a Bird, but contains near a million of distinct parts, and every one of them
shaped in a most regular and admirable form, adapted to a particular Design:
For examining a middle ciz'd Goose-quill, I easily enough found with my naked
eye, that the main stem of it contained about 300. longer and more Downy
branchings upon one side, and as many on the other of more stiff but somewhat
shorter branchings. Many of these long and downy branchings, examining with an
ordinary Microscope, I found diverse of them to contain near 1200. small leaves
(as I may call them, such as OF of the first Figure of the 23. Scheme) and as
many stalks; on the other side, such as IK. of the same Figure, each of the
leaves or branchings, OF, seemed to be divided into about sixteen or eighteen
small joints, as may be seen plainly enough in the Figure, out of most of which
there seem to grow small long fibers, such as are expressed in the Figure, each
of them very proportionably shaped according to its position, or placed on the
stalk OF; those on the under side of it, namely, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
etc. being much longer then those directly opposite to them on the upper; and
diverse of them, such as 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, etc. were terminated with small
crooks, much resembling those small crooks, which are visible enough to the
naked eye, in the seed-buttons of But-docks. The stalks likewise, IK on the
other side, seemed divided into near as many small knotted joints, but without
any appearance of strings or crooks, each of them about the middle K, seemed
divided into two parts by a kind of fork, one side of which, namely, KL, was
extended near the length of KI, the other, M, was very short.

The transverse Sections of the stems of these branchings, manifested the shape
or figure of it to be much like INOE, which consisted of a horny skin or
covering, and a white seemingly frothy pith, much like the make of the main
stem of a Feather.

The use of this strange kind of form, is indeed more admirable then all the
rest, and such as deserves to be much more seriously examined and considered,
then I have hitherto found time or ability to do; for certainly, it may very
much instruct us in the nature of the Air, especially as to some properties of
it.

The stems of the Downy branches INOE, being ranged in the order visible enough
to the naked eye, at the distance of IF, or somewhat more, the collateral
stalks and leaves (if I may so call those bodies I newly described) are so
ranged, that the leaves or hairy stalks of the one side lie at top, or are
incumbent on the stalks of the other, and cross each other, much after the
manner expressed in the second Figure of the 23. Scheme, by which means every
of those little hooked fibers of the leaved stalk get between the naked stalks,
and the stalks being full of knots, and a pretty way dis-join'd so as that the
fibers can easily get between them, the two parts are so closely and admirably
woven together, that it is able to impede, for the greatest part, the
transcursion of the Air; and though they are so exceeding small, as that the
thickness of one of Schem: XXI^
these stalks amounts not to a 500. part of an Inch, yet do they compose so
strong a texture, as, notwithstanding the exceeding quick and violent beating
of them against the Air, by the strength of the Birds wing, they firmly hold
together. And it argues an admirable providence of Nature in the contrivance
and fabric of them; for their texture is such, that though by any external
injury the parts of them are violently dis-joyn'd; so as that the leaves and
stalks touch not one another, and consequently several of these rents would
impede the Bird's flying; yet, for the most part, of themselves they readily
re-join and re-contex themselves, and are easily by the Birds stroking the
Feather, or drawing it through its Bill, all of them settled and woven into
their former and natural posture; for there are such an infinite company of
those small fibers in the under side of the leaves, and most of them have such
little crooks at their ends, that they readily catch and hold the stalks they
touch.

From which strange contexture, it seems rational to suppose that there is a
certain kind of mesh or hole so small, that the Air will not very easily pass
through it, as I hinted also in the sixth Observation about small Glass Canes,
for otherwise it seems probable, that Nature would have drawn over some kind of
thin film which should have covered all those almost square meshes or holes,
there seeming through the Microscope to be more then half of the surface of the
Feather which is open, and visibly pervious; which conjecture will yet seem
more probable from the texture of the brushie wings of the Tinea argentea, or
white Feather winged moth, which I shall anon describe. But Nature, that knows
best its own laws, and the several properties of bodies, knows also best how to
adapt and fit them to her designed ends, and whosoever would know those properties,
must endeavor to trace Nature in its working, and to see what course she
observes. And this I suppose will be no inconsiderable advantage which the
Schematisms and Structures of Animate bodies will afford the diligent enquirer,
namely, most sure and excellent instructions, both as to the practical part of
Mechanics and to the Theory and knowledge of the nature of the bodies and
motions.

Observe. XXXVI. Of Peacoks, Ducks, and other Feathers of changeable colors.
THe parts of the Feathers of this glorious Bird appear, through the
Microscope, no less graudy then do the whole Feathers; for, as to the naked eye
it is evident that the stem or quill of each Feather in the tail sends out
multitudes of Lateral branches, such as AB in the third Figure of the 23.
Scheme represents a small part of about 1/32 part of an Inch long, and each of
the lateral branches emit multitudes of little sprigs, threads or hairs on
either side of them, such as CD, CD, CD, so each of those threads in the
Microscope appears a large long body, consisting of a multitude of bright
reflecting parts, whose Figure it is no easy matter to determine, as he that
examines it shall find; for every new position of it to the light makes it
perfectly seem of another form and shape, and nothing what it appeared a little
before; nay, it appeared very differing ofttimes from so seemingly
inconsiderable a circumstance, that the interposing of ones hand between the
light and it, makes a very great change, and the opening or shutting a Casement
and the like, very much diversifies the appearance. And though, by examining
the form of it very many ways, which would be tedious here to enumerate, I
suppose I have discovered the true Figure of it, yet oftentimes, upon looking
on it in another posture, I have almost thought my former observations
deficient, though indeed, upon further examination, I have found even those
also to confirm them.

These threads therefore I find to be a congeries of small Laminae or plates,
as e e e e e, etc. each of them shaped much like this of a b c d, in the fourth
Figure, the part a c being a ridge, prominency, or stem, and b and d the
corners of two small thin Plates that grow unto the small stalk in the middle,
so that they make a kind of little feather; each of these Plates lie one close
to another, almost like a company of sloping ridge or gutter Tyles; they grow
on each side of the stalk opposite to one another, by two and two, from top to
bottom, in the manner expressed in the fifth Figure, the tops of the lower
covering the roots of the next above them; the under side of each of these
laminated bodies, is of a very dark and opacous substance, and suffers very few
Rays to be trajected, but reflects them all toward that side from whence they
come, much like the foil of a Looking-glass; but their upper ^ides seem to me
to consist of a multitude of thin plated bodies, which are exceeding thin, and
lie very close together, and thereby, like mother of Pearl shells, do not only
reflect a very brisk light, but tinge that light in a most curious manner; and
by means of various positions, in respect of the light, they reflect back now
one color, and then another, and those most vividly.

Now, that these colors are only fantastical ones, that is, such as arise
immediately from the refractions of the light, I found by this, that water
wetting these colored parts, destroyed their colors, which seemed to proceed
from the alteration of the reflection and refraction. Now, though I was not
able to see those hairs at all transparent by a common light, yet by looking on
them against the Sun, I found them to be tinged with a darkish red color,
nothing akin to the curious and lovely greens and blues they exhibited.

What the reason of color seems to be in such thin plated bodies, I have
elsewhere shown. But how water cast upon those threads destroys their colors,
I suppose to be performed thus; The water falling upon these plated bodies from
its having a greater congruity to Feathers then the Air, insinuates it self
between those Plates, and so extrudes the strong reflecting Air, whence both
these parts grow more transparent, as the Microscope informs, and colorless
also, at best retaining a very faint and dull color. But this wet being wasted
away by the continual evaporations and steams that pass through them from the
Peacock, whilst that Bird is yet alive, the colors again appear in their
former luster, the interstitia of these Plates being filled with the strongly
reflecting Air.

The beauteous and vivid colors of the Feathers of this Bird, being found to
proceed from the curious and exceeding smalness and fineness of the reflecting
parts, we have here the reason given us of all those gauderies in the apparel
of other Birds also, and how they come to exceed the colors of all other kinds
of Animals, besides Insects; for since (as we here, and elsewhere also show)
the vividness of a color, depends upon the fineness and transparency of the
reflecting and refracting parts; and since our Microscope discovers to us, that
the component parts of feathers are such, and that the hairs of Animals are
otherwise; and since we find also by the Experiment of that Noble and most
Excellent Person I formerly named; that the difference between Silk and Flax,
as to its color, is nothing else (for Flax reduced to a very great fineness of
parts, both white and colored, appears as white and as vivid as any Silk, but
loses that brightness and its Silken aspect as soon as it is twisted into
thread, by reason that the component parts, though very small and fine, are yet
pliable flakes, and not cylinders, and thence, by twisting, become united into
one opacous body, whereas the threads of Silk and Feathers retain their luster,
by preserving their cylindrical form entire without mixing; so that each
reflected and refracted beam that composes the gloss of Silk, preserves its own
property of modulating the light entire); And since we find the same confirmed
by many other Experiments elsewhere mentioned, I think we may safely conclude
this for an Axiom, that wheresoever we meet with transparent bodies, spun out
into very fine parts, either clear, or any ways tinged, the colors resulting
from such a composition must necessarily be very glorious, vivid, and clear,
like those of Silk and Feathers. This may perhaps hint some useful way of
making other bodies, besides Silk, be susceptible of bright tinctures, but of
this only by the by.

The changeable colored Feathers also of Ducks, and several other Birds, I
have found by examination with my Microscope, to proceed from much the same
causes and textures.

Observe. XXXVII. Of the Feet of Flies, and several other Insects.
THe foot of a Fly (delineated in the first Figure of the 23. Scheme, which
represents three joints, the two Tallons, and the two Pattens in a flat
posture; and in the second Figure of the same Scheme, which represents only
one joint, the Tallons and Pattens in another posture) is of a most admirable
and curious contrivance, for by this the Flies are enabled to walk against the
sides of Glass, perpendicularly upwards, and to contain themselves in that
posture as long as they please; nay, to walk and suspend themselves against the
under surface of many bodies, as the ceiling of a room, or the like, and this
with as great a seeming facility and firmness, as if they were a kind of
Antipodes, and had a tendency upwards, as we are sure they have the contrary,
which they also evidently discover, in that they cannot make themselves so
light, as to stick or suspend themselves on the under surface of a Glass well
polished and cleans'd; their suspension therefore is wholly to be ascribed to
some Mechanical contrivance in their feet; which, what it is, we shall in brief
explain, by showing, that its Mechanism consists principally in two parts, that
is, first its two Claws, or Tallons, and secondly, two Palms, Pattens, or Soles.

The two Tallons are very large, in proportion to the foot, and handsomely
shaped in the manner described in the Figures, by AB, and AC, the bigger part
of them from A to d d, is all hairy, or brisled, but toward the top, at C and B
smooth, the tops or points, which seem very sharp turning downwards and
inwards, are each of them moved on a joint at A, by which the Fly is able to
open or shut them at pleasure, so that the points B and C being entered in any
pores, and the Fly endeavoring to shut them, the Claws not only draw one
against another, and so fasten each other, but they draw the whole foot, GGADD
forward, so that on a soft footing, the tenters or points GGGG, (whereof a Fly
has about ten in each foot, to wit, two in every joint) run into the pores, if
they find any, or at least make their way; and this is sensible to the naked
eye, in the feet of a Chafer, which, if he be suffered to creep over the hand,
or any other part of the skin of ones body, does make his steps as sensible to
the touch as the sight.

But this contrivance, as it often fails the Chafer, when he walks on hard and
close bodies, so would it also our Fly, though he be a much lesser, and nimbler
creature, and therefore Nature has furnished his foot with another additament
much more curious and admirable, and that is, with a couple of Palms, Pattens
or Soles DD, the structure of which is this:

From the bottom or under part of the last joint of his foot, K, arise two
small thin plated horny substances, each consisting of two flat pieces, DD,
which seem to be flexible, like the covers of a Book, about FF, by which means,
the plains of the two sides EE, do not always lie in the same plain, but may be
sometimes shut closer, and so each of them may take a little hold themselves on
a body; but that is not all, for the under sides of these Soles are all beset
with small brisles, or tenters, like the Wire teeth of a Card used for working
Wool, the points of all which tend forwards, hence the two Tallons drawing the
feet forwards, as I before hinted, and these being applied to the surface of
the body with all the points looking the contrary way, that is, forwards and
outward, if there be any irregularity or yielding in the surface of the body,
the Fly suspends it self very firmly and easily, without the access or need of
any such Sponges filled with an imaginary gluten, as many have, for want of
good Glasses, perhaps, or a troublesome and diligent examination, supposed.

Now, that the Fly is able to walk on Glass, proceeds partly from some Schem XX^
ruggedness of the surface; and chiefly from a kind of tarnish, or dirty smoaky
substance, which adheres to the surface of that very hard body; and though the
pointed parts cannot penetrate the substance of Glass, yet may they find pores
enough in the tarnish, or at least make them.

This Structure I somewhat the more diligently surveyed, because I could not
well comprehend, how, if there were such a glutinous matter in those supposed
Sponges, as most (that have observed that Object in a Microscope) have hitherto
believed, how, I say, the Fly could so readily unglew and loosen its feet: and,
because I have not found any other creature to have a contrivance any ways like
it; and chiefly, that we might not be cast upon unintelligible explications of
the Phenomenon of Nature, at least others then the true ones, where our senses
were able to furnish us with an intelligible, rational and true one.

Somewhat a like contrivance to this of Flies shall we find in most other
Animals, such as all kinds of Flies and case-wing'd creatures; nay, in a Flea,
an Animal abundantly smaller then this Fly. Other creatures, as Mites, the
Land-Crab, etc. have only one small very sharp Tallon at the end of each of
their legs, which all drawing toward the center or middle of their body,
enable these exceeding light bodies to suspend and fasten themselves to almost
any surface.

Which how they are able to do, will not seem strange, if we consider, first,
how little body there is in one of these creatures compared to their
superficies, or outside, their thickness, perhaps, oftentimes, not amounting to
the hundredth part of an Inch: Next, the strength and agility of these
creatures compared to their bulk, being, proportionable to their bulk, perhaps,
an hundred times stronger then an Horse or Man. And thirdly, if we consider
that Nature does always appropriate the instruments, so as they are the most
fit and convenient to perform their offices, and the most simple and plain that
possibly can be; this we may see further verified also in the foot of a Louse
which is very much differing from those I have been describing, but more
convenient and necessary for the place of its habitation, each of his legs
being footed with a couple of small claws which he can open or shut at
pleasure, shaped almost like the claws of a Lobster or Crab, but with
appropriated contrivances for his peculiar use, which being to move its body to
and fro upon the hairs of the creature it inhabits, Nature has furnished one of
its claws with joints, almost like the joints of a man's fingers, so as thereby
it is able to encompass or grasp a hair as firmly as a man can a stick or rope.

Nor, is there a less admirable and wonderful Mechanism in the foot of a
Spider, whereby he is able to spin, weave, and climb, or run on his curious
transparent clew, of which I shall say more in the description of that Animal.

And to conclude, we shall in all things find, that Nature does not only work
Mechanically, but by such excellent and most compendious, as well as*
stupendous contrivances, that it were impossible for all the reason in the
world to find out any contrivance to do the same thing that should have more
convenient properties. And can any be so sottish, as to think all those things
the productions of chance? Certainly, either their Ratiocination must be
extremely depraved, or they did never attentively consider and contemplate the
Works of the Al-mighty.

Observe. XXXVIII. Of the Structure and motion of the Wings of Flies.
THe Wings of all kinds of Insects, are, for the most part, very beautiful
Objects, and afford no less pleasing an Object to the mind to speculate upon,
then to the eye to behold. This of the blue Fly, among the rest, wants not its
peculiar ornaments and contrivances; it grows out of the Thorax, or middle part
of the body of a Fly, and is seated a little beyond the center of gravity in
the body toward the head, but that Excentricly is curiously balanced; first,
by the expanded Area of the wings which lies all more backwards then the root,
by the motion of them, whereby the center of their vibration is much more
backwards toward the tail of the Fly then the root of the wing is. What the
vibrative motion of the wings is, and after what manner they are moved, I have
endeavored by many trials to find out: And for the first manner of their
motion, I endeavored to observe several of those kind of small spinning Flies,
which will naturally suspend themselves, as it were, poised and steady in one
place of the air, without rising or falling, or moving forwards or backwards;
for by looking down on those, I could by a kind of faint shadow, perceive the
utmost extremes of the vibrative motion of their wings, which shadow, whilst
they so endeavored to suspend themselves, was not very long, but when they
endeavored to fly forwards, it was somewhat longer; next, I tried it, by
fixing the legs of a Fly upon the top of the stalk of a feather, with Glue,
Wax, etc. and then making it endeavor to fly away; for being thereby able to
view it in any posture, I collected that the motion of the wing was after this
manner. The extreme limits of the vibrations were usually somewhat about the
length of the body distant from one another, oftentimes shorter, and sometimes
also longer; that the foremost limit was usually a little above the back, and
the hinder somewhat beneath the belly; between which two limits, if one may
ghess by the sound, the wing seemed to be moved forwards and backwards with an
equal velocity: And if one may (from the shadow or faint representation the
wings afforded, and from the consideration of the nature of the thing) ghess at
the posture or manner of the wings moving between them, it seemed to be this:
The wing being supposed placed in the upmost limit, seems to be put so that the
plain of it lies almost horizontal, but only the forepart does dip a little,
or is somewhat more deprest; in this position is the wing vibrated or moved to
the lower limit, being almost arrived at the lower limit, the hinder part of
the wing moving somewhat faster then the former, the Area of the wing begins to
dip behind, and in that posture seems it to be moved to the upper limit back
again, and thence back again in the first posture, the former part of the Area
dipping again, as it is moved downwards by means of the quicker motion of the
main stem which terminates or edges the forepart of the wing. And these
vibrations or motions to and fro between the two limits seem so swift, that
it is very probable (from the sound it affords, if it be compared with the
vibration of a musical string, tuned unison to it) it makes many hundreds, if
not some thousands of vibrations in a second minute of time. And, if we may be
allowed to ghess by the sound, the wing of a Be is yet more swift, for the
tone is much more acute, and that, in all likelihood, proceeds from the
exceeding swift beating of the air by the small wing. And it seems the more
likely too, because the wing of a Be is less in proportion to its body, then
the other wing to the body of a Fly; so that for ought I know, it may be one of
the quickest vibrating spontaneous motions of any in the world; and though
perhaps there may be many Flies in other places that afford a yet more shrill
noise with their wings, yet it is most probable that the quickest vibrating
spontaneous motion is to be found in the wing of some creature. Now, if we
consider the exceeding quickness of these Animal spirits that must cause these
motions, we cannot choose but admire the exceeding vividness of the governing
faculty or Anima of the Insect, which is able to dispose and regulate so the
the motive faculties, as to cause every peculiar organ, not only to move or
act so quick, but to do it also so regularly.

Whilst I was examining and considering the curious Mechanism of the wings, I
observed that under the wings of most kind of Flies, Bees, etc. there were
placed certain pendulums or extended drops (as I may so call them from their
resembling motion and figure) for they much resembled a long hanging drop of
some transparent viscous liquor; and I observed them constantly to move just
before the wings of the Fly began to move, so that at the first sight I could
not but ghess, that there was some excellent use, as to the regulation of the
motion of the wing, and did fancy, that it might be something like the handle
of a Cock, which by vibrating to and fro, might, as 'twere, open and shut the
Cock, and thereby give a passage to the determinate influences into the
Muscles; afterward, upon some other trials, I supposed that they might be for
some use in respiration, which for many reasons I suppose those Animals to use,
and, me thought, it was not very improbable, but that they might have
convenient passages under the wings for the emitting, at least, of the air, if
not admitting, as in the gills of Fishes is most evident; or, perhaps, this
Pendulum might be somewhat like the staff to a Pump, whereby these creatures
might exercise their Analogus lungs, and not only draw in, but force out, the
air they live by; but these were but conjectures, and upon further examination
seemed less probable.

The fabric of the wing, as it appears through a moderately magnifying
Microscope, seems to be a body consisting of two parts, as is visible in the 4.
Figure of the 23. Scheme; and by the 2. Figure of the 26. Scheme; the one is a
quilly or finny substance, consisting of several long, slender and variously
bended quills or wires, something resembling the veins of leaves; these are, as
'twere, the finns or quills which stiffen the whole Area, and keep the other
part distended, which is a very thin transparent skin or membrane variously
folded, and platted, but not very regularly, and is besides exceeding thickly
bestuck with innumerable small brisles, which are only perceptible by the
bigger magnifying Microscope, and not with that neither, but with a very
convenient augmentation of sky-light projected on the Object with a burning
Glass, as I have elsewhere showed, or by looking through it against the light.

In steed of these small hairs, in several other Flies, there are infinite of
small Feathers, which cover both the under and upper sides of this thin film as
in almost all the sorts of Butterflies and Moths: and those small parts are not
only shaped very much like the feathers of Birds, but like those variegated
with all the variety of curious bright and vivid colors imaginable; and those
feathers are likewise so admirably and delicately ranged, as to compose very
fine flourishings and ornamental paintings, like Turkey and Persian Carpets,
but of far more surpassing beauty, as is evident enough to the naked eye, in
the painted wings of Butterflies, but much more through an ordinary Microscope.

Intermingled likewise with these hairs, may be perceived multitudes of little
pits, or black spots, in the exended membrane, which seem to be the root of the
hairs that grow on the other side; these two bodies seem dispersed over the
whole surface of the wing.

The hairs are best perceived, by looking through it against the light, or, by
laying the wing upon a very white piece of Paper, in a convenient light, for
thereby every little hair most manifestly appears; a Specimens of which you may
observe drawn in the fourth Figure of the 23. Scheme, AB, CD, OF whereof
represent some parts of the bones or quills of the wing, each of which you may
perceive to be covered over with a multitude of scales, or brisles, the former
AB, is the biggest stem of all the wing, and may be properly enough called the
cut-air, it being that which terminates and stiffens the foremost edge of the
wing; the fore-edge of this is armed with a multitude of little brisles, or
Tenter-hooks, in some standing regular and in order, in others not; all the
points of which are directed from the body toward the tip of the wing; nor is
this edge only thus fringed, but even all the whole edge of the wing is
covered with a small fringe, consisting of short and more slender brisles.

This Subject, had I time, would afford excellent matter for the contemplation
of the nature of wings and of flying; but, because I may, perhaps, get a more
convenient time to prosecute that speculation, and recollect several
Observations that I have made of that particular. I shall at present proceed to
Schem. XXIV.


Observe. XXXIX. Of the Eyes and Head of a Gray drone-Fly, and of several other
creatures.
I took a large gray Drone-Fly, that had a large head, but a small and slender
body in proportion to it, and cutting off its head, I fixed it with the
forepart or face upwards upon my Object Plate (this I made choice of rather
then the head of a great blue Fly, because my enquiry being now about the eyes,
I found this Fly to have, first the biggest clusters of eyes in proportion to
his head, of any small kind of Fly that I have yet seen, it being somewhat
inclining toward the make of the large Dragon-Flies. Next, because there is a
greater variety in the knobs or balls of each cluster, then is of any small
Fly) Then examining it according to my usual manner, by varying the degrees of
light, and altering its position to each kind of light, I drew that
representation of it which is delineated in the 24. Scheme, and found these
things to be as plain and evident, as notable and pleasant.

First, that the greatest part of the face, nay, of the head, was nothing else
but two large and protuberant bunches, or prominent parts, ABCDEA, the surface
of each of which was all covered over, or shaped into a multitude of small
Hemispheres, placed in a triagonal order, that being the closest and most
compacted, and in that order, ranged over the whole surface of the eye in very
lovely rows between each of which, as is necessary, were left long and regular
trenches, the bottoms of every of which, were perfectly entire and not at all
perforated or drilled through, which I most certainly was assured of, by the
regularly reflected Image of certain Objects which I moved to and fro between
the head and the light. And by examining the Cornea or outward skin, after I
had stripped it off from the several substances that lay within it, and by
looking both upon the inside, and against the light.

Next, that of those multitudes of Hemispheres, there were observable two
degrees of bigness, the half of them that were lowermost, and looked toward the
ground or their own legs, namely, CDE, CDE being a pretty deal smaller then
the other, namely, ABCE, ABCE, that looked upward, and side-ways, or foreright,
and backward, which variety I have not found in any other small Fly.

Thirdly, that every one of these Hemispheres, as they seemed to be pretty near
the true shape of a Hemisphere, so was the surface exceeding smooth and
regular, reflecting as exact, regular, and perfect an Image of any Object from
the surface of them, as a small Ball of Quicksilver of that bigness would do,
but nothing near so vivid, the reflection from these being very languid, much
like the reflection from the outside of Water, Glass, Crystal, etc. In so much
that in each of these Hemispheres, I have been able to discover a Land-scape of
those things which lay before my window, one thing of which was a large Tree,
whose trunk and top I could plainly discover, as I could also the parts of my
window, and my hand and fingers, if I held it between the Window and the
Object; a small draught of nineteen of which, as they appeared in the bigger
Magnifying-glass to reflect the Image of the two windows of my Chamber, are
delineated in the third Figure of the 23. Scheme.

Fourthly, that these rows were so disposed, that there was no quarter visible
from his head that there was not some of these Hemispheres directed against; so
that a Fly may be truly said to have an eye every way, and to be really
circumspect. And it was further observable, that that way where the trunk of
his body did hinder his prospect backward, these protuberances were elevated,
as it were, above the plain of his shoulders and Back, so that he was able to
see backwards also over his back.

Fifthly, in living Flies, I have observed, that when any small mote or dust,
which flies up and down the air, chances to light upon any part of these knobs,
as it is sure to stick firmly to it and not fall, though through the Microscope
it appears like a large stone or stick (which one would admire, especially
since it is no ways probable that there is any wet or glutinous matter upon
these Hemispheres, but I hope I shall render the reason in another place) so
the Fly presently makes use of his two fore-feet in stead of eyelids, with
which, as with two Brooms or Brushes, they being all bestuck with Brisles, he
often sweeps or brushes off what ever hinders the prospect of any of his
Hemispheres, and then, to free his legs from that dirt, he rubs them one
against another, the pointed Brisles or Tenters of which looking both one way,
the rubbing of them to and fro one against another, does cleanse them in the
same manner as I have observed those that Card Wool, to cleanse their Cards, by
placing their Cards, so as the teeth of both look the same way, and then
rubbing them one against another. In the very same manner do they brush and
cleanse their bodies and wings, as I shall by and by show; other creatures have
other contrivances for the cleansing and clearing their eyes.

Sixthly, that the number of the Pearls or Hemispheres in the clusters of this
Fly, was near 14000. which I judged by numbering certain rows of them several
ways, and casting up the whole content, accounting each cluster to contain
about seven thousand Pearls, three thousand of which were of a cize, and
consequently the rows not so thick, and the four thousand I accounted to be
the number of the smaller Pearls next the feet and probofcis. Other Animals I
observed to have yet a greater number, as the Dragon-Fly or Adderbolt: And
others to have a much less company, as an Ant, etc. and several other small
Flies and Insects.

Seventhly, that the order of these eyes or Hemispheres was altogether curious
and admirable, they being placed mall kind of Flies, and aerial animals, in a
most curious and regular ordination of triangular rows, in which order they are
ranged the nearest together that possibly they can, and consequently leave the
least pits or trenches between them. But in Shrimps, Crawfishes, Lobsters, and
such kinds of Crustuceons water Animals, I have yet observed them ranged in a
quadrangular order, the rows cutting each other at right angles, which as it
admits of a less number of Pearls in equal surfaces; so have those creatures a
recompense made them, by having their eyes a little movable in their heads,
which the other altogether want. So infinitely wise and provident do we find
all the Dispensations in Nature, that certainly Epicurus, and his followers,
must very little have considered them, who ascribed those things to the
production of chance, that will, to a more attentive considerer, appear the
products of the highest Wisdom and Providence.

Upon the Anatomy or Dissection of the Head, I observed these particulars:

First, that this outward skin, like the Cornea of the eyes of the greater
Animals, was both flexible and transparent, and seemed, through the Microscope,
perfectly to resemble the very substance of the Cornea of a man's eye; for
having cut out the cluster, and removed the dark and mucous stuff that is
subjacent to it, I could see it transparent like a thin piece of skin, having
as many cavities in the inside of it, and ranged in the same order as it had
protuberances on the outside, and this propriety, I found the same in all the
Animals that had it, whether Flies or Shellfish.

Secondly, I found that all Animals that I have observed with those kind of
eyes, have within this Cornea, a certain clear liquor or juice, though in a
very little quantity, and,

I observed thirdly, that within that clear liquor, they had a kind of dark
mucous lining, which was all spread round within the cavity of the cluster, and
seemed very near adjoining to it, the color of which, in some Flies, was gray;
in others, black; in others red; in others, of a mixed color; in others,
spotted; and that the whole clusters, when looked on whilst the Animal was
living, or but newly killed, appeared of the same color that this coat (as I
may so call it) appeared of, when that outward skin, or Cornea, was removed.

Fourthly, that the rest of the capacity of the clusters was in some, as in
Dragon Flies, etc. hollow, or empty; in others filled with some kind of
substance; in blue Flies, with a reddish musculous substance, with fibers
tending from the center or bottom outward; and diverse other, with various and
differing kinds of substances.

That this curious contrivance is the organ of sight to all those various
Crustaceous Animals, which are furnished with it, I think we need not doubt, if
we consider but the several congruities it has with the eyes of greater
creatures.

As first, that it is furnished with a Cornea, with a transparent humor, and
with a uvea or retina, that the Figure of each of the small Hemispheres are
very Spherical, exactly polished, and most vivid, lively and plump, when the
Animal is living, as in greater Animals, and in like manner dull, flaccid, and
irregular, or shrunk, when the Animal is dead.

Next, that those creatures that are furnished with it, have no other organs
that have any resemblance to the known eyes of other creatures.

Thirdly, that those which they call the eyes of Crabs, Lobsters, Shrimps, and
the like, and are really so, are Hemispher'd, almost in the same manner as
these of Flies are. And that they really are so, I have very often tried, by
cutting off these little movable knobs, and putting the creature again into the
water, that it would swim to and fro, and move up and down as well as before,
but would often hit it self against the rocks or stones; and though I put my
hand just before its head, it would not at all start or fly back till I touched
it, whereas whilst those were remaining, it would start back, and avoid my
hand or a stick at a good distance before it touched it. And if in crustaceous
Sea-animals, then it seems very probable also, that these knobs are the eyes in
crustaceous Insects, which are also of the same kind, only in a higher and
more active Element; this the conformity or congruity of many other parts
common to either of them, will strongly argue, their crustaceous armor, their
number of legs, which are six, beside the two great claws, which answer to the
wings in Insects; and in all kind of Spiders, as also in many other Insects
that want wings, we shall find the complete number of them, and not only the
number, but the very shape, figure, joints, and claws of Lobsters and Crabs, as
is evident in Scorpions and Spiders, as is visible in the second Figure of the
31. Scheme, and in the little Mite-worm, which I call a Land-crab, described in
the second Figure of the 33. Scheme, but in their manner of generation being
oviparous, etc. And it were very worthy observation, whether there be not some
kinds of transformation and metamorphosis in the several states of crustaceous
water-animals, as there is in several sorts of Insects; for if such could be
met with, the progress of the variations would be much more conspicuous in
those larger Animals, then they can be in any kind of Insects our colder
Climate affords.

These being their eyes, it affords us a very pretty Speculation to contemplate
their manner of vision, which, as it is very differing from that of biocular
Animals, so is it not less admirable.

That each of these Pearls or Hemispheres is a perfect eye, I think we need not
doubt, if we consider only the outside or figure of any one of them, for they
being each of them covered with a transparent protuberant Cornea, and
containing a liquor within them, resembling the watery or glassie humors of the
eye, must necessarily refract all the parallel Rays that fall on them out of
the air, into a point not far distant within them, where (in all probability)
the Retina of the eye is placed, and that opacous, dark, and mucous inward coat
that (I formerly showed) I found to subtend the concave part of the cluster is
very likely to be that tunicle or coat, it appearing through the Microscope to
be placed a little more than a Diameter of those Pearls below or within the
tunica cornea. And if so, then is there in all probability, a little Picture or
Image of the objects without, painted or made at the bottom of the Retina
against every one of those Pearls, so that there are as many impressions on the
Retina or opacous skin, as there are Pearls or Hemispheres on the cluster. But
because it is impossible for any protuberant surface whatsoever, whether
sphaerial or other, so to refract the Rays that come from far remote lateral
points of any Object as to collect them again, and unite them each in a
distinct point, and that only those Rays which come from some point that lies
in the Axis of the Figure produced, are so accurately refracted to one and the
same point again, and that the lateral Rays, the further they are removed, the
more imperfect is their refracted confluence; It follows therefore, that only
the Picture of those parts of the external objects that lie in, or near, the
Axis of each Hemisphere, are discernably painted or made on the Retina of each
Hemisphere, and that therefore each of them can distinctly sensate or see only
those parts which are very near perpendicularly opposed to it, or lie in or
near its optic Axis. Now, though there may be by each of these eye-pearls, a
representation to the Animal of a whole Hemisphere in the same manner as in a
man's eye there is a picture or sensation in the Retina of all the objects
lying almost in an Hemisphere; yet, as in a man's eye also, there are but some
very few points which lying in, or near, the optic Axis are distinctly
discerned: So there may be multitudes of Pictures made of an Object in the
several Pearls, and yet but one, or some very few that are distinct; The
representation of any object that is made in any other Pearl, but that which is
directly, or very near directly, opposed, being altogether confused and unable
to produce a distinct vision.

So that we see, that though it has pleased the All-wise Creator, to indue this
creature with such multitudes of eyes, yet has he not endued it with the
faculty of seeing more then another creature; for whereas this cannot move his
head, at least can move it very little, without moving his whole body, biocular
creatures can in an instant (or the twinkling of an eye, which, being very
quick, is vulgarly used in the same signification) move their eyes so as to
direct the optic Axis to any point; nor is it probable, that they are able to
see attentively at one time more then one Physical point; for though there be a
distinct Image made in every eye, yet it is very likely, that the observing
faculty is only employed about some one object for which they have most concern.

Now, as we accurately distinguish the site or position of an Object by the
motion of the Muscles of the eye requisite to put the optic Line in a direct
position, and confusedly by the position of the imperfect Picture of the object
at the bottom of the eye; so are these crustaceous creatures able to judge
confusedly of the position of objects by the Picture or impression made at the
bottom of the opposite Pearl, and distinctly by the removal of the attentive or
observing faculty, from one Pearl to another, but what this faculty is, as it
requires another place, so a much deeper speculation. Now, because it were
impossible, even with this multitude of eyeballs, to see any object distinct
(for as I hinted before, only those parts that lay in, or very near, the
optic Lines could be so) the Infinitely wise Creator has not left the creature
without a power of moving the head a little in Aerial crustaceous animals, and
the very eyes also in crustaceous Sea-animals; so that by these means they are
enabled to direct some optic line or other against any object, and by that
means they have the visive faculty as complete as any Animal that can move its
eyes.

Distances of Objects also, it is very likely they distinguish, partly by the
consonant impressions made in some two convenient Pearls, one in each cluster;
for, according as those congruous impressions affect, two Pearls nearer
approached to each other, the nearer is the Object, and the farther they are
distant, the more distant is the Object: partly also by the alteration of each
Pearl, requisite to make the Sensation or Picture perfect; for it is impossible
that the Pictures of two Objects, variously distant, can be perfectly painted,
or made on the same Retina or bottom of the eye not altered, as will be very
evident to any one that shall attentively consider the nature of refraction.
Now, whether this alteration may be in the Figure of the Cornea, in the motion
of access or recess of the Retina toward the Cornea, or in the alteration of a
crustaline humor, if such there be, I pretend not to determine; though I think
we need not doubt, but that there may be as much curiosity of contrivance and
structure in every one of these Pearls, as in the eye of a Whale or Elephant,
and the almighty's Fiat could as easily cause the existence of the one as the
other; and as one day and a thousand years are the same with him, so may one
eye and ten thousand.

This we may be sure of, that the filaments or sensative parts of the Retina
must be most exceedingly curious and minute, since the whole Picture it self is
such; what must needs the component parts be of that Retina which distinguishes
the part of an object's Picture that must be many millions of millions less
then that in a man's eye? And how exceeding curious and subtle must the
component parts of the medium that conveys light be, when we find the
instrument made for its reception or refraction to be so exceedingly small? we
may, I think, from this speculation be sufficiently discouraged from hoping to
discover by any optic or other instrument the determinate bulk of the parts of
the medium that conveys the pulse of light, since we find that there is not
less accurateness shown in the Figure and polish of those exceedingly minute
lenticular surfaces, then in those more large and conspicuous surfaces of our
own eyes. And yet can I not doubt, but that there is a determinate bulk of
those parts, since I find them unable to enter between the parts of Mercury,
which being in motion, must necessarily have pores, as I shall elsewhere show,
and here pass by, as being a digression.

As concerning the horns FF, the feelers or smellers, GG, the Probascis HH, and
I, the hairs and brisles, KK, I shall endeavor to describe in the 42.
Observation.

Observe. XL. Of the Teeth of a Snail.
I Have little more to add of the Teeth of a Snail, besides the Picture of it,
which is represented in the first Figure of the 25. Scheme, save that his
bended body, ABCDEF, which seemed fashioned very much like a row of small
teeth, orderly placed in the Gums, and looks as if it Schem. XXV.
were divided into several smaller and greater black teeth, was nothing but one
small bended hard bone, which was placed in the upper jaw of the mouth of a
House-Snail, with which I observed this very Snail to feed on the leaves of a
Rose-tree, and to bite out pretty large and half round bits, not unlike the
Figure of a (C) nor very much differing from it ^^ bigness, the upper part ABCD
of this bone, I found to be much whiter* and to grow out of the upper chap of
the Snail GGG, and not to be any thing near so much creas'd as the lower and
blacker part of it HIIPKK^ which was exactly shaped like teeth, the bone
growing thinner, or tapering to an edge toward KKK. It seemed to have nine
teeth, or prominent parts IK, IK, IF, etc. which were joined together by the
thinner interposed parts of the bone. The Animal to which these teeth belong,
is a very anomalous creature, and seems of a kind quite distinct from any other
terrestrial Animal or Insect, the Anatomy whereof exceedingly differing from
what has been hitherto given of it I should have inserted, but that it will be
more proper in another place. I have never met with any kind of Animal whose
teeth are all joined in one, save only that I lately observed, that all the
teeth of a Rhinoceror, which grow on either side of its mouth, are joined into
one large bone, the weight of one of which I found to be near eleven pound
Haver dupois. So that it seems one of the biggest sort of terrestrial Animals,
as well as one of the smallest, has his teeth thus shaped.

Observe. XLI. Of the Eggs of Silkworms, and other Insects.
THe Eggs of Silkworms (one of which I have described in the second Figure of
25. Scheme) afford a pretty Object for a Microscope that magnifies very much,
especially if it be bright weather, and the light of a window be cast or
collected on it by a deep Convex-glass, or Water ball. For then the whole
surface of the Shell may be perceived all covered over with exceeding small
pits or cavities with interposed edges, almost in the manner of the surface of
a Poppy-seed, but that these holes are not an hundredth part scarce of their
bigness; the Shell, when the young ones were hatched (which I found an easy
thing to do, if the Eggs were kept in a warm place) appeared no thicker in
proportion to its bulk, then that of an Hen's or Goos's Egg is to its bulk, and
all the Shell appeared very (...) (which seemed to proceed from its
transparency) whence all those pittings did almost vanish, so that they could
not, without much difficulty, be discerned, the inside of the Shell seemed to
be lined also with a kind of thin film, not unlike (keeping the proportion to
its Shell) that with which the shell of an Hen-egg is lined; and the shell it
self seemed like common Egg-shells, very brittle, and cracked. In diverse other
of these Eggs I could plainly enough, through the shell, perceive the small
l^sec^ lie coyled round the edges of the shell. The shape of the Egg it self,
the Figure pretty well represents (though by default of the Graver it does not
appear so rounded, and lying above the Paper, as it were, as it ought to do)
that is, it was for the most part pretty oval end-ways, somewhat like an Egg,
but the other way it was a little flatted on two opposite sides. Diverse of
these Eggs, as is common to most others, I found to be barren, or addle, for
they never afforded any young ones. And those I usually found much whiter then
the other that were prolifick. The Eggs of other kinds of Oviparous Insects I
have found to be perfectly round every way, like so many Globules, of this sort
I have observed some sorts of Spiders Eggs; and chancing the last Summer to
enclose a very large and curiously painted Butterfly in a Box, intending to
examine its gaudery with my Microscope, I found within a day or two after I
enclosed her, almost all the inner surface of the Box covered over with an
infinite of exactly round Eggs, which were stuck very fast to the sides of it,
and in so exactly regular and close an order, that made me call to mind my
Hypothesis, which I had formerly thought on for the making out of all the
regular Figures of Salt, which I have elsewhere hinted; for here I found all of
them ranged into a most exact triagonal order, much after the manner as the
Hemispheres are place on the eye of a Fly; all which Eggs I found after a
little time to be hatched, and out of them to come a multitude of small Worms,
very much resembling young Silkworms, leaving all their thin hollow shells
behind them, sticking on the Box in their triagonal posture; these I found with
the Microscope to have much such a substance as the Silkworms Eggs, but could
not perceive them pitted. And indeed, there is as great a variety in the shape
of the Eggs of Oviparous Insects as among those of Birds.

Of these Eggs, a large and lusty Fly will at one time lay near four or five
hundred, so that the increase of these kind of Insects must needs be very
prodigious, were they not preyed on by multitudes of Birds, and destroyed by
Frosts and Rains; and hence'tis, those hotter Climates between the Tropicks are
infested with such multitudes of Locusts, and such other Vermin.

Observe. XLII. Of a blue Fly.
THis kind of Fly, whereof a Microscopical Picture is delineated in the first
Figure of the 26. Scheme, is a very beautiful creature, and has many things
about it very notable; diverse of which I have already partly described, namely,
the feet, wings, eyes, and head, in the preceding Observations.

And though the head before described be that of a gray Drone-Fly, yet for the
main it is very agreeable to this. The things wherein they differ most, will be
easily enough found by the following particulars:

First, the clusters of eyes of this Fly, are very much smaller then those of
the Dron-Fly, in proportion to the head.

Schem: XXVI.


And next, all the eyes of each cluster seemed much of the same bigness one
with another, not differing as the other, but ranged in the same triagonal
order.

Thirdly, between these two clusters, there was a scaly prominent front B,
which was armed and adorned with large tapering sharp black brisles, which
growing out in rows on either side, were so bent toward each other near the
top, as to make a kind of arched arbor of Brisles, which almost covered the
former front.

Fourthly, at the end of this Arch, about the middle of the face, on a
prominent part C, grew two small oblong bodies, DD, which through a Microscope
looked not unlike the Pendants in Lillies, these seemed to be jointed on to two
small parts at C, each of which seemed again jointed into the front.

Fifthly, out of the upper part and outsides of these horns (as I may call
them, from the Figure they are of, in the 24. Scheme, where they are marked
with FF) there grows a single feather, or brushy Brisle, EE, somewhat of the
same kind with the tufts of a Gnat, which I have before described.

What the use of these kind of horned and tufted bodies should be, I cannot
well imagine, unless they serve for smelling or hearing, though how they are
adapted for either, it seems very difficult to describe they are in almost
every several kind of Flies of so various a shape; though certainly they are
some very essential part of the head, and have some very notable office
assigned them by Nature, since in all Insects they are to be found in one or
other form.

Sixthly, at the under part of the face FF, were several of the former sort of
bended Brisles; and below all, the mouth, out of the middle of which, grew the
proboscis GHI, which, by means of several joints, whereof it seemed to consist,
the Fly was able to move to and fro, and thrust it in and out as it pleased;
the end of this hollow body (which was all over covered with small short hairs
or brisles) was, as'twere, bent at H, and the outer or foremost side of the
bended part HI, slit, as it were, into two chaps, HI, HI, all the outside of
which where covered with hairs, and pretty large brisles; these he could, like
two chaps, very readily open and shut, and when he seemed to suck any thing
from the surface of a body, he would spread abroad those chaps, and apply the
hollow part of them very close to it.

From either side of the Proboscis, within the mouth, grew two other small
horns, or fingers, KK, which were hairy, but small in this Figure; but of
another shape, and bigger in proportion, in the 24. Scheme, where they are
marked with GG, which two indeed seemed a kind of smellers, but whether so or
not, I cannot positively determine.

The Thorax or middle part of this Fly, was cased, both above and beneath, with
a very firm crust of armor, the upper part more round, and covered over with
long conical brisles, all whose ends pointed backwards; out of the hinder and
under part of this grew out in a cluster six legs, three of which are apparent
in the Figure, the other three were hid by the body placed in that posture. The
legs were all much of the same make, being all of them covered with a strong
hairy scale or shel, just like the legs of a Crabb or Lobster, and the
contrivance of the joints seemed much the same; each leg seemed made up of
eight parts, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, to the eighth or last of which, grew the
soles and claws, described before in the 38. Observation.

Out of the upper part of this trunck grew the two wings, which I mentioned in
the 38. Observation, consisting of a film, extended on certain small stiff
wires or bones: these in a blue Fly, were much longer then the body, but in
other kind of Flies they are of very differing proportions to the body. These
films, in many Flies, were so thin, that, like several other plated bodies
(mentioned in the ninth Observation) they afforded all varieties of fantastical
or transient colors (the reason of which I have here endeavored to explain)
they seemed to receive their nourishment from the stalks or wires, which seemed
to be hollow, and near the upper part of the wing LL several of them seemed
jointed, the shape of which will sufficiently appear by the black lines in the
second Figure of the 26. Scheme, which is a delineation of one of those wings
expanded directly to the eyes.

All the hinder part of its body is covered with a most curious blue shining
armor, looking exactly like a polished piece of steel brought to that blue
color by annealing, all which armor is very thick bestuck with abundance of
tapering brisles, such as grow on its back, as is visible enough by the Figure.

Nor was the inside of this creature less beautiful then its outside, for
cutting off a part of the belly, and then viewing it, to see if I could
discover any Vessels, such as are to be found in a greater Animals, and even in
Snails exceeding manifestly, I found, much beyond my expectation, that there
were abundance of branchings of Milk-white vessels, no less curious then the
branchings of veins and arteries in bigger terrestrial Animals, in one of
which, I found two notable branches, joining their two main stocks, as it were,
into one common ductus; now, to what veins or arteries these Vessels were
analogus, whether to the vena porta, or the meseraick vessels, or the like, or
indeed, whether they were veins and arteries, or vasa lactea, properly so
called, I am not hitherto able to determine, having not yet made sufficient
enquiry; but in all particulars, there seems not to be any thing less of
curious contrivance in these Insects, then in those larger terrestrial Animals,
for I had never seen any more curious branchings of Vessels, then those I
observed in two or three of these Flies thus opened.

It is a creature active and nimble, so as there are very few creatures like
it, whether bigger or smaller, in so much, that it will escape and avoid a small
body, though coming on it exceeding swiftly, and if it sees any thing
approaching it, which it fears, it presently squats down, as it were, that it
may be the more ready for its rise.

Nor is it less hardy in the Winter, then active in the Summer, enduring all
the Frosts, and surviving till the next Summer, notwithstanding the bitter cold
of our Climate; nay, this creature will endure to be frozen, and yet not be
destroyed, for I have taken one of them out of the Snow whereon it has been
frozen almost white, with the Ice about it, and yet by thawing it gently by the
warmth of a fire, it has quickly revived and flown about.

This kind of Fly seems by the streams or taste of fermenting and putrefying
meat (which it often kisses, as'twere, with its proboscis as it trips over it)
to be stimulated or excited to eject its Eggs or Seed on it, perhaps, from the
same reason as Dogs, Cats, and many other brute creatures are excited to their
particular lusts, by the smell of their females, when by Nature prepared for
generation; the males seeming by those kind of smells, or other incitations, to
be as much necessitated thereto, as Aqua Regis strongly impregnated with a
solution of Gold, is forced to precipitate it by the affusion of spirit of
Urine, or a solution of Salt of Tartar.

One of these put in spirit of Wine, was very quickly seemingly killed, and
both its eyes and mouth began to look very red, but upon the taking of it out,
and suffering it to lie three or four hours, and heating it with the Sun beams
cast through a Burning-glass, it again revived, seeming, as it were, to have
been all the intermediate time, but dead drunk, and after certain hours to grow
fresh again and sober.

Observe. XLIII. Of the Water-Insect or Gnat.
THis little creature, described in the first Figure of the 27. Scheme, was a
small scaled or crusted Animal, which I have often observed to be generated in
Rainwater; I have also observed it both in Pond and River-water. It is
supposed by some, to deduce its first original from the putrefaction of
Rainwater, in which, if it have stood any time open to the air, you shall
seldom miss, all the Summer long, of store of them frisking too and fro.

It Is a creature, wholly differing in shape from any I ever observed; nor is
its motion less strange: It has a very large head, in proportion to its body,
all covered with a shell, like other testaceous Animals, but it differs in
this, that it has, up and down several parts of it, several tufts of hairs, or
brisles, placed in the order expressed in the Figure; It has two horns, which
seemed almost like the horns of an Ox, inverted, and, as near as I could
ghess, were hollow, with tufts of brisles, likewise at the top; these horns
they could move easily this or that way, and might, perchance, be their
nostrils. It has a pretty large mouth, which seemed contrived much like those
of Crabs and Lobsters, by which, I have often observed them to feed on water,
or some imperceptible nutritive substance in it.

I could perceive, through the transparent shell, while the Animal survived,
several motions in the head, thorax, and belly, very distinctly, of differing
kinds which I may, perhaps, elsewhere endeavor more accurately to examine, and
to show of how great benefit the use of a Microscope may be for the discovery
of Nature's course in the operations performed in Animal bodies, by which we
have the opportunity of observing her through these delicate and pellucid
teguments of the bodies of Insects acting according to her usual course and
way, undisturbed, whereas, when we endeavor to pry into her secrets by
breaking open the doors upon her, and dissecting and mangling creatures whilst
there is life yet within them, we find her indeed at work, but put into such
disorder by the violence offered, as it may easily be imagined, how differing a
thing we should find, if we could, as we can with a Microscope, in these
smaller creatures, quietly peep in at the windows, without frighting her out of
her usual byas.

The form of the whole creature, as it appeared in the Microscope, may, without
troubling you with more descriptions, be plainly enough perceived by the
Scheme, the hinder part or belly consisting of eight several jointed parts,
namely, ABCDEFGH, of the first Figure, from the midst of each of which, on
either side, issued out three or four small brisles or hairs, I, I, I, I, I,
the tail was divided into two parts of very differing make; one of them,
namely, K, having many tufts of hair or brisles, which seemed to serve both for
the finns and tail, for the Oars and Ruder of this little creature, wherewith
it was able, by frisking and bending its body nimbly to and fro, to move
himself any whither, and to skull and steer himself as he pleased; the other
part, L, seemed to be, as 'twere, the ninth division of his belly, and had many
single brisles on either side. From the end V, of which, through the whole
belly, there was a kind of Gut of a darker color, MMM, wherein, by certain
Peristaltick motions there was a kind of black substance moved upwards and
downwards through it from the orbicular part of it, N, (which seemed the
Ventricle, or stomach) to the tail V, and so back again, which peristaltick
motion I have observed also in a Louse, a Gnat, and several other kinds of
transparent body'd Flies. The Thorax or chest of this creature OOOO, was thick
and short, and pretty transparent, for through it I could see the white heart
(which is the color also of the blood in these, and most other Insects) to
beat, and several other kind of motions. It was bestuck and adorned up and down
with several tufts of brisles, such as are pointed out by P, P, P, P, the head
Q was likewise bestuck with several of those tufts, SSS; it was broad and
short, had two black eyes, TT, which I could not perceive at all pearl'd, as
they afterward appeared, and two small horns, RR, such as I formerly described.

Both its motion and rest is very strange, and pleasant, and differing from
those of most other creatures I have observed; for, where it ceases from moving
its body, the tail of it seeming much lighter then the rest of its body, and a
little lighter then the water it swims in, presently boys it up to the top of
the water, where it hangs suspended with the head always downward; and like our
Antipodes, if they do by a frisk get below that superficies, they presently
ascend again unto it, if they cease Schem. XXVII.
moving, until they tread, as it were, under that superficies with their tails;
the hanging of these in this posture, put me in mind of a certain creature I
have seen in London, that was brought out of America, which would very firmly
suspend it self by the tail, with the head downwards, and was said to sleep in
that posture, with her young ones in her false belly, which is a Purse,
provided by Nature for the production, nutrition, and preservation of her young
ones, which is described by Pifo in the 24. Chapter of the fifth Book of his
Natural History of Brasil.

The motion of it was with the tail forwards, drawing its self backwards, by
the frisking to and fro of that tuft which grew out of one of the stumps of its
tail. It had another motion, which was more suitable to that of other creatures,
and that is, with the head forward; for by the moving of his chaps (if I may so
call the parts of his mouth) it was able to move it self downwards very gently
toward the bottom, and did, as 'twere, eat up its way through the water.

But that which was most observable in this creature, was, its Metamorphosis or
change; for having kept several of these Animals in a Glass of Rainwater, in
which they were produced, I found, after about a fortnight or three weeks
keeping, that several of them flew away in Gnats, leaving their husks behind
them in the water floating under the surface, the place where these Animals
were wont to reside, whilst they were inhabitants of the water: this made me
more diligently to watch them, to see if I could find them at the time of their
transformation; and not long after, I observed several of them to be changed
into an unusual shape, wholly differing from that they were of before, their
head and body being grown much bigger and deeper, but not broader, and their
belly, or hinder part smaller, and coyl'd, about this great body much of the
fashion represented by the pricked line in the second Figure of the 27. Scheme,
the head and horns now swam uppermost, and the whole bulk of the body seemed to
be grown much lighter; for when by my frighting of it, it would by frisking out
of its tail (in the manner expressed in the Figure by BC) sink it self below
the surface toward the bottom; the body would more swiftly re-ascend, then
when it was in its former shape.

I still marked its progress from time to time, and found its body still to
grow bigger and bigger, Nature, as it were, fitting and accoutring it for the
lighter Element, of which it was now going to be an inhabitant; for, by
observing one of these with my Microscope, I found the eyes of it to be
altogether differing from what they seemed before, appearing now all over
pearl'd or knobb'd, like the eyes of Gnats. as is visible in the secong Figure
by A. At length, I saw part of this creature to swim above, and part beneath
the surface of the water, below which though it would quickly plunge it self if
I by any means frighted it, and presently re-ascend into its former posture;
after a little longer expectation, I found that the head and body of a Gnat,
began to appear and stand clear above the surface, and by degrees it drew out
its legs, first the two foremost, then the other, at length its whole body
perfect and entire appeared out of the husk (which it left in the water)
standing on its legs upon the top of the water, and by degrees it began to
move, and after flew about the Glass a perfect Gnat.

I have been the more particular, and large in the relation of the
transformation of diverse of these little Animals which I observed, because I
have not found that any Author has observed the like; and because the thing it
self is so strange and heterogeneous from the usual progress of other Animals,
that I judge it may not only be pleasant, but very useful and necessary
toward the completing of Natural History.

There is indeed in Piso, a very odd History, which this relation may make the
more probable; and that is in the 2. Chapter of the 4. Book of his Natural
History of Brasil, where he says, Porro praeter tot documenta fertilitatis
circa vegetabilia and sensitiva marina telluris aemula, accidit and illud, quod
paucis a Paranambucensi milliaribus, piscatoris uncum citra intentionem
contingat infigi vadis petrosis, and loco piscis spongia, coralla, aliasque
arbusculas marinas capi. Inter haec inusitatae formae prodit spongiosa
arbuscula, sesquipedis longitudinis, brevioribus radicibus, lapideis nitens
vadis, and rupibus infixa, erigiturque in corpus spongiosum molle oblongum
rotundum turbinatum: intus miris cancellis and alveis fabricatum, extus autem
tenaci glutine instar Apum propolis undique vestitum, ostio satis patulo and
profundo in summitate relicto, sicut ex altera iconum probe depicta videre
licet (see the third and fourth Figures of the 27. Scheme.) Ita ut Apiarium
marinum vere dixeris; primo enim intuitu e Mare ad Terram delatum, vermiculis
scatebat caeruleis parvis, qui mox a calore solis Muscas, vel Apes potius,
easque exiguas and nigras transformebantur, circumvolantesque evanescebant, ita
ut de eorum mellificatione nihil certi conspici datum fuerit, cum tamen c^erosa
materia propolis Apumque cellae manifest apparerent, at que ipsa mellis
qualiscunque substantia proculdubio urinatoribus patebit, ubi curiosius
inquisiverint haec apiaria, eaque in natali solo and salo diversis temporibus
penitius lustrarint.

Which History contains things sufficiently strange to be considered, as
whether the husk were a Plant, growing at the bottom of the Sea before, of it
self, out of whose putrefaction might be generated these strange kind of
Magots; or whether the seed of certain Bees, sinking to the bottom, might there
naturally form it self that vegetable hive, and take root; or, whether it might
not be placed there by some diving Fly; or, whether it might not be some
peculiar propriety of that Plant, whereby it might ripen or form its vegetable
juice into an Animal substance; or, whether it may not be of the nature of a
Sponge, or rather a Sponge of the nature of this, according to some of those
relations and conjectures I formerly made of that body, is a matter very
difficult to be determined. But indeed, in this description, the Excellent Piso
has not been sufficiently particular in the setting down the whole process, as
it were to be wished: There are indeed very odd progresses in the production of
several kinds of Insects, which are not less instructive then pleasant, several
of which, the diligent Goedartius has carefully observed and recorded, but
among all his Observations, he has none like this, though that of the
Hemerobius be somewhat of this kind, which is added as an Appendix by Johannes
Mey.

I have, for my own particular, besides several of those mentioned by him,
observed diverse other circumstances, perhaps, not much taken notice of, though
very common, which do indeed afford us a very coercive argument to admire the
goodness and providence of the infinitely wise Creator in his most excellent
contrivances and dispensations. I have observed, at several times of the
Summer, that many of the leaves of diverse Plants have been spotted, or, as it
were scabbed, and looking on the undersides of those of them that have been but
a litte irregular, I have perceived them to be sprinkled with diverse sorts of
little Eggs, which letting alone, I have found by degrees to grow bigger, and
become little Worms with legs, but still to keep their former places, and
those places of the leaves, of their own accords, to be grown very protuberant
upwards, and very hollow, and arched underneath, whereby those young creatures
are, as it were, sheltered and housed from external injury; diverse leaves I
have observed to grow and swell so far, as at length perfectly to enclose the
Animal, which, by other observations I have made, I ghess to contain it, and
become, as it were a womb to it, so long, till it be fit and prepared to be
translated into another state, at what time, like (what they say of) Vipers,
they gnaw their way through the womb that bred them; diverse of these kinds I
have met with upon Goosberry leaves, Rose-tree leaves, Willow leaves, and many
other kinds.

There are often to be found upon Rose-trees and Brier bushes, little red
tufts, which are certain knobs or excrescencies, growing out from the Rind, or
barks of those kinds of Plants, they are covered with strange kinds of threads
or red hairs, which feel very soft, and look not unpleasantly. In most of
these, if it has no hole in it, you shall find certain little Worms, which I
suppose to be the causes of their production; for when that Worm has eat its
way through, they, having performed what they were designed by Nature to do, by
degrees die and wither away.

Now, the manner of their production, I suppose to be thus; that the Alwise
Creator has as well implanted in every creature a faculty of knowing what place
is convenient for the hatching, nutrition, and preservation of their Eggs and
of-springs, whereby they are stimulated and directed to convenient places,
which become, as 'twere the wombs that perform those offices: As he has also
suited and adapted a property to those places whereby they grow and enclose
those seeds, and having enclosed them, provide a convenient nourishment for
them, but as soon as they have done the office of a womb, they die and wither.

The progress of enclosure I have often observed in leaves, which in those
places where those seeds have been cast, have by degrees swelled and enclosed
them, so perfectly round, as not to leave any perceptible passage out.

From this same cause, I suppose that Galls, Oak-apples, and several other
productions of that kind, upon the branches and leaves of Trees, have their
original; for if you open any of them, when almost ripe, you shall find a
little Worm in them. Thus, if you open never so many dry Galls, you shall find
either a hole whereby the Worm has eat its passage out, or if you find no
passage, you may, by breaking or cutting the Gall, find in the middle of it a
small cavity, and in it a small body, which does plainly enough yet retain a
shape, to manifest it once to have been a Worm, though it died by a too early
separation from the Oak on which it grew, its navel-string, as 'twere, being
broken off from the leaf or branch by which the Globular body that invelop'd
it, received its nourishment from the Oak.

And indeed, if we consider the great care of the Creator in the dispensations
of his providence for the propagation and increase of the race, not only of
all kind of Animals, but even of Vegetables, we cannot choose but admire and
adore him for his Excellencies, but we shall leave off to admire the creature,
or to wonder at the strange kind of acting in several Animals, which seem to
savor so much of reason; it seeming to me most manifest, that those are but
actings according to their structures, and such operations as such bodies, so
composed, must necessarily, when there are such and such circumstances
concurring, perform: thus, when we find Flies swarming, about any piece of
flesh that does begin a little to ferment; Butterflies about Colworts, and
several other leaves, which will serve to hatch and nourish their young; Gnats,
and several other Flies about the Waters, and marishy places, or any other
creatures, seeking and placing their Seeds in convenient repositories, we may,
if we attentively consider and examine it, find that there are circumstances
sufficient, upon the supposals of the excellent contrivance of their machine,
to excite and force them to act after such or such a manner; those steams that
rise from these several places may, perhaps, set several parts of these little
Animals at work, even as in the contrivance of killing a Fox or Wolf with a
Gun, the moving of a string, is the death of the Animal; for the Beast, by
moving the flesh that is laid to entrap him, pulls the string which moves the
trigger, and that lets go the Cock which on the steel strikes certain sparks of
fire which kindle the powder in the pann, and that presently flies into the
barrel, where the powder catching fire ratifies and drives out the bullet which
kills the Animal; in all which actions, there is nothing of intention or
ratiocination to be ascribed either to the Animal or Engine, but all to the
ingeniousness of the contriver.

But to return to the more immediate consideration of our Gnat: We have in it
an Instance, not usual or common, of a very stange amphibious creature, that
being a creature that inhabits the Air, does yet produce a creature, that for
some time lives in the water as a Fish, though afterward (which is as strange)
it becomes an inhabitant of the Air, like its Sire, in the form of a Fly. And
this, me thinks, does prompt me to propose certain conjectures, as Queries,
having not yet had sufficient opportunity and leisure to answer them my self
from my own Experiments or Observations.

And the first is, Whether all those things that we suppose to be bred from
corruption and putrefaction, may not be rationally supposed to have their
origination as natural as these Gnats, who, it is very probable, were first
dropped into this Water, in the form of Eggs. Those Seeds or Eggs must certainly
be very small, which so small a creature as a Gnat yields, and therefore: we
need not wonder that we find not the Eggs themselves, some of the younger of
them, which I have observed, having not exceeded a tenth part of the bulk they
have afterward come to; and next, I have observed some of those little ones
which must have been generated after the Water was enclosed in the Bottle, and
therefore most probably from Eggs, whereas those creatures have been supposed
to be bred of the corruption of the Water, there being not formerly known any
probable way how they should be generated.

A second is, whether these Eggs are immediately dropped into the Water by the
Gnats themselves, or, mediately, are brought down by the falling rain; for it
seems not very improbable, but that those small seeds of Gnats may (being,
perhaps, of so light a nature, and having so great a proportion of surface to
so small a bulk of body) be ejected into the Air, and so, perhaps, carried for
a good while too and fro in it, till by the drops of Rain it be washed out of
it.

A third is, whether multitudes of those other little creatures that are found
to inhabit the Water for some time, do not, at certain times, take wing and fly
into the Air, others dive and hide themselves in the Earth, and so contribute
to the increase both of the one and the other Element.

Postscript.
A good while since the writing of this Description, I was presented by Doctor
Peter Ball, an ingenious Member of the Royal Society, with a little Paper of
Nuts, which he told me was sent him from a Brother of his out of the Country,
from Mamhead in Devonshire, some of them were loose, having been, as I suppose,
broken off, others were still growing fast on upon the sides of a stick, which
seemed by the bark, pliableness of it, and by certain strings that grew out of
it, to be some piece of the root of a Tree; they were all of them dried, and a
little shrivelled, others more round, of a brown color; their shape was much
like a Figg, but very much smaller, some being about the bigness of a Bay-berry
others, and the biggest, of a Hazel-Nut. Some of these that had no hole in
them, I carefully opened with my Knife, and found in them a good large round
white Maggot, almost as bigg as a small Pea, which seemed shaped like other
Maggots, but shorter. I could not find them to move, though I ghess'd them to
be alive, because upon pricking them with a Pinn, there would issue out a great
deal of white mucous matter, which seemed to be from a voluntary contraction of
their skin; their husk or matrix consisted of three Coats, like the barks of
Trees, the outermost being more rough and spongie, and the thickest, the
middlemost more close, hard, white, and thin, the innermost very thin, seeming
almost like the skin within an Egg's shell. The two outermost had root in the
branch or stick, but the innermost had no stem or process, but was only a skin
that covered the cavity of the Nut. All the Nuts that had no holes eaten in
them, I found to contain these Maggots, but all that had holes, I found empty,
the Maggots, it seems, having eaten their way through, taken wings and flown
away, as this following account (which I received in writing from the same
person, as it was sent him by his Brother) manifests. In a moorish black Peaty
mould, with some small veins of whitish yellow Sands, upon occasion of digging
a hole two or three foot deep, at the head of a Pond or Pool, to set a Tree in,
at that depth, were found, about the end of October 1663. in those very veins
of Sand, those Buttons or Nuts, sticking to a little loose stick, that is, not
belonging to any live Tree, and some of them also free by themselves.

Four or five of which being then opened, some were found to contvin live
Insects come to perfection, most like to flying Ants, if not the same; in
others, Insects, yet imperfect, having but the head and wings formed, the rest
remaining a soft white pulpy substance.

Now, as this furnishes us with one odd History more, very agreeable to what I
before hinted, so I doubt not, but were men diligent observers, they might meet
with multitudes of the same kind, both in the Earth and in the Water, and in
the Air, on Trees, Plants, and other Vegetables, all places and things being,
as it were animarum plena. And I have often, with wonder and pleasure, in the
Spring and Summertime, looked close to, and diligently on, common Garden
mould, and in a very small parcel of it, found such multitudes and diversities
of little reptiles, some in husks, others only creepers, many winged, and
ready for the Air; diverse husks or habitations left behind empty. Now, if the
Earth of our cold Climate be so fertile of animate bodies, what may we think of
the fat Earth of hotter Climates? Certainly, the Sun may there, by its
activity, cause as great a parcel of Earth to fly on wings in the Air, as it
does of Water in steams and vapors. And what swarms must we suppose to be sent
out of those plentiful inundations of water which are poured down by the
sluices of Rain in such vast quantities? So that we need not much wonder at
those innumerable clouds of Locusts with which Africa, and other hot countries
are so pestred, since in those places are found all the convenient causes of
their production, namely, genitors, or Parents, concurrent receptacles or
matrixes, and a sufficient degree of natural heat and moisture.

I was going to annex a little draught of the Figure of those Nuts sent out of
Devonshire, but chancing to examine Mr. Parkinson's Herbal for something else,
and particularly about Galls and Oak-apples, I found among no less then 24.
several kinds of excrescencies of the Oak, which I doubt not, but upon
examination, will be all found to be the matrixes of so many several kinds of
Insects; I having observed many of them my self to be so, among 24. several
kinds, I say, I found one described and Figured directly like that which I had
by me, the Scheme is there to be seen, the description, because but short, I
have here adjoin'd Theatri Botanici trib. 16. Chap. 2. There grows at the
roots of old Oaks in the Springtime, and semetimes also in the very heat of
Summer, a peculiar kind of Mushrom or Excrescence, called Uva Quercina,
swelling out of the Earth, many growing one close unto another, of the fashion
of a Grape, and therefore took the name, the Oak-Grape, and is of a Purplish
color on the outside, Schem: XXVIII.
and white within like Milk, and in the end of Summer becomes hard and woody.
Whether this be the very same kind, I cannot affirm, but both the Picture and
Description come very near to that I have, but that he seems not to take notice
of the hollowness or Worm, for which it is most observable. And therefore it is
very likely, if men did but take notice, they might find very many differing
Species of these Nuts, Ovaries, or Matrixes, and all of them to have much the
same designation and office. And I have very lately found several kinds of
Excrescencies on Trees and Shrubs, which having endured the Winter, upon
opening them, I found most of them to contain little Worms, but dead, those
things that contained them being withered and dry.

Observe. XLIV. Of the tusted or Brush-born'd Gnat.
THis little creature was one of those multitudes that fill our English air all
the time that warm weather lasts, and is exactly of the shape of that I
observed to be generated and hatched out of those little Insects that wriggle
up and down in Rainwater. But, though many were of this form, yet I observed
others to be of quite other kinds; nor were all of this or the other kind
generated out of Water Insects; for whereas I observed that those that
proceeded from those Insects were at their full growth, I have also found
multitudes of the same shape, but much smaller and tenderer seeming to be very
young ones, creep up and down upon the leaves of Trees, and flying up and down
in small clusters, in places very remote from water; and this Spring, I oberv'd
one day, when the Wind was very calm, and the afternoon very fair, and pretty
warm, though it had for a long time been very cold weather, and the wind
continued still in the East, several small swarms of them playing to and fro in
little clouds in the Sun, each of which were not a tenth part of the bigness of
one of these I here have delineated, though very much of the same shape, which
makes me ghess, that each of those swarms might be the offspring of one only
Gnat, which had been hoorded up in some safe repository all this Winter by some
provident Parent, and were now, by the warmth of the Spring-air, hatched into
little Flies.

And indeed, so various, and seemingly irregular are the generations or
productions of Insects, that he that shall carefully and diligently observe the
several methods of Nature therein, will have infinitely cause further to admire
the wisdom and providence of the Creator; for not only the same kind of
creature may be produced from several kinds of ways, but the very same creature
may produce several kinds: For, as diverse Watches may be made out of several
materials, which may yet have all the same appearance, and move after the same
manner, that is* s^^w the hour equally true* the one as the other, and out of
the same kind of matter, like Watches, may be wrought differing ways; and is
one and the same Watch may, by being diversely agitated, or moved, by this or
that agent, or after this or that manner, produce a quite contrary effect: So
may it be with these most curious Engines of Insect's bodies; the All-wise God
of Nature, may have so ordered and disposed the little Automatons, that when
nourished, acted, or enlivened by this cause, they produce one kind of effect,
or animate shape, when by another they act quite another way, and another
Animal is produced. So may he so order several materials, as to make them, by
several kinds of methods, produce similar Automatons.

But to come to the Description of this Insect, as it appears through a
Microscope, of which a representation is made in the 28. Scheme. Its head A, is
exceeding small, in proportion to its body, consisting of two clusters of
pearl'd eyes BB, on each side of its head, whose pearls or eye balls are
curiously ranged like those of other Flies; between these, in the forehead of
it, there are placed upon two small black balls, CC, two long jointed horns,
tapering toward, the top, much resembling the long horns of Lobsters, each of
whose stems or quills, DD, were brisled or brushed with multitudes of small
stiff hairs, issuing out every way from the several joints, like the strings or
sproutings of the herb Horse-tail, which is often observed to grow among Corn,
and for the whole shape, it does very much resemble those brushy Vegetables;
besides these, there are two other jointed and brisled horns, or feelers, EE,
in the forepart of the head, and a proboseis, F, underneath, which in some
Gnats are very long, straight hollow pipes, by which these creatures are able
to drill and penetrate the skin, and thence, through those pipes suck so much
blood as to stuff their bellies so full till they be ready to burst.

This small head, with its appurtenances, is fastened on by a short neck, G, to
the middle of the thorax, which is large, and seems cased with a strong black
shel, HIK, out of the under part of which, issue six long and slender legs,
LLLLLL, shaped just like the legs of Flies, but spun or drawn out longer and
slenderer, which could not be expressed in the Figure, because of their great
length; and from the upper part, two oblong, but slender transparent wings, MM,
shaped somewhat like those of a Fly, underneath each of which, as I have
observed also in diverse sorts of Flies, and other kinds of Gnats, was placed a
small body, N, much resembling a drop of some transparent glutinous substance,
hardened or cooled, as it was almost ready to fall, for it has a round knob at
the end, which by degrees grows slenderer into a small stem, and near the
insertion under the wing, this stem again grows bigger; these little Pendulums,
as I may so call them, the little creature vibrates to and fro very quick when
it moves its wings, and I have sometimes observed it to move them also, whilst
the wing lay still, but always their motion seemed to further the motion of the
wing ready to follow; of what use they are, as to the moving of the wing, or
otherwise, I have not now time to examine.

Its belly was large, as it is usually in all Insects, and extended into nine
lengths or partitions, each of which was covered with round armed rings or
shells; six of which, OPQRST were transparent, and diverse kinds of Peristaltick
motions might be very easily perceived, whilst the Animal Schem* XXIX
Was alive, but especially a small clear white part V, seemed to beat like the
heart of a larger Animal. The last three divisios, W XY, were covered with
black and opacous shells. To conclude, take this creature altogether, and for
beauty and curious contrivances, it may be compared with the largest Animal
upon the Earth. Nor does the Alwise Creator seem to have shown less care and
providence in the fabric of it, then in those which seem most considerable.

Observe. XLV. Of the great Bellied Gnat or female Gnat.
THe second Gnat, delineated in the twenty ninth Scheme, is of a very differing
shape from the former; but yet of this sort also, I found several of the Gnats,
that were generated out of the Water Insect: the wings of this, were much
larger then those of the other, and the belly much bigger, shorter and of an
other shape; and, from several particulars, I ghest it to be the Female Gnat,
and the former to be the Male.

The thorax of this, was much like that of the other, having a very strong and
ridged back-piece, which went also on either side of its legs; about the wings
there were several joynted pieces of Armor, which seemed curiously and
conveniently contrived, for the promoting and strengthening the motion of the
wings: its head was much differing from the other, being much bigger and neater
shaped, and the horns that grew out between his eyes on two little balls, were
of a very differing shape from the tufts of the other Gnat, these having but a
few knots or joints, and each of those but a few, and those short and strong,
brisles. The foremost horns or feelers, were like those of the former Gnat.

One of these Gnats I have suffered to pierce the skin of my hand, with its
proboscis, and thence to draw out as much blood as to fill its belly as full as
it could hold, making it appear very red and transparent; and this without any
further pain, then whilst it was sinking in its proboscis, as it is also in the
stinging of Fleas: a good argument, that these creatures do not wound the skin,
and suck the blood out of enmity and revenge, but for mere necessity, and to
satisfy their hunger. By what means this creature is able to suck, we shall
show in another place.

Observe. XLVI. Of the white featherwing'd Moth or Tinea Argentea.
THis white long winged Moth, which is delineated in the 30. Scheme; afforded a
lovely object both to the naked Eye, and through a Microscope: to the Eye it
appeared a small Milk white Fly with four white Wings, the two foremost somewhat
longer then the two hindermost, and the two shorter about half an Inch long,
each of which four Wings seemed to consist of two small long Feathers, very
curiously tufted, or haired on each side, with purely white, and exceedingly
fine and small Hairs, proportioned to the stalks or stems, out of which they
grew, much like the tufts of a long wing-feather of some Bird, and their stalks
or stems were, like those, bended backwards and downwards, as may be plainly
seen by the draughts of them in the Figure.

Observing one of these in my Microscope, I found, in the first place, that all
the Body, Legs, Horns and the Stalks of the Wings, were covered over with
various kinds of curious white Feathers, which did, with handling or touching,
easily rubb off and fly about, in so much that looking on my Fingers, with
which I had handled this Moth, and perceiving on them little white specks, I
found by my Microscope, that they were several of the small Feathers of this
little creature, that stuck up and down in the rugosities of my Skin.

Next, I found that underneath these Feathers, the pretty Insect was covered
all over with a crusted Shell, like other of those Animals, but with one much
thinner and tenderer.

Thirdly, I found, as in Birds also is notable, it had differing and
appropriate kinds of Feathers, that covered several parts of its body.

Fourthly, surveying the parts of its body, with a more accurate and better
Magnifying Microscope, I found that the tufts or hairs of its Wings were
nothing else but a congeries, or thick set cluster of small vimina or twiggs,
resembling a small twigg of Birch, stripped or whitned, with which Brushes are
usually made, to beat out or brush off the dust from Cloth and Hangings. Every
one of the twiggs of branches that composed the Brush of the Feathers, appeared
in this bigger Magnifying Glass (of which OF which represents 1/24 part of an
Inch, is the scale, as G is of the lesser, which is only) like the figure D.
The Feathers also that covered a part of his Body, and were interspersed among
the brush of his Wings, I found, in the bigger Magnifying Glass, of the shape
A, consisting of a stalk or stem in the middle, and a seeming tuftedness or
brushy part on each side. The Feathers that covered most part of his Body and
the stalk of his wings, were, in the same Microscope, much of the figure B,
appearing of the shape of a small Feather, and seemed tufted: those which
covered the Horns and small parts of the Legs, through the same Microscope,
appeared of the shape C. Whether the tufts of any or all of these small
Feathers, consisted of such component particles as the Feathers of Birds, I
much doubt, because I find that Nature does not always keep, or operate after
the same method, in smaller and bigger creatures. And of this, we have
particular instances in the Wings of several creatures. For whereas, in Birds
of all kinds, it composes each of the Feathers of which its Wing consists, of
such an exceeding curious and most admirable and stupendous texture, as I else
where show, in the Observations on a Feather; we find it to alter its method
quite, in the fabric of the Wings of these minute creatures, composing some of
thin extended membranes Schem. XXX*
or skins, such as the Wings of Dragon-flys; in others, those skins are all
overgrown, or pretty thick bestuck, with short brisles, as in Flesh-flies; in
others, those filmes are covered, both on the upper and under side, with small
Feathers, placed almost like the tyles on a House, and are curiously ranged and
adorned with most lively colors, as is observable in Butter-flies, and several
kinds of Moths; In others, instead of their films, Nature has provided nothing,
but a matter of half a score stalks (if I well remember the number; for I have
not lately met with any of these flys, and did not, when I first observed them,
take sufficient notice of diverse particulars) and each of these stalks, with a
few single branchings on each side, resembling much the branched backbone of a
Herring or the like Fish, or a thin hair'd Peacocks feather, the top or the eye
being broken off. With a few of these on either side (which it was able to shut
up or expand at pleasure, much like a Fann, or rather like the posture of the
feathers in a wing, which ly all one under another, when shut, and by the side
of each other, when expanded) this pretty little gray Moth (for such was the
creature I observed, thus winged) could very nimbly, and as it seemed very
easily move its corpuscle, through the Air, from place to place. Other Insects
have their wings cased, or covered over, with certain hollow shells, shaped
almost like those hollow Trayes, in which Butchers carry meat, whose hollow
sides being turned downwards, do not only secure their folded wings from injury
of the earth, in which most of those creatures reside, but whilst they fly,
serves as a help to sustain and bear them up. And these are observable in
Scarabees and a multitude of other terrestrial crustaceous Insects; in which we
may yet further observe a particular providence of Nature.

Now in all these kinds of wings, we observe this particular, as a thing most
worthy remark; that where ever a wing consists of discontinued parts, the Pores
or interstitia between those parts are very seldom, either much bigger, or much
smaller, then these which we here find between the particles of these brushes,
so that it should seem to intimate, that the parts of the Air are such, that
they will not easily or readily, if at all, pass through these Pores, so that
they seem to be strainers fine enough to hinder the particles of the Air
(whether hindered by their bulk, or by their agitation, circulation, rotation
or undulation, I shall not here determine) from getting through them, and, by
that means, serve the Animal as well, if not better, then if they were little
films. I say, if not better, because I have observed that all those creatures,
that have film'd wings, move them abundantly quicker and more strongly, such
as all kind of Flies and Scarabees and Batts, then such as have their wings
covered with feathers, as Butter-flies and Birds, or twiggs, as Moths, which
have each of them a much slower motion of their wings; That little ruggedness
perhaps of their wings helping them somewhat, by taking better hold of the
parts of the Air, or not suftering them so easily to pass by, any other way
then one.

But what ever be the reason of it, it is most evident, that the smooth winged
Insects have the strongest Muscles or movent parts of their wings, and the
other much weaker; and this very Insect, we are now describing, had a very
small thorax or middle part of his body, if compared to the length and number
of his wings; which therefore, as he moved them very slowly, so must he move
them very weakly. And this last propriety do we find somewhat observed also in
bigger kind of Flying creatures, Birds; so that we see that the Wisdom and
Providence of the All-wise Creator, is not less shown in these small despicable
creatures, Flies and Moths, which we have branded with a name of ignominy,
calling them Vermin, then in those greater and more remakable animate bodies,
Birds.

I cannot here stand to add any thing about the nature of flying, though,
perhaps, on another occasion, I may say something on that subject, it being
such as may deserve a much more accurate examination and scrutiny then it has
hitherto met with; For to me there seems nothing wanting to make a man able to
fly, but what may be easily enough supplied from the Mechanics hitherto known,
save only the want of strength, which the Muscles of a man seem utterly
incapable of, by reason of their smalness and texture, but how even strength
also may be mechanically made, an artificial Muscle so contrived, that thereby
a man shall be able to exert what strength he pleases, and to regulate it also
to his own mind, I may elsewhere endeavor to manifest.

Observe. XLVII. Of the Shepherd Spider, or long legged Spider.
THe Carter, Shepherd Spider, or long-legg'd Spider, has, for two
particularities, very few similar creatures that I have met with; the first,
which is discoverable only by the Microscope, and is in the first and second
Figures of the 31. Scheme, plainly described, is the curious contrivance of his
eyes, of which (differing from most other Spiders) he has only two, and those
placed upon the top of a small pillar or hillock, rising out of the middle of
the top of its back, or rather the crown of its head, for they were fixed on
the very top of this pillar (which is about the height of one of the
transverse Diameters of the eye, and looked on in another posture, appeared
much of the shape, BCD) The two eyes, BB, were placed back to back, with the
transparent parts, or the pupils, looking toward either side, but somewhat
more forward then backwards. C was the column or neck on which they stood, and
D the crown of the head out of which that neck sprung.

These eyes, to appearance, seemed to be of the very same structure with that
of larger binocular creatures, seeming to have a very smooth and very
protuberant Cornea, and in the midst of it to have a very black pupil,
encompassed about with a kind of gray Iris, as appears by the Figure; whether
it were able to move these eyes to and fro, I have not observed, but it is not
very likely he should, the pillar or neck C, seeming to be covered and
stiffen'd with a crusty shell; but Nature, in probability, has supplied Schem
XXXI
that defect, by making the Cornea so very protuberant, and setting it so clear
above the shadowing or obstructing of its prospect by the body, that it is
likely each eye may perceive, though not see distinctly, almost a Hemisphere,
whence having so small and round a body placed upon such long legs, it is
quickly able so to wind, and turn it, as to see any thing distinct. This
creature, as do all other Spiders I have yet examined, does very much differ
from most other Insects in the Figure of its eyes; for I cannot, with my best
Microscope, discover its eyes to be any ways knobb'd or pearl'd like those of
other Insects.

The second Peculiarity which is obvious to the eye, is also very remarkable,
and that is the prodigious length of its legs, in proportion to its small
round body, each leg of this I drew, being above sixteen times the length of
its whole body, and there are some which have them yet longer, and others that
seem of the same kind, that have them a great deal shorter; the eight legs are
each of them jointed, just like those of a Crab, but every of the parts are
spun out prodigiously longer in proportion; each of these legs are terminated
in a small case or shell, shaped almost like that of a Musle-shell, as is
evident in the third Figure of the same Scheme (that represents the appearance
of the under part or belly of the creature) by the shape of the protuberant
conical body, IIII, etc. These are as 'twere placed or fastened on to the
protuberant body of the Insect, which is to be supposed very high at M, making
a kind of blunt cone whereof M is to be supposed the Apex, about which greater
cone of the body, the smaller cones of the legs are placed, each of them
almost reaching to the top in so admirable a manner, as does not a little
manifest the wisdom of Nature in the contrivance; for these long Leavers (as I
may so call them) of the legs, having not the advantage of a long end on the
other side of the hypomochlion or centers on which the parts of the legs move,
must necessarily require a vast strength to move them, and keep the body
balanced and suspended, in so much, that if we should suppose a man's body
suspended by such a contrivance, an hundred and fifty times the strength of a
man would not keep the body from falling on the breast. To supply therefore
each of these legs with its proper strength, Nature has allowed to each a
large Chest or Cell, in which is included a very large and strong Muscle, and
thereby this little Animal is not only able to suspend its body upon less then
these eight, but to move it very swiftly over the tops of grass and leaves.

Nor are these eight legs so prodigiously long, but the ninth, and tenth,
which are the two claws, KK, are as short, and serve in steed of a proboscis,
for those seemed very little longer then his mouth; each of them had three
parts, but very short, the joints KK, which represented the third, being longer
then both the other. This creature, seems (which I have several times with
pleasure observed) to throw its body upon the prey, instead of its hands, not
unlike a hunting Spider, which leaps like a Cat at a Mouse. The whole Fabric
was a very pretty one, and could I have dissected it, I doubt not but I should
have found as many singularities within it as without, perhaps, for the most
part, not unlike the parts of a Crab, which this little creature does in many
things, very much resemble; the curiosity of whose contrivance, I have in
another place examined. I omit the description of the horns, AA, of the mouth,
LL, which seemed like that of a Crab; the speckledness of his shell, which
proceeded from a kind of feathers or hairs, and the hairiness of his legs, his
large thorax and little belly, and the like, they being manifested by the
Figure; and shall only take notice that the three parts of the body, namely,
the head, breast, and belly, are in this creature strangely confused, so that
it is difficult to determine which is which, as they are also in a Crab; and
indeed, this seems to be nothing else, but an Air-crab, being made more light
and nimble, proportionable to the medium wherein it resides; and as Air seems to
have but one thousandth part of the body of Water, so does this Spider seem not
to be a thousandth part of the bulk of a Crab.

Observe. XLVIII. Of the hunting Spider, and several other sorts of Spiders.
THe hunting Spider is a small gray Spider, prettily bespeck'd with black spots
all over its body, which the Microscope discovers to be a kind of feathers like
those on Butterflies wings, or the body of the white Moth I lately described.
Its gate is very nimble by fits, sometimes running, and sometimes leaping, like
a Grasshopper almost, then standing still, and setting it self on its hinder
legs, it will very nimbly turn its body, and look round it self every way: It
has six very conspicuous eyes, two looking directly forwards, placed just
before; two other, on either side of those, looking forward and side-ways; and
two other about the middle of the top of its back or head, which look backwards
and side-wards; these seemed to be the biggest. The surface of them all was
very black, sphaerical, purely polished, reflecting a very clear and distinct
Image of all the ambient objects, such as a window, a man's hand, a white
Paper, or the like. Some other properties of this Spider, observed by the most
accomplished Mr. Evelyn, in his travels in Italy, are most emphatically set
forth in the History hereunto annexed, which he was pleased upon my desire to
send me in writing.

Of all the sorts of Insects, there is none has afforded me more divertisements
then the Venatores, which are a sort of Lupi, that have their Denns in the
rugged walls, and crevices of our houses; a small brown and delicately spotted
kind of Spiders, whose hinder legs are longer then the rest.

Such I did frequently observe at Rome, which espying a Fly at three or four
yards distance, upon the Balcony (where I stood) would not make directly to
her, but craul under the Rail, till being arrived to the Antipodes, it would
steal up, seldom missing its aim; but if it chanced to want any thing of being
perfectly opposite, would at first peep, immediately slide down again, till
taking better notice, it would come the next time exactly upon the Fly's back:
But, if this hapn'd not to be within a competent leap, then would this Insect
move so softly, as the very shadow of the Gnomon seemed not to be more
imperceptible, unless the Fly moved; and then would the Spider move also in the
same proportion, keeping that just time with her motion, as if the same Soul
had animated both those little bodies; and whether it were forwards, backwards,
or to either side, without at all turning her body, like a well managed Horse:
But, if the capricious Fly took wing, and pitched upon another place behind our
Huntress, then would the Spider whirle its body so nimbly about, as nothing
could be imagined more swift; by which means, she always kept the head toward
her prey, though to appearance, as immovable, as if it had been a Nail driven
into the Wood, till by that indiscernable progress (being arrived within the
sphere of her reach) she made a fatal leap (swift as Lightning) upon the Fly,
catching him in the pole, where she never quitted hold till her belly was full,
and then carried the remainder home. I have beheld them instructing their young
ones, how to hunt, which they would sometimes discipline for not well
observing; but, when any of the old ones did (as sometimes) miss a leap, they
would run out of the field, and hide them in their crannies, as ashamed, and
happily not be seen abroad for four or five hours after; for so long have I
watched the nature of this strange Insect, the contemplation of whose so
wonderful sagacity and address has amazed me; nor do I find in any chase
whatsoever, more cunning and Stratagem observed: I have found some of these
Spiders in my Garden, when the weather (toward the Spring) is very hot, but
they are nothing so eager of hunting as they are in Italy.

There are multitudes of other sorts of Spiders, whose eyes, and most other
parts and properties, are so exceedingly different both from those I have
described, and from one another, that it would be almost endless, at least too
long for my present Essay, to describe them, as some with six eyes, placed in
quite another order; others with eight eyes; others with fewer, and some with
more. They all seem to be creatures of prey, and to feed on other small
Insects, but their ways of catching them seem very differing: the Shepherd
Spider by running on his prey; the Hunting Spider by leaping on it, other sorts
weave Nets, or Cobwebs, whereby they ensnare them, Nature having both fitted
them with materials and tools, and taught them how to work and weave their
Nets, and to lie perdue, and to watch diligently to run on any Fly, as soon as
ever entangled.

Their thread or web seems to be spun out of some viscous kind of excrement,
lying in their belly, which, though soft when drawn out, is, presently by
reason of its smalness, hardened and dried by the ambient Air Examining several
of which with my Microscope, I found them to appear much like white Hors-hair,
or some such transparent horny substance, and to be of very differing
magnitudes; some appearing as bigg as a Pigg's brisle, others equal to a
Horss-hair; other no bigger then a man's hair; others yet smaller and finer. I
observed further, that the radiating chords of the web were much bigger, and
smoother then those that were woven round, which seemed smaller, and all over
knotted or pearl'd, with small transparent Globules, not unlike small Crystal
Beads or seed Pearls, thin strung on a Clew of Silk; which, whether they were
so spun by the Spider, or by the adventitious moisture of a fogg (which I have
observed to cover all these filaments with such Crystalline Beads) I will not
now dispute.

These threads were some of them so small, that I could very plainly, with the
Microscope, discover the same consecutions of colors as in a Prisme, and they
seemed to proceed from the same cause with those colors which I have already
described in thin plated bodies.

Much resembling a Cobweb, or a confused lock of these Cylinders, is a certain
white substance which, after a fogg, may be observed to fly up and down the
Air; catching several of these, and examining them with my Microscope, I found
them to be much of the same form, looking most like to a flake of Worsted
prepared to be spun, though by what means they should be generated, or
produced, is not easily imagined: they were of the same weight, or very little
heavier then the Air; and it is not unlikely, but that those great white clouds,
that appear all the Summer time, may be of the same substance.

Schem. XXXII


Observe. XLIX. Of an Ant or Pismire.
THis was a creature, more troublesome to be drawn, then any of the rest, for I
could not, for a good while, think of a way to make it suffer its body to ly
quiet in a natural posture; but whilst it was alive, if its feet were fettered
in Wax or Glue, it would so twist and wind its body, that I could not any ways
get a good view of it; and if I killed it, its body was so little, that I did
often spoil the shape of it, before I could thoroughly view it: for this is the
nature of these minute Bodies, that as soon, almost, as ever their life is
destroyed, their parts immediately shrivel, and lose their beauty; and so is it
also with small Plants, as I instanced before, in the description of Moss. And
thence also is the reason of the variations in the beards of wild Oats, and in
those of Muskgrass seed, that their bodies, being exceeding small, those small
variations which are made in the surfaces of all bodies, almost upon every
change of Air, especially if the body be porous, do here become sensible, where
the whole body is so small, that it is almost nothing but surface; for as in
vegetable substances, I see no great reason to think, that the moisture of the
Air (that, sticking to a wreathed beard, does make it untwist) should
evaporate, or exhale away, any faster then the moisture of other bodies, but
rather that the avolation from, or access of moisture to, the surfaces of
bodies being much the same, those bodies become most sensible of it, which have
the least proportion of body to their surface. So is it also with Animal
substances; the dead body of an Ant, or such little creature, does almost
instantly shrivel and dry, and your object shall be quite another thing, before
you can half delineate it, which proceeds not from the extraordinary
exhalation, but from the small proportion of body and juices, to the usual
drying of bodies in the Air, especially if warm. For which inconvenience, where
I could not otherwise remove it, I thought of this expedient.

I took the creature, I had designed to delineate, and put it into a drop of
very well rectified spirit of Wine, this I found would presently dispatch, as
it were, the Animal, and being taken out of it, and laid on a paper, the
spirit of Wine would immediately fly away, and leave the Animal dry, in its
natural posture, or at least, in a constitution, that it might easily with a
pin be placed, in what posture you desired to draw it, and the limbs would so
remain, without either moving, or shriveling. And thus I dealt with this Ant,
which I have here delineated, which was one of many, of a very large kind, that
inhabited under the Roots of a Tree, from whence they would sally out in great
parties, and make most grievous havoc of the Flowers and Fruits, in the
ambient Garden, and return back again very expertly, by the same ways and
paths they went.

It was more then half the bigness of an Earwig, of a dark brown, or reddish
color, with long legs, on the hinder of which it would stand up, and raise its
head as high as it could above the ground, that it might stare the further
about it, just after the same manner as I have also observed a hunting Spider
to do: and putting my finger toward them, they have at first all run toward
it, till almost at it; and then they would stand round about it, at a certain
distance, and smell, as it were, and consider whether they should any of them
venture any further, till one more bold then the rest venturing to climb it,
all the rest, if I would have suffered them, would have immediately followed:
many such other seemingly rational actions I have observed in this little
Vermin with much pleasure, which would be too long to be here related; those
that desire more of them may satisfy their curiosity in Ligons History of the
Barbados.

Having ensnared several of these into a small Box, I made choice of the
tallest grown among them, and separating it from the rest, I gave it a Gill of
Brandy, or Spirit of Wine, which after a while even knocked him down dead
drunk, so that he became moveless, though at first putting in he struggled for
a pretty while very much, till at last, certain bubbles issuing out of its
mouth, it ceased to move; this (because I had before found them quickly to
recover again, if they were taken out presently) I suffered to lie above an
hour in the Spirit; and after I had taken it out, and put its body and legs
into a natural posture, remained moveless about an hour; but then, upon a
sudden, as if it had been awaken out of a drunken sleep, it suddenly revived
and ran away; being caught, and served as before, he for a while continued
struggling and striving, till at last there issued several bubbles out of its
mouth, and then, tanquam animam expirasset, he remained moveless for a good
while; but at length again recovering, it was again redipt, and suffered to lie
some hours in the Spirit; notwithstanding which, after it had layen dry some
three or four hours, it again recovered life and motion: Which kind of
Experiments, if prosecuted, which they highly deserve, seem to me of no
inconsiderable use toward the invention of the Latent Scheme, (as the Noble
Verulam calls it) or the hidden, unknown Texture of Bodies.

Of what Figure this Creature appeared through the Microscope, the 32. Scheme
(though not so carefully graven as it ought) will represent to the eye, namely,
That it had a large head AA, at the upper end of which were two protuberant
eyes, pearl'd like those of a Fly, but smaller BB; out of the Nose, or foremost
part, issued two horns CC, of a shape sufficiently differing from those of a
blew Fly, though indeed they seem to be both the same kind of Organ, and to
serve for a kind of smelling; beyond these were two indented jaws DD, which he
opened side-wayes, and was able to gape them asunder very wide; and the ends of
them being armed with teeth, which meeting went between each other, it was able
to grasp and hold a heavy body, three or four times the bulk and weight of its
own body: It had only six legs, shaped like those of a Fly, which, as I showed
before, is an Argument that it is a winged Insect, and though I could not
perceive any sign of them in the middle part of its body (which seemed to
consist of three joints or pieces EFG, out of which sprung two legs, yet it is
known that there are of them that have long wings, and fly up and down in the
air.

The third and last part of its body III was bigger and larger then the other
two, unto which it was joined by a very small middle, and had a kind of loose
shell, or another distinct part of its body H, which seemed to be interposed,
and to keep the thorax and belly from touching.

The whole body was cased over with a very strong armor, and the belly III was
covered likewise with multitudes of small white shining brisles; the legs,
horns, head, and middle parts of its body were bestuck with hairs also, but
smaller and darker.

Observe. L. Of the wandering Mite.
IN September and October, 1661. I observed in Oxford several of these little
pretty Creatures to wander to and fro, and often to travel over the plains of
my Window. And in September and October. 1663. I observed likewise several of
these very same Creatures traversing a window at London, and looking without
the window upon the subjacent wall, I found whole flocks of the same kind
running to and fro among the small groves and thickets of green moss, and upon
the curiously spreading vegetable blew or yellow moss, which is a kind of a
Mushrome or Jewsear.

These Creatures to the naked eye seemed to be a kind of black Mite, but much
nimbler and stronger then the ordinary Cheese-Mites; but examining them in a
Microscope, I found them to be a very fine crusted or shell'd Insect, much like
that represented in the first Figure of the three and thirtieth Scheme, with a
protuberant oval shell A, indented or pitted with an abundance of small pits,
all covered over with little white brisles, whose points all directed backwards.

It had eight legs, each of them provided with a very sharp tallon, or claw at
the end, which this little Animal, in its going, fastened into the pores of the
body over which it went. Each of these legs were bestuck in every joint of them
with multitudes of small hairs, or (if we respect the proportion they bore to
the bigness of the leg) turnpikes, all pointing toward the claws.

The Thorax, or middle parts of the body of this Creature, was exceeding small,
in respect both of the head and belly, it being nothing but that part which was
covered by the two shells BB, though it seemed to grow thicker underneath: And
indeed, if we consider the great variety Nature uses in proportioning the three
parts of the body, the Head, Thorax, and Belly) we shall not wonder at the
small proportion of this Thorax, nor at the vaster bulk of the belly, for could
we exactly anatomise this little Creature, and observe the particular designs
of each part, we should doubtless, as we do in all her more manageable and
tractable fabrics, find much more reason to admire the excellency of her
contrivance and workmanship, then to wonder, it was not made otherwise.

The head of this little Insect was shaped somewhat like a Mite's, that is, it
had a long snout, in the manner of a Hogs, with a knobbed ridge running along
the middle of it, which was bestuck on either side with many small brisles, all
pointing forward, and two very large pikes or horns, which rose from the top of
the head, just over each eye, and pointed forward also. It had two pretty large
black eyes on either side of the head EE, from one of which I could see a very
bright reflection of the window, which made me ghess, that the Cornea of it was
smooth, like those of bigger Insects. Its motion was pretty quick and strong,
it being able very easily to tumble a stone or clod four times as big as its
whole body.

At the same time and place, and diverse times since, I have observed with my
Microscope, another little Insect, which, though I have not annexed the picture
of, may be worth noting, for its exceeding nimbleness as well as smalness; it
was as small as a Mite, with a body deep and ridged, almost like a Flea; it had
eight blood-red legs, not very long, but slender; and two horns or feelers
before. Its motion was so exceeding quick, that I have often lost sight of one
I have observed with my naked eye; and though, when it was not frighted, I was
able to follow the motions of some with my Microscope; yet if it were never so
little startled, it posted away with such speed, and turned and vvinded it
self so quick, that I should presently lose sight of it.

When I first observed the former of these Insects, or Mites, I began to
conjecture, that certainly I had found out the vagabond Parents of those Mites
we find in Cheeses, Meal, Corn, Seeds, musty Barrels, musty Leather, etc. these
little Creatures, vvandring to and fro every vvhither, might perhaps, as they
were invited hither and thither by the musty steams of several putrefying
bodies, make their invasions upon those new and pleasing territories, and there
spending the remainder of their life, which might be perhaps a day, or
thereabouts, in very plentiful and riotous living, might leave their offspring
behind them, which by the change of the soil and Country they now inhabit,
might be quite altered from the hew of their primogenitors, and, like Mores
translated into Northern European Climates, after a little time, change both
their skin and shape. And this seems yet more probable in these Insects,
because that the soil or body they inhabit, seems to be almost half their
parent, for it not only hatches and brings those little eggs, or seminal
principles, to perfection, but seems to augment and nourish them also before
they are hatched or shaped; for it is obvious enough to be observed, that the
eggs of many other Insects, and particularly of Mites, are increased in bulk
after they are laid out of the bodies of the Insects, and plump'd sometimes
into many times their former bigness, so that the bodies they are laid in
being, as it were, half their mothers, we shall not wonder that it should have
such an active power to change their forms. We find by relations how much the
Negro Women do besmeer the offspring of the Spaniard, bringing forth neither
white-skinn'd nor black, but tawny hided Mulattos.

Now, though I propound this as probable, I have not yet been so far certify'd
by Observations as to conclude any thing, either positively or negatively,
concerning it. Perhaps, some more lucky diligence may please the curious
Inquirer with the discovery of this, to be a truth, which I now conjecture, and
may thereby give him a satisfactory account of the cause of those creatures,
whose original seems yet so obscure, and may give him cause to believe, that
many other animate beings, that seem also to be the mere product of
putrefaction, may be innobled with a Pedigree as ancient as the first creation,
and far exceed the greatest beings in their numerous Genealogies. But on the
other side, if it should be found that these, or any other animate body, have
no immediate similar Parent, I have in another place set down a conjectural
Hypothesis whereby those Phenomenon may likely enough be solved, wherein the
infinite wisdom and providence of the Creator is no less rare and wonderful.

Observe. LI. Of the Crab-like Insect.
REading one day in September. I chanced to observe a very small creature creep
over the Book I was reading, very slowly; having a Microscope by me, I observed
it to be a creature of a very unusual form, and that not less notable; such as
is described in the second Figure of the 33. Scheme. It was about the bigness
of a large Mite, or somewhat longer, it had ten legs, eight of which, AAAA,
were topt with very sharp claws, and were those upon which he walked, seeming
shaped much like those of a Crab, which in many other things also this little
creature resembled; for the two other claws, BB, which were the foremost of all
the ten, and seemed to grow out of his head, like the horns of other Animals,
were exactly formed in the manner of Crabs or Lobsters claws, for they were
shaped and jointed much like those represened in the Scheme, and the ends of
them were furnished with a pair of claws or pincers, CC, which this little
animal did open and shut at pleasure: It seemed to make use of those two horns
or claws both for feelers and holders; for in its motion it carried these aloft
extended before, moving them to and fro, just as a man blindfolded would do his
hands when he is fearful of running against a wall, and if I put a hair to it,
it would readily take hold of it with these claws, and seem to hold it fast.
Now, though these horns seemed to serve him for two uses, namely, for feeling
and holding; yet he seemed neither blind, having two small black spots, DD,
which by the make of them, and the bright reflection from them seemed to be his
eyes; nor did it want other hands, having another pair of claws, EE, very near
placed to its mouth, and seemed adjoining to it.

The whole body was cased over with armour-shells, as is usual in all those
kinds of crustaceous creatures, especially about their bellies, and seemed of
three kinds; the head F seemed covered with a kind of scaly shell, the thorax
with two smooth shells, or Rings, GG, and the belly with eight knobb'd ones. I
could not certainly find whether it had under these last shells any wings, but
I suspect the contrary; for I have not found any winged Insect with eight
legs, two of those legs being always converted into wings, and, for the most
part, those that have but six, have wings.

This creature, though I could never meet with more then one of them, and so
could not make so many examinations of it as otherwise I would, I did
notwithstanding, by reason of the great curiosity that appeared to me in its
shape, delineate it, to show that, in all likelihood, Nature had crowded
together into this very minute Insect, as many, and as excellent contrivances,
as into the body of a very large Crab, which exceeds it in bulk, perhaps, some
Millions of times; for as to all the apparent parts, there is a greater rather
then a less multiplicity of parts, each leg has as many parts, and as many
joints as a Crabs, nay, and as many hairs or brisles; and the like may be in
all the other visible parts; and it is very likely, that the internal
curiosities are not less excellent: It being a general rule in Nature's
proceedings, that where she begins to display any excellency, if the subject be
further searched into, it will manifest, that there is not less curiosity in
those parts which our single eye cannot reach, then in those which are more
obvious.

Observe. LII. Of the small Silver-colour'd Book-worm.
AS among greater Animals there are many that are scaled, both for ornament and
defense, so are there not wanting such also among the lesser bodies of Insects,
whereof this little creature gives us an Instance. It is a small white
Silver-shining Worm or Moth, which I found much conversant among Books and
Papers, and is supposed to be that which corrodes and eats holes through the
leaves and covers; it appears to the naked eye, a small glistering
Pearl-colour'd Moth, which upon the removing of Books and Papers in the Summer,
is often observed very nimbly to scud, and pack away to some lurking cranney,
where it may the better protect it self from any appearing dangers. Its head
appears bigg and blunt, and its body tapers from it toward the tail, smaller
and smaller, being shaped almost like a Carret.

This the Microscopical appearance will more plainly manifest, which exhibits,
in the third Figure of the 33. Scheme, a conical body, divided into fourteen
several partitions, being the appearance of so many several shells, or shields
that cover the whole body, every of these shells are again covered or tiled
over with a multitude of thin transparent scales, which, from the multiplicity
of their reflecting surfaces, make the whole Animal appear of a perfect
Pearl-colour.

Which, by the way, may hint us the reason of that so much admired appearance
of those so highly esteemed bodies, as also of the like in mother of
Pearl-shells, and in multitudes of other shelly Sea-substances; for they each
of them consisting of an infinite number of very thin shells or laminated
orbiculations, cause such multitudes of reflections, that the compositions of
them together with the reflections of others that are so thin as to afford
colors (of which I elsewhere give the reason) gives a very pleasant reflection
of light. And that this is the true cause, seems likely, first, because all
those so appearing bodies are compounded of multitudes of plated substances.
And next that, by ordering any trasparent substance after this manner, the like
Phenomenon may be produced; this will be made very obvious by the blowing of
Glass into exceeding thin shells, and then breaking them into scales, which any
lamp-worker will presently do; for a good quantity of these scales, laid in a
heap together, have much the same resemblance of Pearls. Another way, not less
instructive and pleasant, is a way which I have several times done, which is by
working and tossing, as 'twere, a parcel of pure crystalline glass whilst it is
kept glowing hot in the blown flame of a Lamp, for, by that means, that purely
transparent body will be so divided into an infinite number of plates, or small
strings, with interposed aerial plates and fibers, that from the multiplicity
of the reflections from each of those internal surfaces, it may be drawn out
into curious Pearl-like or Silver wire, which though small, will yet be
opacous; the same thing I have done with a composition of red Colophon and
Turpentine, and a little Bee's Wax, and may be done likewise with Birdlime, and
such like glutinous and transparent bodies: But to return to our description.

The small blunt head of this Insect was furnished on either side of it with a
cluster of eyes, each of which seemed to contain but a very few, in comparison
of what I had observed the clusters of other Insects to abound with; each of
these clusters were beset with a row of small brisles, much like the cilia or
hairs on the eyelids, and, perhaps, they served for the same purpose. It had
two long horns before, which were straight, and tapering toward the top,
curiously ring'd or knobb'd, and brisled much like the Marsh Weed, called
Horse-tail, or Cats-tail, having at each knot a fringed Girdle, as I may so
call it, of smaller hairs, and several bigger and larger brisles, here and
there dispersed among them: besides these, it had two shorter horns, or
feelers, which were knotted and fringed, just as the former, but wanted
brisles, and were blunt at the ends; the hinder part of the creature was
terminated with three tails, in every particular resembling the two longer
horns that grew out of the head: The legs of it were scaled and hair'd much
like the rest, but are not expressed in this Figure, the Moth being entangled
all in Glue, and so the legs of this appeared not through the Glass which
looked perpendicularly upon the back.

This Animal probably feeds upon the Paper and covers of Books, and perforates
in them several small round holes, finding, perhaps, a convenient nourishment
in those husks of Hemp and Flax, which have passed through so many scourings,
washings, dressings and dryings, as the parts of old Paper must necessarily
have suffered; the digestive faculty, it seems, of these little creatures being
able yet further to work upon those stubborn parts, and reduce them into
another form.

And indeed, when I consider what a heap of Saw-dust or chips this little
creature (which is one of the teeth of Time) conveys into its intrals. I cannot
choose but remember and admire the excellent contrivance of Nature, in placing
in Animals such a fire, as is continually nourished and supplied by the
materials conveyed into the stomach, and fomented by the bellows of the lungs;
and in so contriving the most admirable fabric of Animals, as to make the very
spending and wasting of that fire, to be instrumental to the procuring and
collecting more materials to augment and cherish it self, which indeed seems to
be the principal end of all the contrivances observable in bruit Animals.

Observe. LIII. Of a Flea.
THe strength and beauty of this small creature, had it no other relation at
all to man, would deserve a description.

For its strength, the Microscope is able to make no greater discoveries of it
then the naked eye, but only the curious contrivance of its legs and joints,
for the exerting that strength, is very plainly manifested, such as no other
creature, I have yet observed, has any thing like it; for the joints of it are
so adapted, that he can, as 'twere, fold them short one within another, and
suddenly stretch, or spring them out to their whole length, that is, of the
fore-leggs, the part A, of the 34. Scheme, lies within B, and B within C,
parallel to, or side by side each other; but the parts of the two next, lie
quite contrary, that is, D without E, and E without F, but parallel also; but
the parts of the hinder legs, G, H and I, bend one within another, like the
parts of a double jointed Ruler, or like the foot, leg and thigh of a man;
these six legs he clitches up altogether, and when he leaps, springs them all
out, and thereby exerts his whole strength at once.

But, as for the beauty of it, the Microscope manifests it to be all over
adorned with a curiously polished suit of sable Armor, neatly jointed, and
beset with multitudes of sharp pinns, shaped almost like Porcupine's Quills, or
bright conical Steel-bodkins; the head is on either side beautified with a
quick and round black eye K, behind each of which also appears a small cavity,
L, in which he seems to move to and fro a certain thin film beset with many
small transparent hairs, which probably may be his ears; in the forepart of his
head, between the two fore-leggs, he has two small long jointed feelers, or
rather smellers, MM, which have four joints, and are hairy, like those of
several other creatures; between these, it has a small proboscis, or probe,
NNO, that seems to consist of a Schem XXXIV
Schem. XXXV.
tube NN, and a tongue or sucker O, which I have perceived him to slip in and
out. Besides these, it has also two chaps or biters PP, which are somewhat like
those of an Ant, but I could not perceive them toothed; these were shaped very
like the blades of a pair of round top'd Scizers, and were opened and shut just
after the same manner; with these Instruments does this little busy Creature
bite and pierce the skin, and suck out the blood of an Animal, leaving the skin
inflamed with a small round red spot. These parts are very difficult to be
discovered, because, for the most part, they lie covered between the forelegs.
There are many other particulars, which, being more obvious, and affording no
great matter of information, I shall pass by, and refer the Reader to the
Figure.

Observe. LIVE. Of a Louse.
THis is a Creature so officious, that 'twill be known to every one at one time
or other, so busy, and so impudent, that it will be intruding it self in every
ones company, and so proud and aspiring withal, that it fears not to trample
on the best, and affects nothing so much as a Crown; feeds and lives very high,
and that makes it so saucy, as to pull any one by the ears that comes in its
way, and will never be quiet till it has drawn blood: it is troubled at nothing
so much as at a man that scratches his head, as knowing that man is plotting
and contriving some mischief against it, and that makes it oftentime sculk into
some meaner and lower place, and run behind a man's back, though it go very much
against the hair; which ill conditions of it having made it better known then
trusted, would exempt me from making any further description of it, did not my
faithful Mercury, my Microscope, bring me other information of it. For this has
discovered to me, by means of a very bright light cast on it, that it is a
Creature of a very odd shape; it has a head shaped like that expressed in 35.
Scheme marked with A, which seems almost Conical, but is a little flatted on
the upper and under sides, at the biggest part of which, on either side behind
the head (as it were, being the place where other Creatures ears stand) are
placed its two black shining goggle eyes BB, looking backwards, and fenced
round with several small cilia or hairs that incompass it, so that it seems
this Creature has no very good foresight: It does not seem to have any
eyelids, and therefore perhaps its eyes were so placed, that it might the
better cleanse them with its forelegs; and perhaps this may be the reason, why
they so much avoid and run from the light behind them, for being made to live
in the shady and dark recesses of the hair, and thence probably their eye
having a great aperture, the open and clear light, especially that of the Sun,
must needs very much offend them; to secure these eyes from receiving any
injury from the hairs through which it passes, it has two horns that grow
before it, in the place where one would have thought the eyes should be; each
of these CC has four joints, which are fringed, as 'twere, with small brisles,
from which to the tip of its snout D, the head seems very round and tapering,
ending in a very sharp nose D, which seems to have a small hole, and to be the
passage through which he sucks the blood. Now whereas if it be placed on its
back, with its belly upwards, as it is in the 35. Scheme, it seems in several
Positions to have a resemblance of chaps, or jaws, as is represented in the
Figure by EE, yet in other postures those dark strokes disappear; and having
kept several of them in a box for two or three days, so that for all that time
they had nothing to feed on, I found, upon letting one creep on my hand, that
it immediately fell to sucking, and did neither seem to thrust its nose very
deep into the skin, nor to open any kind of mouth, but I could plainly perceive
a small current of blood, which came directly from its snout, and past into its
belly; and about A there seemed a contrivance, somewhat resembling a Pump, pair
of Bellows, or Heart, for by a very swift systole and diastole the blood seemed
drawn from the nose, and forced into the body. It did not seem at all, though I
viewed it a good while as it was sucking, to thrust more of its nose into the
skin then the very snout D, nor did it cause the least discernable pain, and
yet the blood seemed to run through its head very quick and freely, so that it
seems there is no part of the skin but the blood is dispersed into, nay, even
into the cuticula; for had it thrust its whole nose in from D to CC, it would
not have amounted to the supposed thickness of that tegument, the length of the
nose being not more then a three hundredth part of an inch. It has six legs,
covered with a very transparent shell, and joynted exactly like a Crab's, or
Lobster's; each leg is divided into six parts by these joints, and those have
here and there several small hairs; and at the end of each leg it has two
claws, very properly adapted for its peculiar use, being thereby enabled to
walk very securely both on the skin and hair; and indeed this contrivance of
the feet is very curious, and could not be made more commodiously and
compendiously, for performing both these requisite motions, of walking and
climbing up the hair of a man's head, then it is: for, by having the lesser claw
(a) set so much short of the bigger (b) when it walks on the skin the shorter
touches not, and then the feet are the same with those of a Mite, and several
other small Insects, but by means of the small joints of the longer claw it can
bend it round, and so with both claws take hold of a hair, in the manner
represented in the Figure, the long transparent Cylinder FFF, being a Man's
hair held by it.

The Thorax seemed cased with another kind of substance then the belly, namely,
with a thin transparent horny substance, which upon the fasting of the Creature
did not grow flaccid; through this I could plainly see the blood, sucked from
my hand, to be variously distributed, and moved to and fro; and about G there
seemed a pretty big white substance, which seemed to be moved within its
thorax; besides, there appeared very many small milk-white vessels, which croft
over the breast between the legs, out of which, on either side, were many small
branchings, these seemed to be the veins and arteries, for that which is
analogus to blood in all Insects is milk-white.

The belly is covered with a transparent substance likewise, but more
resembling a skin then a shell, for it is grained all over the belly just like
the skin in the palms of a man's hand, and when the belly is empty, grows very
flaccid and wrinkled; at the upper end of this is placed the stomach HH, and
perhaps also the white spot II may be the liver or pancreas, which by the
peristaltick motion of the guts, is a little moved to and fro, not with a
systole and diastole, but rather with a thronging or justling motion. Viewing
one of these Creatures, after it had fasted two days, all the hinder part was
lank and flaccid, and the white spot II hardly moved, most of the white
branchings disappeared, and most also of the redness or sucked blood in the
guts, the peristaltick motion of which was scarce discernable; but upon the
suffering it to suck, it presently filled the skin of the belly, and of the six
scolop'd embosments on either side, as full as it could be stuffed; the stomach
and guts were as full as they could hold; the peristaltick motion of the gut
grew quick, and the justling motion of II accordingly; multitudes of milk-white
vessels seemed quickly filled, and turgid, which were perhaps the veins and
arteries, and the Creature was so greedy, that though it could not contain
more, yet it continued sucking as fast as ever, and as fast emptying it self
behind: the digestion of this Creature must needs be very quick, for though I
perceived the blood thicker and blacker when sucked, yet, when in the guts, it
was of a very lovely ruby color, and that part of it, which was digested into
the veins, seemed white; whence it appears, that a further digestion of blood
may make it milk, at least of a resembling color: What is else observable in
the figure of this Creature, may be seen by the 35. Scheme.

Observe. LV. Of Mites.
THe least of Reptiles I have hitherto met with, is a Mite, a Creature whereof
there are some so very small, that the sharpest fight, unassisted with Glasses,
is not able to discern them, though, being white of themselves, they move on a
black and smooth surface; and the Eggs, out of which these Creatures seem to be
hatched, are yet smaller, those being usually not above a four or five
hundredth part of a well grown Mite, and those well grown Mites not much above
one hundredth of an inch in thickness; so that according to this reckoning
there may be no less then a million of well grown Mites contained in a cubick
inch, and five hundred times as many Eggs.

Notwithstanding which minuteness a good Microscope discovers those small
movable specks to be very prettily shaped Insects, each of them furnished with
eight well shaped and proportioned legs, which are each of them joynted or
bendable in eight several places, or joints, each of which is covered, for the
most part, with a very transparent shell, and the lower end of the shell of
each joint is fringed with several small hairs; the contrivance of the joints
seems the very same with that of Crabs and Lobsters legs, and like those also,
they are each of them terminated with a very sharp claw or point; four of these
legs are so placed, that they seem to draw forwards, the other four are placed
in a quite contrary position, thereby to keep the body backwards when there is
occasion.

Fig. 1. Schem. 36.
The body, as in other larger Insects, consists of three regions or parts; the
hinder or belly A, seems covered with one entire shell, the middle, or chest,
seems divided into two shells BC. which running one within the other, the Mite
is able to shrink in and thrust out as it finds occasion, as it can also the
snout D. The whole body is pretty transparent, so that being looked on against
the light, diverse motions within its body may be perceived; as also all the
parts are much more plainly delineable, then in other postures, to the light.
The shell, especially that which covers the back, is curiously polisht, so that
it is easy to see, as in a unequal Looking-glass, or foliated Glass-ball, the
picture of all the objects round about; up and down, in several parts of its
body, it has several small long white hairs growing out of its shell, which are
often longer then the whole body, and are represented too short in the first
and second Figures; they seem all pretty straight and pliable, save only two
upon the forepart of its body, which seem to be the horns, as may be seen in
the Figures; the first whereof is a prospect of a smaller sort of Mites (which
are usually more plump) as it was passant to and fro; the second is the
prospect of one fixed on its tail (by means of a little mouth-glew rubbed on the
object plate) exhibiting the manner of the growing of the legs, together with
their several joints.

This Creature is very much diversified in shape, color, and diverse other
properties, according to the nature of the substance out of which it seems to
be engendered and nourished, being in one substance more long, in another more
round, in some more hairy, in others more smooth, in this nimble, in that slow,
here pale and whiter, there browner, blacker, more transparent, etc. I have
observed it to be resident almost on all kinds of substances that are moldy,
or putrefying, and have seen it very nimbly meshing through the thickets of
mould, and sometimes to lie dormant underneath them; and it is not unlikely, but
that it may feed on that vegetating substance, spontaneous Vegetables seeming a
food proper enough for spontaneous Animals,

But whether indeed this Creature, or any other, be such or not, I cannot
positively, from any Experiment, or Observation, I have yet made, determine.
But, as I formerly hinted, it seems probable, that some kind of wandering Mite
may sow, as 'twere, the first seeds, or lay the first eggs, in those places,
which Nature has instructed them to know convenient for the hatching and
nourishing their young; and though perhaps the ^
prime Parent might be of a shape very differing from what the offspring, after
a little while, by reason of the substance they feed on, or the Region (as
'twere) they inhabit; yet perhaps even one of these altered progeny, wandering
again from its native soil, and lighting on by chance the same place from
whence its prime Parent came, and there settling, and planting, may produce a
generation of Mites of the same shapes and properties with the first wandering
Mite: And from some such accidents as these, I am very apt to think, the most
sorts of Animals, generally accounted spontaneous, have their origination, and
all those various sorts of Mites, that are to be met with up and down in diverse
putrefying substances, may perhaps be all of the same kind, and have sprung
from one and the same sort of Mites at the first.

Observe. LVI. Of a small Creature hatched on a Vine.
THere is, almost all the Spring and Summer time, a certain small, round, white
Cobweb, as 'twere, about the bigness of a Pea, which sticks very close and fast
to the stocks of Vines nayl'd against a warm wall: being attentively viewed,
they seem covered, upon the upper side of them, with a small husk, not unlike
the scale, or shell of a Wood-louse, or Hog-louse, a small Insect usually found
about rotten wood, which upon touching presently rouls it self into the form of
a peppercorn: Separating several of these from the stock, I found them, with my
Microscope, to consist of a shell, which now seemed more likely to be the husk
of one of these Insects: And the fur seemed a kind of cobweb, consisting of
abundance of small filaments, or sleaves of cobwebs. In the midst of this, if
they were not hatched, and run away before, the time of which hatching was
usually about the latter end of June, or beginning of July, I have often found
abundance of small brown Eggs, such as A and B in the second Figure of the 36.
Scheme, much about the bigness of Mites Eggs; and at other times, multitudes of
small Insects, shaped exactly like that in the third Figure marked with X. Its
head large, almost half the bigness of its body, which is usual in the foetus
of most Creatures. It had two small black eyes a a, and two small long joynted
and brisled horns b b. The hinder part of its body seemed to consist of nine
scales, and the last ended in a forked tail, much like that of a Cutio, or
Wood-louse, out of which grew two long hairs; they ran to and fro very swiftly,
and were much of the bigness of a common Mite, but some of them less: The
longest of them seemed not the hundredth part of an inch, and the Eggs usually
not above half as much. They seemed to have six legs, which were not visible in
this I have here deli^eated, by reason they were drawn under its body.

If these Minute creatures were Wood-lice (as indeed from their own shape and
frame, the skin, or shell, that grows on them, one may with great probability
ghess) it affords us an Instance, whereof perhaps there are not many like in
Nature, and that is, of the prodigious increase of these Creatures, after they
are hatched and run about; for a common Wood-louse, of about half an inch long,
is no less then a hundred and twenty five thousand times bigger then one of
these, which though indeed it seems very strange, yet I have observed the young
ones of some Spiders have almost kept the same proportion to their Dam.

This, methinks, if it be so, does in the next place hint a Quaery, which may
perhaps deserve a little further examination: And that is, Whether there be not
many of those minute Creatures, such as Mites, and the like, which, though they
are commonly thought of otherwise, are only the pully, or young ones, of much
bigger Insects, and not the generating, or parent Insect, that has laid those
Eggs; for having many times observed those Eggs, which usually are found in
great abundance where Mites are found, it seems something strange, that so
small an Animal should have an Egg so big in proportion to its body. Though on
the other side, I must confess, that having kept diverse of those Mites enclosed
in a box for a good while, I did not find them very much augmented beyond their
usual bigness.

What the husk and cobweb of this little white substance should be, I cannot
imagine, unless it be, that the old one, when impregnated with Eggs, should
there stay, and fix it self on the Vine, and dye, and all the body by degrees
should rot, save only the husk, and the Eggs in the body: And the heat, or
fire, as it were, of the approaching Sunbeams should vivifie those Relicts of
the corrupted Parent, and out of the ashes, as 'twere, (as it is fabled of the
Phoenix) should raise a new offspring for the perpetuation of the species. Nor
will the cobweb, as it were, in which these Eggs are enclosed, make much
against this Conjecture; for we may, by those cobwebs that are carried up and
down the Air after a Fog (which with my Microscope I have discovered to be made
up of an infinite company of small filaments or threads) learn, that such a
texture of body may be otherwise made then by the spinning of a Worm.

Observe. LVII. Of the Eels in Vinegar.
OF these small Eels, which are to be found in diverse sorts of Vinegar, I have
little to add besides their Picture, which you may find drawn in the third
Figure of the 25. Scheme: That is, they were shaped much like an Eel, save only
that their nose A, (which was a little more opacous then the rest of their
body) was a little sharper, and longer, in proportion to their body, and the
wrigling motion of their body seemed to be only upwards and downwards, whereas
that of Eels is only side ways: They seemed to have a more opacous part about
B, which might, perhaps, be their Gills; it seeming always the same
proportionate distant from their nose, from which, to the tip of their tail, C,
their body seemed to taper.

Taking several of these out of their Pond of Vinegar, by the net of a small
piece of filtring Paper, and laying them on a black smooth Glass plate, I found
that they could wriggle and wind their body, as much almost as a Snake* which
made me doubt, whether they were a kind of Eal or Leech.

I shall add no other observations made on this minute Animal, being prevented
herein by many excellent ones already published by the ingenious, Doctor Power,
among his Microscopical Observations, save only that a quantity of Vinegar
repleat with them being included in a small Viol, and stopped very close from
the ambient air, all the included Worms in a very short time died, as if they
had been stifled.

And that their motion seems (contrary to what we may observe in the motion of
all other Insects) exceeding slow. But the reason of it seems plain, for being
to move to and fro after that manner which they do, by waving only, or
wrigling their body; the tenacity, or glutinousness, and the density or
resistance of the fluid medium becomes so exceeding sensible to their extremely
minute bodies, that it is to me indeed a greater wonder that they move them so
fast as they do, then that they move them no faster. For what a vastly greater
proportion have they of their superficies to their bulk, then Eels or other
larger Fishes, and next, the tenacity and density of the liquor being much the
same to be moved, both by the one and the other, the resistance or impediment
thence arising to the motions made through it, must be almost infinitely
greater to the small one then to the great. This we find experimentally
verified in the Air, which though a medium a thousand times more rarified then
the water, the resistance of it to motions made through it, is yet so sensible
to very minute bodies, that a Down-feather (the least of whose parts seem yet
bigger then these Eels, and many of them almost incomparably bigger, such as
the quill and stalk) is suspended by it, and carried to and fro as if it had no
weight.

Observe. LVIII. Of a new Property in the Air, and several other transparent
Mediums named Inflection, whereby very many considerable Phenomenon are
attempted to be solved, and diverse other uses are hinted.
SInce the Invention (and perfecting in some measure) of Telescopes, it has
been observed by several, that the Sun and Moon near the Horizon, are
disfigured (losing that exactly-smooth terminating circular limb, which they
are observed to have when situated nearer the Zenith) and are bounded with an
edge every way (especially upon the right and left sides) ragged and indented
like a Saw: which inequality of their limbs, I have further observed, not to
remain always the same, but to be continually changed by a kind of fluctuating
motion, not unlike that of the waves of the Sea; so as that part of the limb,
which was but even now nicked or indented in, is now protuberant, and will
presently be sinking again; neither is this all, but the whole body of the
Luminaries, do in the Telescope, seem to be depressed and flatted, the upper,
and more especially the under side appearing nearer to the middle then really
they are, and the right and left appearing more remote: whence the whole Area
seems to be terminated by a kind of Oval. It is further observed, that the
body, for the most part, appears red, or of some color approaching near unto
it, as some kind of yellow; and this I have always marked, that the more the
limb is flatted or ovalled, the more red does the body appear, though not
always the contrary. It is further observable, that both fixed Stars and
Planets, the nearer they appear to the Horizon, the more red and dull they
look, and the more they are observed to twinkle; in so much, that I have seen
the Dog-starr to vibrate so strong and bright a radiation of light, as almost
to dazzle my eyes, and presently, almost to disappear. It is also observable,
that those bright scintillations near the Horizon, are not by much so quick and
sudden in their consecutions of one another, as the nimbler twinklings of Stars
nearer the Zenith. This is also notable, that the Stars near the Horizon, are
twinkled with several colors; so as sometimes to appear red, sometimes more
yellow, and sometimes blue, and this when the Starr is a pretty way elevated
above the Horizon. I have further, very often seen some of the small Stars of
the fifth or sixth magnitude, at certain times to disappear for a small moment
of time, and again appear more conspicuous, and with a greater luster. I have
several times, with my naked eye, seen many smaller Stars, such as may be
called of the seventh or eighth magnitude to appear for a short space, and then
vanish, which, by directing a small Telescope toward that part they appeared
and disappeard in; I could presently find to be indeed small Stars so situate,
as I had seen them with my naked eye, and to appear twinkling like the ordinary
visible Stars; nay, in examining some very notable parts of the Heaven, with a
three foot Tube, me thought I now and then, in several parts of the
constellation, could perceive little twinklings of Stars, making a very short
kind of apparition, and presently vanishing, but noting diligently the places
where they thus seemed to play at boepeep, I made use of a very good twelve
foot Tube, and with that it was not uneasy to see those, and several other
degrees of smaller Stars, and some smaller yet, that seemed again to appear
and disappear, and these also by giving the same Object-glass a much bigger
aperture, I could plainly and constantly see appear in their former places; so
that I have observed some twelve several magnitudes of Stars less then those
of the six magnitudes commonly recounted in the Globes.

It has been observed and confirmed by the accuratest Observations of the best
of our modern Astronomers, that all the Luminous bodies appear above the
Horizon, when they really are below it. So that the Sun and Moon have both been
seen above the Horizon, whilst the Moon has been in an Eclipse. I shall not
here instance in the great refractions; that the tops of high mountains, seen
at a distance, have been found to have; all which seem to argue the Horizontal
refraction, much greater then it is hitherto generally believed.

I have further taken notice, that not only the Sun, Moon and Stars, and high
tops of mountains have suffered these kinds of refraction, but Trees, and
several bright Objects on the ground: I have often taken notice of the
twinkling of the reflections of the Sun from a Glass-window at a good distance,
and of a Candle in the night, but that is not so conspicuous, and in observing
the setting Sun, I have often taken notice of the tremulation of the Trees and
Bushes, as well as of the edges of the Sun. Diverse of these Phenomenon have
been taken notice of by several, who have given several reasons of them, but I
have not yet met with any altogether satisfactory, though some of their
conjectures have been partly true, but parley also false. Setting my self
therefore upon the inquiry of these Phenomenon, I first endeavored to be very
diligent in taking notice of the several particulars and circumstances
observable in them; and next, in making diverse particular Experiments, that
might clear some doubts, and serve to determine, confirm, and illustrate the
true and adaequate cause of each; and upon the whole, I find much reason to
think, that the true cause of all these Phenomenon is from the inflection, or
multiplicate refraction of those Rays of light within the body of the
Atmosphere, and that it does not proceed from a refraction caused by any
terminating superficies of the Air above, nor from any such exactly defined
superficies within the body of the Atmosphere.

This Conclusion is grounded upon these two Propositions:

First, that a medium, whose parts are unequally dense, and moved by various
motions and transpositions as to one another, will produce all these visible
effects upon the Rays of light, without any other coefficient cause.

Secondly, that there is in the Air or Atmosphere, such a variety in the
constituent parts of it, both as to their density and rarity, and as to their
diverse mutations and positions one to another.

By Density and Rarity, I understand a property of a transparent body, that
does either more or less refract a Ray of light (coming obliquely upon its
superficies out of a third medium) toward its perpendicular: As I call Glass a
more dense body then Water, and Water a more rare body then Glass, because of
the refractions (more or less deflecting toward the perpendicular) that are
made in them, of a Ray of light out of the Air that has the same inclination
upon either of their superficies.

So as to the business of Refraction, spirit of Wine is a more dense body then
Water, it having been found by an accurate Instrument that measures the angles
of Refractions to Minutes that for the same refracted angle of 30:00 in both
those Mediums; the angle of incidence in Water was but 41. 3' 5. but the angle
of the incidence in the trial with spirit of Wine was 42: 45'. But as to
gravity, Water is a more dense body then spirit of Wine, for the proportion of
the same Water, to the same very well rectified spirit of Wine was, as 21. to
19.

So as to Refraction, Water is more Dense then Ice; for I have found by a most
certain Experiment, which I exhibited before diverse illustrious Persons of the
Royal Society, that the Refraction of Water was greater then that of Ice,
though some considerable Authors have affirmed the contrary, and though the Ice
be a very hard, and the Water a very fluid body.

That the former of the two preceding Propositions is true, may be manifested
by several Experiments: As first, if you take any two liquors differing from
one another in density, but yet such as will readily mix: as Salt Water, or
Brine, and Fresh; almost any kind of Salt dissolved in Water, and filtrated, so
that it be clear, spirit of Wine and Water; nay, spirit of Wine, and spirit of
Wine, one more highly rectified then the other, and very many other liquors; if
(I say) you take any two of these liquors, and mixing them in a Glass Viol,
against one side of which you have fixed or glued a small round piece of Paper,
and shaking them well together (so that the parts of them may be somewhat
disturbed and move up and down) you endeavor to see that round piece of Paper
through the body of the liquors; you shall plainly perceive the Figure to wave,
and to be indented much after the same manner as the limb of the Sun through a
Telescope seems to be, save only that the mutations here, are much quicker.
And if, in steed of this bigger Circle, you take a very small spot, and fasten
and view it as the former, you will find it to appear much like the twinkling
of the Stars, though much quicker: which two Phenomenon (for I shall take
notice of no more at present, though I could instance in multitudes of others)
must necessarily be causd by an inflection of the Rays within the terminating
superficies of the compounded medium, since the surfaces of the transparent
body through which the Rays pass to the eye, are not at all altered or changed.

This inflection (if I may so call it) I imagine to be nothing else, but a
multiplicate refraction, caused by the unequal density of the constituent parts
of the medium, whereby the motion, action or progress of the Ray of light is
hindered from proceeding in a straight line, and inflected or deflected by a
curve. Now, that it is a curve line is manifest by this Experiment: I took a
Box, such as ADGE, in the first Figure of the 37. Scheme, whose sides ABCD, and
EFGH, were made of two smooth flat plates of Glass, then filling it half full
with a very strong solution of Salt, I filled the other half with very fair
fresh water, then exposing the opacous side, DHGC, to the Sun, I observed both
the refraction and inflection of the Sun beams, ID and KH, and marking as
exactly as I could, the points, P, N, O, M, by which the Ray, KH, passed
through the compounded medium, I found them to be in a curve line; for the
parts of the medium being continually more dense the nearer they were to the
bottom, the Ray pf was continually more and more deflected downwards from the
straight line.

This Inflection may be mechanically explained, either by Monsieur Schem.
XXXVII.
Des Carts principles, by conceiving the Globuls of the third Element to find
less and less resistance against that side of them which is downwards, or by a
way, which I have further explicated in the Inquisition about Colors, to be
from an obliquation of the pulse of light, whence the ruder part is continual
promoted, and consequently refracted toward the perpendicular, which cuts the
Orbs at right angles. What the particular Figure of the Curve line, described
by this way of light, is, I shall not now stand to examine, especially since
there may be so many sorts of it as there may be varieties of the Positions of
the intermediat degrees of density and rarity between the bottom and the top of
the inflecting Medium.

I could produce many more Examples and Experiments, to illustrate and prove
this first Proposition, viz. that there is such a constitution of some bodies
as will cause inflection. As not to mention those I have observed in Horn,
Tortoise-shell, transparent Gums, and resinous Substances: The veins of Glass,
nay, of melted Crystal, found, and much complained of by Glass-grinders, and
others, might sufficiently demonstrate the truth of it to any diligent
Observator.

But that, I presume, I have by this Example given proof sufficient ( viz.
ocular demonstration) to evince, that there is such a modulation, or bending of
the rays of light, as I have called inflection, differing both from
reflection, and refraction (since they are both made in the superficies, this
only in the middle); and likewise, that this is able or sufficient to produce
the effects I have ascribed to it.

It remains therefore to show, that there is such a property in the Air, and
that it is sufficient to produce all the above mentioned Phenomenon, and
therefore may be the principal, if not the only cause of them.

First, That there is such a property, may be proved from this, that the parts
of the Air are some of them more condensed, others more rarefied, either by the
differing heat, or differing pressure it sustains, or by the somewhat
heterogeneous vapors interspersed through it. For as the Air is more or less
rarefied, so does it more or less refract a ray of light (that comes out of a
denser medium) from the perpendicular. This you may find true, if you make
trial of this Experiment.

Take a small Glass-bubble, made in the form of that in the second Figure of
the 37. Scheme, and by heating the Glass very hot, and thereby very much
rarifying the included Air, or, which is better, by rarifying a small quantity
of water, included in it, into vapors, which will expel the most part, if not
all the Air, and then sealing up the small neck of it, and letting it cool, you
may find, if you place it in a convenient Instrument, that there will be a
manifest difference, as to the refraction.

As if in this second Figure you suppose A to represent a small sight or hole,
through which the eye looks upon an object, as C, through the Glass-bubble B,
and the second sight L; all which remain exactly fixed in their several places,
the object C being so cized and placed, that it may just seem to touch the
upper and under edge of the hole L: and so all of it be seen through the small
Glass-ball of rarefied Air; then by breaking off the small sealed neck of the
Bubble (without at all stirring the sights, object, or glass) and admitting the
external Air, you will find your self unable to see the utmost ends of the
object; but the terminating rays AE and AD (which were before refracted to G
and F by the rarefied Air) will proceed almost directly to I and H; which
alteration of the rays (seeing there is no other alteration made in the Organ
by which the Experiment is tried, save only the admission, or exclusion of the
condensed Air) must necessarily be caused by the variation of the medium
contained in the Glass B; the greatest difficulty in the making of which
Experiment, is from the uneven surfaces of the bubble, which will represent an
uneven image of the object.

Now, that there is such a difference of the upper and under parts of the Air
is clear enough evinced from the late improvement of the Torricellian
Experiment, which has been tried at the tops and feet of Mountains; and may be
further illustrated, and inquired into, by a means, which some whiles since I
thought of, and used, for the finding by what degrees the Air passes from such
a degree of Density to such a degree of Rarity. And another, for the finding
what pressure was requisite to make it pass from such a degree of Rarefaction
to a determinate Density: Which Experiments, because they may be useful to
illustrate the present Inquiry, I shall briefly describe.

Fig. 3.
I took then a small Glass-pipe AB, about the bigness of a Swans quill, and
about four foot long, which was very equally drawn, so that, as far as I could
perceive, no one part was bigger then another: This Tube (being open at both
ends) I fitted into another small Tube DE, that had a small bore just big
enough to contain the small Pipe, and this was sealed up at one, and open at
the other, end; about which open end I fastened a small wooden box C with
cement, so that filling the bigger Tube, and part of the box, with Quicksilver,
I could thrust the smaller Tube into it, till it well all covered with the
Quicksilver: Having thus done, I fastened my bigger Tube against the side of a
wall, that it might stand the steadier, and plunging the small Tube clear under
the Mercury in the box, I stopped the upper end of it very fast with cement, then
lifting up the small Tube, I drew it up by a small pully, and a string that I
had fastened to the top of the Room, and found the height of the Mercurial
Cylinder to be about twenty nine inches.

Then letting down the Tube again, I opened the top, and then thrust down the
small Tube, till I perceived the Quicksilver to rise within it to a mark that I
had placed just an inch from the top; and immediately clapping on a small piece
of cement that I had kept warm, I with a hot Iron sealed up the top very fast,
then letting it cool (that both the cement might grow hard, and more
especially, that the Air might come to its temper, natural for the Day I tried
the Experiment in) I observed diligently, and found the included Air to be
exactly an Inch.

Here you are to take notice, that after the Air is sealed up, the top of the
Tube is not to be elevated above the superficies of the Quicksilver in the box,
till the surface of that within the Tube be equal to it, for the Quicksilver
(as I have elsewhere proved) being more heterogeneous to the Glass then the
Air, will not naturally rise up so high within the small Pipe, as the
superficies of the Mercury in the box; and therefore you are to observe, how
much below the outward superficies of the Mercury in the box, that of the same
in the Tube does stand, when the top being open, free ingress is admitted to
the outward Air.

Having thus done, I permitted the Cylinder, or small Pipe, to rise out of the
box, till I found the surface of the Quicksilver in the Pipe to be two inches
above that in the box, and found the Air to have expanded it self but one
sixteenth part of an inch; then drawing up the small pipe, till I found the
height of the Quicksilver within to be four inches above that without, I
observed the Air to be expanded only 1/7 of an inch more then it was at first,
and to take up the room of 1 1/7 inch: then I raised the Tube till the Cylinder
was six inches high, and found the Air to take up 1 2/9 inches of room in the
Pipe; then to 8, 10, 12. etc. the expansion of the Air that I found to each of
which Cylinders are set down in the following Table; where the first row
signifies the height of the Mercurial Cylinder; the next, the expansion of the
Air; the third, the pressure of the Atmosphere, or the highest Cylinder of
Mercury, which was then near thirty inches: The last signifies the force of the
Air so expanded, which is found by substracting the first row of numbers out of
the third; for having found, that the outward Air would then keep up the
Quicksilver to thirty inches, look whatever of that height is wanting must be
attributed to the Elater of the Air depressing. And therefore having the
Expansion in the second row, and the height of the subjacent Cylinder of
Mercury in the first, and the greatest height of the Cylinder of Mercury, which
of it self counterballances the whole pressure of the Atmosphere; by
substracting the numbers of the first row out of the numbers of the third, you
will have the measure of the Cylinders so deprest, and consequently the force
of the Air, in the several Expansions, registered. The height of the Cylinder of
Mercury, that, together with the Elater of the included Air, balanced the
pressure of the Atmosphere. The Expansion of the Air. The height of the Mercury
that counter-ballanc'd the Atmosphere The strength of the Elater of the
expanded Air. 00 01 30 30 02 01 1/16 30 28 04 01 1/7 30 26 06 01 2/9 30 24 08
01 30 22 10 01 1/12 30 20 12 01 30 18 14 01 ^/6 30 16 16 02 2/27 30 14 18 02
4/9 30 12 20 03 30 10 22 03 7/9 30 8 24 05 7/18 30 6 25 06 30 5 26 08 30 4 26
09 30 3 26 10 30 3 26 13 30 3 27 15 30 3

I had several other Tables of my Observations, and Calculations, which I then
made; but it being above a twelve month since I made them; and by that means
having forgot many circumstances and particulars, I was resolved to make them
over once again, which I did August the second 1661. with the very same Tube
which I used the year before, when I first made the Experiment (for it being a
very good one, I had carefully preserved it:) And after having tried it over
and over again; and being not well satisfied of some particulars, I, at last,
having put all things in very good order, and being as attentive, and
observant, as possibly I could, of every circumstance requisite to be taken
notice of did register my several Observations in this following Table. In the
making of which, I did not exactly follow the method that I had used at first;
but, having lately heard of Mr. Townly's Hypothesis, I shaped my course in such
sort, as would be most convenient for the examination of that Hypothesis; the
event of which you have in the latter part of the last Table.

The other Experiment was, to find what degrees of force were requisite to
compress, or condense, the Air into such or such a bulk.

The manner of proceeding therein was this: I took a Tube about five foot long,
one of whose ends was sealed up, and bended in the form of a Siphon, much like
that represented in the fourth Figure of the 37. Scheme, one side whereof AD,
that was open at A, was about fifty inches long, the other side BC, shut at B,
was not much above seven inches long; then placing it exactly perpendicular, I
poured in a little Quicksilver, and found that the Air BC was 6 inches, or very
near to seven; then pouring in Quicksilver at the longer Tube, I continued
filling of it till the Air in the shorter part of it was contracted into half
the former dimensions, and found the height exactly nine and twenty inches; and
by making several other trials, in several other degrees of condensation of the
Air, I found them exactly answer the former Hypothesis.

But having (by reason it was a good while since I first made) forgotten many
particulars, and being much unsatisfied in others, I made the Experiment over
again, and, from the several trials, collected the former part of the following
Table: Where in the row next the left hand 24. signifies the dimensions of the
Air, sustaining only the pressure of the Atmosphere, which at that time was
equal to a Cylinder of Mercury of nine and twenty inches: The next Figure above
it (20) was the dimensions of the Air enduring the first compression, made by a
Cylinder of Mercury 5 3/16 high, to which the pressure of the Atmosphere nine
and twenty inches being added, the elastick strength of the Air so comprest
will be found 34 1/16, etc.

A Table of the Elastick power of the Air, both Experimentally and
Hypothetically calculated, according to its various Dimensions.
The dimensions of the included Air. The height of the Mercurial Cylinder
counterpois'd by the Atmosphere. The Mercurial Cylinder added, or taken from
the former. The sum or difference of these two Cylinders. What they ought to be
according to the Hypothesis. 12 29+ 29= 58 58 13 29+ 24 11/6= 53 11/16 53 7/13
14 29+ 20 3/16= 49 3/16 49 5/7 16 29+ 14= 43 43 1/^ 18 29+ 9 = 38 38 20 29+ 5
3/16= 34 3/16 34 24 29 0= 29 29 48 29 -- 14 = 14 3/^ 14 96 29 -- 22 = 6 7 2/8
192 20 -- 25 = 3 ^/^ 3 5/^ 384 29 -- 27 2/8= 1 6/8 1 7/16 576 29 -- 27 = 1 1/8
1 5/24 768 29 -- 28 = 0 0 ^/74/8 960 29 -- 28 1/^;= 0 0 4/5/6 1152 29 -- 28
7/16= 0 ^/16 0 10/16

From which Experiments, I think, we may safely conclude, that the Elater of
the Air is reciprocal to its extension, or at least very near. So that to apply
it to our present purpose (which was indeed the chief cause of inventing these
ways of trial) we will suppose a Cylinder indefinitely extended upwards, [I
say a Cylinder, not a piece of a Cone, because, as I may elsewhere show in the
Explication of Gravity, that triplicate proportion of the shells of a Sphere, to
their respective diameters, I suppose to be removed in this case by the
decrease of the power of Gravity] and the pressure of the Air at the bottom of
this Cylinder to be strong enough to keep up a Cylinder of Mercury of thirty
inches: Now because by the most accurate trials of the most illustrious and
incomparable Mr. Boil, published in his deservedly famous Pneumatick Book, the
weight of Quicksilver, to that of the Air here below, is found near about as
fourteen thousand to one: If we suppose the parts of the Cylinder of the
Atmosphere to be every where of an equal density, we shall (as he there
deduces) find it extended to the height of thirty five thousand feet, or seven
miles: But because by these Experiments we have somewhat confirmed the
hypothesis of the reciprocal proportion of the Elaters to the Extensions we
shall find, that by supposing this Cylinder of the Atmosphere divided into a
thousand parts, each of which being equivalent to thirty five feet, or seven
geometrical paces, that is, each of these divisions containing as much Air as
is supposed in a Cylinder near the earth of equal diameter, and thirty five
foot high, we shall find the lowermost to press against the surface of the
Earth with the whole weight of the above mentioned thousand parts; the pressure
of the bottom of the second against the top of the first to be 1000 -- 1=999.
of the third against the second to be 1000 -- 2=998. of the fourth against the
third to be 1000 ^ 3=997. of the uppermost against the 999. or that next below
it, to be 1000 -- 999=1. so that the extension of the lowermost next the Earth,
will be to the extension of the next below the uppermost, as 1. to 999. for as
the pressure sustained by the 999. is to the pressure sustained by the first,
so is the extension of the first to the extension of the 999. so that, from
this hypothetical calculation, we shall find the Air to be indefinitely
extended: For if we suppose the whole thickness of the Air to be divided, as I
just now instanced, into a thousand parts, and each of those under differing
Dimensions, or Altitudes, to contain an equal quantity of Air, we shall find,
that the first Cylinder, whose Base is supposed to lean on the Earth, will be
found to be extended 35 35/999 foot; the second equal Division, or Cylinder,
whose basis is supposed to lean on the top of the first, shall have its top
extended higher by 35 70/998; the third 35 105/997; the fourth 35 140/996; and
so onward, each equal quantity of Air having its dimensions measured by 35 and
some additional number expressed always in the manner of a fraction, whose
numerator is always the number of the place multiplied by 35. and whose
denominator is always the pressure of the Atmosphere sustained by that part,
so that by this means we may easily calculate the height of 999. divisions of
those 1000. divisions, I supposed; whereas the uppermost may extend it self
more then as high again, nay, perhaps indefinitely, or beyond the Moon; for the
Elaters and Expansions being in reciprocal proportions, since we cannot yet
find the plus ultra, beyond which the Air will not expand it self, we cannot
determine the height of the Air: for since, as we have shown, the proportion
will be always as the pressure sustained by any part is to 35. so 1000. to the
expansion of that part; the multiplication or product therefore of the
pressure, and expansion, that is, of the two extreme proportionals, being
always equal to the product of the means, or 35000. it follows, since that
Rectangle or Product may be made up of the multiplication of infinite
diversities of numbers, that the height of the Air is also indefinite; for
since (as far as I have yet been able to try) the Air seems capable of an
indefinite Expansion, the pressure may be decreased in infinitunt, and
consequently its expansion upwards indefinite also.

There being therefore such a difference of density, and no Experiment yet
known to prove a Saltus, or skipping from one degree of rarity to another much
differing from it, that is, that an upper part of the Air should so much differ
from that immediately subjacent to it, as to make a distinct superficies, such
as we observe between the Air and Water, etc. But it being more likely, that
there is a continual increase of rarity in the parts of the Air, the further
they are removed from the surface of the Earth: It will hence necessarily
follow, that (as in the Experiment of the salt and fresh Water) the ray of
Light passing obliquely through the Air also, which is of very different
density, will be continually, and infinitely inflected, or bended, from a
straight, or direct motion.

This granted, the reason of all the above recited Phenomenon, concerning the
appearance of the Celestial Bodies, will very easily be deduced. As,

First, The redness of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, will be found to be caused by
the inflection of the rays within the Atmosphere. That it is not really in or
near the luminous bodies, will, I suppose, be very easily granted, seeing that
this redness is observable in several places differing in Longitude, to be at
the same time different, the setting and rising Sun of all parts being for the
most part red:

And secondly, That it is not merely the color of the Air interposed, will, I
suppose, without much more difficulty be yielded, seeing that we may observe a
very great interstitium of Air betwixt the Object and the Eye, makes it appear
of a dead blew, far enough differing from a red, or yellow.

But thirdly, That it proceeds from the refraction, or inflection, of the rays
by the Atmosphere, this following Experiment will, I suppose, sufficiently
manifest.

Take a sphaerical Crystalline Viol, such as is described in the fifth Figure
ABCD, and, having filled it with pure clear Water, expose it to the Sun beams;
then taking a piece of very fine Venice Paper, apply it against that side of
the Globe that is opposite to the Sun, as against the side BC, and you shall
perceive a bright red Ring to appear, caused by the refraction of the Rays,
AAAA, which is made by the Globe; in which Experiment, if the Glass and Water
be very clear, so that there be no Sands nor bubbles in the Glass, nor dirt in
the Water, you shall not perceive any appearance of any other color. To apply
which Experiment, we may imagine the Atmosphere to be a great transparent
Globe, which being of a substance more dense then the other, or (which comes to
the same) that has its parts more dense toward the middle, the Sun beams that
are tangents, or next within the tangents of this Globe, will be refracted or
inflected from their direct passage toward the center of the Globe, whence,
according to the laws of refractions made in a triangular Prism, and the
generation of color set down in the description of Muscovi-glass, there must
necessarily appear a red color in the transitus or passage of those tangent
Rays. To make this more plain, we will suppose (in the sixth Figure) ABCD, to
represent the Globe of the Atmosphere, EFGH to represent the opacous Globe of
the Earth, lying in the midst of it, near to which, the parts of the Air,
sustaining a very great pressure, are thereby very much condensed, from whence
those Rays that are by inflection made tangents to the Globe of the Earth, and
those without them, that pass through the more condensed part of the
Atmosphere, as suppose between A and E, are by reason of the inequality of the
medium, inflected toward the center, whereby there must necessarily be
generated a red color, as is more plainly shown in the former cited place;
hence whatsoever opacous bodies (as vapors, or the like) shall chance to be
elevated into those parts, will reflect a red toward the eye; and therefore
those evenings and mornings appear reddest, that have the most store of vapors
and halituous substances exhaled to a convenient distance from the Earth; for
thereby the inflection is made the greater, and thereby the color also the
more intense; and several of those exhalations being opacous, reflect several
of those Rays, which, through an Homogeneous transparent medium would pass
unseen; and therefore we see, that when there chances to be any clouds situated
in those Regions they reflect a strong and vivid red. Now, though one great
cause of the redness may be this inflection, yet I cannot wholly exclude the
color of the vapors themselves, which may have something of redness in them,
they being partly nitrous, and partly fuliginous; both which steams tinge the
Rays that pass through them, as is made evident by looking at bodies through
the fumes of Aqua fortis, or spirit of Nitre [as the newly mentioned
Illustrious Person has demonstrated] and also through the smoke of a Fire or
Chimney.

Having therefore made it probable at least, that the morning and evening
redness may partly proceed from this inflection or refraction of the Rays, we
shall next show, how the Oval Figure will be likewise easily deduced.

Suppose we therefore, EFGH in the sixth Figure of the 37. Scheme, to represent
the Earth; ABCD, the Atmospere; EI, and EL, two Rays coming from the Sun, the
one from the upper, the other from the nether Limb, these Rays, being by the
Atmosphere inflected, appear to the eye at E, as if they had come from the
points, N and O; and because the Ray L has a greater inclination upon the
inequality of the Atmosphere then I, therefore must it suffer a greater
inflection, and consequently be further elevated above its true place, then the
Ray I, which has a less inclination, will be elevated above its true place;
whence it will follow, that the lower side appearing nearer the upper then
really it is, and the two lateral sides, viz. the right and left side,
suffering no sensible alteration from the inflection, at least what it does
suffer, does rather increase the visible Diameter then diminish it, as I shall
show by and by, the Figure of the luminous body must necessarily appear
somewhat Elliptical.

This will be more plain, if in the seventh Figure of th 37. Scheme we suppose
AB to represent the sensible Horizon, CDEF, the body of the Sun really below
it; GHIK, the same appearing above it, elevated by the inflection of the
Atmosphere: For if, according to the best observation, we make the visible
Diameter of the Sun to be about three or four and thirty minutes, and the
Horizontal refraction according to Ticho be thereabout, or somewhat more, the
lower limb of the Sun E, will be elevated to I; but because, by his account,
the point C will be elevated but 29. minutes, as having not so great an
inclination upon the inequality of the Air, therefore IG, which will be the
apparent refracted perpendicular Diameter of the Sun, will be less then CG,
which is but 29. minutes, and consequently six or seven minutes shorter then
the unrefracted apparent Diameter. The parts, D and F, will be likewise
elevated to H and K, whose refraction, by reason of its inclination, will be
bigger then that of the point C, though less that of E; therefore will the
semidiameter IL, be shorter then LG, and consequently the under side of the
appearing Sun more flat then the upper.

Now, because the Rays from the right and left sides of the Sun, etc. have been
observed by Ricciolo and Grimaldus, to appear more distant one from another
then really they are, though (by very many Observations that I have made for
that purpose, with a very good Telescope, fitted with a divided Ruler) I could
never perceive any great alteration, yet there being really some, it will not
be amiss, to show that this also proceeds from the refraction or inflection of
the Atmosphere; and this will be manifest, if we consider the Atmosphere as a
transparent Globe, or at least a transparent shell, encompassing an opacous
Globe, which, being more dense then the medium encompassing it, refracts or
inflects all the entering parallel Rays into a point or focus, so that
wheresoever the Observator is placed within the Atmosphere, between the focus
and the luminous body, the lateral Rays must necessarily be more converg'd
toward his eye by the refraction or inflection, then they would have been
without it; and therefore the Horizontal Diameter of the luminous body must
necessarily be augmented.

This might be more plainly manifest to the eye by the sixth Figure; but
because it would be somewhat tedious, and the thing being obvious enough to be
imagined by any one that attentively considers it, I shall rather omit it, and
proceed to show, that the mass of Air near the surface of the Earth, consists,
or is made up, of parcels, which do very much differ from one another in point
of density and rarity; and consequently the Rays of light that pass through
them will be variously inflected, here one way, and there another, according as
they pass so or so through those differing parts; and those parts being always
in motion, either upwards or downwards, or to the right or left, or in some way
compounded of these, they do by this their motion inflect the Rays, now this
way, and presently that way.

This irregular, unequal and unconstant inflection of the Rays of light, is the
reason why the limb of the Sun, Moon, Jupiter, Saturn, Mars, and Venus, appear
to wave or dance; and why the body of the Stars appear to tremulate or
twinkle, their bodies, by this means, being sometimes magnified, and sometimes
diminished; sometimes elevated, otherwhiles depressed; now thrown to the right
hand, and then to the left.

And that there is such a property or unequal distribution of parts, is
manifest from the various degrees of heat and cold that are found in the Air;
from whence will follow a differing density and rarity, both as to quantity and
refraction; and likewise from the vapors that are interposed, (which, by the
way, I imagine, as to refraction or inflection, to do the same thing, as if
they were rarified Air; and that those vapors that ascend, are both lighter,
and less dense, then the ambient Air which boys them up; and that those which
descend, are heavier and more dense) The first of these may be found true, if
you take a good thick piece of Glass, and heating it pretty hot in the fire,
lay it upon such another piece of Glass, or hang it in the open Air by a piece
of Wire, then looking upon some far distant Object (such as a Steeple or Tree)
so as the Rays from that Object pass directly over the Glass before they enter
your eye, you shall find such a tremulation and wavering of the remote Object,
as will very much offend your eye: The like tremulous motion you may observe to
be caused by the ascending steams of Water, and the like. Now, from the first
of these it is manifest, that from the rarifaction of the parts of the Air, by
heat, there is caused a differing refraction, and from the ascension of the
more rarified parts of the Air, which are thrust up by the colder, and
therefore more condensed and heavy, is caused an undulation or wavering of the
Object; for I think, that there are very few will grant, that Glass, by as
gentle a heat as may be endured by ones hand, should send forth any of its
parts in steams or vapors, which does not seem to be much wasted by that
violent fire of the green Glass-house; but, if yet it be doubted, let
Experiment be further made with that body that is accounted, by Chemists and
others, the most ponderous and fixed in the world; for by heating of a piece of
Gold, and proceeding in the same manner, you may find the same effects.

This trembling and shaking of the Rays, is more sensibly caused by an actual
flame, or quick fire, or any thing else heated glowing hot; as by a Candle,
live Coal, red-hot Iron, or a piece of Silver, and the like: the same also
appears very conspicuous, if you look at an Object betwixt which and your eye,
the rising smoke of some Chimney is interposed; which brings into my mind what
I had once the opportunity to observe, which was, the Sun rising to my eye just
over a Chimney that sent forth a copious steam of smoke; and taking a short
Telescope, which I had then by me, I observed the body of the Sun, though it
was but just peep^d above the Horizon, to have its underside, not only
flatted, and pressed inward, as it usually is when near the Earth; but to
appear more protuberant downwards then if it had suffered no refraction at all;
and besides all this, the whole body of the Sun appeared to tremble or dance,
and the edges or limb to be very ragged or indented, undulating or waving, much
in the manner of a flag in the Wind.

This I have likewise often observed in a hot Sunshiny Summer's day, that
looking on an Object over a hot stone, or dry hot earth, I have found the
Object to be undulated or shaken, much after the same manner. And if you look
upon any remote Object through a Telescope (in a hot Summer's day especially)
you shall find it likewise to appear tremulous. And further, if there chance to
blow any wind, or that the air between you and the Object be in a motion or
current, whereby the parts of it, both rarified and condensed, are swiftly
removed toward the right or left, if then you observe the Horizontal ridge of
a Hill far distant, through a very good Telescope, you shall find it to wave
much like the Sea, and those waves will appear to pass the same way with the
wind.

From which, and many other Experiments, it is clear that the lower Region of the
Air, especially that part of it which lies nearest to the Earth, has, for the
most part, its constituent parcels variously agitated, either by heat or winds,
by the first of which, some of them are made more rare, and so suffer a less
refraction; others are interwoven, either with ascending or descending vapors;
the former of which being more light, and so more rarified, have likewise a
less refraction; the latter being more heavy, and consequently more dense,
have a greater.

Now, because that heat and cold are equally diffused every way; and that the
further it is spread, the weaker it grows; hence it will follow, that the most
part of the under Region of the Air will be made up of several kinds of lentes,
some whereof will have the properties of Unequal, others of Concave glasses;
which, that I may the more intelligibly make out, we will suppose in the eighth
Figure of the 37. Scheme, that A represents an ascending vapor, which, by
reason of its being somewhat Heterogeneous to the ambient Air, is thereby
thrust into a kind of Globular form, not any where terminated, but gradually
finished, that is, it is most rarified in the middle about A, somewhat more
condensed about BB, more then that about CC; yet further, about DD, almost of
the same density with the ambient Air about EE; and lastly, enclosed with the
more dense Air FF, so that from A, to FF, there is a continual increase of
density. The reason of which will be manifest, if we consider the rising vapor
to be much warmer then the ambient heavy Air; for by the coldness of the
ambient Air the shell EE will be more refrigerated then DD, and that then CC,
which will be yet more then BB, and that more then A; so that from F to A,
there is a continual increase of heat, and consequently of rarity; from whence
it will necessarily follow, that the Rays of light will be inflected or
refracted in it, in the same manner as they would be in a Concave-glase; for
the Rays GKI, GKI will be inflected by GKH, GKH, which will easily follow from
what I before explained concerning the inflection of the Atmosphere.

On the other side, a descending vapor, or any part of the air included by an
ascending vapor, will exhibit the same effects with a Unequal lens; for, if we
suppose, in the former Figure, the quite contrary constitution to that last
described; that is, the ambient Air FF being hotter then any part of that
matter within any circle, therefore the coldest part must necessarily be A, as
being farthest removed from the heat, all the intermediate spaces will be
gradually discriminated by the continual mixture of heat and cold, so that it
will be hotter at EE, then DD, in DD then CC, in CC then BB, and in BB then A.
From which, a like refraction and condensation will follow; and consequently a
lesser or greater refraction, so that every included part will refract more
then the including, by which means the Rays, GKI, GKI, coming from a Starr, or
some remote Object, are so inflected, that they will again concur and meet, in
the point M. By the interposition therefore of this descending vapor the
visible body of the Star, or other Object, is very much augmented, as by the
former it was diminished.

From the quick consecutions of these two, one after another, between the
Object and your eye, caused by their motion upwards or downwards, proceeding
from their levity or gravity, or to the right or left, proceeding from the
wind, a Starr may appear, now bigger, now less, then really it would otherwise
without them; and this is that property of a Starr, which is commonly called
twinkling, or scintillation.

The reason why a Star will now appear of one color, now of another, which for
the most part happens when it is near the Horizon, may very easily be deduced
from its appearing now in the middle of the vapor, other whiles near the edge;
for if you look against the body of a Starr with a Telescope that has a pretty
deep Unequal Eye-glass, and so order it, that the Star may appear sometimes in
one place, and sometimes in another of it; you may perceive this or that
particular color to be predominant in the apparent Figure of the Starr,
according as it is more or less remote from the middle of the Lens. This I had
here further explained, but that it does more properly belong to another place.

I shall therefore only add some few Quaeries, which the consideration of
these particulars hinted, and so finish this Section.

And the first I shall propound is, Whether there may not be made an artificial
transparent body of an exact Globular Figure that shall so inflect or refract
all the Rays, that, coming from one point, fall upon any Hemisphere of it; that
every one of them may meet on the opposite side, and cross one another exactly
in a point; and that it may do the like also with all the Rays that, coming
from a lateral point, fall upon any other Hemisphere; for if so, there were to
be hoped a perfection of Dioptricks, and a transmigration into heaven, even
whilst we remain here upon earth in the flesh, and a descending or penetrating
into the center and innermost recesses of the earth, and all earthly bodies;
nay, it would open not only a cranney, but a large window (as I may so speak)
into the Shop of Nature, whereby we might be enabled to see both the tools and
operators, and the very manner of the operation is self of Nature; this, could
it be effected, would as far surpass all other kind of perspectives as the
vast extent of Heaven does the small point of the Earth, which distance it
would immediately remove, and unite them, as 'twere, into one, at least, that
there should appear no more distance between them then the length of the Tube,
into the ends of which these Glasses should be^n serted: Now, whether this may
not be effected with parcels of Glass of several densities, I have sometimes
proceeded so far as to doubt (though in truth, as to the general, I have
wholly despaired of it) for I have often observed in Optical Glasses a very
great variety of the parts, which are commonly called Veins; nay, some of them
round enough (for they are for the most part, drawn out into strings) to
constitute a kind of lens.

This I should further proceed to open, had any one been so inquisitive as to
have found out the way of making any transparent body, either more dense or
more rare; for then it might be possible to compose a Globule that should be
more dense in the middle of it, then in any other part, and to compose the
whole bulk, so as that there should be a continual gradual transition from one
degree of density to another; such as should be found requisite for the desired
inflection of the transmigrating Rays; but of this enough at present, because I
may say more of it when I set down my own Trials concerning the melioration of
Dioptricks, where I shall enumerate with how many several substances I have
made both Microscopes, and Telescopes, and by what and how many, ways: Let such
as have leisure and opportunity farther consider it.

The next Quaery shall be, whether by the same collection of a more dense body
then the other, or at least, of the denser part of the other, there might not
be imagined a reason of the apparition of some new fixed Stars, as those in the
Swan, Cassiope's Charr, Serpentarius, Piscis, Cetus, etc.

Thirdly, Whether it be possible to define the height of the Atmosphere from
this inflection of the Rays, or from the Quicksilver Experiment of the
rarifaction or extension of the Air.

Fourthly, Whether the disparity between the upper and under Air be not
sometimes so great, as to make a reflecting superficies; I have had several
Observations which seem to have proceeded from some such cause, but it would be
too long to relate and examine them. An Experiment, also somewhat analogous to
this, I have made with Salt Water and Fresh, which two liquors, in most
Positions, seemed the same, and not to be separated by any determinate
superficies, which separating surface yet in some other Positions did plainly
appear.

And if so, Whether the reason of the equal bounding or terminus of the under
parts of the clouds may not proceed from this cause; whether, secondly, the
Reason of the apparition of many Suns may not be found out, by considering how
the Rays of the Sun may so be reflected, as to describe a pretty true Image of
the body, as we find them from any regular Superficies. Whether also this may
not be found to cause the apparition of some of those Parelii, or counterfeit
Suns, which appear colored, by refracting the Rays so, as to make the body of
the Sun appear in quite another place then really it is. But of this more
elsewhere.

5. Whether the Phenomenon of the Clouds may not be made out by this diversity
of density in the upper and under parts of the Air, by supposing the Air above
them to be much lighter then they themselves are, and they themselves to be yet
lighter then that which is subjacent to them, many of them seeming to be the
same substance with the Cobwebs that fly in the Air after a Fog.

Now that such a constitution of the Air and Clouds, is such there be, may be
sufficient to perform this effect, may be confirmed by this Experiment.

Make as strong a Solution of Salt as you are able, then filling a Glass of
some depth half full with it, fill the other half with fresh Water, and poyse a
little Glass-bubble, so as that it may sink pretty quick in fresh Water, which
take and put into the aforesaid Glass, and you shall find it to sink till it
comes toward the middle, where it will remain fixed, without moving either
upwards or downwards. And by a second Experiment, of poising such as bubble in
water, whose upper part is warmer, and consequently lighter, then the under,
which is colder and heavier; the manner of which follows in this next Quaery,
which is,

6. Whether the rarifaction and condensation of Water be not made after the
same manner, as those effects are produced in the Air by heat; for I once
poised a sealed up Glass-bubble so exactly, that never so small an addition
would make it sink, and as small a detraction make it swim, which suffering to
rest in that Vessel of Water for some time, I always found it about noon to be
at the bottom of the Water, and at night, and in the morning, at the top:
Imagining this to proceed from the Rarifaction of the Water, caused by the
heat, I made trial, and found most true; for I was able at any time, either to
depress, or raise it, by heat and cold; for if I let the Pipe stand for some
time in cold water, I could easily raise the Bubble from the bottom, whither I
had a little before detruded it, by putting the same Pipe into warm Water. And
this way I have been able, for a very considerable time, to keep a Bubble so
poys'd in the Water, as that it should remain in the middle, and neither sink,
nor swim: For gently heating the upper part of the Pipe with a Candle, Coal, or
hot Iron, till I perceived the Bubble begin to descend, then forbearing, I have
observed it to descend to such or such a station, and there to remain suspended
for some hours, till the heat by degrees were quite vanished, when it would
again ascend to its former place. This I have also often observed naturally
performed by the heat of the Air, which being able to rarifie the upper parts
of the Water sooner then the lower, by reason of its immediate contact, the
heat of the Air has sometimes so slowly increased, that I have observed the
Bubble to be some hours in passing between the top and bottom.

7. Whether the appearance of the Pike of Tenerif, and several other high
Mountains, at so much greater a distance then seems to agree with their
respective heights, be not to be attributed to the Curvature of the visual Ray,
that is made by its passing obliquely through so differingly Dense a Medium
from the top to the eye very far distant in the Horizon: For since we have
already, I hope, made it very probable, that there is such an inflection of the
Rays by the differing density of the parts of the Air; and since I have found,
by several Experiments made on places comparatively not very high, and have yet
found the pressure sustained by those parts of the Air at the top and bottom,
and also their differing Expansions very considerable: Insomuch that I have
found the pressure of the Atmosphere lighter at the top of St. Paul's Steeple
in London (which is about two hundred foot high) then at the bottom by a
sixtieth or fiftieth part, and the expansion at the top greater then that at
the bottom by near about so much also; for the Mercurial Cylinder at the bottom
was about 39. inches, and at the top half an inch lower; the Air also included
in the Weather-glass, that at the bottom filled only 155. spaces, at the top
filled 158. though the heat at the top and bottom was found exactly the same
with a scaled Thermometer: I think it very rational to suppose, that the
greatest Curvature of the Rays is made nearest the Earth, and that the
inflection of the Rays, above 3. or 4. miles upwards, is very inconsiderable,
and therefore that by this means such calculations of the height of Mountains,
as are made from the distance they are visible in the Horizon, from the
supposal that that Ray is a straight Line (that from the top of the Mountain
is, as 'twere, a Tangent to the Horizon whence it is seen) which really is a
Curve, is very erroneous. Whence, I suppose, proceeds the reason of the
exceedingly differing Opinions and Assertions of several Authors, about the
height of several very high Hills.

8. Whether this Inflection of the Air will not very much alter the supposed
distances of the Planets, which seem to have a very great dependence upon the
Hypothetical refraction or inflection of the Air, and that refraction upon the
hypothetical height and density of the Air: For since (as I hope) I have here
shown the Air to be quite otherwise then has been hitherto supposed, by
manifesting it to be, both of a vast, at least an uncertain, height, and of an
unconstant and irregular density; It must necessarily follow, that its
inflection must be varied accordingly: And therefore we may hence learn, upon
what sure grounds all the Astronomers hitherto have built, who have calculated
the distance of the Planets from their Horizontal Parallax; for since the
Refraction and Parallax are so nearly allied, that the one cannot be known
without the other, especially by any ways that have been yet attempted, how
uncertain must the Parallax be, when the Refraction is unknown? And how easy
is it for Astronomers to assign what distance they please to the Planets, and
defend them, when they have such a curious subterfuge as that of Refraction,
wherein a very little variation will allow them liberty enough to place the
Celestial Bodies at what distance they please.

If therefore we would come to any certainty in this point, we must go other
ways to work; and as I have here examined the height and refractive property
of the Air by other ways then are usual, so must we find the Parallax of the
Planets by ways not yet practiced; and to this end, I cannot imagine any
better way, then the Observations of them by two persons at very far distant
parts of the Earth, that lie as near as may be under the same Meridian, or
Degree of longitude, but differing as much in latitude, as there can be places
conveniently found: These two persons, at certain appointed times, should (as
near as could be) both at the same time, observe the way of the Moon, Mars,
Venus, Jupiter, and Saturn, amongst the sixth Stars, with a good large
Telescope, and making little Iconismes, or pictures, of the small fixed Stars,
that appear to each of them to lie in or near the way of the Center of the
Planet, and the exact measure of the apparent Diameter; from the comparing of
such Observations together, we might certainly know the true distance, or
Parallax, of the Planet. And having any one true Parallax of these Planets, we
might very easily have the other by their apparent Diameters, which the
Telescope likewise affords us very accurately. And thence their motions might
be much better known, and their Theories more exactly regulated. And for this
purpose I know not any one place more convenient for such an Observation to be
made in, then in the Island of St. Helena, upon the Coast of Africa, which lies
about sixteen degrees to the Southwards of the Line, and is very near,
according to the latest Geographical Maps, in the same Meridian with London;
for though they may not perhaps lie exactly in the same, yet their
Observations, being ordered according to what I shall anon show, it will not be
difficult to find the true distance of the Planet. But were they both under the
same Meridian, it would be much better.

And because Observations may be much easier, and more accurately made with
good Telescopes, then with any other Instruments, it will not, I suppose, seem
impertinent to explain a little what ways I judge most fit and convenient for
that particular. Such therefore as shall be the Observators for this purpose,
should be furnished with the best Telescopes that can be had, the longer the
better and more exact will their Observations be, though they are somewhat the
more difficultly managed. These should be fitted with a Rete, or divided Scale,
placed at such a distance within the Eye-glass, that they may be distinctly
seen, which should be the measures of minutes and seconds; by this Instrument
each Observator should, at certain prefixed times, observe the Moon, or other
Planet, in, or very near, the Meridian; and because it may be very difficult to
find two convenient stations that will happen to be just under the same
Meridian, they shall, each of them, observe the way of the Planet, both for an
hour before, and an hour after, it arrive at the Meridian; and by a line, or
stroke, amongst the small fixed Stars, they shall denote out the way that each
of them observed the Center of the Planet to be moved in for those two hours:
These Observations each of them shall repeat for many days together, that both
it may happen, that both of them may sometimes make their Observations
together, and that from diverse Experiments we may be the better assured of what
certainty and exactness such kind of Observations are like to prove. And
because many of the Stars which may happen to come within the compass of such
an Iconism, or Map, may be such as are only visible through a good Telescope,
whose Positions perhaps have not been noted, nor their longitudes, or
latitudes, any where remarked; therefore each Observator should endeavor to
insert some fixed Star, whose longitude, and latitude, is known; or with his
Telescope he shall find the Position of some notable telescopical Star,
inserted in his Map, to some known fixed Star, whose place in the Zodiac is
well defined.

Having by this means found the true distance of the Moon, and having observed
well the apparent Diameter of it at that time with a good Telescope, it is
easy enough, by one single Observation of the apparent Diameter of the Moon
with a good Glass, to determine her distances in any other part of her Orbit,
or Dragon, and consequently, some few Observations will tell us, whether she be
moved in an Ellipsis, (which, by the way, may also be found, even now, though I
think we are yet ignorant of her true distance) and next (which without such
Observations, I think, we shall not be sure of) we may know exactly the bigness
of that Ellipsis, or Circle, and her true velocity in each part, and thereby be
much the better enabled to find out the true cause of all her Motions. And
though, even now also, we may, by such Observations in one station, as here at
London, observe the apparent Diameter and motion of the Moon in her Dragon, and
consequently be enabled to make a better ghess at the Species or kind of Curve,
in which she is moved, that is, whether it be sphaerical, or elliptical, or
neither, and with what proportional velocities she is carried in that Curve;
yet till her true Parallax be known, we cannot determine either.

Next, for the true distance of the Sun, the best way will be, by accurate
Observations, made in both these forementioned stations, of some convenient
Eclipse of the Sun, many of which may so happen, as to be seen by both; for the
Penumbra of the Moon may, if she be sixty Semidiameters distant from the Earth,
and the Sun above seven thousand, extend to about seventy degrees on the Earth,
and consequently be seen by Observators as far distant as London, and St.
Helena, which are not full sixty nine degrees distant. And this would much more
accurately, then any way that has been yet used, determine the Parallax, and
distance, of the Sun; for as for the Horizontal Parallax I have already shown
it sufficiently uncertain; nor is the way of finding it by the Eclipse of the
Moon any other then hypothetical; and that by the difference of the true and
apparent quadrature of the Moon is less not uncertain, witness their Deductions
from it, who have made use of it; for Vendeline puts that difference to be but
4'. 30". whence he deduces a vast distance of the Sun, as I have before shown.
Ricciolo makes it full 30'.00. but Reinoldus, and Kircher, no less then three
degrees. And no wonder, for if we examine the Theory, we shall find it so
complicated with uncertainties.

First, From the irregular surface of the Moon, and from several Parallaxes,
that unless the Dichotomy happen in the Nonagesimus of the Ecliptic, and that
in the Meridian, etc. all which happen so very seldom, that it is almost
impossible to make them otherwise then uncertainly. Besides, we are not yet
certain, but that there may be somewhat about the Moon analogus to the Air
about the Earth, which may cause a refraction of the light of the Sun, and
consequently make a great difference in the apparent dichotomy of the Moon.
Their way indeed is very rational and ingenious; and such as is much to be
preferred before the way by the Horizontal Parallax, could all the
uncertainties be removed, and were the true distance of the Moon known.

But because we find by the Experiments of Vendiline, Reinoldus, etc. that
Observations of this kind are very uncertain also: It were to be wished, that
such kind of Observations, made at two very distant stations, were promoted.
And it is so much the more desirable, because, from what I have now shown of
the nature of the Air, it is evident, that the refraction may be very much
greater then all the Astronomers hitherto have imagined it: And consequently,
that the distance of the Moon, and other Planets, may be much less then what
they have hitherto made it.

For first, this Inflection, I have here propounded, will allow the shadow of
the Earth to be much shorter then it can be made by the other Hypothesis of
refraction, and consequently, the Moon will not suffer an Eclipse, unless it
comes very much nearer the Earth then the Astronomers hitherto have supposed it.

Secondly, There will not in this Hypothesis be any other shadow of the Earth,
such as Kepler supposes, and calls the Penumbra, which is the shadow of the
refracting Atmosphere; for the bending of the Rays being altogether caused by
Inflection, as I have already shown, all that part which is ascribed by Kepler,
and others after him; to the Penumbra, or dark part, which is without the umbra
terroe, does clear vanish; for in this Hypothesis there is no refracting
surface of the Air, and consequently there can be no shadows, such as appear in
the ninth Figure of the 37. Scheme, where let ABCD represent the Earth, and
EFGH the Atmosphere, which according to Keplers supposition, is like a Sphaere
of Water terminated with an exact surface EFGH, let the lines MF, LB, ID, KH,
represent the Rays of the Sun; it is manifest, that all the Rays between LB,
and ID, will be reflected by the surface of the Earth BAD, and consequently,
the conical space BOD would be dark and obscure; but, say the followers of
Kepler, the Rays between MF, and LB, and between ID, and KH, falling on the
Atmosphere, are refracted, both at their ingress and egress out of the
Atmosphere, nearer toward the Axis of the spaerical shadow CO, and
consequently, inlighten a great part of that former dark Cone, and shorten, and
contract, its top to N. And because of this Reflection of these Rays, say they,
there is superinduced another shell of a dark Cone FPH, whose Apex P is yet
further distant from the Earth: By this Penumbra, say they, the Moon is
Eclipsed, for it always passes between the lines 1 2, and 3 4.

To which I say, That if the Air be such, as I have newly shown it to be, and
consequently cause such an inflection of the Rays that fall into it, those dark
Penumbra's FYZQHXVT, and ORPS, will all vanish. For if we suppose the Air
indefinitely extended, and to be no where bounded with a determinate refracting
surface, as I have shown it incapable of having, from the nature of it; it will
follow, that the Moon will no where be totally obscured, but when it is below
the Apex N, of the dark blunt Cone of the Earth's shadow: Now, from the
supposition, that the Sun is distant about seven thousand Diameters, the point
N, according to calculation, being not above twenty five terrestrial
Semidiameters from the Center of the Earth: It follows, that whenever the
Moon eclipsed is totally darkened, without affording any kind of light, it must
be within twenty five Semidiameters of the Earth, and consequently much lower
then any Astronomers have hitherto put it.

This will seem much more consonant to the rest of the secundary Planets; for
the highest of Jupiter's Moons is between twenty and thirty Jovial
Semidiameters distant from the Center of Jupiter; and the Moons of Saturn much
about the same number of Saturnial Semidiameters from the Center of that Planet.

But these are but conjectures also, and must be determined by such kind of
Observations as I have newly mentioned.

Nor will it be difficult, by this Hypothesis, to salve all the appearances of
Eclipses of the Moon, for in this Hypothesis also, there will be, on each side
of the shadow of the Earth, a Penumbra, not caused by the Refraction of the
Air, as in the Hypothesis of Kepler; but by the faint inlightning of it by the
Sun: For if, in the sixth Figure, we suppose ESQUIRE and GSR, to be the Rays that
terminate the shadow from either side of the Earth; ESQUIRE coming from the upper
limb of the Sun, and GSR from the under; it will follow, that the shadow of the
Earth, within those Rays, that is, the Cone GSE, will be totally dark. But the
Sun being not a point, but a large area of light, there will be a secondary
dark Cone of shadow EPG, which will be caused by the earth's hindering part of
the Rays of the Sun from falling on the parts GPR, and EPQ* of which halved
shadow, or Penumbra, that part will appear brightest which lies nearest the
terminating Rays GP, and EP, and those darker that lie nearest to GS, and ES:
when therefore the Moon appears quite dark in the middle of the Eclipse, she
must be below S, that is, between S and F; when she appears lighter near the
middle of the Eclipse, she must pass some where between RQ and S; and when she
is alike light through the whole Eclypse, she must pass between RQ, and P.

Observe. LIX. Of multitudes of small Stars discoverable by the Telescope.
HAving, in the last Observation, premised some particulars observable in the
medium, through which we must look upon Celestial Objects, I shall here add
one Observation of the Bodies themselves; and for a specimen I have made choice
of the Pleiades, or seven Stars, commonly so called (though in our time and
Climate there appear no more then six to the naked eye) and this I did the
rather, because the deservedly famous Galileo, having published a Picture of
this Asterisme, was able, it seems, with his Glass to discover no more then
thirty six, whereas with a pretty good twelve foot Telescope, by which I drew
this 38 Iconism, I could very plainly discover seventy eight, placed in the
order they are ranged in the Figure, and of as many differing Magnitudes as the
Asterisks, wherewith they are Marked, do specify; there being no less then
fourteen several Magnitudes of those Stars, which are comprised within the
draught, the biggest whereof is not accounted greater then one of the third
Magnitude; and indeed that account is much too big, if it be compared with
other Stars of the third Magnitude, especially by the help of a Telescope; for
then by it may be perceived, that its splendour, to the naked eye, may be
somewhat augmented by the three little Stars immediately above it, which are
near adjoining to it. The Telescope also discovers a great variety, even in the
bigness of those, commonly reckoned, of the first, second, third, fourth,
fifth, and sixth Magnitude; so that should they be distinguished thereby, those
six Magnitudes would, at least, afford no less then thrice that number of
Magnitudes, plainly enough distinguishable by their Magnitude, and brightness;
so that a good twelve foot Glass would afford us no less then twenty five
several Magnitudes. Nor are these all, but a longer Glass does yet further,
both more nicely distinguish the Magnitudes of those already noted, and also
discover several other of smaller Magnitudes, not discernable by the twelve
foot Glass: Thus have I been able, with a good thirty six foot Glass, to
discover many more Stars in the Pleiades then are here delineated, and those of
three or four distinct Magnitudes less then any of those spots of the
fourteenth Magnitude. And by the twinkling of diverse other places of this
Asterisme, when the Sky was very clear, I am apt to think, that with longer
Glasses, or such as would bear a bigger aperture, there might be discovered
multitudes of other small Stars, yet inconspicuous. And indeed, for the
discovery of small Stars, the bigger the aperture be, the better adapted is the
Glass; for though perhaps it does make the several specks more radiant, and
glaring, yet by that means, uniting more Rays very near to one point, it does
make many of those radiant points conspicuous, which, by putting on a less
aperture, may be found to vanish; and therefore, both for the discovery of the
fixed Star, and for finding the Satellites of Jupiter, before it be out of the
day, or twilight, I always leave the Object-glass as clear without any
aperture as I can, and have thereby been able to discover the Satellites a long
while before; I was able to discern them, when the smaller apertures were put
on; and at other times, to see multitudes of other smaller Stars, which a
smaller aperture makes to disappear.

In that notable Asterism also of the Sword of Orion, where the ingenious
Monsieur Hugens van Zulichem has discovered only three little Stars in a
cluster, I have with a thirty six foot Glass, without any aperture (the breadth
of the Glass being about some three inches and a half) discovered five, and the
twinkling of diverse others up and down in diverse parts of that small milky
Cloud.

So that it is not unlikely, but that the meliorating of Telescopes will afford
as great a variety of new Discoveries in the Heavens, as better Microscopes
would among small terrestrial Bodies, and both would give us infinite cause,
more and more to admire the omnipotence of the Creator.

Observe. LX. Of the Moon.
HAving a pretty large corner of the Plate for the seven Stars, void, for the
filling it up, I have added one small specimen of the appearance of the parts
of the Moon, by describing a small spot of it, which, though taken notice of,
both by the Excellent Hevelius, and called Mons Olympus (though I think
somewhat improperly, being rather a vale) and represented by the Figure X, of
the 38. Scheme, and also by the Learned Ricciolus, who calls it Hipparchus, and
describes it by the Figure Y, yet how far short both of them come of the truth,
may be somewhat perceived by the draught, which I have here added of it, in the
Figure Z, (which I drew by a thirty foot Glass, in October 1664. just before
the Moon was half enlightened) but much better by the Reader's diligently
observing it himself, at a convenient time, with a Glass of that length, and
much better yet with one of threescore foot long; for through these it appears
a very spacious Vale, encompassed with a ridge of Hills, not very high in
comparison of many other in the Moon, nor yet very steep. The Valet it self
ABCD, is much of the figure of a Pear, and from several appearances of it,
seems to be some very fruitful place, that is, to have its surface all covered
over with some kinds of vegetable substances; for in all positions of the light
on it, it seems to give a much fainter reflection then the more barren tops of
the incompassing Hills, and those a much fainter then diverse other cragged,
chalky, or rocky Mountains of the Moon. So that I am not unapt to think, that
the Vale may have Schem: XXXVIII
Vegetables analogus to our Grass, Shrubs, and Trees; and most of these
incompassing Hills may be covered with so thin a vegetable Coat, as we may
observe the Hills with us to be, such as the short Sheep pasture which covers
the Hills of Salisbury Plains.

Up and down in several parts of this place here described (as there are
multitudes in other places all over the surface of the Moon) may be perceived
several kinds of pits, which are shaped almost like a dish, some bigger, some
less, some shallower, some deeper, that is, they s^em to be a hollow
Hemisphere, encompassed with a round rising bank, as if the substance in the
middle had been dug up, and thrown on either side. These seem to me to have
been the effects of some motions within the body of the Moon, analogus to our
Earthquakes, by the eruption of which, as it has thrown up a brim, or ridge,
round about, higher then the Ambient surface of the Moon, so has it left a
hole, or depression, in the middle, proportionably lower; diverse places
resembling some of these, I have observed here in England, on the tops of some
Hills, which might have been caused by some Earthquake in the younger days of
the world. But that which does most incline me to this belief, is, first, the
generality and diversity of the Magnitude of these pits all over the body of
the Moon. Next, the two experimental ways, by which I have made a
representation of them.

The first was with a very soft and well tempered mixture of Tobacco-pipe clay
and Water, into which, if I let fall any heavy body, as a Bullet, it would
throw up the mixture round the place, which for a while would make a
representation, not unlike these of the Moon; but considering the state and
condition of the Moon, there seems not any probability to imagine, that it
should proceed from any cause analogus to this; for it would be difficult to
imagine whence those bodies should come; and next, how the substance of the
Moon should be so soft; but if a Bubble be blown under the surface of it, and
suffered to rise, and break; or if a Bullet, or other body, sunk in it, be
pulled out from it, these departing bodies leave an impression on the surface
of the mixture, exactly like these of the Moon, save that these also quickly
subside and vanish. But the second, and most notable, representation was, what
I observed in a pot of boiling Alabaster, for there that powder being by the
eruption of vapors reduced to a kind of fluid consistence, if, whilst it
boyls, it be gently removed besides the fire, the Alabaster presently ceasing
to boil, the whole surface, especially that where some of the last Bubbles have
risen, will appear all over covered with small pits, exactly shaped like these
of the Moon, and by holding a lighted Candle in a large dark Room, in diverse
positions to this surface, you may exactly represent all the Phenomenon of
these pits in the Moon, according as they are more or less enlightened by the
Sun.

And that there may have been in the Moon some such motion as this, which may
have made these pits, will seem the more probable, if we suppose it like our
Earth, for the Earthquakes here with us seem to proceed from some such cause,
as the boiling of the pot of Alabaster, there seeming to be generated in the
Earth from some subterraneous fires, or heat, great quantities of vapors, that
is, of expanded aerial substances, which not presently finding a passage
through the ambient parts of the Earth, do, as they are increased by the
supplying and generating principles, and thereby (having not sufficient room to
expand themselves) extremely condensed, at last overpower, with their elastick
properties, the resistance of the incompassing Earth, and lifting it up, or
cleaving it, and so shattering of the parts of the Earth above it, do at
length, where they find the parts of the Earth above them more loose, make
their way upwards, and carrying a great part of the Earth before them, not only
raise a small brim round about the place, out of which they break, but for the
most part considerable high Hills and Mountains, and when they break from under
the Sea, diverse times, mountainous Islands; this seems confirmed by the Vulcans
in several places of the Earth, the mouths of which, for the most part, are
encompassed with a Hill of a considerable height, and the tops of those Hills,
or Mountains, are usually shaped very much like these pits, or dishes, of the
Moon: Instances of this we have in the descriptions of Aetna in Sicily, of
Hecla in Iceland, of Tenerif in the Canaries, of the several Vulcans in
New-Spain, described by Gage, and more especially in the eruption of late years
in one of the Canary Islands. In all of which there is not only a considerable
high Hill raised about the mouth of the Vulcan, but, like the spots of the
Moon, the top of those Hills are like a dish, or basin. And indeed, if one
attentively consider the nature of the thing, one may find sufficient reason to
judge, that it cannot be otherwise; for these eruptions, whether of fire, or
smoke, always raising great quantities of Earth before them, must necessarily,
by the fall of those parts on either side, raise very considerable heaps.

Now, both from the figures of them, and from several other circumstances;
these pits in the Moon seem to have been generated much after the same manner
that the holes in Alabaster, and the Vulcans of the Earth are made. For first,
it is not improbable, but that the substance of the Moon may be very much like
that of our Earth, that is, may consist of an earthy, sandy, or rocky
substance, in several of its superficial parts, which parts being agitated,
undermined, or heaved up, by eruptions of vapors, may naturally be thrown into
the same kind of figured holes, as the small dust, or powder of Alabaster.
Next, it is not improbable, but that there may be generated, within the body of
the Moon, diverse such kind of internal fires and heats, as may produce such
Exhalations; for since we can plainly enough discover with a Telescope, that
there are multitudes of such kind of eruptions in the body of the Sun it self,
which is accounted the most noble Aetherial body, certainly we need not be much
scandalized at such kind of alterations, or corruptions, in the body of this
lower and less considerable part of the universe, the Moon, which is only
secundary, or attendant, on the bigger, and more considerable body of the
Earth. Thirdly, it is not unlikely, but that supposing such a sandy or mouldring
substance to be there found, and supposing also a possibility of the generation
of the internal elastical body (whether you will call it air or vapors) it is
not unlikely, I say, but that there is in the Moon a principle of gravitation,
such as in the Earth. And to make this probable, I think, we need no better
Argument, then the roundness, or globular Figure of the body of the Moon it
self, which we may perceive very plainly by the Telescope, to be (bating the
small inequality of the Hills and Vales in it, which are all of them likewise
shaped, or levelled, as it were, to answer to the center of the Moons body)
perfectly of a Sphaerical figure, that is, all the parts of it are so ranged
(bating the comparitively small ruggedness of the Hills and Dales) that the
outmost bounds of them are equally distant from the Center of the Moon, and
consequently, it is exceedingly probable also, that they are equidistant from
the Center of gravitation; and indeed, the figure of the superficial parts of
the Moon are so exactly shaped, according as they should be, supposing it had a
gravitating principle as the Earth has, that even the figure of those parts
themselves is of sufficient efficacy to make the gravitation, and the other two
suppositions probable: so that the other suppositions may be rather proved by
this considerable Circumstance, or Observation, then this supposed Explication
can by them; for he that shall attentively observe with an excellent Telescope,
how all the Circumstances, notable in the shape of the superficial parts, are,
as it were, exactly adapted to suit with such a principle, will, if he well
considers the usual method of Nature in its other proceedings, find abundant
argument to believe it to have really there also such a principle; for I could
never observe, among all the mountainous or prominent parts of the Moon
(whereof there is a huge variety) that any one part of it was placed in such a
manner, that if there should be a gravitating, or attracting principle in the
body of the Moon, it would make that part to fall, or be moved out of its
visible posture. Next, the shape and position of the parts is such, that they
all seem put into those very shapes they are in by a gravitating power: For
first, there are but very few clifts, or very steep declivities in the ascent
of these Mountains; for besides those Mountains, which are by Hevelius called
the Apennine Mountains, and some other, which seem to border on the Seas of the
Moon, and those only upon one side, as is common also in those Hills that are
here on the Earth; there are very few that seem to have very steep ascents,
but, for the most part, they are made very round, and much resemble the make of
the Hills and Mountains also of the Earth; this may be partly perceived by the
Hills incompassing this Vale, which I have here described; and as on the Earth
also, the middle most of these Hills seems the highest, so is it obvious also,
through a good Telescope, in those of the Moon; the Vales also in many are much
shaped like those of the Earth, and I am apt to think, that could we look upon
the Earth from the Moon, with a good Telescope, we might easily enough perceive
its surface to be very much like that of the Moon.

Now whereas in this small draught, (as there would be multitudes if the whole
Moon were drawn after this manner) there are several little Ebullitions, or
Dishes, even in the Vales themselves, and in the incompassing Hills also; this
will, from this supposition, (which I have, I think, upon very good reason
taken) be exceeding easily explicable; for, as I have several times also
observed, in the surface of Alabaster so ordered, as I before described, so may
the later eruptions of vapors be even in the middle, or on the edges of the
former; and other succeeding these also in time may be in the middle or edges
of these, etc. of which there are Instances enough in diverse parts of the body
of the Moon, and by a boiling pot of Alabaster will be sufficiently exemplifi'd.

To conclude therefore, it being very probable, that the Moon has a principle
of gravitation, it affords an excellent distinguishing Instance in the search
after the cause of gravitation, or attraction, to hint, that it does not depend
upon the diurnal or turbinated motion of the Earth, as some have somewhat
inconsiderately supposed and affirmed it to do; for if the Moon has an
attractive principle, whereby it is not only shaped round, but does firmly
contain and hold all its parts united, though many of them seem as loose as the
sand on the Earth, and that the Moon is not moved about its Center; then
certainly the turbination cannot be the cause of the attraction of the Earth;
and therefore some other principle must be thought of, that will agree with all
the secundary as well as primary Planets. But this, I confess, is but a
probability, and not a demonstration, which (from any Observation yet made) it
seems hardly capable of, though how successful future endeavors (promoted by
the meliorating of Glasses, and observing particular circumstances) may be in
this, or any other, kind, must be with patience expected.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.




A description of it: the causes of

Obser. 3. Of fine Lawn.
A description of it: A silken Flax mentioned, an attempt to explicate the
Phenomenon of it, with a conjecture at the cause of the gloss of Silk.

Observe. 4.. Of Tabby.
A short description of it. A conjecture


The great unaccurateness of artificial Phenomenon: the way by which that
operation is performed: some other Phenomenon mentioned

Observe. 6. Of Glass-Canes.
The exceeding smalness of some of these Bodies* By what means the hollowness
of these small pipes was discovered: several Phenomenon of it mentioned.
Phenomenon of it: of congruity and incongruity; Phenomenon explicable 1.
Concerning the propagation of light through differing mediums. 2. Concerning 3.
Concerning the roundness of the Sun, Moon, and Planets. 4. Concerning the
roundness of Fruits, Stones, and diverse artificial Bodies. His Highness Prince
Rupert's Kettering Stone, and of the Sparks of fire. 5. Concerning 6.
Concerning the original of Fountains; 7. Concerning 8. Concerning the
universality of this explication of filtration, and several Phenomenon; such as
the motion of Bodies on the surface of Liquors; several Phenomenon of the
strange Experiment of the suspension of the Mercury at a much greater height
then thirty inches. The efficacy of immediate contact, and the reason of it.


Several Experiments made with Phenomenon, endeavored to be made probable
Thermometers, and the Instrument graduating them. The manner of graduating
them, and their use: Other Experiments to prove the expansion

Observe. 8. Of Fiery Sparks.
The occasion and manner of making this Experiment: diverse Observations
Hypothesis a little further explicated. Some Observations about the

Observe. 9. Of Fantastical Colors.
The texture of Muscovy Glass; its Figures: what other Bodies are like it: etc.
other Instances of such colored bodies in animal substances: several other
distinguishing Observations. Des Carts of Colors examined. An Hypothesis for
the explication of light by motion, endeavored to be explicated and determined
by several Medium [that there seems to be no Experiment that proves the
Instantaneous motion of homogeniety and heterogeniety of transparent Mediums,
and what effects they cause on the Rays of light, explicated by a Figure: an
Examination Hyphotheses of Colors. Des examined. Some Hypothesis further
examined, both in pellucid Medium and in the Eye. The definitions of Colors;
and a further laminated Bodies;

Observe. 10. Of Metalline Colors.
Hypothesis consonant hereunto, explicated by Figures. How Hypothesis

Observe. 11. Of the Figures of Sand.
Of the substances and shapes of common and other Sands: a description of a
very small Shell.


A description of such Gravel, and

Obser. 13. Of Diamonds in Flints.
A description and examination of some of them, explicated further by
Phenomenon of Oculus Mundi. Of the regular Geometrical Figures of


The Figures of hoar Frost, and the Regulus Martis and of Fern. Of the Figures

Observe. 15. Of Kettering Stone.
medium and propagation Oculus Mundi: some other Considerations

Observe. 16. Of Charcoal.
Of two sort of Pores to be found Phenomenon Hypothesis of fire explicated in
twelve Menstruum, in the dissolution of all sulphurous bodies, is very
particularly explicated, and Lignum fossile sent from Rome, and some
Conclusions thence deduced.

Observe. 17. Of Wood, and other
Several Observations of diverse kinds of these substances. A more particular
etc. And

Observe. 18. Of the Pores of Cork,
Several Observations and Considerations Inch, and several Considerations about
etc. of the frothy texture of the Pith of a Feather: some Conjectures about the
probability of values in these Pores. Argued also from the Phenomenon of the
sensible




Observe. 20. Of Blew Mould and Mushromes.
1. That they may be produced without seed. 2. That they seem to have none. 3.
That Salts, etc. are shaped into as 4. Of a kind of Mushrome growing in a
Candle: A more particular explication of this last sort of Mushromes. 5. Of the
figure and manner of the production of petrified Iceicles: several deductions
from these Considerations,


etc.

Observe. 22. Of Sponges, and other fibrous Bodies.
Several Observations and Conjectures etc. (which are

Observe. 23. Of the Form of Sea-weed.
From the curiously shaped Surface of this Sea-weed, and some others, is
conjectured the possibility of

Observe. 24. Of the Surfaces of some Leaves.
The description, 1. Of the bald Surfaces of Leaves. 2. Of the downy Surfaces
of several others. 3. Of the gummous exsudation, or Microscope in several
others. An Instance of all which is afforded in a Rosemary Leaf.

Observe. 25. Of the stinging Points of a Nettle.
Bellonius; and some Considerations about staining and dying of Bodies.

Observe. 26. Of Cowage.
The description of it out of Parkinson: Phenomenon.

Observe. 27. Of the Beard of a wild Oat.
Hygroscope with it: and a Conjecture

Venice Looking-glass.
The description of them.

Obser. 29. Of the Seeds of Time.


Observe. 30. Of Poppy Seeds.


Observe. 31. Of Purslane Seeds.
A description of these and many other Seeds.

Observe. 32. Of Hair.
The description of several sorts of

Observe. 33. Of the Scales of a
A description of their beauteous form.

Observe. 34. Of the Sting of a Be.
A description of its shape, mechanisme,

Observe. 35. Of Feathers.
A description of the shape and curious

Obser. 36. Of Peacocks Feathers.
A description of their curious form

Obser. 37. Of the Feet of Flies, and other Insects.
A description of their figure, parts,

Obser. 38. Of the Wings of Flies



1. All the face of a Drone-fly is nothing almost but eyes. 2. Those are

Obser. 40. Of the Teeth of a Snail.


Observe. 41. Of the Eggs of Silkworms.





Observe. 43. Of a water Insect.
Analogus cited out of Piso. Several Observations about the

Observe. 44. Of the tufted Gnat.
Several Observables about Insects, and a more particular description of

Ob. 45. Of the great bellied Gnat.
A short description of it.

Obser. 46. Of a white Moth.
A description of the feathers and

Obs. 47. Of the Shepherd Spider.
A description of its Eyes: and the sockets of its long legs: and a Conjecture

Obser. 48. Of the hunting Spider.
A short description of it; to which Evelyn. Some further


That all small Bodies, both Vegetable and Animal, do quickly dry and wither.
The best remedy I found to hinder it and to make the Animal lie still

Obs. 50. Of the wandering Mite.


Observe. 51. Of a Crab-like Insect.


Observe. 52. Of a Book-worm.
Phenomenon

Observe. 53. Of a Flea.


Observe. 54. Of a Louse.


Observe. 55. Of Mites.
The exceeding smalness of some Mites, and their Eggs. A description

Ob. 56. Of small Vine-Mites.
A description of them; a ghess at their original; their exceeding smalness
compared with that of a Woodlouse,

Observe. 57. Of Vinegar-worms.
A description of them, with some

Obs. 58. Of the Inflection of the Rays of Light in the Air.
A short rehearsal of several Phenomenon. inflection, mechanically and
hypothetically: what Bodies have such an inflection. Several Experiments to
show that the Air has this propriety; that it proceeds from Phenomenon
Phenomenon explicated. Some Quoeries added.

1. Whether this Principle may not be made use of, for perfecting Optic 2.
Whether from this Principle the apparition of some new Stars may not be
explicated? 3. Whether the height of the Air may be defined by it? 4. Whether
there may not sometimes be so great a disparity of density between the upper
and under parts of the Air, as to make a reflecting Surface? Phenomenon of the
Clouds. An Experiment to this purpose? Paul's Steeple. 8. Whether the distance
of the Planets will not be more difficult to be Telescopes for such Kepler's
Supposition not so probable: the explication of Phenomenon by another
Hypothesis.
Observe. 59. Of the sixth Stars.
Of the multitudes of Stars discoverable by the Telescope, and the variety of
their magnitudes: 78. Stars distinguished in the Pleiades: that there are
degrees of bigness even in the Stars accounted of the same magnitude: the
longer the Glasses are, and the bigger apertures they will endure, the more fit
they are for these discoveries: that it is probable, longer Glasses would yet
make greater discoveries. 5. Stars Galaxie of Orion's Sword.

Observe. 60. Of the Moon.
A description of a Vale in the Moon; what called by Hevelius and Ricciolus,
and how described by them: with what substances the hills of the

ERRATA.
IN the Preface, Page 7. line 18. read feet: line 24. read Gilbert, Harvy.

Page 13. line ult. read taste: p. 34. l. 18. r. small lens: l. penult. r. that
proceeds from: p. 40. l. 44. r. when you: p. 48. l. 34. r. broadest: p. 57. l.
39. dele be: p. 62. l. 36. r. water-drop: p. 64. l. 9. r. duction of GACH: l.
35. r. impressions: p. 96. l. 33. r. compose: p. 100. l. 11. r. Mersennus: p.
106 l. 8. r. extremely: p. 110 l 8. r. ^^: l. 12. r. those: p. 112 l. 32. r.
Aldronendus, Wormius: p. 121. l. 9. dele of: p. 128. l. 43, dele from: p. 129.
l. 18. r. fifth place: p. 130. l. 29. r. Aerial menstruum: p. 136. l. 39. r.
knew how: p. 144. l. 2. r. parts of the: p. 147. l. 36. r. looked on: p. 161.
l. 13. r. body: p. 162. l. 17. dele only: p. 166. l. 11.1.22: l. 11. dele the
Semicolon: l. 17. r. place: p. 167. l. 40. r. 22: p. 172 l. 18. r. and first
for the: p. 198. l. 17. r. and an artific. p. 215. l. ult. r. and from the: p.
221. l. 4 r. whence the under: p. 234. l. 18. r. to hope: p. 238. l. 42. r. is
not less: p. 240. l. 19. r. Moon.


